GLOSSOGRAPHIA: OR A DICTIONARY, Interpreting all such Hard Words OF Whatsoever
Language, now used in our refined English Tongue; With Etymologies,
Definitions, and Historical Observations on the same.

Also the Terms of Divinity, Law, Physic, Mathematics, and other Arts and
Sciences explicated.

Very useful for all such as desire to understand what they read.

The Second EDITION, more correct; wherein above Five hundred choice Words are
added.

By T.B. of the Inner Temple, Barrister.

Erasm. Apoph. Vt homines, it a libros in dies seipsos meliores fieri oportet.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb for George Sawbridge at the Bible on Ludgate
hill. 1661.



TO THE READER.
AFter I had bestowed the waste hours of some years in reading our best English
Histories and Authors; I found, though I had gained a reasonable knowledge in
the Latin and French Tongues, as I thought, and had a smattering both of Greek
and other Languages, yet I was often gravelled in English Books; that is, I
encountered such words, as I either not at all, or not thoroughly understood,
more then what the preceding sense did insinuate: For Example:

In the Turkish History I met with Ianizaries, Mufties, Timariots, Basha's,
Seraglio's, Shashes, Turbants, etc.

In the French History, the Salique Law, Appennages, Vidams, Daulphin, etc.

In the Spanish, the Escurial, Infanta, Sanbenito, etc.

In the Roman Histories I often found mention of Consuls, Tribunes, Dictators,
Pretors, Cohorts, Legions, Theaters, Obelisks; The Capitol, Vatican, Pasquin,
etc.

And in many other Books, mention of several Religious Orders; as Carmelites,
Carthusians, Cistersians, Theatins, Bonhomes, etc. So likewise both of ancient
and modern Sects; as Arrians, Eutychians, Iacobites, etc. Anabaptists,
Arminians, Erastians, Thraskites, Socinians, Quakers, etc.

In Books of Divinity, I found Sanhedrim, Vrim and Thummim, Shibboleth;
Hypostatical, Circuminsession, Introversion, Extroversion, etc.

In every Mercurius, Coranto, Gazet, or Diurnal, I met with Camizado's,
Pallizado's, Lantspezado's, Brigades, Squadrons, Curasiers, Bonmine, Halts,
Iuncta's, Paroles etc.

In the mouths of common people, I heard of Piazza, Balcone, etc. in London:
And in the Country, of Hocktide, Minnyng days, Lurdanes, Quintins, etc.

Nay, to that pass we are now arrived, that in London many of the Tradesmen
have new Dialects; The Cook asks you what Dishes you will have in your Bill of
Fare; whether Olla's, Bisques, Hachies, Omelets, Bouillon's, Grilliades,
Ioncades, Fricasses; with a Hautgoust, Ragoust, etc.

The Vintner will furnish you with Montefiascone, Alicant, Vernaccia, Ribolla,
Tent, etc. Others with Sherbet, Agro di Cedro, Coffa, Chocolate, etc.

The Tailor is ready to mode you into a Rochet, Mandillion, Gippon, Iustacor,
Capouch, Hoqueton, or a Cloak of Drap-de-Berry, etc.

The Shoo-maker will make you Boots, Whole-Chase, Demi-Chase, or Bottines, etc.

The Barber will modifie your Beard into A la Manchim, a la Gascoinade, or a la
Candale.

The Haberdasher is ready to furnish with a Vigone, Codebec, or Castor, etc.
The Semstress with a Crabbat, Toylet, etc.

By this new world of Words, I found we were slipped into that condition which
Seneca complains of in his time; When men's minds once begin to enure themselves
to dislike, whatever is usual is disdained: They affect novelty in speech, they
recall oreworn and uncouth words, they forge new phrases, and that which is
newest is best liked; there is presumptuous, and far fetching of words: And
some there are that think it a grace, if their speech hover, and thereby hold
the hearer in suspense, etc.

I believed my self not singular in this ignorance; and that few, without the
help of a Dictionary, would be able to understand our ordinary English Books. I
found nothing considerable in this kind extant, though now many make it their
study to be learned in our own Language; and I remember Aristotle's, Verba
valent in usu sicut and nummi. For these Reasons, and to indulge my own fancy,
I began to compile this Work; which has taken me up the vacancy of above Twenty
years.

Besides the Words of the nature before specified, you have here such and so
many of the most useful Law Terms as I thought necessary for every Gentleman of
Estate to understand, not intending any thing elaborate for the studied
Professors of that noble Science, there being some excellent Pieces of that
nature already extant; yet I have gleaned diverse Law-terms which escaped both
Cowel and the Terms of Law.

The several parts of man's body, as the Pia and Dura Matter, the Messentery,
Muscles, several sorts of Veins and Arteries, etc. with their proper
Appellations; As also the names and qualities of at least ordinary Diseases, I
thought fit for the knowledge of many, who neither profess the study of Physic,
Anatomy, nor Chyrurgery.

I held it no less necessary for every Gentleman to be so far seen in Heraldry,
as to know (at least) the most usual Terms; as when a Lion or other Beast is
said to be Dormant, Passant, Couchant, Saliant, Rampant, Seisant, Regardant,
etc. and what is meant by a Fesse, Canton, Bend, etc. that he may by
consequence be able to blazon his own Coat.

Here are likewise explicated all Latin words, that are used without alteration
in English, as Encomium, Peccavi, Verbatim, Verago, Bona side, De been esse,
etc. And, with these, the terms of many Sciences unfolded; as, of Logic,
Astrology, Geometry, Music, Architecture, Navigation, etc. with those of our
most ingenious Arts and Exercises, as Printing, Painting, Jewelling; Riding,
Hunting, Hawking, etc.

Yet I will not say I have met with all that might require explication, for
that were an employment for Archymedes, Pulveris Erythraei subducere numerum:
But I have inserted such as are of most use, and best worth knowledge; that is,
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula. To some words I have added Etymologies, to
others, Historical Observations, as they occurred, and this but ex obliquo.

I have avoided Poetical Stories, as much as I could, since they are not
necessary to be understood by the generality; and as for Scholars and Poets,
there is a copious Latin Dictionary of them, and somewhat of late done in
English by Mr. Ross; Yet sometimes I am forced to touch a little upon that
string; as to tell the story of Pandora, to make her Boc understood, and that
of Tantalus, to render the word Tantalize intelligible.

I have likewise in a great measure, shunned the old Saxon Words; as finding
them growing every day more obsolete then other. Besides there is an excellent
Dictionary thereof shortly expected from the learned Mr. Sumner. Yet even such
of those, as I found still in use, are not here omitted.

In this Design, I met with two Objections; The First, that my labor would
find no end; since our English Tongue daily changes habit, every fantastical
Traveller, and homebred Sciolist being at liberty, as, to antiquate and decry
the old, so to coin and innovate new Words: Which Horace thus observed, Ut
Sylvae foliis pronos mutantur in annos:
Prima cadunt; ita verborum vetus interit aetas,
Et juvenum ritu florent modo nata vigentque.
Debemur morti nos, nostraque -- De Art Poet.


Signifying hereby that words in Common Tongues, like leaves, must of necessity
have their buddings, their blossomings, their ripenings and their fallings:
Which old Chaucer also thus remarks.

I know that in form of speech is change
Within a hundred years and words tho
That hidden price, now wonder nice and strange
Think we them* and yet they speak them so,
And sped as well in love, as men now do.
This we grant, and confess it impossible to keep Words of unlearned Tongues
from falling and change in tract of time; which has even happened among the
Latin Writers themselves, when theirs was a spoken Tongue as ours now is; who
though they first made their own words, and gave them their allowance, yet
diverse of Cecilius, Statius, Ennius, and Plautus were by posterior Latinists
rejected; and now again many of them, by the last Writers of all (though
before, as it were, by Proclamation put down for baseness) are, upon a new
Touch, warranted for good, and pass abroad as Sterling; thus we see our Latin
Dictionaries seldom or never Reprinted, without some Additions, Corrections, or
Denotations of obsolete Words: So when any considerable Supplement of new
English Words have legally passed the Mint and Test of our Vertuos, the same
liberty may be allowed this Work; not derigating at all from the use of it in
the interim.

The second Objection was, That the use of such words was not commendable,
according to that of Caesar, Tanquam scopulum vitari debes verbum infrequens;
and he that should use them would be subject to the censure of (...), one that
prefers the novelty or affected elegance of the phrase to the nerves and
importance of the sense* which is confuted by our best modern Authors, who have
both infinitely enriched and enobled our Language, by admitting and
naturalizing thousands of foreign Words, providently brought home from the
Greek, Roman and French Oratories; which though, in the untravel'd ears of our
Fathers, would have sounded harsh, yet a few late years have rendered them
familiar even to vulgar capacities. Witness the learned Works of the L. Bacon,
Mr. Montagu, Sir Kenelm Digby, Sir H. Wotton, Mr. White, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Sands,
Dr. Brown, Dr. Charlton, Dr. Heylyn, etc. wherein such words are used more or
less: To many of which I have added the Authors names, that I might not be
thought to be the Innovator of them. Nor is it my purpose to become an Advocate
for the use of such Words; let every ones Genius and the quality of the Subject
they treat of be their own Dictator; but certainly, at least to understand them
can be no unnecessary burden to the Intellect; since Knowledge is Animi
pabulum. And it is Galens Axiom, Whoever is ignorant of words, shall never judge
well of things. Lib. 1. de Method. c. 5.

My Lord Coke (that Oracle of our Law) has left us these words. In School
Divinity, In Pref in Com. on Littl.
and among the Glossographers and Interpreters of the Civil and Canon Laws, in
Logic and other Liberal Sciences, you shall meet with a whole Army of Words;
which cannot defend themselves in Bello Grammaticali, yet are more significant,
compendious, and effectual to declare the true sense of the matter, then if
they were expressed in pure Latin.

And Mr. Denham, in his quaint Preface to the Destruction of Troy; As Speech is
the Apparel of our Thoughts, so are there certain Garbes and Modes of speaking,
which vary with the times; the fashion of our Clothes not being more subject to
alteration, then that of our Speech: And this I think Tacitus means, by that
which he calls Sermonem temporis istius auribus accommodatum; The delight of
change being as due to the curiosity of the Ear, as of the Eye.

Having thus solved these two main Objections, I may, with an humble
confidence, hope this Book will prove as useful to our Nation, as that
Congenerous Essay, Des Merveilles de Nature, done by Rene, is to the French;
which has been Printed almost twenty several times within little more then so
many years.

To compile and complete a Work of this nature and importance, would
necessarily require an Encyclopedie of knowledge, and the concurrence of many
learned Heads; yet that I may a little secure the Reader from a just
apprehension of my disability for so great an Undertaking, I profess to have
done little with my own Pencil; but have extracted the quintessence of Scapula,
Minsheu, Cotgrave, Spelmans Glossarium, Florio, Thomasius, Dasipodius, Rider,
Hexams Dutch, and Dr Davies Welsh Dictionaries, Cowels Interpreter, etc. and
other able Authors, for so much as tended to my purpose; and hope I have taken
nothing upon trust, which is not authentic; yet should not I thus adventure to
make it public, but that it also had the perusal and approbation of some very
Learned, and my Noble Friends.

It is chiefly intended for the more-knowing Women, and less-learned Men; or
indeed for all such of the illiterate, who can but find, in an Alphabet, the
word they understand not; yet I think I may modestly say, the best of Scholars
may in some part or other be obliged by it. For he that is a good Hebrician,
Grecian, and Latinist, perhaps may be to seek in the Italian, French or
Spanish; or if he be skilled in all those, he may here find some Words, Terms of
Art, or Notions, that have no dependence upon any of those Languages.

Such as neither understand Greek nor Latin, may, with a little pains, and the
help of this Book, know the meaning of the greatest part of such words as we
now use in English, and are derived from either of those Languages, which are
many, and to facilitate this, they may do well to learn the numbers in those
Languages, as En, dyo, treis, etc. unus, duo, tres, etc. and such words and
particles as are most used in Composition; as Monos, Hemi, Pseudos, Tetra, etc.
Circum, Subter, Praeter, Ultra, etc. and then in simple words to understand but
the nature and difference between a Verb, Verbal, Noun, Participle, etc. that
when they know one of them, they may also comprehend all the Derivatives from
the same Fountain; as to illaqueate, illaqueator, illaqueation,
illaqueated-illaqueable, etc. And by once thoroughly learning these, all other
words of this nature, which are not a few, would seem easy.

So likewise for compound Words, knowing Pseudos to signify false, they would
understand Pseudo Prophet to be a False Prophet; circum, about, or round about;
circumstation, a standing round about, etc. with the like. And this easiness of
understanding all the words that come from one root, when one of them is known,
made me forbear to insert the whole number of such words; presuming if the
Reader know one or two of them, he will not be ignorant of the rest; and I have
selected the most difficult.

Sometimes the same word is used both Substantively and Adjectively; as,
Datary, Expedient, Laudative, Missive, etc. And sometime both Substantively and
Verbally; as Attique, Reprive, etc. which being unrestrained in the use, were
almost impossible to observe in all Words: besides, if it be interpreted in the
one acception, it will easily be understood in the other.

So likewise there is a liberty in most Adjectives, whether you will say
Optique (after the French) Optic, Opticous, or Optical; which I thought
unnecessary always to remark.

If I say a word is Greek, French, Italian, etc. I speak not always in rigor;
for, commonly the words we borrow from other Languages, are a little altered
from their Originals to make them speak English.

Something might also be said of the choice of Words in our refined English
Tongue; which are to be liked and approved according to their tone, and the
sweetness of their cadence, that is, as they run musically in the Ear. Latin
Verbs of the first Conjugation are more usually converted into English; as
contamino, as, to contaminate; recalcitro, as, to recalcitrate, etc. then those
of the second, third or fourth Conjugations.

I have madcause of several Authors of different persuasions in Controversial
points both of Religion and other Literature, which possibly will not please
all Readers; and therefore must crave pardon, in this particular, if some
Citations pass under a nonliquent, since the nature of the Words enforced me to
have recourse thereto.

To conclude, though I may truly say, I have taken much pains in this
investigation of Words, yet it is but too probable, that in multiloquio non
deerit peccatum; that in so great a Circumference, some Lines may not be truly
drawn from the Center; which yet I hope will not draw an oblique censure from
the Reader, but his pardon rather, and animadversion; that I may, as St. Austin
advises, Et scribendo proficere and proficiendo scribere, and quae nescio
discere. De Trin, lib. 3. cap. 1.

Rode Caper vites, tamen hic, cum stabis ad Aras, In tua quod fundi cornua
possit, erit.

THO. BLOUNT.

TO HIS HONORED FRIEND Mr. T.B. Upon his GLOSSOGRAPHIA.
HAd Babel, the old World's Rendevouz (first meant
To center Mankind in one joint consent
To undue Homage) by that Politic tie
Settled her Universal Sovereignty,
The World in one vast Fam'ly had combined,
Nor labored thus to know each others mind:
Language and Laws had firmly held together,
That Court and Tower had been the Mint for either:
But, when Dissension bred a Separation,
And each fixed Colony became a Nation,
Chance and Design in time more licensed grew,
And Dialects the Original ensue;
Which by degrees degenerate from their Mother,
Till they disown their birth, and seem another:
Besides, the various Climates tuned their throats
And vocal Organs, apt for different Notes.
Then, Speech, which in this Analytick vein
Was first resolved, compounded grew again,
As Enemies in conquered Countries fixed
And ill-according Dialects intermixed;
Which Chance went on corrupting till next for
Subdued that Nation and that Language too.
But most, in these our Modern times, this I Will
And Language often became a double spoil
To Foreiners; Pictish with Danish clung
Into our Saxo-Belgick-Norman-Tongue;
Not all the Iargons, fancied to inspire
By miracle that disagreeing Quire
Of Babels Bricklayers, were so numerous
As those which, by degrees, encroacht on us.
Nor was it all-jumbling War which wrought alone
This change, and shuffl'd many Tongues in one,
But even Peace (such is the uncertain Fate
Of Speech) which settles all things, alters that.
This nourish't Peace, bred Commerce, which inclined
Men to impart the expressions of their Mind.
Civiler Greek and Latin interlac't
Our rude Ground, with their rich Imbroid'ries graced.
Smooth France, neat Italy, and manly Spain,
Lent it some tinctures of a quainter strain:
And, as with Merchandise, with terms it fares,
Nations do traffic Words, as well as Wares,
Bon-jour usurps upon our plain Good Morrow,
It Is Neighborhood's best praise to lend and borrow.
Travelers, which about the World do roam
Had made us Englishmen, Strangers at home;
'Twas due unto their dearly earned praise
To dress strange Stories in Exotic phrase,
Nay homebred heads unsocially did strive
TO estrange themselves and Shibboleths contrive;
Tradesmen affected uncouth words to cant,
And blunder in terms non-significant;
Each Company would be thought a little Nation
And coin a Dialect in their own fashion:
Artists grew Mock-Divines, and needs would teach.
Their tricks in mystic words 'bove vulgar reach.
Thus were we at a loss, and none could tell
What Trav'llers, Grandsires, Books or Friends meant well.
We Would still been thral'd to the Schoolboys stupid task,
Posed with hard English Words, to stop and ask;
Gallants had paid their Crowns to see the Play,
And never known first what meant an Opera;
Had not this thread been spun to lead them through
Our Tongue, grown Labyrinth and Monster too.
Confusion, in this Book, in Order's set,
An Heap is formed into an Alphabet:
Old Babels Ruins this in part repairs
And in an handsome Work the Rubbish rears,
Scattered thence to our Isle; nor shall we now
Unto their Jars our disacquaintance ow.
Rank't in the first Class of Moderns this would be,
Had not Wits taken toy at industry,
And thought all profitable subjects dull,
'Cause they too solid are to pierce their Skull,
Pervious to naught but what to the ear best chimes,
Sliding in low, or cap'ring in high Rhymes.
But, since all Science first from Notions springs.
Notions are known by Words; there is nothing brings,
Then treating these, to Knowledge more advance,
Held Pedantry by witty Ignorance.
In fine, what is due t'industrious observation,
And re-acquainting our self-stranger Nation
With its disguised self; what is merited
By rendering our hard English Englished;
What, when our Tongue grew Gibberish, to be then
National Interpreter to Books and Men;
What ever praise does such deserts attend,
Know, Reader, it is thy debt unto my Friend.
J: S:

GLOSSOGRAPHIA: OR A DICTIONARIE INTERPRETING HARD WORDS.
A
A Is the first Letter among the Greeks, which they call Alpha, from the first
of the Hebrews, Aleph: It is sometimes used in numbers, as Alpha the first,
Beta the second, Gamma the third. In the Greek composition it has a diverse use;
but the privative is most to our purpose; for being set before a simple word,
it deprives or takes away its proper signification.

Cicero calls A, literam salutarem, a comfortable Letter; because it was a note
of Absolution; but C, literam tristem, a sorrowful letter; because it denoted
Condemnation. See Ignoramus.

Abacted (abactus) driven away by violence or stealth; also deposed.

Abaddon (Hebr. (...) Abadh*) the Devil, so called in the New Testam. Apoc
9.11. quasi, A bad one; it properly signifies one that burns with a desire of
destroying men.

Abandon (from the Span. Abandonar) to banish or prescribe: to leave or forsake.

Abannition (abannitio) a banishing for a year, properly among the Greeks for
manslaughter.

Abate (from the Fr. Abatre* i. to break down or destroy) signifies, in its
vulgar sense, to diminish or take away; as to abate the courage of a man; so
one that abateth in Lands and Tenements, by his entry diminishes and takes away
the freehold in Law descended to the Heir. In another sense it signifies to
beat down or overthrow, as to abate Castles, Houses and the like; and to abate
a Writ, is to destroy it for a time through want of good ground or other
defect: And hence comes Abatement, which in our Common Law, is an entry into
Land by interposition of one that has no right after the death of the Ancestor,
and before the entry of the Heir.

Abba (Syriack) Father; So Christ expounds it, Mark. 14.36. and St. Paul, Romans
3.15.

Abbat or Abbot (from Hebr. (...) Abh, or the Syriack Abba, i.e. Father) a
spiritual Lord that has the rule and pre-eminence over a Religious House.

Abbord (from the Italian abbordare) to go near the shore; also to board or
grapple with a ship. Florio.

Abeyance or Abayence (from the Fr. Bayer, i. to gape, covet, or expect) our
Lawyers would signify hereby a kind of hope or longing expectance; because
those things that are in Abeyance, though for the present in no man, yet they
are, in hope and expectation, belonging to him who is next to enjoy them. When
the Parson of a Church dies, we say the Freehold is in abeyance (because the
Church is in expectation of a successor) in Potentia, as Logicians phrase it.
Co. on Lit. l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 646.

Abbreviator (Latin) one that abridges or makes a brief draught of a thing. In
Rome there are Officers belonging to the Pope, called Abbreviators de parco
majori (whose Office is to endite letters at request of suppliants, which
inditing is termed a rough draught, or copy of the Request) And Abbreviators
also de parco minori, whom the Italians call Giannizzeri, who also attend on
the expedition of Letters. 1. Part Treasury of Times.

Abbreviature (abbreviatura) a brief writing, an Abridgment or brief of a thing.

Abdals, a kind of Religious people among the Persians who take their name from
Abdala, Father of Mahomet; they have no abode, vow poverty, lodge in Churches,
etc. Herb. Travels, p 167.

Abdera. A City in Thrace, where Democritus the laughing Philosopher lived.
Hence Abderian laughter is used for mad, foolish, or incessant laughter; and
Abderite, for Democritus, or any inhabitant of that place.

Abdicate (abdico) to reject, to renounce, to refuse.

Abdication (abdicatio) a rejecting or refusing.

Abdominous (from abdomen) pertaining to the outward or former part of the
belly, or to an insatiable panch; unweildy, gross, panch-bellied. Mr. Fuller.

Abduct (abduco) to lead away by force, or flattery; to entice, to withdraw.

Abduction (abductio) a leading or taking away.

Abecedary (abecedarius) pertaining to the Cross-row, or the A, B, C.

Abecedarian (abecedarius) one that teaches or learns the Cross-row, or the A,
B, C.

Abel (Hebr.) a man's name, signifying mourning or vanity.

Abequitate (abequito) to ride away or from.

Aberration (aberratio) a wandering or straying out of the way. Dr. Brown, in
his Vulgar Errors, uses the word Aberrancy, in the same sense.

Abessed or Abbaised (Fr. abaisse) debased, dejected, humbled, bent, or brought
down. Rush. Dialog.

Abet, in our Common Law signifies to encourage or set on to some evil: also
to maintain or patronize.

Abgregate (abgrego) to lead out or from the flock, to separate.

Abhorrency (from abhorreo) an abhorring, hating, or detesting. L. Bacon.

Abject (abjectus) cast away, condemned, base.

Abigat (Hebr.) the Fathers joy, or Father of joy.

Abissines. See Abyssines.

Abition (abitio) a going away or dying.

Abjudicate (abjudico) to give away by judgment.

Abjuration (abjuratio) a forswearing or renouncing by Oath. In our Common Law
it is an Oath taken to forsake the Realm for ever. But there is a latter Oath
so called; which concerns matters of belief, and was confirmed and established
by Ordinance, 1643. ca. 15. and enlarged 1656. ca. 16. which may be tendered to
any person, suspected of Popish Recusancy, at the age of 16. and is impugned by
a notable Treatise called the Christian Moderator, Part 3.

Ablactation (ablactatio) a weaning as children from the Mothers Teat, or young
beasts from their dam.

Ablation (ablatio) a taking away or from, a bearing away by stealth.

Ablectick (ablectus) that is set forth or garnished for sale.

Ablegation (ablegatio) a sending forth or out of the way.

Ablepsy (ablepsia) blindness of mind, unadvisedness, inconsiderateness.

Abligate (abligo) to bind from.

Ablocate (abloco) to set to hire, to take from one and set to another.

Ablution (ablutio) a washing off, a rensing away.

Abnegate (abnego) to deny earnestly or refuse, to say no.

Abnodate (abnodo) to prune or cut away knots from Trees.

Abolition (abolitio) an abolishing, disannulling or destroying utterly.

Abone (from the Ital. abonare or abbonare) to make good or seasonable, to
ripen.

Abominate (abominor) to detest or abhor.

Abortion (abortio) the casting of the young, a bringing forth before time. Dr.
Brown uses the word (Abortment) in this sense, and I have read Aborcement.

Abortive (abortivus) any thing brought forth before its time, that is
delivered untimely, still-born.

Abradacarba (whence or what language quaere, but) Samonicus Serenus ascribes a
virtue to the word against Agues. Cambden.

Abraiamins, a certain kind of Sorcerers or Enchanters among the Indians.
Treasury of Times.

Abrasion (abrasio) a shaving away.

Abrenunciation (abrenunciatio) a forsaking or renouning.

Abricot or Apricot plumb, quasi in aprico coctus. i. ripened in the Sun;
because they grow not, unless in the Sun and warmth. Min.

Abrodictical (abrodiaetus) that feeds daintily, curious in diet.

Abrogate (abrogo) to disannul, take away or repeal: to lay aside, as of no use
or fruit. See Prorogue.

Abrupt (abruptus) broken off, rash, sudden, out of order.

Absolonism, The opinion or practice of Absalom, i. disobedience or rebellion
against Parents.

Abscession (abscessio) a departing or going away.

Abscission (abscissio) a cutting off or away.

Absconding (abscondens) hiding, concealing.

Absconsion (absconsio) a hiding or concealing.

Absentaneous (absentaneus) done in absence, pertaining to absence.

Absolution (absolutio) a dismissing, forgiving or discharging.

Absonant Absonous (absonus) untuneable, jarring, unlike, confused.

Absorb (absorbeo) to sup up all, to drink up, to consume, to devour. Bac.

Absorpt (absorptus) supped up, devoured, swallowed up.

Abstemious (abstemius) that drinks no wine, sober, temperate, moderate in diet.

Abstention (abstentio) an abstaining, or a withholding an heir from taking
possession of his Land. Cressy.

Absterge (abstergeo) to wipe away, to cleanse or put away. Feltham.

Abstract (from abstraho) a small work or draught taken out of a greater. Also
a term in Logic. See Concrete.

Abstersion (abstersio) a wiping away, or wiping out, a cleansing.

Abstersive (abstersus) that wipes or makes clean.

Abstrude (abstrudo) to thrust away or out, to hide, to shut up. Fell.

Abstruse Abstrusive (abstrusus) hid, secret, dark, not easy to be understood.

Abstrusity (from abstrudo) darkness, secrecy. Dr. Brown.

Absurd (absurdus) foolish, harsh, without wit or grace.

Abvolate (abvolo) to fly or vanish away.

Abyrtace, a dainty kind of meat with the Medes and other barbarous Nations,
sharp, and quick of taste, to provoke and please the appetite, composed of
Leeks, Garlike, Cresses, Senvie, Pomgranate kernels, and such like. Plut. Mor.

Abysme (abysmus) the same with Abyss.

Abyssines (Abyssini) the people of that part of Aethiopia which is subject to
Prester John.

Abyss (abyssus) a bottomless gulf or pit, any deepness that cannot be
sounded. Hence

Abysmal. Deep, bottomless.

Academy (Academia) a woody or shady place near Athens, where Plato taught; so
called from Ecademus, one of the Hero's; now taken for any famous Shool or
University; hence Philosophers of the Sect of Plato are called Academicks. In
Alexandria (now called Scanderia) in Egypt, Gautenus (says Heylyn) read
Divinity and Philosophy in the year 180. from whom it is thought the Orders of
instituting Universities first began in Christendom.

Academick Academical (academicus) belonging to such a School or Academy,

Acatalepsy (acatalepsia) incomprehensibleness: the Opinion of the Sceptiques.

Accelerator (Latin) a hastner. Bac.

Accelerate (accelero) to hasten or make speed unto.

Accent (accentus) tune, tenor, the rising and falling of the voice, the due
sound over any word or letter, or the mark of any letter which directs the
pronunciation. There are also accents of sentences; as in the close of a period
we let fall the voice, in a demand, raise it.

Acceptilation (acceptilatio) a verbal Acquittance.

Accerse (accersio) to call forth, to send for; to provoke, to accuse.

Access (accessus) an approaching or coming to, an increasing, a growing, a
passage, or a way to a place. The Access of an Ague, is the approach or coming
of the fit, and the Recess is when the fit is over or leaves the Patient. In
Lancashire they call the Ague it self the Access, as, such a one is sick of the
Access.

Accessory Accessory (accessarius) guilty of a sa^il^: in our Common Law it
signifies a man guilty of a fellonious offense not principally, but by
participation, as by commandment, advise or concealment.

Acclamation (acclamatio) a shouting or crying out in liking or disliking.

Acclivity (acclivitas) steepness.

Accolyte. See Acolyte.

Accommodate (acco^modo) to compose, fit, apply to, or lend.

Accommodatitious (accommodatitius) proper, fit, convenient; also applied,
inclined, or disposed.

Accordant (Fr.) agreeable, well fitting unto, concordant.

Accordance (Fr.) an accord or agreement; a concord in music.

Accort (Fr.) discreet, advised, circumspect, foreseeing; also subtle and
cunning.

Accost (from the Fr. Accoster, or Ital. accostare) to join side to side, to
approach or draw near to; also to affront.

Accoutred (from the Fr. Accoustre) attired, arraied, decked, apparelled.

Accoutrement (Fr. Accoustrement) attire, dressing, apparalling: also habit,
clothing, or raiment.

Accretion (accretio) an increasing, or growing.

Accumbing (accumbens) sitting at a Table, lying down. Dr. Br.

Accumulate (accumulo) to heap up, to increase or load; to gather in heaps.

Accurate (accuratus) curious, diligent, exact.

Accusative (accusativus) that whereby one is accused.

Ac-drinc (Sax.) a kind of drink made of Acornes, used of old, in time of
dearth and necessity. Sax. Dict.

Acephalick (acephalus) without head, title, or beginning.

Acephalists (acephali) a kind of Heretics, that had no Author or beginning;
the word importing as much.

Acerbity (acerbitas) a sour or sharp taste, cruelty, roughness.

Acerote (acerotus) full of chaff or straw, course, brown.

Acervate (acervo) to heap to gether, to mough up.

Acersecomick (Acersecomes) one whose hair was never cut.

Acetars (acetaria) sallets or sawces made of roots or herbs mixed with
vinegar, to stir up appetite.

Acetosity (acetositas) sourness, sharpness; the substance or taste of vinegar.

Acherontick (acheronticus) wanting joy and comfort; also pertaining to Hell,
from Acheron a Lake in Epirus, which (as Poets feigned) who ever passed over,
should never return; hence and for its ill color and taste it is taken for
Hell.

Acherusian (acherusius) pertaining to the Lake or River Acherusia, which is
taken for the entrance into Hell.

Acidity (aciditas) sharpness, sourness. Lord Bac.

Acid (acidus) sour, sharp, biting.

Acoustick (Gr.) pertaining to the sense of hearing, or that helps the hearing.
Bac.

Acolastick (acolastus) that lives under no correction, riotous.

Acolyte (acolythus) a Minister, whose office is to bring water, wine, and
light to the Altar: also a novice or young proficient.

Aconick (from aconitum) poisonous; or pertaining to the venomous herb called
Aconite.

Acqueste (Fr. from acquiro) purchases made, or things bought by the unmarried;
or by, or for only one, (therein different from conquests.)

Acquiesce (acquiesco) to be at rest or quiet, to rest upon, to lean or assent
unto.

Acquisition (acquisitio) a getting, obtaining, or purchasing.

Acre (Sax. Aeker) is a certain quantity of land, containing in length 40 Rods,
Poles or Pearches, and sour in breadth, or to that quantity, be the length more
or less, And, if a man erect a new Cottage, he must lay four Acres of land to
it after this measure, ordained by Stat. 31. Eliz. ca. 7.

Acrimony (acrimonia) sharpness, sourness.

Acreamatick (acreamaticus) that hearkens or gives ear to any thing, that
requires much study and search; also musical, harmonious, or delightful to the
ear and eye.

Acroatick, was that part of Aristotle's doctrine which he taught in the Lyceum,
wherein his more remote and subtle Philosophy was handled, and such things as
appertained to the contemplation of Nature, and dialectic disceptations. Hist.
Phil.

Acrocomick (acrocomus) that has long hair.

Acronychal (acronychus) belonging to those stars which rise in the twilight,
soon after Sun setting.

Acrosticks (acrostichis) a kind of verses, when the first or last letters of
every verse make some name, word, or sentence. As these upon Mors.

M ors solet innumeris morbis abrumpere vita M,
O mnia mors rostro devorat ipsa su O.
R ex, princeps, sapiens, servus, stulius, miser, aege R,
S is quicunque velis, pulvis and umbra sumu S.
Acteoned, Horned. A word made from Actaeon, who is poetically feigned to have
been turned into a Stag; and it is sometimes used in a waggish sense, for
Cuckolded.

Actifs, an order of Friars that wear Tawny habits, and feed on nothing but
roots Cotgrave.

Actitation (actitatio) a debating of a cause in the Law.

Actuality (actualitas) among Philosophers, signifies the perfection of
existence or being above forms; as when we say a man is, we say more then when
we say a man.

Actual sin. See Venial.

Actius Naevus, a Roman South-sayer of great fame, in the presence of Tarquin
did cut a Whetstone in two with a Razor; hence it is we use to say proverbially
sharper then Actius his Razor, as in Rel. Med.

Aculeate (aculeatus) that has a sting or prick, biting, vexing. Bac.

Acuminate (acumino) to make sharp-edged or pointed.

Acuminous (from acumen, minis) sharp edged or pointed: subtle in wit, of a
penetrating judgment.

Acupictor (Lat.) an Embroiderer, or any one that works with the Needle.

Acute (acutus) subtle sharp-edged, ingenious, crafty.

Acyrology (acyrologia) improper speech, or a speaking improperly.

Adage (adagium) a Proverb or common saying.

Adagial, proverbial or full of Adages.

Adam (Hebr. i. rubescere) any thing made of red earth; and because man is the
most excellent work made of earth, therefore the word Adam stands absolutely
for man; and Addam in the Persian tongue, signifies a man. Herb.

Adamantine (adamantinus) belonging to, or hard as an Adamant or Diamond;
invincible.

Adamical pertaining to Adam. Dr. Br.

Adamate (adamo) to love dearly, to love foolishly or wantonly; to desire
fervently.

Adamites (Adamiani) a Sect of Heretics begun in Bohemia about two hundred
years since, by Adamus Pastor an ignorant fellow, who pretended, forsooth, to
raise a sort of sanctified people, but indeed it was rather an herd of
shameless beasts; one proper mark of their profession was, to meet stark naked
in their Synagogues, which were sometimes hot Stoves, and none were to be
admitted into their number, but such as could stand stark naked before the rest
of their company, men and women, for the space of an hour, without shame or
blushing; they held sundry heretical Doctrines, as that in Christ there was but
one Nature, etc. There were in the third age after Christ, some that gave
beginning to such a Sect, but failing of acceptance, it dyed, or lay as it were
raked up in Embers till the forenamed Adamus blew this cole in Bohemia, and
afterward about the year 1535 in Holland, chiefly at Amsterdam, Vtricht, and
Emden, in which and many other places they are still conceived to be lurking.

Addiction (addictio) a deliverance of goods to the possession of another, or
to him that offers most.

Additament (additamentum) an addition or increase.

Addomestique (Fr.) tamed, made gentle, housal, familiar.

Adelantado (Spanish) (change the o into e then it is French) a Lord Deputy or
President of a Country for the King; a Princes Lieutenant in a Province; also a
General or Admiral.

Adeling (Sax.) a Prince or child of a King; a royal youth.

Adelman or Eadelman (Sax.) a Nobleman or Gentleman.

Ademption (ademptio) a taking away or from.

Addoulce (Fr. Adoulcir) to mitigate with sweetness, to make sweet. See Adulce.

Address or Adresse (Fr.) a direction; a short course, a near and ready way. I
address my self to such a person, is to resort unto, make toward, or make my
application to him.

Adecatist (from a and Decas) one that is against paying Tithes or Tenths.

Adeption (adeptio) an obtaining, acquisition or getting.

Adequate (adaequo) to make even, plain, or level; to advance himself, that he
may be even with, or like another.

Adhamate (adhamo) to catch or take with Hook or Net.

Adhesion (adhaesio) a cleaving or sticking unto, a fastening to a thing.

Adjacent (adjacens) that lies near unto or borders upon.

Adiaphorie (adiaphoria) indifferency.

Adiaphorous, Indifferent. Dr- Tailor uses it in his Liberty of Prophesying.

Adjournment (Fr.) is, in our Common Law, an assignment of a day in Court, or a
putting off or dissolving a Court till another day; or a warning to appear at a
day.

Adipal (adipalis) fat or gross.

Adjument (adjumentum) help, aid, or assistance.

Adjunct (adjunctus) taken Substantively, is a quality joined to another thing,
as heat to fire; weight to lead, etc.

Adjunct (adjectively) joined to or added unto.

Adjure (adjuro) to command a thing, by interposing the authority and name of
God or Christ; As we adjure you by Jesus. Act. 19.13.

Adjuration (adjuratio) a requiring an oath of another. Also an earnest
charging or commanding another to say or do somewhat. As when Caiphas said to
Christ, I adjure thee by the living God, to tell us if thou art Christ, the Son
of God. Mat. 26.63.

Adjutant (adjutans) helping or aiding, properly in that which is good. One
that helps another in the discharge of an Office, which is also signified by
Coadjutor. Also an Officer in an Army so called.

Adjust (Fr. Adjuster) to place justly, set aptly, couch evenly, join
handsomely, match fitly, dispose orderly, several things together.

Adjuvate (adjuvo) to help or aid, to further or favor.

Adjutory (adjutorius) that helps or pertains to aid or helping; the two bones
which extend from the shoulders to the Elbow, are called Adjutory bones.

Administrator (Lat.) in our Common Law is properly taken for him that has the
goods of a man, dying intestate, committed to his charge by the Ordinary, and
is accountable for the same, whenever it shall please the Ordinary to call him
thereunto. An Administrator is by the Statute of 31. Edw. 3. cap 11. authorized
to dispose of the goods of the deceased as fully, and to be accountable for the
same, as Executors. Of Administrators and Executors, see a Treatise written by
M. Wentworth of Lincolns Inn.

Administratrix (Lat.) she that has that charge or office.

Admiration (admiratio) wondering at, marvelling. An Admiration point is thus
[!] As when we say, O tempora! O Mores!

Ad Octo or Vt Octo. A term in Philosophy, which signifies the superlative
degree; because in Philosophy the eighth degree is the highest, in which they
distinguish qualities or accidents.

Adolescency (adolescentia) Youth: the age from 15 to 25.

Adonai (Hebr.) a Lord, or sustainer; the Jews use this as an ordinary name of
God: On Festivals they pronounce Jehovah.

An Adonique (adonicum) a kind of short verse consisting of a Dactyle and
Spondee, such is Rara juventus; so called from Adonis, in whose, honor they
were first made.

Adopt (adopto) to choose, or take to be ones heir or child.

Adoption (adoptio) a free election or choosing one for his child out of the
course of inheritance; a taking or admitting one to be his child by favor, who
is not so by nature.

Adoxy (adoxia) ignominy, shame; slander, infamy.

Adrian Adriatique Sea (Adriaticum Mare) the gulf of Venice, extending 700
miles in length, and 140 in breadth, was so called of Adria, once a famous
Sea-Town on the mouth of Eridanus or Poe. Heylyn.

Advectitious (advectitius) which is brought or carried unto.

Adventual Adventive or Adventitious (adventivus) that comes by chance,
besides the purpose, unlooked for.

Advent (adventus) the time from the Sunday that falls either upon St. Andrews
day or next to it, till Christmas; which time was wont to be spent in some
extraordinary devotion, by way of preparation for the Feast of the Nativity of
our Savior then approaching. The words bare signification is, a coming unto,
or apptoaching.

Adversative (adversativus) pertaining to an Adversary, which is contrary or
against some person or thing.

Advesperate (advesperascit) it waxes or grows toward night.

Advigilate (advigilo) to watch diligently.

Adulation (adulatio) properly the fawning of a Dog, slattery.

Adulatory (adulatorius) pertaining to slattery.

To Adulce (Fr. Adoulcir) to sweeten, mollify or appease. L. Bac. Hen. 7.

An Adult (adultus) one of full age. As Adulta virgo, a maid that is
marriageable.

Adulter (adultus) grown to full age, come to his full ripeness, force and
bigness.

Adulterate (adultero) to commit adultery; to counterfeit or corrupt.

Adultery (adulterium) properly spoken of married persons; but if only one of
two persons, by whom this sin is committed, be married, it makes Adultery; and
this is felony by Act of Parl. 1650. ca. 10. Adulterium, seems to have taken
that name, as it were ad alterius thorum, i. to another bed, which the
Adulterer always aims at.

Adumbrate (adumbro) to shadow, to resemble, to draw a picture imperfectly.

Adumbration (adumbratio) a shadowing or bare portraying of a thing; also an
imitation or expressing of another thing somewhat to the likeness and nature of
the same.

Aduncity (aduncitas) crookedness, hookedness.

Aduncous Adunque (aduncus) crooked downwards, hooked. Bac.

Advecate (advocatus) a man of Law that pleads, assists, or sollicits another
man's matter, so called ab advocando, i. calling unto, because he is called to
his Clients assistance; most properly a Procurator or Doctor of the Civil Law.

Advowzen (advocatio) the reversion of a spiritual promotion, and signifies, in
our Common Law, a right to present a Clergyman to a Benefice, as much as Jus
Patronatus in the Canon Law. Of this there are two sorts., Advowzen in gross,
which belongs or adhears to any Manor, as parcel of the right of it; and
Avowzen dependent, which depends on a Manor, as appurtenant thereunto.

Adure (aduro) to roast, burn or parch. Bac.

Adust Adusted (adustus) burnt, parched, vexed.

Adustible, burnable, parchable.

Adustion (adustio) parching or burning.

Adynamous (adynamus) weak, impowerful.

Aedil (aedilis) See Edil.

Aegipans (aegipanes) monsters having bodies like men, and feet like Goats,
Wood-Gods.

Era. See Epoche.

Aereal (aerius) belonging to the air.

Aeromancy (aeromantia) a kind of divination by the air.

Aeromantick (aeromanticus) pertaining to such divinations.

Affability (affabilitas) courtesy in speaking and hearing others, kindness to
men.

Affectation (affectatio) too much curiosity, study of eloquence against
nature, an extreme laboring without discretion to imitate another.

Affeerours ( afferatores, alias affidati) are those that are appointed in
Court-Leets upon oath to mulct or set fines upon the heads of such as have
committed faults arbitrably punishable, and have no express penalty set down by
Statute.

To Affiance (from ad and fides) to betroth, or make sure.

Affictitious (affictitius) feigned or counterfeit.

Affidavit, is borrowed from the Canonists, among whom Affidare is used for
fidem dare, and so it signifies, he has sworn or given his faith; but with us
it is generally taken for an Oath, or Deposition put in writeing.

Affinage (Fr.) a fineing or refining of metals.

Affinity (affinitas) kindred or alliance by marriage; sometimes likeness or
agreement.

Affirmative (affirmatus) that affirms or avoucheth.

Affluence (affluentia) plenty, abundance.

Afforest (afforesto) to turn ground into Forest.

Affray (from the Fr. Affres, i. a fright) may be without word or blow given,
as if a man show himself furnished with Armor or Weapons not usually worn, it
may strike a fear into others unarmed. For which reason it is a common wrong,
and inquireable in a Leet; which makes it differ from Assault, which is always
a particular injury. 4 H. 6, 10.8 Ed. 4, 5.

Affricate (affrico) to rub upon or against, to grate or crumble.

Africa (Gr.) one of the four parts of the world lying Southward; herein is
Barbary, Numidia, Lybia, the Land of Negroes, Aethiopia interior and exterior,
Egypt and the Islands. It is called Africa of the Greek word Phrice, which
signifies cold, and the privative A; so, Africa signifies a Country without
cold, as indeed it is.

Africa African (Africus) pertaining to Africa, or to the Southwest wind.
Africk-bird, taken for a coward or one in gay clothes that has little Spirit.

Aga (from the Gr. (...), i. duco, to lead) an Officer that commands the great
Turks Janissaries, and is the third in repute in his Empire. Sands.

Agamist (agamus) he that is unmarried.

Agarick (agaricum) a white and soft Mushrom, or excrescence growing on the
Larch Tree; also a root in Sarmatia that helps digestion. Cotgr.

Age (aetas) that part of a man's life which is from his birth to this or his
last day. A man, by our Common Law has two ages; the age of 21 years is termed
his full age, and 14 the age of discretion. Lit. l. 2. c. 4. In a woman there
are six. 1. At seven years of age the Lord her Father may sistrain his Tenants
for aid to marry her; for at those years she may consent to Matrimony. 2. At
the age of nine years she is Dowable. 3. At twelve years she is able finally to
confirm her former consent given to Matrimony. 4. At fourteen years she is
enabled to receive her land into her own hands, and shall be out of Ward if she
be of this age at the death of her Ancestor. 5. At sixteen years she shall be
out of Ward, though at the death of her Ancestor she was within the age of
fourteen years. 6. At one and twenty years she is able to alienate her Lands
and Tenements. At sixteen years of age every person may be summoned to take the
Oath of Abjuration. Acts 1656. c. 16. Proclus (a Greek Author) divides the life
of man into seven Ages. 1. Infancy, contains four years. 2. Childhood contains
ten years. 3. Youth-hood or Adolescency consists of eight years, that is, from
fourteen to two and twenty. 4. Young manhood continues nineteen years, that
is, from two and twenty to forty one. 5. Ripe manhood has fifteen years of
continuance, and therefore makes his progress to 56 years. 6. Old age, which,
in adding 12 to 56 makes up 68. 7. Decrepit age is limited from 68 years to 88.
See more divisions of Age, if you please in first part Treasury of Times, p.
377. and in Vul. Err. p. 216.

Agelastick (from Agelastus, Grandfather of Crassus, who never laughed but once
in all his life and that was to see a Mare eat Thistles, hence) we use it for
one that seldom laughs; sad, or sullen.

Agemoglans or Agiam Oglans, are those Christian children, which are seized by
Turkish Officers, when they are between the age of ten, and eighteen or twenty,
to be made Janissaries, or for other service of the Great Turk. The word
signifies unexpert, or untutored youths.

Aggerate (aggero) to heap up, to increase.

Aggested (aggestus) heaped up, or laid on a heap. Fuller.

Agglomerate (agglomero) to fold or wind up in bottoms to gather together.

Agglutinate (agglutino) to join or glue together.

Aggrandisement (Fr.) a greatning, enlarging, advancement.

Aggrandize (from the Ital. Aggrandire) to greaten, augment, enlarge, increase,
or make great.

Aggravate (aggravo) to load or burden; to make a thing worse by words.

Aggregate (aggrego) to gather or assemble together, or in Troops.

Aggressor (Lat.) a setter upon, an Assailant, one that begins.

Aggression (aggressio) a setting upon or entrance into, an assault.

Agiograph (agiographa) a holy writing, a holy Writ. See Hagiographer.

Agist (from the Fr. gist) signifies in our Common Law to take in and feed the
Cattle of strangers in the Kings Forest, and to gather the money due for the
same to the Kings use: the Officers that do this are called Agistors, or
Guest-takers, of whom the King had four in every Forest, where he had any
Pawnage; their function is termed Agistment, which is also used for the taking
in of cattle into the Parks or grounds of Subjects. Hence comes the word
gisting, or (as the Country people corrupt it) joysting of cattle. Manwood For.
Laws. See Pawnage.

Agitable (agitabilis) that may easily be moved or tossed.

Agitate (agito) to do often, to toss, shake or discuss.

Aglet (Fr. Aguillette) a little plate of any metal, the tag of a point.

Agnail (from the Sax. Angnaegle) a sore under the nail of a man or beast, a
Corn growing upon the Toes.

Agnation (agnatio) kindred by the Fathers side.

Agnition (agnitio) knowledge or acknowledging.

Agnize (agnosco) to acknowledge, confess or avow, to know by some token, to
admit or allow.

Agnominate (agnomino) to allude to ones name, to nickname.

Agony (agonia) horror or trembling, torment of body and mind.

Agonism (agonisma) the reward or prize won by activities; the reward of
victory.

Agonarch or Agonothete (Agonotheta) a Judge or Overseer in feats of activity,
a Master of Revels.

Agonist (agonista) a Champion, one that contends in masteries.

Agonistic Agonistical (agonisticus) warlike or skilful in exercises.

Agrarian Laws, were among the Romans, preferred by the Tribunes of the
Commons, as well for division of lands and fields (conquered from the enemies)
among the Commons, as to restrain the possessions of the Nobles within a
certain limit. Livy.

Agreat (Sax.) altogether. As to take a work agreat, is to take the whole work
altogether, or, as some say, by the lump.

Agrestical (agrestis) pertaining to the field, rude, rustical.

Agricole (agricola) a Husbandman, Farmer, or Plowman.

Agriculture Agricolation (agricultura) husbandry or Tillage of Land.

Agroter (Sax.) cloyed, made big, swelled. Chaucer.

Ajax Shield, a proverb for a sure defense; from Ajax a famous Warrior of the
Greeks.

Airie of Hawks (Fr. Air) is that we call a nest of other Birds.

Alabaster (alabastrum) a kind of marble, white and very clear, which by reason
of its natural coldness, preserves things long from corruption; and therefore
they used to make boxes of it, to keep sweet Ointments, and Tombs to bury
Princes and great Personages.

Alabandical (alabandicus) barbarous or sottish.

Alay, A term in hunting, when the Heart is in full chase, and one lies near a
covert and shakes off some fresh Hounds into the Cry, to supply and make it the
stronger, lest some over-haled dogs should happen to sink in the latter end of
the chase.

Alacrity (alacritas) cheerfulness, liveliness, courage, joyfulness of heart.

Alarm (conclamatio ad arma) a calling together to Arms, as is usually done in
a Garrison, upon the approach of an enemy.

Alazony (alazonia) arrogance, or pride.

Albe (alba) a long white linen garment, wherewith Priests are clothed when
they say Mass, by which Albe is represented the long white robe, by derision
put on our Savior in the presence of Herod. Treatise of Mass.

Albion, Great Britain, so called, either from the Greek word Olbion that is
happy, or from Albis rupibus, its white rocks.

Albis (Lat.) as when we say a book in Albis, that is a book in quires or
unbound. A term more used beyond Sea, then with us; we say in Quires, the
French, in blanc.

Albor (Lat.) any whiteness or white color, the white of an egg.

Albuginous (albugineus) pertaining to the white spot in the eye, or to the
white of an egg, or to any white color. Dr. Br.

Alchaick Verse ( Alcaicum Carmen, from Alcaeus, the inventor) has, after two
Dactiles, two Trochees, thus- vv-vv-v-v. But, according to Fabricius, it has
five feet, he places the first a Spondee or Iambick; the second an Iambick, the
third a long syllable, the fourth a Dactyle, the fifth a Dactyle or Amphimacre,
and gives this example.

Vides ut alta stet nive candidum
Soracte, nec jam sustineant onus.
Alchymy (alchymia) the art of distilling or drawing quintessence out of metals
by fire, separating the pure from the impure, setting at liberty such bodies as
are bound and imprisoned, and bringing to perfection such as are unripe. Bac.

Alchymist (alchymista) one that uses or is skilled in that Art, a Chymick. A
melter or extracter of Quintessences, from the Gr. (...), and that from the
Hebr. Alkum.

Alchoran or Alcoran (i. Scripture) the book of the Turks Religion, first
broached by Mahomet, who was an Arabian, and born in the year 572. his Father
was a Pagan, and his Mother a Jew. In Arabia he was chosen Captain of a
rebellious multitude, among whom he inducted a new Religion (which he pretended
was revealed to him by the Angel Gabriel) consisting partly of Jewish
Ceremonies, which he learned of one Abdalla, partly of Christian Precepts
taught him by Sergius a Nestorian Monk, and partly of other fantastical
sopperies, which his own inventions suggested to him. This Religion (if we may
so call it) Osmen the fourth Caliph of the Saracens (who married Mahomets
Daughter, and by that means got a sight of all his papers) reduced into four
Volumes, and divided into several Chapters, the whole Body of it is but an
Exposition and gloss of these eight Commandments.

1. Every one ought to believe, that God is a great God and only God, and
Mahomet is his Prophet.

2. Every one must marry to increase the Sectaries of Mahomet.

3. Every one must give of his wealth to the poor.

4. Every one must make his prayers five times a day.

5. Every one must keep a Lent one month in the year.

6. Be obedient to thy Parents.

7. Thou shall not kill.

8. Do to others as thou would be done unto.

And the Turk writes on the outside of his Alcoran, Let no man touch this Book
but he that is pure. M.S. in Arch. Bod. You may read more of this heathenish
superstition in Dr. Heylins description of Arabia, and indeed in the Book it
self, not long since printed in English.

Alembick (alembicus) A Still or Stillatory to distill waters.

Alectryomachy (alectryomachia) a Cock-fight.

Alectryomancy (Gr.) divination by a Cock or by the Cock-stone. Cotgr.

Alebromancy (Gr.) divination by barley meal mixed with wheat.

Aleger, the like kind of liquor made of sour Ale, as Vinegar of wine. Bac.
Not. Hist. 155.

Alexipharmacal (from Alexipharmacum) that is good against poison, enchantments
and execrations.

Aletude (aletudo) fatness of body, grossness.

Alferes (Span.) an Ensign or Ancient-bearer in war.

Algebra (Syriack) the Art of figurative numbers or of equation. An Art
consisting both of Arithmetic and Geometry; Chaucer calls it Algrim.

Algebraical, pertaining to that Art.

Algid (algidus) chil, cold.

Algifical (algificus) which makes chil, or cold.

Algidty Algor (algiditas) great cold or chilness.

Algorism (algorismus) the Art or use of Ciphers, or of numbering by Ciphers;
skill in accounting.

Algorist (algorista) one skilful in reckonings or figuring.

Alhidade, a rule on the back of the Astrolabe to measure heights, breadths,
and depths. Du Bartas.

Alibie (alibilis) nourishable, comfortable.

Alicant Wine, So called from Alicante, the chief Town of Mursia in Spain,
where great store of Mulberries grow, the juice whereof makes the true Alican
wine.

Alienate (alieno) to alter the property of a thing, to sell or estrange.

Alien (alienigena) a sorraigner, a stranger born, and not here enfranchised.

Aliment (alimentum) any thing that nourishes the body.

Alimonie (alimonia) nourishment, maintenance; But in a modern legal sense it
signifies, that portion or allowance, which a married woman sues for, upon any
occasional separation from her husband, wherein she is not charged with
Elopement or Adultery. This was formerly recoverable in the Spiritual Court,
but now only in Chancery.

Alimental Alimentary (alimentarius) pertaining to nourishment.

Alimentation, nourishment, or that causes or breeds nourishment.

Allaborate (allaboro) to labor vehemently, to increase a thing by labor.

Allaud (allaudo) to praise or commend.

Allectation (allectatio) an alluring, or enticing.

Allective (alliciens) that allures or enticeth.

Allegory (allegoria) a dark speech or sentence which must be understood
otherwise then the litteral interpretation shows, and is prosecuted through the
whole sentence. As when St. Jo. Baptist speaking of our Savior. Mat. 3, said,
Whose fan is in his hand, and he shall make clean his floor, and gather the
wheat into his barn, but the chaff he shall burn with unquenchable fire. The
meaning is, that Christ being supreme Judge of all, shall separate the good
from the evil, rewarding the one in Heaven, and punishing the other in Hell
fire. Bull.

Allegorical, pertaining to, or spoken by an Allegory.

Alleluiah or Alleluia (Heb.) Praise ye our Lord, used as a sign of exultation.
Paulus Diaconus writes, that when the Britains were invaded by the Saxons and
Picts, and ready to fight a battle with them, they were admonished by Germanus
a French Bishop (sent hither with St. Lupus, to confute the Pelagian Heresy)
that they should say as he said, and forthwith he cried out aloud Alleluiah,
which when the whole Army of Britains had done, the sound thereof struck such a
terror into their enemies, that they presently fled, and the Britains had the
victory. De gestis Romans l. 15. and Bid Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 20.

This Alleluia (says a learned Author) is an Hebrew word, composed of Allelu
and Jah, whereof the Imperative Mood Allelu (as near as can be uttered, for in
it self it signifies joy beyond all utterance) is as much as praise ye; and the
word Jah is one of the ten names signifying our Lord, which some think to be
the first word that children pronounce, when they are new born. This word
Alleluiah the Jews much esteem, and pronounce many times together in their
Synagogues.

Allevate Alleviate (allevo) to lift up, ease, or comfort, to assuage or
diminish.

Alliciency (from allicio) an allurement or enticing, a drawing or persuading
unto.

Alligation (alligatio) a tying or binding to.

Alliant or Ally, one that is in league, or of kindred with one.

Allision (allisio) a dashing against or upon, a rubbing against.

Alliteration (alliteratio) a figure in Rhetoric, repeating and playing on the
same letter.

Allobrogical (from Allabroges) of or belonging to the people of Savoy.

Allocation (allocatio) a placing or adding unto; also allowance made upon an
account.

Allocution Alloquy (allocutio) a speaking or talking unto, a communication or
parley.

Allodial Lands (terrae allodiales) free-lands, for which no Rents, Fines, nor
Services are due.

Allude (alludo) to speak any thing which has resemblance, or is privily
directed to touch another matter, to scoff covertly, to play to or with
another, to speak by relation to any thing.

Alluminor (from the Fr. Allumer, i. to lighten) one that colors or paints in
paper or parchment; so called, because he gives light and ornament by his
colors to the Letters or other figures colored. An. 1. Ric. 3. ca. 9.

Allusion (allusio) a likening or applying of one thing to another, and it is
as it were a dalliance or playing with words like in sound, unlike in sense, by
changing, adding, or substracting a letter or two; so that words nicking and
resembling one the other, are appliable to different significations. As the
Almighty (if we may herein use a sacred Authority) in ratification of his
promise to the seed of Isaac, changed Abram, high Father, into Abraham, that
is, Father of many; and Sarai that is, my Dame, into Sara, that is, Lady or
Dame. The Greeks nicked Antiochus Epiphanes, that is, the famous, with
Epimanes, that is, the furious. The Romans likewise played with bibbing Tiberius
Nero, calling him Biberius Mero. So in Quintilian, the sour fellow Placidus was
called Acidus, and of late one called Scaliger, Aliger. Came. Rem. fol. 158.

Alluvion (alluvio) the still rising and swelling of a river, a deluge or
inundation.

Almanac (Hebr. Almanahh) a Prognostication or Calendar. But Verstegan derives
it from the Germans; they used (says he) to engrave upon certain squared sticks
about a foot in length, the courses of the Moons of the whole year, whereby
they could always certainly tell when the New and Full Moons should happen, as
also their Festival days; and such a carved stick they called an Al-mon-aght,
that is to say, Al-mon heed, to wit, the regard or observation of all the
Moons, and hence is derived the name Almanac. Verstegan p. 46, 47.

Almicantharats and Almadarats, Arabian names of Lines or Circles, which are
imagined to pass through every degree of the Meridian Parallel to the Horizon,
up to the Zenith. Du Bartas.

Alody (alodium) signified anciently what in the more strict sense Inheritance
does in our Law, that is, Lands descended from the Ancestor. Seldom.

Almner Almoner or Amner (eleemosynarius) is an Officer of a King or Princes
house, whose function is carefully to collect the fragments and distribute them
every day to the poor: Charitably to visit the sick and leprous, those that are
in prison, poor widows, needy persons, and those that have no constant abode;
likewise to receive and faithfully distribute cast horses, robes, money and
other things given in Alms; he ought also to stir up the King with often
admonitions, especially on Festival days, to be bountiful in giving Alms, and
to beseech that his rich Robes may not be given to Parasites, Masquers,
Stage Players, or the like, but may go toward the increase of his Alms. Fleta
l. 2. cap. 22.

Alnath, is a fixed star in the horns of Aries, from whence the first mansion
of the Moon takes his name, and is called Alnath. Chaucer.

Aloes. See Lignum Vitae.

Aloe Zocatrina, the juice of an herb brought hither dry out of Zocatara, an
Affrican Island, the best whereof is clear, clean and red, like the color of a
Liver; It is very bitter, but an excellent medicine to purge choleric humors
out of the Stomach, yet not good to be taken inwardly by such as are troubled
with the Hemorrhoides. Bull.

Alogick (alogicus) unreasonable, inconsiderate.

Alogy (alogia) without reason; also unmeasurable excess in cheer.

Alopecy (alopecia) a disease causing the hair to fall, the Foxes evil;
shedding of the hair.

Alosha, A kind of drink in Spain, which they drink between meals in hot
weather, it is made of water and honey, and is much of the taste of our Medea.

Alpha ((...)) the first letter of the Greeks called of us (a) (as Omega is the
last) it is used for the first or chief of any thing; Almighty God is called in
the Apocalypse, Alpha and Omega, i. the beginning and ending, first and last.
Rev. 13.13.

Alphabet (alphabetum) the cross-row of letters, the A, B, C. so called from
Alpha, and Beta the two first letters of the Greek Alphabet or Cross-row, and
therefore most peculiar to the Greek tongue.

Alphabetical (alphabeticus) belonging to or done after the order of the A, B,
C.

Alphitomancy (Gr.) divination by barley meal.

Alphonso, a famous Musician, who invented a particular way of playing on the
Viol, which still retains his name.

Altercation (altercatio) an angry reasoning, contention or brawling in words.

Alterative (alterativus) changed, or that may be changed. Bac.

Alternative Alternate (alternatus) done or changed by courses or turns one
after another, interchangeable.

Alternity (from alternus) a succession by course, a changing by turn.

Altiloquum (altiloquus) that speaks loud or of high matters.

Altisonous (altisonus) which sounds clear or loud.

Altitonant (altitonans) that thunders from above, an Epithete of Jupiter used
by Poets.

Altitude (altitudo) height, depth or loftiness.

Altivolant (altivolans) flying on high, or soaring aloft.

Alveary (alvearium) a Bee-hive, or the place where Bees or Bee-hives stand. It
may be used Metaphorically for a house full of Inhabitants, a Library full of
Books, or the like.

Alveated (alveatus) hollowed like a hive, vaulted or trenched.

Aluminous (aluminosus) done with or full of Alume, tasting of Alume. Vul. Er.

Alumnate (alumno) to nourish or feed.

Alutation (alutatio) a tawing, tanning or dressing of Leather.

Alytatk (alytarcha) he who sees that good rule be kept at common Games and
Exercises. Gregory.

Amalekites or Amalecites, were descendents of Esau by his Grandchild Amalec
(which word is Hebrew, and signifies populus lambens, a licking people:) these
Amalekites inhabited some of the lands betwixt Phaenicia and the red Sea, and
were the first that took Arms against Moses and the children of Israel, as they
were traveling betwixt the said Red Sea, and the land of Promise, over whom
Joshua (appointed General of the Israelites by Moses) got a famous victory, as
you may read in Exodus 17. Hence it is that enemies to the children of God or
good people, or enemies to good proceedings, are commonly called Amalekites.

Amalthean Horn, plenty of all things. So used from Amalthaea, a she Goat, that
Jupiter sucked, whose horns are feigned to have abounded with plenty of all
things. Cicero's Library was also called Amalthaea, for being abundantly stored
with Books.

Amandation (amandatio) a sending away or removeing.

Amanuensis (Lat.) a Clerk or Secretary always attending; a Scribe or public
Notary.

Amaritude (amaritudo) bitterness, solitariness, grief.

Amarous (amarus) bitter, sharp, froward, hard to be appeased, frightful, sour.

Amarulent (amarulentus) very bitter, frightful, envious.

Amatory (amatorius) pertaining to love or lovers; lovely. Spots.

Amazons (amazones) warlike women of Scythia, that had but one Teat (their name
in Greek importing as much) they were very manlike, and did cut off their right
Breast, that it might not hinder their shooting, for they were excellent
Archers; they lived by themselves, and if at any time they went to their
Husbands or neighboring men, and conceived; if it were a Female child they
kept it; if a Male, they sent it to the Father: the Country where they live is
denominated from them, and called Amazonia.

Ambage (ambages) an idle circumstance of words, a far fetched speech, or a
speech far from the purpose. Bac.

Ambagious (ambagiosus) full of idle circumstances of speech, or of deceitful
words.

Amber (ambra) a kind of hard yellow Gum, wherewith they make Beads and
Bracelets.

Dioscorides says, it falls in manner of a liquor from Poplar Trees into the
River Po in Italy, where it congeals and becomes hard. But L. Guicciard.
affirms (and more probably) that it is the juice of a Stone, which grows like a
Coral in Poland in a Mountain of the North Sea, clean covered with water, and
in the Months especially of September and December, this liquor is by violence
of the Sea, rent from the rock, and cast into the Havens of Poland and the
neighboring Countries. Besides its beauty, and the quality it has of burning
like pitch, and attracting straws and iron, like the Adamant, it is good for
stopping the blood, Falling Sickness, Dropsies, and many other Diseases. Heyl.
But see more of the quality and nature of Amber, in Dr. Browns Vulgar Errors,
l. 2. cap. 4.

Ambergreece or Ambergrise (Fr. Ambergris) a sweet Aromatic juice or perfume
so called. Aetius and Simon Sethius (Greek Authors) affirm it to be a kind of
Bitumen coming forth of the Fountains or Springs in the bottom of the Sea, and
that by floating upon the water it becomes hard, etc. A great quantity thereof
is found in Sofala, and in the Isles of Comaro, Demogra, Mozambique, and along
this Tract even to the Isles of Maldina or Naledina, which look into the East.
There is Amber of four several colors; White, Gray, Red, and Black, which
comes according to the variety of places or Regions where it is found; the Gray
is preferred before all the other, and is known to be good, if when pricking it
with a pin, it delivers forth a moisture like oil. The fume of it is good
against the falling sickness, and comfortable to the brain.

Ambidexter (Lat. ex ambo and dexter) he that uses his left hand as well as
his right, that plays on both sides. In our Common Law it signifies that Juror
or Embraceor, that takes of both parties, for the giving his Verdict. He
forfeits ten times so much as he takes, Anno 38. Edw. 3. c. 12. Cromptons
Justice of Peace, fol. 156. B.

Ambidextrous, That can use both hands, that plays on both sides.

Ambient (ambiens) environing, encompassing, seeking of honor ambitiously.

Ambifarious (ambifarius) double, or that may be taken both ways.

Ambiguity (ambiguitas) doubtfulness, incertainty, obscurity.

Ambiguous (ambiguosus) doubtful, obscure.

Ambilevous (ambilaevus) left handed. Vul. Er.

Ambiloge Ambilogy (ambilogium) a doubtful speech.

Ambiloquent (ambiloquus) that speaks doubtfully, or that can speak two
languages.

Ambitude (ambitudo) a circuit or compassing round; also ambition.

Ambosexous (ambosexus) that is both male and female, of both Sexes.

Amblygone (Gr.) a blunt angle, or a triangle, one of whose angles is blunt.
Cotg.

Ambrose (Gr.) divine, immortal.

Ambrosia (Gr.) is Poetically used for the meat of the gods, as Nectar was
their drink. It is sometimes taken for immortality.

Ambrosiack Ambrosial Ambrosian (ambrosianus) divine, fragrant sweet smelling,
also immortal.

Ambulatory (ambulacrum) substantively is a place to walk in, a Gallery.

Ambulatory (ambulatorius) adjectively, going or walking up and down,
changeable.

Amburbial (amburbialis) that goes about the City. Amburbial Sacrifices were,
when the beast went about the City before he was sacrificed.

Ambuscado (Spa.) soldiers hid in a secret place to entrap the enemy unawares;
an ambush, a way-laying, or laying in wait for.

Ambustion (ambustio) a burning or scorching about.

Amebean Verse (Carmen Amoebaeum) a Song or Verse when one answers another by
course, or is sung by turns.

Amen (Heb. i.e. vere) in the end of prayer, wishing that it may be so, so be
it. But when it is found twice repeated, as Amen, Amen, then it implies verily,
verily, for confirmation of a truth, Mat. 18.3. Joh. 6.26. Durantus says, that
Amen imports, Be it to us which we have prayed for. Amen is used in most
languages; in Turkey they use (Homin) instead of it. S.H.B.

Amenity (amaenitas) pleasantness, mirth, delight, amity.

Amerciament (from the Fr. merci, i. Mercy) signifies the pecuniary punishment
of an offender against the King or other Lord in his Court that is found to be
in misericordia, i. to have offended and to stand at the mercy of the Lord.
There seems to be a difference between Amerciaments and Fines, Kitchen fol.
214. For Fines, as taken for punishments, are punishments certain, which grow
expressly from some Statute, and Amerciaments are arbitrably imposed by
Affeerors. Cow.

America, one of the four parts of the world, so called from Americus Vespacius
a Florentine, who with Columbus a Genoese, first discovered this Country about
the year 1492. which is most aptly called the New world; new, for the late
discovery; and world, for the vast spaciousness of it. For, it being divided
into two parts, Mexicana and Peruana, the compass of the first is deemed 17000,
of the other 13000 miles. Heyl.

American Disease, The great Pox, brought first from the Indies by the
Spaniards into Christendom, and at the Siege of Naples, they bestowed it on the
French their enemies in the year 1528. See Morbus Gallicus.

Amfractuosity (anfractuositas) a manifold winding, turning, involution,
intricacy, compass.

Amfractuous (anfractuosus) full of turnings or windings, intricate, maze-like,
perplexed.

Amicable (amicabilis) friendly, like a friend.

Amict or Amice (amictus, us) a garment or attire; particularly it is that
linen attire, which Priests put first on, when they vest themselves, by which
is represented the head-cloth wherewith the Jews covered the face and eyes of
our Savior, when buffeting him they said, Prophecy, who is he that struck thee?

Amicted (amictus) clothed or covered with a garment.

Amie, from the (Fr. amie, beloved, and that from Amatus,) a name common both
to men and women. The Earls and Dukes of Savoy, who are commonly called Aim,
were in Latin called Amadeus, that is, loving God, as Theophilus. We now use
Amias for this, in difference from Amie the woman's name. Came.

Amission (amissio) a loss or losing.

To Amit (amitto) to lose; to pardon.

Ammodite (ammodites) a creeping vermin like a Viper, but of a sandy color,
and full of black spots.

Ammoniack, A kind of gum almost like Frankincense, so called, because it grows
in Lybia, near the place where the Temple of Jupiter Ammon or Hammon was. There
is also a kind of salt so called, which is found in Africa under sand, and is
like Alum. Bull.

Amnesty (amnestia) forgetfulness of things past. Icon. Basil.

Amnick (amnicus) of or belonging to a River.

Amonites, taken either for a distinct people descended from Amon, or generally
used for all the Heathen (whereof they were the worst and wickedest) which
possessed the land. Genesis 15.16. Josh. 2.10. Amos. 2.9.

Amorist (amator) a lover, an amorous fellow, a wooer.

Amorositie (from amor) amorousness, lovefulness.

Amoroso (Ital.) a he-lover, and Amorosa, a she-lover.

Amort (from the Fr. amorti) extinguished, deaded, quenched. Hence it is we use
to say to those that are melancholy, what, alls-a-mort, or amortified?

To Amortize, (from mors) to deaden, kill or slay. Lord Bacon and Chaucer.

Amotion (amotio) a removing or Putting away.

Amphibology (amphibologia) a word or speech that has a double or doubtful
understanding or meaning.

Amphibion Amphibious (amphibium) (amphibius) that lives as well by water as on
land. Fuller.

Amphibolous Amphibolical Amphibological (amphibolicus) doubtful or doubtfully
spoken.

Amphictious (Amphyctiones) were the most noble Counselors of Greece, selected
out of the twelve prime Cities, and instituted either by Acrisius (as Strabo)
or (as Halicarnassaeus thinks) by Amphictyon the son of Helen, from whom they
seem to have derived their name: They had power to decide all controversies,
and to enact Laws for the common good; their meetings were at the beginning of
the Spring and Autumn. Ryder.

To Amphionize, i. to play the Amphion, who was the author of harmony, and by
his Eloquence brought men from savageness to civility. Apol. for Learning.

Amphyscians (amphyscii) such people as live under the burning Zone, near the
Equinoctial line; so called, because their shadows at noon are sometimes toward
the North, sometimes toward the South. Bull.

Amphitheater (amphitheatrum) a kind of round Scaffold or Playhouse full of
benches of diverse heights, for people to sit and behold public exercises; It
differs from a Theater as the Full Moon from the half: this was but
half-circled, that round, and composed as it were of two Theaters, and is
thereof so called. Caius Julius Caesar, (says Polydore Virgil) built the first
Amphitheater in the field, and consecrated it to Mars. Verona a City in
Lombardy boasts of an Amphitheater, able to contain 80000 people. And
Vespatians Amphitheater at Rome, said to be as great. Theoderick King of the
Goths did utterly abolish the pastimes then used to be exhibited upon these
Amphitheatres.

Amphitrite (Gr) the wife of Neptune, used for the Sea. Ovid.

Amphoral (amphoralis) containing or pertaining to Amphora, which is a vessel
or pot with two ears, by some taken for a Rundlet of nine gallons. Anciently
the Italick Amphora contained five Gallons, the Attick Amphora, seven Gallons
and a half. Godwin. 143.

Ampliation (ampliatio) a deferring or prolonging of Judgment or trial, till
the cause be better certified: an enlargement, a Reprive.

Amplification (amplificatio) an amplifying, enlarging or dilating.

Amplitude (amplitudo) greatness, dignity, breadth, largenes.

Amplivagant (amplivagus) that stretches far, or has a large scope.

Ampullous (ampullarius) pertaining to, or empty as a bottle or such like
vessel: also proud, swelling or gorgeous.

Amputation (amputatio) a cutting off, away, or about, a proyning.

Amulete (amuletum) a ball like a Pomander, good against infection or
bewitching; also any thing that is hung about the neck to preserve one from
bewitching or infection.

Ana, A barbarous word used by Physicians, and signifies of every one a like
quantity.

Anabaptists, a sort of Heretics, whose erroneous Tenants or the greatest part
of them are.

1. That Christ took not flesh from the Virgin Mary, but that he past through
her, as the Sun beams through glass, or rain through a spout.

2. That there is no original sin.

3. That children ought not to be baptized.

4. That such as have been baptized in their infancy ought to be rebaptized
when they come to years of discretion.

5. That lay people may Preach and administer the Sacraments.

6 That Absolution and the Church-peace ought to be denied to such; who are
fallen into any grievous sin, yea though they repent of it.

7. That Luther and the Pope are false Prophets; but of the two Luther the
worst.

In matters of State they hold, 1. That the people may depose their Magistrates
and chief Rulers. 2. That a Christian with a good Conscience may not take upon
him or bear the office of Magistrate, or keep any Court of Justice. 3. That
none may administer an oath to another. 4. That no malefactor ought to be put
to death.


In family-government they hold, 1. That no man has a Property in his goods,
but that all things ought to be held in common 2. That it is lawful to have
more wives then one at once. 3. That a man may put away his wife, if she differ
from him in point of Religion, and be not of their Sect.


There are diverse sorts of Anabaptists, whereof some hold but part of these
opinions, some all of them, and others more then these, whereof you may see
more at large in Dr. Featley's description of Anabaptists, Entitled the
Dippers dipped, and in Heresiography, an English book so called. Melancthon
says, that one Nich. Stork first* broached Anabaptism in Germany, about the
year 1521. which very much raigns at this time in many parts of Christendom.

Anabathrum (anabathrum) a Pulpit, or any place whereunto we ascend by steps or
stairs.

Anacephalize (from Anacephalaeosis) to make a brief rehearsal or
recapitulation of things spoken. Mr. Evelin

Anachorite or Anchoret Anchoreta, (so called, because they use to live (...),
i. retired from company) a kind of Religious persons that live solitarily in
Cells and dig their graves with their nails.

Anachoretical Anachoretal (Anachoretalis) belonging to solitariness or
Hermites.

Anachronicism Anachronism (Gr) an error in Chronology, or an undue connection
of time, a false Chronicling, a repeating of time.

Anacreontick Verse (so called from Anacreon, a Lyrick Poet, who was the first
inventor of it) consists of seven syllables, which as I take it, are not tied
to any certain Law of quantity. As Sat est quiet dulci
Fessum fovere corpus.


Anadem (anadema) a kind of ornament for women's heads, as Garlands, Cornets or
Borders.

Anaglyphick or Anaglyptick (anaglyphycus) pertaining to the Art of Carving,
Embossing or Engraving CAROLVS REX. Anagr. CRAS ERO LVX. HENRICUS PERCIVS.
Anagr. HIC PVER SINCERVS, The precise in this practice, strictly observing all
the parts of the definition, are only bold with H, either in omiting or
retaining it, for that it cannot challenge the right of a letter; but the
Licentiates, somewhat licentiously, lest they should prejudice poetical
liberty, will pardon themselves for doubling or rejecting a Letter, if the
sense fall aptly, and think it no injury to use E for AE, V for W, S for Z, and
C for K, and contrariwise.

The Greeks (says Camden) refer this invention to Lycophron, who was one of
those Poets, whom they called the seven stars or Pleiades, and flourished about
the year 380.

Anagogical (anagogeticus) subtle, or of deep understanding, or belonging unto
high matters.

Anagrammatism. The art of making Anagrams, which is a dissolution of a name
truly written into his letters, as his Elements, and a new connection of it by
Artificial transposition (without addition, substraction or change of any
letter) into different words, making some perfect sense appliable to the person
named; As before Christ, in the time of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus King of Egypt,
whose name he thus Anagrammatized,

(...). Made of honey.

And upon Arsinoe his wife, thus, (...).

(...). June's Violet.

Anagraph (anagraphe) a registring or recording of matters: an Inventory.

Analects (analecta) fragments, scraps of meat or crumbs gathered together; and
Metaphorically it is used for collections or fragments of learning, gathered
out of any Book or Author.

Analem (analemma) a Mathematical Instrument, whereby is found out the
elevation of any Planet, or the height of any other thing.

Analogism (analogismus) a forcible Argument, from the Cause to the Effect,
implying an unanswerable necessity.

Analog^^^ (analogia) the just proportion, correspondence and measure, which
the object or subject holds with true reason required therein: An Agreement,
harmony or apt answering of the thing to the considerations proper thereunto.
El. of Ar.

Analogous Analogical (analogicus) proportional, equal, resembling.

Analogists (analogistae) tutors who are not bound to give account of those
whom they have under tuition; as Guardians and protectors of Wards.

Analysis (Lat.) a resolution or unfolding of an intricate matter: or a
resolving or distribution of the whole into parts.

Analyze, to resolve or explicate an intricate matter, etc.

Analytick, that which resolves.

Ananias (Heb.) the grace of the Lord, or (as some will have it) Divinatio
Domini.

Anapest (anapaestus) a foot in a Latin verse, consisting of two short
syllables and one long, as, vacuas.

Anapestick Verse (anapaesticum) or Aristophanick, commonly used in Tragedies,
has three seet, an Anapaest, a Dactyle and a Spondee, which are used in all
parts of the verse indifferently, as, Castos sequitur mala paupertas.
Vitioque potens regnat adulter.


Anapologetic (from the Gr. Anapologetos) inexcusable, or without excuse.

Anarchic (anarchicus) belonging to Anarchy, without rule or government.

Anarchy (anarchia) when people are without a Prince or Ruler; lack of
Government, confusion.

Anarchism, the Doctrine, Positions or Art of those that teach Anarchy; also
the being it self of the people without a Prince or Ruler.

Anathem (from the Gr. anathema with an eta or e longum) an offering or gift
given to an Idol, or to the Church, and hanged up in the Temple in testimony of
devotion or thanksgiving.

Anathem (from anathema with an epsilon or e breve) a man that is accursed or
given to the Devil by Excommunication; also execration or excommunication it
self. Anathema Maranatha is one accursed for ever, or eternal execration, 1
Cor. 16. Anathema belongs to all obstinate scandalous offenders, Anathema
Maranatha, only to blasphemers of the Holy Ghost. Gal. 19. Romans 9.2.

Anathematize (anathematizo) to excommunicate, to swear, curse, and give to the
Devil.

Anatiferous (from anas) that brings the disease or age of old women. Dr. Br.

Anatocism (anatocismus) a yearly revenue of usury, and taking interest for
interest.

Anatomy (anatomia) the incision or cutting up the body of man or beast, as
Surgeons do to discover the substance, actions and use of every part.

Anatomical (anatomicus) belonging to, or skilful in that Art.

Anatomize, to cut up the body of man, etc. Vt supra.

Ancestor (antecessor) a forerunner. In Law there is a difference between
Antecessor and Predecessor, the first is applied to a natural person, as J.S.
and antecessores sui. The last to a Body Politic or Corporate, as, Rector de
D. and Predecessores sui.

Anchoral (anchoralis) pertaining to the Anchor or Cable.

Anchoresse, a religious woman that lives solitarily in a Cell. Vide Anachorite.

Ancil (ancile) was a short Buckler or Scutcheon which was formed without
corners, being rebated on each side in the fashion of a decressant or Moon in
the last quarter. This Ancile (as they say) fell from Heaven into the hands of
King Numa in time of a plague at Rome, and he being advertised by Egeria, that
it was for the health of the City, and ought to be kept safe, caused eleven
more to be made so like, as they could not be known from the pattern, which
hereby was preserved; the keeping hereof was committed to the 12. Salii. Livy
and Fern.

Andrew (Gr. Andreas) manly or manful.

Androgynal (androgynus) pertaining to male and female, Hermaphroditical.

Androgyne (androgynus) he that is male and female, an Hermophrodite.

Anelate, a Faulchion or wood-knife, which I gather out of M. Par. p. 535. and
542.

Angelical (angelicus) of or like an Angel.

Anfractuosity. See Amfractuosity.

Angelot (Fr.) a kind of little Cheeses in France, so called.

Angle (angulus) a corner, nook, or secret place. It is also a Geometrical term
for a corner, included by two lines; of which there are three sorts, to wit, a
right, an acute, and obtuse angle.

1. A Right Angle, is when the two lines meeting do frame a just square Angle
of 90 degrees.

2. An Acute, is when the two lines enclose less then a square, thereby
becoming more sharp, and therefore Acute.

3. An Obtuse Angle, is when the two lines include more then the square; making
it thereby the more blunt and dull, and is therefore called Obtuse. Enchirid.
of fortificat.

Anglicism, the form or manner of speech proper to the English.

Angor (Lat.) anguish or grief either of body or mind.

Anguineous (anguineus) of or belonging to a Snake.

Angular (angularis) which has angles or corners, crooked.

Angularity; Fullness of Angles or corners; the being of a thing cornerwise.

Angust (angustus) strait, narrow, slender.

Anhelation (anhelatio) shortness of breath, difficulty of breathing, the
Phthisique.

Anheled (anhelus) which breaths with pain or difficulty, puffed up, broken
winded.

Anility Anity (anilitas) old age of women: dotage.

Animable (animabilis) that which may have life or soul.

Animadversion (animadversio) an observing, considering or giving attention
unto; also a punishment or correction.

Animal (Lat. ab anima) a living creature that has sense, man or beast,
sometimes we call a Block-head or dull-head an Animal. Animal spirit, See in
Vital.

Animalillio (Span.) a little Animal.

Animality (animalitas) the essence or being of a living creature.

Animate (animo) to hearten or encouarge, to give life or inspire with life.

Animosity (animositas) liveliness, courage, stoutness; also heart-burning or
stomaching.

Annals (annals) brief histories or Chronicles of memorable things done from
year to year, properly spoken of acts done in former ages, not in present.
Tacitus applies to Annals, matters of State; to Diaries, acts and accidents of
a meaner nature.

Annalist, he that makes or writes such Annals or yearly Chronicles.

Annatian Law, was a Law among the Romans, first proposed by L. Julius, a
Tribune of the Commons, touching the year of the age requisite to sue for any
public Office, or to exercise the same. Livy.

Annats, First fruits paid of spiritual things; so called because the rate so
paid, is also after one years profit. These Annats (says Pol. Virg.) began
first at the Popes own Benefices, whereof he was Patron. But Clement the fifth
generally decreed it in the year 1305. Boniface the ninth, and John the 22 th
renewed that Decree.

Anne (Hebr. Hannah) gracious or merciful.

Anneale, To paint upon glass, to anoint, or do any thing with oil.

Annicerians, a Sect of Philosophers, which took name from Anniceris, Disciple
to Paraebates.

Anniferous (annifer) that bears fruit all the year.

Annihilate (annihilo) is the opposite to creation; as to create, is to make
something of nothing, or to produce an effect without the help of precedent
materials: so to annihilate is utterly to destroy or to reduce something to its
old nothing; and as to create is an action proper only to God himself, so in
like manner to annihilate is only proper to Him, whereas other kinds of
productions and corruptions are the ordinary effects of sublunary and second
Causes.

Anniversary (anniversarius) that comes every year at a certain time, yearly,
or from year to year.

Those were of old called Anniversary days, whereon the martyrdom or death-days
of Saints were celebrated yearly in the Church; or the days whereon at the
years end, men were wont yearly to pray for the souls of their deceased
friends, according to the continued custom of Roman Catholics.

Annosity (annositas) old age, agedness.

Annotation (annotatio) a noting or marking.

Annual (annualis) of or belonging to the year, yearly or every year.

Annuity (annuus reditus) a yearly Rent to be paid for term of life or years,
or in Fee. There are diverse differences between a Rent and an Annuity, whereof
the first is, that every Rent is going out of Land, and an Annuity goes out of
no Land, but charges only the person of the granter, or his heirs, that have
Assets by descent. The second difference is, that for the recovery of an
Annuity, no Action lies, but only the Writ of Annuity against the Granter, his
heirs or successors: but of a Rent the same Actions lie, as do of Land, as the
case requires. The third difference is, that an Annuity is never taken for
Assets, because it is no Freehold in Law, nor shall it be put in execution
upon a Statute-Merchant, Statute-Staple, or Elegit, as a Rent may. Doctor and
Student. Dial. 1. c. 3. and Dier fol. 345. number. 2. speaks also to this effect.

Annul (annihilo) to frustrate, make void or bring to naught.

Annulated (annulatus) that wears Rings, ringed.

Annulet (annulus) a Ring, or any thing like a Ring.

Annunciate (annuncio) to declare unto, to bring news or a message.

Anodynes (anodyna) medicines, which by provoking sleep, do assuage pains and
grief.

Anoisance. See Nuisance.

Anomaly (anomalia) inequality, irregularity, unlikeness.

Anomalous (anomalus) inequal, unlike, irregular.

Anonymal (anonymus) without name, without Author.

Anopsy (Gr.) want of sight, dimness of sight, darkness of color. Vul. Er.

Anorexy (anorexia) queasiness of Stomach, want of appetite.

Antagonist (antagonista) one that contends for mastery against another; an
adversary or enemy.

Antarchy (Gr.) an opposition to Government.

Antartick Circle (antarcticus circulus) a Circle in the Heavens southwards
toward the Antipodes, remote from our sight; so called because it is opposite
to the Arctick Circle, and is 45 degrees distant from the Tropic of Capricorn.
Heyl.

Antarctick Pole, the South Pole of the world.

Ante-acts (ante-acta) deeds done in former times, bypast actions.

Anteambulate (anteambulo) to go before, as Ushers do.

Antecedaneous, the same with Antecedent. Apol. for Learning.

Antecede (antecedo) to go before, to excel or surpass.

Antecedent (antecedens) that has a Relative, that goes before or excels; In
an Argument or discourse consisting of two Propositions, which by Logicians is
called an Enthymem, the first Prosition is called the Antecedent, the other
inferred out of the first, is called the Consequent.

Antecession (antecessio) a going before or excelling.

Antecursor (Lat.) one that runs or rides before, a forerunner.

Antediluvian (from ante and diluvies) before the deluge or the great flood. So
Antideluvians, are people that lived before the flood.

Antefact (antefactum) a deed done before, a former action.

Antegenital (antegenitalis) born before, elder born.

Antegression (antegressus) a going before.

Anteloquy (anteloquium) a Preface, or the first place or turn in speaking:
also a term which Stage Players use, by them called their Cue.

Antemeridian (antemeridianus) before noon, or midday.

Anteoccupation (anteoccupatio) a preventing, or seizing first.

Antepone (antepono) to put or set before, to prefer.

Anterior (Lat.) that is before; the former.

Antevene (antevenio) to come before, to anticipate, or prevent

Anthemy. See Antiphon.

Anthime (anthimus) Anthine (anthinus) that is full of, or made of flowers, or
of the honeycomb.

Anthology (Gr.) a speaking or treating of flowers.

Anthologicks (anthologica) books that entreat of flowers or herbs.

Anthony (from the Gr. Anthos, a flower) flourishing.

Anthromancy (Gr.) divination by the raising of dead men. Cotgr.

Anthropology (Gr.) a speaking or discoursing of men.

Anthropophagy (Gr.) a feeding on man's flesh; hence

Anthropophagize, to play the Canibal, to eat or feed on man's flesh.

Anthropopathy (Gr.) humane or man's passion.

Anthropomorphites (anthropomorphitae) a sect of simple Heretics that began
in Egypt about the year of Christ 395 in time of Pope Siricius, and of the
Emperor Theodosius the elder: their peculiar Doctrine was, that God had a body
or corporeal shape, consisting of head, neck, arms, etc. like a man; having
their appellation from the Greek word (...), which signifies Man; they are also
commonly called Vadiani or Audiani, from their esteemed Father or Author
Auduus, a Syrian, that lived about the year 380. in time of Pope Damasus.

Antichrist (antichristus) an enemy or adversary to Christ. It is compounded of
the Greek proposition Anti and Christus, which signifies contrary or against
Christ.

Antichambre (Fr.) any outward chamber which is next or near the bedchamber.

Anticipate (anticipo) to take before, to prevent, to forestall.

Antichronism (Gr.) a false or contrary computate of time.

Antidate (ab ante and datus) the dating a Letter or other writing before the
time of making or writing it.

Antidicomarians, i. Mary's adversaries, a sort of Heretics, enemies to the
blessed Virgin. Sir Tho. More.

Antidote (antidotum) a medicine or preservative against venom or poison.

Antike work ( ab antes, i. a prop or butteress) a work in painting or carving
of diverse shapes of Men, Birds, Flowers, Fishes, etc. imperfectly and
disorderly mixed and made one out of another for delight sake.

To Antigonize, to play the Antigonus, who was a bountiful King of Macedonia.

Antigraph (antigraphum) an example, a copy, a counterpane.

Antigrapher (antigraphus) a Controller, Treasurer, he that keeps the accounts
or money received to the Princes use, a maker or keeper of counterpanes of
Deeds.

Antilogy Antiloquy (antilogia) contradiction, gainsaying, or thwarting.

Antimetrical, contrary, or against the rule or order of meeter, or verse.
Recl. Pap.

Antimony (antimonium) is a vein of the earth, like lead, howbeit it has this
difference from a metal; a metal melts, Antimony is brayed, and will be burnt
rather then molten; it is cold and dry in the third degree, and is used in
Collyries for the eyes.

Antimonial, belonging to Antimony.

Antinomy (antinomia) the repugnance or contrariety between two Laws, or the
contrarying of a Law. It was the custom in Athens to delegate five persons, to
revise and examine every year the contrary-Titles of Law, which they call
Antinomies, etc.

Antinomians ( ab (...) contra, and (...) lex, quasi adversarii legis,
adversaries to the Law) are a sort of Reformists hatched in Luthers days, about
the year 1525. by a disciple once of Luthers, called John, sir-named Islebius,
a Husbandman (from the Town Islebium, where he and Luther were both born in the
County of Mansfield in Germany) The Tenets of that Sect are; That there are no
Devils; That the men of the Gospel are not bound to do the good works of Gods
Law, as being neither necessary, nor profitable; That whatsoever sins a man
falls into, be they Whoredoms, Adulteries, Thefts, Rebellions, or whatever
other, yet if he do but believe the promises of the Gospel, he is sure to be
saved; with such other damnable points. This Heresy is still lurking in many
corners of Christendom; one John Eaton is said to have been the first professor
of it in England.

Antipast, The first dish of a dinner, or meal; or somewhat eaten before meal,
as Oysters, etc.

Antipathy (antipathia) a contrariety in nature, or natural repugnance; a
contrariety in passions or inclinations, a disagreement of dispositions.

Antipathetical ( anti and patheticus) of a contrary passion or nature.

Antiperistasis, a term used in Philosophy, when heat, being kept in by cold,
waxes the stronger in it self; or cold kept in by heat grows more vehement: an
encounter of contraries, or contrary circumstances.

Antipelargy (antipelargesis) the reciprocal love of children to their Parents,
or (more generally) any requital or mutual kindness. Cotg.

Antiphrasse (antiphrasis) a figure, where a word has a contrary meaning.

Antiphrastical, that has or gives a contrary meaning to words.

Antiphone (antiphona) as Anthemn, a kind of Verse or Sentence, which
Churchmen sing by course, one singing one verse, and another another. Vox
reciproca duobus choris alternatim psallentibus. A responsory song.

Antipileptical (Gr.) that is good against the falling sickness; or which is
contrary to that disease. Dr. Br.

Antipodes (Gr.) people dwelling on the other side of the earth with their feet
directly against ours, so as a right line, drawn from the one to the other,
passes from North to South, through the Center of the world. These are distant
180 degrees, which is half the compass of the earth. They differ in all things
as seasons of the year, length of days, rising and setting of the Sun, with the
like. Plato is said to be the first Author of this word Antipodes.

Antipodal, belonging to the Antipodes, or to those people that have their feet
directly against ours. Br.

Antiprestigiation (antipraestigiatio) a contrary juggling, the diversity or
opposition of Legerdemain. Hist. of Goths.

Antiquary (antiquarius) one that searches, or is well skild in Antiquities, as
Coyns, Histories, old words, etc.

Antiquate (antiquo) to bring into the ancient manner or estate; to abrogate or
make void.

Antique (antiquus) old, ancient, out of use.

Antistrophe (Gr. i. inversio) a figure in Rhetorique, when between two things
that mutually hang one on the other, there is an interchangeable conversion, As
Servus Domini, Dominus servi.

Antisabbatarians, a sort of Heretics, who would have no particular Sabbath at
all, but every day to be a Sabbath to a Christian man.

Antithesis (Gr.) a Rhetorical figure, when contraries are opposed to
contraries, as Spokes in a Wheel; a contrary Position, opposition.

Antithets (antitheta) opposites, contraries.

Anti-Trinitarians, i. Adversaries to the blessed Trinity, who are more spoken
of in Writers under the name of Trinitarians, which comprehends those Heretics
that reject the word Trinity, as not being found in Holy Scripture, and deny
the number and distinction of Three persons in the blessed Trinity. As the
Arians, who denied him to be truly God, whom true believers call the Son of the
Eternal Father, or the second person of the Blessed Trinity. Or as the
Sabellians (having their name from their Author Sabellius an Egyptian, who
lived Anno Christi 260.) who denied any difference or distinction betwixt the
Three persons, confounding the Three into One. Or as the Macedonians (so
denominated from Macedonius a Bishop of Constantinople, living about the year
of Christ 359.) who denied the Holy Ghost to be God, or, as many other old
condemned Heretics, to whose opinions subscribed those in the last age, who
are termed Deists, followers of one Gregorius Pauli a Minister of Cracovia in
Poland about the year of Christ 1564, who vented many blasphemies against the
blessed Trinity; and diverse others, as Ludovicus Herser, Michael Servetus,
Campanus, with many of their Disciples in Germany, Hungary, Poland, and other
places, where there are of them to this day.

Antitype Antitypie (antitypum) an example or copy, like or contrary to the
pattern. L. Bac.

Antonians, an order of Religious persons, instituted about the year 324, by
the Egyptian Monk St. Anthony, who at the first sold his possessions, and
distributed their worth among the poor, and afterward betook himself to a most
holy austere course of life, perpetually addicted to Prayer, Fasting, Watching,
and other corporeal mortifications; teaching his Disciples or followers to
fight against the Devil and his temptations with the sign of the Holy Cross;
his life was written by Athanasius, one of the Greek Fathers, who lived in his
days.

Antonomastically, that is said or spoken by the figure Antonomasia, which is a
putting one name for another. Schism. disp.

Anxiety (anxietas) sorrow, anguish, heaviness.

Anxiferous (anxifer) bringing sorrow, causing anguish.

Aonian, An Epithete for the Muses; from Aonia, a part of Boeotia, where there
is a Well dedicated to them, who are thence called Aonides.

Apathy (apathia) a wanting of affection, the affection of the Stoics, without
passion, impassibility.

Apelles Table. See Table.

Apennage Appennage (Fr.) the portion of the Kings younger Sons in France, a
child's part. They have in France a fundamental Law, which they call the Law of
Appennages, whereby the Kings younger Sons cannot have partage with the elder.
This Law was made by Charlemain, before whose time France was dividable into as
many Kingdoms as the King had Sons. By this Law the younger (though sometimes
they are content with yearly Pensions) are to be entitled to some Duchy, and
all the Profits and Rights thereto appertaining; all matters of regality only
excepted, as Coinage, levying Taxes, and the like. It is derived from the
German word Avanage, which signifies a portion. View of France.

Apellean (Apelleus) of or belonging to Apelles, an excellent Painter.

Apepsy (apepsia) crudity, bad digestion or rawness of the stomach.

Aperture Apertion (from aperio) an opening, discovering, uncovering, or
revealing. Sir H. Wot.

Aperient (aperiens) opening, discovering, revealing, disclosing. Bac.

Apertive (apertus) opening; also open, clear, manifest.

Apertly (aperte) plainly, openly, evidently. Bac.

Aphelium (Gr. aphelion) is the point wherein the Earth, or any other Planet is
most distant from the Sun. Ricciolus.

Aphetical (apheticus) pertaining to the Planet that is the disposer of life in
a nativity.

Aphorism (aphorismus) a short selected Sentence briefly expressing the
properties of a thing; or which serves as a maxim or principle to guide a man
to any knowledge, specially in Physic.

Aphoristical, pertaining to an Aphorism.

Aphrodite (Gr.) the Surname of Venus.

Apian (apianus) belonging to Bees, sweet, or tasting like honey.

Apocalypse (apocalypsis) a divine Book written by St. John Evangelist, while
he was banished in the Isle of Pathmos; so called because it contains many
profound mysteries there revealed to him. The words genuine signification is, a
revelation or vision.

Apocalyptical, belonging to the Apocalypse, or to a Vision or revelation.

Apocryphal (apocryphus) that which is hidden, unknown or doubtful; whose
original authority is not known; part of the Scripture so called, because it is
doubted whether it be true Scripture, or not certainly known to be so.

Apodictical (from apodixis) pertaining to a plain proof, or demonstration of a
thing. Br.

Apogeon Apogee (apogaeum) a Shroud or Den under the earth; also a term in
Astronomy, signifying the point in the Heaven, where any Planet is furthest
from the center of the Earth; the remotest point of an Epicycle. Rider.

Apograph (apographum) a copy written by a pattern; Also an Inventory of ones
goods.

Apolactize (apolactizo) to kick or spurn with the heel, to despise.

Apollinean (Apollineus) of or belonging to Apollo the god of Music, Physic,
and Poetry, or to the Sun.

Apollyon (Gr.) signifies a destroyer; a name attributed to the Devil in the
New Testament, Apoc. 9.11. They had a King over them, whose name in Hebrew is
Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon.

Apology Apologism (apologia) a defense or excuse, a speech or written answer
made in justification of any one.

Apologetical Apological (apologeticus) pertaining to such a defense or excuse.

Apologize (apologizo) to make such a defense or excuse.

Apologue (apologus) a Fable or Tale, such as Aesops were, when bruit Beasts
are feigned to speak, and which covertly teach lessons of good life.

Apomel (apomeli) a kind of drink made of water and honey.

Apophlegmatism (apophlegmatismus) a medicine to purge the Phlegm.

Apoththegm (apophthegma) a brief and pithy speech or sentence of renowned
personages.

Apopheret (apopheretum) a New Years Gift, a Present.

Apoplectical (apoplecticus) pertaining to the Apoplexy.

Apoplexy (apoplexia) a very dangerous disease, wherein a man lies without
sense or motion, as if he were dead, with his eyes closed, and great difficulty
in fetching his breath; it comes for the most part of cold and gross phlegmatic
humors, oppressing the brain in such sort that the Animal spirits cannot pass
from thence into the sinews, as they were wont. It either causes present
death, or else ends in a dead Palsy.

Aporetique (from aporia) ever doubting, never certain in any thing, wanting
counsel.

Apostate (Apostata) he that revolts or falls from any thing he has undertaken
to defend, as from true Religion. Julianus the Emperor was most infamous for
this crime, and therefore called Julian the Apostate.

Apostatize (apostato) to make defection by revolt, to rebel or fall away from
his Religion, duty or purpose.

Hence comes Apostasy the Substantive, and Apostatical the Adjective.

Aposteme. See Impostume.

Apostle (Apostolus) one sent of a Message, a Messenger or Ambassador.
Therefore the twelve whom Christ sent to preach the word of God, are properly
called Apostles.

Apostolicks or Apostolians (Apostolici) a sort of Heticks that hold, 1. That
many Christians in these days have more knowledge then the Apostles. 2. That
there is a salvation to be revealed unknown to the Apostles themselves. 3. That
God in a short time will raise up Apostles, men extraordinarily endued with
visible infallible gifts to preach the Gospel, etc. with other such erroneous
Tenets.

Apostroph (apostrophus) a mark or comma, signifying the cutting off some
vowel, as it is for it is, the end, for the end, and the like; most used in
Poetry. It is also a figure, when we convert our speech from one matter or
person to another.

Apostume (apostema) an Impostume, an unnatural swelling of any corrupt matter
in the body. See Impostume.

Apothegme. See Apophthegm.

Apotheke (apotheca) a place where any thing is laid to be kept, as a shop,
warehouse, or storehouse.

Apotomy (apotomia) a cutting off; a Mathematical term.

Apozeme (apozema) a decoction, or medicine made of water with diverse kinds of
Spices and Herbs boiled together, used instead of Syrrups; broth. Bac. Not.
Hist.

Apparel (Fr.) preparation, provision, ready making; It is an ancient word
used in the Accounts of the Inner Temple, and signifies that sum at the foot of
an account, which the house remains in debt, or which remains charged on the
house.

Apparitor (Lat.) a Sergeant, Beadle, or Sumner; but most commonly used for an
inferior Officer that summoned in Delinquents to a spiritual Court.

Appeal (Fr. appel) is often used in our Common Law as in the Civil: which is a
removing of a cause from an inferior Judge to a superior, as Appeal to Rome,
Ann. 24. H. 8. c. 12. and 1 Eliz. c. 1. So St. Paul appealed from Festus to
Caesar. And it is also commonly used for the private accusation of a murderer,
by a person who had interest in the murdered party; or of any Felon, by one of
his accomplices in the Fact. See more of this in Mr. Leighs Phil. Comm.

Appellation (appellatio) a calling or pronouncing an Appeal.

Appellative (appellativus) naming, mentioning or calling. Grammatically it is
taken for common, opposite to proper; as this word homo, a man, is by the
Grammarians called a Noun, or name appellative, because common to all men; and
this word Petrus, Peter, is a Noun or name proper to one individual person.

Appendant (appendens) is any thing belonging to another, As Accessorium
principali, with the Civilians, or Adjunctum subjecto with the Logicians. An
Hospital may be appendant to a Manor. Fitzher. Not. Br. fol. 142. Common of
fishing appendant to a Freehold. Westminster. 2. cap. 25. An. 13. Ed. 1.

Appennage. See Apennage.

Appenditious (appendicus) that depends on another, pertaining to an Appendix.

Appendix (Lat) a hang-by, an addition, a Pent-house, label or any thing that
depends on another.

Appensor (Lat.) he that weighs or ponders.

Appetency (appetentia) appetite, desire, lust.

Appetible (appetibilis) to be or that may be desired.

Appetition (appetitio) an earnest desire, endeavor, or lust. Hist. of
Philosophy.

Appian Way (Appia via) a notable street or Highway which leads from Rome to
Capua in Campania, which Appius Claudius, in his Consulship, paved with stones
and walled, and therefore took denomination from him; but was extended to
Brundusium in Calabria, by Julius Caesar and Trajan. Of all others it seems to
be the principal, by the testimony of Papinias the Poet, Appia cunctarum fertur
Regina viarum.

Applaud (applaudo) to show joy or liking of a thing, by clapping the hands, or
other sign of rejoicing, to allow or praise.

Applause (applausus) a clapping the hands in token of joy or good liking of a
thing.

Application (applicatio) a making any thing meet with another, an applying of
one thing to another.

Applumbature (amplumbatura) a joining or soldering with lead.

Apposite (appositus) put or set to, meet for the purpose, convenient.

Apposition (appositio) an adding or putting to, or together.

Appostile (Fr.) an answer to a Petition, set down in the margent thereof, and
generally any small addition to a great discourse in writing. Cotgr.

Apprentice (Fr. Apprenti, and that from apprendre, to learn, whence their
Apprentisage, and our Apprentiship) is such a person, who serves a certain time
(for the most part seven years) by pact, for the learning of any Art. In former
time Barristers were called Apprentices to the Law. As appears by Mr. Seldens
notes on Fortescu, p. 3. So the learned Plowden styled himself; and Mr. Hen.
Finch in his Nomotechnia writes himself Apprentice del Ley.

Appretiate (appretio) to esteem at an high rate or price.

Appretiation (appretiatio) an high valuing or estimation.

Appretiatively (appretiative) according to the price or value; It is usually
contradistinguished to intensively; As we may be said to love a Dog more then a
Child intensively, but not appretiatively.

Approperate (appropero) to hasten, to make speed to.

Appropinquation (appropinquatio) an approaching or coming nigh unto.

Appropriation (appropriatio) a term in our Law when any Body corporate or
private person has the right, and converts the profit of an Ecclesiastical
Living to his or their own use, only maintaining a Vicar to serve the Cure.

To make an Appropriation, License must be obtained of the King in Chancery,
and the consent of the Diocesan, Patron and Incumbent are necessary, if the
Church be full; But if the Church be void, the Diocesan and the Patron, upon
the Kings license, may conclude it. Plowden in Grendons Case, fo. 496. b. and
Seq. To dissolve an Appropriation, it is enough to present a Clerk to the
Bishop; for, that once done, the Benefice returns to the former nature. Fitz.
not. br. fol. 35. F.

Approver (approbator) signifies in our Common Law, one that confessing Felony
of himself, appeals or accuses another, one or more to be guilty of the same:
and he is called so, because he must prove that which he has alleged in his
appeal. Stanf. Pl. Cor. fo. 142. And that proof is by Battle, or by the
Country at his election that appealed.

Appuyed (from the Fr. Appuye) stayed, propped, supported or held up; also
rested or leaned on.

Aprication (apricatio) a warming or heating in the Sun.

Apricity (apricitas) the warmth of the Sun in winter, Sun-shining, fair warm
weather.

Aprique (apricus) warmed with the Sun, or that loves to be in the Sunshine,
sunny.

Aptitude (aptitudo) fitness, meetness, convenience.

Aptote (aptotum) a noun without a case, indeclinable.

Apyrexie (Gr) the remitting of a Fever; or the shaking in the course of an
Ague. Riverius.

Aqua Coelestis is rectified wine, being in some sort made like the heaven for
subtilty and pureness. Chym. Dict.

Aquarius, or the Waterman; one of the twelve signs of the Zodiac, so called
from the plenty of rain water, which we commonly have, when the Sun enters that
sign. Min.

Aquatical (aquaticus) belonging to, living or breeding in the water.

Aquatile (aquitalis) that haunts or lives in the water.

Aquation (aquatio) a carrying, fetching, or providing water; also abundance of
rain water.

Aqueduct (aquaeductus) a conduit or conveyance of water by a pipe.

Aqueous (aqueus) waterish like to water. Vul. Er.

Aquiliferous (aquilifer) that bears the picture of an Eagle in his Ensign,
such was the Roman Standard Bearer.

Aquiline (aquilinus) of or belonging to an Eagle.

Arabesque (Fr.) Rebesk work; branched work in painting or in Tapestry; or a
small and curious flourishing.

Arabian Bird, the Phoenix, which the Country called Arabia in Asia, is said to
bring forth.

Arabian stone, the stone called Corneol, being a kind of Onyx, and found in
Arabia.

Arable (arabilis) that may be tilled or ploughed.

Araneous (araneous) full of Spiders webs.

Aratrate (aratro) to till or plough, to stir or ear ground.

Arbitrary (arbitrarius) that which is voluntary or left to our own will or
censure; belonging to arbitrament.

Arbitratour (arbitrator) is an extraordinary Judge or Commissioner in one or
more causes, between party and party, chosen by their mutual consents. This
Arbitrament is either general, that is, including all Actions, Quarrels,
Executions and Demands; or special, which is of one or more matters, facts, or
things specified. The Civilians (says Dr. Cowel) make a diffetence between
Arbiter and Arbitrator; For though they both ground their power upon the
comprimize of the parties, yet their liberty is diverse. For Arbiter is tied to
proceed and judge according to Law, with equity mingled: Arbitrator is
permitted wholly to his own discretion, without solemnity of process, or course
of judgment, to hear or determine the controversy committed to him, so it be
juxta arbitrium boni viri.

Arborary (arborarius) of or belonging to Trees or Arbours.

Arborist (from Arbor) he that has skill in Trees, a woodman.

Arbustive or Arbustine (arbustinus) of or belonging to shurbs or young Trees,
shrubby.

Arcabuz (Sp.) a kind of hand-gun or Caliever.

Arcabuzier, one that serves with such a Gun in the wars.

Arcadian (arcadicus) belonging to the people or country of Arcadia, rustic,
blockish, clownish.

Arcade (Fr.) an Arch or half a Circle. Merc. Ital.

Arcane (arcanus) hid, secret, privy, unknown.

Arcenal. See Arsenal.

Arche (Gr. Archos) the first or chief; Hence

Archetype (archetypum) the first pattern or original Copy, the principal
figure or example, whereby a thing is framed.

Arch Dapifer, a chief Sewer, and is the Title that belongs to the Count
Palatine of the Rhene, under the Emperor.

Archduke, as much as the first or principal Duke. This Title belongs only to
the House of Austria, divised by the Emperor Fredrick to grace his Nephew
Philip, when he was to marry Joan the Daughter of Spain. 2. part Treasury of
Times.

Arch-Flamens, were among the Heathens, what Archbishops or Arch-Priests are
among Christians; the Heathenish Romans had three Arch-Flamens in Britain in
King Lucius his time, whose seats were at London, York and Caerlion upon Vske,
and 28 Flamens; to whose power other Judges were subject. These by Pope
Eleutherius's Legate, were converted from Idolatry, etc. Hen. Hunting. Hist.
lib. 1. and in Prolog. and Broughtous Eccles. Hist. fol. 273. See Flamen.

Archigrapher (archigraphus) the chief Secretary or principal Clerk.

Archiloquy (archiloquium) the first part or beginning of a speech.

Archimandrite (archimandrita) an Abbot, Prior, or chief of a Hermitage. Dr.
Tailor.

Archimimick (archimimus) the principal Player or chief Jester.

Architect (architectus) the Master Builder, the chief workman in Architecture,
the first inventer.

Architectonical (Gr.) of or belonging to a chief Master or Architect.

Architecture (architecture) the art of devising, framing, or drawing plots in
building. It is written that this Science did begin in Cain, because he was the
first that ever built a City, which he called by his Sons name Enoch, as
appears Gen 4. This Art contains the condition of Carpentry, Masonry, Imagery,
Goldsmithry, and whatever is to be wrought in either wood, stone, or metals.
1. part Treas. of times.

Architrave (Architrabs) the Crown or Chapter of a stone Pillar: The
reason-piece or master-beam in buildings of Timber.

Archive (archivum) the place where ancient Evidences, Charters and Records are
kept; the Chancery or Exchequer. L. Bac.

Arch-triumphant. See Triumphant Arch.

Archon (Gr.) the chief Magistrate among the Athenians.

Archonticks (archontici) certain Heretics who affirmed the world to be the
work of Princes, and denied the Resurrection. They took their name from Archon
the first of that Sect, and began about the year of Christ 334. Rider.

Archytas Wooden Dove, (famoused by Agellius and other Authors) which by reason
of weights equally poised within the body, and a certain proportion of air (as
the spirit of life) enclosed, slew cheerfully forth, as if it had been a living
Dove. Compl. Gent.

Arcitenent (arcitenens, ab arcum tenendo) which bears or shoots with a Bow.

Arctation (arctatio) a straitning or making narrow.

Arctick Circle ( arcticus Circulus, so called for that it is correspondent to
the Circle in Heaven called the Bear, in Greek Arctos) is distant from the
Tropic of Cancer 45 degrees, and passes through Norway, Muscovy, Tartary,
etc. Heyl.

Arctick Pole (Polus arcticus) the North Pole of the world: for Arctick, of it
self signifies northward or northern.

Arcuate (arcuatus) fashioned like a bow or arch. Bac.

Arcubalist or Arbalist (arcubalista) a warlike engine to cast or shoot darts
or stones. Our Rich. 1. first showed the use of this Engine to the French, and
was shortly after slain by a shot thereof discharged by Bertram de Gurdon at
the siedge of Chaluz in France. Came.

Arcubuse. See Arcabuz.

Ardelion (ardelio) one full of gesture, a busy body, a meddler in all matters.

Ardour (ardor) ardent love, hot or fervent desire, parching heat.

Arduity (arduitas) height, steepness, difficulty.

Areatour (areator) a thresher, or he that makes clean the floar.

Arefaction (arefactio) a making dry or withered. Bac.

Arefy (arefacio) to make or become dry, to wither.

Arenaceous (arenaceus) of or like sand, sandy. Dr. Br.

Arenated (arenatus) mixed with sand, sandy.

Areopagite (areopagita) Judges of Life and Death among the Athenians,
instituted by Solon; their custom was to use so much severity and integrity in
judgment, that they heard all causes and matters in the night, to the end they
might have no occasion to regard the parties, but only have their eye and
respect earnestly on the matter before them. They were called Areopagites from
the Greek Areopagos, that is, Mars his street, a street in Athens so called,
where they sat. St. Dionysius, converted to the Christian faith by St. Paul,
was one of those Judges. Pol Virg.

Areopagy (areopagus) the Town where those Judges sat in Judicature.

Areopagetical, belonging to the Areopagi.

Aretaloger Aretalogon (aretalogus) one that brags or boasts of virtue in
himself, a talking fellow, a liar.

Arescation (from aresco) a drying or withering up. Felt.

Aretaphila (Gr. i.e. amatrix virtutis) a lover of, or friend to virtue; a
woman's name.

Aretine (aretinus) of or belonging to the City Aretium, now Arezzi in Italy.

Argentanginy (argentangina) the silver Squincy, when one for money feigns
himself sick and not to speak.

Argentry Argent (Fr. from Argentum) silver, coin, or money; in Heraldry it
signifies the silver color, or white, which the Heralds hold to be the first
and most excellent color. And white ( Plato says) is the fittest color for
God; among the Planets it is compared to the Moon, and among precious stones to
the Oriental Pearl. Min.

Argillous (argillosus) full of white clay, fat, fertile, clammy. Br.

Argonauts (argonautae) the worthies that went into Colchos to fetch the
Golden-Fleece; so called of the ship Argo, in which they sailed; the chief of
them were Jason, Typhis, Castor, Pollux, Hercules and Theseus. Also taken for
idle and lazy Mariners.

Argonauticks, Books treating of Navigation or shipping.

Argutious (argutus) subtle, witty, of deep reach, full of words.

Arid (aridus) dry, barren, withered, unfruitful.

Aridate (arido) to make dry or barren.

Aridity (ariditas) dryness or barrenness.

Aries (Lat.) a Ram; an Engine heretofore used in besieging Cities; so called
because it had horns of Iron like a Rams-head, which battered the walls; or
otherwise, because they rushed against the walls with it, as a Ram with his
head, and back again. The form of which you may find in Marcellinus, l. 23. c.
3. Also the first sign of the Zodiac, so called, because when the Sun enters
into that sign about mid- March, he begins to beat with his beams upon the
beginnings of the New-year as a Ram does butt, or push with his horns. Du
Bartas.

Arietine (arietinus) of or like a Ram.

Arietation (arietatio) a butting like a Ram; or a battering with the Engine
called the Ram.

Ariolation (ariolatio) foretelling, soothsaying. Vul. Er.

Aristocracy (aristocratia) a kind of Government in a Commonwealth, wherein
the Nobles or better sort only rule. Such is the Republique of Venice, which
is governed by a Senate of Noble men.

Aristocratical, of or belonging to that kind of Government.

Arithmetic (arithmetica) the art of numbering: It is written, that Abraham
first taught this Art to the Egyptians, and that afterward Pythagoras did much
increase it.

Arithmancy (Gr.) divination made by number, which has consideration and
contemplation of Angelical virtues; of names, signacles, natures, and
conditions, both of Devils and other Creatures.

Aritude, the same with Aridity.

Arc (arca) in holy Scripture signifies two things. 1. The Ark made by Noah at
the commandment of God, which was 300 Cubits long, (one foot and half to the
Cubit) 50 Cubits broad, and 30 high, Genesis 6. which shows (according to
Butaeo) the whole concavity to have been 450000. The remnants of which,
Josephus says, were in his time to be seen.

2. It signifies a most precious and consecrated coffer, or chest called the
Ark of Testament or Testimony, made of the wood Sethim, and plated within and
without all over with gold: it had four corners, and in each corner a golden
Ring, through which were put bars of the same wood, covered likewise with gold,
which served for the carriage of it; This Ark was two Cubits and a half long,
one Cubit and a half broad, and one Cubit and a half deep, Exodus 25.30. in it
was kept part of the Manna in a pot of gold, also the two Tables of the Law,
and Aarons rod that had budded. Heb. 9.4.

Armada (Sp.) a great Army or Navy.

Armature (armatura) armor, or the use of weapons; the skill of bearing arms.

Armiferous (armifer) one that bears arms or weapons, warlike.

Armilet Armollet (armilla) a bracelet for the Arm.

Armillate (armillatus) which has or wears bracelets.

Arminians (so called from James Arminius a professor of Divinity at Leyden,
who lived about the year 1605.) a sort of Heretics, called also Remonstrants;
that hold several erroneous opinions concerning Predestination, the Redemption
of man by Christ's death, etc. And in some points agree with the ancient
Pelagians. Heresiog.

Armipotent (armipotens) powerful in arms, valiant, courageous.

Armomancy (armomancia) Divination by the shoulders of beasts.

Armoniack (armoniacum) a gum issuing from the Cyrenian Ferula, or Fennel-gyant.

Armorick (Armorica) Britain in France so called, and the people of that
Country are called Armoricans.

Arobe, a measure of Sugar among the Portuguese at Brazil, containing 25 of our
English Bushels. Heyl.

Aromatic Aromatical (aromaticus) sweet of savor, odoriferous.

Aromatization (aromatizatio) among Physicians is defined to be an artificial
manner of preparation, whereby medicaments are made more odoriferous and
suaveolent, to the better acceptance of the Palate and Heart, and the greater
strength and oblectation of the vital and animal faculties. Renodaeus.

Aromatize (aromatizo) to perfume, season, or anoint with sweet odors or
spices.

Arpent (Fr.) an acre or furlong of ground; the most ordinary one called L'
arpent de France, is 100 Perches square (or every way) after eighteen foot to
the Perch. This word is found in Dooms day Book.

Arquebuse (Fr.) a Gun, somewhat bigger then a Musket, a Caliever.

Arquebusier (Fr.) that serves with such a Gun.

Arquebusade (Fr.) a shot with a bullet of an Arquebuse.

Arraign, a Prisoner is said to be arraigned, when he is indicted and put to
his Trial.

Arrearages (comes of the French Arrierages, i. reliqua) signifies the
remainder of an account, or sum of money remaining in the hands of an
accountant; it is also used more generally for any money unpaid at the due time,
as arrearages of Rent.

Arreptitious (arreptitius) caught or tormented by a Devil; also he that steals
or creeps in privily.

Arrest (Fr.) in the common signification it is well known for a seizure of, or
Execution served upon a man's person or goods; But we sometimes use it (as the
French) for a Sentence, Decree, Order or final Judgment of a Court.

Arrianism, An ancient and pestilent Heresy (hatched by one Arrius a Lybian
born (but a Priest of Alexandria) who denied the Son to be consubstantial or of
the same substance with God the Father, and asserted him a Creature made by
God, capable of vice, etc. To beat down which Heresy, the first Council of
Nice was called, the Nicen Creed made, and the Clause of one substance with the
Father, proved to be consentaneous to the word. To subscribe the Decrees of
this Council, Arrius was sent for by the Emperor Constantine; To whom he went,
having written his own heretical Tenets, which he hid in his bosom, and reading
before the Emperor the Decrees of the Council, he wrote a Recantation of his
heresy, swearing that he meant as he had written; which words the Emperor
referred to the Recantation, but he to the paper of his own Tenets in his
bosom: when he had taken this Oath, he went in triumph through the streets of
the City, till a necessity of nature enforcing him, he withdrew aside to a
house of ease, where he voided out his guts, and sent his Soul as a Harbinger
to the Devil, to provide room for his body. Heyl.

This Heresy began about the year of Christ 315. in the time of Pope
Silvester, and Constantine the great Emperor; and notwithstanding, Arrius and
his deceived accomplices, were excommunicated by their own Bishop Alexander, upon
the first broaching of their Tenets, and that the Heresy was condemned by the
aforesaid Council of Nice; and thirdly, notwithstanding the aforesaid sudden
and infamous death of the Author, the heresy died not with him, but did
afterward much spread it self (by the help of Constantine the Emperor) through
all Christendom, but more in the East, then in the Western Church of God, nor
is it to this day quite extinct, diverse still adhering to it, especially in
Transylvania and the bordering Countries.

Arride (arrideo) to smile or look pleasantly upon, to show a liking and
consent by gesture, to applaud.

Arrision (arisio) a smiling upon, an applause.

Arriva. See Reevo.

Arrogate (arrogo) to attribute much to ones self, to boast, to claim more then
is due, to presume.

Arrogance (arrogantia) pride, presumption, haughtiness.

Arsenal (Fr. Arcenal, Ital. Arsenale) an Armory or storehouse of Armor,
Artillery or ships.

The Venetians (says Heylin) have an Arsenal, in which are kept 200 Galleys,
nigh to which are houses stored with Masts, Sayls, and other Tackling: so that
they can speedily set out a great Navy.

Arsenick (arsenicum) a kind of gold color called Orpine or Orpiment, others
call it Oker: The natural one is of two sorts, the one red, the other yellow.
Cotgr.

Arseverse (i averte ignem) a pretended spell written upon the door of an
house, to keep it from burning. It Is a Tuscan word, quasi Arsurum averte.

Arseversie, Preposterously, perversely, the cart before the horse.

Artemisean Month, The month of May.

Artery (arteria) a sinew like a vein, a hollow vessel, in which the spirits of
life mixed with blood do pass through the body. All these kinds of veins
proceed from the heart, where the vital spirits are made, and are those which
pant or beat, called commonly the pulses. Bull.

Aorta (Gr) the great Artery, the root whereof is fastened to the little grisly
bone which is in the heart; this is called the mother of all other Arteries.

Axillar Artery (arteria axillaris) the Arm-hole Artery, or a left branch of
the Aorta, from which it ascends obliquely toward the Armhole, where, after it
has sent its branches to the higher ribs and other adjacent parts, it descends
to the bought of the Cubit.

Carotick Artery (arteria carotica) issues from the Axillar, and is divided
into two branches; the inward and greater, which goes unto the brain; the
outward, which passes unto the Larinx, tongue, nose, eyes and Muscles of the
Temples.

Cervical Artery (arteria cervicalis) an Artery in the Nape or hinder part of
the Neck, issues from the Sous-claviere, and goes thence from the Neck-bone to
the brain.

Coeliaque Artery (arteria coeliaca) is a main branch of the great Artery, from
which it descends to the Midriff and intrails.

Coronal Arteries, are two little branches of the great Artery, and led by it
unto the left ventricle and broad end of the heart.

Crotaphique Artery (arteria crotaphica) is a great sinew near the Temples.

Crural Artery, is the Artery of the Thigh, among whose Muscles it divides it
self.

Cubical Artery, is a branch of the Axillar.

Cystepatique Artery, is a branch of the Coeliaque, and goes to the Liver and
Gall.

Diaphragmatique Artery, issues from the trunk of the great Artery, and thence
goes to the Diaphragma.

Epigastrick Artery, is a branch of the Iliack Artery; and distributes it self
among the Muscles of the Epigastrum.

Gastripiploique Artery, is a branch of the Coeliaque, whence it goes to the
Ventricle and Epiploon.

Geminous Arteries; the twin Arteries, two small ones which descend to the joint
of the knee, between the processes of the Thigh-bones.

Grand Artery. As Aorta.

Hypogastrick Artery, is a branch of the Iliack, and distributes it self among
the parts of the Hypogastrium.

Iliack Artery, is the descendent branch of the great one.

Intercostal Arteries, are two; an upper, which bestows it self among the
Muscles that are between the four highest ribs, and an under one, which goes to
every Muscle, that is between the rest of the ribs.

Lumbarie Arteries, the Loin Arteries, issue from the Aorta unto all the parts
of the loins, giving life to the marrow of the backbone, and sending as many
branches to its joints, as there be holes in it.

Mamillar Artery, the Pap Artery, issues from the trunk of the Aorta.

Mesenterique Arteries, are two, an upper, which distributes it self among the
small guts, and an under one, which goes to the lower part of the Mesentery.

Plantar Arteries, are two branches of the Thigh-Arterie (which they divide in
the middle of the Leg) an inward one, which descends to the joint or setting on
of the foot, and passing along the sole, ends in five branches, whereof two
serve for the great Toe, two for the second Toe, and one for the middle Toe;
the outward (as the inner) ends also in five branches, two whereof it bestows
on the little Toe, two on the next unto it, and one on the middle one.

Privy Artery, issues from the great Arteries descendent branch, and bestows it
self among the privities.

Radial Artery, A second branch of the arm-hole Artery, whence it bestows it
self on the Radius or the upper and greater bone of the Arm.

Renal Artery, the Kidney Artery, issues out of the Aorta, and enters into the
Kidney, bringing to it the serosity of the arterial blood.

Sacred Artery, a branch of the great Arteries descendent branch, goes to the
Marrow which is in the Os Sacrum.

Sous claviere Artery, the ascendent branch of the great Artery.

Spermatique Artery, goes from the body of the Aorta to the Testicles, and
there joins with the vein that governs those parts.

Splenitique Artery, is the greatest branch of the Coeliaque, whence it goes to
the Spleen and therein ends.

Thorachique Artery, the Brest-Artery, issues out of the great Arteries
ascendent branch, and goes to the anterior Muscles of the Breast.

Venous or Veiny Artery, is one of the three principal ones of the body, issues
from the left Ventricle of the heart and carries blood from thence to the Lungs
for their nourishment

Trachean or Trachian Artery* called also the pipe of the Lungs, is one of the
three principal Arteries in the body, and the instrument of breath and voice,
it begins at the Larinx, and ends at the Lungs or Lights.

Arterial (arterialis) of or belonging to the Arteries.

Arterious (arteriosus) full of Arteries.

Arteriotomye (Gr.) an incision or cutting of Arteries.

Arthritical (arthriticus) gouty, diseased in the joints.

Artick. See Arctick

Arthur, a Latin name in Iuvenal drawn from the goodly fixed Star Arcturus,
and that from Arctus, is the Bear, as Visicinus among the Romans. The famous
Arthur made this name first famous among the Britains. Came. But why may not
Arthure be rather a British word composed of Art^, which signifies a Bear, and
awr, signifying a man, Vir? So Arthur, quasi, a man that for his strength and
terror may be called a Bear.

Articular (articularis) pertaining to the joints.

Articulate (articulo) to set down articles or conditions of agreement, to
joint or point.

Artifex (Lat. Subst.) a workman, a craftsman, a cunning artificer, a master of
his Art.

Artilan or Artist (Fr.) idem.

Arvisian Vine, (so called from Arvis (now Amista) a mountain in the Island
Sio, formerly called Chios, where it is made) one of the best sorts of Greek
wine, thus praised by Virg. Eclog. 3.

Ex multo in primis hilarans convivia Baccho,
Ante focum, si frigus erit; si messis, in umbra:
Vina novum effundam calathis Arvisia Nectar.
Pleasant with plenteous Bacchus, when we feast,
By the fire, if cold: in shades, if heat molest:
I Bouls will with Arvisian Nectar fill.
The Arval Brothers or Fraternity (frates arvales) were twelve Priests among
the old Romans, who (besides the performance of public Sacrifices) were
appointed Arbitrators or Judges to decide controversies concerning Landmarks,
and bounds of the fields, whence they took their name. Godw.

Arundiferous (arundifer) that bears or brings forth Reeds or Canes.

Aruspicy ( aruspicium or Haruspicium) a kind of Divination, when men (by
opening and viewing the Bowels of Beasts killed for Sacrifice) undertook to
foretell things to come; and such persons were called Aruspices, ab aras
inspiciendo.

Arythmancy. See Arithmancy.

Ascalonyte; Herod, so called because he was born at Ascalon, a Town in Jury.

Ascance, a beholding sideways, or looking on one side.

Ascendant (ascendens) or Horoscope, is the point of the Ecliptic, arising at
some determinate moment of the natural day; in which the Infant is conceived or
born; (so called from two Greek Nouns (...), i. Hora, and (...), scopus) which
is the scope to be aimed at; for the condition of the whole life is believed to
depend on that moment; and therefore that moment and point of the Ecliptic, is
to be proposed and established as the principal scope levelled at in
Astrological consideration. Ricciolus in his Almagesto Novo.

Ascentive (from ascendo) that ascends or climbs up.

Ascetike (from the Greek Ascetes, i. Monachus) pertaining to a Monastery or
place where people give themselves to Meditation or Payer. Sir Ken. Digby's
Treatise of Bodies.

Asclepiad (asclepias, adis) a kind of verse consisting of a Spondee, a
Choriambique, and two Dactyles.

Sublimi feriam sidera vertice. Asia, One of the Four parts of the world,
bounding toward the East, so called from Asia, Daughter to Oceanus and Thetis,
wife to Iapetus, and mother to Prometheus; It stretches in length about five
thousand and two hundred miles, and in breadth four thousand five hundred and
sixty; wherein are contained the several Regions of, 1. Anatolia, 2. Syria, 2.
Palestina, 4. Armenia, 5. Arabia, 6. Media, 7. Assyria, 8. Mesopotamia, 9.
Persia, 10. Chaldaea, 11. Parthia, 12. Hircania, 13. Tartaria, 14. China, 15.
India, 16. the Islands. This part of the world has worn the Garland of
super-eminency.

1. Because here man was created, and put to Till the Land.

2. Here our Savior Christ was born, wrought his Divine Miracles, and suffered
on the Cross for our salvation.

3. Here were done the actions memorized by the Holy Penmen of the Old and
New Testament.

4. Here were the first Monarchies of the Babylonians, Assyrians, Persians and
Medes.

5. This is the common mother of us all, from whence as from the Trojan horse,
innumerable Troops of men issued to people the other parts of the uninhabited
world. Heyl.

Asiatick (Asiaticus) pertaining to Asia.

Asinine (asininus) of or belonging to an Ass.

Asmatographers (asmatographi) they who sell or make Songs, or Lessons for any
instruments.

Asmodius (Gr.) the Feind of Lechery, or Spirit of Carnality; Also the name of
the Devil, that killed the seven Husbands of Sara the Daughter of Raguel,
mentioned in the third Chapter of Toby. Holy Court.

Asotu, Intemperate, incontinent, prodigal. Hence perhaps it is we call a
Drunkard a Sot.

Aspect (aspectus) beholding or viewing, sight, presence or beauty.

In Astronomy it signifies the distance between the Planets and heavenly signs:
and there are four such Aspects. The first called, a Trine Aspect (because it
divides the Heavens into three even parts) is the distance of four signs from
each other; as Aries beholds Leo and Sagittarius with a Trine Aspect, because
these are distant four signs, the one before, the other after Aries. The second
called a Quartile, is the distance of three signs, as Aries beholds Cancer and
Capricorn with a Quartile Aspect, because they are distant three signs from
him. The third called a Sextile Aspect, is the distance of two signs, as Aries
beholds Gemini and Aquarius with this Sextile Aspect, being but two signs
distant from them. The fourth, called an Opposite Aspect, is the farthest
distant that can be, namely a distance of six signs asunder; As Aries beholds
Libra with this Opposite Aspect, and Libra beholds Aries with the same. The
like is of all the other Signs or Planets placed in them. For example, Taurus
beholds Cancer and Pisces, with a Sextile; Leo and Aquarius with a Quartile,
Virgo and Capricorn with a Trine, and Scorpio with an Opposite Aspect. The
distance of one or five Signs is not called an Aspect.

Aspectable (aspectabilis) worthy the beholding, or looking on; visible, that
may be seen.

Asper, A sort of foreign Coin, of our money about five farthings; others say,
ten Aspers make but six pence.

Asperate (aspero) to make sharp, rough, eager, or angry, to make more grievous.

Asperity (asperitas) sharpness, harshness, unpleasantness, rudeness of manners.

Aspernate (asperno) to contemn, reject, set light by, or abhor.

Aspersion (aspersio) a besprinkling, wetting or bedewing; and by Metaphor,
infamy or slander.

Asphaltick, Of or belonging to the dead Sea, or Lake called Asphaltites, nigh
which once stood the infamous Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha. This Lake has such
a bituminous or sulphry strong smell, that no living thing can endure it. Rel.
Med.

Aspirate or Aspiration (aspiratio) a breathing, aspiring or influence; also
the pronouncing a syllable with some more force of breath then ordinary, as we
do those that have the Letter H, as have, her, homo, hamus, etc. contrary to
which pronunciation is that which has nothing of the sound of H, as are, ear,
amo, onus, etc.

Asportation (asportatio) a carrying or conveying away, a transporting.

Assart (Fr. Essarter) to glade or make glades in a wood; also to grub up or
clear a ground of bushes, shrubs, etc. or to lop off the boughs of a Tree.
Assart is taken for an offense committed in the Forest, by plucking up those
woods by the roots, that are Thickets or Coverts of the Forest, and by making
them plain, as arable land. Manwoods For. Law. But if a man sue out a License
to assart his grounds in the Forest, and to make it several for Tillage, then
it is no offense. Cow.

Assassine (Ital. Assassino) a Thief, a Cutthroat, a Murderer; one that kills
another for gain or upon hope or promise of reward; such a one was he, who
murdered the Count of Tripolis in the wars for the Holy Land; and such a one
was he, who so desperately wounded our Edw. 1. at the siege of Ptolemais or
Acon. Heyl.

Assassinate (from the Ital. Assassinare) to murder and rob together.

Assation (assatio) a roasting; in Physic, it signifies the coction of
medicaments in their own juice.

Assault. See Affray.

Assectation (assectation) an accompanying, following or observing.

Assentation (assentatio) a flattering, soothing or dissembling.

Assertion (assertio) an affirmation or avouching; a procuring of ones liberty.

Assessor (Lat.) a Councellor, a Judge lateral, an assistant, one that is
associate in Office and Authority to another. It is an Officer in an Assembly
of Presbyterian Divines, whereof there are two at the least.

Assestrix (Lat.) a woman which is assistant or sits by another; a Midwife.

Assets (from the French Assez, i. satis) signifies in our Common Law, goods
enough to discharge that burden, which is cast upon the Executor or Heir, in
satisfying the Testators or Ancestors Debts or Legacies. See Brook, titulo,
Assets per descent: By whom you shall learn, that whosoever pleads Assets,
says nothing, but that he against whom he pleads, has enough descended or
come into his hands, to discharge that which is in demand. The Author of the
new Terms of Law makes two sorts of Assets. Viz. Assets par descent, and enter
mains, the former being to be alleged against an heir, the other against an
Executor or Administrator.

Asseveration (asseveratio) an earnest affirming or avouching.

Assideans, it is controverted whether they were Pharisees or Essenes, or what
they were; but see Moses and Aaron. p. 33.

Assiduity (assiduitas) diligence without ceasing, continual attendance,
unintermitted solicitation.

Assiduous (assiduus) daily, continual, diligent, approved, always at hand.

Assignation Assignment (assignatio) an appointment or distribution, the
passing a thing over to another.

Assignee (assignatus) is he that is appointed or deputed by another to do any
act, or perform any business, or enjoy any commodity. And an Assignee may be
either in Deed, or in Law. Assignee in Deed, is he that is appointed by a
person: an Assignee in Law, is he whom the Law so makes, without any
appointment of the person. Dyer fol. 6. number. 5. Perkins Tit. Grants, says,
that an Assignee is he that uses or enjoys a thing in his own right, and
Deputy he that does it in the right of another.

Assimilate (assimilo) to liken, resemble or compare.

Assimulate (assimulo) to feign a thing, to counterfeit, to represent, to set a
good face on the matter.

Assize (from the Norman word Assize, and that derived from the Fr. asseoire,
i. collocare) is a word diversely used in our Common Law. Littleton, in the
Chapter of Rents, says it is aequivocal, and sets down three significations of
it; one as it is taken for a Writ; another as it is used for a Jury; the third
as for an Ordinance.

But concerning the General Assizes, take thus much out of Sir Fra. Bacons use
of the Law; all the Counties of this Realm (says he) are divided into six
Circuits, and two learned men are assigned by the Kings Commission to every
Circuit, and to ride twice a year through those Shires allotted to that
Circuit; these we call Justices or Judges of Assize, who have five several
Commissions by which they sit. The first is a Commission of Oyer and Terminer,
directed to them and many others of the best account in their Circuits; but in
this Commission the Judges of Assize are of the Quorum, so as without them
there can be no proceeding. This Commission gives them power to deal with
Treasons, Murders and all manner of Felonies and Misdemeanors whatsoever, and
this is the largest Commission they have. The second is a Commission of Goal
delivery. That is only to the Judges themselves, and the Clerk of the Assize
associate: and by this Commission they are to deal with every prisoner in the
Goal, for what offense soever he be there. The third Commission is directed to
themselves only and the Clerk of Assize to take Assizes, by which they are
called Justices of Assize; and the office of these Justices is to do right upon
Writs called Assise, brought before them by such as are wronfully thrust out of
their Lands. The fourth Commission is to take Nisi Prius directed to none but
to the Judges themselves and their Clerks of Assizes, by which they are called
Justices of Nisi Prius. The fifth is a Commission of Peace in every County of
their Circuit. And all the Justices of the Peace having no lawful impediment,
are bound to be present at the Assizes to attend the Judges as occasion shall
fall out: if any make default, the Judges may set a Fine upon him at their
pleasure and discretions: The Sheriff of every Shire is also to attend in
person, or by a sufficient Deputy allowed by the Judges, who may fine him if he
fail, etc. See more of this in the Use of the Law, fol. 13. usque ad 21.

Associate (associo) to accompany, to join in Office, to make fit; to make ones
self companion with another.

Assonate (assono) to sound together, to answer by sound.

Assuefaction (assuefactio) a teaching or attaining by use, enurement.

Assuete (assuetus) accustomed, practiced, enured, exercised by long
continuance.

Assuetude (assuetudo) custom, use, continuance, usage.

Assumpsit (the third person of the Preterfect Tense of the Verb assumo, i.e.
to take to or upon ones self) is a voluntary promise made by word, whereby a
man assumes or takes upon him to perform or pay any thing to another. This word
contains any Verbal Promise made upon consideration; for a promise without
consideration will not in Law bind to performance, but is called, nudum pactum
ex quo non oritur actio.

Assumption (assumptio) a taking to, or upon, a lifting up, an attributing:
Also the Minor Proposition in a Syllogism; As

Whatsoever is due by the Law of Nature, cannot be altered.

But Allegiance and Obedience of the Subject to the Supreme Power, is due by
the Law of Nature:

Ergo, it cannot be altered.

The first part of this Syllogism is called the Major; the second, beginning
with But, is the Assumption or Minor, and Ergo, makes the Conclusion.

Assumptive (assumptivus) that takes to himself or promises, or that is lifted
up.

Asterisque (Asteriscus) a little Star, also a figure in writing in form of a
star (*) showing want of something, or somewhat to be noted.

Asterism (asterismus) a constellation or imaginary form of fixed stars.

Asthma (Gr.) a difficulty of breathing, a disease when ones breath is hindered
by some humor.

Asthmatical (asthmaticus) belonging to that disease, short-winded, pursey.

Astipulation (astipulatio) an assent, agreement, affirmation, or avowing a
thing.

Astism (astismus) a kind of civil jest, without prejudice or anger.

Astrea, Justice; so called of Astraeus, a most just Prince. Sands.

Astragal (astragalus) a term of Architecture, and is (according to Vitruvius,
an ancient and famous Author thereof) a ring or writhen circle to deck or adorn
the neck of a column, and is therefore transferred to the canon, agreeing
somewhat in shape with the Column or Pillar. Enchirid. of Fort.

Astragalize (astragalizo) to make or use Astragals: also to play at Dice,
Huckle-bones or Tables.

Astriction (astrictio) a knitting, binding, or fastening to, or together.

Astrictive Astringent (astrictivus) which has power to bind or knit unto.

Astriferous (astrifer) that bears stars, an Epithete most proper for the
Heavens or Sky.

To Astringe (astringo) to bind fast, to join together, to strain, to tie, to
knit. Bac.

Astroarch (Gr.) the Queen of the Planets, the Moon.

Astrolabe (astrolabium) a flat-round instrument, whereby Astronomers gather
the motion and distance of heavenly bodies, and whereby the length, height, and
breadth of any other thing may be discerned and found out.

Astrology (astrologia) is a Science which tells the Reasons of the Stars and
Planets motions. Astrology (says Dr. Bullokar) does promise by the motion and
influence of Stars and Planets to foretell things to come; or (as my Lo. Bac.
says) it professes to discover the influence and domination of the superior
Globe over the inferior; and therefore may be termed a kind of natural
divination, so long as it keeps it self in due limits, and arrogates not too
much to its certainty; into which excess if it once break forth, it can then be
no longer called natural Divination, but superstitious and wicked; for the
Stars may incline, but not impose a necessity in particular things.

Astrological, pertaining to Astrology.

Astrologer (astrologus) he that is well skilled in Astrology, or discourses
of the variety of constellations, planetical Aspects, disposing of the Houses;
and by these and their dispositions, conjectures of future occurrences.

Astronomy (astronomia) a Science that teaches the knowledge of the course of
the Planets, Stars and other celestial motions. This Art seems to be very
ancient; for Josephus lib. 1. Antiq. writes that the Sons of Seth,
Grandchildren to Adam, first found it out; who hearing Adam foretell the
universal Flood which should shortly drown the world, they thereupon erected
two great Pillars, engraving in them the Principles of Astronomy, the one of
which pillars was of brick, the other of stone, that in case the water should
wash away the brick, yet the stone might preserve the knowledge hereof for
posterity. Bull. These Pillars were called Enoch, or Enos Pillars. Zoroastes
the first King of Bactria (who reigned in the time of the Assyrian Monarch
Ninus.) is said to have notably augmented or perfected this Science.

Astronomical, belonging to Astronomy.

Astronomer (astronomus) is he who (as Heylin describes him) searches the
reason of the variety of heavenly motions, the diversity of circles, asterisms,
risings and settings of Stars and the like.

Astute (astutus) crafty, cunning, subtle, malicious.

Asyle (Asylum) a Sanctuary, a defense or place of refuge for offenders. Mont.
See Sanctuary.

Asymbolike (asymbolus) that pays nothing of the shot or reckoning, scot-free.

Asymphony (asymphonia) a disorder in descant, a disagreeing.

Achievment (Fr. Achevement) the performance or accomplishment of any gallant
exploit, a bringing to perfection; Also a term of Heraldry, signifying the Arms
of any Gentleman, set out fully, with all that belongs to it; viz. the
Supporters, Helmet, Wreath, and Creast, with Mantles and Words; such as is hung
out on the front of a House of any person of quality after his death.

Atheism (Gr.) the damnable doctrine and opinion of the Atheists, infidelity,
the denying of, or not beleiving in God.

Atheist (from the Gr. (...). i.e. Sine Deo, godless) he that believes there is
no God or rule of Religion, and that the Soul dies with the body.

Athletike Athletical (athleticus) skilful in the art of wrestling, active.

Atlantic Sea. i. The Mediterranean Sea, or a part thereof, lying westward, so
named from Mount Atlas in Mauritania.

Atmosphere (Gr.) the Sphere of vapors, or the second Region, being as high in
the Air, as the Sun carries any vapors.

Atome (atomus) a mote flying in the sunbeams; the least moment of time, or
any thing so small that it cannot be made less.

Atramental Atramentous (atramentalis) belonging to ink, or black as ink. Vul.
Er.

Atrabilarie (atra bilis) that is subject to or troubled with black Choler or
melancholy.

Atrate (atratus) made black, one clothed in black.

Atrocity (atrocitas) cruelty, fierceness, outragiousness.

Atrophy (atrophia) a consumption, that comes by a fearful eating too little,
or greedy devouring too much; want of nourishment.

Attacted (attactus) touched, or briefly handled.

Attainder, from the Fr. Attaindre, i. to attain unto, overtake, catch, or
touch, from the Latin attingere, because he that is attainted, is as it were,
catched, overtaken and plainly deprehended: for Attainder is a conviction of
any person of a crime or fault, whereof he was not convict before: As if a man
have committed Felony or Treason, etc. and is thereof indicted, arraigned,
found guilty, and has judgment, then he is said to have an Attainder sued
upon him, or he is attainted.

Attaque (Fr.) an assault, encounter, skirmish, fight; a violent meeting of two
Armies or Enemies. Sir H.B. Voyage into the Levant.

Attemperate (attempero) to make fit or meet, to aim right.

Attenuate (attenuo) to make thin or slender, to diminish or make less.

Attentate (attento) to attempt, assay, or prove, also used substantively.

Attestation (attestatio) a witnessing, affirming, or testimony.

Atticism (Atticismus) a phrase or manner of speech of the Athenians: an
elegancy of speech.

Attiguous (attiguus) joining or touching, by or near unto.

Attinge (attingo) to touch lightly or softly; to mention or handle briefly, to
reach to, to arrive or come to.

Attique or Attick (Atticus) pertaining to the Country of Athens, Elegant.
Attick Faith, is most firm Faithfulness in keeping promise.

Attr^r^d (from the Lat. Tiara, which is an ornament for the heads of the
Persian Kings, Priests, and women) a term used among Heralds, when they have
occasion to speak of the horns of a Buck or Stag.

Atone (from ad and tonus) to bring into tune or harmony; to make a consort or
agreement, which we also call an Atonement.

Attournment (from the Fr. tourner. i.e. to turn) is in our Common Law a
yielding of the Tenant to a new Lord, or an acknowledgement of him to be his
Lord (which we usually call to turn Tenant) for otherwise he that buys or
obtains any Lands or Tenements of another which are in the occupation of a
third, cannot get possession; yet see the Stat. 27. H. 8. c. 16. The words used
in attournment are set down in Littleton: I agree to the Grant made to you,
etc. But the more common attournment is to say, Sir, I attourn to you by force
of the same Grant: or, I become your Tenant, etc. or else deliver to the
Grantee a penny, half penny or farthing by way of Attournment. Lit. l. 3. ca.
Attournment. whom you may read more at large.

Attournment may be made to the Lord himself or to his Steward in Court. Kitch.
fo. 70.

Attraction (attractio) a drawing or pulling unto, a bait or allurement.

Attract (from the Fr. Attraict) the same. Cressy.

Attractation (attrectatio) a soft and often handling, or touching, a feeling
or meddling with.

Attribute Attribution (attributio) an assignment, delivery or giving unto:
also a fit term or title applied to any thing.

Attrition (attritio) a rubbing, wearing, washing or striking against: In
divinity, it is Metaphorically used for that sorrow which a sinner has for his
sins, not being founded principally on the love of God above all things, but in
the fear of the pains of Hell, or in the consideration of the foulness of sin,
or in some other like thing. It is also called imperfect Contrition.

Attrite (attritus) worn, wasted, or fretted: or that has that kind of sorrow
abovementioned.

Avarice (avaritia) covetousness or greediness, inordinate desire of money, etc.

Auctifical (auctificus) that makes an increase or augmentation.

Auctive (auctivus) increasing, causing growth.

Auctor (Lat.) he that increases or augments; an author or first inventor.

Aucupation (aucupatio) birding or fowling: also gain, advantage.

Audacity (audacitas) rashness, boldness, fool-hardiness, sauciness.

Audible (audibilis) that may be heard, understood or perceived.

Audience (audientia) the sense of hearing, listening; sometime it signifies an
assembly of people hearkening to something spoken: and when an Ambassador
delivers his Embassy to a King, we call it, Giving him audience.

Auditor (Lat.) one that hearkens; But in the common acceptance it is an
Officer to some great personage who does yearly (by examining the accounts of
all Underofficers accountable) make up a general book, that shows the
difference between their receipts and their allowances, commonly called
allocations; As namely, the Auditors of the Exchequer take the Accounts of
those Receivers, which receive the revenues of the Augmentation, as also of the
Sheriffs, Escheators, Collectors, and Customers, and set them down and perfect
them. See Stat. 33 H. 8. cap. 33.

Avenage (Fr.) a certain quantity of Oats paid to a Landlord in lieu of foam
other duties. Cotgr.

Avenue (Fr. advenue) is the space that is left for passage to and fro, in and
out, a Camp, a Garrison, or Quarter, when the place is either fortified with a
Line of Communication or Barricado's; an access, passage, or entry into a place.

Average (averagium) signifies service which the Tenant owes the Lord by horse
or carriage of horse. It is also used for a certain Contribution that Merchants
and others proportionably make toward their losses, who have their goods cast
into the Sea, for the safeguard of the Ship or of the Goods and Lives of those
in the Ship, in time of tempest: And this contribution seems to be so called,
because it is proportioned after the rate of every man's average or goods
carried.

Averdupois, See Avoir du pois, and see Weights.

Avery is the place where Oats or Provender for Horses is kept; From the Saxon
and Belgic Haver, i. Oats, because Oats are the common Provender for Horses.
Min.

Aver (from the Fr. averer) to justify, avouch or maintain.

Averment, a term in Law, when a Defendant offers to make good or justify an
Exception pleaded in abatement or bar of the Plaintiffs act. New terms of Law.
But Cowel rather thinks it should signify the act then the offer of justifying
the Exception; whom vide.

Avernian Avernal (avernalis) belonging to the Lake Avernus, or to Hell.

Avernus, A Lake not far from the City Cuma in terra di lavoro, anciently
called Campania in Italy, the stink whereof killed birds as they flew over it:
It was dedicated to Pluto, and is usually taken for Hell. Of which, thus
Virgil, Aen. l. 6.

Quam super haud ullae poterant impune volantes
Tendere iter pennis, talis sese halitus atris
Faucibus effundens supera ad convexa ferebat:
Vnde locum Graii dixerunt nomine Avernum.
Over which no Fowl unstruck with hasty death,
Can stretch her strengthless wings, so dire a breath
Mounts high heaven from black jaws; the Greeks the same
Avernus call, expressed in the name.
You may read more of Avernus in Sands his Travels, fol. 280.

Averpenny (quasi average-penny) is money contributed toward the Kings
Averages. Rastal.

Averruncation (averruncatio) a scraping or cutting off, as men do Vines, a
weeding or taking away, an appeasing. Gr.

Aversion (aversio) a turning or driving away, a hating or disliking.

Augmentation (augmentatio) increase. The Court of Augmentation was erected 27
H. 8. as appears by chap. 27. of that years Parl. It was so called from the
augmentation or increase of the Revenues of the Crown by the suppression of
Abbeys and Religious houses; And the Court was ordained, that the King might be
justly dealt with, touching the profits of such Religious houses. Cow. For
Augmentations to Preaching Ministers, See Acts 1649, 31. 1650, 5, 13. 1654, 49.

Augrime (algorithmus) skill in accounting or numbering.

Augury (augurium) a divination, foretelling or Sooth-saying of things to come,
by the chirping, flying, voices or sitting of Birds: The Professors whereof
(called Augures) were of great account among the Heathen Romans, insomuch that
there was a College of them in the City, neither would the Romans undertake
any public matter of importance without asking their assent. But the vanity
thereof was well derided by a wise Jew, named Mossolamus, as Josephus writes:
For an Augur in the Wars once requiring that the Army which was then marching
might stand still a while, till he took observation of a Bird, thereby to
foreknow the success of that Expedition, this Jew (whilst the Augur was busy
in his art) shot at the bird with an arrow, and by chance killed her; whereat
the Augur and others being highly offended; Are you so foolish (quoth the Jew)
to imagine this poor Bird can tell what will happen to us, that could not
foresee her own death so near at hand? They were called Augures, ab avium
garritu, from the chirping and chattering of Birds. The Egyptians were the
first inventers of this Diabolical superstition.

Augurize (auguro) to divine, prophecy, foretell or conjecture at things to come
by the aforesaid vain observations.

Augures-staf, was a crooked wand, which the Augures held in their hand, when
they made their divination. etc. The ceremonies whereof, and the words of
Augury, you may read in the first part of the Treasury of times, p. 184.

August (augustus) taken adjectively signifies Royal, Majestical, Imperial,
Sacred; It is a common name of the Emperors among the Latins (as Pharao was of
the Kings of Egypt) since Octavius Augustus his time, who was the second
Emperor of the Romans. In the 41 or 42 year of his reign was born our Savior
Jesus Christ. August also is the name of the Sextile or sixth month from
March; which took denomination from the aforesaid Emperor Augustus, because
that month he entered into his Consulship, brought Triumphs into Rome, and
conquered Egypt.

Augustals (augustalia) Plays in honor of Augustus.

Augustan Confession (Augustana Confessio) the Protestant Confession of Faith,
so called from the City Ausburgh in Germany, where at a General Diet, appointed
the eighth of April 1530. this Confession was presented by the Duke of Saxony
and some others to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, etc. Herb. H. 8.

Augustine, by the termination of the word is a diminutive from Augustus, out
of which it may be properly Englished little Augustus; It is the proper name of
diverse men, usually contracted in English into Austin, whereof the most
renowned was St. Austin, Bishop of Hippo in Africa, one of the ancient Fathers
of the Church, a man of a most profound wit and learning, and of a most holy
and religious life, after he was converted by St. Ambrose to Catholic
Religion, from the Manichaean Heresy.

Augustine, or Austin-Friers, are those that observe the aforesaid St. Austins
institute of life; they live in common, serving God day and night, tied by the
vows of Poverty, Chastity and Obedience; of which holy Institute and Vows was
Dr. Martin Luther, before he became a Reformer.

Answering Augustines, is a phrase used in Oxford where there was a Monastry of
these Augustines, who were so eminent for their abilities in disputing, that
the University did by a particular Statute, impose it as an exercise upon all
those that were to proceed Masters of Art, that they should first be disputed
upon by the Augusten-Friars; which old Statute is still in force, produced at
this day for an equivalent exercise. Mr. Fullers Chapter Hist.

Augustinians (not taking name from St. Austin, the Father and Doctor of the
Church, but from one Augustine a late Bohemian) are a branch of those
Reformers, ordinarily called Sacramentaries, who had their origin from Andreas
Carolostadius about the year of Christ, 1524. These Augustinians (besides other
blasphemies) held, that Heaven gates were not yet open, but remain shut till
the general Resurrection, and last Judgment. Lindanus Dialog. 2.

Aviary (aviarium) a place where birds are kept, or where birds haunt or use; a
Cage.

Avid (avidus) desirous, greedy, covetous.

Avidity (aviditas) desire, earnest, or ardent affection, greediness.

Aulnage (Fr.) Ell-measure, the measuring with an Ell.

Aviso (Spa.) an admonition or advice.

Aulnegeor or Alnegeor (from the Fr. aulne. i.e. an Ell) one that carries or
measures with an Ell: an Officer of the King, who by himself or his Deputy in
places convenient, looks to the assize of woollen cloth made through the Land,
and two Seals for that purpose ordained him, an. 25. E. 3. stat. 4. ca. 1. Also
an. 3 R. 2. ca. 2. who is accomptable to the King for every cloth so sealed.
Min.

Aulick (aulicus) belonging to the Hall, or Court, courtly.

Aumone (Fr. aumosne) the tenure of Land by divine service, was anciently
called by this name, Cok. upon Lit. 97. Briton. 164.

Ancient Demeasn, Demain or Domain. (1. publicum vectigal, or Vetus
patrimonium Domini) signifies in our Common Law, a certain Tenure whereby all
the Manors belonging to the Crown in the days of St. Edward the Saxon King, or
William the Conqueror, were held. The number and names of which Manors as of
all other belonging to common persons, he caused to be written into a book
(after a survey made of them) now remaining in the Exchequer, and called
Doomsday Book, and those which by that Book appear to have belonged to the
Crown at that time, and are contained under the title (Terra Regis) are called
Ancient Demeasn. Kitch. fo. 98. See more in Cowel.

Avocation (avocatio) a calling away or withdrawing.

Avoir-du-pois (Fr.) or Avoir-du-poix. i. habere pondus, or justi esse
ponderis) to be of full or due weight: it signifies in our common Law two
things: first, a kind of weight, diverse from that called Troy weight, which
contains but twelve ounces to the pound, whereas this contains sixteen. And in
this respect it may probably be conjectured, to be so called, because it is of
more weight then the other. Also it signifies such merchandise as are weighed
by this weight, and not by Troy weight, as in the Statute of York, an. 9- E. 3.
in Prooem. an. 27. Edw. 3. Stat. 2. ca. 10. and an. 2. Rich. 2. ca. 1. See
weights.

Avowry or Advowry (from the French, advouer, alias avouer) and signifies as
much as a justifying or maintaining an act formerly done. For example, one
takes a distress for rent, or other thing, and he that is distreyned sues a
Replevin; now he that took the distress, or to whose use the distress was taken
by another, justifying or maintaining the act, is said to avow, and that is
called his Avowry. Terms of the Law.

Auricle (auricula) a little ear.

Auricular (auricularis) belonging to, or spoken in the ear. As auricular
Confession, is that which is made in private to the Ghostly Father, none
hearing but himself, opposite unto public Confession, which is made in the
hearing of many.

Auricular vein, is the ear vein, which runs up by the kernels under the ear;
Chyrurgeons open it against deafness, pain and ulcerations of the ears. See in
Vein.

Auriferous (aurifer) that bears or brings gold.

Auriflambe. See Oriflambe.

Aurigation (aurigatio) the driving or guiding a Cart or Coach.

Aurigraphy (aurigraphia) a writing or graving in gold.

Aurist (from Auris) one that has skill in curing diseases in the ear, or
imperfections in hearing.

Aurora (Gr.) the morning, or break of day, quasi aurea hora, or aurae hora,
the hour when it begins to shine, or be light.

Aurum-votabile, is liquor of gold, without any corrosive, which very few know,
yea, of those who daily prepare it, rather to the destruction, then health of
men. Chym. Dict.

Auscultation (auscultatio) a giving ear or obeying, a hearkening.

Auspical (auspicalis) pertaining to Soothsaying or Divination by the flight of
birds.

Auspices (auspicia) were properly the observation of Birds, either by their
singing and flying in the air, or by their gesture and manner of feeding in the
Coop, whereby their Augurs and Pullarij pretended to know the will of the gods,
whether they favored their enterprise or no. The Birds that gave sign by their
voice and singing, they called Oscines, quasi ore canentes: Those that gave it
by their flight and wings, were named Alites or Praepetes.

And they were called Auspices that did foretell things by beholding the flight
of birds, and were so denominated ab aves aspiciendo.

Auspicious (auspicatus) happy, bringing good luck.

Austerity (austeritas) sharpness, vigorousness, rudeness.

Austral (australis) Southern or partaining to the South.

Australize, to go, turn or bend toward the South, also to come from the
South. Br.

Austromancy (austromantia) is a kind of invented superstition, concerning the
observation of winds; as when they break forth into great vehemence, contrary
to their custom, whence men, that are more idle then rational, pronounce a
presage of something to come. Chym. Dict.

Autarchy (Gr.) a Government by one alone, without help.

Authentic (authenticus) that which is allowed, or has just authority, the
original.

Autology (Gr.) speaking of or to ones self. Br. and How.

Autogeneal (Gr.) self-begotten.

Autocrasie (Gr.) self-subsistence, a being able to subsist of ones self.
History of K. Charles.

Autograph or Autographical (autographus) that which is of the Authors own hand
writing. Rushworths Dialogues.

Automatous Automatarian (automatarius) of or belonging to the art of making
Clocks, or such things as seem to move of themselves.

Autome (automatum) an instrument, or artificial body (made by Daedalus, or any
other of like skill) which moves alone without the help or support of any other
thing; a self-moving instrument.

Autonomy (autonomia) liberty to live after ones own Laws.

Autopsie (Gr.) self-sight, or beholding.

Autoptical (from autopsia) a self-beholding, confirming by once own sight.

Autotheism (Gr.) the being of God, of himself, or not from another; Calvin's
autotheism signifies that point of Doctrine held by Calvin; which is, That God
the Son is not Deus de Deo, God from God, whereas the Nicen Creed says, He is
so.

Autumnal (autumnalis) belonging to harvest or Autumn, which is from the sixth
of August to the sixth of November, and is one of the four Quarters of the
year; Others reckon Autumn to begin at the Aequinoctium. i.e. about the twelfth
of September, and to end at the Solstice or shortest day, about the eleventh of
December.

Auturgie (auturgia) a working with ones own hand.

Auulsion (avulsio) a plucking away, or from.

Auxiliare (auxilior) to help, aid, or supply, to heal, or give cure.

Auxiliary (auxiliarius) that comes to aid, help, or supply.

Auxiliary Forces, were such as the neighbor or confederate Counties did send
to the Romans; or certain additional Forces, besides the standing Army.

Axillary (axillaris) belonging to the Arm-hole, or Armpit.

Axillary Vein. See in Vein.

Axillar Artery. See in Artery.

Axiomancy (axiomantia) divination or witchcraft done by Hatchets.

Axiom (axioma) a maxim or general ground in any Art: a Proposition or short
Sentence generally allowed to be true, as in saying, the whole is greater then
its part.

Axicle (axiculus) a little shingle or board, a latch, a pin that a pully runs
on.

Axis (Lat.) an Axeltree, the Diameter of the World, that is, an imagined line
reaching from one Pole to another; the Pole Artick, or Antarctike.

Azamoglaus, The Turks Janissaries before they be enrolled in pay, so called.

Aziminth^ or Azimuths, great circles meeting in the Zenith or vertical point,
and passing through all the degrees of the Horizon.

Azimuthal, belonging thereto.

Azure, a fair light blew, or sky color, so named from the Arabian word Lazul,
which is the same. It betokens to the bearer a zealous mind.

Azyms (azymus) unleavened, sincere, unmingled.

Azymes (Gr.) was a solemnity of seven days among the Jews, in which it was not
lawful to eat leavened bread; The Pasche or Easter of the Jews.

B
BAal (Hebr.) a Lord, a Master, Husband, or Patron: It was a common name
whereby the Heathens called their gods, 2 King. 1, 2. Judge. 8.33. Baal and
Moloch are taken to be one and the same Idol. See Moses and Aaron, p. 143. Whom
the Hebrews called Baal, the Babylonians called Bell. p. 153.

Baal-Zebub. See Bel-zebub

Babef (in Hebr. it signifies confusion) was an ancient City of Chaldea in
Mesopotamia, famous for the confusion of Languages, which there happened: For
immediately after the universal Deluge, Nimrod the son of Chus, the son of
Cham, persuaded the people (as some Authors surmise) to secure themselves from
the like danger by building some stupendous Edifice, which might resist the
fury of a second Deluge. This counsel was generally embraced, Heber only and
his family contradicting such an unlawful attempt; the major part prevailing,
the Tower began to rear a head of majesty 5164 paces from the ground (says
Isidore) having its basis and circumference equal to the height. But God
beholding from high this fond attempt, sent among them (who before were one
Language) a confusion of seventy two Tongues, which hindered the proceeding of
this building, one not being able to understand what his fellow called for.

Bring me (quoth one) a Trowel, quickly, quick,
One brings him up a hammer; how this brick
(Another bids) and then they cleave a Tree.
Make fast this rope, and then they let it flee.
One calls for Planks, another Mortar lacks;
They bring the first a stone, the last an Axe.
Du-Bartas.
Thus being compelled to desist from so unlucky an enterprise, they greedily
sought out such as they could understand, with whom consorting themselves they
forget their former acquaintance, and now are divided into seventy two
different Nations, comprehending about 24000 men, besides women and children,
Genesis 10.10.

The City Babel or Babylon (howsoever the Tower was hindered) went forward and
was finished an. mun. 1960. the out-walls were built by Q. Semiramis; it
contained in compass 60 miles, it had 100 gates, the walls were in height 200
(some Writers say 300) foot, in breadth 75, and the River Euphrates passing
through the midst of it. 1. part. of the Tr. of Times, p. 142.

Hence it is we use Babelish for confused; and Babylonical for magnificent or
costly, and to Babble, or babble, to twattle, or speak confusedly, which word
Babble Verstegan urges as a proof that our old Saxon Language is as ancient as
the Tower of Babel. p. 147.

Bacchanalize (from Bacchus) to rage, play mad pranks, fare like mad men, as
the Priests of Bacchus were wont to do, when they celebrated his Feasts.

Bacchanals (Bacchanalia) the places where the Feasts of Bacchus or
Bacchanalian feasts were solemnized in riot and drunkenness. Also the Feasts
themselves or time when they were kept, i. at Shrovetide. Sometimes also
deboisht drunkards, men and women are called Bacchanals.

Baccharach, A City standing on the banks of the River Rhyne in Germany, so
called quasi Bacchi ara; in ancient time there was an Altar erected to the
honor of Bacchus, in regard of the richness of the wines which are made there,
and therefore called bachrag or baccharach; vulgarly, Rhenish wines.

Bacchation (bacchatio) riot, drunkenness.

Bacchean (baccheus) belonging to Bacchus the God of wine, drunken, sottish.

Bacciferous (baccifer) that bears berries.

Bachyllion, a song or dance, which seems to take name of Bachyllus, a famous
Tragaedian Poet, who devised and practiced it; as Piladion, of Pilades, as
notable a Comedian. Plutarch.

Badget (comes of the Fr. bagage. i. Sarcina) one that buics corn, salt or
other victual in one place to transport to another for gain. Also a beast so
called.

Bagatel (Fr. bagatelle) a toy, trifle, or thing of no value. Mr How.

Balatron (balatro) a Babbler, or vain-talking fellow, a Prater or vile Knave.

Bail (from the Fr. Bailler. i. attribuere, tradere, tribuere) is used in our
Common Law properly for the freeing or setting at liberty one arrested or
imprisoned upon action either civil or criminal, under surety taken for his
appearance at a day and place certainly assigned. Bract. lib. 3. cap. 8. number.
8. and 9.

The reason why it is called bayl is, because by this means the party
restrained is delivered into the hands of those that bind themselves for his
forthcoming. There is both common and special bayl; common bayl is in actions
of small prejudice, or slight proof, in which case any Sureties are taken;
whereas upon cases of greater weight special bail or Surety must be given, as
Subsidy men at the least, and they according to the value. See the difference
between bail and mainprize in Manwoods Forest Law. page 267.

Bain (Fr.) a Bath, Stew, or hot-house.

Baisemains (Fr.) kissing of the hand, humble service.

Balasse (Sax.) ballast or balance, Gravel or any thing of weight laid in the
bottom of Ships to make them go upright.

Balcone (Ital. balcon) a bay window, much used in our new buildings, and
therefore needs no further explanation.

Balcors. See Conders.

Bale (Fr.) a pack or certain quantity of merchandise, as a bale of Spicery, or
of Books.

Balk (Sax.) a little piece of ground in arable land, which by mischance the
Plough slips over, and leaves unplowed, a ridge between two furrows.

Ballista (Lat.) an ancient warlike Engine to cast or shoot darts or stones, to
batter and shake City walls, made with ropes of sinews and women's hair twined
together: As appears by Venus Calva at Rome, to whom, by reason the women of
the City parted with their hair for that purpose, a Temple was dedicated. The
form of this Engine you may read in Godwin's Anthology, lib. 4. cap. 3.

Ballon (Fr.) a great Ball, which they use at a sport so called in Italy; also
the round Globe or top of a Pillar.

Ballotation, a kind of casting lots, or a making election by Balls, as in
Venice at the choice of their Grand Duke.

Balm, a precious juice or liquor, otherwise called Balsamum, or Opobalsamum
(from the Hebr. Bagnal Shemen) It drops (by cutting) out of a little low plant
(about a yard high) having leaves like Rue, but whiter, which grows in Egypt,
and some places of the Holy Land. This juice is somewhat like oil, but more
clammy, and inclining to a certain redness. It has a strong smell, and is not
pleasant in taste. Being put in a vessel of water it will sink down to the
bottom like a round pearl without breaking, and may be taken up again with the
point of a knife. It is an excellent Medicine to take any scar out of the body,
and for diverse other purposes, but very costly and rarely gotten. Saladinus
writes that there was but one Vineyard of these in the whole world, and that
belonged to the Great Turk. Bull.

Balneary (balnearium) a bathing place.

Balnearion (balneatio) a bathing.

Balneator (Lat.) a Master or Keeper of a Bath or Stew.

Balthazar (Hebr) signifies, Scarcher of treasure, or without treasure; This
was the name of one of the Magi, or wisemen, vulgarly called the three Kings
of Collein, who came out of the East to worship our Savior. The first of them,
called Melchior, an old man with a long beard, offered gold, as to a King: The
second called Jasper, a beardless young man, offered Frankincense, as unto God:
The third called Balthazar, (a Blackmore with a spreading beard) offered
Myrrh, as to a man ready for his Sepulcher.

Tres Reges Regi regum tria dona ferebant;
Myrrham homini, uncto aurum, thura dedere Deo:
Tu tria fac itidem dones pia munera Christo,
Muneribus gratus si cupis esse tuis.
Pro myrrha lacrymas, auro cor porrige purum,
Pro thure ac humili pectore funde preces.
Thus in English.

Three Kings, the King of Kings three gifts did bring;
Myrrh, Incense, Gold, as to God, Man, and King.
Let three pure gifts be likewise given by thee
To Christ, even such as acceptable be.
For Myrrh, tears; for Frankincense impart
Submissive prayers; for pure Gold, a pure heart.
See Vul. Errors, fol. 353. and Sands Travels. 181.

Baltick-Sea (so called from a great Peninsula formerly called Baltia now
Scandia) is that which begins at the narrow passage called the Sound,
interlaceth Denmark, Swedland, Germany, and Poland, and extends even to Livonia
and Lituania. The reasons why this Sea being so large does not ebb and flow,
are first, The narrowness of the Straight, by which the Ocean is let into it.
And secondly, The Northern situation of it, whereby the celestial influences
produce therein the lesser operation. Heyl.

Ban^iti (Ital.) Outlaws, Rebels, Fugitives, condemned by Proclamation; Bando
in Ital. signifying a Proclamation. These in the Low Countries are called
Freebooters; in Germany, Nightingales; in the North of England, Moss-Troopers;
in Ireland Tories.

Banderol or Bannerolle (Fr. Banderolle) a little flag or streamer, or a Pennon
worn on the top of a Horsemans Lance; A Cornet-Devise.

Bandle, an Irish measure of two foot in length.

Banes or Bans (from the Fr. Ban) signifies a Proclaming or public notice of
any thing. The word is ordinary among the Feudists, and grown from them to
other uses; as to that, which we here in England call a Proclamation, whereby
any thing is publicly commanded or forbidden. But it is used more especially
in publishing matrimonial contracts in the Church before marriage, to the end
if any man can say any thing against the intention of the parties, either in
respect of kindred, or otherwise, they may take their exception in time. Cow.
But Mr. Sumner derives it from the Saxon Abannon. i. to publish. See his Sax.
Dict. verbo. Abannon.

Bangue, A kind of drink in the Oriential Countries, as Cambaia, Calicut,
Marsingha, which is rare and precious, it is said (like the poets Nepenthe) to
provoke pleasing dreams. How.

Bank (Sax. Banc) a bank or hillock; also a Bench, high seat or Tribunal, and
is properly applied to the Court of Common Pleas, because the Justices of that
Court in legal Records are termed Iusticiarii de Banco. Coke on Lit. l. 2. c.
3. sect. 96. And the Proceedings of that Court are said to be in Communi Banco.

There is another Court formerly called the King's Bench (now the Vpper-Bench)
because the Records of that Court are styled Coram Rege, and because Kings in
former time did often sit there in person.

Banner (Hebr.) an Ensign or standard for war; some derive it from the Brit.
Ban, which signifies a high place, because Banners are wont to be set on a high
place, or carried on high.

Baptism (from the Gr. B(...), i. a washing with water, or diving over the
head) is one of the Sacraments instituted by our Savior Christ in remedy
against Original sin in the Law of Grace, as Circumcision was the remedy
against that sin in the Law of Moses. Before Christ's institution of this
Sacrament John Baptist did baptize unto penance, but his Baptism was not a
Sacrament. In Authors you may read of three sorts of Baptism, which Divines
call, Baptismus fluminis, of water, which is the already mentioned; Baptismus
flaminis, of the Spirit, which is contrition of heart, with desire of the
Sacrament of Baptism; And Baptismus sanguinis, of blood, which is martyrdom.
The custom of the Primitive Church was to have Godfathers and Godmothers in
the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism; their Office was not only to
be Witnesses of the Baptism, or to speak or answer for the baptized; but also
to undertake a charge of instructing or seeing him instructed in the true
Religion in due time.

Baptist (baptista) a name of excellency given to Saint John, that had the
honor of baptizing our Savior Christ in Jordan, and who first baptized.

Baptistery (baptisterium) a Font to baptize in, a Bath, a vessel to wash the
body in.

Baptization (baptizatio) a washing, a watering, or baptizing.

Barbarism (barbarismus) a fault in the pronouncing, tone or accent of words;
rudeness of speech or behavior.

Barbican or Barbicane (French Barbicane) an out-work in any building; also a
Wall or Bulwark before or over a Wall, breast-high, to defend from the enemies
shot. Some take it for a Sentinels house, or Scout-house; Chaucer uses the
word Barbican, for a Watchtower: Hence Barbican by Red-cross-street in London
is thought to take its denomination

Barbitist (barbitista) a Lutinist, or one that plays on the Lute.

Bards (from the old British Bardo) the ancient Poets of the Britans. Bardus,
according to Pompeius Festus, Gallice cantorem significat, qui virorum fortium
lauds canit. Diod. Sicul. lib. 5. calls them Factores cantionum; And Lucan (
lib. 1.) Poetas sive vates.

Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremptos
Laudibus, in longum, vates, dimittitis aevum,
Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi.
In Wales, of old, the Bards did also keep the Ensigns, Arms and Genealogies of
the Nobility. See more in the Laws of Howel Dha.

Barkary, a house where they put bark of trees; a Tan-house.

Barnard. See Bernard.

Barn (Sax. Bearn) a child. Hence it is we say in the North of England, how do
Wife and Barnes, i. How do Wife and Children?

Barnabas or Barnaby (Hebr.) Son of the Master, or Son of comfort.

Baroco, The name of a Syllogistical Mood in Logic, wherein the first
Proposition must be an universal Affirmative, and the other two Negatives.

Barricado (Spa. Barracada, Fr. Barricade) a warlike defense of empty barrels
and such like vessels filled with earth against an enemies shot or assault. It
was so called because it was made of those vessels, which the French call
Bariques, i. a vessel bigger then our Barrel.

Barettor or Barrator (Fr. Barateur, i. a deceiver) in our Common Law, is a
common wrangler, that sets men at odds, and is himself never quiet, but at
variance with one or other: but Skene (de verh. signif. verbo Barratry) says
Barraters are Symonists, and so called from the Italian (barrataria) signifying
corruption or bribery in a Judge giving a false Sentence for money.

Barratrie or Barrataria, any kind of Simony, especially in obtaining the right
of Benefices. Socinus Reg. 55. Baldus in Consilio, 21. par. 5.

Barriers (from the Fr. Bars) signifies with us that which the Fr. call ( jeu
de Bars, i. palaestram) a martial sport or exercise of men armed and fighting
together with short swords, within certain limits or Lists, whereby they are
severed from the beholders. This exercise was formerly much in request in
England, but now is laid aside.

Barristers or Baristers may be said to be of two sorts 1. The outward or Utter
Baristers, are such, as (for their long study and great industry bestowed upon
the knowledge of the Common Law, which must be for seven years space at least)
are called out of their contemplation to practice, and in the face of the world
to take upon them the protection and defense of Clients causes. These always
plead without the Bar, and are in other Countries called Licentiati in Jure,
howbeit in modesty they at first continue themselves hearers for some years,
like the Scholars of Pythagoras, that for the first five years never adventured
to reason or discourse openly upon any point of their Masters Doctrine. 2. The
Inner Baristers are those who are admitted (as a mark of respect) to plead
within the Bar; such are King, Queen, or Princes Attorney, Solicitor or
Sergeants, or any of the Kings Council. But at the Rolls and some other
inferior Judicatures, all Lawyers of the degree of the Bench are admitted
within the Bar See Mootmen, and Apprentice.

Bartholmew (Heb.) the Son of him that makes the waters to mount, that is, of
God, which lifts up the mind of his Teachers, and drops down water
(Szegedinus.) Came.

Bascuence (Spa. Basceuenca) the Language of the Country of Biscay in Spain.

Basate (basio) to kiss or salute.

Bashaw or Bassa a Nobleman or great Commander over Soldiers among the Turks.

Basil or Basilical (from the Gr. (...), Rex) Royal, Kingly, Magnificent.
Basilisk vein. See Vein.

Basilisks (basilicae) were stately Edifices or Halls at Rome, at first serving
to plead in under Covert, wherein they differed from Fora, and also to
administer Justice; of (...), which signifies a Judge, as well as a King; but
afterward they used to meet there in consultation, and to negotiate and
traffic; and these had not only Benches and Bars like Law-Courts, but shops
also, for the better sort of Wares and Merchandise. Livie.

Basis (Lat.) the ground or foundation of any thing; the foot of a Pillar.

Bastardy (comes of the Brit. Bastardo, i. Nothus) and signifies in our Common
Law, a defect of birth objected to one begotten out of wedlock. Bracton lib. 5.
c. 19, per totum.

Bastilie or Bastilde (Fr.) the Fortress or Fortification termed a Bastillion
or Bastile; In Paris la Bastille, is as our Tower, the chief Prison of the
Kingdom, and the chief Fortress of that City.

Bastion (Fr.) a Bulwark or Fortress; the fortification called a Cullion-head.

Baston (Fr.) a staff, batt, or cudgel. It signifies in the Statutes of this
Nation one of the Warden of the Fleet's Servants or Officers, that attended the
Kings Court, with a red staff, for the taking such to Ward, as were committed
by the Court. So it is used an. 1. R. 2. c. 12. and 5. Eliz. c. 23.

Bastonado (Spa. Bastonada) a banging or cudgeling.

Batable ground, was the land lying between England and Scotland, heretofore in
question, when they were distinct Kingdoms, to which it belonged. An. 23. Hen.
8. c. 16. as if we should say debatable ground, for by that name Skene calls
ground that is in controversy between two.

Battavians (Batavia) people of Germany inhabiting Holland, Hollanders.

(...) (Fr. Battaillon, Span. Battallon) the main Battle, or a great Squadron
of Footmen appointed to fight, so called by the Switzers and Italians, being
(after the Greek Phalanges or the Roman Legions) of between six and eight
thousand Soldiers. Min.

Battolgy (battalogia) a vain repetition of words, babbling.

Bawdrick, an old fashion Jewel that women did wear.

Baudkin. See Tinsel.

Beatifical (beatificus) that makes happy or blessed.

To Beatify (beatifico) to make happy or blessed.

Beatitude (beatitudo) blessedness, happiness, prosperity. The eight Beatitudes
are abstractedly thus; 1. To be poor of spirit. 2. Meek. 3. Mourn. 4. To hunger
and thirst after Justice. 5. To be Merciful. 6 Clean of heart 7. Peacemakers.
8. To suffer persecution for Justice. Which see at large in St. Matthew cap. 5.
They are called Beatitudes, because the Scripture says, Beati qui, etc. they
are blessed that are in any of those states.

Beatrice (beatrix) that makes happy or blessed; a woman's name.

Beavis, may seem probably to be corrupted from the name of the famous Geltique
King Bellovesus. The French having made in like sort Beauvis of the old City
Bellouacum. In both these is a significancy of beauty. In later times Bogo has
been used in Latin for Beavis. Camden.

Beazar-stone (breeds in the Maw of the Goat called a Beazar) and is much used
in Physic as a Cordial, but there are several kinds of it.

Bec. See Bek.

Bechical (bechicus) pertaining to a Cough.

Beco^^a^, Signifies money paid for the maintenance of Beacons.

Bid Beade (Sax.) he that prays, or a devout man, as Eucherius or Eusebius in
Greek: we retain still Bedema^ or Bedesma^ in the same sense; and to say our
Bedes, is to say our prayers. Camden.

Bid was also the name of a most learned English Monk commonly mentioned with
the Epithete Venerable, which was a title given him even in his life time, for
his eminent learning, gravity, and sanctity of life; he lived in a Monastery
near Newcastle upon Tine in the seventh age, dying about the year of Christ
734. he wrote a multitude of Books, the Catalogue whereof may be seen in Dr.
Pits De illustribus Angliae Scriptoribus.

Bedpheere (Sax.) a Bedfellow.

Beemol (Fr.) the flat key in Music. Bac.

Bede-roll (Sax.) is a roll or list of such as Priests were wont to pray for in
Churches.

Bedle or B^^el (Sax. B^del, or from the Heb. Badhal) because they separate the
good from the bad, or beggars from rich men.

Bedlem. See Bethlem.

Begletbeg ( i. the Lord of Lords) a Viceroy or supreme Commander under the
Great Turk, that commands both the Sansiakes and Bassa's; of these there are
only two, the one of Greece, the other of Natolia, and are by the Turks called
Rumely. In the Persian tongue it signifies a Marquess. Herb.

Beguines, an order of Nuns or religious women, who are commonly all old or
well in years. Cot.

Bek or Bec, a Phrygian word, signifying bread. Herodotus declares lib. 2. that
Psammeticus a King of the Egyptians, was desirous on a time to make trial what
language a Child would naturally speak, being brought up among dumb people, or
where no speech should be heard, to the end he might judge thereby, what was
the most ancient and natural Language; and did therefore cause two children to
be nursed in a Forest, where no voice of man could be heard; after four years
were past, being brought before the King they could sometimes pronounce this
word Bec, whereupon some gathered that the Phrygian was the first language of
man. But (as St. Augustine says) these children might have learned the word
Bec (and so retained it) of Goats, among which they were nourished. For, as he
shows in his Work of the quantity of the Soul, all manner of speaking is by
hearing and imitation. Notwithstanding he believes that (before the confusion
of Tongues at Babel) the Hebrew Language was natural to all. Aug. in Civit. Dei
lib. 16. cap. 11.

Beck (Danish Becc) a Brook in Yorkshire.

Bedridden or Bed-red (Sax.) Bedreda) one so weak by sickness or old age, that he
cannot rise from his bed.

Be or Beestings, quasi breastlings, the first milk that comes from the
Teat, after the birth of any thing. Min.

Behiram, A Feast among the Turks, wherein they pardon all injuries. H. Court.

To Belage, is a Sea-term, and signifies to make fast any running Rope, when it
is hailed as much as you would; so that it cannot run forth again, till it be
loosed.

Bel-videre, The Popes Palace in Rome, so called; the word signifies fair to
see, or pleasant to behold. As Belvoir Castle in Lincolnshire the noble Seat of
the Earl of Rutland also does.

Bell, In the Chaldean tongue signifies the Sun; and therefore Ninus and
Semarimis gave that name to their Father Bell or Belus, that he might be honored
as the Sun, which the Babylonians worshipped as a God. Bell also is a contract
of Behel, which comes of Bahal, a Lord: it was not only the particular Idol of
the Babylonians, but a general name of the Idols in the East, agreeing to all
the Idols of the Gentiles, as some write, Jer. 9, 5. 1 King. 18, 25.

Bellacity (bellacitas) warlikeness.

Belgic Belgian (belgicus) pertaining to the Low Countries or Netherlands,
called Belgia.

Belial (Heb.) a wicked unprofitable fellow, one without yoke, and is many
times taken for the devil.

Bellatrice (bellatrix) a warrioress, a woman well skilled in war, a virago.

Bellicose (bellicosus) valiant in arms, warlike, apt to war.

Belligerate (belligero) to make war, to fight.

Bellipotent (bellipotens) mighty in wars, puissant at Arms.

Bellitude (bellitudo) fairness.

Bellona, The Goddess of War.

Belluine (belluinus) of or belonging to beasts, beastly, cruel.

Belomancy (Gr.) a Divination by Arrows. Vul Er.

Beelzebub or Beelzebub (Heb.) signifies an Idol of flies, or the flye-God,
worshipped by the Cyreneans, and Ekronites; but it is commonly used for the
Prince or chief of the Devils. As in Luke 11.15. In Beelzebub Principe
Daemoniorum ejicit Daemonia. See Mr. Cowels notes on his Poems. p. 30.

Benet (contracted from Benedictus) blessed or happy; a man's name.

Benedict (benedictum) a good saying, an honest report.

Benjamin (Heb.) the son of the right hand, or filius dierum. Philo.

Benedictines or Benedictine Monks, a sort of Religious persons so called, from
St. Benedict, who was born at Nursia in Vmbria, An. 482. he gathered the Monks
of Italy together, and gave them a rule in writing. Their habit is a loose Gown
of black, their under Garment white woollen, their Crowns shaven. Of this
ancient Order have been above fifty Popes, and at least 200 Cardinals, etc.

Benefact (benefactum) a good deed or benefit.

To Be-negro, to make black, or of the nature of Negroes.

Benemerent (benemerens) that deserves well.

Beneplacity (beneplacitum) that which pleases well, good liking.

Benevolent (benevolens) favorable, bearing good will* friendly.

Benificence (beneficentia) liberality, well-doing.

Bention, blessing. Chaucer.

Bernard or Barnard (Germ.) St. Bernards Cluniac Monks draw it from Bona nardus
by allusion; some turn it hard child. If it be derived (as the Germans will
have it) from Bearne, which signifies a bear, it is answerable to Arthur;
others yet more judicially translate Bernard into filialis indoles, child-like
disposition toward Parents, as Bernher, Lord of many children. Came.

Verstegan says, the true Orthography is Beornhart, and by corruption
Bearnheart, i.e. Bears-heart.

Bernardines. See Cistercians.

Berry or Bury (Sax.) a dwelling place or Court; The chief house of a Manor,
or the Lords seat is so called in some parts of England to this day, especially
in Herefordshire, where there are the Berries of Luston, Stockton, etc.

Besant. See Bizantine.

Besestain, an Exchange or the chief Marketplace among the Turks. See
Bisestano.

Bethlem or Bedlem (from the Hebrew, Beth-e-ehem; i. Domus panis, a house of
bread) a place where mad people are kept: or the Bed or Chamber whereon they
fling and tumble themselves. the Hospital so called without Bishopsgate was
founded by Simon Fitz-Mary Sheriff of London. An. 1246. Stow.

Bethlemites, an order of religious persons, that wore a star with five rays
on their backs, and had a Covent in Cambridge, but continued not long. Mat.
Paris in An. 1247.

Beverage (Fr. Beuvrage) drink.

Bezants (Fr. Bezans) in Blazon, they must ever be round, whole, and of metal.
See Bizantine.

Bezil, That part of a Ring or Jewel, in which the Stone or Signet is set, is
called the Collet, and the upper part of the Collet which fastens and
encompasseth the Stone, is the Bezil.

Bibacity (bibacitas) great or courageous drinking or quaffing.

Bibliographer (bibliographus) a writer of Books, a Scrivener.

Bibliotheque (bibliotheca) a Library or study of Books.

Bibliopolist (bibliopola) a Bookseller.

Bice, a fine blew color used by Painters. There is also green Bice.

Bicolor (Lat.) of two colors, party-colored, changeable.

Bicipital Bicipitous (from biceps, itis) that has two heads, divided into two
parts or two tops.

Bicornous (bicornis) that has two horns or corners, forked, divided into two.

Bid-ale, is when an honest man decayed in his estate, is set up again by the
liberal benevolence and contribution of friends at a Feast; to which those
friends are bid or invited. Most used in the West of England, and in some
Counties called a Help-ale.

Bidental (Lat.) a place where they used to sacrifice sheep, where any place
was blasted with lightning; whatsoever is stricken with lightning. Also any
instrument with two teeth; a fork.

Biennial (biennis) of two years continuance, two years old.

Bifarious (bifarius) that which may be spoken two ways.

Biformed (biformis) that has two shapes, forms or faces.

Biferous (bifer) that bears fruit twice a year.

Bifront (bifrons) which has two foreheads.

Bifurcous (bifurcus) which has two forks.

Bigamist (bigamus) he that has married two wives, of which sort Lamech was
the first.

Bigamy (bigamia) the marriage of two wives; It is used in our Common Law for
an impediment to be a Clerk, and makes a prisoner lose the benefit of the
Clergy. For the Canonists hold, that he that has been twice married may not be
a Clerk; and they ground it upon these words of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3.2. Oportet
ergo Episcopum irreprehensibilem esse, and unius uxoris virum. And also him
that has married a widow, they by interpretation take to have been twice
married, and both these they not only exclude from Holy Orders, but deny all
privileges of Clergy; but this Law is abolished by Anno 1. Ed. 6. cap. 12. And
to that may be added the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 7. which allows to all men,
that can read as Clarks, though not within Orders, the benefit of Clergy in
case of Felony, not especially excepted by some other Statute. Cowel.

Bigat (bigatus) was a piece of Roman silver Coin, so called of Bigia a
Chariot, drawn with two horses, stamped upon the one side, and it was the same
with Denarius. Livie.

Bigot (Fr.) an hypocrite, or one that seems much more holy then he is; also a
scrupulous or superstitious fellow. Sir K. Digby's Treatise of Bodies.

Bilaws, are Orders made in Court-Leets, or Court-Barons by common Assent for
the good of those that make them, farther then the public Law binds. Coke Vol.
6. fol. 63. a. Kitchen fol. 45. and 79.

Bilboblade, from Bilboa a City of Biscay in Spain, where the best blades are
made.

Bilinguis (ex bis and lingua) double tongued, deceitful. In our Common Law it
is used for that Jury that passes between an Englishman and an Alien or
Stranger, whereof part must be Englishmen, and part strangers. Anno 28, Edw.
3. cap. 13.

Biltous (biliosus) choleric, melancholy, churlish, angry.

Bilk is said to be an Arabic word, and signifies nothing: Cribbidge-players
understand it best.

Billet (Fr.) a little Bill, note or ticket, stuck up upon a post or door; and
more commonly a stick of firewood, well known in London.

Bimatical (from bimatus) pertaining to the age or space of two years.

Bimensal (from bimensis) pertaining to the space of two months.

Binarchy (binarchia) the joint rule or equal Authority of two Princes in one
Country

Binarious (binarius) pertaining to two.

Binomial or Binomious (binomius) that has 2 names.

Bipartite (bipartitus) divided into two parts.

Binne or Bin in the old Saxon signified a Manger, we use the name now most
commonly for a place to put bread or oats in.

Bipatent (bipatens) open on both sides.

Bis^statio the chief market place in Constantinople, which is every day kept
open in full sale, except Friday only, which is their Sabbath.

Bipedal Bipedancous Bipedical (bipedalis) that is two foot long,
double-footed, or that has two feet.

Birlings, little Sea-vessels, so called, used by the Islanders of Scotland.
Spotsw.

Bisexous (from bis and sexus) that is both male and female, of two sexes or
kinds.

Bisou^ (Fr.) a fault at Tennis: also a compound dish of boyld meat, made of
young Chickens, Pigeons, and other ingredients, etc.

Bissected (bis and sectus) cut or parted in two equal parts; a term in
Mathematics. Br.

Bissextile (bissextilis) Leap year, so called, because the sixth Calends of
March, are in that year twice reckoned (viz.) on the four and twentieth and
five and twentieth of February; so that Leap year has one day more then other
years.

Thirty days has September,
April, June and November,
February has eight and twenty alone,
And all the rest have thirty and one.
But when of Leap-year comes the time,
Then days has February twenty and nine.
Bissextum sextae Martis tenuere calendae;
Posteriore die celebrantur festa Mathiae.
This Leap-year is observed every fourth year, and was first devised by Julius
Caesar to accommodate the year with the course of the Sun.

Bitume (bitumen) a kind of clay or slime naturally clammy, like pitch, growing
in some Countries of Asia; It was of old used in Physic; the best is heavy,
bright and clear, of purple color, and having a strong smell; the black is
accounted naught; this Bitumen was used instead of Mortar at building the Tower
of Babel, as appears in Genesis 11. There is al a kind of Bitumen, like a liquor,
flowing out of Mare Mortuum and out of some fountains in the Island Sicily,
which is used instead of oil to burn in Lamps.

Bituminous (bitumineus) belonging to Bitumen.

Bitumin^^ch, soldered or done with Bitumen.

Bizante or Besant, a very ancient coin of Gold; so called because it was
coined at Constantinople, formerly called Bizantium. This coin is not now
known, but Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury (as it is in the Authentical Deed)
purchased Hendon in Middlesex of King Edgar to Westminster for 200 Bizantines:
of what value they were was utterly forgotten in the time of King Edw. 3. for
whereas the Bishop of Norwich was condemned to pay a Bizantine of Gold to the
Abbot of St. Edmondsbury, for encroaching upon his liberty (as it was enacted
by Parliament in the time of the Conqueror) no man then living could tell how
much that was: so as it was referred to the King to rate how much he should
pay: which was the more strange, considering, but 100 years before 200000
Bezants were exacted by the Sultan, for redeeming St. Lewis of France, which
were then valued at 100000 livres. The name continues yet in the blazons of
Arms, where plates of gold are called Bezants; and a great piece of gold valued
at 15. l. (which the King of England formerly offered on high festival days)
was called a Bizantine; but afterward there were two purposely made for the
King and Queen with the resemblance of the blessed Trinity inscribed, In
honorem sanctae Trinitatis, and on the other side the picture of the Virgin
Mary, with In honorem sanctae Mariae Virginis, and this was used til the first
year of King James, who caused two to be new cast, the one for himself, having
on the one side the picture of a King kneeling before an Altar with four Crowns
before him, implying his four Kingdoms* and in the circumscription, Quid
tribuam Domino pro omnibus quae tribuit mihi: On the other side a Lamb lying by
a Lion, with Cor contritum and humiliatum non despiciet Deus. And in another
for the Queen, a Crown protected by a Cherubin, over that an eye, and Deus in a
cloud, with Teget ala summus; on the reverse, a Queen kneeling before an Altar
with this Circumscription, Piis precibus, fervente fide, humili obsequio. Came.
Rem.

The French Kings were also accustomed to offer 13 Besants at the Mass of their
Coronation in Rheims; to which end Hen. 2. (after some discontinuance of that
custom) caused the same number of them to be made, and called them Bysantins,
but they were not worth above a double Ducket the piece. Cot.

Black-rod, Is the Huissier or Usher belonging to the order of the Garter; So
called of his black-rod which he carries in his hand: he was of the Kings
Chamber, and Usher of the Lords House in Parliament. Min.

Blain (Sax. Blegene) a kind of Bile or Ulcer, drawing quickly to a head, with
a vehement inflammation of the whole part about it.

Blancmanget (Fr.) a kind of Custard; a white meat made of flower, milk, sugar,
and the brains of Pullets. Bac.

Blanch (Fr.) white or fair; we use it in England for a woman's name.

Blandishment (from Blandio, or from the Fr. Blandissement) a soothing,
smoothing, tickling of the mind and affection with terms of flattery, an
alluring, enticing.

Blandiloquence (blandiloquentia) fair-speaking, flattering.

Blatant, babbling, twatling. Clievland.

Blateron or Blatteroon (blatero) a babbler, an idle-headed fellow. Mr. How.

Blatteration (blateratio) vain-babling, flattering in speech.

Blaze, is a certain fire which the Inhabitants of Staffordshire, and some
other Counties were wont, and still do make on Twelf-Eve, 5. Jan. at night, in
memory of the Blazing-Star, that conducted the three Magi to the Manger at
Bethlem.

Blazon, (Fr.) is the description of arm^s;, and their appurtenances, by the
received terms or other apt expressions of things by words. Elements of Ar.

Blemishe, marks made by hunters, to show where a Deer has gone.

Blend (Sax.) to mix or mingle together.

Blepharen (blepharo, onis) he that has great brows, or eyelids.

Blesiloquent (blaesiloquus) broad-spoken, or that speaks stammeringly.

Blithe (Sax.) joyful, glad, merry, cheerful.

Bliwmantle, The name of an Office of one of the Poursuivants at Arms. See
Harold.

To Blissome, as the Ram does the Ewe, i. to Tup her. So to go a blissoming is
to desire the Ram. Rider.

Blomary, the first Forge in an iron Mill, through which the iron passes after
it is once melted out of the Mine.

Bloudwit (from the Sax. blout, i. blood, and wit, for which we have the word
(wite) still in the west parts of England, signifying a charging of one with a
fault, or an upbraiding.

This Bloodwit is a word used in Charters of Liberties anciently granted, and
signifies an amerciament for shedding blood. So that whosoever had it given him
in his Charter, had the penalty due for shedding blood granted him. Cow. Fleta
says, Significat quietantiam misericordia pro effusione sanguinis. lib. 1.
cap. 47.

Boccone (Ital.) a morsel, a good bit; Sometimes taken for poison.

Bociant (Sax.) a possession, an inheritance, a Farm or house with land
belonging to it.

Boethetic (Gr.) a part of Physic. See Medicine.

Boillary or Bullary of Salt, a little house or furnace where Salt is boiled
and made; as at Droitwich in Worcestershire. Co. instit. p. 4. b.

Bole-Armoniack, a kind of faint red color used by Painters; the chiefest use
of it is in making a Size for burnished gold. Peacham.

Bolus (Lat.) a morsel or mouthful. In physic it is a medicament of a middle
consistency betwixt a Potion and a Pill.

Bombard (bombarda) a Gun, or piece of Ordnance; Hence

Bombardical, thundering, or roaring like a piece of Ordnance. How.

Bombycinous (bombycinus) that is made of silk or silken.

Bombilation (bombilatio) a humming as of Bees. Br.

Bonaght, was an exaction in Ireland imposed at the will of the Lord, for
relief of the Knights called Bonaghti, that served in the Wars. Antiq. Hiber.
p. 60.

Bonair (Fr.) gentle, mild, courteous.

Bonairite (Fr.) gentleness, mildeness, courtesy.

Bonasus. See Monops.

Bonaventure (bonaventura) good adventure; the name of a great Saint and
Doctor, a Friar of St. Francis Order, that lived and flourished in the
thirteenth age after Christ.

Bonefire, is well known in the modern use of it, and was so called from the
ancient custom of burning dead men's bones.

Bone-min^ (Fr.) a good countenance, posture or show.

Bongrace (Fr.) a certain cover which children use to wear on their Foreheads
to keep them from sun-burning; so called because it preserves their good grace
and beauty.

Bonhemes (Fr. i. good men) a religious Order of Friars instituted by St.
Francis de Paula, a Town of Calabria in Italy: a person of eminent sanctity and
austerity of life, and of that humility, that he styled himself the least or
meanest of men, and ordered the followers of his Institute or Rule, to take the
appellation of Minimi (the least or unworthiest among men) and thence they are
commonly called Minims or Minorites. One point of mortification, whereunto the
Regulars of that Order tie themselves by vow (besides their three Vows of
Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience) is a total abstinence from flesh-meats. It is
an Order much reverenced in France, where the Founder lived, and died at Tours,
an. 1507. There were two Convents of these formerly in England, the one at
Asbridge in Buckinghamshire, the other at Edington in Wiltshire.

Bonifate (bonifatus) that has good fortune or fate.

Boniface (bonifacius) wel-doer, or good and sweet face. A name of diverse, as
well Popes of Rome, as others.

Bon-jour (Fr.) good morrow or good-day.

Boon (Sax. Beu^, Chaucer, Bon^) a petition or request.

B^o^ (Gr.) a slow working Star in the North Pole, near Charles wain which it
follows.

Boras or Borar, a white or greenish substance like Saltpeter, wherewith
Goldsmiths use to soder gold and silver: some write it is the gum of a tree,
which is very unlikely; others affirm it to be made of old Lees of Oil, by art
and drying in the Sun, brought to be white; but Dr. Bullokar rather conceives
it to be a Mineral.

To Board. See Abbord.

Bordel (from the Ital. Burdello) a Brothel-house, or Bawdy House. Chau.

Boreas (Gr.) the North or North-East Wind; commonly taken for a great
blustering wind.

Boreal Borean (borealis) pertaining to the North Wind, northernly.

Borith (Heb.) a kind of herb used by Fullers to take away spots in cloth.

Borow or Borough is a Corporate Town that is not a City, an. 2. Ed. 3. cap. 3.
namely all such as send Burgesses to the Parliament, the number whereof you may
find in Mr. Cromptons Jurisd. fo. 24. and more of this in Cowel.

Borow-English, Is a customary descent of Lands or Tenements, which (in all
places where this custom holds) descend to the youngest son; or if the owner
have no issue, to his youngest Brother, as in Edmunion. Kitch. fo. 102. And the
reason of this custom (as Littleton says) is, for that the youngest is
presumed in Law to be least able to shift for himself.

Boscage (Fr.) a Grove, Thicket, or small wood, a place that is stored, or set
thick with trees. Also a picture representing much wood or trees. Sir H. Wot.

Bosphores (Bosphori) two Straits in the Sea, so called of an Oxes wading over
them, the one surnamed Thracian, the other Cimmerian. Dub.

Botanical (botanicus) pertaining to herbs.

Botanomancy (botanomantia) divination by herbs.

Botargo (Ital. from the Gr. (...), i.e. salted eggs) is a kind of Sawsage or
Pudding made of the eggs and blood of the Sea Mullet mixed with salt. Dr.
Muffet.

Bote or Boot is an old Saxon word, and signifies help, succor, aid and
advantage; coming from the Low Dutch Boete, Baete, which is amends, remedy, and
help; so we may say what boots or avails it? or what boot will you give me? and
is commonly joined with other words, as Bridg-boot, Burgh-boot, Fire-boot,
Hedge-boot, and diverse others.

Bo^^e (Fr.) A Buskin or Summer Boot; we otherwise call them Boots with
quarters, which have strings and no Spurs, but a heel like a Shoo on the
outside.

Botoiph (Sax.) helpship.

Bouge or Budge of Court, was the Diet, or rather the bread, beer, and wine
which was allowed by the King to any Officer and his servants.

Bovicide (bovicida) a slaughter-man of Oxen, a Butcher.

Bovillon (Fr.) a kind of broth, or boiled meat, made of several ingredients.

Boureau (Fr.) a Hangman or Executioner.

Boursier (from the Lat. Bursa, a purse) a purse-bearer; in our Universities,
he is commonly the Treasurer or Purse-keeper of a College

Boutefeu (Fr.) the literal signification is one that blows the fire, or that
wilfully sets houses on fire; but Metaphorically it is used for one that
raises discord, an Incendiary, a firebrand of Sedition, one that loves to set
and see men at strife.

Bourgeon (from the Fr. Bourgeoner) to bud, spring, or sprout out.

Boy or Buoy of an Anchor (Spain* Boya) is a piece of wood, an empty barrel or
the like, tied to an Anchor, and floating on the water, to show where the
Anchor lies.

Boza, A drink in Turkey made of seed, much like new mustard, and is very heady.

Brachial (brachialis) belonging to the arm.

Bourgeoise (Fr. Bourgeoisie) a Burgess-ship, the state or condition of a
Burguer or Burgess; also a Boroughship* and the Liberties and Privileges
belonging to a Town or Borough. Cressy.

Brace, in the common acceptance is a known word signifying two or a couple;
but with Printers, a Brace is that which couples two or more words together,
and is made thus

Brachylogy (Brachylogia) shortness of speech.

Brachygraphy (brachygraphia) the Art of writing by short characters. I cannot
say, either who was the Author, or whether the invention be ancient or more
modern, only I find in Dion, that Mecaenas (that great Favorite of Augustus
Caesar, and favorer of learning) first sound out certain notes and figures ad
celeritatem seribendi, for the speedier dispatch of writing.

Brackmans, a Sect of Philosophers in India, that lived only by herbs, roots,
and fruit. These Brackmans or Bramines are now the Indian Priests (perhaps
following the custom of the Egyptians who were wont to choose their Priests out
of their whole number of Philosophers) and are of like authority in their
Church, as the Mufties are among the Turks, and as the Flamines and
Arch-flamines were among the heathen Romans, or as the Druids among the
Britains and Gauls. They hate Mahumed, and acknowledge one God and Creator of
all things: the better sort are called Mockadams, or Masters. Herb. Tr.

Bragodoela, a coined word with us, for a ranting coward, or bragging fellow.

Bragget or Braggot (br. Bragod) a drink made of Malt, water and honey, used in
Wales, having the name from the British Brag. i.e. malt, and Gots, i.e.
Hony-combs. This drink is also called by us, and in Low Dutch Mede, ex melle,
honey. Also a stay cut out of stone or timber, to bear up the Summer, in Masonry
called a Corbel in Timber-work, a Bragget, Bracket, or shoulder-peece. Rider.

Brandish (Fr. brandir.) to make to shine or glister with gentle shaking or
moving.

Bravado (Fr. bravade, Spa. brabada) a show of Challenge or of daring, a
boastful affront.

Brave (brabium) the prize or reward given to him that overcomes in Plays or
Exercises.

Breviary (breviarium) an abridgement, or compendious draught, a short
collection. Particularly, it is the name of a Book, to the daily recital
whereof Catholic Priests are tied, from the time they take the order of
Sub-Deaconship, in discharge of part of their Function. I have heard that the
late Lord Treasurer Cecil, after he had diligently perused this Book, did
greatly admire the order and method of it, saying it might well be termed a
Breviary, for containing so much, and such variety in so contracted a bulk.

Breviloquence (breviloquentia) a brief or short form of speaking.

Brian (Fr.) shril voice.

Brigand (Fr.) a Footman armed, or serving with a Brigandine; In old time when
those kind of Soldiers marched, they held all to be good prize, that they
could purloin from the people, and thereupon this word now signifies also a
Theif, Purse-taker, or Highway robber. White.

Brigandine (Fr.) a jack or coat of Mail, but properly ancient Armor of
Skale-like plates and many joints. This word is used an. 4, and 5. Ph. and Mar.
ca. 2.

Brigantine (Fr.) a kind of swift vessel for Sea, bigger then the Frigot, and
less then the Foist, having some ten or twelve Oars on a side, and commonly a
theevish Vessel: of these the Rhodians are said to be the first Inventors.

The Falque is said to be the least Sea-Vessel with Oars, the Frigot next, then
the Brigantin, the F^ist, the Galiot, the Galey and the Galeasse the biggest.
Ren.

Brigade Brigado (Fr.) a term of War; six men make a Rot, or File, three Rots
of Pikes make a Corporalship, but the Musketeers have four Files to a
Corporalship; three Corporalships of each arms make a complete Company, i.e.
nine Rots of Pikes and twelve Rots of Musketeers (one and twenty Rots together)
which amount to the number of 126 men, besides all Officers, Musteryoungs, and
Pasvolants; four of these Companies (being 504 men) make a Squadron, and three
such Squadrons form a perfect Brigade. Bar.

Brig-bote or Brugbote signifies a Tribute, contribution or aid toward the
mending of Bridges, whereof many are freed by the Kings Charter, and hereupon
the word is used for the very liberty or exemption from this Tribute. And Fleta
l. 1. c. 47. says, Brigbote significat quietantiam reparationis pontium.

Brigid or Bridget contracted also into Bride, an Irish name, as it seems, for
that the ancient St. Brigid was of that Nation. Came.

Brigidians, an order of religious persons instituted by Brigidia a Widow,
Queen of Sweden, in the time of Pope Vrbane the Fifth, about the year of our
Lord 1372. it was as well of men as women, albeit they dwelt severally. Pol.
and Heyl. The Nuns of this Order had a noble Convent at Sion in Middlesex,
built by K. Henry the Fifth.

Brocado (Span.) cloth of gold or silver. Hence we call that Brocado'd silk or
satin, which is wrought or mixed with gold or silver, and sometimes that is
called Brocado'd silk, which is wrought with several colors of silk.

Brocage, means used by a Spoaksman, or the trade of a Broker.

Brochity (brochitas) crookedness properly of teeth or tushes.

Brocket, a red Deer of two years old. See Spitter.

Brodehalfpenny (Sax.) signifies a Toll or Custom for setting up Tables or
Bords in a Fair or Market, from which they that are freed by the Kings Charter,
had this word mentioned in their Letters Patents. Insomuch, as at this day the
freedom it self (for shortness of speech) is called Brodehalfpenny.

Brothelty, dishonesty, bawdery, whoredom.

A Brouch or Ouch (monile) a jewel to wear about the neck.

Brownists, a dangerous Sect, first broached in England by Robert Brown of
Rutland-shire about the year 1583. and is in effect pure Donatism, vamped with
some new Editions. Of which see Mr Fuller's Church History, l. 9. c. 268.

Bruyere (Fr.) Heath, Ling, Hather; also a Heath or heathy ground; a word much
used in Fines and Recoveries. e

Bruma (Lat.) The shortest day in the year, used also for Winter or December.

Brumal (brumalis) belonging to the shortest day, winter-like.

Bubo (Lat.) a S^ritch-Owle; also a botch or sore about the Groin.

Bubulcitate (bubulcito) to cry or call like a Cow-herd, to play the Neat-herd.

Buccinate (buccino) to blow or sound a Trumpet or Horn, to publish or blaze
abroad.

Bucculent (bucculentus) blub-cheeked, wide-mouthed.

Buccentoro or Buccintoro, A stately great Galeass, or Galley Foist, wherein
the Duke of Venice with the Senate sail in triumph yearly on Ascension day, to
espouse the Sea, etc. See Sands Travels, page 2.

Buckeldians, one of those fourteen Sects of Heretics, which Alstedius
comprehends under the title of Anabaptists, which are 1. Muncerians. 2.
Apostolicks. 3. Separatists. 4. Catharists. 5. Silents. 6. Enthusiasts. 7.
Libertines. 8. Adamites. 9. Hutites. 10. Augustinians. 11. Bucheldians. 12.
Melchiorites. 13. Georgians. And 14. Menonists. See more of these in Doctor
Featlies description of Anabaptists, page 24.

Bucolicks (bucolica) pastoral songs, or songs of Heardsmen.

Buffoon (Fr. Bouffon) a Jester or Sycophant, merry fool, or one that lives by
making others merry.

Buggerie (Fr. Bougrerie) is described to be carnalis copula contra naturam,
and haec vel per confusionem Specierum, sc. a man or a woman with a bruit
beast, vel sexuum; a man with a man, or a woman with a woman. See Levit. 18.22,
23. This offense committed with mankind or beast is felony without Clergy; it
being a sin against God, Nature, and the Law; And in ancient time such
offenders were to be burnt by the Common Law. 25. Hen. 86.5. Eliz. 17. Fitz.
Not. Br. 269. My Lord Coke ( Rep. 12. page 36.) says, that this word comes
from the Italian, Buggerare, to bugger.

Bulbous (bulbosus) having round heads in the roots. Bac.

Bulged or Bilged (a Sea-term) a ship is said to be bulged, when she strikes on
a Rock, Anchor or the like, and breaks off her Timbers or Plancks there, and so
springs a Leak.

Bulimy Boulimy (bulimia) unsatiable hunger, great famine.

Bull (bulla) properly a gold ornament or jewel for children, of a round
compass, and hollow within, made like a heart, and used to be hung about their
necks; and hence the Briefs or Mandats of the Pope are called Bulls, from the
lead, and sometimes golden Seal affixed thereto, which Seal, Matthew. Paris, Anno
1237. describes thus: In Bulla Domini Papae stat Imago Pauli a Dextris Crucis
in medio Bullae figuratae, and Petri a sinistris: See more of these Bulls in
Sir Henry Spelmans Glossarium.

Bulls of Basan, properly fat Bulls; strong, powerful, and cruel Enemies, Psalm.
22.12. Many young Bulls have encompassed me: Basan was the fruitful Country of
Og, and became the Jews by conquest, Deuteronomy. 3.1, 2.

Bullary. See Boilary.

Burlesque (Ital.) drolish, merry, pleasant: Mr White, in his Apol. for
Tradition.

Burghgrave (Germ.) is in Germany a title of honor, and signifies as much as
Earl or Count of the Castle or Garrison; also the Captain or Governor of a
Fortress.

Burlybrand (Sax.) a great sword. Chaucer.

Burnish (from the Italian Brunisce) to make a thing glister or look fair by
rubbing it. Also a term among Hunters when Hearts spread their horns, after they
are fraied or new rubbed.

Burser. See Boursier.

Bursholder, an Head-borough, a Ruler or chief Officer in a Borough.

Butlerage of Wines, signifies that imposition of sale Wine brought into the
Land, which the Kings Butler by virtue of his office may take of every ship,
An. 1. H. 8. ca. 5. See Prisage.

Buttress, a stay to prop up a wall or building.

Buxiferous (buxifer) that bears box.

Buxome or Buxum (Sax. Boscum) pliant, amiable, obedient, merry, gentle, meek,
dutiful.

Buxomness or Bughsomness (Sax.) pliablness or bowsomness, to wit, humbly
stooping or bowing down in sign of obedience; It is now mistaken for lustiness
or rampancy.

Buzzar, a Marketplace among the Persians. Herb.

Byram, a great Feast among the Turks; which is their Carneval, and lasts three
days.

Byrlaw or Laws of Burlaw (leges rusticorum) Laws made by Husbandmen,
concerning neighborhood, to be kept among themselves. Skene, p. 33.

By-spel (Sax. B^gspel) a Byword, Parable, or Proverb.

Byssine (byssinus) silken, or which is made of fine flax or cloth.

C
THe Letter C among the Ancients denoted Condemnation. See A.

Cabala, (Hebr.) receptio, a receiving.

Cabala, Kabala, or Cabalistick are, a hidden Science of Divine Mysteries,
which consists in drawing several senses either out of the same letters of a
Hebrew word, as they lie first written in the word, or by different
combinations of them, or by changing one letter for another according to art,
or from the different writing a letter in one word, from the writing of the
same letter in another word, or yet by some other nice ways, known to the
Hebrew Rabbis, who only use this Art for their Exposition of Scripture; And
as it is an Art proper to the Jews, so is it judged by the better learned, to
contain more of the imaginary, or fantastical, then of solid learning, toward
the true understanding of holy Scripture. See Moses and Aaron, p. 169.

Picus Mirandula describes it shortly thus, Est namque universa illa secretior
Divinae legis exposi^io ex ore Dei a Moyse accepta and Prophetarum animis a Deo
infusa. It comprehends all those secret ways of exposition of the Divine Law,
which were received by Moses from the mouth of God, and were afterward revealed
by God to his Prophets.

And Camden says, "That (as the great Masters of the Jews testify) Moses
received of God a litteral Law, written by the finger of God in the Two Tables
of the Ten Commandments to be imparted to all, and another mystical, to be
communicated only to seventy men, which by tradition they should pass to their
posterity, whereof it was called Cabala, which was divided into Mercana or
Merana, concerning only the sacred names of God, and Bresith, or Berescith, of
other names, consisting of Alphabetary revolution, which they will have to be
Anagrammatism, by which they say Mary resolved, made our holy Mistress. But
whether this Cabala is more ancient then the Talmudical learning, hatched by
the curious Jews (as some will) about 200 years after Christ, let the learned
consider." Came.

Arithmancy, Theomancy and Cosmology, are said to depend on the aforesaid
Cabala, which (to give you also Reuclins definition of it) is nothing else but
a kind of unwritten Theology; and that therein is a much greater part of belief
and speculation, then of discipline.

We use to say, he is not of our Cabal, that is, he is not received into our
Council, or is not privy to our secrets.

Cabalis (cabalista) one skilful in that secret Science.

Cabal (caballus) an horse, a Jade.

Cablish (cablicia) among the Writers of the Forest Laws, signifies Brush-wood;
but I rather think with Sir H. Spelman, it more properly signifies
wind-faln-wood, because I find it written of old cadibulum from cadere.

Cacanis, a kind of Doctors among the Jews.

Cacofurgo Cecafogo (Spa.) Shitefire.

Cachexie (Gr.) an ill habit or disposition of body.

Cachinnation (cachinnatio) great laughter, or a laughter in derision.

Cacos (Gr.) Malus, evil: hence

Cacochymy (cacochymia) ^l juice in the body, causing ^l digestion, and bad
nutrient: Or a corruption of all the humors in the body.

Cacodaemon (Gr.) an evil spirit, a devil.

Cacography (Gr.) ill writing, or writing of evil things.

Cacology (cacologia) evil speech or report, detraction.

Cacophony (cacophonia) an ill, harsh, or unpleasing sound (in words) a vicious
utterance or pronunciation.

Cacozelous (cacozelus) ill-minded or affectioned, one that imitates badly.

Cacuminate (cacumino) to make sharp or copped.

Cadaverous (cadaverosus) like a dead carcass, deadly, ghastly or full of dead
carcasses.

Cadee or Cade (Arab.) a Judge or Justice of the Peace among the Turks; also a
Lord.

Cadence Cadency (from cado) a just falling; round going of words; a
proportionable time or even measure in any action or sound.

Cadent (cadens) falling, failing, dying.

Cadet (Fr.) a younger brother among Gentlemen.

Caducean (caduceus) among the Romans was the name of a wand or rod, so called
a cadendo, because at the sight thereof all quarrels and discords presently
ceased, and it was carried by their Heralds and Ambassadors as an Ensign of
Peace. Peach.

Celibate (caelibatus) single life, the state of man or woman unmarried. Herb.
H. 8.

Cageole (Fr. cageoler) to prattle or jangle like a Jay; to prate much to
little purpose; to inveigle with fair words.

Caduciferous (caducifer) that carries a white rod in sign of peace.

Calamitous (calamitosus) full of calamity, wretched, destroyed with tempest.

Calamize (calamizo) to pipe or sing.

Calamist (from calamus) a Piper or Whistler with a reed.

Calamity (calamitas) destruction of Corn or other thing, misery, mischief,
etc. Calamitas (says my Lord Bacon) was first derived from calamus when the
corn could not get out of the stalk. Not. Hist.

Calasticks (calastica) purging medicines or ointments.

Calcauthous (from calcauthum) pertaining to ^hoomakers-black, or Vitriol.

Calcation (calcatio) a treading or stamping.

Calceate (calceo) to Shoe or put on Shoes, or Socks.

Calcedon, a term used by Jewellers and Lapidaries, as when in a Rubie
especially, or Sapphire, there is a certain foul vein, of somewhat a different
and most commonly whitish color to the other part of the stone, that they call
a Calcedon, and it makes the stone of less value; There is also a precious
stone called Calcedonius.

Calcined (calcinatus) burnt to ashes, or reduced to powder by fire.

Calcinize, To burn to ashes, to reduce metals to powder by the fire, to refine.

Calcitrate (calcitro) to kick or spurn, to refuse with disdain.

Calculate (calculo) to cast accounts to reckon.

Calcule (calculus) an account or reckoning; a Table-man, Chess-man, or Counter
to cast accounts withal.

Calculosity (calculositas) fullness of stones or Counters.

Caledonian (caledonius) belonging to Scotland, formerly called Caledonia.

Calefy (calefacio) to make warm or hot.

Calefaction (calefactio) a warming or heating.

Calfactive (calfactus) heating or warming, of property or power to heat or
warm.

To Calender Linen Cloth and Stuff, is to smooth, trim, and give it a gloss; a
term used by Linen Drapers and Mercers.

Calends (calendae) properly the first day of every month, being spoken by it
self, or the very day of the New Moon, which commonly did fall out together; If
Pridie be placed before it, then it signifies the last day of the foregoing
month, as Pridie Calend. Maii, is the last day of April. If any number be
placed with it, it signifies that day in the former month, which comes so much
before the month named; as the tenth Calends of October, is the twentieth day
of September, because if one begin at October, and reckon backwards, that
twentieth day of September, is the tenth day before October. In March, May,
July, and October, the Calends begin at the 16 day, in other months at the
fourteenth; which Calends must ever bear the name of the month following, and
be numbered backward from the first day of the said following months. See more
in Hoptons Concord. p. 69. and see Ides.

At the Greek Calends (ad Graecas Calendas) i. never; for the Greeks have no
Calends.

Calent (calens) hot or warm.

Calenture (Spa. Calentura) a burning Fever, or an Ague.

Calidity (caliditas) heat, warmth.

Calid (calidus) hot, warm, burning, fierce and hasty.

Caliduct, Palladio observes that the Ancients did warm their rooms, with
certain secret Pipes, that came through the walls, transporting heat, to sundry
parts of the house, from one common Furnace, which Sir Hen. Wotton properly
calls Caliducts.

Caliga^o^ (caligatio) dimness of sight, blindness.

Calig^ (caligatus) that wears Stockings, Bus^ings, or harness for the Legs.

A Caligate Soldier (caligatus miles) a common Soldier; also a Soldier,
that, for fear of the enemy, feighneth himself to be weary and faint.

Calip^, A name or tittle of Dignity or Estate in Egypt, which people of the
Mohammedan Religion used to confer on such a man, whom they thought to be of
holy life, a great and diligent observer of Mahomets Law, as also well learned
therein, granting him besides, to command with Royal Authority; At the
beginning of this Religion all Caliphs were Kings, witness Mahomet himself
inventer thereof, who was King of Arabia. These Caliphs were also a kind of
Highpriests, at whose hands the Mahumetan Princes were wont to receive their
Diadems and Regalities. But their Office is now executed in the Turks Dominions
by the Mufti or Chief Priest of the Saracens. Heyl.

Callent (callens) crafty, witty, cunning, or wise by experience.

Callid (callidus) idem.

Calligraph^ (calligraphia) fair-writing.

Callosit^ (callositas) hardness or thickness of skin. Br.

Callo^ (Sax.) a lewd woman. Chauc. So perhaps Call^w may be lewd or wicked,
which Mr. Cleveland uses in his Poems, where he speaks of a callow curse.

Calour (calor) heat, warmth, hot love.

Calpe. See Hercules Pillars.

Calsounds or Calsunes, a kind of drawers or such like garment of Linen,
which the Turks wear next their skin. Sands.

Caltrop or Calthrop (Fr. Chaussetrope) an instrument used formerly in war,
made with four pricks of Iron, of such a fashion, as which way soever it was
thrown, one point will always stick up like a nail, to spoil the enemies horse
feet.

Calvary or Mount Calvary (calvarium) a hill a little out of Jerusalem, where
the malefactors were ordinarily executed, and where our Savior Christ was
Crucified for the Redemption of mankind. The Mount had the name Calvary from
the skuls and dead men's bones that lay there up and down.

Calvinist. One that holds the same opinion with Calvin in matters of Religion.
See Lutheranism.

Calvity (calvitas) baldness, deceit.

Calumniate (calumnior) to accuse or charge falsely, to cavil or detract. He
that in his accusation, forges faults never committed, is said to Calumniate.
He that undertakes ones suit, and either will not urge reasons in the behalf of
his Clyent, or answer the Objections of his adversary, when he is able, is said
to Prevaricate. i. to play the false Proctor. He that desists in his
accusation, and lets his suit fall, is said Tergiversari. Sylv. in Orat. pro
Mur.

Calumnious (calumniosus) full of cavils or false accusations, slanderous.

Calydonian, of or belonging to Scotland, or to a Forest there, called
Calydonia Sylva.

Cambio (Spa.) a Burse or Exchange; as the Royal Exchange in London.

Cambren (from the British Came, i. crooked, and ^ren; a stick) a crooked
stick, with notches on it, which Butchers use to hang Sheep or Calves on, when
they dress them.

Cambrian (from Cambria) belonging to Wales, Welsh, British.

Camerade (Fr. and Camerada Span. from Camera a Chamber) a Tent, Chamber, or
Cabin-fellow, or a fellow-Souldier.

Camoise, crooked; as Camoise-nosed, hook-nosed; from the Brit. Came, i.
crooked; whence we also say C^m-Cam, for crooked, overthwart, or clean contrary.

Cam^ate (camero) to vault, seil, or make an Arch or Roof.

Cam^lionize, to live by the Air, or in the fire; or change color, as the
Camelion is said to do.

Camisado (from the Span. Camisa i. a shirt) a sudden assaulting or surprisal
of the enemy; So termed because the Soldiers that execute it, did commonly
wear shirts over their armor, or take their Enemies in their shirts. Cotgr.

Campsor (Lat.) a banker, or changer of money.

Campain (Fr. Campaigne) a plain field, or a wide and level piece of ground. A
word much used among soldiers, by whom the next Campain is usually taken for
the next Summers Expedition of an Army, or its taking the field.

Campus Martius, a field near Rome, where the ancient Romans made use of all
manly exercises, and the people often assembled to give their suffrages toward
the election of Magistrates, etc. It was so called, because dedicated to Mars.

Campus scelera^us (Lat.) was the place where the vestal Nuns, if they were
defloured, suffered punishment; the field of execution.

Canary wi^e. So called, because it is made in the Canary Islands.

Cancer (Lat.) a crevice, or crab; also one of the Twelve Celestial Signs, so
called for that as the Crab retrogrades or goes backward; so the Sun (being in
that sign about mid- June ascends no higher but recedes by degrees, and hastens
toward Capricorn. Min.

Candefy (candefacio) to make white, clear, or pure.

Cand^d^t^ (candidati) those that stand in election and sue for dignities of
Magistracy, during which time, among the Romans, they wore whiter and newer
gowns then ordinary, that they might be the more easily seen and discerned; A
word still in use in Universities; Also gallant young Gentlemen or Knights
about the Emperors person.

Candlemass-day (Sax. Candel-moesse) the Feast of the Purification of the
Blessed Virgin (2. Feb.) so called from the many candles that were wont to be
hallowed and lighted in the Church on that day. The Dutch call it Lic^tmisse.
Sax. Dict.

Candid (candidus) white, fair, clear; also fortunate, pure, innocent.

Candor (Lat.) whiteness, brightness, purity, sincerity, without craft or
malice.

Canel bone (jugulus) the Neck or Throat-bone.

Canibals. A barbarous kind of people that eat man's flesh.

Canicular day^s (dies caniculares) See Dog days.

Cani^ude (canitudo) hoariness, whiteness, gravity.

Canon. (Gr.) Properly a Rule or line to make any thing straight, or to try the
straightness of it. Hence Laws or Decrees for Church Government are called
Canons; and certain times of Prayer used by Churchmen are called Canonical
hours of Prayer, as Matins, Lauds, etc. And we call those Canonical books,
which are authentical Scripture.

Canonical (canonicus) according to Rule, or Order, received into the Canon,
put into the Roll; Authentical.

Canonize (canonizo) to examine by rule, to Register, to put in the rank and
number: also to declare and pronounce one for a Saint.

Canor (Lat.) melody or sweet singing.

Canorous (canorus) loud, shrill, pleasant, loud singing.

Cantabrians (Cantabri) people of Biscay (formerly Cantabria) in Spain.

Cantation (cantatio) singing or enchanting.

Cantabrize, to follow the custom or fashion of Cambridge. Mr Fuller: and it
may be applied to Biscay in Spain, in Latin called Cantabria.

Cantharides (Lat.) certain flies of a bright shining green color, breeding in
the tops of Ash and Olive Trees beyond the Sea. They are sometimes used by
Physicians, to raise blisters in the body; but their heads, wings, and feet
must be cast away. The juice of them is poisonous. Bull.

Canticle (canticum) a pleasant Song, a Ballad, a Rhyme.

Cantion (cantio) a song or enchantment, a sorcery or charm.

Cantilene (cantilena) a verse, a common speech or tale, a song.

Canto (Ital.) a Song or Sonnet; also as Canton.

Canton, from the Greek, (...), which is a corner properly of the eye; also an
Hundred, Precinct, or Circuit of Territory, wherein there are diverse good Towns
and Villages: This word is proper to Helvetia or Switzerland, which was divided
or Cantonized about the year of Christ 1307. into 13 such Cantons.

It is also a term in Heraldry, and signifies as much as an Angle or corner in
a coat of Arms, contracted thus:

It possesses for the most part the dexter point of the Scotcheon, and is the
reward of a Prince given to an Earl. Peach.

Cantonize. To divide into Cantons, quarters or corners.

Cantor (Lat.) a singer or charmer.

Cantred or rather Cantref signifies an hundred Villages, being a British word
compounded of the Adjective Cant, which signifies an hundred, and Tref, a Town
or Village. In Wales the Counties are divided into Cantreds, as in England into
Hundreds. This word is used An. 28. H. 8. c. 3.

Canzonet (from the Ital. Canzonetta) a song or ditty.

Car-a-pe (from the Lat. caput and pes) from head to foot; as when a Soldier
is completely armed, we say he is armed Cap-a-pe. The Romans called such
soldiers Cataphracti.

Capacitat^ (from capacitas) made capable or fit to receive. Lo. Prot. Speech
to Parl. 8. April, 1657.

Capacity Capability (capacitas) an aptness to contain or receive.

Our Common Law allows the King two Capacities, a natural, and a politic; in
the first he may purchase Lands to him and his Heirs; in the later to him and
his Successors. And a Parson has the like.

Cape (Fr. cap) that whereof Seamen speak in their voyages, is some remarkable
nook or elbow of Land, that shoots farther into the Sea then any other near
part of the Continent. In Spanish it is called Cabo; i. an end, quasi the end
or last of such a Land, as Cabo de Buena Esperansa the Cape of good hope, first
found by Vasco de Gama a Portugal.

Caparison (Fr. Caparasson) trapping or furniture for a horse.

Capets (Fr. Cappres) A prickly plant almost like Brambles, growing in Spain,
Italy, and other hot Countries: the root whereof is much used in Physic,
against obstructions of the Spleen or Milt. The flowers and leaves are brought
hither from Spain, preserved in pikle, and are commonly eaten with Mutton: they
stir up the appetite, warm the Stomach, and open the stoppings of the Liver and
Milt. Bull.

Capharnaits, those of Capharnaum in Palestine, who first doubted of the
mystery of the blessed Sacrament.

Ca^, Three chief Officers among the Venetians, to whom and to the Senate the
Dukes Authority is in all things subject. Heyl.

Capillary (capillaris) of or like hair, hairy.

Capillatur^ (capillatura) a frizling of the hair, the bush of hair on the head.

Capistrate (capistro) to halter, muzzle, or tie.

Capillation (capillatio) hairiness, a making a thing hairy, or causing hair to
grow.

Capital (capitalis) worthy of death, deadly, mortal, belonging to the head.
The seven Capital sins are Pride, Covetousness, Lechery, Anger, Gluttony, Envy
and Sloth; and are called Capital, because they are heads of many others,
which proceed from them as Rivers from their source.

Capitation (capitatio) a tribute paid by the heads; pole money. Br.

Capite, was a tenure when a man held Lands immediately of the King, as of his
Crown, were it by Knights service, or in Socage. Brook. tit. Ten. 46.94. This
Tenure, and those of Knights service and Socage in chief are now taken away,
and all Tenures turned into Free and common Soccage. Act. 1656. ca 4.

Capitol (capitolium) an ancient Palace in Rome, so called from the head of a
man found there when they dug to lay the foundation; Arnobius says his name
was Tolus, and from Caput and Tolus came Capitolium. When Brennus and his Gauls
overcame the Romans near the River Allia in Italy, Rome it self was forsaken of
its chief strength, only the Capitol was manned by Manlius and saved from the
fury of the Gauls, by the cackling of Geese which awaked the watch, etc.

Capitulate (capitulo) to divide by chapters or heads; also to bargain or agree
by Articles.

Capnomancy (capnomantia) a divination by smoke arising from an Altar, whereon
Incense or Poppy-seed is burned. Cotgr.

Capouch^ (Fr. Capuchon, lat. Capitium) a coul, hood, or cover for the head,
which Monks and Friars use to wear.

Capouchins or Capucines, a religious Order of Friars so called of their Coule
or Capouch, ordained by Matthew. Basci of Ancona. Friar Lewis his companion
obtained of the then Pope, the habit and rule of St. Francis in the year 1526.
In the space of 42 years they increased to 2240 associates, had 222
Monasteries, and were divided into 15. Provinces. Heyl. They wear neither
shirts nor breeches. Cotgr.

Caprichio Caprich (from the Spa. capricho) an humor, a fancy, a toy in ones
head, a giddy thought; hence

Caprichious, humorsome, fantastical, full of whimseys or toys, giddy-headed.

Capricorn (capricornus) the Goat or one of the 12 Signs of the Zodiac; so
named from the custom and nature of that beast; for as the Goat commonly climbs
up to the top of the steepest hills to seek his food; so the Sun (when in in
Mid- December, he enters the Tropic of Capricorn) ascends our Hemisphere. Min.

Caprification (caprificatio) husbanding or dressing wild fig trees or other
trees.

Capriole (Fr.) a caper in dancing; also the leaping of a horse above ground,
called by horsemen, the Goats leap.

Capstand, an Instrument to wind up things of great weight, a Crane. Bull.

Capsulary (from capsula) pertaining to a little Coffer, Chest, or Casket.

Capsulated, locked or shut up in a Chest or Casket.

Captation (captatio) subtilty to get favor, a cunning endeavor to get a thing.

Captious (captiosus) full of craft, curious, hurtful, catching or taking hold
of every little occasion to pick quarrels.

Caracol (from the Fr. fair le Caracol) to cast themselves into a ring, as
soldiers do.

Captivity (captivitas) bondage.

Captivate (captivo) to take captive or prisoner.

Caracter. Vide Character.

Caravan or Karavan (Fr. Caravene) a convoy of Soldiers for the safety of
Merchants that travel by Land. Voyage Levant, and Sands.

Capuchet (from the Fr. Capuchon, a Coul or Hood) hooded or covered with a Coul
or into the Hood. See Capouche.

Carbonado (Spa. carbonada, lat. carbonella) a rasher or collop of Bacon, or
any meat smutcht with or broiled on the coals: also a slash over the face,
which fetches the flesh with it.

Caravel, a kind of swift Bark.

Carbuncle (carbunculus) has two significations, the one a precious stone, the
other a dangerous botch or sore. Carbuncle stone, is bright, of the color of
fire, and has many virtues, but chiefly prevails against the danger of
infectious air. Some call a Ruby in perfection a Carbuncle; others say a
Diamond of a red or fiery color, is a Carbuncle. Carbuncle disease is a botch,
or ulcer, called otherwise by a Greek name Anthrax, caused of gross hot blood,
which raises blisters, and burns the skin; This Ulcer is ever accompanied with
a Fever.

Carceral (carceralis) of or belonging to a prison.

Sea- Card (charta marina) is a Geographical description of coasts, with the
true distances, heights and courses or winds laid down in it; not describing
any Inland, which belongs to Maps. Seamen use these Cards to instruct them in
Navigation.

Cardiacal (cardiacus) of or pertaining to the heart, cordial, comforting the
heart.

Cardinal (cardinalis) a high dignity in the Church of Rome, whereof there are
about 70 in number, and were first instituted by P. Paschal the first. Minsh
derives the word from Cardo, inis, the hook or hinge of a door: for as the door
hangs or depends on the hinges, so the Church on the Cardinals. The word taken
Adjectively, is pertaining to a hook or hinge; also chief or principal; the
four Cardinal Virtues are, 1 Prudence* 2 Temperance, 3 Justice, 4 Fortitude. So
called, because they are the principal foundations of a virtuous well-ordered
life, and as it were the hinges on which all other moral virtues depend; the
four principal winds, East, West, North, and South, are also called Cardinal
Winds.

Cardiognostick (Gr.) that knows the heart; an attribute peculiar to God alone;
Mr. How.

Carefox or Carfax, A Marketplace in Oxford, so called; which may come of the
French Quarrefour or carrefour, signifying any place or part of a Town, where
four streets meet at a head; as at Carfox in Oxford, for there is the Quarre,
the square and quadrant. Min. Or (according to Mr. Sumner) it may be a
corruption from the French, quatre voyes. i. four ways.

Ca^e^e (Fr.) a cheering, cherishing, welcoming, making much of.

Caret (Lat.) it wants; it is the name for this mark () which is made in
writing, where any thing is wanting, left out or enterlined; or to show where
an interlineation comes in.

Cargazon or Cargaison (from the Span. Carga. i.e. a load) the freight or
lading of a ship.

Carine (carina) the Keel or Bottom of a Ship Any kind of bringing a ship over
to lie on one side; to be trimmed (she being on float) is called Careening.

Carity (caritas) dearth, scarcity, dearness.

Cark, is a quantity of wool, whereof 30 make a Sarplar. A. 27. H. 6. cap. 2.

Carmasal or Carmusal, a kind of Turkish ship or Galley.

Carmelite (had beginning and name at and from Mount Carmelus in Syria, where
Elias the Prophet lived long solitary) a strict order of Friars instituted by
Almericus Bishop of Antioch, An. 1122. They followed St. Basil and were
reformed by the virtuous Spanish Virgin St. Teresa, who made them certain
constitutions confirmed by Pope Pius the fourth, Ann. 1565. Heyl.

Carminate (carmino) to card wool, or hatchel flax, to sever the good from the
bad.

Carnage (Fr.) flesh time, or the season wherein it is lawful to eat flesh; It
is also a term of Venery, signifying that flesh which is given to the dogs
after hunting.

Carnalist, One that is devoted to carnalities, a carnal man.

Carnaval (Fr.) Shrovetide; also a licentious or dissolute season.

Carnel work, The building of ships first with their Timbers and Beams, and
after bringing on their Planks, is called Carnel-work, to distinguish it from
Clinch-work.

Carnify (carnifico) to quarter or cut in pieces, as the Hangman does, to
torment.

Carnous (carnosus) full of flesh, fleshy, gross, thick.

Carnivorous (carnivorus) that devoureth flesh.

Carnificine (carnificina) the place of execution, or the office of a Hangman.

Carnogan (Brit.) a little kind of a wooden dish with hoops, a Piggin.

Carol, A Christmas song, or Hymn in honor of our Saviors birth; it comes from
Cantare, i. to sing, and Rola an interjection expressing joy; for heretofore in
the burden of delightful songs, and when men were jocound, they were wont to
sing Rola, Rola, as sometimes they now do, Hey down, derry derry. It was an
ancient custom among the Christians in their Feasts, to bring every one into
the midst, and incite him to sing unto God, as well as he could, either out of
holy Scriptures, or out of his own wit and invention. Tertul. lib. adv. Gentes,
cap. 39.

Carous, Gar in the old Teutonick signified all, and aus, out; so that to drink
Garaus, is to drink all out; hence by corruption, to drink Carous, and now we
say to Carous it, i. to drink all out.

Carpatian-Sea (so called from an adjacent Island called Carpathos, now
Scarpanto) a Sea lying between Rhodes and Crete.

Carp^cratians, a sort of Heretics so called.

Carrat (Fr. carat) among Goldsmiths and Mintmen is the third part of an ounce;
among Jewellers or Stonecutters, but the 192 part, for eight of them make but
one sterlin, and a sterlin is the four and twentieth part of an ounce. Three
grains of Assize or four grains of Diamond weight make a carrat. A fool of
twenty five carrats, is an egregious fool, a fool beyond all proportion; the
finest gold being but of four and twenty carrats, which is the essay, by which
the fineness of the gold is known. Cotgr.

Carrick Carrack a ship of a great burden; so called of the Italian word
carico, or carco, a burden or charge; you have this word, An. 2. R. 3. ca. 4.
and 1. Jac. ca. 33.

Carriere (Fr) the ring or circle where they run with great horses; also their
course or full speed.

Cartage. See Cartouch.

Cartel (Fr.) a Letter of defiance, or a challenge for a (single) Combat. Lo.
Herbert uses it often in his Hen. 8.

Carthusians, a religious order of Monks, instituted by St. Bruno, a native of
Collein, who being a Parisian Doctor of Divinity, and a Canon of Rheims,
abandoned the world, and with six associats began his austere Heremitical
course of life, on the Carthusian Mountains, in the Diocese of Gratianopolis,
with the license of Hugh then Bishop thereof; and from thence his Order took
the name of Carthusians: he flourished in the time of Pope Urban the second,
and died 1101. Those of his rule have at this day near 100 Monasteries; they
eat no flesh, never meet but on Sundays, labor with their hands, watch, pray,
etc. their robe is white, with a short cape.

Cartilage (cartilago) a gristle. Physicians define it to be a similary part,
dry and hard, yet not so as a bone; flexible, which a bone is not; framed to
stay the soft parts, and to repel the injuries of external hard bodies. Reads
Anat.

Cartilagineous (cartilagineus) of a gristle or full of gristles.

Carrucate of Land (carrucata terrae) is a word much used in the ancient
Charters, and Land-evidences of this nation, and signifies as much land as may
be tilled in a year by one Plough; it is also called in the ancient Laws Hilda
vel Hida terrae, and in others Carue de terre; now a Plough-land. Carrucata is
a corruption from the French Carrue, a Plough.

Cartouche (Fr.) a charge of powder and shot ready made up in a paper; we
corruptly call it a cartage. Also a roll in Architecture.

Carvel, a kind of ship.

Caspian Sea (mare Caspium) a Sea near Hyrcania, that has no passage into any
other Sea, but is a huge Lake, and neither ebbs nor flows. Therefore Sir Philip
Sidney (to note, that he persisted always one) depainted out this Sea
surrounded with his Shoars, and over it this Motto, Sine refluxu, for his
Devise.

Case-Mate (Fr.) a loop-hole in a fortified wall to shoot out at, or in
fortification, a place in a ditch, out of which to plague the assailants.

Cassation (from casso) a quashing, annulling, or making void.

Castalian-Wel; a fountain at the foot of Parnassus, sacred to the Muses;
taking name of Castalia a Virgin, who (as Poets fain) flying from the
leacherous god Apollo, fell down headlong, and was turned into this fountain.
Rider.

Castifical (castificus) making chaste, pure or continent.

Castigate (castigo) to chastise, correct, reprove, or punish.

Castleward, Is an imposition laid upon such Subjects, as dwell within a certain
compass of any Castle, toward the maintenance of such as watch and ward the
Castle. Mag. Char. c. 20. and an. 32. H. 8. ca. 48. It is used sometimes for
the very circuit it self; which is inhabited by such as are subject to this
service, as in Stows Annals, p. 632.

Castrate (castro) to geld, to cut off, or mangle, to take away the strength.

Castrensian (castrensis) of a Camp or Army; that pertaines to an Host or War.

Casuist (from casus) one that writes, or is well seen in cases of conscience.

Casule, or Planet ( casula) one of those attires wherewith the Priest is
vested, when he says Mass, resembling the purple robe of derision, which the
Soldiers put on our Savior, saying, Hail King of the Jews. Tr. of Ma.

Cata-baptist (Gr.) one that abuses or depraves, or is an adversary to the
Sacrament of Baptism. A Catabaptist may sometimes be no Anabaptist, such was
Leo Capronymus, who defiled the Font at his Baptism, yet was not Christened
again, but every Anabaptist is necessarily a Cataptist, for the iteration of
that Sacrament is an abuse and pollution of it. Dippers dipped.

Catachrestical Catachrestique (from catachresis) abusive, as when one word is
improperly put for another.

Cataclysm (cataclysmus) a general flood, or deluge, a great shower of rain.
Mr. Evelyn.

Catadrome (catadromus) a place where they run with horses, for prize; a
Tilt-yard. An Engine which builders use like a Crane, in lifting up or putting
down any great weight.

Cataglottism (Gr.) a kissing with the tongue. Cotg.

Catagmatical (catagmaticus) of or belonging to broken bones; or to the healing
or closing such bones.

Catagraph (catagraphe) the first draught or delineation of a picture.

Cataloguize (from catalogus) to insert into a catalogue, to inroll.

Catals Chatels In our Common Law it comprehends all goods movable and
immovable, but such as are in the nature of a Freehold or parcel thereof.
Howbeit Kitchen. chap. Cat. fol 32. says, That ready money is not accounted
any goods, or hattels, nor Hawks, nor Hounds. See more in Cow.

Catalepsie (catalepsis) occupation, deprehension, knowledge: Also a disease in
the head, occasioned by a distemper of the brain.

Catamidiate (catamidio) to put one to open shame, and punishment for some
notorious offense, to scorn, to defame. ka me, ka thee.

Catamite (catamitus) a boy hired to be abused contrary to nature, a Ganymede.
Herb. tr.

Cataphysick, Against nature.

Cataphor (cataphora) a deep or dead sleep.

Cataphrygians. A Sect of Heretics that lived in the time of Pope Soter, and
the Emperor Commodus about the year of Christ 181. they bore that name, because
their Arch-leaders, Montanus and Apelles were of the Country Phrygia; they
erred about Baptism, rejecting the form that Christ and his Apostles used; they
baptized their dead, held two Marriages as bad as fornication, with other
wicked Tenets.

Cataplasm (cataplasma) properly a medicine or poultis made of diverse herbs
either bruised or boiled in water, and so applied outwardly to the body: if
there be oil added after the decoction, it is not then called a Cataplasm, but
an Emplaister.

Catapult (catapulta) an ancient warlike Engine to shoot Darts or great Arrows
a far off; and by this name was called not only the instrument it self, but
the arrow or whatsoever was shot out of it; as Turneb. writes in his 15.
Advers. cap 1. This Engine was also called Balista.

Cataract (cataracta) a Portcullis, a great fall of water from an high place;
also a distillation of humors out of the eyes, a Flood-gate.

Catarrhe (catarrhus) a Rhewm or distillation of waterish humors out of the
head into the mouth, throat, or eyes, caused by a cold, and sometimes hot
distemperature of the brain.

Catastasis (Gr.) the third part of a Comedy, and signifies the state and full
vigor of it. Tragedies and Comedies have four principal parts in respect of
the matter treated of, 1. Protasis. 2. Epitasis. 3. Catastasis. 4. Catastrophe.

Catastrophe (Gr.) a subversion, the end, or last part of a Comedy or any other
thing: a sudden alteration, the conclusion or shutting up a matter, or the
inclination unto the end, as Vitae humanae catastrophe, the end of a man's life.

Catechetical (from catechesis) pertaining to an Instruction, by mouth or book.

Catechize (catechizo) to inform or instruct.

Catecumene (catecumenus) one lately taught and catechized by mouth; or one
that is catechized, but has not received the Communion.

Categorem (categorema) that part of a proposition which is predicated of the
other.

Categorematical. See Syncategorematical.

Category (categoria) properly an accusation. It is also a term used in Logic,
and is the same with predicament. See Predicament.

Categorical (categoricus) plain, authentical, already resolved on. Cotgr.

Catenate (cateno) to link, chain or tie.

Catharians, were a branch of the Novatian Heretics that lived in the third
age after Christ. They took the name Cathari from the Greek word (...) (which
signifies clean or pure) by reason of the cleanness and purity they challenged
to themselves, saying, they were altogether pure from sin, and therefore
omitted that clause in the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we
forgive, etc. they denied original sin, and the necessity of Baptism, with
other Heretical doctrines.

Catharists (so called from the Gr. (...), i. to purge, from certain execrable
cleansings or purgings which they used) a branch of the Manichean Heretics,
that appeared first to the world in the time of Pope Felix the first, and of
Aurelian the Emperor, about the year of Christ 297. They rejected the
Sacraments of the Church, held oaths to be unlawful, and forbidden Christians
in all cases, etc. with other such mad positions.

Cathartical (catharticus) pertaining to a purgative, or evacuative medicine;
and such medicines are called Catharticks.

Cathedral (from cathedra) of or belonging to a chair.

Cathedral Church, so called from the Bishops chair in every such Church; what
soever City gives title to a Bishop, there only is a Cathedral Church, as at
York, Worcester, Hereford, etc. but none at Shrewsbury, Northampton, etc. See
Parish.

Cathedrarious (cathedrarius) of or belonging to a chair or seat.

Catholicisme (catholicismus) generality or universality, or the Orthodox Faith
of the Catholic Church.

Catholicon (Gr.) a certain composition in Physic, so termed, because it
purges all kind of humors.

Catholic King, a Title peculiar to the King of Spain; as Most Christian, to
France; and Defender of the Faith, to England.

Alphonso the first of Oviedo had this Title for his sanctity; with him it
dyed, and was revived in Alphonso the great, the Twelfth of Leon, and Oviedo,
by the Grant of Pope John the Eighth: after it lay dead till the days of
Ferdinand the great, who re-obtained this Title from Pope Alexander the Sixth,
because he procured the Moors to be baptized, banished the Jews, and in part
converted the Americans to Christianity. Hist. of Spain.

Catholisation, The being or becoming a Catholic.

Catopticks professors of the Optics, or art speculative.

Catoptromantie (catoptromantia) divination by vision in a glass.

Cavalier (Fr.) Caval^ro (Sp.) a Knight or Gentleman, serving on horseback, a
man of Arms.

Cavalry (Spa. cavaleria) Fr. cavallerie) Horsemen in an Army, Knighthood,
Horsemanship.

Caveary or ^ckary a strange meat like black Soap, made upon the River Volgba
in Russia, out of a fish called Bellongina, the Sturgeon, the Severiga, and the
Sterledy, and thence transported to England, and other Countries, 2. part of
Treas. etc.

Caveat (from caveo) let let him take heed; but it is commonly used as a
substantive, for a warning or admonition; And so among the Proctors, when a
person is dead, and a competition arises for the Executorship, or
Administratorship, the party concerned enters a Caveat, to prevent or admonish
others from intermedling.

Caverne (caverna) a cave, den or hollow place.

Cavesan or Cavechin (Fr. Cavesanne) a false rein, or head-strain (commonly of
silk) to lead, or hold a horse by.

Cavillation (cavillatio) a mock or jest, a subtle allegation, a forged cavil)
a wranggling.

Cavity (cavitas) hollowness, emptiness.

Caulking a Ship, is the driving of Ockham, spun hair, and the like into all
the Seams, rends and treenels of the Ship, without which it is impossible for
her to swim and keep out water.

Cauphe. See Coffa.

Cauphe-house a Tavern or Inn where they sell Cauphe or Coffa.

To Caupona^ (cauponor) to sell wine or other victuals, to sell for money or
gain,; to cauponate a war, is to make war for money. 4. Ages Poem.

Caursines (otherwise called Lumbards) were Italians by birth, and came into
England in the year 1235. terming themselves the Popes Merchants, driving no
other trade then letting out money, great banks whereof they brought over into
England, differing little from Jews, save that they were more merciless to
their debtors. Some will have them called Caursines, quasi causa ursini, so
bearish and cruel in their causes, others Caursini, quasi Corrasini, from
scraping all together. Fuller, lib. 3. page 59, 61.

Caus-way, is well known to be a way paved with flint or stone, from the Fr.
Cailloeux i. flinty; and I have been informed that Caux in old French signified
a flint, now Caillon.

Causality Causation (causatio) an excuse, essoyning or pretense.

A Causal, that contains or expresses the cause of a thing; In Grammar these
are conjunctions causal, nam, quia, etc.

Causidick (causidicus) a Lawyer, a Pleader, an Advocate or Counselor, which
may also be taken adjectively.

Caustic (Causticus) apt to burn or scald; also a medicine that burns, and
is used when a disease cannot otherwise be mastered. Bull.

Cautele (cautela) a provision, or taking heed, an assurance.

Cautelous (from cautela) circumspect, wary, advised.

Cauterie (cauterium) a hot iron, or searing iron, which is by Physicians
called an actual Cauterie; and a potential Cauterie is that which is without
fire and iron, but has partly like strength, as Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, etc.

Cauterism (cauterismus) a cutting, burning, or searing the body for an
inflammation or swelling.

Cauterize (cauterizo) to burn, stop up, or sear with hot irons, ointments or
medicines.

Cautional Cautionary (cautionalis) pertaining to caution, pledge, or wariness.

Cautionary, or pledge Towns, are such as are pawned or given in assurance for
money, or fulfilling of Covenants or Articles agreed on.

Cauter (Lat.) he that foreseeth, or bewareth.

Cayer (Fr.) a quire of written paper, a piece of a written book, divided into
equal parts. Lustr. Ludov.

Cecity (caecitas) blindness.

Ceculients, (from caecutio) a waxing blind, dimness of sight, purblindness,
half blindness. Br.

Cedent (cedens) giving place, departing, yiedling.

Celature (caelatura) the art of engraving.

Celebrity (celebritas) a solemn Assembly of great personages, famousness,
greatness in the world, renown.

Celibate. See Caelibate.

Celebrate (celebro) to frequent, to solemnize with an Assembly of men, to make
famous: also to keep a festival day or other time with great solemnity.

Celeripedean (from celeripes) swift-footed, nimble-heel'd.

Celerity (celeritas) quickness, speed, haste.

Celestify (from caelestis) to make celestial, heavenly or excellent. Vul. Er.

Celestines. An Order of Friars, instituted by one Peter, a Samnite, born in
the year 1215. He always wore a chain of Iron next his flesh, and over that a
shirt of hair. Pope Gregory the eleventh confirmed this Rule: they follow St.
Bennet, and took name from the said Peter, who for his Sanctity was chosen
Pope, and called Celestine the fifth. Heyl.

Celsity Celsitude (celsitudo) loftiness, excellency haughtiness, nobleness,
highness.

Celostomy (coelostomia) when one speaks hollow in the mouth.

Celt (Celta) one born in Gaul, a part of France.

Celtique (celticus) pertaining to the people of Gaul.

Cement or Ciment (caementum) a strong and cleaving Mortar, made for the most
part of Tiles, Potsheards, Glass, Flint, dross of Iron, etc. beaten all to
dust, and incorporated with Lyme, Oil, Grease, Rozen and Water. Min. Hence

Cemented, made or wrought with such Mortar, souldred or pieced together.

Cemetery (Lat. Coemeterium Fr. Cimitiere) a Churchyard.

Cenatical Cenatory (caenaticus) pertaining to a supper.

Cenotaph (cenotaphium) is an empty funeral monument or tomb, erected for the
honor of the dead, wherein neither the corpse nor relics of the defunct are
deposited; in imitation of which, Herses are set up in Churches, commonly on
the Anniversary day. Weaver. fol. 32.

Cene (coena) a Supper or Feast. Cressy.

Cenosity (caenositas) foulness, or filthiness.

Cense (census) a cessing, mustering or valuing the people. When the Roman
Commonwealth flourished, the City of Rome contained 463000 men able to bear
Arms, free Denizons, and such as were enrolled into Cense, besides Servants,
Women and Children. Heyl.

Cension (censio) a punishment or censure of condemnation done by the censor,
an advice or opinion.

Censer (thuribulum) a vessel belonging to the Sanctum Sanctorum, wherein the
Priest did burn incense before our Lord, in the old Law, Rev. 8.3. which vessel
and the use of it in some sort is still continued by the Roman Catholics in
their Churches upon festival days, etc. A persuming-pan.

Censor (Lat.) a Master of Discipline, a judge or reformer of manners, one that
values, musters, or taxes. The Office of the Censors among the ancient Romans,
was chiefly to value men's estates, that accordingly every man might be taxed
for the wars; to censure ill manners, punish misdemeanors, depose Senators, and
put men from a more honorable Tribe to a lower; Also to Demise unto certain
Farmers, called Publicans, the public profits of the City for a Rent, and to
put forth the City-works to them to be undertaken at a price.

Censorious Censorian (censorius) pertaining to the Censor, severe, grave.

Centaurs (Centauri) people of Thessaly, who first devised to break horses for
war, whence they being seen by other people on horseback, were supposed to be
but one creature, which had the upper part of his body like a man, and the
nether part like a horse. This was in the time of the war between the
Thessalians and the Lapithae, Ann. Mundi 2724. Rider. Or (as Servius declares)
when some young Thessalians on hors-back were beheld afar off, while their
horses watered, that is, while their heads were depressed, they were conceived
by their first spectators, to be but one animal, and answerable hereunto have
their pictures been drawn ever since.

Centenary (centenarium) that which contains a hundred years, or a hundred
pound weight.

Center (centrum) the point in the midst of any round thing, the inward middle
part of a Globe. The Earth is called the Center of the world, because it is in
the midst thereof.

Centoculated (quasi centum habens oculos) that has a 100 eyes; Feltham, in
his Resolves, uses this word, as an Epithere for Argus.

Centon (cento) a garment patched up of many shreds, and diverse colors; a work
compiled of many fragments, a mingle mangle of many matters in one book, a
Rapsody.

Central (centralis) pertaining to the Center, situate in the very midst.

Centuple (centuplex) a hundred fold.

Centuplicated, made or increased an hundred fold.

Century (centuria) a band of a hundred footmen, the number of a 100, an age
containing an hundred years. Among the ancient Romans, Centuries were the
ranges and degrees of men according to their worth, as they were assessed and
enrolled by the Censors.

Centuriate (centurio) to divide by hundreds, to distribute into bands.

Centurists, Four German Writers of the Ecclesiastical History, who divided
their works into hundreds of years, and called them Centuries.

Centurion (centurio) a Captain over an hundred footmen.

Cephalconomancy (Gr.) divination by an Asses head broiled on coals. Cotgr.

Cephalique (cephalicus) belonging to, or good for the head.

Cepi Corpus ( i. I have taken the body) is a return made by the Sheriff, that
upon an Exigend or other Writ, he has taken the body of the party. Fitzha.
not. br. fol. 28.

Cepphick (cepphicus) very light, trifling, of no estimation.

Ceramity (ceramites) a precious stone of the color of Tyle.

Ceratine (ceratinus) as Ceratine arguments, sophistical and intricate
arguments.

Cerberus, A Dog with three heads, feigned to be Porter of Hell gates. By the
three heads are signified the three Ages, by which death devours man, viz.
Infancy, Youth, and old Age. Rider.

Cerberus haec ingens latratu regna trifauci
Personat, adverso recubans immanis in antro.
Virgil. Cerdonists or Cerdoniant, a sect of ancient Heretics, so called from
Cerdo their first Father, who taught two contrary principles to be in the cause
of every thing, a good God and a bad; under the the bad he ranked Moses and the
Prophets, under the good he comprehended Christ, and the teachers of the
Gospel, etc. he was the Master of Marcion the Heretic, and lived about the
year of Christ 150. Rider.

Cereal (cerealis) pertaining to corn, or food, or to Ceres the Goddess of
Harvest.

Cerebrosity (cerebrositas) brain-sickness, hair-brainedness.

Ceromancie (ceromantia) divination or soothsaying by wax put into water.

Ceromatick (ceromaticus) anointed with oil, as Wrestlers were wont to be.

Cerinthu^rs. So called from Cerinthus an Heretic, who taught, that Christ at
his coming again should give to his people all carnal delights and pleasures:
he denied all the Scripture, only Matthew excepted, and lived about the year
of Christ 97. Rider.

Ceroferarie (ceroferarius) he that has the care or custody of the wax-candles
in a Monastery; also the candlestick.

Cerote (cerotum) a plaster made of oils, Turpentine and wax, a Searcloth.

Certaminate (certamino) to contend or strive, to be at variance.

Certiorari, is a a Writ issuing out of the Chancery to an inferior Court to
call up the Records of a cause therein depending, that conscionable justice may
be ministered, upon complaint made by Bill, that the party seeking the said
Writ, has received hard dealing in the said Court. Terms of the Law. See the
diverse forms and uses of this in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 242.

Cervine (cervinus) belonging to an Heart, of the color of an Heart, tawny.

Ceruleated (from coeruleus) painted, or done with blew or azure, sky-colored.
Herb. Tr.

Ceruse (cerussa) white lead; often used by Chyrurgeons in ointments and
plasters. It is with Painters a principal white color; and has been and
still is much used by women in painting their faces, whom Martial in his merry
vain scoffeth, saying, Cerussuta timet Sabella solemn.

Ceruse differs from Lithargy (called also white lead) for this is made of the
grossest lead as it is in the Mine, that of lead refined out of the Mine.
Cotgr. See Lithargie.

Cesariated (caesariatus) which has or wears long hair.

Cessant (cessans) that does nothing, that prolongs the time, lingering.

Cessation (cessatio) slackness, idleness, rest, loytering. A cessation of Arms
is, when both sides are agreed that no act of hostility shall be committed,
during a certain time set down.

Cession (cessio) a giving up or ceasing, a yielding or giving over. Bac.

Cessor (Lat) a Loyterer, an idle fellow.

Cest (cestus) a marriage girdle, full of studs, wherewith the Husband girded
his Wife at the Wedding, and which he loosed again the first night.

Cetareous Cetaciou^ (cetarius) belonging to Whales, or such like great fishes.

Cha, is a leaf of a tree in China, about the bigness of a Myrtle, which being
dried in iron Sives over the fire, and then cast into warm water, serves for
their ordinary drink. Hist. of China, f. 19.

Chag^ (Fr.) cark, melancholy, heaviness, anxiety, anguish of mind; also a
disease coming by melancholy. Mr. Mont.

Chalcographer (chalcographus) a Printer, or one that ingraves in brass.

Chaldean-Art (Ars Chaldaea) fortune-telling or figure flinging. So called, for
that the Chaldaeans were much addicted to Judicial Astrology.

Chaldron, or Chalder of Coals, contains Thirty six Bushels. Act of Parl. 1651.
ca. 1.

Chalybete (chalybaeus) of or belonging to steel or iron.

Chalybete Water (in the Physical dialect) is that water wherewith hot steel or
iron has been extinguished.

Chamelionize, To live by the Air, as the Chameleon is said to do, or to change
color, as that beast does, who can turn himself into all colors, saving white
and red.

Chamf^ring, a small gutter or furrow made by art upon some pillar of stone, or
timber, called also a Rebate.

Chamfered, channelled or made hollow.

Chamverdekins, or Chaumberdakyns, were Irish begging Priests, banished England
1. Hen. 5. c. 7, 8.

Chamelot or Chamolet, a kind of stuff intermixed with Chamois or Cammels hair,
and therefore so called.

Chamois, a wild-Goat, or Shamois, the skin thereof dressed is called
ordinarily Shamois Leather.

Champarty (from the Fr. Champ-parti. i. the field or land divided, between him
that has the title, and the Champerter who maintains the suit) signifies in our
common Law a maintenance of any man in his Suit depending, upon condition to
have part of the thing (be it Lands or Goods) when it is recovered. Fitzh. not.
br. fol. 171. and for this the party is to be fined by the Stat. 33. Ed 1.
Lamb. 441.

Champertors, are those that move Pleas or Suits, or cause them to be moved,
either by their own procurement or by others, and pursue them at their proper
costs, to have part of the land in variance, or part of the gain. An. 33. E. 1.
Stat. 2. in fine. See more of this in Cowel.

Chanfton, The name of an Italian coin worth about xx d.

Chanterie (Fr. from the Lat. canto, to sing) was a Chapel (commonly annexed,
to some Parochial or Cathedral Church) endowed with lands or other yearly
Revenues, for the maintenance of one or more Priests, daily to sing Mass for
the Souls of the Donors, or such others as they did appoint. 37 Hen. 8.4. 1.
Edw. 6.14. Of these Chanteries, there were forty seven within St. Paul's Church
London. See Mr. Fullers Chapter Hist. l. 6. f. 357.

Chanticleer (Fr.) one that sings clear, a Cock.

Chaomancy; a kind of divination by the air.

Chaos (Gr.) a huge immense and formless mass, the rude and undigested first
heap of natural elements; the world so called, before it was formed, as in Ovid.

Vnus erat toto naturae vultus in orb,
Quem dixere Chaos --
And metaphorically, any thing without a shape, a general confusion.

Chaperon (Fr.) a Hood or French-Hood (for a woman) also any Hood or Bonnet;
mentioned in the Stat. 1. R. 2.7. And among Heralds it is that little
Escotcheon which is fixed in the forehead of the horses that draw the Hearse.

Chapin (Span.) Shoes with high cork, or wooden soles.

Chaplet (Fr. chapelet) a Wreath, Garland, or attire for the head made of Gold,
Pearl, or other costly or curious stuff, used to be fastened behind, in manner
of a folded Roll or Garland.

Chapter (Capitulum) signifies in the common and Canon Law (whence it is
borrowed) Congregationem Clericorum in Ecclesia Cathedrali, conventuali,
regulari vel collegiata; why this collegiate company should be called a Chapter
( i. a little head of the Canonists) is for that this Company or Corporation is
a kind of Head, not only to rule and govern the Diocese in the vacancy of the
Bishopric, but also in many things to advise the Bishop when the Sea is full.

Character (Gr.) a mark, sign, seal, or print of any thing, a Branding-iron, a
letter or figure. A Character in Chronology is a certain note whereby an
infallible judgment is made of the time proposed. Greg.

The Printers Characters, or names of their several sorts of Letters are, 1.
Pearl, which is the least. 2. Non-Pareil. 3. Breviar. 4. Minion. 5.
Long-Primer. 6. Small Piquy. 7. Piquy. 8. English Roman. 9 Great Primer. 10.
Double Piquy. 11. Small Canon. 12. Fat Canon. 13. Capitals. And all these,
except the first, and four last have an English or black letter corresponding.

Characteristique, pertaining to a character, mark, sign, or figure.

Characterize (characterizo) to note, mark, or describe. To write in
Shorthand, or in characters. See Brachygraphy.

Charientism (charientismus) pleasantness, good grace in speaking. It is a
trope or manner of speaking which mitigates hard matters with pleasant words.

Charlatan (Fr.) a Mountebanck, a cousening Drug-seller, a prattling
Quacksalver. Mr. Montagu uses it. See Mountebank.

Charlatancry (Fr.) cousening, or gulling speech, cogging, lying, extreme
commendation of a trifle, thereby to make it more saleable.

Charles (in the ancient Teutonick, from whence this name takes original) was
first Garedel, whereof by abbreviation it became Careal, now in the modern
Teutonick it is Barle. Gar did signify all, and edel or ethel, noble; so that
Charles signifies all or wholly noble. In the old Saxon it was Ceorl. Verst.

Charles-wain, certain Stars winding about the north Pole of the world, in
fashion like four Wheels, and horses drawing it. Bull.

Charmer (one that uses conjurations) is said to be he that speaks words of a
strange language, without sense; that if one say so or so to a Serpent, it
cannot hurt him. He that whispers over a wound, or reads over an Infant, that
it may not be frighted, or lays the Bible on a child, that it may sleep, etc,
Moses and Aaron, p. 175.

Charnel-house (Fr.) Charneir) a place wherein the Souls and bones of the dead
are laid.

Charons-boat, Poetically thus. Charon is feigned to be the Ferry-man of Hell,
that carries the souls of the dead in a boat over three Rivers. i. Acheron,
Styx, and Cocytus.

Chart (charta) paper, parchment or any thing to write on: Also a writing or
written Deed.

Charter (Fr. Chartes, i. instrumenta.) It is taken in our common Law for
written evidence of things done between man and man, which Briton in his 39
chapter divides into Charters of the King, and Charters of private persons.
Charters of the King are those whereby the King passes any Grant to any person
or more, or to any body politic, as a Charter of exemption that a man shall
not be empanelled upon any Jury, etc. Cowel.

Charter-land (terra per Chartam) is such as a man holds by Charter, that is,
by evidence in writing, otherwise called Freehold, an. 19. H. 7. c. 13. and
Kitch. fol. 86.

Charter-partie, is an Indenture of Covenants and agreements made between
Merchants and Mariners concerning their Sea affairs. Stat. 32. H. 8.14. and
1649. 21.

Charybdig, A Gulf, or Whirl-pit on Sicily side of the narrow Seas between
Sicily and Italy, which violently attracting all vessels that come too nigh it,
devours them, and casts up their wrecks at the shore of Tauronia, not far from
Catana. Opposite to this in Italy stands the dangerous Rock Scylla, at whose
foot many little Rocks shoot out, on which the waters strongly beating, make
that noise which the Poets feign to be the barking of Dogs. This passage
between these two being, to unskilful Mariners, exceeding perilous, gave rise
to the proverb, Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charybdim.
Who seeks Charybdis for to shun,
Does often times on Scylla run.
Heyl.

Chasmatical (chasmaticus) pertaining to a chasm; which is the gaping or
opening of the earth or firmament.

Chatharist. See Catharist.

Chasuble (Fr.) a fashion of Vestment or Cope, that is open only in the sides,
and is worn at Mass, both by the Priest (who has it round) and his assistant
Deacon, and Subdeacon, who have it square in the bottom. Cotg.

Chattels. See Catals.

Chauldron. See Chaldron.

Chaunce-medley, Is in our Common Law the casual slaughter of a man, not
altother without the fault of the slayer. See Manslaughter.

Cheapside, the famous London street is so called, from the Sax. Ceapan, i. to
traffic, buy or sell; hence also comes to cheapen.

Chenix (Lat. chaenix) a measure containing a Sextary and half, or about two
pints and a quarter.

Chersonese ( chersonesus, the same with pen^insula) a tract of Land, which
being almost encompassed round by water, is joined to the firm land by some
little Isthmus or narrow neck of land, as Peloponnesus, Taurica and Peruana.
Heyl.

Cherub Cherubin (Heb. i.e. fullness of knowledge) the second of the nine Quires
or Ranks of Angels mentioned in Scripture, so called of their sublime knowledge
or illuminated understanding. In Scripture God is said to sit on the Cherubins;
because he over-reaches and is above all understanding. They also are said to
bear and draw his Chariot: to signify all his proceedings to b^ according to
wisdom; and to be full of eyes, to certify Gods knowledge to penetrate into
all secresies, and all to be open before him. They are set forth only with
heads and wings, without bodies: whereby is notified, that greatest
understanding is found in spiritual and incorporeal creatures, and that
overgreat corporal cares are impediments to profound knowledge. Tr. of Mass.

Chessiy, A vermin commonly lying under stones or Tyles.

Chevissance (Fr.) an Agreement or composition made; an end or order set down
between a Creditor and a Debtor; sometimes taken for gain or booty. Lo. Bac. in
his H. 7. This word is used for bargaining. An. 37. H 8. ca. 9. and 13. Eliz.
ca. 5. and 8.

Cheverel-Leather. Minshew says it comes from the Fr. Chevreul. i. a wild Goat,
of whose skin (says he) it is made. But others hold it takes denomination from
the River Charwel or Chervel, in Latin Cheruellus, running on the East side of
Oxford, the water whereof is famous for tawing or dressing Leather; then which,
no Leather in the world is more soft, white and delicate. Doctor Pit in his
description of Oxford.

Cheverons (Fr. Chevron) strong rafters that meet at the top of the house, to
hold up the Tyles and covering of the house.

Chibbol (caepulo) a little Onyon.

Chicanerie (Fr.) wrangling, pettifogging, litigious or crafty pleading, the
perplexing of a cause with tricks or impertinent words.

Childermas-day. See Innocents day.

Chiliad (chilias, adis) the number of a thousand.

Chiliarch (chiliarchus) a Colonel, Captain, or Commander of a thousand men.

Chiliasts (chiliastae) certain Heretics, who hold that Christ shall come to
live and reign corporally, and his Saints with him, in a fullness of worldly
contents here on earth for a thousand years after the general Resurrection. The
first broachers of this Opinion are thought to be Cerinthus, and Papias, St.
John the Evangelists Disciple, who lived about the year of Christ 100. They are
now commonly called Millenarians. Rider.

Chilonick, or Chilonian (chilonicus) brief, succinct, compendious; from one of
the Grecian wise men, Chilo, who in all his speeches and writings was very
short.

Chimaera, A hill in the South part of the Province of Lycaonia, in the top
whereof Lions roared; in the middle, Goats grazed; and in the lower parts
Serpents lurked. Hence Chimaera is feigned by the Poets to be a Monster, having
the head of a Lion, the body of a Goat, the tail of a Serpent. Ovid.

Quoque Chimaera jugo mediis in partibus hircum,
Pectus and ora Leae, Caudam Serpentis habebat.
Chimer' her mid-parts from a Goat did take,
From Lion head and breast; tail from a Snake.
This Mountain was made habitable by Bellerophon, who is therefore feigned to
have killed the Monster Chimaera. Hence Chimaera is metaphorically taken for a
strange fancy, a castle in the air, an idle conceit. Chimaera was also the name
of a ship, for so Virgil ( l. 5. Aeneid.) calls one of the greatest ships of
Aeneas.

Chimerical (from Chimaera) imaginary, fantastical, that never was, nor ever
will be.

Chiminage (from the Fr. Chemin. i. a way, passage or rode) a Law-term,
signifying a Toll for Wayfrage or passage through a Forest. Manwood, part 1. of
his For. Laws fol. 86.

Chiragrical (from Chiragra) that has the Gowt in the fingers or hands.

Chirograph (chirographum) a sign Manual, a Bill of ones hand, an obligation or
handwriting.

Chirographer (chirographus) an Officer in the Common Bench that engrosseth
Fines, in that Court acknowledged, into a perpetual Record, etc.

Chirology (chirologus) a talking or speaking with the hand, or by signs made
with the hand.

Chiromancer (chiromantes) a Palmester, or one that tells fortunes by the lines
of ones hand.

Chiromancy (chiromantia) Palmestry, a kind of divination practiced by looking
on the lines or marks of the fingers and hands; an Art still in use, among
Fortune Tellers, Egyptians and Juglers. And is (according to my Lord Bacon) a
mere Imposture. Chiromancy according to Paracelsus, treats not of the
lineaments of the hands only, but also of the whole body, and not only of men,
but of all natural things. Of which read Dr. Rothmans Treatise translated into
English by Mr. Wharton. 1652.

Chironomer (chironomus) one that teaches to use gestures with the hands,
either in dancing, pleading, etc. a Morice-dancer.

Chivalry (Fr. Chevalerie, in Lat. servitium militare) signifies in our Common
Law a tenure of Land by Knight Service; which is taken away by Act, 1656. ca.
4. Chivalry is otherwise taken for Knighthood, or the knowledge of a Knight or
noble person in feats of Arms; also valor, prowess.

Chlorie, The Goddess of Flowers, called also Flora.

Chocolate a kind of compound drink, made, and so called, by the Indians; the
principal ingredient, is a fruit called Cacao, which is about the bigness of a
great black fig, etc. See more in a Treatise of it, printed by Jo. Oaks, 1640.

Chorus (Lat.) a Company of Singers or Dancers, a Quire. The singing or music
between every Act in a Tragedy or Comedy. In a Comedy there are four Accessory
parts. viz. 1. The Argument. 2. Prologue. 3. Chorus. 4. Mimick. Of all which,
the Tragedy has only the Chorus. Of these see more in Mr. Godwins Anthology.
chapter de Ludis.

Choral (choralis) belonging to the Chorus or Quire. As Viccars Choral,
mentioned in Act 1649. ca. 24.

Choriambiqus (choriambus) a foot in Meeter, having the first and last syllable
short, and two middle short, as flebilibus.

Churister. See Quirister.

Chorographer (chorographus) a describer of Countries and Regions.

C^raphy (chorographia) is a description of any whole Region, Kingdom or
Nation; and is two fold; 1. Ancient, by Tribes and Families, as Germany was
divided betweee the Chatti, Cherusci, Suevi, Tencteri, etc. 2. Modern, into
Shires and Provinces, as Germany now is into Francony, Saxony, Suevia, Bavaria,
etc. Heyl.

Chrisome ((...)) signifies properly the white cloth, which is set by the
Minister of Baptism upon the head of a child newly anointed with Chrism after
his Baptism: Now it is vulgarly taken for the white cloth put about or upon a
child newly Christened, in token of his Baptism; wherewith the women use to
shroud the child, if dying within the month; Otherwise it is usually brought to
Church at the day of Purification.

Chrisme (chrisma) a kind of hallowed ointment used by the Roman Catholics in
the Sacrament of Baptism and for certain other Unctions. And is composed of Oil
and Balm.

Chrismatory (from Chrisma) a vessel wherein that Oil was kept, wherewith Kings
were wont to be anointed at their Coronation, or wherein the Holy Oil called
Chrism is kept.

Christianism (christianismus) Christianity, the being or profession of a
Christian.

Chromatick (chromaticus) that never blusheth, whose color never changes;
also pleasant or delightful; as Chromatick Music, pleasant Music, composed
much of discords to render it more delightful. But Chromaticum melos ab
antiquis dicebatur una ex tribus musicae partibus, quae ob nimiam mollitiem
infamiae nota non caruit.

Chronical (chronicus) temporal, or returning at a certain time.

Chronical Diseases, are such as come at certain times by fits, and have some
intermission.

Chronogram (from the Gr. chronos. i. tempus, and Gramma, Litera) is a kind of
Sentence or Verse, in which the figurative letters do promiscuously make up the
year of our Lord; (which letters are usually for distinction printed in a
different Character. As upon Duke Bernard of Weymer his taking Brisack in the
year, 1938, This.

InVICto fortIs CeCiDit BraeIsaels AChILLI,
IVngItVr and tanto DIgna pVeLLa VIro.
Chronographer (chronographus) a writer of Chronicles or Annals.

Chronography (chronographia) the writing of Annals, or description of time.

Chronology (chronologia) a speaking of times, or the Art of numbering the
years from the beginning of the world. Heylin says, Chronologies are only
bare supputations of the times without any regard of the acts then happening,
such are the Chronologies of Funccius, Scaliger and Helvicus.

Chronologer (chronologus) he that computes times, a writer of Chronicles.

Chronologicks, books treating of Chronology.

Chrysocol (chrysocolla) a kind of Mineral, found like sand in veins of brass,
silver or gold; one kind of it is called Borax or green earth, wherewith
Goldsmiths solder gold.

Chrysolite (chrysolithus) a kind of Jasper, of a Gold color.

Chrysopase (Fr.) a precious stone that yields a golden luster.

Churchwardens (Ecclearum Gardiani seu custodes) are Officers yearly chosen by
the consent of the Minister and Parishoners according to the custom of every
several place, to look to the Church, Churchyard, and such things as belong to
both, and to observe the behavior of their Parishioners for such faults as
appertain to the Jurisdiction or censure of the Court Ecclesiastical. They are
a kind of Corporation enabled by Law to sue for any thing belonging to their
Church, or poor of their Parish. See Lambert in his Pamphlet of the duty of
Churchwardens.

Churl (Sax. Ceorle) a Country Clown, a Bumpkin; in the North a Carle.

Chyle (chylus) the white juice of digested meat, the matter whereof our blood
is made. The word originally signifies a juice concocted by heat unto a
consistence that holds both of moisture and dryness. Cot.

Chylifactory (from chylus and factus) that makes or causes the white juice
coming of the meat digested in the stomach. Vul. Er.

Chylification, a making or causing of that white juice in the stomach.

Chymick or Chemist and Chemistry. See Alchimy.

Chymere. See Taberd.

Cibarious (cibarius) pertaining to meat, sit to be eaten.

Ciboir (Fr.) a Pix, the box or cup wherein the Sacrament is put and kept in the
Churches of Roman Catholics.

Cibosity (cibositas) plenty of victuals, store of food.

Cicatrice (cicatrix) a token, a scar of a wound, skin bred upon a wound or
soar.

Ciceronical (from Cicero) learned or eloquent, as Cicero was.

Cicurate (cicuro) to tame or make tame. Br.

Cilerie or Silerie, Drapery wrought on the heads of Pillars or Posts, and made
like cloth, or leaves turning diverse ways. See Silery, and Drapery.

Cilice (cilicium) a cloth or garment made of hair.

Cilicious (cilicius) pertaining to hairy or woollen cloth. Br.

Cimbal. See Cymbal.

Cimeliark (cimeliarchum) a Jewel house; also a Vestry in a Church.

Ciment. See Cement.

Cimisse, A noysom little worm flat and red, which raises Wheals where it
bites: if it be broken it yields a stinking smell. Bull.

Cimeterre (Fr.) a crooked sword. See Scymitar.

Cimmerian. That sees no Sun, or lives without the light of the Sun, obscure,
dark, from Cimmerii a people of Italy, dwelling in a Valley near the mountain
Pausilype, so environed with hills, that the Sun never comes to it. Hence the
proverb Cimmerian darkness, where Ovid places the Palace of Somnus.

Est prope Cimmerios longo spelunca recessu,
Mons cavus, etc. Metam. lib. 11.
A Cave there is near the Cimmerians deep
In hollow hill, the Mansion of dull sleep;
Never by Phoebus seen; from earth a night
There of dim clouds ascends, and doubtful light.
Cincture (cinctura) a girding.

Cindalism (cindalismus) a play that Boys use to fling at a heap of dust,
dust-point.

Cinefaction (cinefactio) a reducing into, or burning unto ashes.

Cinefy (cinefacio) to bring to ashes.

Ciniph (Lat.) a Gnat.

Cinerulent (cinerulentus) full of ashes.

Cinnaber or Cinoper (cinnabaris) Vermillion, Sanguinary; is either natural (a
soft, red, and heavy stone found in Mines) or artificial (the more common and
better colored) made of calcinated Sulphur and Quicksilver. The Paynims used
to paint their Idols therewith, and themselves in public feasts and
solemnities, as we read, Camillus, when he triumphed in Rome, was painted with
Vermillion. So Virgil speaking in his tenth Eglogue of the shepherds god Pan,
says.

Pan Deus Arcadiae venit, quem vidimus ipsi
Sanguineis ebuli baccis minioque rubentem,
Pan, the Arcadian God, we saw appear
With bloody berries stained and Cinoper.
Cinque Ports (Fr.) five Ports or Havens which lie toward France in the East
of England, (viz.) Hastings, Dover, Hithe, Rumney, and Sandwich; for Rye and
Winchelsea are but limbs or members belonging to Hastings, as likewise Lid and
old Rumney, are Limbs of the Port of new Rumney, and not distinct Ports by
themselves. The Inhabitants of these Cinque Ports and of their members, enjoy
diverse privileges above the rest of the Commons of that Country. They pay no
Subsidies; Suits at Law are commenced and answered within their own Liberties;
their Majors have the credit of carrying the Canopy over the King or Queen at
their Coronation. And for their greater dignity, they are placed then at a
Table on the right hand of the King. Min. See the first institution of these
Cinque Ports, and of the Lord Warden, in Camdens Brit. fol. 230.

Cion, Dion or Scion (Fr.) a Plant, a young Shoot, or Sprig growing out of the
root or stock of a Tree. And by a metaphor, a child or youth.

Cipher (ciphra) a figure or number, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, are the
figures, and (0) a cipher in Arithmetic, Which (0) of it self is of no value,
but increases the value of other figures, to which it is joined. Hence it is we
use to say that person stands for a cipher, who being in company of others,
neither speaks nor acts as they do.

There is also a kind of writing, which we call by Ciphers or Characters,
whereof every exercised Statesman has peculiar to himself, and which was
invented by J. Caesar, when he first began to think of the Roman Monarchy, and
was by him in his Letters to his more private and retired friends, used, that
if by misfortune they should be intercepted, the contents of them should not be
understood; ne obvia literarum lectio cuivis esset. Heyl.

Of these there are many kinds, as Ciphers simple; ciphers intermixed with
Nulloes or non-significant characters; ciphers of double letters under one
character; wheel-cyphers, kay-cyphers; ciphers of words, ciphers of actions and
others, Bac. Adv. p. 264.

Circensial, belonging to the Cirques, or to the Plays called Circenses, there
exhibited.

Circinate (circino) to make a circle, to compass, or turn round.

Circuition or Circiture (circuitio) a compassing or going about; also a
circumstance far-fetched.

Circular (circularis) pertaining to a circle.

Circulate (circulo) to compass about, to environ.

Circulation, properly an incircling or invironing: also a subliming or
extraction of Waters or Oil by Lymbeck, so termed, because the vapor before it
is resolved, seems to go round, or circle-wise. Min.

Circum (a preposition often compounded with other words) signifies about,
round about, of all sides or parts. As

Circumaggerate (circumaggero) to heap, or cast a heap about.

Circumambulate (circumambulo) to walk round about.

Circumambient (from circum and ambio) environing or encompassing about, or on
all sides. Sir Jo. Suckling uses it thus.

The Circumambient air does make us all
To be but one bare individual.
Circumbilivagination, circular motion going round, wheeling about. Cotgr.

Circumcelians, the rigid sort of Donatists, as the Rogatists were the
moderate; so called, quia circum cellas vagantur. St. Aug. in Psalm. 32.

Circumcesion (circumcessio) a giving up, or ceasing round about; a general
yielding.

Circumcinct (circumcinctus) compassed or girt about.

Circumcision (circumcisio) a cutting about, or making incision; And to speak
more properly, it is a cutting away a part of the prepuce and double skin,
which covered the head or extremity of Virga virilis, which was performed with
a sharp cutting stone, and not with any knife of iron steeled, etc. It was a
ceremony prescribed by God to Abraham and his posterity, heirs of the divine
promises ( Genesis 17.) and commanded to be observed by them, under pain of
death, as a sign and seal of the Covenant betwixt God and them, and as a
distinctive mark of them from all other people.

This ceremony was to be fulfilled in their male-children on the eighth day
after their nativity, but was no more used after the Resurrection and Ascension
of our Lord Jesus.

Circumferentor, an instrument that Surveyors use.

A Circumflex is that mark, which is used over the letter (a) in the second
person of the preterperfect-tense of a Verb of the first Conjugation, when one
syllable is cut off by the figure Syncope. As Amasti, for Amavisti.

Circumflexion (circumflexio) a bowing or bending round about.

Circumfluent Circumfluous (circumfluus) that flows and runs about, or that is
flowed about.

Circumfodient (circumfodiens) that digs or entrenches about.

Circumforaneous (circumforaneus) that haunts Markets to deceive, that loyters
idly in Markets.

Circumfulgent (circumfulgens) shining about, or on all sides.

Circumfusion (circumfusio) a sprinkling or pouring about.

Circumgyration (cicumgyratio) a turning, or wheeling round about, a dizziness.
Plutarchs Morals.

Circumjacent (circumjacens) lying about or on all sides.

Circumincession (from circum and incedo) a going or walking round about; among
Divines it signifies the reciprocal being of the persons of the blessed Trinity
in each other.

Circumlition (circumlitio) an anointing about, also a polishing.

Circumlocution (circumlocutio) an uttering of that in many words, which might
be said in fewer.

Circumplicate (circumplico) to fold or wind about, to roll or wrap about.

Cicumrotation (circumrotatio) the going about of a wheel. Greg.

Circumscript (circumscriptus) written or drawn about with a line; also
deceived or disannulled.

Circumstantiate (from circumsto) to cause a standing about, to do or perform
any thing with its circumstances.

Circumstantibus (a law term) signifies those that stand about for supply or
making up the number of Jurors (if any impannelled appear not, or appearing, be
challenged by either party) by adding to them so many other of those that are
present, or standing by, as will serve the turn. See Anno 35. Hen. 8. cap. 6.
and Anno 5. Elizab. cap. 25.

Circumstatien (circumstatio) a standing round about.

Cicumvallation (circumvallatio) a trenching about or enclosing.

Cicumvest (circumvestio) to cloth round about, to garnish.

Circumvent (circunvenio) to compass about, to deceive craftily.

Circumvolate (circumvolo) to fly about.

Circumvolve (circunvolvo) to roll, or wrap round about.

Circundate (circundo) to compass about, to enclose.

Circundolate (circundolo) to chip, cut, or hew about.

Circunduction (circunductio) a leading about; also a deceit or guile.

Circunligate (circunligo) to tie or bind about.

Circunsonate (circunsono) to make a sound on all parts, to be heard on every
side; to ring about.

Circunspicuous (circumspicuus) which may be seen on all sides.

Circunvagant (circunvagus) that wandereth about.

Circunvection (circunvectio) a carrying or conveying about.

Cirque (circus) a round Place or List at Rome, where people sat to behold
Tourning, Coursing, Justing, and such like public Exercises, first instituted
in Tarquinius Priscus his reign. See Sands sol. 297.

Cisalpine (cisalpinus) of or pertaining to the Country of Lombardy.

Cisterne (cisterna) a vessel set in the ground, wherein they gather rain water
to keep, any hollow Vault.

Cistercians, a religious order of Monks instituted about the year of Christ
1088. under Pope Urban the second, by Robert, Abbot of the famous Monastery of
Cisteaux in Burgundy, whence the observers of that institute were called
Cistercians. Into that Monastery, entered afterward one Bernard, a Burgundian,
who proved so strict an observer of Monastical discipline, and so eminent in
sanctity and learning, that the Regulars of the aforesaid institute took their
appellation from him, and were called Bernardines, and so are at this day
sometimes called by the one name, sometimes by the other. Their uppermost robe
is white and large, they eat no flesh, they follow in part St. Benets Rule. Of
these we had several Monasteries in England, as Rivax, Garradon, Woburn, etc.

Citation (citatio) a summoning to appear, a calling into Law, an Arrest.

Citherean Isle. See Cytherean.

Citharist (citharista) he that plays on a harp, a Harper.

Citharize (citharizo) to play on the harp.

Citrean Citrine (citreus) which has the color of a Citron, yellow color, of
or belonging to a Citron.

Citadel (Ital. Cittadella) a Castle or Fortress of a City, either to aw or
defend it.

Civet (Fr. civette) a sweet substance like musk, some say it is the dung of
the beast Hyena; Others, that it is engendered in the skin of the testicles of a
beast, much like a Feyne, some calling them Cats.

Civic^ (civicus) pertaining to the City. The Civick Crown was bestowed only
upon him, who had saved a Citizens life; though in process of time it was also
bestowed on the Lord General, if he spared a Roman Citizen, when he had power
to kill him.

Clan. a Family, feud, or party in Scotland, so called.

Clancularious or Clancular (clancularius) secret or unknown.

Clandestine (clandestinus) secret, hidden, private.

Clangor (Lat.) the sound of a Trumpet, the cry of an Eagle or other bird.

Clarentius or Clarentiaux A King at Arms, in degree second to the Garter, and
was ordained by Edward the fourth; for he attaining the Dukedom of Clarence by
the death of George his brother, whom he put to death for aspiring the Crown,
made the Herald that properly belonged to the Duke of Clarence, a King at
Arms, and called him Clarentius, His Office is to marshal and dispose the
Funerals of all Knights and Esquires through the Realm, on the south side of
Trent. Pol. Vir. See Harald.

Claricords, instruments so called.

Claricymbal, See Clavecymbal.

Clarigation (clarigatio) a clearing, a proclaiming or denouncing war, etc. See
Reprizal.

Clarion (Fr. Clairon) a kind of small straight-mouthed, and shrill-sounding
Trumpet, used commonly as a treble to the ordinary one. Min.

Clarify (clarifico) to make clear or fair.

Clarisonant (clarisonus) sounding clear, loud, or shril.

Class (classis) a ship, or Navy, an order, or distribution of people
according to their several Degrees. In Schools, (wherein this word is most
used) a Form or Lecture restrained to a certain company of Scholars.

Classical (classicus) pertaining to a ship, or belonging to a form or degree;
approved.

Servius Tullius caused a general valuation of every Citizens estate throughout
Rome, to be taken upon record, with their age; and according to their estates
and age, he divided the Romans into six great Armies or Bands which he called
Classes; The valuation of those in the first Class, was not under two hundred
pounds, and they alone by way of excellency, were termed Classici: And hence
figuratively, are our best, and most approved authors, viz. such as are of good
credit and authority in the Schools, termed Classici Scriptores, Classical
Authors. God-win.

Claudicate (claudico) to halt, to be lame, or feeble, to fail Apol. for
learning.

Claudity (clauditas) lameness.

Clavecymbal (clavecymbalum) a pair of Virginals, or ^laricords; so called,
because the strings are wrested up with clavis, a key. Min.

Clavicularious (clavicularius) of or pertaining to a key.

Clavigerous (claviger) that bears or keeps keys.

Claustral (claustralis) of or pertaining to a Cloister or close place.

Clementines, part of the Canon Law, so called from Pope Clement the third, who
compiled it, and was published about the year, 1308. Min.

Cleped (Sax.) called, named.

Clepsydre (clepsydra) a water-Dyal, a vessel that measures hours by the
running of water thereout; Also a Gardiners watering-pot, an hourglass.

Cleromancy (cleromantia) a divination by lots.

Clickets (Fr. Clicquets) flat bones, wherewith a pretty rattling noise is made
by children. Cot.

Cliental (clientalis) of, or belonging to a Client.

Clientele (clientela) a multitude of Clients: Also safeguard or protection.

Climacter (climactera) an account or reckoning made by degrees; the perilous
time of man's life, at every seven or nine years end; Some have hereby divided
the age of man's life in this manner; The seventh year they reckon dangerous,
and by this account the 14, 21, 28, 35, etc. are climacterical years; likewise
the ninth year is esteemed equally dangerous, and so the 18, 27, 36, etc. and
81 especially, which is nine times nine. But the most dangerous and
climacterical year is, at the age of 63. because both accounts meet in this
number, namely, seven times nine, and nine times seven.

See a learned discourse of these climaterical years, in Dr. Browns Vulgar
Errors, fol. 208.

Climacterical Climaterical (climactericus) of, or pertaining to Climacter,
supra.

Cliff is properly a broken mountain on the Seaside, and comes from our Verb
to cleave; for that it seems to our view, as cleft or cloven from the part that
sometimes belonged to it.

Climate or Clime (clima) a term used in Cosmography, and signifies a space of
the earth comprehended between two parallels, or three lesser innominate
Circles; They serve to distinguish the length and brevity of the days in all
places.

For under the Equator, the days are of the just length of twelve hours, but
after in every Clime they increase the length of half an hour; so that there
are numbered forty eight Parallels, or twenty four Climates, before the days
extend to twenty four hours length, which once attained, they increase by weeks
and months, till they come to the length of half a year: We therefore are to
reckon twenty four Climates Northward, and as many Southward. Heyl.

Clinopaly (clinopale) overmuch use of Lechery, or wrestling in the bed.

Cloaca (Lat.) the Channel or Sink of a Town, whereby all filthy things pass;
An House of Office: Also the Paunch of a Glutton. Hence

Cloacal, pertaining to such filth.

Clothe, one of the three destines. See Lachesis.

Clove is the 32 part of a Weigh of Cheese, i. eight pound. An. 9. H. 6. c. 8.

Cluniacks (cluniacenses) religious persons of the order of St Benedict, but
reformed by Odo, Abbot of Cluni in Burgundy (who lived An. Dom. 913) and thence
took name; of these we had a Convent at Barnstable and elsewhere in England.

Clusive (clusus) shut up, compassed.

Clysterise (from Clyster, eris) to give a Clyster, to purge or wash, to convey
by Clyster up into the guts.

Coacervation (coacervatio) heaping or gathering together. Bac.

To Coacervate, To heap together.

Co^ction (coactio) heaping together, a compulsion or constraining.

Coadjutor (Lat.) a fellow-helper, one that labors in the same affair with
another.

Coadjuvate (coadjuvo) to help or assist together.

Coadunation (from coaduno) a gathering, assembling, uniting or joining
together.

Coagitate (coagito) to move or stir together.

Coagulate (coagulo) to join or congeal together, to gather into a cream or
curd; to make that which was thin thick.

Coalesce (coaleseo) to grow together, to close again, to increase. Dr.
Charlton.

Coalition (coalitio) a nourishing or increasing together.

Coangustation, a making one thing strait with another, a making narrow.

Coarctate (coarcto) to strain, to gather a matter into few words, to shorten.

Coassation (coassatio) a planking with boards, a boarding or joining a floor.

Coxation (coaxatio) the croaking of Frogs or Toads. Dr Featly in his Dipper.

Coccineau (coccineus) died into scarlet, or crimson color.

Coctible (coctibilis) easy to be sod or baked.

Cochin^al or Cuchanel (Lat. Coccus Spa Cochinilla) a kind of dust or grain,
wherewith to die the Crimson or Scarlet color; it is a little worm breeding in
a certain shrub, which they call Holy-Oke, or Dwarf Oak, and is found in
Cephalonia and other places; on the leaves whereof there arises a tumor, like
a blister, which they gather, and rub out of it a certain red dust, that
converts (after a while) into worms, which they kill with wine (as is reported)
when they begin to quicken. Bac. Not. Hist.

Cocket, is a seal pertaining to the Custom-house. Regist. Orig. fol. 192. a.
Also a Scrowle of Parchment, sealed and delivered by the Officers of the
Custom-house to Merchants, as a warrant that their Merchandise is customed. An.
11. H. 6. cap. 16. This word is also used for a distinction of bread in the
Statutes of Bread and Ale, made An. 51. H. 3. where you have mention of bread
Cocket, Wastel-bread, bread of Trete, and bread of common wheat. Cowel.

Cockle-stayres (cochlea) a pair of winding stairs. Sir H. Wot.

Cockleary, pertaining to such stairs; crooked. Dr Br.

Cock^ey or Cockneigh applied only to one born within the sound of Bow-bell,
that is within the City of London, which term came first (according to Minshew)
out of this Tale; A Citizens Son riding with his Father out of London into the
Country, and being utterly ignorant how corn grew, or Cattle increased, asked,
when he heard a horse neigh, what he did? his Father answered, the horse does
neigh: riding farther, the Son heard a Cock crow, and said, does the Cock neigh
too? Hence by way of jeer he was called Cock-neigh.

A Cockney, according to some, is a child that sucks long: But Erasmus takes it
for a child wantonly brought up, and calls it in Lat. Mammothreptus.

Cambden takes the Etymology of Cockney, from the River Thamesis, which runs by
London, and was of old time called Cockney. Others say the little Brook which
runs by Turnbole or Turnmil-street, was anciently so called.

Coction (coctio) a seething, boiling or digesting.

Coctive (coctivus) sodden, easily boiled, soon ripe.

Code (codex) a volume containing diverse books; more particularly a Volume of
the Civil Law so called, which was reduced into one Code, or Codice, by
Justinian the Emperor, it being before in three, which is therefore called
Justinians Code. Min.

Codebec (Fr.) a kind of course French hat so called.

Codicil (codicillus) a diminutive of Code or Codex) a little book, a Schedule
or supplement to a Will, also a letter missive. Writers conferring a Testament
and a Codicil together, call a Testament a great Will, and a Codicil a little
one, and compare a Testament to a ship, and the Codicil to a boat tied to the
said ship. Codicils are now used as additions annexed to the Testament, when
any thing is omitted which the Testator would add, or any thing put in, which
he would retract. A Codicil is the same that a Testament is, but that it is
without an executor. See Swinburn in his Treatise of Testaments, and Wills, p.
1. sect. 5.

Codinniack (Fr. Cotignac) conserve or marmolade of Quinces.

Coemption (coemptio) a buying together.

Coemptional (coemptionalis) which is often in buying, or a buying together.
Among the Romans, Coemptionales senes, were those old men, in whose tuition and
authority, men by their last Will and Testament, left their Widows or
Daughters, and without whom they might not pass in Dominium virorum per
coemptionem. i. be married, according to the Ceremony called Coemption, whereby
the Husband and Wife seemed to buy one another. Livie. See more of this in
Godwins Anthology, chap. de nuptiis, etc.

Coercible (coercibilis) which may be bridled or restrained.

Coertion (coertio) restraint, keeping in order and subjection, punishing.

Coetaneous (coaetaneus) which is of the same time and age.

Coeternal (coaeternus) of the same eternity, lasting together for eternity,
equally eternal.

Coeval (from con and aevum) that are of the same age or time.

Cogitative (cogitativus) musing, pensive, full of thoughts.

Coffa or Cauphe, a kind of drink among the Turks and Persians, (and of late
introduced among us) which is black, thick and bitter, destrained from Berries
of that nature, and name, thought good and very wholesome: they say it expels
melancholy, purges choler, begets mirth, and an excellent concoction. Herb. tr.
150. not. hist. 155.

Cognition (cognitio) knowledge, judgment, examination of things.

Cognominal (cognominis) that has one and the same name or surname.

Cognoscible (from cognosco) that may be known or enquired into; knowable.

Coherence (cohaerentia) a joining together, a loving or agreeing with each
other.

Cohibency (cohibentia) a keeping under or restraining.

Cohibition (cohibitio) a letting or forbidding to do.

Cognizance or Cognizance ( cognitio. i. knowledge) in our Common Law is
diversely taken; sometimes it signifies an acknowledgement of a Fine, or
confession of a thing done; as also to make Cognizance of taking a distress;
sometime, as an audience or hearing a thing judicially, as to take Cognizance:
Sometime a power or jurisdiction; as Cognizance of Plea, is an ability to call
a Cause or Plea out of another Court, which no one can do but the King, or
supreme Magistrate, except he can show Charters for it. Manw. part. 1. p. 68.
See the new terms of Law, and the new book of Entries, Verbo, Conusance.

Cognizance is also a badge of Arms upon a Servingman, or Watermans sleeve.

Cognoscitive (from cognosco) that knows or may be known or enquired.

Cohesion (cohaesio) a sticking or cleaving to, or together.

Cohort (cohors) a Band of Soldiers, any company of men whatsoover.

Cohort was ordinarily a Band of 5000 Soldiers, though once or twice in Livie
we read of Quadragenariae cohortes. See Legion.

Cohortation (cohortatio) an exhortation, persuading, or encouraging.

Coition (coitio) an assembly, confederacy or commotion; also carnal copulation.

Coins (ancones) corners of a wall.

Coincident (coincidens) that happens at the same time.

Coincidency, a happening at at the same time.

Coinquinate (coinquino) to soil, or stain, to defile or defame.

Colaphize (colaphizo) to buffet or beat with the fist.

Collabefaction (collabefactio) a destroying, wasting or decaying.

Collachrymate (collachrymo) to weep or lament with others.

Collactaneous (collactaneus) that is nursed with the same milk.

Collapsed (collapsus) slid, fallen down, discouraged.

Collaqueate (collaqueo) to entangle together.

Collateral (collateralis) not direct, on the one side, joining to, or coming
from the same side. Every degree of kindred, is either right lineal, or
Collateral. The right lineal is that which comes from the Grandfather to the
Father, from the Father to the Son, and so still right downward. Collateral is
that which comes side-ways, as first between Brothers and Sisters, then between
their Children, etc. Also Uncles, Aunts, and all Cousens are contained under
this term Collateral kindred.

Collateral assurance, is that which is made over and beside the Deed it self.
For example, if a man covenant with another, and enter Bond for the performance
of his covenant, the Bond is termed Collateral assurance; because it is
external, and without the nature and essence of the covenant. Cowel.

Collaterate (collatero) to join side by side.

Collation (collatio) a joining or coping, a benevolence of many; also a short
banquet or repast.

Collation of a Benefice, signifies the bestowing a Benefice by the Bishop,
that has it in his own gift or Patronage.

Book-binders and Sellers also use the word in another sense, as to collation a
Book, is, to look diligently by the letters or figures at the bottom of the
page, to see that no sheet is wanting, or too much.

Collatitious (collatitius) done by conference or contribution of many.

Collative ( collativum, subst.) a Sacrifice made of many men's offerings
together, a benevolence of the people to the King.

Collative (adjectively) conferred together, made large, mutual.

Collaud (collaudo) to praise with others, to speak well of.

Collect (collectum) that which is gathered together; and more particularly, it
is the Priests Prayer in the Mass, so called because it collects and gathers
together the supplications of the multitude, speaking them all with one voice;
or because it is a collection and sum of the Epistle and Gospel for the day; it
is also used in the like sense in the Common Prayer Book.

Collectaneous (collectaneus) gathered or mingled with many things, that
gathers or notes out of diverse works.

Collectitious (collectitius) gathered of all, or many sorts.

Collective (collectivus) that is gathered together into one.

Colleague (collega) a companion or Co-partner in Office.

Collegate (collego) to send together.

Collar days, were certain festival days at Court; so called because on those
days the King and Knights of the Garter, did use to wear their Collers of S^.

Collet (Fr.) the throat, or fore part of the neck; It is also that part of a
Ring or Jewel, wherein the stone is set. See Bezil.

Collide (collido) to knock or bruise together.

Colligate (colligo) to tie or gather together, to comprehend or wrap up. Sir
H. Wot.

Colligence, a knitting, gathering, or bringing together. Cotgr.

Collimate (collimo) to wink with one eye, to level or aim at a mark.

Collineate (collineo) to level at, or hit the mark.

Colliquation (colliquatio) a melting or dissolving, a consumption of the
radical humor, or substance of the body.

Collision (collisio) a breaking, bruising or dashing together, Collision of a
vowel, is the contracting two Vowels into one.

Collistrigiated (from collistrigium) pertaining to, or that has stood in a
Pillory.

Collitigate (from con and litigo) wrangling or going to law together.

Colloquy (colloquium) talk that men have together, a conference.

Colluctation (colluctatio) a wrestling or contending together. Hist. of iron
age.

Collusion (collusio) a playing together, deceit, or cousenage. When an Action
at law is brought against one by his own agreement to defraud a third person,
we call it Collusion.

Coliyre Collyry (collyrium) a physical term signifying any medicine for the
eyes, most commonly applied in a liquid form.

Colobe (colobium) a Coat with half sleeves, coming but to the knees, used by
the Ancients, and changed afterward into the Dalmatica.

Coloieros, A sort of Grecian Monks and Nuns, so called, whereof you may read
in Mr. Sand's Travels, p. 81, 82.

Colon (Gr.) a mark commonly used in the middle of a sentence, and is made with
two pricks thus (:) See Semi-colon.

Colonie (colonia) the Romans (when their City was too full of inhabitants)
used to withdraw a certain number to dwell in some other place, which number
so withdrawn, as also the place to which they were sent was, and still is
called by this name; Also a Grange or Farm, where husbandry is kept.

Colloquintida, a kind of wild Gourd, which the Persians name, Gall of the
earth, because it destroys all herbs near which it grows. It is often used in
Physic, to purge slimy gross humors from the sinews and joints. Bull.

Col^sse (colossus) a great Image or Statue made for the honor of any person,
as in Rhodes there was one 70 Cubits high, made by Chares of Lindum in twelve
years space, to the honor of the Sun. This Colossus was made in the Image of a
man, the Thumb of which few men could fathom. The brass of this Statue was so
much, that when Muani, General of Caliph Osman, united Rhodes to the Mahumetan
Empire, it loaded 900 Camels. Heyl. We read also of a Statue of Nero which was
a hundred foot high. But above all, that of Mercury made at Auvergne containing
four hundred foot in height, and of inestimable value. 2. part Treasury.

Colostration (colostratio) a disease or indisposition in the stomach of young
ones, caused by sucking the Beestings or first milk that comes from the Teat.

Colubriferous (colubrifer) that bears or brings forth Snakes or Serpents.

Columbary (columbarium) a Pigeon-house or Culver-hole.

Columbine (columbinus) Dove-like, pertaining to a Dove or Pigeon.

Columity (columitas) safety, soundness, health.

Column (columna) a round Pillar or Post: Also when a page or side of a leaf
written or printed, is divided into two or more parts along the Paper, as this
page is divided into two, those parts or divisions are called Columns.

Columnary-Tribute (columnarium) a tribute that was exacted for every Pillar
that held up the house.

Colures (coluri) two great moveable Circles, passing through both the Poles of
the world, crossing one another with right spherical Angles: So that like an
Apple cut into four quarters, they divide the whole sphere into equal parts:
the one passes through the Equinoctial points and Poles, and is called the
Equinoctial Colure: The other through the Solstitial points, and is called the
Solstitial Colure Peacham.

Comald, A strict Order of Friars begun in Italy, Ann. 1012. by Romoald of
Ravenna; Their first Monastery was built near Arezzo in the Duchy of Florence,
by one Comald, hence the name: their Robe is white, they follow the rule of St.
Benedict. Grimston.

Comarck (comarchus) an Earl, a Governor of a Town or City.

Combination (combinatio) a coupling together, a setting together in Order: but
it is most commonly taken for a practice between two or more for some evil deed.

Combustion (combustio) a burning or consuming with fire.

Combustible (combustibilis) soon fired, easy to be burned.

Comedy (Comoedia) a Play or Interlude. It is a kind of Fable representing, as
in a Mirror, the similitude of a civil and private life, beginning for the most
part with some troubles, but ending with agreement or joy. These Plays are
called Comoediae from (...), which signifies Villages, because Comoedians did
go up and down the Country, acting these Comedies in the Villages, as they
passed along. Godwin. See Tragedy.

Comediographer (comoediographus) a Comical Poet, or writer of Comedies.

Comessation (comessatio) a late supper, inordinate or riotous eating; Johannes
Tislinus says, it is a Bever taken after Supper, or a night drinking.

Comestion (comestio) an eating or devouring.

Comestible (from comedo) eatable, fit to be eaten. Sir H.W.

Comet (cometa) a blazing star. It is properly a great quantity of exhalations
hot and dry, fat and clammy, hard, compact like a great lump of pitch, which,
by the heat and attractive virtue of the Sun and Stars, is drawn up from the
earth into the highest Region of the Air, where, being near the Element of
fire, it is enflamed, and appears like a Star with a blazing tail, and sometime
is moved after the motion of the Air, which is circular, but it never goes down
out of the Compass of sight (though it be not seen in the day time for the
brightness of the Sun) but still burns till all the matter be consumed. Goodly
Gallery.

Comical (comicus) pertaining to, or which is handled in Comedies: also
pleasant or merry. The Ancient Grecians and Romans had four sorts of
Stage Plays, viz. Mimical, Satirical, Tragical, and Comical. Of which see more
in Mr. Godwins Anthologie, cap. de Ludis.

Comices (comitia) were the solemn Assemblies of the people at Rome, lawfully
summoned by the Magistrates, to choose Officers, to enact new Laws or cancel old
by their voices.

Comius pugnator (Lat.) one that fights near at hand, or hand to hand. Lo.
Brook.

Comity (comitas) gentleness, courtesy, mildness.

Comitial (comitialis) pertaining to an Assembly of people convened for the
choosing Officers or making Laws. Among the Ancient Romans, if any of the people
assembled were taken with the falling sickness, the whole Assembly or Comitium
was dissolved; hence the Falling sickness is at this day called Morbus
Comitialis, or the Comitial evil. Godwin.

Comma (Gr.) the least note of distinction, or a point in the part of a
sentence without perfect sense, and is made thus (,)

Commaculate (commaculo) to spot, to defile, or distain.

Commandre, was the name of a Manor or chei^ Message with Lands and Tenements
thereto belonging, relating formerly to the Priory of St. John's of Jerusalem in
England; such is that at Eagle near Lincoln. These were given to the Crown by
32. Hen. 8.

Commasculate (commasculo) to take stomach or hardiness.

Commaterial, Of the same or of like manner of substance. Bac.

Commeator (Lat.) one that goes to and fro, as a Messenger.

Commemorate (commemoro) to rehearse or remember.

Commendaces (Fr.) Funeral Orations, Prayers made for the dead; Verses made in
praise of the dead. Cotg.

Commendam (commenda) is, when a Benefice (being void) is commended to the
charge and care of some sufficient Clerk, to be supplied, till it may be
conveniently provided of a Pastor. In which case we use to say, such a one has
it in Commendam. And that this was the true original of this practice, you may
read at large in Duarenus de Sacris Ecclesiae Ministeriis and Beneficiis l. 5.
c. 7.

Commensal (commensalis) a Table-companion. Doctor Kellison.

Commensurability (commensurabilitas) an equal proportion or measure of one
thing with another. A joint measuring.

Comment Commentary (commentum) an abridgement, an Exposition, a Book of Notes
and Remembrances. The nature of Commentaries is properly to set down a naked
continuance of the events and actions, without the Motives and designs, the
counsels, speeches occasions and pretext, with other passages: So that Caesar
modestly rather then truly applied, the name Commentary to the best History in
the world. Heyl.

Comment, sometimes signifies a fiction or lie.

Commentitious (commentitius) devised, feigned, counterfeit.

Commessation (commessatio) a riotous or untimely Banquet, an inordinate eating.

Commigration (commigratio) a flitting, or going from one place to another.

Commilitons (commilito, onis) a Fellow-souldier, a Comrade.

Commination (comminatio) a vehement or extreme threatening.

Comminuible (from comminuo) that may be broken in pieces or bruised. Vul. Er.

Commissary (commissarius) a title of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, ordained to
this special end, to supply the Bishops jurisdiction and Office in the
out-places of the Diocese, or else in such Parishes as were peculiar to the
Bishop, and exempted from the jurisdiction of the Archdeacon; for where either
by prescription or composition, there are Archdeacons, that have jurisdiction
within their Arch-Deaconries, as in most places they have, there this
Commissary is but superfluous.

Commissary, is also an Officer in War, whose function is chiefly to look that
the Provision and Victuals provided for the Army and Garrisons be justly
distributed and disposed. Cotgr.

Commissure (commissura) a joint of any thing closed and opened, a conjunction,
a joining, joining close or couching things together. Sir Hen. Wotton.

Committee, is he or they to whom the consideration or ordering of any matter
is referred, either by some Court or consent of parties, to whom it belongs. As
in Parliament, a Bill being read, is either consented to and passed, or denied,
or neither, but referred to the consideration of some certain men, appointed by
the House, farther to examine it, who thereupon are called a Committee.

Common Hunt, The Lord Mayor of Londons Dog-keeper.

Commorance Commoration (commoratio) an abiding or dwelling in a place
together, a lingering: Also a figure, when one tarries long upon a matter.

Commotes, signifies in Wales a part of a Shire, as a Hundred. An. 28. H. 8. c.
3. It is written Commoithes, A. 4. H. 4. c. 17. and is used for a gathering
made upon the people (as it seems) of this or that Hundred, by the Welch-men.

Commotion (commotio) trouble or disquieting.

Commune (communis) that which belongs to one as well as another, common,
public.

Communicate (communico) to impart with another, to talk together, to mix with.

Community (communitas) a participation, fellowship, or society; good
correspondency, near familiarity one with another; a Corporation or Company
incorporate.

Communion (communio) mutual participation together.

Communition (communitio) a fortifying or making strong on all parts.

Commutative (commutativus) bartering, trucking or exchanging one with, or for
another.

Compaction (compactio) a joining or setting together.

Compage (compago) a close joining or setting together, a joint. Br.

Compaginate (compagino) to couple, join or knit together.

Compart, Compartition or Compartment (Fr. Compartiment) a square Table or
piece in building, especially of stone; also a Bed or Border in a Garden; a
partition, or equal division. By Compartition, Architects understand a graceful
and useful distribution of the whole ground-plot, both for rooms of office, and
of reception or entertainment, as far as the capacity thereof and the nature of
the Country will comport. Sir H. Wotton.

Sea-Compass (pyxis Nautica) an instrument which Mariners use for their
direction in Navigation; whereon are described the 32 Points or Winds; the
Needle whereof (being in manner of a Flower de Luce) always points toward the
North. About the year 1300 one Flavio of Melphi in Naples found out this
Sea-Compass, consisting of eight ^inds only, the four principal, and four
collateral; and not long after, the people of Bruges and Antwerp perfected that
excellent invention, adding 24 other subordinate Winds or Points. Of this there
are three kinds; the first, the plain Meridional Compass. The second, a Compass
of Variation. The third, a Dark Compass.

Compatible (from compatior) that can abide, agree or suffer together;
concurrable, that can endure or bear with one another.

Compatriot (compatriota) he that is of the same Country.

Com^r (from the Lat. compar) signifies a fellow, an equal, a consort, a fellow
in Peerage. But taken from the Latin Compater, it is a word by which the Father
of a child calls the Gossips, Witnesses, or Godfathers of his child, and it may
be read in significations somewhat different from these expressed. In the Isle
of Zacynthus or Zant they have a custom at Weddings to invite many young men,
whom they call Compeers, of which every one gives the Bride a Ring; which done,
it is there held an abuse as detestable as Incest, to accompany her in any
carnal kind: wherefore they choose such for Compeers, as have formerly been
suspected of too much familiarity. Sands.

Comp^llation (compellatio) a blaming or reproving; a calling by names, or
naming, with disgrace.

Compendious (compendiosus) very concise, very short or brief.

Compendium (Lat.) a saving or sparing, a gain by sparing an abridgement, a
Compend. Bac.

Compensable (Fr.) able to recompense or make amends for.

Compensation (compensatio) a recompense, satisfaction or reward.

Comperage (Fr.) Gossiping; the affinity or friendship gotten by christening
Children together. Cotgr.

Comperendinate (comperendino) to delay, or prolong from day to day.

Competible (competibilis) that may be asked or sued for with another, that may
be convenint or agreeable.

Competitor (Lat.) he that sues for the same thing with another.

Competize (competo) to ask or sue for the same thing another does, to stand in
competition.

Compital (compitalis) belonging to cross-streets, or places where many ways
meet.

Compitalitious (compitalitius) of or belonging to the Feasts of Compitalia,
which were solemnized in cross ways or of streets.

Complaisance (Fr.) delight, pleasure, fullness of, or fellowship in joy.

Complacence Complaicence (complacentia) as complaisance.

Complacentious Complaisant obsequious, observant, soothing (and thereby)
pleasing.

Complement (complementum) (a furnishing, filling up, or perfecting that which
wants: it is usually taken for verbal expressions of respect, of affection, of
readiness to serve, and the like. Or Complement, is a performance of affected
ceremonies in words, looks and gestures.

Completion (completio) a fulfilling, accomplishing or performing. Dr. Ham.
Annot.

Complexive (complexivus) that may be embraced or contained.

Accomplices (from complex, icis) companions or partners in evil.

Complicate (complico) to fold up, or wrap together.

Complicity (complicitas) a consenting or partnership in evil.

Compline or Completory (completorium) the last of the Canonical Hours in the
Roman Cath. Church, so called; which began at nine of the Clock at night. See
Prime.

Complore (comploro) to bewail or weep together.

Comportment (Fr. comportement) behavior, carriage, bearing of one self.

Compositor (Lat.) he that sets, joins or composes things together. See
Impositor.

Compotation (compotatio) a banquet, or drinking together.

Compotist (compotista) a caster of accounts, a Reckoner, or Calculator.

Comprecation (Comprecatio) a praying, desiring or beseeching.

Comprehensible (comprehensibilis) that may be comprehended, contained, and
laid hold of.

Comprehensor (Lat.) a Comprehender. See Viator.

Compromize (compromissum) is a mutual promise of two or more parties at
difference, to refer the ending their controversies to the arbitrament and
equity of one or more Arbitrators. West in the second part of his Symbolography
under the title of Compromise, Sect. 1. defines it thus, A Compromise is the
faculty or power of pronouncing sentence between persons at variance, given to
Arbitrators by the parties mutual private consent, without public Authority.

Compression (compressio) a pressing or thrusting together.

Compunction (compunctio) a pricking or stitch, remorse of conscience.

Compurgator (Lat.) a cleanser, clearer or purger.

Computist, the same with Compotist.

Comrade. See Camerade.

Comus, the god of Banqueting. Sive sit compotatio, sive amatoria lascivia.

Concamerate (concamero) to vault or arch, as an Oven is.

Concatenate (concateno) to chain, or link together.

Concavous Concave (Concavus) hollow, bending, crooked.

A Concave (Concava) a hollow place, or Cel.

Concavity (concavitas) hollowness.

Concede (concedo) to grant, yield, or condescend unto.

Concention (concentio) a consort of many voices or instruments in one, an
agreement or concord, singing in tune.

Concentrick (concentricus) which has one and the same Center.

Conceptacle (Fr.) any hollow thing which is apt to receive, hold, or contain.
Cotgr.

Concertation (concertatio) strife, debate, disputation, variance.

Concession (concessio) sufferance, leave, or pardon; a Grant.

Concidence (concidencia) a like falling in the ends of words.

Conciliate (concilio) to accord, to make friends together, to reconcile.

Concinnity (concinnitas) properness, aptness, handsomness, decency.

Concion (concio) an Oration, Speech or Sermon made publicly to the people;
also the Assembly or Congregation it self.

Concional (concionalis) pertaining to a Sermon or Oration, or to the Assembly
or Pulpit.

Concionator (Lat.) he that preaches or proposes an Oration to the people.

Concisso Concisure (concisura) a cutting or dividing; a rent or schism. So St
Paul; Beware of the concision. Phil. 3.2.

Concise (concisus) brief; beaten, cut, mangled, or killed.

Concitate (concito) to provoke, stir up, or prick forward.

Co^clamation (conclamatio) a shout or noise of many together.

Conclave (conclavium) an inner Parlor, a Closet, or privy Dining Room:
especially it is the name of the place in Rome, where the election of the Pope
is made by the Cardinals. Also the meeting or Assembly of the Cardinals it self
for that election or for any important affair of the Church.

Conclavist (from conclave) one of those Cardinals that meet in the conclave
for the election of the Pope; or he that has the keeping of that room.

Conclusive (conclusus) shut up, concluded, full and perfect.

Concoction (concoctio) digestion in the stomach, a boiling.

Concomitant (concomitans) following or accompanying together; sometimes taken
substantively for a companion.

Concord (concordia) agreemen or peace; It is in our Common Law, by a peculiar
signification, defined to be the very agreement between parties that intend the
levying a Fine of Lands one to the other, how and in what manner the Land shall
pass.

Concordate (concordo) to be at concord or agreement, to agree.

Concords, In Music, which are Perfect or semi-perfect, between the Unison and
the Diapason, are, the fifth, which is most perfect, the third next, and the
sixth which is more harsh, and the fourth with is called Diatessaron Bac.

Concorporate (concorporo) to mix or temper into one body, to incorporate.

Concrement (concrementum) an increase or growing together.

Concrete (concretum) a thing congealed or joined together: Also a term in
Logic, signifying a subject and an accident joined together, as for example,
Album is a Concrete, signifying a subject (be it a man or a horse) and the
accident Albedo or whitness, joined together; And Albedo or whiteness by it
self is termed the abstract of that Concrete.

Concreted Concretive (concretivus) congealed, joined or grown together:

Concretion (concretio) a congealment, thickning, growing or fastening together.

Concrimination (concriminatio) a joint accusing.

Concubinage (concubinatus) the keeping a Whore for his own filthy use, an
unlawful use of another woman instead of ones wife: In Law, it is an exception
against her that sues for her Dowry, whereby it is alleged, that she was not
a Wife lawfully married to the party, in whose lands she seeks to be endowed,
but his Concubine. Britton. cap. 107. Brac. lib. 4. Tract. 6. cap. 8.

Concubinal (concubinalis) pertaining to a concubine.

Concubinary, one that keeps a Concubine, which is as it were a half Wife, as
the Hebrew word Pilgesh signifies.

Conculcate (conculco) to tread under foot, to suppress or contemn, to wear
with often treading or standing upon.

Concumbence (from concumbo) a lying together.

Concupiscence (concupiscentia) a fervent or covetous desire of a thing; also
lust, or the pravity of our nature.

Concupiscible (concupiscibilis) that which desires earnestly or naturally,
that which is desirable.

The Concupiscible Faculty, is the unreasonable or sensual part of the soul,
which covers meat, drink, and all sorts of delights beyond measure.

Concussion (concussio) a shaking together, a dashing out, a terrifying,
public extortion by threatening.

Concussionary (Fr. Concussionaire) a public extortioner, one that
(counterfeiting an authority) extorts gifts from men by threatening to punish or
prosecute their offenses.

Condense (condensus) thick, close together, compact.

Condensitie (condensitas) thickness, closeness, hardness.

Conders (from the Latin conducere, i. to conduct or lead) are such as stand on
high places near the Seacoast, at the time of Herring-fishing, to make signs
with Boughs, or such like in their hands, to the Fishers, which way the Shole
of Herrings passes; For that may better appear to such as stand on some high
Cliff on the shore, by a kind of blew color, that the said Shole makes in the
water, then to those in the ship: These are otherwise called Huers and Balcors,
as appears by the Statute. Anno 1. Jac. cap. 22.

Condict (condictum) an accord or agreement, a composition, and appointment.

Condiment (condimentum) sauce or seasoning.

Condisciple (condiscipulus) a School-fellow, or Fellow-Disciple.

Conditaneous (conditaneus) that may be sawced, seasoned, or preserved.

Condited (conditus) sawced, seasoned, tempered, mixed, made savory. Bac.

Conditor (Lat. a condio) one that seasoneth, sawceth, or tempereth.

Conditor (Lat. a condo) a builder, maker, or founder.

Condolence (condolentia) a sympathy in grief, a fellow-feeling of another
sorrow.

Condone or Condonate (condono) to give willingly, to forgive or pardon.

Conducible (conducibilis) profitable, good, which may be hired.

Condilome (condiloma) a swelling or excrescent flesh in or about the
fundament, proceeding of an inflammation.

Conduct (conductus) a Passport, a guiding or leading, a leading of Soldiers,
as Commanders do. Salvus conductus, a license of passing without molestation,
or with warrant of security, a safe conveyance or conduct.

Cone (conus) a Geometrical figure, broad beneath, and sharp above, with a
circular bottom: Also any other thing, broad beneath, and small above.

Confabulate (confabulo) to tell tales, to commune or discourse together.

Confarreation (confarreatio) the solemnizing a Marriage, a ceremony used at
the solemnization of a Marriage, in token of most firm conjunction between man
and Wife, with a Cake of Wheat or Barley: This ceremony is still retained in
part with us, by that which we call the Bride-Cake, used at many Weddings.

Confarreated (confarreatus) married with that ceremony.

Confection (confectio) a measuring, mingling, or dispatching.

Confederate (confoedero) to consent or agree together.

Confer^on (confertio) a stuffing or filling.

C^nfessionary (Fr. Confessionaire) belonging to, or treating of auricular
Confession.

Conficient (conficiens) which finisheth, procures, or works.

Confident (from confido) a friend to whom one trusts, in whom he has
confidence, on whose assistance he relies, a a second in a single Combat; it
is also used adjectively.

Configulate (configulo) to play the Potter, to work in clay.

Confines (confinia) the End, Bounds or Marches of any Country.

Confiscate from confisco, and that (with the Fr. Confisquer) from Fiscus,
which originally signifies a Hamper, Pannier, Basket, or Freil; but
Metonymically, the Emperors Treasure, because it was anciently kept in such
Hampers: And though our Kings kept not their treasure in such things, yet as
the Romans said, that such goods as were forfeited to the Emperors Treasury for
any offense, were bona confiscata, so we say, those that are forfeited to our
Exchequer, are confiscated. See more of Goods confiscate in Stawnf. Pl. Cor. l.
3. ca. 24.

Conflagitate (conflagito) to request or desire a thing importunately, or
earnestly.

Conflagrant (conflagrans) most earnestly desiring or burning in love.

Conflagration (conflagratio) a general burning or consuming with fire.

Confluctuate (confluctuo) to flow together, to be uncertain what to do.

Confluence (confluentia) an abundance of any thing flowing or running
together, a coming thick together.

Conforaneous (conforaneus) of the same Court or Market place.

Conge d'eflire (Fr. i. leave to choose) is a mere French word, and signifies
in our common Law the Kings permission royal to a Dean and Chapter in time of
vacation to choose a Bishop, or to an Abbey or Priory to choose their Abbot or
Prior. Fitz. not. br. fo. 169. b. 170. b, c, etc.

Congelative (congelativus) that has the faculty to congeal or dry up.

Congenerous (congener) of one stock or kindred, of the same sort or kind.

Congeniality, a likeness of Genius or Fancy with another; as Sir Hen. Wotton
says, Poets and Painters have always had a kind of Congeniality. p. 254.

Congeo^, an old word signifying a Dwarf.

Congeriate (from congeries) to heap or lay together, to pile up. Felth.

Congiary (congiarium) a dole or liberal gift of a Prince or Nobleman to the
people; it took name of the measure Congius, much about our Gallon, which was
given in oil or wine, by the Poll; but afterward any other such profit or
distribution, were it in money or other provisions, passed under that title.
Plut.

Conglaciate (conglacio) to be frozen, to be idle.

Conglob^t^ (conglobo) to heap, gather together, or make round, or Globe-like.

Conglomerate (conglomero) to wind thread on bottoms, to assemble or gather
together.

Conglutinate (conglutino) to glue or join together.

Conglutinative, that which has strength to glue together.

Congratulate (congratulor) to rejoice with one for some good fortune.

Congregate (congrego) to gather or assemble together, to associate.

Congregationalists, otherwise called Independents, or Dissenting Brethren in
the late Assembly of Divines, are such as gather Congregations, etc. and go a
middle way betwixt Presbytery and Brownism. The chief of these were Thomas
Goodwin, Philip Nigh, Sidrach Simson, Jeremiah Burrowes, and William Bridge. See
Mr. Fullers Church History, l. 11. p. 208. See Independents.

Congress (congressus) a going with another to fight, an encounter.

Congruity (congruitas) agreeableness, conformity.

Congruous (congruus) apt, convenient or fit for the purpose.

Conical (conicus) belonging to a Conus, or the Crest of an Helmet.

Conjugal (conjugalis) belonging to marriage.

Conjugates (conjugata) that spring from one original; a term in Logic.

Conjugation (conjugatio) a joining together, a derivation of words of one kind.

Conjunction (conjunctio) a combination, coupling or knitting together: Also
the part of speech termed a Conjunction; a sentence which has diverse parts
together.

Conjunctive (conjunctivus) which knits or fastens together.

Conjuncture (conjunctura) a joining together.

Conjuration (conjuratio) as it is compounded of ( con and juro) signifies a
compact or plot made by persons combining themselves together by Oath or
Promise to do some public harm. But in our Common Law it is used especially
for such as have personal conference with the Devil or evil spirit, to know any
secret, or to effect any purpose. An 5. Eliz. cap 16 And the difference between
Conjuration and Witchcraft is, that the Conjurer seems by prayers and
invocation of Gods powerful names, to compel the Devil to say or do what he
commands him: The Witch deals rather by a friendly and voluntary conference or
agreement between him or her, and the Devil or Familiar, to have his or her
turn served for soul, blood, or other gift offered him: So that al^ Conjurer
compacts for curiosity to know secrets, and work marvels; and the Witch of mere
malice to do mischief. And both these differ from Inchanters, or Sorcerers,
because the former two have personal conference with the Devil, and the other
meddle but with medicines, and ceremonial forms of words called Charms,
without apparition. Daltons J.P. 279

Conizor or Cognizor (Lat. cognitor) in Law it is used in the passing of Fines*
for him that acknowledges the Fine; and the Conizee is he to whom it is
acknowledged. West. par. 1. Symb. l. 2. Sect. 59. and part. 2. tit. Fines Sect.
114.

Conjure (conjuro) to swear or conspire together, to exorcise a spirit, i. to
swear him or conjure him by the power of another, by the names or spells they
use; whereas Adjure is to swear one to, as I adjure, i. swear thee to it by
mine own power, and conjure by the power of another.

Connascenc^ (from con and nascor) a growing, rising or springing together, a
being born together. Vul. Er.

Connexive (connexivus) that couples or knits together.

Connubial (connubialis) pertaining to wedlock or marrying together.

Connutritious (connutritus) that has the same nourishment or bringing up.

Conquassate (conquasso) to shake, dash, or break in pieces.

Conquestion (conquestio) a complaining, lamenting, moan-making, or crying.

Consanguinity (consanguinitas) kindred by birth or blood, nearness in blood.

Consarcinate (consarcino) to patch or piece together, to add to.

Conscension (conscensio) a mounting or climbing up, a leaping on horseback.

Conscission (conscissio) a cutting or paring.

Conscissure (conscissura) a gash or cut, a renting in a place.

Conscious (conscius) culpable, that is of Council, or guilty of a thing.

Conscription (conscriptio) an enrolling, writing, or registring.

Consectaneous (consectaneus) which follows others.

Consectar^ (consectarium) a brief argument wherein the conclusion necessarily
follows the antecedent; or a thing that follows out of another already
demonstrated.

Consectation (consectatio) a following together; and in Philosophy it
signifies the consideration of those affections of a Proposition, in respect
whereof two Propositions signify together the same thing, and are true or
false. Hist. Phil.

Consectator (Lat.) he that follows, or pursues.

Consecutif Consecutive (consecutus) following or succeeding.

Consecution (consecutio) a consequent, order or following. Month of
consecution. See Month.

Conseminate (consemino) to sow diverse seeds together.

Consentient (consentiens) concenting, agreeing, according.

Consequentious (from consequentia) most important, full of consequence which
necessarily follows.

Conservator of the peace ( Conservator, or Custos Pacis) was an Officer that
had charge to preserve the Kings peace, before the time of King Edward the
Third, who first erected Justices of the Peace instead of those Conservators,
etc. See Lamb. Eirenarcha. l. 1. ca. 3.

Conservator of the Truce and safe Conducts (^onservator induciarum and
salvorum Regis conductuum) was an Officer appointed in every Port of the Sea,
under the Kings Letters Patents, and had forty pounds for his yearly stipend at
the least. His charge was, to enquire of all offenses done against the Kings
Truce, and safe Conducts, upon the main Sea, out of the Countries and
Franchises of the Kings Cinque Ports, as the Admirals of Custom were wont, and
such other things as are declared, An. 2. H. 5. ca. 6. Touching this matter you
may read another Stat. An. 4. H. 5. ca. 7.

Conservatory, a place to preserve, or keep things in. Also used adjectively.

Conserves (from conservo) the juice or substance of any thing boiled with
Sugar, and so kept. Bull.

Consession (consessio) a sitting together or with others.

Consigne consigno) to present, exhibit or deliver in hand, or into the hands
of; to assign over, to gage, or pawn.

Consistory (consistorium) signifies as much as Praetorium or Tribunal. It is
commonly used for a Council house of Ecclesiastical persons, or the place of
Justice in the Court Christian; A Session or Assembly of Prelates.

Consitio^ (consitio) a setting or planting.

Consolidate (consolido) to make sound that which was broken, to make whole.

Consolidation in our Common Law, is a combining or uniting two Benefices in
one. Also a strengthening or joining with.

Consolate (consolor) to comfort and ease ones grief.

Consonants (consonantes literae) letters which have no sound of themselves,
but as they are joined with others, b, c, d, etc. with all the rest, (except
the Vowels) are called Consonants.

Consort (consors) one that partakes of the same lot, a fellow or companion.

Conspersion (conspersio) a sprinkling about.

Conspurcatio^ (conspurcatio) a defiling or making foul.

Conspu^a^ (Lat.) he that spits upon others.

Consta^ (Lat. it is evident, plain, certain) is the name of a kind of
Certificate, which the Clerk of the Pipe, or Auditors of the Exchequer make at
the request of any person, who intends to plead in that Court for discharge
(commonly) of Lands Sequestered; the effect of this Constat is to declare what
does constare on Record, as for what cause the lands were sequestered, for what
rent letten, and the like; and the Auditors Fee for it, is 13 s. 4 d. A Constat
is held to be superior to a Certificat, because this may err or fail in its
contents; that cannot, as certifying nothing but what is evident upon Record.

Constellation (constellatio) an assembly, or company of Stars together in one
sign, presenting some living creature or other thing, after a certain sort; And
of these Constellations, the number in the Heavens are 48. whereof 21 are in
the North, 15 in the South, and 12 in the Zodiac. Hopton.

Conster^ation (consternatio) a great fear or astonishment; Also sedition or
tumult.

Constipate (constipo) to make thick together, to stuff together.

Constrictive (constrictivus) that has virtue to strain or bind together.

Consubstantial (consubstantialis) of the same substance, whereof another is
made.

Consuetude Consuetudinal (from consuetudo, inis) accustomed, wont, used. Also
the Book wherein the ancient customs of a Monastery were written was called the
Consuetudinal.

Consul (Lat. from consulendo, of giving counsel) a chief Officer among the
Romans, of which two were chosen yearly to govern the City, and command their
Armies.

In Paris Les Consul^, are five honest and substantial Citizens, who determine
all cases of debt (not exceeding 4000 li. Turnois) between Merchant and
Merchant: Their authority continues but a year, and the utmost punishment they
can inflict, is but imprisonment. In most Cities of Aquitain, the chief
Governors are termed Consuls; the rest of the good Towns in France have such
Consuls, as Paris, by the names of Les Judges and Consuls des Merchands. Cotgr.

Consummate (consummo) to make up or accomplish, to sum up a reckoning.

Contabulate (contabulo) to plank or floor with boards, to join together.

Contaction (contactio) a touching or joining together, a staining or
coloring. Felth.

Contaminate (contamino) to violate or distain by touching or mixing, to defile
or corrupt.

Contemerate (contemero) to violate, defloure or pollute.

Contemplatio^ (contemplatio) beholding in mind, deep musing, study or
meditation.

Contemplation, (in the accepted general notion of the word) signifies a clear,
ready, mental seeing and quiet regarding an object; being the result and effect
of a precedent diligent enquiry and search after the nature, qualities, and
other circumstantial conditions of it. Mr. Cressy.

Contemplative (contemplativus) that exercises or consists in contemplation, or
study.

Contemporiarism (from con and tempus) the being at one and the same time;
coexistency.

Contemporaneous Contemporary Contemporal (contemporarius) that is of one and
the same time or age.

Conterminate (contermino) to lie near or border on a place.

Conterraneous (conterraneus) that is of the same Country or Land.

Contesse^ation (contesseratio) a league between strangers. Dr. Tailor.

Contest (contestes) a fellow witness, or a witness examined in the same cause
with another. It is used among the Civilians at Doctors Commons.

Contestate (contestor) to bear or prove by witness, to witness together.

Contexture (contextura) a weaving togethe^, a composition, the form and style
of a discourse, a making fi^.

Contignation (contignatio) the raftering or rearing a house in Sollars,
Stories or Floors, the boarding or planking a house. Greg.

Contiguity (from contiguus) a touching one another, nearness, the close being
of two together.

Contiguous (contiguus) that touches or is next to, very near.

Continency (continentia) a refaaining of ill desires, or more strictly, a
refraining from all things delightful that hinder perfection.

Continent ( continens, subst.) a great quantity of Land, continued without
division of Sea, as the Low Countries to Germany, that to Austria, Austria to
Hungary, etc. It is otherwise called Terra firma.

Contingent (contingens) which chances or happens.

Continuity (continuitas) a continuation, wholeness, intireness, or entire
conjunction.

Contorsion (contorsio) a wrestling or wreathing.

Continual Claim, is a Claim made from time to time, within every year and day
to land or other thing which in some respect we cannot attain without danger:
For example, if I be disseized of Land, into which (though I have right) I dare
not enter for fear of beating, it behooves me to hold on my right of entry to
the best opportunity of me and my Heirs, by approaching as near it as I can
once every year, as long as I live, and so I save the right of Entry to my
Heirs. Terms of Law.

Contorsion (contorsio) a writhing, wresting, or pulling away.

Contrabanded Goods, prohibited goods, that are forbidden to be imported by
Proclamation; from the Ital. Bando, i. a Proclamation. In the Act of Parl.
1649. c. 21. it is written Contrabanda goods.

Contramure (Promurale) an out-wall compassing the walls of the City, and
placed before them for the more safeguard. Min.

Contrasto (Span. contrasta) strife, contention, or opposition.

Contratation (Spa.) a Contract; a Bargain.

A Contratation house, is a house where Contracts or Bargains are made.

Contrectation (contrectatio) often touching, handling, or treating of.

Contravention (from contravenio) a coming against, a speaking against one, an
accusing.

Contristate (contristo) to make sorry, heavy or sad.

Contrite (contritus) worn or bruised; but is most commonly used for penitent
or sorrowful for misdeeds, remorseful.

Contrition (contritio) bruisedness, or wearing with use. In Divinity it is a
perfect sorrow and horror that a man has for having committed sin, and this,
for that he loves God with a sovereign and singular love.

Or Contrition (says an Author) is when the foulness of sin is set off only
by conceiving the goodness of God, without reflection upon reward or pain.

Contrition (says another Author) is the bruising a sinners heart (as it were)
to dust and powder, through unfeigned and deep sorrow conceived at Gods
displeasure for sin.

Contrucidate (contrucido) to wound, to murder or kill.

Contumacy (contumacia) disobedience, self-will, stubbornness.

Contumelious (contumeliosus) reproachful in words, spiteful, disdainful.

Contumulate (contumulo) to bury or intomb together.

Conturd (contundo) to knock or beat in pieces, to strike down: And
metaphorically to conquer or subdue.

Contusion (contusio) a beating, pounding, or bruising.

Convalesce (convalesco) to wax strong, to recover health.

Convalescen (convalescens) that waxes strong, or recovers health.

Convalidate (convalido) to strengthen, to confirm, to recover health.

Convene (convenio) to come or assemble together, to summon one to appear
before a Judge.

Convent. See Covent.

Conventional (conventionalis) that is done with agreement, and consent of
diverse.

Conventicle (conventiculum) a little or private Assembly or Convention,
commonly for ill; first attributed in disgrace to the Schools of Wicklif in
this Nation, above 200 years since.

Conventual (from conventus) belonging to a Covent or multitude resorting
together, as of religious persons. Also a sort of Friars so called.

Conv^ntual Church. See Parish.

Convert. See Pervert.

Convexity (convexitas) crookedness, hollowness, bending down on every side;
Convexity is the outside of an hollow body, as Concavity the inside. In a
painted Globe of the world, the descriptions are upon the convexity thereof,
and that face is unequal, the rest is belly, or concave. El. Armory.

Conviction ( convictio from convinco) a proving guilty, and is in our Common
Law, either when a man is outlawed, and appears and confesses, or else is found
guilty by the Inquest. Min.

Convoke (convoco) to call or assemble together.

Convivi^l (convivialis) pertaining to Feasts or Banquets.

Convocation (convocatio) a calling or assembling together, most commonly of
Ecclesiastical persons for Church affairs. A Synod and a Convocation seem to be
all one; before the Statute of Praemunire (16. Ric. 2. ca. 5.) it was constantly
called a Synod; afterward it took up the name Convocation, from the word^
convocari faciatis, in the Kings Writ; And (since our Scotizing) it is called
an Assembly.

Convocation-House, is that wherein the whole Clergy is assembled for
consultation upon matters Ecclesiastical in time of Parliament; and as the
house of Parliament, so this consisted of two distinct houses; One called the
higher Convocation-house, where the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. sat severally
by themselves; the other the Lower Convocation house, where all the rest of the
Clergy were bestowed. Cow. See Prolocutor.

Convoy (Fr.) is most commonly taken for a company of Soldiers or Ships for
the wafting, or safe conducting of passengers.

Convulsion (convulsio) a drawing together; a plucking or shrinking up of the
sinews, as in the Cramp; or when the Mouth, Nose, Eye, Lip, or other part is
turned awry out of its due place.

Coolisse Broth. See Cullis,

Cooperate (coopero) to labor or work together.

Co-optate (coopto) to elect or choose.

Coparceners (participos) otherwise called Parceners, in our Common Law are
such as have equal portion in the Inheritance of their Ancestor. Parceners are
either by Law or Custom; Parceners by Law, are the issue female, which (in case
of no Heir male) come in equality to the Lands of their Ancestors. Bract. l. 2.
c 30. Parceners by custom are those, that by custom of the Country challenge
equal part in such Lands: As in Kent by Gavel-kind. See Littleton l. 3. ca. 1,
2. and Britton c. 27. Entitled, de Heritage divisable. The ^own of England is
not subject to Coparcenary. An. 25. H. 8. ca. 22.

If Coparceners refuse to divide their common inheritance, and choose rather to
hold it jointly, they are said to h^ld in Parcenary or Coparcenary. Lit. fol.
56.

Copal, a kind of white and bright Rosin brought from the West Indies, whereof
the people there were wont to make perfumes in their Sacrifices: It is hot in
the second degree, and moist in the first, and is used here to be burnt against
cold diseases of the brain. Bull.

Copesmate (from the Sax. Ceap. i. merchandise, and mate, i. companion) a
partner or copartner in merchandise.

Copy (copia) plenty, abundance, riches, eloquence, provision of things.

Copiosity (copiositas) plenty, store, abundance, copiousness.

Copulation (copulatio) a coupling or joining; it was one of the three ways of
betrothing marriage in Israel. See Moses and Aaron, p. 231.

Copulative (copulativus) which coupleth or joyneth, or which may couple or
join.

Coquetteri^ (Fr.) the prattle or twattle of a pert Gossip or Minx.

Coquinate (coquinor) to play the Cook, to boil or dress meat.

Coraage (coragium) is a kind of imposition (upon some unusual occasion) of
certain measures of Corn. For Corus tritici, is a certain measure of Corn.
Bracton l. 2. ca. 26.

Coral or Corral (Corallium) There are two principal sorts hereof, the one
white, the other red, but the red is best. It grows like a tree in the bottom
of the Sea, green when under the water, and bearing a white berry; and when
out, turns red. It is cold and dry in operation, good to be hanged about
childrens necks, as well to rub their Gums, as to preserve them from the
Falling Sickness. Sands 235. There is also a black and yellow kind of Coral.
See more in Dr. Browns Vul. Err. fol. 91.

A Corbel, Corbet, or Corbil. In Masonry is a jutting or shouldering piece cut
out in stone, as we may see in walls, to bear up a post, Summer or other
weight, (which in Timber-work, is called a Bracket or Braggat.) This and such
like terms of art, for the most part are taken from the similitude of Beasts,
Birds, or some living thing, which they resemble, whence this is called Corbel
(from the French Corbeau, a Crow or Raven) because they were wont to make such
Jutties out of a wall in form of a Crow. Min. See Bragget.

Corban or Korban (Heb.) a Chest or Coffer in the Temple of Jerusalem, where
the Treasure that served for the Priests or Temples use was kept. Also the
treasure it self, or an Almes-box. Also a gift or offering on the Altar. Mark.
7.11.

Cordage (Fr.) Ropes, or stuff to make Ropes of; all kind of Ropes belonging to
the rigging a ship.

Cordelier or Cordilier (Fr.) a gray Friar of the Order of St. Francis; so
called because he wears a rope or cord about his middle for a Girdle, full of
twisted knots.

Cordiner or Cordwainer (from the French Cordvannier) or from the Lat. corium,
a Skin or Hide) a Shoo-maker, a Tanner, or Leather-dresser, a Currier.

Cordovan Leather, so called from Cordova or Corduba a City in Spain. In the
Islands of Corfica and Sardinia, there is a beast called Musoli, not found
elsewhere in Europe, horned like a Ram, and skinned like a Stag, his skin
carried to Corduba, and there dressed makes our true Cordovan Leather.

Corespond. See Correspond.

Corinthian work, a sort of Pillars in Architecture. See Tuscan.

Cornage (from the Lat. cornu, a horn) in our Common Law it signifies a kind of
Grand Sergeanty, the service of which tenure is to blow a horn, when any
invasion of the Northern Enemy is perceived, and by this many hold their Land
Northward, about the wall commonly called the Picts wall. Came. Brit. fol. 609.

Cornelian Law, L. Cornelius Sylla, being Dictator, made a Law (among others)
that all such as would follow him in the Civil War, should be capable of any
Office or Magistracy, before they came to their full years, etc. Those kind of
Roman Laws always took denomination from him that preferred them.

Corneous (corneus) of, or like a horn, hard, or white as horn.

Cornicle (corniculum) a little horn.

Cornigerous (corniger horned, having or wearing horns: One of the Wine-god
Bacchus his Epithets, because with drinking much wine men grow fierce and
furious, as horned beasts, whence that Satirical, -- Sumit cornua pauper.

Cornice, a term of Architecture. See Frize.

Cornucopia (Lat.) plenty or abundance of all things.

Cornuted (cornutus) that has horns: also Cuckolded.

Corody Corrody (from corrodo, to eat together) signifies in our Common Law a
sum of money, or allowance of meat and drink, due to the King from an Abbey or
other House of Religion, whereof he is Founder, toward the reasonable
sustenance of such a one of his Servants, being put to his Pension, as he
thinks good to bestow it on. And the difference between a Corrody and a Pension
seems to be, that a Corrody is allowed toward the maintenance of any of the
Kings servants, that live in the Abbey; a Pension is given to one of the Kings
Chaplains, for his better maintenance in the Kings service, till he may be
provided a Benefice. Cow. Of both these read Fitz. not. br. fol. 230, 231, 233.

Corollary (corollarium) the addition or vantage above measure, an overplus,
or surplusage; also a small gift or largess bestowed on the people at public
Feasts.

Coronary (coronarius) belonging to a Crown.

Coroner (Cororator) is an ancient Officer of this Land; so called because he
deals wholly for the King and Crown. There are four of them commonly in every
County, and they are chosen by the Freeholders of the same upon Writ, and not
made by Letters Pattents. Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 126. See Lieghs Phil. Com.

Corporal (corporalis) that has, or petains to the body; Also an inferior
Officer in a Foot-Company; But in the Roman Church it signifies a little linen
cloth which is spread upon the Altar, and whereon the Chalice and Host are
placed. And the word is also used in the like sense in the Service Book which
was sent into Scotland, in the year 1637.

Corporation (corporatio) is a permanent thing, that may have succession; it is
an Assembly and joining together of many into one fellowship, brotherhood and
mind, whereof one is Head and chief, the rest are the body.

Corporeal (corporeus) that has a body, or pertaining to the body.

Corporature (corporatura) the quantity, fashion, or constitution of the body.

Corpuscule (corpusculum) a little body. Mr. Evelyn.

Corrade (corrado) to scrape together, to take away or spoil.

Corrasive ( corrasivus from corrado) which scrapes together, shaves or spoils:
This word is many times mistaken for corrosive, from corrodo.

Correlatives (correlativa) Relatio (according to the Philosophers) is, Cujus
totum esse est ad aliud esse, whose whole being is to be to another, whence
Correlatives are such things as are mutually one to another, and cannot be, nor
be explicated, but in order to one another. As Father and Son, superior and
inferior, Husband and Wife, etc.

Correption (correptio) a correcting in words, a rebuking, a snatching away.

Correptory (from corripio) that rebukes or chastises, that snatches away.

Correspond (correspondeo. i. concorditer respondeo) to answer concordingly,
agreeingly, or in the same proportion, to accord or consent together, to run
one and the same course together.

Correspondent, agreeable, proportionable, or answerable to another thing.

Corridor, A curtain in Fortification.

Corrigible (corrigibilis) that may be corrected or amended.

Corrivals (corrivales) they who have water from, or use the same River. And
metaphorically, a Competitor in love, or they that love one and the same woman.

Corrivality (corrivalitas) the love of a Corrival, a corrivalship.

Corroborate (corroboro) to make strong, to harden or confirm.

Corrode (corrodo) to gnaw about, to eat away: Also to back-bite.

Corrodie. See Corodie.

Corrodible (corrodibilis) that may be gnawn or eaten away. Vul. Er.

Corrosive (corrosivus) gnawing or eating about, biting, as it were a nipping
the very heart: Also a fretting plaster, or any thing, which being laid to the
body, raises blisters, and makes it sore.

Corrugation (corrugatio) a wrinkling, or furrowing of the skin, a frowning.

Corsary (Fr. Corsaire) a Courser.

Corslet (from the Ital Corsalletto) armor for the breast, and back.

Corse-present. See Mortuary.

Corticated (corticatus) that has a rind or bark.

Corvine (corvinus) pertaining to, or like a Raven or Crow; black as a Crow.

Coruscant (coruscans) glistering, shining, or lightning.

Coruscation (coruscatio) a flash of lightning, or a kind of seeming sparkling
fire, which appears in Mines by night.

It Is (says an Author) a glistering of fire rather then fire indeed, and a
glimmering of lightning, rather then lightning it self.

Corve^ (Ital.) a prancing, or continual dancing of a horse of Service. Hence
to corvet, is to leap or prance, as a Horse of Service does.

Cor^bant (Corybantes) Cybeles, or Cybelles Priests; so called from Corybantus,
one of her first Attendants.

To play the Corybant, is to run madly up and down, playing on a Cymbal, and
wagging the head as those Priests were wont to do; Also to sleep with open eyes.

Cosc^mancy (coscinemantia) a divining by a Sieve.

Co-si^ificativ^ (from con and significo) of the same signification with
another thing.

Cosm^s (Gr.) mundus, the world. Hence

Cosmarchy (cosmarchia) the power of the Devil, the government of the world.

Cosmical (cosmicus) of the world, worldly.

In Astronomy we term that the Cosmical ascension of a Star, when it arises
together with the Sun, or the same degree of the Ecliptic, wherein the Sun
abides. Vul. Er. 224.

Cosmodelyte, may be derived from (...) mundus, and (...), timidus, or miser;
and so Englished, one fearful of the world, or a worldly wretch.

Cosmography (cosmographia) the description of the world in general. This Art,
by the distance of the Circles in Heaven, divides the Earth under them into her
Zones and Climats, and by the elevation of the Pole, considers the length of
the day and night, with the perfect demonstration of the Suns rising and going
down, etc. And is best handled by Pliny in his Natural History.

Cosmographer (cosmographus) a describer of the world.

Cosmographical, pertaining to Cosmography.

Cosmology (Gr.) a speaking of the world.

Cosmopolite (from Cosmos, mundus, and Polites, Cives) a Citizen of the world;
or Cosmopolitan.

Cosmometry (Gr.) a measuring of the world. It is thus defined, Cosmometry
shows the reason of the world, by measures of degrees and minutes of the
Heavens, and the differences of Climates, days and nights, the elevation of the
Poles, diversity of the noon Tides, and shadows in Dyals, and divides it self
into Cosmography, and Geography. 1. part. Treasury.

Costrel or Cas^rel, a kind of bottle to carry wine or such like in.

Couchant (Fr.) couching, or lying on the ground. See Levant and Counchant.

Covent or C^vent (conventus) a multitude of men assembled together: The whole
number of religious persons dwelling in one house together, which, according to
Chaucer in the Sompners Tale, is but thirteen, viz. twelve and the Confessor.

A Cloister or Abbey of Monks or Nuns. Hence Covent Garden took denomination,
because it belonged to that Covent or religious House, now called Whitehal,
which heretofore belonged to the Black Friars, by the gift of the Earl of Kent.
Stow. Sur. 487.

Coverture, is a French word, and signifies any thing that covers, as Apparel,
a Coverlet, etc. In our Common Law, it is particularly applied to the estate
and condition of a married woman, who by the Laws of the Realm is in potestate
viri, under coverture or Covert baron, and therefore disabled to make any
bargain or contract, without her husbands consent or privity, or without his
allowance or confirmation. Brook. hoc titulo, per totum.

Coulant (Fr.) gliding, slipping, slowing gently along.

Count (Fr. Comte) an Earl.

Couldray, is the name of a noble House belonging to the Lord Viscount Montagu
in Sussex; in French it signifies a Hasel wood, or Grove, whence perhaps it
took denomination.

Counter-compone, a term in Herauldry. as if you say, a Cross Counter-compone,
that is, a Cross compounded of two sundry colors, or three. See Accidence of
Armory, fol. 54.

The Counter or Contor, Is the name of two Prisons in London, wherein Debtors
and others, for misdemeanors are imprisoned; so called from a Contor which in
high Dutch signifies locus seclusus, a Prison.

Countermure or Counter scarf in a fortified Town, is a bank of a Ditch or
Mount opposite against the wall. See Contramure.

A Counterround (Fr. contreronde) when one round goes one way, and another
another. Also a certain number of Officers and Commanders going to visit the
Watch of the Corpse de guard, Sentinels, or the Rounds, to see if they are
diligent in performing their duty.

Countertaile or Countertallie (Fr. Contretaile) a Tally to confirm or confute
another Tally. It is a piece of wood which the one party keeps, that is cut off
from another piece kept by the other party; and so when both meet with their
Tallies, they score up the number of what is delivered and received, by cutting
a notch with a knife. Min.

Coupant (Fr.) cutting, cleaving, lopping, mowing, carving.

Court Baron (Curia Baronis) is a Court that every Lord of a Manor (which in
ancient times were called Barons) has within his own Precincts; Of this and
Court Leet, read Kitchen.

Cou^tisan (Fr. Courtesane) a Lady, Gentlewoman, or waiting woman of the Court;
Also (but less properly) a professed Strumpet, famous (or infamous) Whore.

Courteue of England (Lex Angliae) is used with us for a Tenure. For if a man
marry an Inheritrix seized of Land in Fee-simple, or in Feetail general, or as
Heir in Tail special, and gets a child of her, that comes alive into the world,
though both it and his Wife die forthwith, yet if she were in possession, he
shall keep the land during his life, and is called Tenant by the Courtesy of
England. Glanvil. l. 7, ca. 18. Littleton l. 1. ca. 4.

Courtilage alias Curtsage (curtilagium) signifies a Garden, Yard, or piece of
void ground lying near, and belonging to a Message. West. part. 2. Symbol.
Tit. Fines, Sect. 26.

Couthurlaugh, is he that wittingly receives a man outlawed, and cherishes and
hides him. In which case, he was in ancient times subject to the same
punishment, that the Outlaw himself was. Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. ca. 13. nu. 2.
It is compounded of the old Saxon word (Couthr) i. known, and (Utlaugh) an
Outlaw, as we now call him.

Crabbat (Fr.) is properly an Adjective, and signifies comely, handsome,
gracious; But it is often used Substantively for a new fashioned Gorget which
women wear.

Crambe (Gr.) a kind of Colewort of a very bitter taste. Schism. disp.

Cranage (cranagium) is a liberty to use a Crane, for the drawing up Wares from
Vessels at any Creek of the Sea or Wharf unto the Land, and to make profit of
it. It signifies also the money paid and taken for the same. New Book of
Entries. fol. 3. col. 3.

Crany (cranium) the bone of the head, the skul or brainpan. Also a cleft,
chinck, or little Cranny.

Crapulent (crapulentus) surfeiting or oppressed with surfeit.

Crasis (Gr.) a complxion, temperature or mixture of natural humors.

Crasse (crassu^) gross, thick, fleshy, dull.

Crassity Crassitude (crassitudo) fatness, thickness or grosness.

Crassulent (crassulentus) full of grosness, very fat.

Crastinate (crastinoi) to delay from day to day, to prolong.

Creance (Fr.) trust, faith, belief, confidence; also credit, etc. Chaucer.

Creansour signifies a Creditor, viz. him that trusts another with any debt, be
it in money or wares. Old not. br. fol. 67.

Crebrous (creber) frequent, often, accustomed, usual.

Crebrity (crebritas) a multitude, oftenness, manifoldness.

Credulity (credulitas) lightness or rashness to believe any thing.

Creek (crepido) seems to be part of a Haven, where any thing is landed or
disburdened from the Sea. So that when you are out of the main Sea, within the
Haven, look how many landing places you have, so many Creeks may be said to
belong to that Haven. See Crompt. Jurisdictions fol. 110. a.

Cremation (crematio) a burning.

Crepitation (crepitatio) a creaking, crashing, or rattling noise.

Crepusculous (from crepusculum) pertaining to twilight in the evening or
morning. Br.

Crescent (crscens) growing, increasing, waxing bigger.

Cressant (Fr. Croissant) in Heraldry it signifies the New Mood, or the Moon in
time of waxing or increasing, some times taken for a Half Moon.

Cresset, An old word used for a Lanthorn or burning Beacon. Min.

Cretan (Cretensis) an inhabitant of the Island of Candy or Creet; also a liar,
because those in that Island are especially noted to be tainted with that vice,
as St. Paul observed of them out of Epimenides: (...).

Cretical (from Creta) belonging to a Cretian or liar.

Creticism or Cretism, the Art of coining or inventing lies. Sir W. Ral. fol.
560.

Criminous (criminosus) ready to accuse, blameworthy, full of crime.

Crible (cribrum) a Sive to sift corn.

Cribration (cribratio) a winnowing or sifting corn from chaff with a Sive.

Crinal (crinalis) belonging to the hair.

Crined (from crinis) in Heraldry it signifies haired.

Crinigerous (criniger) that has or wears hair.

Crinosity (crinositas) hairiness.

Criptick. See Cryptick.

Crisis (Gr.) judgment: In Physic it signifies a sudden change in a disease,
or the conflict between nature and sickness; that is, the time when either the
Patient becomes suddenly well, or suddenly dies, or waxes better after or
worse, according to the strength of his body and violence of the disease.

Crism. See Chrism.

Crispin or Crespin, a proper name for a man, and the name of a certain Saint,
who is Patron to Shoo-makers.

Crispitude (crispitudo) curledness.

Crist (crista) a Crest, a Tuft, a Plume.

Cristal (chrystalus) a Mineral substance like clear glass or ice. There are
two kinds hereof; one which grows upon extreme cold Mountains, being there
congealed like Ice, by the Mineral virtue of the place, as Albertus writes.
Another that grows in the earth in some places of Germany. See more of the
nature and properties of it in Dr. Browns Vul. Er. l. 2. cap 1.

Cristalline (crystallinus) white and transparent as Crystal, or of or
belonging to crystal. The Crystalline humor is seated in the midst of the eye,
and of a round figure, somewhat flattened both before and behind; it is the
first instrument of sight, and a glass wherein the spirit imagines and judges
of the forms represented to it. Cot.

Crithology (crithologia) the office of gathering the first fruits of Corn.

Critical or Judicial days (dies critici) are when the disease comes to the
Crisis or judgment of amending or impairing, and they are the fourth and
seventh days; because in them the Physicians use to judge of the danger of a
disease: But the seventh is accounted the chief Critical day, and the fourth a
token or sign, what the seventh day will be, if the Patient live so long. This
account must be made according to the number of weeks thus; In the first week
the fourth day is the token or Critical of the seventh day. In the second week
the eleventh is the critical of the fourteenth. In the third, the seventeenth
is the critical of the twentieth, (for Hippocrates reckons the twentieth day
for the last of the third week.) In the fourth, the twenty fourth is the
critical of the twenty seventh; and so forth to an hundred. Bull.

Critic, Taken Ad^ectively, is the same with Critical. But Substantively, it
signifies one that takes upon him to censure or judge of other men's words, acts
or works.

Criticism. The Art of judging or censuring men's words, writings, or actions:
also a quillet or nicety in judgment.

Crosser. A Bishops staff, so called either from the French Croce, a Cross;
of the figure of the Cross which it has, or from Croce, which in our old
English signifies a Shepherds Crook, because Bishops are spiritual Pastors or
shepherds.

Crocation Crocitation (crocatio) the kawing of Crows, Rooks or Ravens.

Croises (cruce signati) Pilgrims. See Croysado.

Cronical Cronographie See in Chro.

Cronie (from cronus) a contemporary Disciple, or intimate companion, between a
servant and friend; a consident; and perhaps may have this ancient Etymology;
Diodorus the Philosopher was Scholar to Apollonius Cronus, after whom he was
called Cronus, the name of the Master being transmitted to the Disciple.

Crotaphites (Chrotaphitae) the two muscles of the Temples.

Crotchet (Fr. crochet) a measure of time in Music, containing in quantity a
quarter of a Sembrief, or two Quavers. It is sometimes used for a whimsey or
idle fancy of the brain: as we say, his head is full of Crotchets.

Crouched (Fr. croise, Ital. croche) crossed or marked with a cross, blessed;
hence the name of Crouched Friars, because they wear the sign or picture of a
Cross or Crouch. And hence the Crouches or Crutches, which Cripples use,
because they somewhat resemble a cross.

Cr^sad^ (Fr. croysade) an expedition of Christians, assembled out of diverse
Countries (by preaching and the Popes Bulls) against the Turks or other
Infidels; termed so, because every one of them, when he undertakes the journey,
accepts of, and wears on his Cassock or coat Armor, the badge of the cross. Cot.

Cruciferous (crucifer) he that bears the cross.

Cruciate (crucio) to torment, to afflict or vex.

Crudity (cruditas) rawness of stomach, indigestion.

Crude (crudus) raw, fresh, not ripe, not digested.

Cruor (Lat.) blood dropping out of a wound.

Crural (cruralis) belonging to the legs, knees, or thighs.

Crus^ible or Cruzet (Fr. creuset) a Cruet, or little earthen pot wherein
Goldsmiths melt or calcine their gold and silver.

Crus^ng (a Sea term, from Croiser, to cross) crossing or coasting up and down;
as our men of War do at Sea to meet with Pirates.

Crustaceo^s (from crusta) pertaining to the crust, hard shell or pill of any
thing. Dr. Brown in his Vulgar Errors, calls Lobsters, Shrimps, Crevises, etc.
Crustaceous animals.

Cryptical Cryptick (crypticus) hidden or secret.

Cryptography (Gr.) a description of secrecy, or secret things.

Cryptolog^ (Gr.) whispering, secret speech or communication.

Crystal See Crystal.

Cubebes (Fr.) a certain fruit sold by Apothecaries like pepper. It comes out
of India, and is hot and dry in operation. Bull.

Cubicular (cubicularis) pertaining to the Chamber.

Cub^ (cubus) a Geometrical body or figure, apiece, having six faces, like
a Dye; in Arithmetic, a number multiplied in it self, as Nine arising of
thrice three, and Sixteen of four times four.

Cubick or Cubical (cubicus) square like a Dye.

Cubicul^t^ (cubicularis) pertaining to the Chamber.

Cubit (cubitum) the length of the Arm from the Elbow to the end of the middle
Finger, which is usually about a foot and half; this is the common Cubit; but
we read of three other Cubits, 1. The holy Cubit, this was a full yard. 2. The
Kings Cubit was three fingers longer then the common Cubit. 3. A Geometrical
Cubit contained six common Cubits. Moses and Aaron. 260.

Cubiture (cubitura) a lying down.

Cuchanel or Cutchoneale (Fr. Couchenil, Lat. Coccus) a kind of grain of great
value, wherewith our Dyers dye Scarlet or Crimson color in grain, as we call
it. Some say ^t is a little worm bred in the fruit of a certain tree.

Cu^, The last word of an Actor, which gives the hint to him that is to enter
next; also an item when anyone shall begin to speak.

Cucullated (cucullatus) hooded, wearing a hood. Br.

Cucubat^ (cucubo) to make a noise like an Owl, to howl or whoop.

Cucurbite (cucurbita) a Gourd.

Cu^rp^ (Span.) a body; en Cuerpo, without a Cloak.

Cu^n^g^, is a word used for the making up of Tin, into such fashion as it is
commonly framed for its carriage into other places. An. 11. H. 7. c. 4.

Cuirassi^r (Fr.) one armed with Cuirats, most commonly spoken of horsemen.

Cur^t^, Cuitars or Corslets (Fr cuirace) armor for the breast and back.

Culde^s (a corruption from cultores Dei. i. worshipers of God) an ancient
Religious people in Scotland, so called. Broughton, fol. 588 Giraldus
Cambrensis Topograp. Hiberniae Distinct. 2. c. 4. testifies, that in Ireland
there was Capella, cui pauci coelibes, quos Coelicolas, vel Colideos vocant,
devote deserviebant. Spotswoods Hist. p. 4.

Culcrag^ (Fr.) buttock-stirring, tayl-wagging, Lechery.

Culinary (culinarius) belonging to the Kitchen.

Cullion-^ean. See Bastion.

Cullis (Fr. coulis) a broth of boiled me at strained, fit for a sick or weak
body.

Culminate (culmino) to come to the top or highest.

Cul^able (culpabilis) worthy of blame.

Cultivate (culto) to plow or till.

Culture (cultura) husbandry, tillage, dressing or triming.

Cu^ Secto^ (Lat.) a niggard, close-fist, pinch-peny, or miser. Bac.

Culvertail, A term among Carpenters, and signifies the so letting one piece of
timber into another with artificial joints, that they cannot fall asunder.

Cumulate (cumulo) to make a heap to gather together, to increase.

Cumble (from the Fr. comble, i. cumulus, or from the Spa. cumbre) the
top-fulness, height or overplus of any thing. Mr. Howel.

Cunctation (cunctatio) delaying, lingering, or deferring.

Cuniculous (cuniculosus) full of holes or mines under the ground; full of
Conves.

Cupidity (cupiditas) covetousness, lust, desire, wanton affection.

Cupidiuous Cupidous (cupidus) covetous, desirous, greedy.

Cupglass or Cup^ingglass A hollow round glass with a hole in the bottom, used
by Physicians sometimes, to draw blood or wind out of the body, for it sucks
with great strength, by reason of a little flame of fire made in it. Bull.

Cupol^ (It.) a high Arch or round loover of any Church, house or Steeple; some
have erroneously used it for a spire or pinnacle of a Steeple. See Dome.

Curfeu, comes of the Fr. Couvrir, i. to cover, and feu, the fire; we use it
for the eight o'th clock Bell, or an evening Peal, by which the Conqueror in
the first year of his reign, willed every man to take warning for the raking up
his fire, and putting out his light. So that in many places at this day, where
a Bell is customably rung toward Bedtime, it is said to ring Curfeu. Stows
Ann. and Sir Rich. Baker, fol. 34.

Curranto (ab huc and illuc Currendo, Fr. Courante) a running dance, a French
dance, different from what we call a Country dance.

Curricu^re or Curricurro, a kind of Boat in the East India's almost like our
Barges. Herb.

Current (currens) running: It is also used Substantively, for a swift running
stream of water, and sometimes taken for a strait of the Sea.

Curtizan. See Courtisan.

Curtilage. See Courtilage.

Curtesy of England. See Courtesy.

Curvature (curvatura) a bending or crookedness; also a roundle.

Curvilineal (from curva and linea) whose lines are crooked. Per. Inst.

Curvity (curvitas) crookedness, deformity.

Curules (Lat. from Currus a Chariot) were those Roman Senators, who, being of
higher dignity then the rest, were wont for greater honor sake, to be carried
to Court in Chariots, and were seated in Curule Chairs made of Ivory.

Curvous (curvus) crooked, bowed, uneven.

Cuspe (cuspis) the point of any thing, as of a weapon; a sting.

Cuspidate (cuspido) to point or make sharp at the end.

Cuticular (cuticularis) full of pores or little holes, for sweat to come out
at.

Cuvele, the mother of the gods, etc. See the many names and particular Fables
of her, in Rider.

Cycle (cyclus) a round or circle. In Astronomy it is thus defined. The
division of the year into 52 weeks, because it sets off one day supernumerary,
makes an alteration in all the rest; so that the days of the week (which use to
be assigned by the letters of the Alphabet) fall not alike in several years;
but Sunday this year must fall out on the next years Monday, and so forward
till seven years; and (because the Bissextile superadds another day every
fourth year) till four times seven, that is, 28 years are gone about. This
revolution is called the Cycle of the Sun, taking name from Sunday, the letter
whereof (called therefore Dominical) it appoints for every year. It is sound by
adding nine (for so far the Circle was then gone about) to the year of our
Lord, and dividing the whole by 28. so to the year 1639, if nine be added, the
numerus factus will be 1648, which, divided by 28, leaves 24 for the Cycle of
the Sun.

The Cycle of the Moon is the revolution of 19 years, in which space (though
not precisely) the Lunations recur. For, because of the Sun and Moons unequal
motions, the changes falli^g out inconstantly, the time of conjunction could
not be still the same. This variety the Ancients perceiving to be periodical,
endeavored to comprehend what Circle it made in going about. The learned
Meto^, finding the Revolution was not completed in less time then the space of
19 years, set forth his Ennedecaetris, within the Circle whereof the Lunations
(though not exactly) do indeed recur, so that if the quadrature of the Moon
shall fall out as this day of this year, the like shall return again, the same
day of the 19 year succeeding. This Cycle is therefore called Cyclus
decennovennalis, and from the Author Annus Metonicus; from whose Athenians the
Egyptians may seem to have received it, as the Romans from them, in Letters of
gold; from whence (if not from the more precious use of it) it obtained to be
called, as it still is, the numerus aureus, or Golden number. It was made
Christian by the Fathers of the Nicene-Council, as being altogether necessary
to the finding out the Neomenia Paschalis, upon which the Feast of Easter, and
all the moveable rest depended. It self is found by adding an unite to the year
of our Lord, and dividing the whole by 19. the remainder shall be the Cycle of
the Moon; or if nothing remain, the Cycle is out, that is nineteen. Mr.
Gregory, de Aeris and Epochis, p. 133.

Cyclom^try (cyclometria) a measuring of Circles

Cycloped^ (cyclopedia) the universal knowledge of all Sciences. Fuller.

Cyclo^s (cyclopes) an ancient and big-bon^d sort of people, which had but one
eye, and that in the midst of the forehead, inhabiting the Island of Sicily;
The Poets called them Giants, because they were people of a mighty stature, of
which rank was the so much famoused Polyphemus, that with such humanity
entertained Ulysses and his companions. Rider. Hence

Cycloptick Cyclopean belonging to those Giants or Cyclops, Monstrous,
one-eyed, furious. Eicon Basil.

Cylinder (cyclindrus) a Geometrical figure round and long, consisting from top
to toe, of two equal parallel Circles: Also it is taken for that part of the
bore of a gun, which remains empty, when the Gun is laden, a Roler to beat
Clods.

Cylindrical, pertaining to or like a Cylinder. Vul. Er.

Cymace (cymatium) a kind of Pillar so graven, that the carved work resembles
the waves; or a ledge or outward member in Architecture, fashioned somewhat
like a Roman S, and termed a Wave or Ogee.

Cymbal (cymbalum) was a kind of instrument, composed of thin plates of brass,
with certain small bars of Iron, fastened and cross billeted in the plates,
wherewith they made a great noise. Others think Cymbals are bells, which,
according to the opinion of some, were consecrated to the service of the Church
by Pope Sabinian. Caussin.

Cymracean (from the Brit. Cymraeg, i. Welsh) Cambrian Welsh or British. Mr.
How.

Cymbalist (cymbalistes) he that plays on the Cymbal.

Cy^anthropie (Gr.) a frenzy which makes a man haunt unfrequented places, with
a conceit that he is turned into a dog. Cotgr.

Cynical Cynick (cynicus) dogged, currish or churlish like a dog. There was in
Greece an old Sect of Philosophers called ^ynicks, first instituted by
Antisthenes; and were so called, because they did ever bark at and rebuke men's
Vices, and were not so respective in their behavior as civility required.
Diogenes was so famous in this kind of Philosophy, that he was surnamed the
Cynick

C^ege^icks (cynegetica) books treating of hunting: whereof Oppianus wrote four.

C^oc^halist (cynocephalis) a beast like an Ape, but having the face of a Dog:
a Baboon.

Cy^orexi^ (cynorexia) a greediness and unnatural appetite of meat.

Cynosure (cynosura) a figure of stars in Heaven.

Cynt^us, A hill in Delos, where Latona brought forth Apollo and Diana; whence
Apollo and the Sun are called Cynthius; Diana and the Moon Cynthia.

Cyprine (cyprinus) of or belonging to the Cypress-Tree, which is destinated to
the dead; in that, being once cut, it never re-flourisheth.

C^renaick, a Sect of Philosophers, so called from Aristippus, a Disciple of
Socrates, and Professor of Philosophy, who (after the death of Socrates)
returned into his Country at Cyrene in Africa; his Scholars took this name
from Cyrene, the place, but by some called Hedonick, or voluptuous, from the
doctrine.

Cystique Vein. See in Vein.

D
DAbuz^, a weapon like a Mace, carried before the Grand Turk.

Dactyle (dactylus) a foot in a verse consisting of three syllables, the first
long, and the two last short, as Carmina. Also a Date, the fruit of the
Palm Tree.

Dactylogie (dactylogia) finger-talk, speech made with the fingers.

A D^gs^in (gausape) a rough Mantle or hairy Garment Rid.

Dagon, the Idol of the Philistines, mentioned 1 Samuel 5.4. It had the upper
part like a man, the nether like a fish. See Moses and Aaron. p. 156.

Da^ma^ick (Dalmatica vestis) the Vestment of a Deacon or Subdeacon, properly
belonging to his Order; so called because they were first made in Dalmatia.

Damage Cle^r (Damna Clericorum) was originally no other then a gratuity given
the Prothonotaries, and their Clerks for drawing special Writs and pleadings,
but afterward it came to a certainty of 2 s in the pound, which is taken away
by Act 1650. cap 44.

Damage-fes^nt (a term in our Common Law) is when a strangers beasts are in
another man's ground, without license of the Tenant of the ground, and there
feed, or otherwise spoil the corn, grass, woods, etc. In which case the Tenant
whom they hurt, may therefore distrain and impound them as well in the night as
in the day. But in other cases, as for Rent, and services, and such like, none
may distrain in the night. New Terms of the Law.

Dandruff or Dandraff (furfur) a scurff or a kind of small scales that stick to
the skin of the head, and often hang about the hairs. They are caused by salt
phlegm or some other corrupt humors, piercing insensibly the pores, and then
slightly congealed by the air, and may be taken away by washing the head with
salt water, or Vinegar warm.

Danegelt, Dane^g^lt, or Danegold (compounded of Dane and gelt, i. pecunia) was
a tribute laid upon our Ancestors of twelve pence for every Hide of Land
through the Realm by the Danes. Stow in his Annals, p. 118. says, this Tribute
came to 48000. l. per an. and that it was released by Edward the Confessor,
Heylin says by King Steven.

Dane^nge. See Merchenlage

Danism (danisma) usury.

Danist, An Usurer.

Danistick (danisticus) pertaining to usury.

Dapatical (dapaticus) sumptuous, costly, magnificent.

Daphnamancy (from the Gr. (...) i laurus, and (...), i. Divinatio) divination
by a Laurel Tree.

Dapife^ (Lat.) he that serves at a banquet, a Sewer. See Arch-Dapifer. The
great Master or Steward of the Kings house was so termed in old time. Cotg.

Danocaginous (from the Ital. dapoco) that has a little or narrow heart,
low-spirited, of little worth.

Dardanean Art (ars dardania) Witchcraft or Magic; so called from Dardanus, a
wicked Magician.

At si nulla valet medicina repellere pestem,
Dardaniae veniant arts, etc. --
Darick (Daricus) a kind of ancient coin bearing the Image of Darius King of
Persia, and valuing about two shillings.

Datary (datarius) that is, freely given: taken Substantively, it is an Office
in Rome for collation of Church Benefices; also a dater of Writings.

Date (dactylus) a kind of sweet fruit brought from Numidia and other far
Countries. The Date Trees are some male, some female: the first brings forth
only flowers, the other fruit; yet herein is the male beneficial to the
increase of the Dates; for, unless a flowred bough of the male be ingraffed
into the female, the Dates never prove good.

Dation (datio) a giving, a gift, a dole.

Datism (datismus) is when by a heap of Synonyma's, we rehearse the same things.

Dative (dativus) that gives, or is of power to give.

Daulphin. See Dolphin.

St. David's day, The first of March kept solemnly by the Britans in honor of
their Patron St. David, whom their Records and Tradition testify to have been
a person of eminent sanctity and austerity of life, excellently learned; a most
eloquent preacher of Gods word, and Archbishop of Menevy, now from him called
St. David's in Pembrook-shire. He flourished in the fifth and sixth age after
the coming of Christ, and dyed in the 140 year of his own, as Dr. Pits
witnesses in de illustribus Britanniae Scriptoribus. The Brittans always wear
a Leek on that day in memory of a famous victory obtained by them against the
Saxons; the said Britains for the time of the battle, wearing Leeks in their
hats for their military colors by St. David's persuasion.

Days (according to the division of Authors) are either Astronomical or
Political: of Astronomical, some are natural, and some again Artificial. An
Artificial day consists of twelve hours, Joh. 11.19. There be twelve hours in
the day. Genesis 1.4, 5. and 47-9. A Natural day consists of twenty four hours.
The beginning of Politic days, is diverse: for the Athenians began their day
from Sunset; but the Jews, Chaldeans, and Babylonians from Sunrise; the
Egyptians and the Romans from midnight, of whom we take our pattern to count
the hours from midnight, one, two, three, etc. The Vmbrians from noon. The
parts of Politic or Civil days (according to Macrobius) are these. The first
time of day is after midnight. The second, in Lat. Gallicinium, Cocks-crow. The
third Conticinium, the space between the first Cock and break of day. The
fourth Diluculum, the break or dawn of the day. The fifth Mane the morning. The
sixth Meridies, noon or midday. The seventh Pomeridies, the afternoon. The
eighth Serum diei, Sunset. The ninth, suprema tempestas, twylight. The tenth,
Vesper, the evening or eventide. The eleventh, prima fax, candle-time The
twelfth, nox concubia, bed time. The thirteenth Nox intempesta, the dead time
of the night. Vide Agellium, Macrobium, and Fungerum.

Maundy Thursday (the last Thursday in Lent, and next before Easter) so called
as it were, Mandati Thursday, from a ceremony, used by the Bishops and Prelates
in Cathedral Churches and Religious Houses, of washing their Subjects feet;
which ceremony is termed the fulfilling the Mandate, and is in imitation of our
Savior Christ, who on that day at night after his last Supper, and before his
institution of the Blessed Sacrament, washed his Disciples feet, telling them
afterward that they must do the like to one another: this is the Mandate,
whence the day is nominated. At the beginning of the aforesaid ceremony, these
words of Christ (uttered by him soon after his washing their feet) John. 13.34.
are sung for an Antiphon. Mandatum novum do vobis, ut diligatis invicem, sicut
dilexi vos. I give you a new Mandate, etc.

Deaction (deactio) a finishing or perfecting.

Dealbate (dealbo) to white-lime, parget or make white.

Dearck (dearchus) a Captain or Governor of ten.

Dearraignment. A Law-term. V. Shep. Epit. 491.

Deaurate (deauro) to gild or lay over with gold.

Debauchery (from the Fr. desbauche) incontinency, riot, disorder, unruliness.

Deb^llate (debello) to vanquish or overcome by war.

Debellation (debellatio) a vanquishing or overcoming by war. Sir Tho. More
uses it.

De b^ne e^s^, are three common Latin words, the meaning I conceive to be this;
to take or do a thing de been esse, is to accept or allow it as well done for
present; but when it comes to be more fully examined or tried, it is to stand
or fall, according to the merit or well being of the thing in its own nature;
or as we say, valeat quantum valere potest. So in Chancery, upon motion to have
one of the Defendants in a Cause, examined as a witness, the Court (not then
precisely examining the Justice of it, or not hearing what may be objected on
the other side) often orders a Defendant to be examined De been esse, i. that
his Depositions are to be allowed or suppressed at the Hearing, as the Judge
shall see cause, upon the full debate of the matter; but for the present they
have a well-being, or allowance.

Debentur (the third person plural of debeor, to be due or owing) is by Act of
Parliament 1649. cap. 43. ordained to be in the nature of a Bond or Bill to
charge the Commonwealth to pay the Souldier-creditor or his Assigns, the sum
due upon account for his Arrears. The form of which Debentur, you may see in an
Act 1649. c. 63.

Debilitate (debilito) to weaken or make feeble, to make faint.

Debility (debilitas) weakness, feebleness.

Debonnaire (Fr.) gentle, mild, courteous, affable.

Debosche Debauche (from the Fr. desbaucher) to corrupt, make lewd, or put out
of order, to vitiate.

Debulliate (debullio) to bubble or sees over.

Deca (Gr.) december, ten.

Decachord (decachordium) an instrument with ten strings.

Decacuminat^ (decacumino) to take off the top of any thing.

Decad (decas, adis) a term or number of ten, be it of years, months, books,
etc. as the Decads of Livy consist each of ten Books; Also a tenth.

Decadency (from de and cado) a falling down or from, a declining, decay, ruin.

Deca^i^t (from decas) a writer of Decads, such was Titus Livius.

Decalogue (decalogus) the ten Commandments or words of God.

Decameron (Gr.) that is of ten parts. Boccacius gives his book of Fables
(being divided into ten parts) that Title. Min.

Decapitate (decapito) to behead, or pull off the head.

Decatc^. The same with Deark.

Decede (decedo) to depart, or yield from; to give place to; to cease or dye.

D^cember. One of the twelve months, so called from december, ten, because it was
the tenth month from March, which was the first among the Romans.

Decemped^ (decempedalis) of ten foot, or ten foot long.

Decemvirate (decemviratus) the Office or Authority of those ten Noblemen or
Governors among the Romans, who were called Decemviri, they were appointed to
govern the Commonwealth instead of the two Consuls, and had the highest
Authority, from whom none could appeal. The Roman Laws were divided into ten
^ables whereto these Decemvi^s added other two, and called them the Laws of the
twelve Tables whereof you may read Pomponius Laetus.

Decennial (decennalis) belonging to, or containing ten years.

Deception (deceptio) deceit, fallacy, craft, cosenage.

Deceptive (deceptivus) deceitful, deceiving, wily, crafty, full of subtilty.

Decerp (decerpo) to pluck off or away, to gather, to diminish.

Decertation (decertatio) a contending or striving.

Decession (decessio) a departing or diminishing.

Deciduous (diciduus) subject to fall off, hanging or falling down.

Decim^. See Nona.

Decimate (decimo) to take the Tenth, to gather the Tyth.

Decimation (decimatio) the punishing every tenth Soldier by Lot, was termed
Decimatio legionis; also a Tything or paying a tenth part.

Decirci^ate (decircino) to bring out of compass or roundness, to unbind.

Decision (decisio) a determining or deciding, a cutting off or lessening.

Decisive (decisus) deciding, determining, fit, or able to end a controversy.
And Decisorie, Idem.

Declamation (declamatio) an Oration made of a feigned subject, or only for
exercise; also a crying out aloud.

Declarative (declarativus) which does declare or show forth.

Declivity (declivitas) a steep bending downwards, as on the side of a hill.

Decoctible (decoctibilis) easy to be sodden or boiled.

Decollation (decollatio) a beheading, as the Decollation of St. John Baptist,
a holy day instituted of old in memory of the beheading St. John Baptist, on
the twenty ninth of August yearly. See Lapidation.

Decoction (decoctio) a boiling or seething. In Physic it signifies commonly
any liquor in which medicinable roots, herbs, seeds, flowers, or any other
thing has been boiled.

Decor (Lat.) comeliness or beauty.

Decorate (decoro) to beautify, to make decent.

Decoration (decoratio) a beautifying or adorning. Bacon.

Decortication (decorticatio) a pilling or plucking off the bark.

Decorticate (decortico) to pill or pluck off the bark. Apol. for learning.

Decorum (Lat.) comeliness, honesty, good grace.

Decrement (decrementum) a decreasing. Feltham.

Decrepite (decrepitus) very old, at deaths door, whose Candle is almost burnt
out.

Decressant (from decresco) the Moon decreasing or in the last quarter, the
wayning of the Moon.

Decretist (decretista) a Student, or one that studies the Decretals.

Decretals (decretales) a Volume of the Canon Law, so called; or books
containing the Decrees of sundry Popes. Or a digestion of the Canons of all the
Councils that pertained to one matter, under one head.

Decretal, taken Adjectively, belonging to a Decree.

Decretaliarck (Gr.) an absolute Commander, one that commands by Decree, or
whose command is, and is obeyed as a Decree. Cotg.

Decrustation (decrustatio) an uncrusting, a paring away of the uppermost part,
or uttermost rind.

Deculcate (deculco) to tread or trample upon.

Decumbence (from decumbo) a lying or sitting down.

Decumbent (decumbens) that lies or sits down; or dies.

Decuple (decuplus) ten times so much.

Decu^y (decuria) a Band of ten Soldiers. Also it signified four or five bands
of Soldiers, each consisting of ten hundred horsemen, appointed to be
assistant to the Judges sitting upon life and death: also the Senators and
Judges were divided into Bands, called Decuriae, and the chief of them was
called Decurion. Rider.

Decurion (decurio) a Captain over ten horse; and sometimes it is used for an
Alderman or chief Burgess in a Roman Colony.

Decursion (decursio) a hasty running, a running down or unto.

Decussated (decussatus) cut or divided after the form of the letter X, or of
St. Andrews cross, which is called Crux decussata.

Decussation (decussatio) a division, cut, sawn, or carved, after the form of
four lines drawn a cross by one Center star-wise, so it makes eight even
portions.

Decutient (decutiens) that shakes or beats down.

Dedalea^. (daedale^s) intricate or perplexed, also expert or cunning. A
derivative from Daedalus an expert Artificer, who first invented the Saw, Axe,
Sail, and Sail-yards for a ship, which gave occasion for the Fable of Daedalus
his wings, etc.

Dedecorate (dedecoro) to dishonest, to dishonor or defame.

Dedentition (dedentitio) the falling or losing of teeth. Dr. Brown.

Dedignation (dedignatio) a disdaining or contemning.

Dedition (deditio) a yielding or rendering up a place besieged.

Defailiance (Fr.) a failing, languor, faintness, defect; also a fainting.

Defalcation (defalcatio) a pruning or cutting, a deducting.

Defalk (Fr. defaulquer) to deduct, deduce, abate, take out of.

Defatigable (defatigabilis) easily to be wearied.

Defatigate (defatigo) to make weary, to tire.

Def^ca^e (defaeco) to purge from dregs, to refine, to scum.

Defecation (defaecatio) a purging from dregs, a refining.

Defection (defectio) a falling away, a revolting back, an infirmity.

Defeizance, or Defeasance (from the Fr. Desfaire, i. to undo) signifies, in
our Common Law, a condition relating to an Act, as to an Obligation,
Recognizance or Statute, which performed by the Obligee or Recognizee, the act
is defeated and made void, as if it never had been done; whereof you may see at
large, West. part. 1. Sym. l. 2. sect. 156. and Shep. Epit. p. 775.

Defender of the Faith. (Defensor Fidei) is a peculiar title given to the Kings
of England by the Pope, as Catholicus to the King of Spain, and
Christianissimus to the French King. It was first given by Leo decimus to King
Henry the Eighth, for writing against Martin Luther, in behalf of the Church of
Rome. The Bull for this Title bears date quinto Idus Octobr. 1521. and may be
seen at length in the Lord Herberts Henry the Eighth, fol. 105. Stows Annals,
p. 863.

Defensat^v^, is a medicine that keeps humors from coming to a sore or place
affected, or hinders the inflammation thereof. Cotgr.

Deficient (deficiens) fainting or failing.

Definition (definitio) est oration explicans essentiam rei per genus and
differentiam; a declaring what a thing is by a Gender or something that is
common to the thing declared, and to other things also, and by a difference
only agreeing to the thing explicated, and distinguishing it from all things
else: Definition also is a Decree or Determination, as the Definition of a
Council.

Definitive (definitivus) which limits or determines.

Deflagration (deflagratio) a burning or inflammation.

Defletion (defletio) a bewayling or bemoaning.

Deflexure (deflexura) a bowing or bending.

Defloration (defloratio) a deflowring or dishonoring.

Defluxion (defluxio) a flowing or falling down of humors, a looseness.

Defeneration (defoeneratio) a taking money upon usury.

Deforsour (comes of the Fr. forceur. i. expugnator) is used in our Common Law
for one that overcomes and casts out by force, etc. See the difference between
a Def^rsour and a Desseisor, in Cowel on this word.

Defunct (defunctus) dead, ended.

Degenerate (degenero) to grow out of kind, to grow base.

Deglutinate (deglutino) to unglue or loosen.

Deglutition (deglutitio) a devouring or swallowing down; also the passage or
descending of the meat and drink from the mouth into the stomach.

Degrade (degrado) to put out of Office, to put from his degree, estate, or
dignity. In Sleidans Comment. you may read the manner of degrading Priests to
be thus. The party to be degraded is attired in his Priestly Vestments, and
holds in the one hand a Chalice filled with wine mixed with water, and in the
other a gilt patent with a Wafer or bread. Then kneeling down the Bishops
Deputy first takes from him all these things, commanding him to say no more
Masses. Secondly, scraping his fingers end with a piece of glass, he enjoins
him never to hallow any thing. And thirdly, stripping him of his Priestly
Vestments, he is clothed in a Lay habit, and so delivered into the power of the
Secular Magistrate, if his offense so require it.

Degrandinate (degrandino) to hail much.

Degree, A term often used in Astronomy and Physic. In Astronomy it signifies
the thirtieth part of a Sign (viz.) of Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc. for into so
many parts or degrees are all these Signs divided. In Physic it signifies a
proportion of heat, or cold, moisture or dryness in the nature of Simples; and
there are four such proportions or Degrees. The first Degree is so small, that
it can scarce be perceived. The second, that which manifestly may be perceived
without hurting the sense. The third, that which somewhat offends the sense.
The fourth, which so much offends, that it may destroy the body. For example,
sweet Almonds, Rice, Bugloss, ripe Grapes, are hot in the first degree:
Parsley, Saffron, Honey, in the second degree: Cummin, Galingal, Pepper, in the
third degree: And Garlic, Spourge, Euphorbium in the fourth degree. So Barley
is cold in the first degree, Cucumbers in the second, Sengreen in the third,
and Hemlock in the fourth degree. Where note, that in heat, cold, and dryness,
there may be four degrees, and in moisture but two. Bull.

Deicide (deicida) he that kills God.

Dejeration (dejeratio) a solemn swearing.

Deiformity, the form or shape of God.

Deify (deifico) to make a God.

Deipnosophists (Gr. Deipnosophista) Athenaeus his great learned books carry
that title, importing a Conference, Discourse or inter-speech among wise men at
a supper. El. Ar.

Deists. See Anti-Trinitarians.

Deity (Deitas) the Godhead or nature of God, the Divinity.

Delator (Lat.) he that secretly accuses.

A Delegate (delegatus) one to whom Authority is committed from another, to
handle and determine matters, a Deputy or Surrogate.

To Delegate (delego) to assign or appoint to an Office or charge, to send on a
message.

Delenifical (delenificus) that mitigates or makes gentle.

Deletion (deletio) a racing or blotting out, a destroying.

Deleted (deletus) scraped or put out, defaced, destroyed.

Deletorious (deletorius) that blotteth or raceth out.

Delian-twins, Apollo and Diana; the Sun and Moon: so called from the famous
Island Delos, where Latona at one birth brought forth Apollo and Diana.

Delibate (delibo) to taste, to touch, to sacrifice or diminish.

Delibrate (delibro) to pill or pull off the bark.

Delict (delictum) a fault, an offense; properly by omitting that which should
have been done.

Delignate, to rid a place of wood, to destroy wood. Fuller.

Delimate (delimo) to file, or shave off.

Delineate (delineo) to draw the form or portraiture of a thing.

Delinquent (delinquens) that has offended, failed, or left undon.

Delirium (Lat.) dotage, a going crooked or out of the right way, madness. Rel.
Med.

Delirous (delirus) that doteth and swerveth from reason. Discourse of
Enthusiasm.

Delphick sword, In the City Delphos was the Temple of Apollo, where was a
sword that served for all purposes in Sacrifices.

Deltoton (Gr.) a constellation of stars like the Greek letter (...).

Delusion (delusio) a mocking, abusing or deceiving.

A Deluge (from the Lat. diluvium^) an universal overflowing of the waters;
Noe's flood.

Demain or Demeasn (from the Lat. Dominicum, or Fr. Demain or Domain) signifies
as much as Patrimonium Domini. Hotaman in verbis feudalibus, verbo Dominicum,
by diverse Authorities, proves those lands to be Dominicum, which a man holds
originally of himself; and those to be feodum, which he holds by the benefit of
a superior Lord. But this word is now most commonly used for a distinction
between those Lands that the Lord of a Manor has in his own hands, or in the
hands of his Lessee; and such other Lands appertaining to the said Manor,
which belong to Free or Copyholders; howbeit the Copyhold belonging to any
Manor, is also in the opinion of many good Lawyers, accounted Demeasn. Cowel.

Dementation (dementatio) a making or being mad.

Demi (Fr. from the Lat. dimidium) half.

Demi chase (Fr.) half-chase, or half-hunting boots; so called by the French,
we call them Summer-riding-boots.

Demigrate (demigro) to flit or remove.

Demission (demissio) an abasement, faintness, abating.

Demit (demitto) to put or lay down, to abate in courage, to humble ones self.

Democracy (democratia) a kind of Government of a Commonweal, wherein the
people have the chief rule without any Superior or Magistrate over them, save
only such as themselves choose.

Democratical (democraticus) pertaining to a such a Government.

Democritus, A Philosopher of Abdera a City of Thracia, who was wont to laugh
at what chance or fortune soever. Hence

Democritick. Mocking, jeering, laughing at every thing.

Demolition (demolitio) a demolishment, the ruin, subversion or pulling down
of buildings, etc.

Demon (demon) a devil, a spirit, a hobgobling or hag.

Demonachation (Fr.) an abandoning or depriving of Monkish profession. Cotg

Demoniach or Demonical (demoniacus) possessed with a devil, devilish, furious.

Demonicratic. The Government of devils.

Demonologie (daemonologia) a speaking of, or consulting with the devil.

Demonstrative (demonstrativus) that which declares any thing evidently.

Denary (denarius) of or containing ten.

Dendrology (Gr.) the speaking of Trees; the title of Mr. Howels well-known
Book, otherwise called Dedonas Grove.

Deneer (Fr. Denier) a small copper coin about the tenth part of an English
penny; also a penny weight.

Denigrate (denigro) to make black.

Denizen (from the Fr Donaison, i. Donatio, aut quasi Danes-son, i. Dani
filius) is in our Common Law, an Alien enfranchised here in England by the
Princes Charter, and enabled almost in all respects, to do as native Subjects
do, namely, to purchase and possess Lands, to be capable of any Office or
Dignity. Yet it is short of Naturalization, because a stranger naturalized, may
inherit Lands by descent, which a man made only a Denisen, cannot.

Denomination (denomiratio) a naming or denoncing.

Density (densitas) thickness.

Dental (from dens, ntis) pertaining to the Teeth. Bac.

Denticle (denticulus) a little tooth; Also that part of the Chapter of a
Pillar, which is cut and graven like teeth. Vitru.

Dentifrice (dentifricium) powder, or any thing to rub the teeth with.

Dentiloquent (dentiloquus) one that speaks through the teeth, or lisps.

Dentiscalp (dentiscalpium) an instrument to scrape the teeth, a tooth-picker.

Dentition (dentitio) a breeding of teeth.

Denudation (denudatio) a laying or leaving bare, a denuding.

Denumerate (denumero) to pay ready money, to pay money down.

Denunciate (denuncio) to denounce or give warning, to proclaim.

Deobturated (deobturatus) shut or stopped from. Dr. Charl. in his Physiologia.

Deodand (deodandum) is a thing given or forfeited (as it were) to God, for the
pacification of his wrath in a case of misadventure, whereby any Christian Soul
comes to a violent end, without the fault of any reasonable creature. For
example, If a horse should strike his keeper, and so kill him: If a man in
driving a Cart, and seeking to redress any thing about it, should so fall, as
the Cart-wheel running over him, should press him to death: If one should be
felling of a tree, and giving warning to company by, when the tree were near
falling, to look to themselves, and any of them should be slain nevertheless by
the fall of the tree. In the first of these cases, the Horse; In the second,
the Cart-wheel, Cart and Horses; and in the third, the Tree is to be given to
God, that is to be sold and distributed to the poor for an expiation of this
dreadful event, though effected by unreasonable creatures. Stawnf. pl. Cor. l
1. ca. 2. And though this be given to God, yet is it forfeited to the King by
Law, as sustaining Gods person, and an Executioner in this case to see the
price of these distributed to the poor, etc. Fleta says, that this is sold,
and the price distributed to the poor, for the soul of the King, his Ancestors,
and all faithful people departed this life. l. 1. ca. 25. de submersis.

Depauperate (depaupero) to impoverish, to make or become poor.

Depeculation (depeculatio) a robbing the Commonwealth or Prince; a public
robbing.

Dependent (dependens) that hangs down, or depends upon.

Depension (depensio) a weighing a paying of money.

Depilat^ (depilo) to pull off, or take away hair.

Depilatory (depilatorius) that makes the hair fall; It is also used
substantively, for any ointment, salve, water, etc. which takes away hair.

Depilous (depilis) that is made bare, without wool, fur, or hair.

Deplantation (deplantatio) a taking up Plants.

Depletion (depletio) an emptying.

Deplication (deplicatio) an unfolding.

Deploration (deploratio) a lamenting or bewailing.

Deplore (deploro) to bewail, lament or mourn.

Deplume (deplumo) to pluck off the feathers, to unfeather.

Depolition (depolitio) a polishing, perfecting or finishing.

Deponent (deponens) laying down or aside: A Verb Deponent in Grammar is so
called, because it deposes or lays aside some of the quality of a common
Verb, that is, the passive signification, and the Participle in dus; all of
which kind end in r, as loquor, etc.

In Chancery, and other Courts of Justice we call those Deponents that are
sworn to an Affidavit, or sworn and examined upon Interrogatories, and the
Deponents answers to such Interrogatories are called Depositions.

Depopulate (depopulo) to dispeople, to spoil, waste, or destroy.

Deportation (deportatio) a conveying, a carrying away, ^n utter banishing.

Deporim^ (Fr.) behavior, demeanor, carriage.

Depositar^ (depositarius) a Keeper of that which is committed to keep in
trust, a Guardian or Fe^ssee in trust.

Deposi^e^ (depositus) laid down, put away, left in another hand or keeping.

Depositum (Lat.) a pledge or gag^, that which is committed of trust to be
kept, also a wager or stake. The whole Doctrine of our Christianity, being
taught by the Apostles, and delivered to their successors, and coming down from
one to another, is called the Depositum. Rh^m. Test. p. 534.

Depra^ (depravo) to corrupt, make crooked, to wrest.

Depredation (depraedatio) a robbing* or spoiling, a preying upon.

Deprecation (deprecatio) a praying for pardon, and putting away by prayer.

Depredable (depraedabilis) that may be robbed or spoiled.

Deprehend (deprehendo) to take at unawares, to take in the very act.

Depression (depressio) a pressing or weighing down.

Depretiate (depretio) to make the price less, to make cheaper.

Deprome (depromo) to draw, take or fetch out, to declare.

Depromption (depromptio) a drawing or bringing forth.

Depudica^e (depudico) to deflowre, to violate.

Depulsion (depulsio) a putting off, a driving away.

Depuration (depuratio) a cleansing of filthy matter from a wound, a making
clean.

Dequantitate, to lessen or diminish the quantity. Vul. Er.

Dereliction (derelictio) a leaving or forsaking.

Deric (a corruption from the Sax. Dewghtric, i. rich in virtue) a proper name,
which in Latin they call Theodericus; It is with us abusively used for a
Hangman; because one of that name was not long since a famed Executioner at
Tiburn.

Deride (derideo) to mock or laugh at.

Derision (derisio) a laughing, mocking or deriding.

Derivative (derivativus) that is derived or taken from another. As humanus,
from homo; manly, from man, etc.

Derogate (derogo) to diminish, abolish or disable, to disparage.

Derogatory (derogatorius) disparaged or derogated from, disabled, diminished.

D^r^ncin^te (deruncino) to cut off or pill away that which is superfluous.

Der^ses or De^ve^shes, a a kind of Monks, or (falsely termed) religious
persons among the Turks, that turn round with Music in their divine Service.

Desarcinate (desarcino) to unload, or unburthen, to unfraught.

Descant (discanto) to run division, or variety with the voice, upon a musical
ground, in true measure; to sing off of a ground. Transferred by metaphor to
paraphrasing ingenuously upon any affective subject.

Deschevel. See Disshevel.

Desecate (deseco) to cut in sunder, to cut off, to reap down. Sir H. Wot.

Desecrate (desecro) to discharge of his Orders, to degrade.

Desection (desectio) a cutting down.

Desiccative (from desicco) that drys up, or has the power to dry.

Desertion (desertio) a leaving or forsaking.

To Desiderate (desidero) to desire, wish or long for.

Desidious (desidiosus) slothful, lazy, sluggish.

Desipience (desipientia) is when the sick person speaks and does idly; dotage.

Despexion (despectio) a looking downwards.

Despoliate (despolio) to spoil, rob, or pill.

Despicable (despicabilis) worthy to be despised.

Despond (despondeo) to betroth or promise in marriage; also to fail in
courage, or despair. Lord Prot. Speech.

Despondency (from despondeo) a promising in marriage; also a failing in
courage, a despairing.

Despondingly (from despondeo) desperately, out of hope.

Desponsation (desponsatio) an affiance or betrothing.

Despot (despota) a Lord or Ruler of a Country; as the despot of Servia, etc.

Among the ancient Greeks, he that was next to the Emperor, either by nearness
of blood, or by institution, was by a general name called Despotes, Seld.

Despotical, of, or belonging to a Lord or Master; Lordly.

Destinate (destino) to ordain, to purpose, or design.

Destitut^on (destitutio) a leaving or forsaking.

Desuetude (desuetudo) disuse, or lack of custom.

Desultorious Desultorie (desultorius) vaulting or leaping; also unconstant,
mutable.

Desumption (desumptio) a choosing, or taking out.

Detection (detectio) an opening, discovering, or revealing.

Detenebrate (detenebro) to dispel or drive away darkness, to bring light. Br.

Detention (detentio) a withholding or keeping back, a detaining.

Deteriorated (deterioratus) made worse, impaired, spoiled.

Detersive (detersus) scoured, wiped, put away. Montagu.

Detorsion (detorsio) a turning or bending aside.

Detraction (detractio) a plucking away, a backbiting* a slander.

Detrimental (from detrimentum) hurtful, dangerous, full of loss.

Detrite (detritus) worn out, bruised, or consumed.

Detrude (detrudo) to thrust down or out.

Detrusion (detrusio) a thrusting down or out.

Detruncation (detruncatio) a cutting short, or lopping off.

Devastation (devastatio) a wasting or spoiling.

Devection (devectio) a carrying away or down.

Developed (Fr. desvelope) unwrapped, unfolded, undone, opened. It is the
proper term for spreading or displaying an Ensign in war.

Dev^xity (devexitas) the hollowness of a valley, a bending down.

Deviate (devio) to go out of the way, to go astray

Devirginate (devirgino) to defloure a Virgin; to corrupt.

Devise (Fr.) is an invention or conceit in picture, with his Motto or Word,
born as well by Noble and Learned Personages, as by Commanders in War, to
notify some particular conceit or design of their own. And is the same which
the Italians (and we also from them) call an Imprese, wherein there is required
a correspondency of the Picture, which is as the body; and the Motto, which (as
the soul) gives it life; that is, the body must be of fair representation, and
the Motto in some different language, witty, short and answerable thereto,
neither too obscure, nor too plain, and most commended, when it is an
Hemistich, or parcel of a verse; for example, one, who, as triumphing over the
force of Venus, depainted her Son, winged Cupid, in a net, with this Motto. Qui
capit, Capitur. Likewise the needle in the Sea Compass still moving, but to the
North-point only, with Move or immotus, notified the respective constancy of
the bearer to one only.

Who desires further knowledge in this ingenious Art, may ^ead The Art of
making Devises, and Camb. Remains, ti^ Impreses.

Devise, in our Law Dialect, is properly applied to the gift of Lands, as
Legacy is to the gift of Goods or Chattels in a last Will and Testament.

Drum^, the Devil, or a devilish Idol, most superstitiously adored by the
Painims of Calicut in the East In^tia's. Herb. 188.

Devoire (Fr. from the Lat. debere) duty, that which every one ought to do
according to the rule of Law and Reason.

Devolve (devolvo) to tumble or roll down. And by translation, to fall, come
or happen from one to another.

Devolution (devolutio) a tumbling or rolling down, a falling into lapse.

Deuterogamy (deuterogamia) second Marriage, or a repetition of it.

Deuteronomy (deuteronomium) the fifth Book of Moses, so called, because the
greatest part of it is a repetition of the Laws contained in the former Books,
Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers.

Deu^e^a (from deuteria) pertaining to a weak or second sort of wine, or to the
second of any kind. Dr. Br.

Deuteroscopy (Gr.) the second end, aim, or intention; a second consideration,
or thought.

Dewian of Beasts, is the hollow part, or Gorge in the throat.

Dexterity (dexteritas) aptness, promptness, readiness.

Dia, a term set before medicinal confections or Electuaries that were devised
by the Greeeks. Cotg.

Diabetical (from the Gr. diabetes) pertaining to that disease, when one cannot
make water.

Diabolical (diabolicus) pertaining to the Devil, Devilish.

Diacatholicon (Gr.) an Electuary much used in Physic, so called, because it
serves as a gentle purge for all humors. Bull.

Diacimi^on (Gr) a composition made of Simples fit to dissolve windiness in the
stomach.

Diaconal (diaconalis) of or belonging to a Deacon.

Diadem (diadema) a Kings Crown, or Wreath for the head; it properly signifies
a wreathed Head-band, with which the ancient Kings were contented, as thinking
the Crown belonged only to the Gods. Cotgr.

Diagon or Diagonal (diagonalis) a line which passes from one corner, or one
angle of a Geometrical body to another corner or angle of the same.

Diagram (diagramma) a Title of a Book, a sentence or decree: Also a figure in
Geometry; and in Music it is called a proportion of measures distinguished by
certain notes. Rider.

Diagraphick-Art (diagraphice) the art of painting or graving.

Dialectick-Art (dialectica) the Art of Logic, and a part of Philosophy, which
teaches to reason or discourse in an artificial form by Enthymems, and
Syllogisms in mood and figure.

Dialect (dialectus) is a manner of speech peculiar to some part of a Country
or people, and differing from the manner used by other parts or people, yet all
using the same Radical Language, for the main or substance of it. In England,
the Dialect in the North, is different from that in the South; and the Western
differs from both. As in this example; At London we say, I would eat more
cheese if I had it, the Northern man says, Ay sud eat mare cheese gin ay
hader, and the Western man says, Chudee' at more cheese un ich had it, or on
chad it.

The Grecians had five especial Dialects. As 1. The property of speech in
Athens, called the Attick Dialect, which was most copious and fittest for
eloquence. 2. The Ionick, which the ancient Writers most used. 3. The ^orick.
4. The Aeolick, or Bucolic, fittest for Poets. 5. The common. Heyl. So every
Country commonly has in diverse parts of it some difference of language, which
is called the Dialect or Sub-dialect of the place.

In Italy, there are above eight several Dialects or Sub-dialects, as the
Roman, the Toscan, the Venetian, the Milanois, the Neapolitan, the Calebresse,
the Genoevais, the Piomontez, besides the C^rsican, Sicilian, and other
neighboring Islands, etc. Mr. How.

Dial (dialis) pertaining to the day.

Diallel, As Parallels are lines running one by the other without meeting: So
Diallels are lines which run one through the other, that is, do cross,
intersecate, or cut. El. Ar.

Dialogue (dialogus) a communication, reasoning, or disputation between two
parties or more, or a written Discourse where such a conference is set down.

Dialogical (dialogicus) of or pertaining to a Dialogue.

Dialogism (dialogismus) a figure or discourse, when one dicusseth a thing by
himself, as it were talking with another, does move the question and make the
answer.

Diameter (Lat.) is a certain straight line drawn through the center of a
figure, and of both sides bounded in the compass of it, which cuts or divides
the figure into two equal parts. Euclid.

Diametrical (diametricus) pertaining to such a Diameter.

Diana, The Moon; Also a Goddess of hunting, much honored for her chastity,
having had many Temples dedicated to her; whereof the chief was that at
Ephesus, called the Temple of Diana; which for the spaciousness, furniture and
workmanship, was accounted one of the worlds wonders; It was 200 years in
building, contrived by Ctesiphon, being 425 foot long, and 220 broad, sustained
with 127 pillars of marble, 70 foot high, whereof twenty seven were most
curiously graven, and all the rest of marble polisht. It was fired seven times,
and lastly by Herostratus (that night in which Alexander was born) to get
himself a name. Heyl.

Diapasm (diapasma) a perfume, a pomander, a medicine of dry powders, that is
either cast among Apparel to make them smell sweet, or into a wound, or
superfluously into drink. Rid.

Diapase or Diapason (Gr.) a perfect concord of all in Music: An eighth. See a
further explanation of this in L. Bac. Not. Hist. fo. 30.

Diapente (Gr.) a concord in Music called a fifth.

Diaprid^ or Diapred (Fr. diapre) diversified with flourishes or sundry
figures, whence we call Cloth that is so diversified, Diaper. Min.

Diaphanity (from diaphanum) clearness, transparency. Vul. Er.

Diaphanous (diaphanus) clear as crystal, transparent.

Diaphony (diaphonia) a diverse sound, a discord.

Diaphonist (diaphonista) he that makes diverse sounds.

Diaphoretick (diaphoreticus) that dissolveth or sends forth humors.

Diaphragm (diaphragma) a long and round Muscle lying overthwart the lower part
of the Breast, separating the Heart and Lights from the Stomach, and the vital
parts from the natural; the Midriff.

Diarrhoetick (from diarrhoea) that has a Lask or looseness in the belly
without inflammation.

Diaty (diarium) that contains the particular actions of every day, a Journal
Book, or a book of remembrance. See Annals.

Diatessaron (Gr.) of fours; a concord in Music called a Fourth, whereof there
are four in the Scale, which compriseth fifteen strings.

Diatonick Music (diatonum) keeps a mean temperature between Chromatic, and
Enharmoniac; and may go for plain Song.

Diatr^be (diatriba) an auditory, or place where disputations, or exercises are
held.

Dibble, An instrument to set herbs in a Garden.

Dicacity (dicacitas) scoffing, taunting, or bourding, much speaking.

Dication (dicatio) a vowing, submitting, promising, or dedicating.

Dicearchy (dicaearchia) just government.

D^cear^k (dicaearchus) a just Prince.

Diceology (dicaeologia) justification by, or in talk.

Dichotomy (dichotomia) a dividing or cutting into two parts; or a division
made by two and two.

Dicker of Leather, is ten Hides.

Dictamen (Lat.) a thing written by another man's instruction.

Dictate (dicto) to appoint or tell another what, and how he shall write, which
is also used substantively, as Dictates, or Lessons which the Master indites
for the Scholars to write.

Dictator (Lat.) he that indites a thing to be written: Also a chief Ruler
among the ancient Romans, from whom no Appeal was granted, and for half a year
had a Kings power, never chosen but when the Commonwealth was in some great
danger or trouble, and at half years end, under pain of Treason, yielded up his
Office; So named, either because he only said the word and it was done, or
because he was Dictus, nominated only by one of the Consuls, and not otherwise
chosen.

Dictitat^ (dictito) to speak or tell often, or in diverse places; to plead.
Felth.

Dictature (dictatura) a pronouncing a thing to be written; The Dictatorship.

D^dascalick (from didascalus) pertaining to a M^ster or Teacher.

Didram (didrachmum) an ancient coin consisting of two drams; of our money it
values 15 d. It is used for Tribute money, Matthew. 17.24.

Didymus (from the Gr. (...). i. geminus) the name of St. Thomas, one of the
Apostles, and signifies a Twin. He was called Didymus, for being a twin, born
with some other, or for some such cause. Tr. of Mass.

Diennial (diennis) of or pertaining to two years.

Diet (diaeta) in Germany it is the same thing as a Parliament in England, a
great Assembly or Council of the States and Princes of the Empire.

Dieretick (from Diaeresis) pertaining to a division, or the figure, Diaeresis,
whereby one syllable is divided into two parts, as Evoluisse for Evolvisse. Bac.

Dietary, that treats of, or pertains to Diet.

Dietetical (diaeteticus) pertaining to (moderate) diet, such as Physicians
prescribe.

Dietical (dieticus) keeping from day to day, regular.

Dieu et mo^ dro^t (Fr.) God and my Right. The Motto of the Kings Arms, first
used (as some affirm) by Henry the Eighth.

Diffarreation (diffarreatio) a sacrifice done between a man and his wife at
Divorcement: As Confarreation was at the marriage. Rider.

Diffibulate (diffibulo) to unbutton, open or ungird.

Difficacity (difficacitas) hardness or difficulty.

Difficilitate (from difficilitas) to make difficult or hard.

Diffident (diffidens) distrustful, desperate, doubtful.

Diffluence (diffluentia) a looseness, a flowing forth or abroad.

Diffusion (diffusio) a scattering abroad, a spilling or spreading.

Digamist or Digamite ( digamus or digama) a man that has two wives together,
or a woman that has two Husbands; Also one that marries after his first Wives
death or divorce.

Digested (digestus) disposed, ordered, divided.

The Digests (digestus) a volume of the Civil Law, so called, because the legal
precepts therein, are so excellently ordered, disposed and digested.

A Digestive in Chyrurgerie is taken for that which prepares the matter to
mundification or cleansing.

Digit (Fr. digitte) a Character which expresses a figure in Arithmetic, as
V. the figure of five, an X. ten, etc.

Digitation (digitatio) the form of the fingers of both hands joined together,
or the manner of their so joining. Cotgr.

Digital (digitalis) pertaining to a finger, or fingers breadth.

To Digite, to point with the finger. Felth.

Digladiation (digladiatio) a debate, a fight, a strife.

Dignorate (dignoro) to mark, as men do beasts, to know them.

Dignosce (dignosco) to discern, to know by diverse parts. Scotch Papers.

Digression (digressio) a departing, a changing of purpose, a straying from the
matter, a swerving from.

Dijudicate (dijudico) to judge between two, to determine.

Dike-grabe, An Officer in the Low Countries, who has the oversight and
command ot the Dikes and Banks that preserve the Country from the inundation of
the Sea.

Dickins, a corruption of Devilkins, i. little Devils; as it is usually said,
the Dickins take you.

Dilacerate (dilacero) to tear or rend in pieces.

Dilariate (dilanio) the same with Dilacerate.

Dilapidate (dilapido) to rid a place of stones, to consume and spend wastfully.

Dilatable (from dilato) that may be enlarged, or made bigger, extendable.

Dilatation (dilatatio) an enlarging or making bigger.

To Dilate (dilato) to extend, or enlarge, to delay.

Dilatatory (from dilato) an inlarger; an instrument wherewith Chyrurgeons open
those parts that by sickness or other accidents are too much closed.

Dilatory (dilatorius) that delays or prolongs time.

Dilection (dilectio) love or charity.

Dilemma (Gr.) a kind of Argument called by Logicians Cornutum Argumentum,
which convinces ones adversary both ways, as in saying; If he be a good man,
why do you speak evil of him? If naught, why do you keep him company?

There is a Tradition of a Dilemma, that Bishop Morton (Chancellor to H. 7.)
used, to raise up the Benevolence to higher rates, and some called it his Fork
and some his Crote^; for he had concluded an Article in the Instructions to the
Commissioners, who were to leavy the Benevolence; That if they met with any
that were sparing, they should tell them, they must needs have, because they
laid up; And if they were spenders, they must needs have, because it was seen
in their port and manner of living. I. Bac. Hen. 7. p. 101.

Dilling (proculus) a child born when the Father is old, or the last Child that
Parents have; in some places called a Swil-p^ugh.

Dilogy (dilogia) a doubtful speech, which may signify or be construed two ways

Diloricate (dilorico) to undo, cut or rip a coat that is sewed.

Dilucid (dilucidus) clear, light, manifest, easy to be discerned.

Dilucidate (dilucido) to declare or make plain.

Dilution (dilutio) a washing, or clensing, a purging or clearing.

Diluvial (diluvialis) of or belonging to the Deluge or great Flood.

Dimension (dimensio) a measuring or compassing.

Dimetient (dimetiens) measuring.

Dimication (dimicatio) battle, fight, contention.

Dimidiate (dimidio) to divide into halves or two parts.

Diminution (diminutio) a diminishing, abating or lessening.

Diminutive (diminutivum) that which is diminished or made less; or the lesser
of that whereof there is a bigger. As Libellus, a little book, and Foemella a
little woman, are the diminutives of Liber and Foemina. So is Rivolet, of a
River.

Dinarchy (Gr.) the joint Rule or Government of two Princes.

Dioces (dioecesis) is a Greek word compounded of (...) and (...), and
signifies with us the Circuit of every Bishops Jurisdiction. For this Nation
has two sorts of divisions: one into Shires or Counties, in respect of
temporal policy; another into Diocesses, in respect of jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical. Cow.

Diocesa (dioecesanus) he that has the Jurisdiction of a Diocese; or he that
inhabites within a Diocese.

Diogenes, a Philosopher, who for his dogged disposition, was Sir-named the
Cynick. Hence it is that we call this or that man, who is of a churlish or
harsh disposition, a Diogenes.

Dionymal (dionymus) that has two names.

Dioptick Art (dioptice) the Perspective, Art, or that part of Astronomy, which
by Quadrants and hollow instruments pierces the heavens, and measures the
distance, length, bigness, and breadth of the Celestial bodies. Min.

Dioptrical, pertaining to Dioptra, which is a measure to weigh water; a
Quadrat, or Geometrical Instrument, wherewith the distance and height of a
place is known afar off, by looking through certain little holes therein: The
looking-hole or sight of any instrument. Dr. Charl.

Diple, a note or mark in the Margent to signify that there is somewhat to be
amended. Rider.

Dipondiary (dipondiarius) that is of two pound weight.

Dipsades (dipsas, adis) a kind of Snakes, whose biting (consuming the humors
of man's body) causes a mortal thirst in the party bitten.

Diphthong (diphthongus) two vowels contracted into one body or form, whereof
in the Latin tongue there are five, ae, au, oe, eu, ei.

Diptote (diptoton) a Noun that has but two Cases.

Diptyck (diptychus) having two leaves when it is opened, any thing like two
leaves.

Dire (dirus) cruel, terrible, vigorous.

Dirge (a corruption from the Latin word dirige) signifies the office of the
dead, used to be said by Roman Catholics for the souls in Purgatory, and is so
called from the first word of the first Antiphon of the office, which is Dirige.

Directory (from the Lat. Dirigo) is the name of a book introduced by the late
long Parliament in the stead of the Common Prayer Book, which was voted down on
the 26 of November, 1644. and is called a Directory, because it directs the
Ministers and people in a different way of praying, preaching, and administering
the Sacraments.

Direption (direptio) a robbing, spoiling, or ransacking of places and persons
for goods and riches, and taking it away; properly in the winning a place by
assault when all things lie open to the lust of the Conqueror. See Repudiate.

A Diribitory (diribitorium) a place wherein Soldiers are numbered, mustered,
and receive their pay; a place where the Romans gave their voices.

Dirity (diritas) cruelty, terribleness.

Diruption (diruptio) a bursting, ot breaking a sunder.

Dirutor (Lat.) he that destroys or pulls down.

Dis, a preposition used only in composition; sometimes it is a note of
privation, sometimes of diversity, sometimes of separation; and sometimes Dis
joined with another word, keeps still the same signification with the simple
word.

Discalceate (discalceo) to pull off ones shoos.

Disceptation (disceptatio) disputation, debating, or arguing.

Disceptator (Lat.) a Judge, Arbiter, or Days-man; Also he that argues or
disputes.

Discerption (discerptio) a renting in sunder.

Discession (discessio) a departing, a leaving, or going away.

Discind (discindo) to cut off or in pieces, to separate: How.

Discinct (discinctus) ungirded, dissolute, negligent.

Disciplinable (disciplinabilis) that is capable of learning or instruction.

Disclusion (disclusio) a shutting out, a separation.

Discomfiture (from the Fr. disconfiture) a defeature, overthrow, or
vanquishing.

To Discolor (discoloro) to make of diverse colors: Also to take away or fade
the color.

Discontinuity, discontinuance; a dis-joyning or separation.

Discordant (discordans) disagreeing, out of tune.

Discrepant (discrepans) differing, jarring, disagreeing, repugnant unto.

Discr^ed (discretus) severed, parted, discerned.

Discriminate (discrimino) to divide, or put a difference betwixt.

Discubation (discubatio) a lying down to sleep.

Discumbence (from discumbo) a sitting upon a bed, a lying down to sleep, a
sitting down at Table.

Discurrent (discurrens) that wanders or runs hither and thither.

Discusion (discussio) a strict examining of a matter: Also a striking or
dashing into diverse parts.

Disembogue (from the Spanish Des embocar) to cast out of the mouth, to vomit.
Among Seamen it signifies to come out of the mouth of any gulf, through a
straight.

Disgregate (disgrego) to set apart, to sever.

Disertitude (disertitudo) eloquence.

Disimbellish (from the Fr. desembeller) to disfigure, or impair the beauty of.

Dis-jugate (dis-jugo) to disjoyn, part or sever.

Disjunctive (dijunctivus) that disjoyns, or separates.

Dislocate (disloco) to remove out of his due place, to put out of joint, to
displace.

Disme (Fr.) a Tithe or tenth of.

Dispand (dispando) to stretch out or spread abroad.

Disparates (disparata) separate things, diverse, unlike. It is also a term of
Logic applied to such things as have no connection.

Disparility (disparilitas) inequality, unlikeness, difference.

Disparition (disapparitio) a disappearing, or vanishing.

Dispensaror (Lat.) a Steward, or Officer that lays out money for a household, a
dispencer or disposer.

A Dispensatory, a book that teaches how to make all Physical compositions.

Dismes (decimae) Tithe, or the tenth part of all the fruits, either of the
earth or beasts, or our labor due to God, and consequently to him that is of
the Lords lot, and has his share, viz. our Pastor. It signifies also the
tenths of all spiritual Livings, yearly given to the Prince, called a perpetual
Disme. A. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. ca. 35. which in ancient times were paid to the
Pope, till Pope Urban gave them to Richard the second, to aid him against
Charles the French King, and those other that upheld Clement the seventh against
him. Pol. Virg. l. 20. Lastly, It signifies a tribute levied of the
temporality. Holinshed. fol. 111.

Dispauper, is a word most used in the Court of Chancery, as when one is
admitted to sue in forma pauperis, if that privilege be taken from him, he is
said to be Dispaupered.

Disperpelled, a term in Heraldy when any thing of soft substance, does, by
falling from high, shoot it, self out into diverse corners or ends. Bull.

Dispicience (dispicientia) circumspection, advisement, diligent consideration.

Displ^cence (from displiceo) displeasure, dislike. Mont.

Displosion (displosio) a breaking asunder as a bladder.

Dispoliate (dispolio) to rob or spoil,

Disquamation (disquamatio) a scaling of fish, a taking off the shell or bark.

Disquition (disquisitio) a diligent search or enquiry.

Disseiti^ (from the Fr. Disseisir) signifies in our Common Law, an unlawful
dispossessing a man of his Land, Tenement, or other immovable or incorporeal
Right, etc. Instit. of the Com. Law. ca. 15.

Dissection (dissectio) a cleaving in pieces, a cutting off or asunder.

Disseminate (dissemino) to sow here and there, to spread abroad.

Dissentaneous (dissentaneus) not agreeing, disagreeing.

Dissen^rie. See Dysentery.

Dissidence (dissidentia) discord, or displacing.

Dissilient (dissiliens) leaping down off a place, or hither and thither.

Dissimilar or Dissimilary parts; (dissimilares parts) are those parts of a
man's body, which are unlike in nature one to another, as the Head, Hands, Feet,
Heart, Liver, etc. And the Similary parts are those that are of like nature, as
the Skin, Nerves, Fat, etc.

Disheviled, or Discheveled (from the French deschevele) an old word used by
Chaucer, and yet still in use, and signifies as much as bare-headed,
bare-haired, or the hair hanging down disorderly about the ears. Min.

Dischevel (Fr. discheveler) to loose, disorder, scatter or pull the hair about
the ears.

Dissipate (dissipo) to scatter or spread abroad, to disperse.

Dissipable (dissipabilis) that may be spread or scattered abroad.

Dissology (dissologia) the speech of two.

Dissoluble (dissolubilis) easy to be loosed or dissolved.

Dissonance (dissonantia) a discord in tunes and voices.

Dissyllable (dissyllabus) a word of two syllables.

Distantial (distans, antis) differing or distant, far asunder, diverse.

Distend (distendo) to stretch or reach out; to enlarge.

Distention (distentio) a stretching out, an enlarging.

Distick (distichon) a double meeter, a couple of verses a sentence contained
in two verses.

Distill (distillo) to drop down by little and little.

Distortion (distortio) a wresting, writhing or crookedness. Felth. uses the
word Distorquement in the same sense.

Distress (districtio) signifies most commonly in our Law, a compulsion in
certain real Actions whereby to bring a man to appearance in Court, or to pay
debt, or duty denied. The effect whereof most usually is, to drive the party
distrained to Replieve the distress, and so to take his action of trespass
against the distrainer, or else to compound neighborly with him for the debt or
duty for which he distrains; In what cases a distress is lawful, See The new
terms of Law, Verbo distress. Sometimes it signifies great affliction or
misery.

Districate (from the Ital. districare) to rid out of trouble or encumbrance.

Distringent (distringens) that rubs* or wipes off, or that troubles greatly.

Disveloped. See Developed.

Dithyramb (dithyrambus) a kind of Hymn or song in honor of Bacchus, who was
surnamed Dithyrambus; and the Poets, who composed such Hymns, were called
Dithyrambicks.

Dition (ditio) dominion, power, authority, mastership.

Ditty (from the Ital. detto, i. dictum) a rhyme expressed in words, and sung to
a musical tune. Min.

Divagation (divagatio) a straying or wandering about.

Dival (divalis) divine, belonging to the gods.

Divan Divano a Judgment hal, a great Court of Law or Justice among the Turks
and Persians, not much unlike or inferior to our Parliament, of which there is
one held in every Province; But the chief Divan or Tribunal of Justice is held
in the Great Turks Palace at Constantinople, the four first days of every week.
Hist. of Fran.

Divaricate (divarico) to stride or spread wide one from another.

Divelled (from Divello) pulled away, or asunder, undone, ravished. Felth.

Diventilate (diventilo) to fan or winnow Corn with a Wind-fan; also to turn
out of one hand into another.

Diverberate (diverbero) to strike, beat or cut.

Diversify (diversifico) to vary, or make diverse.

Diversiloquent (diversiloquens) that varieth or speaks diversely.

Diverticle (diverticulum) a by-way: a crafty shift.

Dividend, in the Exchequer seems to be one part of an Indenture. An. 10. Ed.
1. ca. 11. and 28 ejus. Stat. 3. ca. 2.

Dividen^ (from divido) in the University is that share which every one of the
Fellows does equally and justly divide, either by an Arithmetical or
Geometrical proportion of their annual stipend.

Dividual (dividuus) that may be severed or divided.

Dividuity (dividuitas) a division; also an aptness to divide.

Divination (divinatio) a presage or foretelling of things to come; which may
be divided into three different kinds, viz. Supernatural, Natural and
Superstitious. Supernatural Divination (only revealed to man by God) is not
properly called Divination but Prophecy, with which all the holy Prophets have
in former times been inspired.

Natural Divination, may be divided into two branches, whereof the first is
that which has in former times been practiced by wicked spirits in Oracles and
Answers given by them in Idols, and is at this day sometimes seen in possessed
persons, who by suggestion of the Devil may foretell things to come, and this is
but a Natural Divination: For though to us it seem miraculous, because of our
ignorance in the causes and courses of things, yet in those spirits it is but
natural, who by their long experience and great observation, besides the
knowledge of secrets in Nature, and their quick intelligence from all places,
are able to foresee much more, then we by nature can.

The second Branch of Natural Divination is that, which a wise man may foretell
by probable conjecture, being no way offensive* so long as it is only guided
by reason, and overruled by submitting it self to the Almighty power of God.
And to this second kind of Divination, Astrology may also be referred which (by
the motion and influence of Stars and Planets) promises to foretell many things,
so long as it keeps it self in due limits and arrogates not too much to the
certainty thereof; into which excess of vanity, if it once break forth, it is
then no longer called Natural Divination, but Superstitious and wicked; For the
Stars may incline, but not impose a necessity on particular things.

The third and last manner of Divination is that which we call Superstitious;
whereof there has been among the Gentiles diverse different kinds. As namely,
Augury, by the flying, feeding, and chirping of Birds. Alphitomancy, by Barley
meal. Auruspicy, by opening and viewing the bowels of Beasts. Necromancy, by
calling up Devils or dead men's Ghosts. Geomancy, by making certain circles and
lines in the earth. Hydromancy, by some apparition in water. Pyromancy, by the
fire, or by spirits appearing in the fire. Palmistry, or Chiromancy, by looking
on the lines of the fingers and hands. Coscinomancy, by a Sieve. Aeromancy, by
the Air. Capnomancy, by the flying of smoke. Catoptromancy, by visions in a
glass. Sorcery, or Cleromancy, by lots. Armomancy, by the shoulders of beasts.
Axiomancy, by Hatchets. Daphnomancy, by a Laurel or Bay Tree. Alectryomancy, by
a Cock. Alebromancy, by Barley meal mixed with Wheat. Botanomancy, by virtue of
herbs. Cephaleonomancy by an Asses head broiled on coals. Ceromancy, by wax put
into water. Lithomancy, by a stone. Belomancy, by Arrows. Libanomancy, by
Incense or Frankincense. Metopomancy, by the face. Necyomancy by conference
with dead bodies raised, etc.

All which being by the Pagans themselves accounted deceitful and vain, it
remains that of Christians they be utterly rejected and abhorred. Of the nature
and definition of Divination, see more in my L. Bac. advan. of learn. p. 209.

Divinize, To make divine or heavenly.

Divinipotent (divinipotens) that has power in divine things.

Divitiate (divitio) to enrich, or make rich. Felth.

D^vitiosity (divitiositas) abundance of riches.

Divorce (divortium, a diversitate mentium) the dissolution of marriage, a
separation of man and wife, which was (as our Savior witnesses, Matthew. 19.8.)
first permitted by Moses to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 24.1. for the hardness of
their hearts, that men might rather put their Wives away, whom they grew weary
of, then use them with too great extremity to shorten their lives, as many did;
The woman so divorced was to have of her Husband a writing (as St Hierom and
Josephus witness in l. de ant. 4. c. 8.) to this effect, I promise that
hereafter I will lay no claim to thee, and this writing was called a Bill of
Divorce. But with Christians this custom is abrogated, saving only in case of
Adultery. The ancient Romans also had a custom of Divorce, among whom it was as
lawful for the Wife to put away her Husband, as for the Husband to dismiss his
Wife; But among the Israelties this prerogative was only permitted to the
Husband. See Repudiate.

In our Common Law, Divorce is accounted that separation between two de facto
married together, which is a vinculo Matrimonii, non solum a mensa and thoro.
And therefore the woman, so divorced, received all again that she brought with
her. This is only upon a nullity of the marriage through some essential
impediment, as Consanguinity or affinity within the degrees forbidden,
precontract, impotency, or such like. See The new terms of Law.

Diuretical (diureticus) that provokes one to piss, that has the power or
property to make one piss, or to cause Urine.

Diurnal (diurnalis) belonging to the day, or to a Pamphlet so called.

Diurnal (diurnum) taken substantively, is a Day-book, or Register of every
days business, news, or action.

Diuturnity (diuturnitas) long space of time, long continuance.

D^vulgate (divulgo) to publish or make common.

Divulsion (divulsio) a pulling in pieces, or asunder.

Dizain (Fr.) the number of ten, the tenth: Also a Ditty of ten Stanzaes: or
Stanza of ten verses; also a French penny. And sometimes it is taken for a pair
of Beads of ten courses.

Docible (docibilis) apt to be taught.

Docibility (docibilitas) easiness to be taught, aptness to learn, quickness of
apprehension.

Docilize (from doceo) to make docible, tractable, teachable.

A Dock for ships (navale) there are two kinds of them, a dry Dock, which is
made with Floodgates, to keep out the Tide, in which ships are built and
repaired, and wherein they sit without danger. A wet Dock, which is in any
Creek or place, where a ship may be cast in out of the Tides way; and there
when a ship has made her self (as it were) a place to lie in, we say she has
Docked herself.

Docket, is a Brief in writing. An. 2. and 3. P. and Ma. c. 6. West writes it
Dogget, by whom it seems to be some small piece of paper or parchment containing
the effect of a larger writing. Sym. part. 2. tit. Fines. Sect. 106.

Doctiloquent (dictiloquus) that speaks learnedly.

Doct^rat (Fr.) a Doctorship, the state or degree of a Doctor.

Document (documentum) a lesson, admonition or example.

Dodecatemory (Gr.) a term in Astrology, signifying a twelfth part, and is most
commonly applied to the division of the Zodiac into twelve signs.

Dodeclaedron (Gr.) a figure of twelve angles or corners, a twelve-cornered
proportion.

Dodona, a City of Epirus, near which stood a Grove of Oaks only dedicated to
Jupiter, called Dodona's Grove, the Oaks were said to speak, and were wont to
give oraculous answers to those that came to consult them.

Dodrantal (dodrantalis) of nine ounces or nine inches in length or weight.

Dog Days, or Canicular days (dies caniculares) certain days in July and
August, so called of the Star Canis, or the Dog Star, which then (rising with
the Sun) is predominant and greatly increases the heat thereof. During the
time this Dog Star reigns, the River Nilus in Egypt overflowes his banks, as
though the waters were led by that star. Min. See Vul. Er. upon this subject,
fo. 221. And the first part of the Treasury of times, fo. 72.

Doge, is the title of dignity belonging to the supreme Magistrate among the
Venetians, who is also called Duke.

Dogdraw, is a manifest deprehension of an offender against Venison in the
Forest. There are four of these noted by Mr. Manw. part. 2. of his Forest Laws,
c. 18. viz. Stable-stand, Dog-draw, Back-bear, and Bloody-hand. Dog-draw is
when one is found drawing after a Deer by the scent of a Hound that he leads in
his hand, etc.

Dogmatical (dogmaticus) prudent, wise, learned, belonging to points of
learning or doctrine.

Dogmatist (dogmatistes) he that induces any new Sect or Opinion, one that
makes or would try conclusions, a forger of new Sects.

Dogmatize (dogmatizo) to impose a doctrine; to instruct or teach.

Dolation (dolatio) a smoothing or making even.

Dole (dolus) deceit, treachery, guil. If from (dolor) then grief or sorrow. We
also call Alms distributed to the poor at a Funeral, Dole, quasi Deal, from the
Sax. Daelan, i. to divide or distribute, because we deal or divide it out in
portions.

Doleance (Fr.) a waiting, lamentation, moaning or complaining.

Dollar, a Dutch coin worth about 4s. or 4s. 4d. of our money.

Dolorous (dolorosus) full of grief, sorrow, or pain.

Dolphin (Fr. Dauphin) the eldest Son of France, called so of ^aulphine, a
Province given, or (as some report) sold in the year 1349 by Humbert Earl
thereof to Philip de Valors, partly on condition, that for ever the French
Kings eldest Son should hold it (during his Fathers life) of the Empire. Cot.

Domable (domabilis) easy to be tamed.

Domestical Domestic (domesticus) pertaining to the household, tame, familiar.

Dome (from domus) a Townhouse, Guild Hall, State-house, Meeting House in a
City, from that of Florence, which is so called. Also a flat round Loover, or
open roof to a Steeple, Banqueting House, etc. Somewhat resembling the bell of
a great Watch. Merc. Ital. Also a doom, judgment or sentence; from the Sax.
Dome.

Dolyman, a Turkish Gown, long coat, or upper Garment, closed with long buttons
down to the girdle-stead.

Domicil (domicilium) a mansion house, or dwelling place.

Domination (dominatio) Dominion, Rule, or Authority over others.

Dominations, are one of the nine Quires of Angels mentioned by St. Paul, Col.
1.16.

Dominative (dominans) bearing rule or sway.

Domini or Anno Domini, is the computation of time from the Incarnation of our
Savior Jesus Christ. As the Romans made their computation from the building
the City of Rome; and the Grecians numbered their years by the Olympiads or
Games called Olympic. So Christians, in remembrance of the happy Incarnation,
and blessed birth of our Savior, reckon the time from his Nativity. See Epoch.

Dominical (dominicus) pertaining to the Lord and Master. The Dominical Letter
in Calenders is so called from a kind of pre-eminence it has above the rest
of the letters, in token whereof it is of red color, representing the purple,
which is a robe of dignity: or rather, because it shows the Dominical or Lords
day thoughout the year. Min.

Dominica^s, otherwise called Preaching or Black Friars, a religious Order
instituted by St. Dominick a Spaniard, about the year 1206. he sent his
Associates to preach the Gospel even to the furthest parts of the world then
known, which they did with great success, as their Successors since have done,
and do still even in India and America: This Order was confirmed by Pope
Honorius the Third, about the year 1216.

Domino, a kind of hood or habit for the head, worn by Canons; and hence also a
fashion of vail used by some women that mourn.

Dominicide (dominicida) he that kills his Master.

Domition Domiture (domitura) a taming or breaking.

Donary (donarium) a gift or present, properly to a holy use.

Donatists, a Sect of Heretics, so called from Donatus Bishop of Carthage, the
first broacher of the Heresy, who lived about the year 358 in the time of Pope
Liberius, and the Emperor Constantine. Their prime tenet was, that the true
Church was only in Africa, and that out of Africa there was no true Baptism;
they held also that the Son in the mystery of the Blessed Trinity, was less
then the Father, and the Holy Ghost less then the Son, with other damnable
points, etc. See Circumcellians.

Donative (donativum) a Princes benevolence or gift. A Donative Benefice, is
that which is merely given and collated by the Patron to a man, without either
presentation to, or institution by the Ordinary, or Induction by his
commandment. Fitzh. not. br. fo. 35. E. See the Statute A. 8. R. 2. ca. 4.

Donative ( donativus adjectively) that is able or apt to give.

Doniferous (donifer) that carries a gift.

Donor (in our Common Law) signifies the giver, and Donee he or she to whom a
gift is given.

Dooms-day-book, so called because upon any difference, the parties received
their doom from it. Others (less probably) say it is called Dooms-day-book,
Quasi, domus Dei Book; But to confirm the former Etymology, it is called in
Latin, Liber Judiciarius. See Ancient Demeasn.

Dorado (Span.) a thing gilded or guilt. It is used in Religio Medici fo.
135.) for a man that has a fair outside, but no qualities or good parts
within.

Dorick Dialect (dilaectus Dorica) one of the five Dialects of the Greek
tongue. Vide Dialect.

Dorick-work, is a term in Architecture, and signifies one of the five orders
of Pillars mentioned by Vitruvius. See Tuscan.

Dorick or Dorian Music (Dorica musica) a kind of grave and solemn Music, and
therefore assigned to great Personages; and so called because the Dorians first
devised it.

Dormant (Fr.) a term in Heraldry, as a Lion dormant, i. a Lion sleeping, or
lying in a sleeping posture.

Dormitive (from dormio) that causes sleep.

Dorp (Belg.) a Village or Country Town. See Thorp.

A Dorter, Dortoire or Dormitory (dormitorium) a place where many sleep
together; so was the place anciently and still is called, where religious
persons are wont to take their nights rest in their Covents, many in the same
room.

Dose (from Dosis, i. a giving) the quantity of Potion or Medicine which a
Physician appoints his Patient to take at once.

Dotkiy, A thing of small value, a kind of coin ( Stanf. pl. cor. fo. 37.) it
seems to come of the Dutch word Duytke^, that is, the eighth part of a Styfer
or French Shilling, of which Styfers ten in the Low Countries or ten Sols in
France, are of the same value with an English shilling, viz. twelve pence. Min.

Dovetaild, is a term among Joyners, and signifies that particular sort of
joining boards together; so called, when one piece of the one goes into, or
mingles with the other, and is much better, and more costly then a common,
plain, joining boards together.

Doublet (Fr.) a counterfeit Jewel or stone of two pieces joined or glewed
together.

Dotal (dotalis) belonging to a Dowry or Jointure.

Dovane (Fr. Douane) the name of the Custom-house of Lions; hence also any
Custom or Impost.

Dowager (dotata) a Widow endowed, or that has a Jointure; a title applied to
the Widows of Princes, and great Personages only.

Downs, With us has two significations; the one, certain hilly Plains in the
West Country, so called; and this Down comes from the old Saxon Dune, i. a
hill, commonly that stretches it self out in length: The other a certain part
of the Sea lying near the Sands upon the coast of Kent, where commonly our
English Navy rides; and this we borrow from the Hollanders, who call the
Sandbanks, which lie on the Seaside, the Dunes; And the Town of Dunkirk,
rightly in English, Dun-Church, took denomination from its being situate in
the Dunes or Sandbanks of the Sea. Verst.

Dower Dowry (dos) signifies in our Common Law two things. First, That which
the Wife brings to her Husband in marriage, otherwise called Maritagium,
Marriage good. Next, and more commonly, That which she has of her Husband,
after the Marriage determined, if she outlive him. Glanvile, l. 7. ca. 2.
Bracton l. 2. ca. 38. See more in Cowel. And you may see the form of a Dowry
Bill, among the Jews, in Moses and Aaron, p. 235.

Dowsets, The stones of a Stag or Buck, so called by Hunts-men.

Doxology (Gr.) a song of praise, a speaking or giving glory; as when we say,
Glory be to the Father, etc. that is properly Doxology, and is said to be
composed by the first Council of Nice, and St. Jerome to be the Author of
adding the other Versicle, As it was in the beginning, etc. View of Directory,
fo. 32, 33.

Doxy, a she Rogue, a woman man Beggar, a lowzy Queen.

Draco's Laws, Laws, which for being extreme severe and cruel, are therefore
said to be written rather with blood then ink; such are those that punish
trivial offenses with death, or some other excessive torment. So called from
^raco an ancient and severe Lawmakers in Athens.

Dram (dram) the eighth part of an ounce, it contains three Scruples, every
scruple being of the weight of twenty wheat corns: So that a Dram is the just
weight of Sixty corns of wheat. Also a piece of money among the Grecians, the
most usual whereof valued of ours ^ d. ob.

Dramatick (dramaticum) a kind of Poetry, when the persons are every one
adorned and brought upon the Theater, to speak and act their own parts. Hobbi.
See Poesy.

Drap-de berry, a thick kind of cloth so called, for that it was first made in
the County of Berry in France.

Drapery (so called of the French word Drap, i. cloth) a term which Painters
use, consisting principally in the true making and folding a Garment, in
drawing or limning, giving to every fold his proper natural doubling and
shadow. Peacham. See Silerie.

Drift or a Drift, a term aamong Watermen, and signifies the floating of a
Boat alone without any person in it, to row or steer it, but is carried to and
fro with the Tide.

Dril, a Stone-cutters tool, wherewith he bores little holes in Marble, etc.
Also a large overgrown Ape, or Baboon, so called.

Drogoman (or Draguman) an Interpreter or Truchman, the word is used by the
Turks from the Gr, (...). The Fr, write it Drogueman. See Truchman.

Drol (Fr.) a good fellow, boon Companion, merry Grig; one that cares not how
the world goes.

Drolery (Fr.) is with us taken for a kind of facetious way of speaking or
writing, full of merry knavish wit.

Dromedary (dromas, adis) a kind of Camel with two bunches on his back, very
swift, being able to carry a man 100 miles a day, and may abide three days
journey without drink.

Dropacist (dropacista) one that pulls off hair and makes the body bare.

Drudger, one that fishes for oysters; and that kind of fishing is called
drudging.

Druids (Druides) certain Prophets or learned Pagan Priests that lived naked in
woods, giving themselves to the study of Philosophy, and avoiding all company
as much as they might: they were of such estimation among the people, that all
controversies were referred to their determination, and a great penalty laid on
such as disobeyed their sentence. They believed the immortality of the Soul,
but supposed (with Pythagoras) they still passed by death, from one body to
another. Caesar lib. 6. de bello Gal. They took their name from (...), an Oak,
because they held nothing more holy then an Oak, which was also sacred to
Jupiter; or because they were wont to exercise their superstition in Oken
Groves, whence Lucan lib. 7.

-- Nemora alta remotis
Incolitis lucis, --
Ant. Hiber. p. 27. Dryads (Dryades) Nymphs of the woods, or wood Fairies.

Dual (dualis) pertaining to the number two.

Duality (dualitas) the number two, duplicity.

Duana. See Divano.

Duarchy (duarchia) a government wherein two govern jointly.

To Dub a Knight (from the Fr. Addouber, i. to dress or arm at all points) to
make a Knight, or to confer that order upon any one.

Dubiosity (from dubiosus) doubtfulness.

Dubious (dubious) doubtful, uncertain.

Ducal (ducalis) that has the conduct or leading; Dukelike, of or belonging to
a Duke.

Ducket (ducalis aurem) a certain gold coin which was first coined in Rome, in
the year of the City 547. and afterward it began to be used in other places.
So called, because it bore the image of a Duke, and is worth about six
shillings and eight pence. Pol. Virgil.

Ducenarious (ducenarius) pertaining to two hundred.

Ductarious (ductarius) that draws, leads, or guides.

Ductible (ductibilis) that may be led.

Ductile (ductilis) easy to be drawn or led.

Duction (ductio) a leading or bringing down.

Duel (duellum) a fight between two.

Dulcacid ( dulcacidus, quasi dulcis and acidus) that which has a mingled
taste with sweet and sower.

Dulcify (from dulcis and facio) to make sweet.

Dulciloquent (dulciloquus) that speaks sweetly.

Dulcimer or Dulcimel (sambuca) so called, quasi, dulce melos, i sweet melody)
a musical Instrument; A Sambuke.

Dulcarron is a proportion in Euclid ( lib. 1. Theor. 33. Propos. 47.) which
was found out by Pythagoras after a whole years study, and much beating his
brain; in thankfulness whereof, he sacrificed an Ox to the Gods; which
sacrifice he called Dulcarnon. Alex. Neckam, an ancient writer in his book De
naturis rerum, compounds this word of Dulia and caro, and will have Dulcarnon
to be quasi Sacrificium carnis. Chaucer aptly applies it to Creseide; showing,
that she was as much amazed how to answer Troilus, as Pythagoras was wearied in
bringing his desire to effect.

Dulcisonant (dulcisonus) that sounds sweetly.

Dulcitude (Lat.) sweetness.

Dulcoration (from dulcor, oris) a making sweet. Bac.

Dulocracy (dulocratia) a kind of Government, when slaves have so much license
that they rule and domineer.

Dulocratical, pertaining to that kind of Government.

Dumal (dumalis) pertaining to Briars.

Dumosity (dumositas) that has many, or is full of Brambles or Briars.

To Dun, is a word lately taken up by fancy, and signifies to demand earnestly,
or press a man to pay for commodities taken up on trust, or other debt.

Duodecennial (duodecennis) of twelve years.

Duple (duplex) double, two, twice so much

Duplicity (duplicitas) doubleness, twice so much.

Duplicate (duplico) to double, increase or make twice as much A Duplicat is
used by Crompton for a second Letters Patent, granted by the Lord Chancellor in
a ca^e wherein he had formerly done the same; and was therefore thought void.

So a second Letter written and sent to the same purpose, as the former, and to
the same party for fear of miscarriage of the first, or for other reason, is
called a Duplicat: and when such a second letter is written, to be sent, the
custom is to write the word Duplicat in the head of the Letter, to signify
that it is a second Letter. A third Letter may also after the same manner be
called a Triplicate.

Durable (durabilis) that which will last or continue long.

Dura-mater (Lat.) the outward hard skin that enwraps the brains, as Pia-mater
is the inner skin next the brains.

Dures (duritia) is in our Common Law a Plea used in way of exception, by him
that being cast into Prison at a man's suit, or otherwise by beating or threats,
hardly used, seals any Bond to him during his restraint. For the Law holds this
not good, but rather supposes it to be constrained. Brook in his Abridgment
joins Dures and Manasse together, i. Duritiam and Minas, hardness and
threatening. See the new book of Entries, verbo D^res, and the new Terms of Law.

Durity (duritas) hardness, rudeness, cruelty.

Duumvirate (duumviratus) the Office of the Duumviri at Rome, or of two in
equal Authority, and may be taken for the Sheriff-ship of the City of London,
or of any other place, where two are in joint Authority.

Dwas-light (Sax.) a false or foolish fire or light misleading the Traveller;
Jack with a Lanthorn. Sax. Dict. See Ignis fatuus.

Dwindle (Sax. Dwinan) to consume, to waste, to vanish, to moulder away by
degrees. Chaucer uses Dwined, the Participle.

Dyna, a Coin among the East-Indians valuing thirty shilling of our money. Herb.

Dynarchy. See Dinarchy.

Dynasty (dynastia) government, rule or power.

Dys (Gr.) in composition signifies evil, difficil or impossible.

Dyscracy (dyscrasia) when some humor or quality a bounds in the body, a
distemper.

Dysentery (dysenteria) a perilous flux with excoriation and painful wringing
of the bowels, and some blood issuing: the bloody flux.

Dysnomy (dysnomia) evil constitution or ordering of the Law.

Dyspathy (Gr.) ill affection, passion, or vexation of mind.

Dyspepsie (Gr.) ill concoction or digestion, rawness of the stomach.

Dysopsie (Gr.) dimness, ill sight.

E.
EAldorman among the Saxons was as much as Earl among the Danes. Came. Brit. fo.
107. Also an Elder, Senator or Statesman. And at this day we call them Aldermen
that are Associates to the chief Officer of a Town. 24. H. 8. ca. 13.

Eame (Sax.) the mothers Brother; still retained in Lancashire.

Eane (Sax. Eanian) to bring forth, as the Ewe does the Lamb.

Eardor-burh (Sax.) the Metropolis or chief City.

Easement (esamentum) is a service that one neighbor has of another by Charter
or prescription without profit, as a way through his ground, a Sink, or such
like. Kitchen. fo. 105. which in the Civil Law is called Servitus praedii.

Easter. See Pasche.

Easterling. See Sterling.

Ebene (ebenus) a tree that grows in Aethiopia, bearing neither leaves nor
fruit; it is black, and has no grain like other wood, and is sharp biting in
taste, being burnt it yields a pleasant smell, neither is its smoke offensive,
but the green wood is so full of sap, that it will flame like a candle. It is
good against many diseases of the eyes. That which grows in India is spotted
with white and yellow, being of less estimation then that of Aethiopia. Bull.

Ebionites (so called from Ebion their first founder, who lived in the time of
Pope Anaclet, and the Emperor Titus about the year of Christ 71.) were certain
Heretics that denied the Divinity of our Savior Christ, and held he was only
a man, conceived and born from man and woman, as the rest of mankind. Against
which Heresy St. John wrote his Gospel; which they impugned and rejected, as
they did also the Gospels of St. Mark and St. Luke, and only admitted that of
St. Matthew.

Ebriety (ebrietas) drunkenness.

Ebriosity (ebriositas) continual drunkenness.

Ebrious (ebrius) drunken, or that causes drunkenness.

Ebullate (ebullo) to bubble or burst out.

Ebullition (ebullitio) a boiling, bubling, or seething, a rising up in bubbles.

Ebur^ean (eburneus) of Ivory, or white like Ivory.

Eccentrick (eccentricus) that has not all one center, or that has no center,
or is out of the center.

Echo or Echo (Gr.) a resounding, or giving again of any noise, or voice in a
Wood, Valley, or Hollow place. Poets feign, that this Echo was a Nymph so
called, who being rejected by one whom she loved, pined away for sorrow in the
Woods, where her voice still remains, answering the outcrys of all complaints.

Ecclesiastical (ecclesiasticus) belonging to the Church or Churchmen.

Eclesiastick (Ecclesiastes) a Preacher, a Churchman.

Eclipse (eclipsis) a defect or failing. Commonly it signifies a want of light:
and there are two such Eclipses, namely of the Moon, and of the Sun.

Eclipse of the Moon never happens but at her full, nor then always, but when
she is in such a point that the interposition of the earth deprives her of the
Sun beams, from whence she takes her light. Eclipse of the Sun is not so
usual, and happens only at the change of the Moon, as when the Moon, being
between the Sun and us, does, with her dark body, hide part of his light from
us: Which was the cause that Dionysius Areopagita (seeing the Sun so admirably
eclipsed at our Saviors Passion, contrary to all reason, when the Moon was not
in any nearness to hinder his light) cried out in amazement. Aut Deus naturae
patitur, aut machina mundi dissolvetur. Either the God of Nature suffers, or
else the frame of the world will be destroyed. Bull.

Ecliptic line (linea Ecliptica) an imagined line running through the midst of
the twelve Signs, in which the Sun always keeps his course, and is so termed,
because the Eclipses happen, when the Moon is either in conjunction or
opposition under this line. Min.

Eclogue or Eglogue (ecloga) is commonly taken for a Pastoral speech, or a Poem
containing a communication of Shepherds, such as Virgils Eclogues. But the word
in Greek signifies properly an election or choice gathering of things together,
or an abridgement of Authors.

Ecstasy (ecstasis) a trance, swowning or astonishment, a ravishment or
transportation of the spirit, by passion, etc.

Ecstatick Ecstatical (ecstaticus) taken with an Ecstacy or trance.

Ectype (ectypum) a thing made according to the example and copy; a
counterfeit. Ross.

Edacity (edacitas) unsatiable eating, greediness of stomach. Bac.

Eddy, Is the running back of the water in some place, contrary to the Tide or
stream, and so falling into the tide again, which happens by reason of some
head-land or point in a River, jutting out suddenly, and so hindering the full
current which the water had before it came to that Point. And an Eddy wind, is
that wind, which recoils from any Sail, or Halse going contrary to that wind
whence it proceeds, but is never so strong as the other.

Eden (Hebr.) delectation, or a place of pleasure and delight. The Garden of
Eden stood near the River Euphrates in Syria, and abounded with all manner of
pleasures and delights, and therefore Eden is used for Paradise.

Edentate (edento) to strike out, or draw out ones teeth.

Edict (edictum) a Commandment, Ordinance or Proclamation.

Edification (aedificatio) a building: But most commonly it is taken for
instruction, so plainly delivered, that the hearer profits by it.

Edifice (aedificium) from the Hebr. (...) Edhen. i. aedes) a building or frame
of a building, also the art of building.

Edil or Aedil (aedilis) an inferior Officer among the ancient Romans, whose
charge was to register Sanctions, oversee the Building of Temples, as also of
private houses, such as our Churchwardens, or Surveyors, etc. And of these
Aediles there were two sorts, Plebeii and Curules, as you may read in Godwins
Anthol. chapter de Aedilibus.

Edish (Sax. Edise) the rowen or aftermash; still retained in some parts of
England.

Edisserator (Lat.) a shewer or declarer.

Edition (editio) a setting forth, a publishing, an impression. As of Books, we
call it a first, a second, third, fourth, etc. Edition, when a book has been so
many several times imprinted.

Edituate (aedituor) to defend the house, or rule over the Temple or house.
Greg.

Edmund (Sax.) for Eadmund, i. happy or blessed peace. Our Lawyers do yet
acknowledge Mund^ for peace, in their word Mundbrech, for breach of Peace.

Educate (educo) to bring up or nourish.

Edward in Sax. Coins Eadward, i. Happy keeper. The Christian humility of King
Edward the Confessor brought such credit to this name, that since that time it
has been most usual in all Estates: That Ward signifies a keeper is apparent
by Wood-ward, Mil-ward, etc. Came.

Effable (effabilis) that may be spoken, uttered or expressed.

Effascinate (effascino) to bewitch or charm.

Effemination (effoeminatio) a making womanish, weak or or wanton, a womanizing.

Effete (effoetus) which has lately brought forth; that bears no more,
barren. Fuller.

Efficacy (efficacia) force, strength, virtue or ability.

Efficacy (says Peacham) is a power of speech, which represents a thing after
an excellent manner, neither by bare words only, but by presenting to our
minds the lively Idaea's or forms of things so truly as if we saw them with our
eyes; As the places in Hell, the fiery arrow of Acesta, the description of
Fame, the flame about the Temples of Ascanius, etc.

Efficient (efficiens) that brings to pass, causing or effecting.

Effiction (effictio) an expressing or representing.

Effigies (Lat.) an image made after the similitude of a thing; likeness,
representation.

Efflagitate (efflagito) to desire earnestly, or require importunately.

Efflated (efflatus) breathed or blown away, yielded, or given up. Herb.
Travels.

Efflorescence (from Effloresco) the outward face, or superficies, the upmost
rind or skin of any thing, also a deflouring. Bac.

Effluence (effluentia) a running or flowing out, a flux.

Effluent Effluous (effluus) that runs or flows out.

Effluvium (Lat.) a running out or flowing over. Often used in Vul Er.

Effocate (effoco) to choke, or strangle.

Effoeminate (effoeminatus) woman-like, nice, wanton.

Effort (Fr.) endeavor, labor, travel, pains-taking, a striving for a matter
with whole force and power.

Effracture (effractura) a breaking open.

Effrenation (effrenatio) headlong rashness, unbridled rashness, unruly
headiness.

Effrontery (Fr.) impudence, malepertness, shamelesness. Eicon Basil.

Effund (effundo) to pour out, to consume riotously.

Effusion (effusio) a pouring out, prodigality.

Egbert, or rather Ecbert (Sax.) i. always bright, or famous for ever.

King Egbert, who was the seventeenth King of the West Saxons, having subdued
the Principal Kingdoms of the Saxon Heptarchy, styled himself the first English
Monarch, commanding South Britain to be called England, from the English
Saxons, from whose blood he was extracted, and over whom he reigned. Came.

Egean Sea (mare Aegaeum) part of the Mediterranean Sea near Greece, dividing
Europe from Asia. A Sea dangerous and troublesome to sail through, in regard of
the multitude of rocks and Islands every where dispersed; Insomuch that a man
is proverbially said to sail in the Aegean Sea, that is encumbered with
difficulties, or attempts a business of much hazard.

Egestion (egestio) a distributing abroad, a carrying or casting forth of
ordure or dung, a voiding, or evacuation.

Egestuosity (egestuositas) extreme poverty.

Egestuous (egestuosus) very poor or needy.

Eglentine, Sweet-briar, or Dog-briar.

Egilopical (egilopicus) that has or pertains to the disease Aegilopa, which
is a kind of Fistula or Imposthume in the corner of the eye, growing to be a
Canker, eating to the nose, and is called the Lachrymale Fistula. Bid.

Eglogue. vide Eclogue.

Eglomerate (eglomero) to unwinde.

Egregious (egregius) excellent, singular, passing good.

Egresse Egression (egressus) a passage or going forth.

Egritude (aegritudo) sickness, grief, coffeehouse.

Egrimony (aegrimonia) idem.

Egurgitate (egurgito) to draw out, to empty, to disgorge.

Ejaculate (ejaculo) to shoot or cast out, to hurl forth.

Ejaculatorie (ejaculatorius) that has the property or power to dart, shoot,
or spout forth.

Ejection (ejectio) a throwing or casting forth.

Eirenarch (Eiranarches) a Justice of Peace.

Eirenarchy (Irenarchia) the Office or Government of a Constable, or a Justice
of Peace. Mr. Lamberd wrote a book called Eirenarchie, or the Office of a
Justice of Peace.

Eigne (Fr. Aisn, eldest) a Law term; as Eign right is the eldest right, where
there are more Titles then one. Act. of Parl. 30. April. 1649.

Ejulation (ejulatio) wailing or crying out with pitiful lamentation.

Ejuration (ejuratio) a renouncing or resignation.

Ela, the highest note in the Gamut.

Elaborate (elaboratus) cunningly wrought, exactly done, labored painfully.

An Elaboratory, a Workhouse.

Elacerate (elacero) to tear or rend in pieces.

Elamites, the people of Persia, so called from Elam, son of Sem, son of Noah.

Elapidate (elapido) to rid a place of stones.

Elapsion (elapsio) a fliding forth or away.

Elaqueate (elaqueo) to unsnare or dis-intangle,

Elate (elatus) carried out, advanced, proud, lofty.

Elaxate (elaxo) to unloose or make wider.

Eleack, a Sect of Philosophers instituted by Phaedo, an Elean, of a noble
family.

Eleanor, a woman's name from Helena, i. pitiful.

Electorat, An Electorship, a choosing or electing, or the right or power of
election; such as the Electors of the Empire have. Also the Office or territory
of an Elector.

Elective (electivus) pertaining to election or choosing, subject to choice.

Electriferous (electrifer) that yields Amber.

Electrum (Lat.) a kind of Amber distilling out of the Poplar tree, as some
report: the Poets faign it to have been the tears of the Phaetontiades (which
were turned into Poplar trees) bewailing their brother Phaeton. See Amber.

Electricity (electrisitas) the power to attract straws or light bodies, as
Amber does.

Electrine (electrinus) pertaining to, or that is made of Amber.

Electuary (electuarium) a medicine or confection to be taken inwardly, and is
made two ways, either liquid, as in Forma opiat^; or whole, as in Tables or
Lozenges, or in fashion four square and long, which is called Manus Christi.

Or it is a medicinable composition, made of choice Drugs, and of substance
between a Syrup and a Conserve; but more inclinable to this, then that. Cot.

Eleemosynary (eleemosynarius) an Almner, or one that gives alms.

Eleemosynate (eleemosyno) to give alms.

Elegancy (elegantia) eloquence of words, fineness, neatness.

Elegy (elegia) a mournful song or verse, commonly used at Funerals, or upon
the death of any person, and composed of unequal verses.

Elegiacal (elegiacus) belonging to an Elegy or lamentation.

Elegiographer (elegiographus) a writer of Elegies, or lamentable verses.

Elements (elementa) are the most simple bodies extant in nature; from the
several participation of whose qualities all mixed bodies have their several
beings, and different constitutions; they are four in number, to wit, Fire,
Air, Water and Earth. Element in the singular number stands for one of those:
sometimes also it signifies a Letter, as A, B, C, sometimes the first
foundation or Principle of a thing.

Elementary (elementarius) pertaining to, or which consists of Letters,
Principles or Elements.

Elench (elenchus) an argument subtly reproving.

Elenchical, that reproves by argument.

Elenct^s Elenctical (elencticus) which serves for reprehension.

Elephantine (elephantinus) pertaining to an Elephant.

Elevate (elevo) to lift or hold up, to lighten.

Elevatory (from the Lat. elevo, to lift up) the instrument wherewith
Chyrurgeons lift up the broken and sunk-in parts of the skul, and draw out
Bullets or hail-shot that is entered but a little way into the flesh or bones.

Elibation (elibatio) a tasting or offering Sacrifices.

Elicitation (elicitatio) a drawing out or alluring.

Elide (elido) to hit against a thing, to dash, to break, to squeeze, to
strangle.

Elicite (elicitus) drawn out or allured.

Eligible (elegibilis) to be elected; fit or like to be chosen.

Eliminate (elemino) to put out or cast forth of doors, to publish abroad. Mont.

Elimate (elimo) to cut off with a file, to polish, or purge.

Elingued (elinguis) dumb, speechless. Felth.

Ellipsis (Gr.) a defect; also a certain crooked line, coming of the
byas-cutting of a Cone or Cylinder.

Eliquament (eliquamentum) fatness* or juice of fish or flesh.

Elixation (elixatio) a seething or boiling.

Elision (from elido) a cutting off.

Elizabeth (Hebr.) the God of oath, or (as some will) Peace of God, or quiet
rest of the Lord. Mantuan playing with it makes it Eliza-bella. Min.
ridiculously compounds it of the Hebrew word El, i. Deus, and the Greek word
Isa and Beta.

Elixer or Elixir (vox Arabica) quentessence, or the Philosophers stone, or one
of the names thereof: some take it for the Chemical powder of production: the
word originally signifies force or strength. Min.

Elocution (elocutio) a fit and proper order of words and sentences.

Elocution (says Judge ^oddridge) consists of three things. 1. Of the voice,
as the instrument. 2. The words, that are the subject. 3. The manner of doing,
which is the form of delivery, etc. English Lawyer, fo. 25.

Ellis (Hebr.) corruptly for Elias, i. Lord God.

Elohim (Hebr.) Nomen divinum, a Judicio, quasi Deus Judex. In any process of
Justice and Judgment, God always styles himself Eloah or Elohim. Greg.

Elogy (elogium) a report or testimonial of ones praise or dispraise.

Elongate (elongo) to remove afar off, to defer or prolong. Vul. Err.

Elopement (a Law term) is when a married woman leaves her Husband, and dwells
with the Adulterer, by which, without voluntary submission, and reconcilement
to him, she shall lose her Dower; Stat. Westminster. 2. c. 34.

Sponte virum mulier sugiens, and adultera facta,
Dote sua careat; nisi sponso sponte retracta.
Eloquence (eloquentia) a gift or good grace of speaking. That is properly said
to be Eloquence (according to Tully) where there is a judicious fitting of
choice words, apt and grave sentences to mattter well disposed, the same being
uttered with a comely moderation of the voice, countenance and gesture. Cic. in
Prol. Rhetor.

Elucidaries (from elucido) expositions or declarations of things that are
obscure.

Elucidate (elucido) to make bright, to shine outward, to manifest, to expound
or express.

Elucubrate (elucubro) to watch and write by candlelight.

Elutheria, Feasts dedicated to Jupiter, from whence he is called the
Elutherian God.

Elychnious (from E, and lychnus) that has no match or light; without a weik.

Elysium or Elysian fields (Campus Elysius) a Paradise, into which the Heathens
believed the Souls of the just went after their departure hence. This Elyzium
is meant by Virgil, when he says, Devenere locos laetos, and amaena vireta
Fortunatorum nemorum, sedesque beatas.


Emaceration (emaceratio) a pulling down or making lean.

Emacity (emacitas) a desire to be always buying.

Emaciate (emacio) to make lean, or pull down the flesh.

Emaciating diseases, Consumptions, or such like.

Emaculate (emaculo) to make clean, to take away spots.

Emanation (emanatio) a flowing or proceeding from.

Emancipate (emancipo) to make free, to set at liberty, to affranchize, or sell
his title to another. By the Roman Law every Son was in such subjection to his
Father, that before he could be released of it and made free, he should by an
imaginary sale, be sold three times by his natural Father, to another man, who
was called by the Lawyers Pater Fiduciarius, a Father in trust; yea and be
bought again by the natural Father, and so manumised by him, and then he became
free. This imaginary sale was called Mancipatio; the children thus alienated
from the Father, were termed Emancipati; this form of setting free was termed
Emancipatio. Godwin.

Emanuel. See Emmanuel.

Emarginate (emargino) to take away the scurf about the brims of wounds and
soars.

Emascu^a^ (emasculo) to geld, to take away that by which one is male.

Embargo (Span.) a stop or arrest, properly of ships.

Ember wick (so called from the Gr. (...), i. dies; of which there are four in
the year set down in most Almanacks. They are of great antiquity in the Church,
called the Quatuor tempora in the Latin Fathers; And (besides the first
institution of them for quarterly seasons of devotion, proportioned to each
part of the year, as the first fruits of every season, that the whole and each
division of it might be blessed by it, and again beside their answerableness to
those four times of solemn fast, mentioned among the Jews, that we Christians
may not be inferior to them in that duty) an admirable use is assigned to them
in the Church in imitation of the Apostles, Act. 13.3. View of Directory, fol.
56. They are called Ember-days, or days of ashes, (says another Author) from
the no less ancient then religious custom of eating nothing on those days till
night, and then only a Cake baked under the Embers or ashes which they called
panem subcineritium, or Ember-bread. Turb. Cat. But Sir Hen. Spelm. de Council
says the true word is Imber from the old Sax. Imbren.

Embellish (Fr Embellir) to beautify, garnish, adorn, bedeck, trim up, or set
out unto the eye.

To Embezel ( forte ab Ital. Invaligiare, i. in sacco ponere) to steal or
pilfer. Min.

Emblem (emblema) is properly any fine work cunningly set in wood or other
substance, as we see in Chessboards and Tables, notwithstanding it is commonly
taken for a sweet moral symbol consisting of picture and words, by which some
weighty matter is declared. See Art of making Devises, p. 7.

Emblematical (emblematicus) pertaining to an Emblem.

Emblematist, he that makes Emblems.

Emblements, a Law term, signifying strictly the profits of Land which has
been sowed; but the word is sometimes used more largely, for any profits that
arise and accrue naturally from the ground, as grass, fruit, or trees, hemp,
flax, etc. Mr. Shep.

Embolism (embolismus) the adding a day or more to a year, Leap-year.

Embo^ment (Fr. embouchement) a mouthing or putting into the mouth of; a
subornation or fore-Instruction; a lesson given or conned beforehand.
Malvezzies translater.

Embos^, A term used by hunters when a Deer is so hard chased that he foams at
the mouth, and hangs out the tongue; it comes from the Span. des embocar, i. to
cast out of the mouth.

Embracer, A Law term, and is he that, when a matter is in trial, comes for
reward to the Bar, being no Lawyer nor witness, and speaks in favor of one of
the parties: or who labors the Jury, or uses any unlawful practice, to make
them give their Verdict as he would have them.

Embrocation (Ital. embrocatione) a fomenting, besprinkling or gentle bathing
the head or any other part, with a liquor falling from aloft upon it, in the
manner of rain.

Embryon (embryo) a child in the mothers womb, before it has perfect shape; and
by Metaphor, any thing before it has perfection.

Embryous, pertaining to an Embryon.

Em^uschment (from the Fr. embouscher) a falling into the Sea, as a River does.

Emendal^, (from emendo) is an old word, yet still used in the accounts of the
Inner Temple; where so much in Emendals at the foot of an account, signifies fo
much in bank or stock for the House, q. a mending or increasing the common
purse.

Emendation (emendatio) an amending, mending, reformation or correction.

Ementition (ementitio) a lying or forging.

Emergency (from emergo) an issuing or coming out, a rising up out of the water.

Emergent (emergens) issuing or running out: this word is often used when we
speak of an Emergent occasion, which is, when it rises out of somewhat done
before.

Emerald (from the Span. esmeralda, Lat. Smaragdus) a precious stone, the
greenest of all other, and is therefore very comfortable to the sight. The best
of this sort are brought out of Scythia, and some affirm them to be taken out
of the Griffins nest. It is found by experience (as Albertus writes) that if
the Emrald be good, it inclines the bearer to chastity, and cannot endure the
action of lust. There is also a disease sounding near this word, for which see
Hemorroide.

Em^tique (from the Gr.) vomiting.

Emigration (emigratio) a departing, a going from one place to live at another.

Emication (emicatio) a shining or appearing aloft.

Eminency (eminentia) excellency passing or standing above others. Also a
particular title of honor given to all Cardinals, and is held to be above
Excellency.

Emissary (emissarius) a suborned accuser, a Spy, a Talebearer, one sent out,
a Scout.

Em^rsion (from emergo) a rising or appearing out, a coming out.

Emission (emissio) a shooting, sending or casting forth.

Emit (emitto) to send forth, to publish abroad, to cast out.

Emmanuel (Hebr. God with us) one of the names under which our Savior Christ
was foretold by the Prophets, Isa. 7.14. Matthew. 1.23. The union of two natures
in one person of our Redeemer is noted in this word, Joh. 1.14.

Emollid (emollidus) soft, tender, nice, effeminate.

Emollient (emolliens) a making soft, pliant or loose Emollient medicines, i.
mollifying or asswaging, such are milk, honey, etc.

Emo^ument (emolumentum) profit gotten by labor and cost

Emotion (emotio) a stirring or moving forth.

Empale. See Impale.

Empanel, A Law term and signifies the writing or entering the names of a Jury
into a Parchment Schedule, Roll or paper by the Sheriff, which he has summoned
to appear for the performance of such public service as Jurors are employed in.

Emparl^nce (from the Fr. parler, to speak) signifies in our Common Law a
desire or petition in Court, of a day to pawse what is best to do, or of a day
of respite. The Civilians call it Petitionem induciarum.

Emphasie (emphasis) earnestness, or an express signification of ones
intention, a strong or vigorous pronuntiation of a word, a significant force in
either.

Em^ical (emphaticus) that which is uttered with most express signification, in
such sort, that it sets forth to the full the intent of the Speaker; forcible,
vigorous, earnest, or done with an Emphasie.

Emphyteuticary (Emphyteuticarius) he that makes a thing better then it was
when he received it, that raises his rents, or improves. Mr. Seld.

Emphyte^icy (emphyteuticus) set out to farm, hire, or rent.

Empirick (Empiricus) a young and unskilful Physician, who without regard
either of the cause of the disease, or the constitution of the Patient, applies
those Medicines, whereof either by observation of other men's Receipts, or by
his own practice, he has had experience from some other, work they how they
will.

Empirically (empirice) done like an Empirick, unskilfully, done by practice
only, without Theory.

Emplastration (emplastratio) a plastering, or dawbing, a graffing by
inoculation; And in Physic, the applying a salve or plaster.

Empory (emporium) a Mart-Town, a place wherein a general Fair or Market is
kept.

Emporetical (emporeticus) pertaining to Merchants or Markets.

Emprimed, A term used by Hunters when a Heart first forsakes the Herd.

Emption (emptio) buying or purchasing.

Emptional (emptionalis) that may be bought or purchased.

Emptory. See Empory.

Empyreal (empyraeus) fiery or burning. The Empyreal Heaven is the highest
Heaven above the Firmament; so called because of the bright shining or fiery
splendour of it; the Mansion or dwelling place of God, and his Elect.

Emrods. See Hemerrhoide.

Emucid (emucidus) very filthy, moldy or unclean.

Emulate (aemulo) to strive to exceed, also to envy or disdain.

Emulgent ( emulgens, from emulgeo) milking or stroaking. The Emulgent vein is
one of the two main branches of the hollow vein, which goes to the reins, and
there is divided into diverse others; some call it the Pumping vein.

Emulsion (emulsio) any kind of seed, etc. brayed in water, and then strained
to the consistence of an Almond milk; also any kind of Cream, or milky humor.

Emunctories (emunctoria) certain kernelly places in the body, by which
principal parts void their superfluities; as under the Armpits for the Heart,
under the Ears for the Brain, and the Groin for the Liver. Also a pair of
Snuffers.

Enargy (enargia) evidence, clearness, or a plain representing of a thing.

Encaustick (encausticus) enameled, wrought with fire, varnished.

Encheson ( A. 50. E. 3. c. 3.) is a Law French word, signifying as much as
occasion, cause, or reason, wherefore any thing is done. See Skene de verb. sign.

Enchiridion (Gr.) a small Manual Book that one may clasp or carry in ones
hand, a handful of a thing.

Enclitick Enclitical (encliticus) that inclines or gives back. Enclitical
Conjunctions in Grammar are so called, because they incline or cast back the
accent to the syllable going before, of which sort are these three, que, ne,
ve, which are joined to the end of other words. As in this verse of Horace,
Indoctusque pilae, discive, trohive, quiescit,

Encomium (Lat) a praise or song in commendation of any person.

Encomiastick (encomiasticus) belonging to, or one that writes, an Encomium;
praising, commending, extolling.

Encrochment, a Law term, as when two men's grounds lying together, the one
presses too far upon the other, or when a Landlord takes more rent or services
of his Tenant then of right is due; they are called Encroachments, etc.

Encyclical (from encyclides) pertaining to that learning, which comprehnds all
Liberal Sciences; round. Dr. Ham.

Encyclopedy (encyclopaedia) that learning which comprehends all Liberal
Sciences; an Art that comprehends all others, the perfection of all knowledge.

Enditement (indictamentum) comes of the French word Inditer, i. to accuse, or
appeach, and is a Bill or Declaration made in form of Law (for the benefit of
the Commonwealth) of an accusation for some offense, either criminal or penal,
exhibited to Jurors, and by their verdict sound and presented to be true,
before an Officer having power to punish the same offense.

Endorsed, a term in Heraldry, when two beasts are painted with their backs
turned to each other. Also we call that endorsing, when we write the title on
the outside of a Letter.

Endrome (endromis) a course long-wool'd mantle, which Wrastlers and Runners
flung upon them when they were anointing, and after they had exercised.

Energy (energia) efficacy, effectual operation or strength.

Energetical, very forcible, or effectual.

Enervate (enervo) to weaken, to cut off sinews; to enfeeble.

Enervity (enervitas) weakness, feebleness.

Enfranchise (from the Fr. Enfranchir) to make free, to incorporate a man into
any Society or Body Politic, to make one a free Denizen.

Engastrimuches (engastrimuchi) w^ those, that being possessed, seemed to speak
out of theit belly.

England (Sax. Engla-land) was so first named (after the common opinion) by
Egbert the first sole and absolute Monarch of the English men.

Engonas^ or Engonnas^, (the name of one of the Constellations) commonly taken
for Hercules, who in the Globe is figured with his right knee bent, in the
manner of kneeling, and with his left foot treading part of the head of the
Dragon. Min.

Engyscope (from the Gr.) an instrument for discerning the proportion of small
things.

Enharmoniack (enharmonion) one of the three general sorts of Music; song of
of many parts, or a curious concent of sundry Tunes.

Enigma (Aenigma) a Riddle, a dark speech, or intricate sentence.

Enigmatical (aenigmaticus) obscure, hard to understand, full of Riddles.

Enigmatist (aenigmatistes) he that makes or propounds Riddles or hard
questions.

Ennead (enneas, adis) nine, the number of nine.

Ennealogue (Gr.) a speaking or treating of nine points; an Oration or Treatise
divided into nine parts or Chapters.

Enoch or Enos pillars. The story runs shortly thus; Enos (the son of Seth the
son of Adam) who is held to be the first Author of Astrology, having heard his
Grandfather Adam say, all things should be destroyed by the universal Flood,
was desirous that Science should not perish, before it came to the knowledge of
men, did therefore erect two Pillars, one of stone, the other of brick, to the
intent, if the brick wasted with water or storms, yet the stone should preserve
the Letters whole and perfect; and in these Pillars were graved all that
concerns the observations of the stars, etc. one of which Josephus affirms
remained even in his time. See Astronomy.

Enodate (enodo) to unknit, to cut away the knot; to declare or make manifest,
to untie.

Enormit^ (enormitas) want of measure or rule, unevenness, hugeness.

Ensiferous (ensifer) that bears or carries a Sword.

Enquest (Inquisitio) is in our Common Law especially taken for that
Inquisition or Enquest of Jurors or by Jury, which is the most usual trial of
all causes, both criminal and civil in our Land.

Entaile (feudum talliatum) comes of the Fr entaille And in our Common Law is a
Substantive abstract, signifying Fee tail, or Fee entailed. See Fee and Tail.

Entelechie (entelechia) a soul or form that has power or motion within
herself.

Entendment (Fr.) wit, or understanding. It signifies in our Common Law so much
as the true meaning or signification of a word or sentence. Of which see Kitch.
fo. 224.

To Enterfeir (from the Lat. inter and ferire) to rub or dash one heel against
the other, to exchange some blows.

Enthalamize (from Thalamus) to bring the Bridegroom and Bride to their
Bedchamber.

Enthean or Entheater (entheatus) inspired with God.

Enthusiasts or Enthusiasi^s, a Sect of people that thought themselves inspired
with a Divine Spirit, and to have a clear sight of all things they believed,
etc.

Spondanus says, they sprung from the Anabaptistical Sect of Nicholas Stork of
Silesia in the year 1522.

Enthusiasm or Enthysiasm (enthysiasmus) an inspiration, a ravishment of the
spirit, divine motion, Poetical fury.

Enthys^asmica^, pertaining to an inspiration.

Enthymeme (enthymema) is a term of Logic, and signifies an imperfect
Syllogism, which wants either the major or minor Proposition; As for example.

Every sin deserves correction.
Every theft is a sin.
Therefore every theft deserves correction.
Now if we leave out the first part (called the major) and say thus, Every
theft is a sin: Therefore every theft deserves correction Or omit the second
part (called the minor) and say, Every sin deserves correction: therefore every
theft deserves correction; then it is called an Enthymeme, to wit, a keeping in
the mind (for so the word properly signifies) because one of these parts is
concealed in the mind, and not uttered; and in that regard it is called
truncatus Syllogismus, a lame or maimed Syllogism.

Enthymematical, pertaining to an Enthymeme.

Entitatively (entitative) a term in Philosophy; and is when a thing is taken
according to its essence, form or being.

Entitie (entitas) a being or subsistence.

Enucleate (enucleo) to take out the kernel, to declare or explicate a
difficulty, to interpret or expound.

To Envelope (Sp. Enveloper) to wrap, unfold, involve or enclose; also to
poster or incumber.

Enumerate (enumero) to reckon up, to declare, to number.

Enunciative ( enunciatum, Subst.) any thing pronounced or spoken, a
proposition or speech, which simply affirms or denies any thing, as to say,
Peter is a Scholar, Peter is no Scholar.

To Enunciate (enuncio) to pronounce, utter, or reveal.

Enure. See Inure.

Eolian, pertaining to Aeolus, the god of the winds; also inconstant as the
wind.:

Epact (epacta) the day put to or added to make the Leap year; or it is a
number of eleven days, in which the common Solar year exceeds the common Lunar
year, the one consisting of 365 days, the other of 354 days, and therefore they
add the excess unto the Lunar year to coequal them; For Epacta comes from
(...), which signifies intercalare or addere; by the addition of which excess
in every four years, there is gotten a number more then 30, which is greater
then the Epact can be, because from Change to Change there can be but Thirty
days; therefore Thirty must be taken from that excess, and the remainder is the
Epact for the next year; As 1659. the Epact is Seventeen, whereto add Eleven,
which makes Twenty eight, that is the Epact for the next year.

To get the Epact for ever do thus; Multiply the Prime by Eleven, parting the
Product by Thirty; and the Remainder is the Epact: Or see the age of the Moon,
the Eleven Kalends of April, for that is the number of the Epact. Hop. Concord.

Epatride, were Noble men among the Athenians, and held the like dignity with
them as the Patricii did at Rome.

Eparch (Eparchus) the President of a Province, or the chief of all the
Provincial Presidents.

Epheby (ephebus) a Stripling of fourteen years of age and upwards.

An Ephemeran or Ephemerides (ephemeris, idis) a book wherein daily Acts are
registered, a Journal or Diary: commonly it is taken for a book of Astronomy (in
use among such as erect figures to cast men's Nativities) by which is shown how
all the Planets are placed, every day and hour of the year.

Ephemeridian, belonging to such a Register or Day-book.

Ephemerist, One that registreth daily actions, or one that casts Nativities,
with the help of an Ephemerides; a maker of an Ephemerides.

Ephesian Temple, i. The Temple of Diana at Ephesus. See Diana.

Ephesian Moan, may be taken for a sad and continual lamentation, and is
deduced from Heraclitus, a Philosopher of Ephesus, who always wept at the
miseries of the world, and mortal men. The phrase is used by Du Bartas.

Ephi or Epha, an Hebrew measure, containing nine Gallons of ours.

Ephialtes (Gr.) the night Mare; it is a kind of disease commonly called the
Elfe, or Nightmare, with which whoever is affected, he supposes himself to be
invaded by some spirit, which leaning hard upon him, stops the passage of
breath. Min. See Incubus

Ephippiated (ephippiatus) sadled, or that has a saddle on his back.

Ephod (Hebr.) a Priestly Garment, used anciently to be worn by the Priests
among the Jews, whereof there were two kinds. The first was made of gold and
twisted silk, of purple, scarlet, and violet color, and fine linen with
broidered work, and this only belonged to the High Priest, and was only used
by him, when he executed his function: it covered the back, and the breast; and
on the shoulders there were set two great precious Onyx stones, and in them
graven the names of the twelve Sons of Jacob, called the twelve Patriarchs; in
the right shoulder the six eldest, and in the left the six youngest; that the
High Priest going into the Sanctum Sanctorum, to officiate, might among other
things be put in mind he was to pray to God for the posterity of those twelve
Patriarchs.

The other was of white linen, used by the inferior Priests, Levites, and also
by Laics. Moses and Aaron, p. 14.

Epicedium (Lat.) a Funeral Song, or verses in praise of the dead, which were
wont to be sung before the Corpse were buried.

Epicene (epicaenus) common of both Sexes or kinds. The Epicene Gender, is that
which concludes both Sexes under one Article, as Aquila being declinable only
with the feminine Article, signifies both the male and female of Eagles.

Epichrists (epichrista) ointments.

Epicurean or Epicure (one that gives himself wholly to pleasure, especially to
gluttony; Heretofore it signified one that followed the Sect of the Philosopher
Epicurus, who taught, that the greatest happiness was to be without pain, and
to enjoy pleasure of body, and mind, and that death was nothing, nor any thing
after death.

Epicurean (epicureus) voluptuous, given to nothing but pleasure and gluttony.

Epicurism (epicurismus) the manner or custom of an Epicure, a living wholly
according to sense and pleasure, in eating, drinking, etc.

Epicycle (epicyclus) a term in Astronomy, signifying a lesser circle, whose
center or middle part is in the circumference of a greater. In the upper part
of this Epicycle, the five Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury
go forward according to the course of the Signs, as Aries to Taurus, etc. in
the lower part they are retrogade, that is, go backward, as from Gemini to
Taurus, from Taurus to Aries again. Between these two Motions are said to be
two Stations. viz. when a Planet cease going forward, and begins to
retrograde, or coming to the furthest point of his retrogradation, goes forward
again. So that in the Epicycle these Planets wheel about sometimes according,
sometimes contrary to the order of the Signs. Bull.

Epick or Epique (epicus) a sort of Poesy which is made in Heroical and lofty
Verses, most commonly Hexameters. See Poesy.

Epidemy (epidemia) an universal sickness, and general infection, a most
catching or contagious disease.

Epidemical (epidemicus) public, universal; infectious, contagious.

Epigamy (epigamia) affinity by marriage with other Nations.

Epigastrick (epigastricus) pertaining to the outward part of the belly, from
the bulk to the privities.

Epigram (epigramma) signif^es properly, a superscription or writing set upon
any thing; now it is commonly taken for a short witty Poem, which under a
feigned name does covertly praise or tax some particular person or thing.

Epigrammatist (epigrammatista) a maker of Epigrams.

Epigrammatographer (epigrammatographus) a writer of Epigr^ms.

Epigraph (epigraphe) an inscription or title.

Epilepsie (epilepsia) the Falling Sickness, whereto most commonly children and
young folks are most subject. This disease is caused by some humor or vapor;
suddenly stopping the passage of spirits in the brain, which the brain striving
to expel, causes ^he Patient to fall down, and commonly foam at the mouth.
Bull.

Epileptick (epilepticus) that has the Falling Sickness.

Epilogism (Gr.) a computation, or a numbering by way of repetition. Greg.

Epilogue (epilogus) the conclusion or knitting up of a matter; a Speech made
after an Interlude or Play ended.

Epil^gize (epilogizo) to conclude or deliver an Epilogue.

Epiod (epiodium) a song sung before the Corpse were buried.

Epiphany (epiphania) an appearing of light, or a manifestation. The feast of
Twelfth day after Christmas, is so called, in memory and honor of Christ's
manifestation or apparition made to the Gentiles by a miraculous blazing Star,
by virtue whereof he drew and conducted the three Magi or Sages, commonly
called the three Kings, who upon sight of that star came out of the East into
the Country of Palestine or Jewry, to adore him in the Manger, where they
presented him, as on this day with Mirh, Gold, and Frankincense, in testimony
of his Regality, Humanity and Divinity. The Vigil of this Feast was of old
called Vigilia Luminum; And the Ancients were wont to send lights one to
another. Greg.

Arthur the British King is said to have begun the custom of solemnizing the
Twelve days in Christmas with such Feasts and Sports as yet are, or lately
were used, by the Lords of mis-rule, in some Gentlemen's houses. Heyl. See
Balthazar.

Episcopal (episcopalis) of or like a Bishop,

Episcopate (episcopo) to play the Bishop, to oversee diligently.

Epistyle (epistylium) an architrave; also a little Pillar set upon a greater.

Epistolary (epistolaris) serving for Letters or Epistles.

Epitaph (epitaphium) an Inscription or writing, set upon a Tomb, most commonly
in lamentation or praise of the party there buried: The invention whereof is
referred to the Scholars of Linus, who first bewailed their Master, when he was
slain, in doleful verses, then called of him Aelina, afterward Epitaphia, for
that they were first sung at burials, after engraved upon the Sepulchers.
According to Plato's Laws an Epitaph should be comprised in four Verses. The
Lacedaemonians reserved this honor only to Martial men, and chaste women. Came.

Epitasis (Gr.) the second and busiest part of a Comedy, which signifies the
intention or exaggeration of matters. See Catastasis.

Epithalamy (epithalamium) a Bridal Song, or Poem, or a Song at a Wedding, in
commendation of the parties married; Such was that of Solomon, Psalm. 45.
wherein the praise of the Church and her spiritual Marriage and Union with
Christ is set down. Such also is that of Stella in Statius, and of Julia in
Catullus, etc. It is so called from the Greek word (...), i. apud, and
Thalamus, a Bedchamber, but more properly a Bride-chamber, because this Song
was used to be sung at the door of the Bride-chamber, when the Bride bedded.
There are two kinds of Epithalamies, the one used to be sung at night, when the
married couple entered Bed; the other in the morning, to raise them up. Min.

Epithalamize, to make or sing an Epithalamy or Bridal song.

Epitheme (epithema) a kind of liquid medicine applied to an outward part of
the body, by a piece of thin linen, or cotton dipped in it; thereby to supple
the place, or cool and comfort the inward (Heart, Stomach, or Liver) that is
under it.

Epithemetical, belonging to such a kind of medicine.

Epithet (epitheton) a word added to a Noun Substantive to express some quality
of it. As to say, a Noble person, Unbridled lust, etc. here Noble and Unbridled
are the Epithets expressing the quality of a Person and Lust.

Epitoge (epitogium) a Cassock, or long Garment worn loose over other Apparel,
the habit of a Graduat in the University.

Epitomator (Lat.) he that abridgeth, or abbreviates any matter in writing; an
Epitomist.

Epitomy (epitome) an abridgement, abbreviation, or short gathering of any
matter in writing. My Lord Bacon says, Epitomes are the corruptions and moaths
of Histories.

Epitomize (epitomizo) to abbreviate or make an abridgement.

Epoch (epoch) a term of time, or as it were a certain retention or cohibition
of it in a Chronological History, taken from the beginning of some Empire,
Kingdom, or notable event, The Jews had several Epochs peculiar to themselves
alone, and one in common with their Neighbors; those which they had among
themselves were, First, From the Creation of the World, or the beginning of
time. 2. From the universal Deluge, which happened An. Mun. 1656. 3. From the
confusion of Tongues, A.M. 1786. 4. From Abraham's Journey out of Chaldaea into
Canaan, A.M. 2021. 5. From their deliverance out of Egypt, A.M. 2453. 6. From
the first year of Jubilee, A.M. 2499. 7. From the building of Solomon's Temple,
A.M. 2932. And lastly, from the Captivity of Babylon, An. M. 3357.

That which they had common with other Nations, was the Epoch of the Victory of
the Greeks, which took beginning from the first Victory which Seleucus had
against Antigonus in An. Mun* 3637. an account much used by the Jews,
Chaldeans, Syrians, and other Nations of the East. But the Chaldeans also had
their own Epoch, or Account apart, reckoning their time from the first year of
Nabonasser ( Salmanassar he is called in Scripture) which being 438 years
before this of Seleucus, must fall in An. Mun. 3201.

Next for the Grecians, they reckoned a long while by Olympiads, the first of
which is placed in the year of the World 3174. But this account perished under
the Constantinopolitans; they reckoned after by Indictions (an account devised
by Justinian) every Indiction containing fifteen years, the first beginning An.
Christ. 513. Which among Chronologers is still used. The Romans reckoning first
from the foundation of their City, which was An. Mund. 3213. And afterward
from the Sixteenth year of Augustus his Empire (being that which is properly
called the Roman Era) An. Mund. 3936. An Account used by the Spaniards (where
it first began) till the reign of Pedro the Fourth of Aragon, who abrogated it
in his Dominions, An. Christ. 1350. followed therein by John the first of
Castile, An. Christ. 1383. and at last by the King of Portugal also 1415.

The Christians generally reckon from the birth of Christ, but this they did
not use till the year 600. following in the mean time the account of the Empire.

And finally, The Mahometans begin their Hegira (for so they call the time of
their computation) from the flight of their Prophet Mahomet from Mecha, when he
was driven thence by the Philarchoe; which happened 16 July, An. 617. (or as some
will have it) 622. As the word Epoch is used by the Grecians, so in the same
sense is Era by the Latins; it is called Epoche, (...), a sistendo, quod
illinc sistantur and terminentur mensurae temporum. And A. cr. A. q. Annus erat
Augusti. Scalig. lib. 5. Greg.

Epod (epodus) a kind of Lyrick Verse wherein the first is always longer then
the second. As those of Horace.

Beatus ille qui procul negotiis,
Vt prisca gens mortalium, etc.
Epostracism (epostracismus) a kind of sport or play with an Oister-shell or
flat stone thrown into the water, and making a circle one or more ere it sinks;
it is called a Duck and a Drake, and a white penny Cake.

Epulary (epularis) belonging to Feasts or Banquets.

Epulosity (epulositas) great banqueting.

Epulous (epulosus) liberal in Feasts, full of banqueting

Equator (Equator) is a great Circle going round the terrestrial Globe from
East to West. It passes through Habassia, Sumatra, and Guiana. The use of it
is to show the latitude of any Town, Promontory, etc. And is so called, either
because it is equally distant from the Poles, or because when the Sun is in it,
the day and night are equal. Heyl. and Min.

Equanimity (aquanimitas) uprightness of heart or mind, quietness, patience,
indifferency.

Equation (aequatio) making equal, even or plain.

Eques auratus, a Knight, so called in Latin, because it was lawful for Knights
only to beautify their Armor and Caparisons for their horses with gold. Fern.
102.

Equestrian (equestris) pertaining to a Horseman, Knight or Gentleman, or to
an Horse. Sir H.W.

Equiangle, where the Angles are equal.

Equicrural, even-legged, that has his legs even or alike.

Equidial (aequidialis) when the days and nights are both of a length.

Equidistants. See Parallels.

Equiformity, evenness or likeness in form or fashion.

Equilateral (aequilatus) that has even sides, or that has both sides of an
equal bigness.

Equilibrity (aequilibritas) equality of weight.

Equinoctial (aequinoctium) is an imagined line pas^ng just in the midst
between the two Poles of Heaven, to which line the Sun coming twice a year
(namely, about the eleventh of March, and the eleventh of September) makes the
days and nights of equal length in all the world (unless with such as inhabit
just under the Poles;) for which cause it is called Aequinoctial: The Signs,
Aries and Libra both begin at this time.

Equipage (Fr,) a dighting or setting forth of man, horse, or ship-furniture;
good Armor, fit attire, sufficient array.

Equiparate (aequiparo) to make equal, to be like, to make comparison.

Equiparable (aequiparabilis) fit to be compared or equalled unto.

Equipensate (aequipenso) to esteem alike.

Equipollent (aequipollens) valuing equally, or being of like force or worth.

Equiponderous, of equal weight.

Equipped (Fr.) accoutred, furnished, set forth.

Equivalent (aequivalens) of equal might, value or worth.

Equivocal (aequivocus) that has a double or doubtful signification. An
Equivocal word is that which contains more significations then one, or that
which serves for several notions. As the word Arms, in our vulgar use, equally
signifies those parts of our body so called, or weapons or tokens of honor, and
with an aspiration (which is an Elench or deceit in the Accent) harms. See
Per. Instit. p. 18.

Equivocation (aequivocatio) a double, diverse and doubtful signification of a
word or speech.

Equorean (aequoreus) pertaining to the Sea.

Eradicate (eradico) to pull up by the roots, to destroy utterly.

Erarians (Aerarii) were those, who being Citizens of Rome, were by the Censors
deprived of giving their voices in their Century or Tribe; paid all Tribute
with Citizens, according to the valuation of their goods, and served in the
Wars at their own charges; and it seems they took that name either because era
pendebant, or era non merebant. Livie.

Erased, A term of Heraldry, when any member of a beast seems torn from the
body.

Erasmus (Gr.) amiable or to be beloved; a man's name.

Erastianism, the Tenets or Opinions of the Erastians.

Erastians, A sort of modern Heretics, so called from one Thomas Erastus a
Doctor in Physic, their first Author, born at Baden in Switzerland, and died
at Basil about the year 1583. Among other Tenets, he held that the power of
Excommunication in a Christian State, principally resides in secular power, etc.

Erato, One of the nine Muses, who (as Ovid says) Nomen amoris habet.

Erean (aereus) made of brass or copper, brazen.

Erebus, Hell, or a River in hell.

Eremetical (eremiticus) pertaining to an Hermit, or one that dwells in the
wildernss.

Ereption (ereptio) a violent taking away.

Eretriack, a Sect of Philophers, the same with the Eleack, but changed into
this name from Menedemus, who was born at the City Eretria, an eminent
Philospher of this Sect.

Ergotism, Arguing, quarrelling, sophistry, quiddities; from the Lat. Ergo. a
word much used in Syllogisms and Arguments.

Eriferous (aerifer) bringing forth, or bearing Brass or Copper.

Erimanthian, Belonging to Erimanthus a Mountain in Arcadia, where Hercules
slew a huge wild-Bore, that wasted the Country; hence this Beast is called the
Erymanthian Monster, in Il. Pastor Fido.

Ermines (Fr.) a little beast less then a Squirrel, the fur whereof is very
costly, worn only by Princes or great persons. It has a tail of a thumb long.
Ermine in Heraldry sometimes signifies white powdered with black, and sometimes
black powdered with white. Bull.

Eristical (from eris, idis) contentious, full of strife. Mr. White Apol. for
Tradition.

Eristicks (from eris) Books or Treatises of Controversy or Disputes.

Erivate (erivo) to draw water away by a stream, to dry up.

Erogation (erogatio) a bestowing or liberal distribution.

Erosion (erosio) a consuming or eating up, a gnawing or eating into.

Erumnate (aerumno) to impoverish, to make miserable or wretched.

Erratique (erraticus) that wanders or creeps up and down.

Errant (errans) wandering, or straying out of the way; it is also attributed to
Justices of Circuit. Pl Cor. fol. 15.

Errata (Lat.) errors or faults committed of ignorance; they are most commonly
taken for those faults or omissions, which escape correction in printing. See
Theta.

Errh^ne (errhinum) a medicine, which being made either liquid or in dry
powder, is used to stop bleeding at the nose, to provoke sneezing, to cause
childbirth, and to purge the brain. Bac.

Erroneous (erroneus) full of errors or mistakes.

Erubescency (erubescentia) blushing for shame.

Eructate (eructo) to belch or break wind upward, to send or cast out.

Eructation (eructatio) a belching.

Erudition (eruditio) learning, knowledge or instruction.

Erugate (erugo) to take away wrinckles.

Eruginous (aeruginosus) full of rust, cankered, corrupted, blasted*

Eruncate (erunco) to weed out, to pull out weeds.

Eruption (eruptio) a violent issuing or breaking forth.

Erysipely (erysipelas) a bile or swelling, full of heat and redness: Also St.
Anthonies sore.

Erysipelatous (erysipelatosus) troubled with that disease or grief.

Er^t^an Sea, (the Red Sea, otherwise called the Arabian Gulf or Gulf of Mecha)
so called from King Erythraeus; It is called the Red Sea, not from any material
redness therein, but from the redness of the earth and sands, and from the
great abundance of Coral, which grows plentifully in the bottom of this Sea.
See more in Vul. Er. 320.

Esaias (Heb) reward of the Lord.

Escal (escalis) pertaining to meat, fit to be eaten.

Escambio is a License granted to one for the making over a Bill of Exchange to
a man beyond Sea. Register Original. fol. 199. a.

Escheat (from the Fr. Escheoir, i. cadere) signifies in our Common Law any
Lands or other profits that fall to a Lord within his Manor by way of
forfeiture, or the death of his Tenant, dying without heir general or special,
or leaving his heir within age unmarried, Magna Charta. Cap. 31. Fitz. not. br.
fol. 143.

Escheator, An Officer that observes the Escheats of the King in the County
where he is Escheator, and certifies them into the Exchequer. He continues in
his Office but one year, nor can he be Escheator above once in three years. An.
1. H. 8. Cap. 8. and An. 3. esusdem Cap. 2. See more of this in Cromptons
Justice of Peace.

Escotcheon (Fr. Escusson) a Buckler or Shield, whereof in Europe we have only
two kinds in use (the Lozenge excepted) viz. that we use in England, France,
Germany, etc. and the Oval they bear in Italy, which form they yet (from the
old Romans) hold in use. The word Escutcheon, is derived from the French un
Escu, that from the Latin Scutum, and that again from (...) in Greek, which
signifies Leather, because the Ancients had their Shields of tanned Leather,
the skins laid thick one over another, as appears by that of Ulysses upbraiding
Ajax, Quae nisi fecissem, frustra Telamone creatus
Gestasset laeva taurorum tergora septem.


Escuage (from the Fr. Escu, i. clypeus, a Buckler or Shield) in our Common Law
signifies a kind of Knights service, called service of the Shield; the Tenant
holding thereby, is bound to follow his Lord into the Scottish or Welsh wars at
his own charge, etc. Fitz. not. br. fo. 84. C.

Esculent (esculentus) that may be eaten, or pertaining to eating.

Escutial (Span. but some affirm it to be an Arabic word, and to signify
Domus lucis) is the name of that incomparable Edifice built by Philip the
Second King of Spain in twenty four years times, and at eight millions charge,
and is termed the eighth wonder of the world. It contains, first the King of
Spains Palace. Secondly, St. Lawrence Church. Thirdly, the Monastery of
Hieronymites. And fourthly, Free-Schools; it has eleven or twelve several
Quadrangles, every one with Cloisters. Quade.

By extension of the word, or by metaphor it may be taken for any other
magnificent Palace or Structure.

Esnecy (aesnecia) is a Prerogative given to the eldest Coparcener to choose
first, after the Inheritance is divided. Flet. l. 5. cap. 10. in divisionem.

Esons-bath, Aeson in his old age (as Poets feign) had youth and vigor restored
to him by the Prayers of Medea a notable Sorceress, etc. See Medea. Hence we
may imagine Aesons-bath to have had the virtue of restoring youth to aged
persons; the phrase is used in Rel. Medici.

Esopical (aesopicus) fabulous or pertaining to such tales or fables, as those
of Aesop.

Esples ( expletia, from the Lat. expleo) seem to be the full profit that the
ground or land yields, as the hay of the Meadows, the feed of the pasture, the
corn of the arable, the Rents, Services, and such like issues. Cow.

Esquier (armiger) is in letters little altered from the Fr. Escuier, i.
scutiger) it signifies with us that degree of Gentry, which is next to a
Knight. Sir Tho. Smith is of opinion, that at the first these were bearers of
Arms to Lords and Knights, and by that had their name and dignity. See Came.
Brit. fol. 111. In our old Saxon, an Esquire was called Scyldknapa, or
(according to our modern Orthography) Shieldknave, i. he that in war did bear
the Shield of Arms of his Chief or Superior. Verst.

Esqulinus, one of the seven Hills in Rome. As 1. Aesquilinus. 2. Quirinalis.
3. Viminalis. 4. Coelius. 5. Tarpeius. 6. Palatinus. 7. Aventinus; which may be
better be remembered by this contracted verse, Aesqui. Quiri-Vimin. Coel. Tar.
Palatinus, Aventin.

Esquiry (Fr. Eicuyrie) the Stable of a Prince, a Querry ship; also the dignity
or estate of an Esquire. Spotswood.

Essay (Fr.) a proof, a trial, a flourish or preamble; Among Comoedians the
trial or proof of their action, which they make before they come forth
publicly upon the Stage, is their Essay.

Essence (essentia) the being or natural substance of any thing.

Essenes or Esseans ( aesseni vel aessei, so called from the Syriack (...),
Asa, signifying to heal or cure diseases) were certain Sectaries or
Philosophers, among the Hebrews of two sorts, the one Practicks the other
Theoricks, both agreed in their Aphorisms, but in certain circumstances they
differed. They referred every thing to Destiny, deemed the Soul to be mortal,
would have men fight till death in defense of Justice, sacrificed not with the
rest of the people, nor scarce conversed with them; were much given to tillage
and husbandry, highly prizing purity of life and sanctity of conversation, they
lived in common, never married, kept no servants, saying, Servants were wicked,
and a Wife cause of discord. Their life was Monastic, and themselves given
much to contemplation of the nature of Herbs, Plants, Stones, and Beasts: In
diet, meat and drink, moderated by sufficiency, much addicted to Moral
Philosophy, not caring for wealth, or hoarding up treasure. Josephus, and Moses
and Aaron, p. 50.

Essedary (essedarius) a kind of Warrior that was wont to ride in a Wagon or
Chariot, but fought on foot, formerly in use with the ancient Gauls; also a
Waggoner or Chariot-man.

Essed (essedum) a Wain, Chariot or Wagon. In ancient time it was a Chariot
for fight, of a peculiar form.

Essential (essentialis) belonging to the essence or being of any thing.

Essentifical, that makes or causes the essence or being.

Essoine, comes of the Fr. essoyne or exoine, i. causarius miles, he that has
his presence forborne or excused upon any just cause, as sickness or other
encumbrance. It signifies in our Common Law an alleadgement of an Excuse for
him that is summoned or sought for to appear or answer to an Action real, or to
perform suit to a Court Baron, upon just cause of absence, etc. See more in
Cowel.

Estandard. See Standard.

Estiferous (aestifer) that brings or endures heat.

Estival (aestivalis) pertaining to Summer, or to the longest day in the year.

Estivate (aestivo) to summer in a place, to dwell or retire to a place for the
Summer season.

Estovers (from the French estover, i. to foster) signifies in our Common Law
nourishment or maintenance. For example, Bracton l. 3. tract. 2. cap. 18. number.
2. uses it for that sustenance which a man, taken for Felony, is to have out
of his lands or goods, for himself and his family, during his imprisonment: and
the Stat. An. 6. E. 1. cap. 3. uses it for an allowance in meat or cloth. It
is also used for certain allowances of wood, to be taken out of another man's
wood. Mr. West part. 2. Symbol. tit. Fines sect 26. says, that the name of
Estovers contains house-boot, hey-boot and plow-boot, as if he gave in his
grant these general words, de rati^nabili estoveria in boscis, etc. he may
thereby claim these three. Cow.

Estreat (from the Lat. Extractum, or from the Fr. Extraict) is used in our
Common Law for the Copy or true note of an original writing. For example, of
amerciaments or penalties set down in the Rolls of a Court, to be levied by the
Bailiff or other Officer, of every man for his offense. See Fitz. not. br fol.
75. H. 1. K. and 76. a. And so it is used Westminster. 2. c. 8. and 13. Ed. 1.

Estrepement or Estripament (of the Fr. Estropier, i. to maim or lame)
signifies in our Common Law, spoil, or waste made by a Tenant for life upon any
Lands or Woods to the prejudice or him in the reversion, as namely in the Stat.
An. 6. Ed. 1. cap. 13. And sometimes it is taken for a Writ in the nature of a
prohition to forbid the committing Waste. Not. br. 60, 61.

Estuate (aestuo) to burn or parch with heat, to rage, as the Sea does.

Esurini (esurialis) pertaining to those days, whereon men forbear meat,
fasting, hungry.

Esurion (esurio) an hungry fellow.

Eternize (aeterno) to make immortal or eternal.

Etesia^ (etesius) belonging to the East winds, easterly.

Etherial (aethereus) pertaining to the sky or firmament, celestial.

Ethick (ethicus) moral, belonging to manners.

Ethics, Books treating of moral Philosophy and manners. Also moral
Philosophers themselves are called Ethics. As Logic entreats of the
Understanding and Reason; so Ethick of the Will, Appetite and affections. Bac.

Ethiopians or Moors, the people of Aethiopia; the particulars of their
opinions, wherewith they have infected the true purity, I find thus registered.
1. They use to Circumcise both males and females. 2. They baptize males forty,
females eighty days after their circumcision. 3. After the receipt of the
Sacrament, they are not to spit till Sunset. 4. They profess but one Nature
and one Will in Christ. 5. They accept only the three first general Councils.
6. Their Priests live only by the labor of their hands; for they allow them
nothing, and permit them not to beg. 7. They rebaptise themselves every
Epiphany day in Lakes and Ponds, because that day they suppose Christ to have
been bap^ised by John in Jordan. Heyl.

Ethnarchy (ethnarchia) principality or rule.

Ethnic (ethnicus) heathenish, ungodly, irreligious: And may be used
substantively for a Heathen or Gentile.

Ethology (ethologia) the feat of counterfeiting men's manners: An interlude of
a moral subject, or wherein men's manners are acted and expressed.

Etiology (aetiologia) a rendering of a cause, a showing of reason.

E^na (Aetna) a hill in the Island of Sicily, which continually sends forth
flames of fire, occasioned by the abundance of sulphur and brimston therein
contained, which is blown by the wind driving in at the chaps of the earth, as
by a pair of bellows, etc. of this hill there are many Poetical fictions which
I omit: it ^s now called Montgibal.

Etymology ( etymologia ab (...), verus, and (...), sermo) the true original or
derivation of a word; as lepus quasi levipes.

Etymologia est resolutio vocis in verum and proprium effectum, and verbi
veritatem notificat, and ob id, eam Cicero veriloquium appellat. Clau.
Cantiuncula de loc. legal.

Etymological (etymologicus) pertaining to Etymology.

Etymologize (etymologizo) to show the true derivation of a word, to intrepret
or expound words truly.

Evacuate (evacuo) to make empty or void, to purge. In the Rhemes Testament,
Evacuated from Christ, signifies, made void, and having no part with him.

Evade (evado) to escape, to pass without danger.

Evagation (evagatio) a wandering, roving or straying abroad.

Evagirate (evagino) to draw out of a sheath or scabbard.

Evangeliques, a sort of Reformers so called, appearing at, or not long after
Luther in Germany.

An Evangelistary, The office of an Evangelist; also a Pulpit, or the place
where the Gospel is delivered.

Evangelism (evangelismus) joyful tidings; as the Annunciation of the Virgin
Mary, the tidings of Christ's Nativity, etc.

Evangelist (evangelista) one that brings good tidings; a writer or preacher of
the Gospel.

Evangelize (evangelizo) to preach the Gospel, to bring good tidings.

Evanid (evanidus) vain, decaying, unfruitful, frail.

Evaporate (evaporo) to breath or steam out, to send out vapors.

Evasion ( evasio from evado) an escaping, a shift.

Eucharist (Eucharista) properly signifies a giving of thanks. In
Ecclesiastical writings it is taken for the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ.

Eucharistical, Pertaining to the Eucharist.

Eucrasy (eucrasia) a right temperature of the body, humors and qualities.

Eudoxie (Gr.) excellency of name, good report or estimation.

Eve the wife of Adam; from the Heb. Evah, i. living or giving life. Adam so
called his wife, because she was the mother of every living thing.

Evection (evectio) a carrying out or forth.

Eveck or Evick (Ibex) a kind of wild Goat.

Eventerate (from e and venture) to take out the belly or paunch of any thing;
also to come out of the belly. Dr. Br.

Eve^tilate (eventilo) to winnow as we do Corn; and metaphorically to sift or
examine a matter thoroughly.

Eversion (eversio) a ruin or overthrowing.

Evertuate, to take away the virtue or strength.

Evestigate (evestigo) to seek, to follow, to hunt after.

Eugantan (euganeus) pertaining to that people or Country, by the inner Gulf of
the Adriatique Sea, toward the Alps, which belongs to the Dominion of Venice.

Eugenia (Gr) nobleness or goodness of birth or blood.

Evibration (evibratio) a shaking, brandishing, or darting.

Eviction (evictio) an over vercoming or convincing by Law.

Evince (evinco) to vanquish, to surmount, to convince; to obtain by earnest
labor; also to convict and recover by Law.

Eviration (eviratio) a gelding or taking away the Genitals.

Evintegrony (aevintiger) that bears age without decay.

Evisceration (eviscero) to imbowel, or draw out the guts.

Evitable (evitabilis) that may be shunned or avoided.

Eviternity (aeviternitas) eternity, everlastingness, immortality.

Euloge or Eulogy (eulogia) a well speaking, an honest speech; a Praise or
Benediction.

Eulogical (eulogicus) well-spoken.

Eunuchate or eunuchize (eunuchizo) to geld men, or to play the Eunuch, or
gelded man.

Eunuchism, the state or condition of an Eunuch, the want of virility.

Eunomians, A sort of Heretics, who maintained, that no sin could be hurtful
to one having Faith. St. Aug. Her. Cap. 54.

Evocation (evocatio) a calling out, forth, or upon; a mustering, calling back,
or withdrawing.

Evolatical (evolaticus) that flies or gads abroad.

Evolution (evolutio) a rolling or tumbling out, a reading over.

Euphemism (euphemismus) a good or favorable interpretation of a bad word.

Euphony (euphonia) a good sound or voice, as they use to say in Schools,
Euphoniae gratia, for good sound sake.

Euphorbium, A gum or tear of a strange plant growing on Mount Atlas in Lybia.
It is yellowish, clear, and brittle. It may be used in Ointments against
Palsies, Cramps, and shrinking of sinews; but to be taken inwardly is very
dangerous, unless the malice of it be well corrected, for it is exceeding hot
in the fourth degree. Bull.

Euripe (Euripus) signifies generally any Strait, Fret, or Channel of the Sea,
running between two shoars, as Julius Pollux defines it. But Euripus Euboicus
or Chalcidicus, is a narrow passage of Sea dividing Attica and the Island of
Euboea now called Golpho de Negroponte, which ebbs and flows seven times every
day: the reason of which when Aristotle could not find, it is said he threw
himself into the Sea with these words, Quia ego non capio te, tu capias me. But
see Dr. Br. Vul. Er. fol. 364. Hence.

To Euripize, To ebb and flow, as Euripus does, to be always in motion, to be
inconstant, to be whirled hither and thither.

Eurythmie (eurythmia) is that agreeable harmony between the breadth, length,
and height of all the rooms of a Fabric. Vitruv. l. 1. c. 2.

Europe (Europa) one of the four parts of the world, lying toward the West,
containg England, France, Spain, Italy, Germany, all Greece, Creet or Candy,
with many other Kingdoms, great Countries and Islands. We have many opinions
concerning the derivation of the word, but the most received is, that it is
called Europe of Europa, King Agenors daughter, whom Jupiter (as Poets feign)
in likeness of a Bull carried over Sea into the Island Candy. Bull.

Eustace (eustachius) standing firm, constant: a proper name.

Eutaxie (eutaxia) good order, placing or disposing. Apol. for learning.

Euthanasie (Gr.) a happy death. Bac.

Euterpe, one of the Muses.

Euthymie (euthymia) security, quiet, hearts-ease.

Eutrapelize (from Eutrapelia) to treat civilly, or use courteously. Four Ages.

Eutychians followers of the Arch Heretic Eutyches, who, about the year of
Christ 443. in time of Pope Leo the first, and Theodosius the second Emperor,
dogmatized, that there was but one nature in Christ, that Christ was not truly
born of the Virgin Mary, with many other absurd errors against Faith.

Evulsion (evulsio) a plucking up.

Exacerate (exacero) to purge from chaff.

Exacinate (exacino) to pull or press out the kernels.

Exacution (exacutio) the pointing or making a thing sharp.

Exaggerate (exaggero) to heap up together, to increase or amplify.

Exagitate (exagito) to trouble, chide, to discuss, to stir up or move.

Ex-amussim (Lat) exactly, justly, according to rule.

Exanguious (exanguis) without blood, dead, fearful, pale. Vul. Er.

Exanimate (exanimo) to trouble in mind, to astonish, to kill.

Exanthems (exanthemata) the Smallpox, wheals or pushes in a man's skin,
Measles.

Exantlate (exantlo) to draw out, to empty, to sustain or suffer, to overcome
with great pain. Dr. Charleton.

Exarate (exaro) to dig or plow up, also to write with the pen or engrave.

Exarch (Exarchus) a Vice-Emperor, a Lieutenant of the Empire.

Exarchy or Exarchate, The chief place of dignity under the Emperor, the
Lieutenancy of the Empire.

Exariculate (exarticulo) to put out of joint.

Exartuate (exartuo) to carve as meat is carved, to quarter as the hangman does.

Exasperat (exaspero) to make sharp, to vex or make angry.

Exaturate (exaturo) to fill an hungry stomach, to satisfy a greedy mind.

Exauctorate or Exauctorat (exauctoro) to put out of pay, service or office.

Exaugurate (exauguro) to unhallow, to profane.

Exausp^cate (exauspico) to have ill luck, to do a thing unfortunately.

Excalfaction (excalfactio) a heating, chafing or warming.

Excambion (from Cambio) an Exchange. Spots.

Excandescency (excandescentia) anger soon come and gone.

Excavation (excavatio) a making hollow. Sir H.W.

Execation (excaecatio) a blinding or making blind.

Excelsity (excelsitas) height, loftiness.

Excentrick (excentricus) that moves out of its Center, or that has no
Center. Excentrick Orbs, are those circles in heaven, which have not their
center in the Center of the earth.

Excentricity, the being out of Center.

Exceptor (Lat.) he that write ones words as he speaks them; a gatherer.

Excety (excerpo) to pick out or choose.

Excern (excerno) to sift, to purge, to seirce, to bolt. Bac.

Excision (excisio) a breaking down, a wasting or destroying.

Excitate (excito) to stir up, to encourage.

Exclusion (exclusio) a shutting out, a debarring.

Exclusory (exclusorius) that has power to exclude or shut out.

Excommunication (excommunicatio) is thus defined by Panormitan: Excommunicatio
est nihil aliud quam censura a Canone vel Judice Ecclesiastico prolata and
inflicta, privans legitima communione sacramentorum, and quandoque hominum: And
it is divided in majorem and minorem: Minor est per quam quis a sacramentorum
participatione conscientia vel sententia arcetur. Major quae non solum a
Sacramentorum, verumetiam fidelium communione excludit, and ab omni actu
legitimo separat and dividit. Venatorius de Sent. Excom. Excommunication is a
Censure inflicted by the Canon or Ecclesiastic Judge, depriving the person
offending or the lawful Communion or the Sacraments, and sometimes of the
liberty even of conversing with the faithful.

Excoriate (excorio) to pluck off the skin or hide, to flay or fret the skin
off. How.

Excreable (excreabilis) that may be voided by spitting or retching.

Excrement (excrementum) the dregs of digestion made in the body, the offal or
refuse of any thing.

Excrementous Excrementitious pertaining to the excrements or refuse of nature
or other thing, dreggy, filthy, full of excrements.

Excrescence (from excresco) the unnatural swelling or growing out of a thing,
as of a wart, wen, etc.

Excretion (excretio) the voiding of excrements or superfluity in the body.

Excrutiate (excrucio) to torment or vex.

Exculca^ (exculco) to tread, trample or kick up.

Exculcate (exculpo, as) to clear ones self of a fault.

Excuriate (excurio) to throw out of the Court.

Excursion (excursio) a skirmish, an invasion or inroad, a digression in
speech, a running out.

Excusatory (excusatorius) pertaining to excuse, excusing.

Excussion (excussio) a diligent inquisition or examination; a shaking off, a
casting off or out.

Execation (execatio) a cutting forth or away.

Execrable (execrabilis) cursed, detestable, horrible.

Execration (execratio) a cursing or banning; a wishing of mischief to come.

Executor (Lat.) one that executes or does a thing. But more particularly it is
he that is appointed by any man in his last Will and Testament to have the
disposing of all his substance according to the contents of the said Will. See
more of this in the Office of Executors.

Exemplat (Lat.) a person or thing containing an example to follow or eschew;
As Cicero is exemplar, and his Eloquence exemplum.

Exemplify (exemplifico) to give an example or copy.

Exemption (exemptio) a taking away, an exception or priviledging.

Exenterate (exentero) to pull out the garbish or guts of a thing, to unbowel
or empty.

Exequies (exequiae) funeral solemnities at a Burial, so called (a sequendo)
because the Corpse go first, and the multitude follows.

Exequial (exequialis) that brings or pertains to a Funeral.

Exercitate (exercito) to exercise often, to use much.

Exercitation (exercitatio) use, custom, practice.

Exert (exertus) showed or put forth, standing out; open, drawn.

Exesion (exesio) a gnawing or eating up, a consuming.

Ex^a^e (exhalo) to breath out, to cast forth a breath or fume; also to give up.

Exhalation (exhalatio) a fumy smoke, hot and dry, drawn out of the Earth by
the heat of the Sun, which being inflamed, is the material cause of diverse
fiery impressions in the Air, and being thin and lighter then a vapor, is
carried up even to the highest Region. Goodly Gallery.

Ex^armonians, discords, or dissonances in music.

Exhausted (exhaustus) drawn out, emptied, consumed.

Exhibit (exhibeo) to set abroad, to present, to give, to show it self.

Exhibition (exhibitio) a giving, deliverance or preservation; a gift or
allowance.

Exhil^r^re (exhilaro) to make one merry, to refresh.

Exhilaration (says my Lord Bacon) has some affinity with joy, though it be a
much lighter motion. Not. hist. 151.

Ex^guity (exiguitas) littleness, scarceness, slenderness.

Exigen^ (exigens) a straitness, narrowness, distress or necessity. Also a Writ
which lies, where a man brings a personal Action, and the Defendant cannot be
found, nor has any thing within the County, whereby he may be attached or
destrained, then this Writ shall go forth to the Sheriff to make Proclamation
at five Counties one after another, that if he appear not, he shall be
outlawed; and if he be outlawed then all his Goods and Chattels are forfeit
to the King. In an Indictment of Felony, the Exigent shall go forth after the
first Capias. And there are four Exigenters who are Officers in the
Common Pleas, that make out these Exigents.

Exiguo^s (exiguus) little, small, slender

Exilition (from exilio) a leaping or going out hastily.

Exility (exilitas) slenderness, leanness, smalness.

Exile (exilium) banishment.

Eximious (eximius) excellent, singular, choice.

Eximiety (eximitas) excellency.

Exinanited (exinanitus) pilled, robbed, emptied, exceedingly abased, reduced
to nothing.

Exinanition (exinanitio) an emptying, an evacuation, a bringing to nothing.

Existimate (existimo) to suppose, to judge, to think or deem.

Exit (the third person of exeo, to go out) he went forth or departed out, he
ended; and is sometimes used Substantively.

Exitial Exitious (exitiosus) mischievous, dangerous, baneful, deadly,
destructive.

Exodus (Gr. ab (...), i. extra out, and (...), i. via, a way) a going forth or
departing out. The second Book of the Old Testament is so called, because it
treats of the people of Isreal's going out of the Land of Egypt. Min.

Exoine (Fr.) an excuse; a discharge of, or toleration for absence, upon a
lawful cause alleged. See Essoine.

Exolete (exoletus) past, grown out of use, worn out, stale.

Exolution (exolutio) a full and perfect payment; also a faintness or looseness
of all the parts of the body.

Exonerate (exonero) to unload, to ease, to dispatch.

Exoptable (exoptabilis) to be desired or wished.

Exorable (exorabilis) easy to be entreated.

Exorbitate (exorbito) to go out of the right way, to be irregular.

Exorbitancies (exorbitantiae) things out of order, rule, or measure,
extravagancies.

Exorcis^ (exorcizo) to adjure; to charge the devil in the name of God, or by
the reverence that is due to holy things, to do the will of him that Exorciseth.

Exorcism (exorcismus) adjuration; prayers used by the Church against the power
of the devil.

Exorcist (exorcista) one, who by a special gift of God, calls foul spirits out
of the bodies of those who are possessed with them.

Exordium (Lat.) a beginning an entrance.

Exornate (exorno) to garnish, to adorn, to make fair.

Exortive (exortivus) that pertains to rising, or the East part.

Exosseous (exossus) without bones, that has no bones.

Exoster (exostra) an ancient Engine for war; now used for a Petard to blow
open a Port or Gate.

Exotetick, was that part of Aristotle's doctrine which conduced to Rhetoric,
Meditation, nice Disputes, and the knowledge of Civil things. Yet I have read
Exoterick Books (libri Exoterici) to consist of plain ordinary matter.

Exotic (exoticus) foraign, strange, barbarous, outlandish.

Expand (expando) to declare or utter; to display or spread abroad.

Expansion (expansio) a displaying, an opening, a spreading forth.

Ex-parte (Lat.) partly, in part, or of one part; but in the Court of Chancery
it has this signification; a joint Commission is that wherein both Plaintiff
and Defendant join; a Commission Ex part, is that which is taken out by one
party only.

Expatiate (expatior, aris) to wander, to stray, to spread abroad.

Expectable (from expecto) that may be expected or looked for.

Expedient (from expedio) is used both Substantively and Adjectively:
Substantively it is a help or fit means to prevent further mischief, or compass
any matter; Adjectively, it signifies, fit, helping, furthering, necessary.

Expeditate (from ex, and pes, to unfoot) is a word usual in the Forest Laws,
otherwise called Lawing of Dogs, signifying, to cut out the balls of Dogs feet,
or (as some will have it) to cut off by the skin, the three claws of the
forefoot on the right side for the preservation of the Kings game. Charta
Forestae ca. 6. Every one that kept any great dogs not expeditated, did forfeit
to the King three shillings and four pence Cromp. Juris. fol. 152. and Manwood,
part. 1. fol. 205. and 212.

Expedite (expedio) to dispatch, to discharge, to prepare. to bring to pass.

Experiment (experimentum) use, practice, proof or trial.

Exp^ble (expiabilis) that may be purged or satisfied for.

Exp^ate (expio) to pacify with prayer, to purge by Sacrifice, to make amends
or satisfaction for.

Exp^ (expiatio) a pacifying with prayer, a recompense or making amends.

The Feast of Expiation (among the ancient Hebrews) was commanded to be
celebrated on the tenth day of the month Tisri, answering to our September,
Lev. 13. It was so called, because the High Priest did then confess unto God
both his own sins and the sins of the people, and by the performance of certain
Rites, and Ceremonies, expiate them, and make an atonement with God for them.

Explement (explementum) a thing that fills up or accomplishes.

Expletive (expletivus) that fills a place, or makes perfect; fulfilling or
making up.

Explicate (explico) to unfold, display, declare or expound.

Explicit (explicitus) unfolded, declared, ended.

Explode (explodo) publicly to disgrace, or drive out by hissing or clapping
of hands.

Explorement Exploration (exploratio) a search, a trial or searching out.

Explosion (explosio) a casting of or rejecting, a hissing a thing out.

Expolition (expolitio) a triming, polishing or burnishing.

Ex post-facto (Lat.) a Law term, and signifies the doing something after
another; or the doing something after the time wherein it should have been done.

Expostulate (expostulo) to require, also to complain, to quarrel in words, to
find him self grieved.

Exprobration (exprobratio) a reproach or upbraiding.

Expugnable (expugnabilis) pregnable, which may be forced or won by force.

Expugnation (expugnatio) a conquering or winning by assault.

Expuition (expuitio) a spitting forth.

Expulsion (expulsio) an expelling, banishing or putting forth.

Expumicate (expumico) to polish or smooth with a pumice stone, to purge or
make clean.

Expunge (expungo) to put, cross, or blot out.

Exquisite (exquisitus) much searched for, singular, curious, exact.

Exsufflation, a breathing out or upon.

Extant (extans) which appears above others, standing out, which is in being.

Extancy (extantia) a standing up, or appearing above others.

Extacy. See Ecstacy.

Extemporality (extemporalitas) a promptness, or readiness without
premeditation or study.

Extempore (Lat.) out of hand, on a sudden, without premeditation.

Extemporaneous Extemporary (extemporarius) sudden, speedy, without
premeditation.

Extend (extendo) to stretch out, enlarge or prolong. It signifies in our
Common Law, to seize and value the Lands or Tenements of one bound by Statute,
etc. that has forfeited his bond, to such an indifferent rate, as by yearly
rent the obligor may in time be paid his debt. The course and circumstance of
this see in Fitz. not. br. fol. 131. Brief^d execut. sur. stat. Merch.

Extensible (extensibilis) which may be extended or drawn out in length.

Extensive (extensivus) that may be stretched out, or made long.

Extent (from extendo) has two significations, sometimes signifying a Writ or
Commission to the Sheriff for the valuing of Lands or Tenements. Regist.
Judicial in the Table. Sometimes the act of the Sheriff or other Commissioner,
upon this Writ. Brook. tit. Extent. fol. 313.

Extenuate (extenuo) to diminish, to make less, to undervalue.

Extercorate (extercoro) to carry forth dung or ordure, to cleanse.

Exterior (exterior) more outward, in a lower place or degree.

Exterminate (extermino) to drive or cast out, to banish, to ruin, to destroy.

External (externus) outward, strange, foreign.

Exterraneous or Extraneous (exterraneus) strange, of another Land or Country.

Extersion (extersio) a wiping out.

Extimate (extimus) the outmost or last, the contrary to intimate.

Extimulate (extimulo) to prick forward, to stir up or encourage.

Extinct (extinctus) quenched, put out, appeased, dead.

Extirpate (extirpo) to pluck up by the roots.

Extispicious (from extispicium) pertaining to South-saying by the intrals of
beasts.

Extorsion (extorsio) exaction, a wreathing or wringing out or from. In our
Common Law it signifies an unlawful or violent wringing of money or moneys
worth from any man. For example, if any Officer, by terrifying any Subject in
his Office, take more then his ordinary duties, he commits, and is inditable of
Extorsion. To this may be referred the exaction of unlawful Usury, winning by
unlawful Games, excessive Toll in Milners, etc. See more in Cromp. Just. of P.
fo. 48, 49, 50.

Extort (extoqueo) to take away by force, to wrest away by violence.

Extract Extraction (extractio) a drawing out, a breviate or abridgment, also a
draught or copy.

Extramission (extramissio) a sending out, or beyond.

Extraneous. See Exterraneus.

Extravasal (from extra and vas) that is besides or out of the vessel.

Extricable (extricabilis) which a man may rid himself of or from.

Extricate (extrico) to rid out, to deliver to shake off all lets.

Extrinsecal (extrinsecus) outward, on the outside, out of the matter.

Extroversion, a turning outward: In mystical Divinity it is a scattering or
distracting ones thoughts upon exterior objects.

Extrude (extrudo) to thrust or drive out, to hasten forth.

Extuberate (extubero) to swell much, to rise up like a bunch, also to make to
swell.

Extumescence (from extumesco) a swelling or rising up.

Exuberancy (exuberantia) abundance, plenty.

Exuberate (exubero) to abound, to be plentiful, to bear in great abundance.

Exuccous (exuceus) without juice. Vul. Er.

Exudate (exudo) to send forth liquor, to sweat or drop out.

Exulcerate (exulcero) to make sore, to vex, to fret, to raise blisters.

Exuge (exugo) to suck up, to drink up.

Exulate (exulo) to be banished to live in exile.

Exult (exulto) to rejoice greatly, to triumph over one, to leap for joy.

Exultation (exultatio) a rejoicing, leaping for joy, a triumphing.

Exuperable (exuperabilis) that may be exceeded, passed, or got over.

Exustion (exustio) a burning or parching.

Air (comes of the old Fr. word Err, a journey) signifies (in Briton. ca. 2.)
the Court of Justices Itenerants. And Justices in Air, are those only, which
Bracton in many places calls (Justiciarios Itinerantes) Of the Air, read
Britton ubi supra, who expresses the whole course of it. And Bracton l. 3.
tract. 2. ca. 1, and 2. The Air also of the Forest is nothing but the
Justice-Seat otherwise called; which is, or should by ancient custom be held
every third year by the Justices of the Forest journeying up and down to that
purpose. Cromptons Jurisd. fo. 156. Manwood part. 1. page 121, etc.

Ezechias (Hebr.) strength of the Lord.

Ezechiel (Heb.) seeing the Lord.

F
FAbal (fabalis) of or belonging to a beam.

Fabellator (Lat.) he that feigns or invents tales.

The difference betwixt fabellator and fabulator, can be no other then that
betwixt fabella and fabula; this signifying a fable or tale, that a short or
little tale.

Fabric (fabrica) a Shop, or Workhouse wherein any thing is framed; the art
of framing or making, building, or proportioning. It is most commonly used for
a building or a thing artificially made.

Fabricate (fabrico) to make, to build, to invent.

Fabricator (Lat.) a framer, or inventer, a builder.

Fabulator (Lat.) a teller of tales or fables, a Fabulist.

Fabulosity (fabulositas) an addition to, or custom of telling lies or tales,
fullness of lies.

Fabulous (fabulosus) full of lies or fables.

Facade (Fr.) the forefront, forepart, outside or representation of the
outside of a house. Merc. Ital.

Facetious (facetosus) full of mirth and pleasantness.

Facile (facilis) light, easy, quick, gentle.

Facility (facilitas) easiness, gentleness, courtesy.

Facinorous (facinorosus) full of naughty acts, attempting soul deeds,
villainous.

Fact (factum) a deed, a work, a thing done or made.

Factitious (factitius) counterfeited, made to the likeness of any thing.

Factor (Lat.) a doer or maker; It is commonly used for him that buys and sells
for a Merchant, or that looks to his business, in his absence.

Facture (factura) the making or doing a thing.

Faculent (faculentus) bright or clear.

Faculty (facultas) power to do or speak, promptness. And of these there are
three, which govern man, and are distributed into the whole body, namely,
Animal, Vital, and Natural: The Animal Faculty is that which sends feeling and
motion to all the body, from the brain by sinews, and nourishes the
Understanding; The Vital Faculty gives life from the heart by Arteries to all
the body; The Natural Faculty gives nourishment to all the parts of the body,
from the Liver by Veins, etc. Vigon.

In our Common Law it is used for a privilege or especial power granted to a
man by favor, indulgence and dispensation, to do that which by the Common Law
he cannot: As to eat flesh upon days prohibited; to marry without Banes first
asked; to hold two or more Ecclesiastical Livings; the Son to succeed the
Father in a Benefice, and such like. And for granting these, there was a
particular Officer under the Archbishop of Canterbury, called, the Master of
the Faculties. Cow.

Facundity (facunditas) eloquence.

Facundious (facundosus) full of eloquence.

Facundate (facundo) to make eloquent or pleasant.

Faddom, is a measure of six foot by which Seamen measure the depth of water,
and length of Cables.

Faitors, seems to be a French word antiquated or something traduced. For the
modern French is ( faiseur, i. factor) It is used in the Stat. A. 7. R. 2. cap.
5. And in the evil part signifying a bad doer. Or it may not improbably be
interpreted an idle liver, taken from (faitardise) which signifies a kind of
numb or sleepy disease, proceeding of too much sluggishness, which the Latins
call (Veternus) for in the said Statute it seems to be a Synonymon to Vagabond.

Falarick (falaricus) pertaining to a kind of dart thrown out of Towers
besieged.

Falcator (Lat.) he that cuts with a Bill or Hook.

Falcation (falcatio) a mowing or cutting with Bill or Hook. Vul. Er.

Falchon or short Sword, from the Lat. falce, i. a hook, quod ( ut scribit
Herodot. l. 5.) gladiolus iste a femore suspendi solitus, in dorso falcis
instar incurvus esset; because it turns up somewhat like a hook.

Falcidian Law, a Law among the Romans so called, because made in the time of
the Consulship of Falcidius; which Law entreated of the liberty which every
Citizen of Rome ought to have in the disposal of his goods.

Falciferous (falcifer) that carries or bears a hook or Bill.

Falernian Wine, Muscadine; So called from a field called Falernus in Campania,
which abounds with those excellent Grapes that make this wine.

Fallacy (fallacia) deceit, a crafty device, guile or fraud.

Fallaciloquence (fallaciloquentia) deceitful speech.

Fallax (Lat.) deceitful, beguiling, counterfeit. L. Bacon makes it a
Substantive, when he says (here lies the Fallax) i. the deceit, or the thing
that is apt to deceive.

Famicide (famicida) a slanderer or destroyer of ones good name.

Falouque (Fr.) a Barge or kind of Barge-like boat, that has some five or six
Oars on a side. See Brigantine.

Falsification (falsificatio) a falsifying, a forging, adulterating,
sophisticating.

Famigerate (famigero) to blaze abroad, to report.

Familiar (familiaris) a spirit or god of the household among the Heathens. Also
in Spain there is a kind of a Sergeant or Sumner so called belonging to the
Inquisition.

Family of Love, or Familism, a blasphemous Heresy broached by one Hen.
Nicholas of Amsterdam about the year 1550. He maintained, that Christ is
already come in his glory to judge, etc. And that the Seat or Throne of
judgment whereon Christ sits, is the Community of the Family of Love, whereof
the said H.N. is the eldest Father; and that he and they are Godded with God,
and God manned with them, etc. These Familsts are now conceived to be turned
into those we call Ranters.

Fanal. See Fane.

Fanatic (fanaticus) mad, foolish, inspired with prophetical fury.

Fane(from the Gr. (...), i ostendo, Fr. Fanal) a weathercock, to show the
station of the wind. First invented by Andronicus Cirrestes at Athens. Pol.
Virg. Also the Lantern of a Ship or Gally.

Fannel (Fr. Fanon) a scarf-like Ornament worn about the left Arm of a
sacrificing Priest. See Maniple.

Fannian Law, a Law among the Romans, repressing excessive banquets, enacted in
the Consulship of Fannius, and therefore so called.

Fantome. See Phantome.

Fanus (deus anni) a Heathen god whom the Phenicians expressed by a Dragon with
her tail in her mouth, to show how the years run round.

Farce (Fr.) a fond and dissolute Play, or Comedy; also the Jig at the end of
an Interlude, wherein some pretty knavery is acted; also any stuffing in meat.

Farced (farcitus) stuffed or filled.

Farcinate (farcino) to stuff.

Farragirous (from farrago, inis) that is mixed with sundry grains together, or
with good and bad. Vul. Er.

Farinaceous or Farinous (farinaceus) mealy or full of meal, bemealed,
beflowred.

Farreation (farreatio) a Sacrifice whereby Priests confirmed marriage.

Farsang, is three of our English miles, or a League among the Persians. Herb.
tra.

Fasciate (fascio) to swaddle or bind.

Fascicular (facicularis) belonging to a bundle or fardel.

Fasciculate, To tie up into a bundle or fascicle.

Fascicle (fasciculus) a handful bound together; a packet; also any thing
carried in the hand to smell.

Fascinate (fascino) to bewitch, to forespeak, or inchant.

Fascination, A bewitching, a charm, a forespeaking. Fascination is the power
and intensitive act of the imagination upon the body of another.

Fa^tidious (fastidiosus) disdainful, loathing, soon offended.

Fastigate Fastigiate (fastigio) to raise up, or grow up to a sharp top.

Fas^s, A strong hold, an inaccessible place. Bac.

Fastuosity (fastuositas) disdain, pride.

Fatality (from fatum) fatalness; also unavoidableness, as of a thing appointed
by destiny. Cotg.

Fate (fatum) destiny, that which must of necessity come to pass by Gods secret
appointment.

Fatal (fatalis) pertaining to destiny or fate.

Fatidical (fatidicus) that tells fortunes or destinies.

Fatiferous (fatifer) that brings fate or destiny.

Fatigable (from fatigo) which may be wearied or tired.

Fatigate (fatigo) to make weary, to trouble much.

Fatigue (Fr.) weariness, tediousness, trouble, toil; as we say the Fatigues of
war or of a long journey.

Fatiloquent (fatiloquus) that soothsaith or prophecieth.

Fatuate (fatuor) to play the fool.

Fatuity, (fatuitas) foolishness, blockishness, idiotism.

Favaginous (from favus) like or full of honey, or honey comb.

Faunes (Fauni) Gods of the fields and woods.

Faunick (faunicus) wild, woodish, rude.

Favontan (Favonius) pertaining to the west-wind, favorable.

Faustity (faustitas) good luck, happiness.

Fautor (Lat.) a favorer, a furtherer, or maintainer.

Fautresse (fautrix) she that favors or maintains.

Fealty, (of the Fr. feaulte, i. fidelitas) signifies in our Common Law an oath
taken at the admittance of every Tenant, to be true to the Lord of whom he
holds his Land. And he that holds Land by this oath of fealty, only holds in
the freest manner that any man in Engl. under the King may hold. Because all
with us that have Fee, hold per fidem and fiduciam, that is, by fealty at the
least, Smith de Repub. Anglor. l. 3. c. 8. Act 1656. c. 4.

Feasible (Fr. faisable) effectable, which may be performed, acted or done.

Febricitate (febricito) to be sick-of a Fever, or Ague.

Febriculous (febriculosus) that has or is subject to a Fever.

Februate (februo) to purge Souls by Sacrifice or Prayer.

Fecial (faecialis) pertaining to the Herald that denounces war or peace: The
manner was thus; The Faecialis carried a Lance or Spear headed with Iron, and
half burnt with fire, and strewed herbs all the way in sign of peace, even to
the confines of those against whom he was to menace war; there in the presence
of three men of good years, declared, that he and the people of Rome did
denounce war against them, etc. And then threw the Lance as far as he could
upon their ground. When they proclaimed Peace, the Faecialis took up a stone in
his hand, which (after certain solemn words pronounced, and those to be read in
Godwins Anthol. lib. 4. cap. 1.) he cast out of his hand, etc. And of these
Foeciales or Heralds, there were in Rome a College of twenty, the principal of
them was Pater patratus.

Feculency (foeculentia) filthiness, fullness of dregs.

Feculent (foeculentus) soul, unclean, loathsome, full of dregs.

Fecundity (foecunditas) plenty, fertility, abundance.

Fedity (foeditas) filthiness, foulness, dishonesty.

Feid, Feed or Feud, Is that ill custom which has been much used in Scotland,
and the North of England, viz. a combination of kindred, to revenge the death
of any of their blood against the killer, and all his race. These deadly Feids,
King James in his Basilicon Doron, advised his son to redress with all care
possible. The word signifies hatred. See Feud.

Fee (feodum, alias feudum) is in our Law an equivocal word, but most usually
taken for an estate of inheritance in Lands to one and his Heirs for ever, or
to one and the heirs of his body. But it is also used for the compass or extent
of a Manor; and in the common acceptance, the word is well known.

Fee-farm, is when a Tenant holds of his Lord in Fee-simple, paying him a
yearly rent, to half or a third part of the value of the Land, more or less.

Fee-simple (feodum simplex) is when any person holds Lands or Rent to him and
his Heirs for ever; and these words his Heirs make the Estate of inheritance;
for if Land be given to a man for ever, yet he has but an Estate for life.

Feisible. See Feasible.

Fellifluous (fellifluus) flowing of the Gall.

Felicitae^ (felicito) to make prosperous or hapyy. Felth. And I have read
Felicify.

Felicitous (from felix) happy, or made happy.

Felion (from fell, i. choler or grief of mind) an angry blister or wheal, most
commonly on the finger or thumbs end.

Felo de se, Is he that commits Felony by murdering himself. See Crompt. Just.
of Peace, fo. 28. and Lamb. Eiren. l. 2. c. 7. p. 243.

Feloqur. See Falouque.

Fencemonth, is a month wherein it is unlawful to hunt in the Forest, because
the female Deer fawn in this month, which begins fifteen days before Midsomer,
and ends fifteen days after. So that to this month there are 31 days assigned.
See Manwood part. 1. of his Forest Laws, p. 80. but more at large part.
secunda, c. 13. per totum.

Fenestral (fenestralis) belonging to a window.

Felony (felonia) seems to come of the Fr. felonnie, i. impetuositas,
atrocitas, immisericordia. We account any offense Felony that is in degree next
to petty Treason, and compriseth diverse particulars under it, as Murder,
Theft, killing of a man's self, Sodomy, Rape, wilful burning of houses, and
diverse such like, which are to be gathered, especially out of Statutes, whereby
many offenses are daily made Felony, that before were not. Felony is discerned
from lighter offenses, by this, that the punishment thereof is death; Howbeit
Petit Larceny (which is the stealing of any thing under the value of twelve
pence) is Felony, as appears by Brook. tit. Coron. n. 2. His reason is, because
the Indictment against such a one must run with these words, felonice cepit,
and yet this is not punished by death, though it be loss of goods. A man may
call that Felony, which is under petit Treason, and punished by death. And of
this there are two sorts: one lighter, that for the first time may be relieved
by Clergy; another that may not; and these are to be known by the Statutes; for
Clergy is allowed where it is not expressly taken away. Vid. Stanf. l. 1. pl.
Cor. a fine cap. 2. usque ad 39. Lamb. Just. P. l. 2. cap. 7. and Crompt. J.P.
fol. 32, etc.

Feminine (foemininus) of the female kind.

Feneration (foeneratio) usury, or the practice thereof.

Feneratitious (foeneratitius) taken or given to usury, or pertaining thereto.

Feodarie, alias Feudarie, alias Feudatarie (feudatarius) was an Officer
authorized and made by the Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries, by
Letters Patents under the Seal of that Office; his Function was to be present
with the Escheator at the finding any Office, to give evidence for the King, as
well concerning the value as the tenure, to survey the Land of the Ward, after
the Office found, and to rate it; he was also to assign the Kings widows their
Dowers, and to receive all the Rents of the Wards Lands, within his Circuit,
and to answer them to the Receiver of the Court of Wards and Liveries. This
Office is mentioned, An. 32. H. 8. cap. 46.

Feofment (from the Gottish word feudum, and signifies Donationem feudi) is in
our Common Law any gift or grant of any Honors, Castles, Manors, Messuages,
Lands or other corporal and immovable things of like nature, to another in
Fee-simple, by the delivery of seism, and possession of the thing given,
whether the gift be made by word or writing; and when it is in writing it is
called a Deed of Feofment, and in every Feofment the giver is called the
Feoffer, and he that receives by virtue thereof, the Feoffee; And Littleton
says, that the proper difference between a Feoffer and Donor, is, that the
Feoffer gives in Fee-simple, and the Donor in Fee-tayl.

Feracity (feracitas) fruitfulness.

Feral (feralis) deadly, mortal, dangerous, lamentable.

Ferial (ferialis) of or belonging to holy days, idle, vacant, unimployed.

Feriation (feriatio) quietness, idleness.

Ferient (feriens) striking, hitting or knocking.

Ferine (ferinus) wild as a beast.

Ferit (Ital. ferite) a wound or blow.

Ferity (feritas) cruelty, fierceness.

Fermentarious (fermentarius) made of leaven, leavened.

Ferment (fermentum) leaven.

Fermented Fermentated leavened, puffed up.

Fermentation (fermentatio) a fastening or settling; a leavening, as of bread; a
mixing or incorporating; also a working, as of Ale or Beer.

Ferocious (from ferox, ocis) fierce, harsh, cruel, proud, haughty.

Ferocity (ferocitas) fierceness, harshness, cruelty.

Feronia, a Goddess of the Woods.

Ferrean (ferreus) of iron, iron-like; also hard-hearted, cruel.

Ferried (from fero or far) born or carried; as ferried over a River.

Ferruginous (ferruginosus) like to or of the color of rusty iron.

Ferruminate (ferrumino) to soulder or fasten together, properly in matters of
iron.

Fertility (fertilitas) fruitfulness, abundance.

Fertilize (Fr. fertilizer) to make fertile, fruitful or rank; also to increase
or grow fruitful.

Fervent (fervens) Fervid (fervidus) scalding, burning, fierce, vehement.

Ferular (ferula) a wooden Instrument, wherewith the Master strikes boys hands
in Schools for correction; called also a Palmer.

Fervor (Lat.) a burning heat, earnestness, vehemence of passion.

Fesse point (from the Lat. Fascia) the middle part of an Escutecheon whose
breadth is divided into three even parts.

Fessitude (fessitudo) weariness, tiredness.

Festinate (festino) to make haste, to do a thing speedily.

Festivous (festivus) merry, pleasant, delightful, provoking mirth, pertaining
to holy days.

Festivity (festivitas) mirth, pleasantness, a good grace.

Festucous (from festuca) belonging to a young tender sprig or stalk of a tree
or herb from the root upward.

Fetiferous (foetifer) fruitful, that brings forth fruit or young.

Feuid (foetidus) stinking, filthy, ill-smelling.

Fetor (foetor) a stink or ill-savor.

Feud or Feid, or deadly Feud (feuda) a profession of an unquenchable hatred,
till we be revenged even by the death of our enemy: and is deduced from the
German word Feid, which (as Hotoman says in verbis feudalibus) modo bellum,
modo capitales inimicitias significat. This word is used 43. El. c. 13. See
Feid.

Feudal (Fr.) of or belonging to a Fief, Manor, Fee or Fee-simple; also held in
Fief or in Fee. Cotg.

Feudary. See Feodary.

Feud-boote (Sax. Faehth-bote) a recompense for engaging in a Feud or Faction,
and for the damages consequent; it being the custom of ancient times for all
the kindred to engage in their Kinsmans quarrel; according to that of Tacitus,
de Morib. German. Suscipere tam inimicitias, seu patris, seu propinqui, quam
amicitias necesse est. Sax. Dict.

Feudist, One that bears a feud or enmity; also one that writes of Fees and
Inheritances.

Feuge. See Fugue.

Fewmets or Fewmishing, the dung of a Deer.

Fiants (Fr. fiens) the dung of a Fox or Badger; a term of hunting.

Fibers (fibrae) the small threads, or hair-like strings of roots; also the
threads or strings of Muscles and Veins.

Fibrous (fibrosus) full of hair-like threads or strings.

Fibulate (fibulo) to join, or fasten together.

Fictile (fictilis) earthen, or made of earth. Bac.

Fictitious (fictitius) dissembled, feigned, counterfeit.

Fideicide, a Faith-destroyer; a breaker of word or trust.

Fideicommissor (Lat.) he that commits a thing to the disposure of another.

Fidejussor (Lat.) a Surety for another in a money matter.

Fidius, the god of faithfulness, and Son of Jupiter.

Fiduciary (fiduciarius) taken substantively, is a Feoffee in trust; or one
entrusted on condition to restore; adjectively, trusty or sure. A Fiduciary
Father. See Emancipate.

Fiduciate (fiducio) to commit a trust, or to make condition of trust.

Fierabras (from the Fr. fire a bras) fierce at arms; a name for a Braggadocia
or desperate fellow.

Fifteenth (Decima quinta) is a Tribute or Imposition of money laid upon every
City, Borough, and other Town through the Realm, not by the Poll, or upon this
or that man, but in general upon the whole City or Town; so called because it
amounts to one fifteenth part of that which the City or Town has been valued
at of old.

Figment (figmentum) a forged tale, a lie.

Figurative (figurativus) that is spoken by way of figure.

Filaceaus (from filum, or the Fr. filace) of or pertaining to fine flax or
thread.

Filament (filamentum) a thread, string or rag, or any thing like thereto, the
beard of a root. Rel. Med.

Filanders (Fr. filandres) small worms that breed in bruised, surfeited, or
foul-fed Hawks; also nets to catch wild Beasts with.

Filazer (filazarius) of the Fr. [filace] is an Officer in the Common Pleas,
whereof there are fourteen: They make out all original Process, as well real as
personal and mixed.

File (filum) is a thread or wire whereon Writs or other exhibits in Courts are
fastened, for the more safe keeping them. It is also a term in War, where six
Musketeirs or Pike-men (or as many as go a breast) make a File or Rot. See
Brigade.

Filial (filialis) of or belonging to a son.

Filiaster (Fr. filiastre) a Son in Law, or Son by a former marriage.

Filme (from the Belgic velme, quod idem denotat) a fine thin skin within the
body dividing the flesh or any near member one from another. Also a skin like a
cap wherein diverse children are born. And the skins in wrapping the brains are
called Filmes; the inmost, which is next the brain, is also called pia meninx,
or pia matter, the other dura meninx, or dura matter.

The Infant has three Teguments or Membranous Filmes, which cover it in the
womb, that is, the Corion, Amnios, and Allantois; whereof see more in Vul. Er.
p. 269.

Filtration (F.) a straining, distilling, or passing of Simples, etc. through a
Felt, woollen cloth or the like. Cotgr.

Fimbriated (from fimbria) environed with an hem or edge: a term of Heraldry.

Financer (Fr. Financier) an Exchequer-man, Receiver, Under-Treasurer or Teller
in the Exchequer.

Financy (Fr. finance) wealth, substance, riches, goods; also a Princes Revenue
or Treasure Bac.

Findible (findibilis) that which may be cut or riven.

Finitive (finitivus) which defines or determines.

Finours of Gold and Silver, are those that purify and part those metals from
other courser, by fire and water. A. 4. H. 7. cap. 2. They are also called
Parters, in the same place, sometimes Departers.

Fire-boot (compounded of Fire, and this Saxon word Bote, i. compensatio, a
recompense) signifies allowance or eslovers of wood to maintain competent fire
for the use of the Tenant.

St. Anthonies Fire (Erysipelas) a disease so called, being an inflammation
with Sores or Biles, or a swelling, full of heat, and redness, etc.

Firmity (firmitas) firmeness, stableness, constancy,

Fire-drake, a fire sometimes seen flying in the night, like a Dragon; common
people think it a spirit, that keeps some treasure hid; but Philosophers affirm
it to be a great unequal exhalation inflamed between two clouds, the one hot,
the other cold (which is the reason that it also smoaks) the middle part
whereof, according to the proportion of the hot cloud, being greater then the
rest, makes it seem like a belly, and both ends like a head and tail.

First Fruits (primitiae) were the profits of every spiritual Living for one
year, given in ancient time to the Pope throughout all Christendom; but by the
Stat. A. 26. H. 8. c. 3. translated to the Prince; For ordering whereof, there
was a Court erected, An. 32. H. 8. ca. 45. but it was dissolved, An. 5. M.
Sess. 2. ca. 10. and since that time, though those profits are reduced again to
the Crown by the Statute 1. Eliz. ca. 4. yet was the Court never restored, but
all matters formerly therein handled, were transferred to the Exchequer. See
Annats.

Fiscal (fiscalis) pertaining to the Fisque, or public Treasure.

Fisque (Fiscus) the public Purse, the public Revenue or Treasure; a Treasury
or Exchequer. Tacitus.

Fissiped (fissipes, pedis) cloven-footed.

Fissure (fissura) a cleft, a division, a parted leaf.

Fistula (Lat. Span. Fistola) a dangerous Ulcer or Sore still running. It goes
up into the body with a long narrow hole like a pipe, and therefore so called,
and is commonly hard in the outside.

Fistulary (fistularis) belonging to that disease, or to a pipe.

Fitz (Fr. fills, a son) is used as an addition to some Sirnames, as Fitz
Herbert, Fitz Williams, answerable to the Hebr. Ben, the Welsh Ap, and the
Irish Mac.

Fizgig, is a kind of Top which boys play with; And Mariners so call a
certain dart, wherewith they strike fishes as they swim.

Flabellation (flabellatio) a fanning, an airing, or giving wind unto.

Flable (flabellum) a Fan.

Flaccid (flaccidus) withered, feeble, weak, flaggy.

Flagellation (flagellatio) a whipping or scourging.

Flagitious (flagitiosus) ungracious, wicked, full of mischief.

Flagitate (flagito) to ask instantly, to desire earnestly.

Flagrant (flagrans) burning, ardent, bright.

Flagrancy (flagrantia) ardent desire, burning with flame, an inordinate love.

Flamens, The Priests among the Romans and Druides, so called: Their
Arch-Priests that presided over chief Towns, or great Districts, were called
Arch-Flamens; They took that name of Filamen, a filet or woollen yarn, which
they used to wear on their heads, or as others say, from their Mitre or head
Ornament, which was called in old time flama. See Arch-flamen.

Flammability, aptness to be inflamed, or set on fire.

Flammation (flammatio) a setting on fire.

Flammeous (flammeus) somewhat colored like a flame of fire; belonging to a
flame.

Flammiferous (flammifer) that brings or causes a flame or fire.

Flasque (from the Lat. flecto) a term in Heraldry, and signifies an Archline
in an Escotcheon. Guill.

Flatility (flatilitas) unconstancy, incertainty.

Flatulent (flatulentus) windy, or ingendring winds; as Pease and Beans are
flatulent meat.

Flatuous (flatuosus) full of blowing or windiness.

Flatuosity, windiness, fullness of wind.

Fledwit (of the Sax. Fled, i. a fugitive; and wit, which some make but a
termination, signifying nothing of it self: Others say it signifies a
reprehension, censure, or correction.) In our ancient it Law signifies a
discharge or freedom from amerciaments, when one having been an outlawed
Fugitive, comes to the peace of his own accord. Rastal. Expos. of words. See
Bloodwit.

Fleet (Fleta) is a famous Prison in London, so called, as it seems, from the
River, upon the side whereof it stands. Camb. Brit. fol. 137. To this Prison
none are usually committed, but for contempt to the Laws, or upon absolute
commandment of the King; or the Superior Courts of Justice; or lastly, upon
debt, when men are unable or unwilling to satisfy their Creditors.

Phlegmatic. See Phlegmatic.

Flectiferous (flectifer) that yields or causes tears or drops.

Flexanimous (flexanimus) that turns the mind; That is of a mind easily bent or
turned.

Flexibility (flexibilitas) aptness to bend or yield.

Flexible (flexibilis) that may be bowed, tender, tractable, pliant, apt to
move.

Flexiloquent (flexiloquus) that speaks doubtfully, so that he may be taken
diverse ways.

Flexion (flexio) a bending or bowing.

Floccify (floccifacio) to set naught by, to esteem little.

Flora, the Goddess of flowers, otherwise called Chloris.

Floramor (from the Lat. flos ymoris) a kind of Herb, or Plant, the flowers
whereof are held to have a singular faculty to beget love.

Florein, a Coin whereof there are several sorts, one about the value of three
shillings four pence, the other about two shillings ten pence farthing. In
Languedock, and the Countries adjoining, they have a piece called a Florin
worth eighteen pence sterling.

Florid (floridus) garnished with flowers, fresh, lively.

Floriferous (florifer) that bears flowers.

Flosculous (from flosculus) flowery, or pertaining to a flower, or blossom,
full of flowers. Vul. Er.

Flotson, alias Flotzam, is a word proper to the Seas, signifying any goods
that by shipwreck are lost and lie floting or swiming upon the top of the
water, which with Jetson, Lagon and Shares are given to the Lord Admiral by his
Letters Patents. Jetson, is a thing cast out of the ship, being in danger of
wreck, and beaten to the shore by the waters, or cast on the shore by Mariners.
Coke Vol. 6. fol. 106. a. It comes of the French Jetter, to cast out. Lagon
alias Lagam vel Ligan is that which lies in the bottom of the Sea. Coke ibid.
of the Dutch Ligghen, to lie. Shares are goods due to more by proportion, from
the Sax. Schyzen, i. to divide. Min.

Fluctiferous (fluctifer) that raises or brings waves.

Fluctuate (fluctuo) to rise in waves and surges, to be boisterous and rough;
to waver, doubt, or be uncertain.

Fluctisonant (fluctisonus) sounding or roaring with waves or billows.

Fluctivagant (fluctivagus) wandering on the water or Sea, tossed by the waves.

Fluctuous (fluctuosus) troublous, unquiet, boisterous.

Fluent Fluid (fluens) flowing, or gushing out, waterish.

Fluidity (fluiditas) wetness or flowing.

Fluminous (fluminosus) full of rivers.

Fluvial (fluvialis) of or belonging to a River.

Fluvious (fluviosus) flowing much.

Flux (fluxus) a flowing or issue.

Fluxibility, Aptness to flow.

Focillate (focillo) to nourish, comfort, or refresh.

Fodder, or Fother (Sax.) a certain weight of Lead or Tin, about 2000 pound, or
a Wain-load; it is mentioned in Acts 1656 9.

Fodient (fodiens) that digs or thrusts into.

To Foine (pungo) to prick or sting. Rider.

Foines, A kind of Fur brought for the most part out of France. The top
whereof is black, and the ground whitish; the beast that bears it, is about the
bigness of a Cat.

Foliaceous (foliaceus) of or like a leaf.

Folio (folium) a sheet or large leaf of paper. We say a book is in Folio, when
two leaves of it make a sheet; in Quarto, when four leaves make a sheet; in
Octavo, when eight leaves make a sheet, Duodecimo, or in Twelves, when the
sheet is made into twelve leaves, etc. Every folio or leaf has two pages.

Foliatanes (from folia, i. leaves) an order of religious persons, who lived
only upon leaves, which the Pope put down, as finding leaves unable to nourish
man's body.

Folcland (Sax,) Copyhold Lands were so called in the time of the Saxons; and
Charter-lands were called Bock-land. Kitch. 174. fundus sine scripto possessus,
says Mr. Sumner.

Folkmoote, is a Saxon word, compounded of Folk, i. populus, and Gemettan, i.
convenire. It signifies (according to Mr. Lambert, in his exposition of Saxon
words, verbo, conventus) two kinds of Courts, one now called the County Court,
the other called the Sheriffs Turn. This word is still in use among the
Londoners, and signifies Celebrem ex omni Civitate conventum. Stow. Surv. But
Mr. Manwood in his first part of Forest Laws, p. 111, has these words,
Folkmote is the Court holden in London, wherein all the folk and people of the
City did complain of the Mayor and the Aldermen for misgovernment within the
City.

Foliage (Fr. Fueillage) branched work in painting or Tapestry; also leasiness.

Follicle (folliculus) a little bag, purse, or bladder.

Foliate (foliatus) leaved or having leaves; Gold foliate, is leaf Gold. Bac.

Foment (fomento) to warm, comfort, cherish.

Fomentation (fomentatio) a fomenting, comforting, or asswaging. In Physic it
properly signifies powdry or dry things in bags, or any liquor in a Sponge or
Bladder applied warm to the body to metigate pain, or make way by opening the
^pores, for ointments or plasters to be applied.

Fons Solis, a Fountain near the Temple of Jupiter Hammon in Lybia, that at
midnight is as hot as boiling water, and at noon as cold as any ice; which may
the rather be credited, since our Bathes in England are much warmer in the
night then in the day. Sir Wa. Ral. History of the World, l. 4. f 184.

Font (fons) a Fountain or Water-spring. What the Font of a Church is every one
knows, but not why so called. The Rites of Baptism in the primitive times were
performed in Fountains and Rivers, both because the Converts were many, and
those ages unprovided of other Baptisteries; and in this Rite we still retain
the name; for hence it is we call our Baptisteries, Fonts; which when Religion
found peace, were built and consecrated for the more reverence and respect of
the Sacrament. Rationale.

Fontal (fontalis) pertaining to a Fountain or Well.

Forable (forabilis) that may be boared or pierced.

Foraminous (foraminosus) full of holes.

Foraneous (foraneus) belonging to a Market or Court.

Forcinated (forcipatus) bended like a hook.

Foreloin, a term in hunting when a Hound meets a chase, and goes away with it,
before the rest of the Cry.

Forensal (forensis) pertaining to the Commonplace; used in pleading or in the
Judgment place.

Forestal (from the Belg. Veur, i. ante, and Stallen, Merces disponere) is to
buy Corn, Cattle or other Merchandise by the way as it comes toward the Fair
or Market to be sold, to the intent to sell the same again, at a dearer price.

Forestaller, is he that forestalls, and buys things in such sort.

Forelorn Hop^, a party of Soldiers sent before the whole body of the Army to
skirmish with the Enemy; the French call it Enfans perdues; the Roman Velites
were in a manner answerable hereunto.

Forelorn, comes from the Belg. Verloren, i. perditus, lost. The Forelorn-Hope
is given for lost, in respect it is most commonly desperate Service. See Perdu.

Formalist (from forma) one that is very punctual or precise in his actions or
words.

Formator (Lat.) he that instructs, makes or forms.

Formalize, to form, to give or add form unto.

Formidable (formidabilis) dreadful, to be feared, terrible.

Formidolous (formidolosus) fearful, that fears, dreadful, dangerous.

Formosity (formositas) comeliness, beauty.

Formulary (Fr. Formulaire) the style or manner of proceeding in the Law; a
President for doing any thing.

Fornication (fornicatio) Whoredom, Letchery, spoken of single persons; if
either party be married, then it is Adultery. It is punished by three months
imprisonment for the first offense; the second is made Felony by Act 1650. c.
10.

Fortitude (fortitudo) strength, valor, courage. It is one of the four
Cardinal Virtues, and is thus defined; Fortitude is a virtue that moderates the
irascible power, according to reason, and so it helps us to overcome those
difficulties, which require courage in choosing one harm to avoid another. Fit.
Cat.

Fortuitous Fortuite (fortuitus) that happens by chance, sudden, casual,
accidental.

Fosse way (from fossus, dig'd) it was originally one of the four grand
Highways of England, so called; because it is conceived to be dug or made
passable by the ancient Romans, or ditched at least on one side; but now
several inferior Highways are so called. See Watling-street.

Fosset (cistella) a little chest.

Fossion (fossio) a digging or delving.

Fossile (fossilis) that which is or may be dug.

Fotion (fotio) a nourishing or keeping warm.

Fotive (fotus) nourished, kept warm.

Fougade (Fr.) a Mine, or up-blowning Fire-work, or Wildfire. Rel. Med.

Foulk or Fulk^, a man's name; some derive it from the German Volig, i. noble
and gallant; But I from Fool, the English Saxon word for people, as though it
were the same with Publius of the Romans, and only translated from Publius as
beloved of the people and Commons.

Fracid (fracidus) more then ripe, rotten-ripe, putrified.

Faction (fractio) a breaking or bursting.

Fragile (fragilis) frail, brittle, soon broken, mortal, weak. Bac.

Fragility (fragilitas) brittleness, weakness, inconstancy.

Fragment (fragmentum) a piece or gobbet of a thing broken.

Fragor (Lat.) the noise made with the fall of any thing; a cracking or
crashing of things broken asunder; a great noise or busling. Sands.

Fragrancy (fragrantia) a sweet smell or savor.

Franc, is a French coin of twenty sols tournois, which amounts to near 2 s.
sterling.

Francis (Ger.) from Franc, that is free, not servile or bound. The same with
the Gr. Eleutherius, and the Lat. Liberius. Came.

Franciscans or Franciscan Friars, a Religious Order instituted by St. Francis
an Italian about the year of our Lord, 1198. and confirmed by Pope Innocent the
Third; His rule prescribed Chastity, Obedience, Poverty, much fasting, and
other austerities to all that should be admitted of that Order; Of which you
may read more in St. Bonaven. de vita St Francisci. Out of this great Order
have sprung diverse others, as Observantes, Conventuales, Minimi, Capuciani,
Collectanei, etc.

Frangible (frangibilis) that may be broken, breakable.

Franchise (Fr.) liberty, freedom, exemption; also good breeding, free-birth;
it is taken with us for a privilege or exemption from ordinary Jurisdiction,
and sometimes an immunity from tribute, etc.

Frank-Almoin (libera Eleemosyna) in French Franc Aumosne, signifies in our
Common Law a Tenure or Title of Lands. Britton (Cap. 66. number. 5.) says thus of
it. Frank-Almoine is Lands or Tenements bestowed upon God, that is, given to
such people as bestow themselves in the service of God, for pure and perpetual
Alms, whence the Feoffers or givers cannot demand any terrestrial service, so
long as the Lands remain in the hands of the Feoffees.

Frank marriage (Fr. Franc-marriage) is a Tenure in Tail special, growing from
these words in the gift, Sciant, etc. Me T.B. de O. dedisse, etc. I.A. filio
meo and Marg. uxori ejus filiae verae T.N. in liberum maritagium unum
Messagium, etc. West. p. 1. Symb. l. 2. Sect. 303. The effect of which words
is, that they shall have the Land to them and the Heirs of their bodies; and
shall do no fealty to the Donor till the fourth Degree, etc.

Frank pledge (franciplegium) is compounded of franc, i. lib^r, and pledge, i.
fidejussor, a free-pledge or surety, and signifies in our Common Law, a pledge
or surety for freemen.

Fraternize (from frater) to agree as brothers; to concur with, or be near
unto; also to admit into a Fraternity, Brotherhood or Society.

Fraternal (fraternalis) of or belonging to a brother.

Fratricelli, a Sect of Heretics broached by one Hermannius an Italian, about
the year of Christ 1304. in time of Pope Benedict the eleventh, and Albertus
the first Emperor; they were otherwise called fratres de paupere vita, brothers
of a poor life. 1. They taught promiscuous beddings; that nothing was to be
held proper or ones own; that Christians are not to be Governors of a
Commonwealth, with other foolish errors condemned by Pope Boniface the eigth.

Fratricide (fratricidium) brother-slaughter.

Fratruel^ (fratrueles) brothers children, cousin Germans

Fraudation (fraudatio) a deceiving or beguiling.

Fradulent (fradulentus) crafty, deceitful, full of guil.

Free-booters. See Banditi.

Frederic (Germ.) Rich peace, or (as the Monk which made this allusion would
have it) peaceable reign.

Est adhibenda fides rationi nominis hujus
Compositi Frederic, duo componentia cujus
Sunt Frederic, Frith, quid nisi Pax? Ric, quid nisi regum?
Sic per Hendiaden, Fredericus, quid nisi vel Rex
Pacificus? vel regia Pax? Pax, pacificusque.
For Frederic the English have commonly used Frery and Fery, which has been now
a long time a Christian name in the ancient Family of Tilney, and lucky to
their house, as they report. Came.

Freed-stool (Sax. i. seeds pacis) was of old a refuge for malefactors at
Beverley in Yorkshire, where St. John of Beverley, Archbishop of York erected a
Monastery, which King Athelstan made a Sanctuary to secure offenders against
all legal prosecution.

Frement (fremens) gnashing, or grinding the teeth, roaring or braying.

Frenigerent (fraeniger) that rules the bridle.

Frescades (Fr.) refreshments; as (in Summer time) light garments, cool air,
cool places, cool drinks, Bowres or shades overspread with green boughs.

Fresco (Ital.) fresh, cool, coldish; also unsalt, new laid, new made, sweet;
green or lusty. As we say, to walk or drink in Fresco, i. to walk in the cool
or fresh air, or to drink cool or fresh wine.

Fretrots, a sort of Sectaries (which wore a secret Crown on their heads)
incestuous, as Adamites, by night, and suppressed in the year, 1310.

Friable (friabilis) that may be crummed, or broken small. Bac.

Frication or Friation (fricatio) a rubbing or fretting together.

Friar or Friar (from the Lat. Frater, or from the Fr. friar, i. a brother)
there are four principal Orders reckoned of them An. 4. H. 4. ca. 17. (viz.)
Minors, Gray Friars, or Franciscans; Augustins; Dominicans, or Black Friars;
and White Friars or Carmelites; from these four Orders the rest descended. See
in Zecchius de Repuh. Eccl. p. 380. And Linwood, tit. de Relig. Domibus, ca. 1.
verbo, St. Augustine.

Friar Observant (frater observans) is an Order of Franciscans, and it is to be
noted, that of these four Orders mentioned in the word above, the Franciscans
are, Minores tam observantes quam conventuales, and Capuchini. Zecch. de Repub.
Eccl. tract. de regular. cap. 2. These Friars Observant (mentioned An. 25. H.
B. ca. 12.) are so called, because they are not combined together in any
Cloister, Covent or Corporation, as the Conventuals are, but only tie
themselves to observe the Rules of their Order, and more strictly then the
Conventuals do; and upon a singularity of zeal separate themselves from them,
living in certain places and companies of their own choosing, and of this you
may read Hospinian, de Orig and prog. Monachatus, fol. 878. ca. 38.

Fricasse (Fr. fricassee) any meat fried in a pan.

Friga, an Hermaphroditical Idol, adored by the old Saxons on the day now
called Friday, which thence took its denomination, and was of old called
Frigedeag. Verst. p. 63.

Frigefaction (frigefactio) a making cool.

Frigerate (frigero) to cool.

Frigeratory (frigeratorium) a Cooling-house or place.

Frigid (frigidus) cold, faint, negligent, flow; also that is unable for carnal
copulation

Frigidity (frigiditas) coldness.

Frigifie (frigifacio) to cool, or make cold.

Frigor (Lat.) coldness.

Frigorifical (frigorificus) that makes or procures cold.

Friperer (from the Fr. Fripier, i. interpolator) one that scowres up and mends
old Apparel to sell again, a Broker. This word is used for a bastardly kind of
Broker. A. 1. Ja. ca. 21.

Fripery, The use of that kind of Trade, Brocage; also a Brokers shop, or a
street of Brokers.

Fritiniancy Fritiniency (from fritinio) is a chirping like a Swallow.

Frize, and Cornice, the Crests, furniture^ and finishing at the upper end of a
Column or Pillar; a term of Architecture.

Frondiferous (frondifer) that bears leaves or branches.

Frondosity (frondositas) leaviness, or aptness to bear leaves.

Frontal (frontale) a Frontlet or attire for the forehead, or a plaster
applied to the Forehead. It is also used Adjectively.

Frontispiece (frontispicium) the forefront of an house or other building;
also the Title or first page of a book done in picture.

Frontiniac, a luscious kind of rich wine, made at a Town so called in France.

Fructiferous (fructifer) bearing fruit.

Frugality (frugalitas) thrift, sobriety, moderation in expenses.

Fruggin (from the Fr. fourgon, or Lat. furca) an Ovenfork (so termed in
Lincolnshire) to put fuel into an Oven, and stir the fire.

Frugiferent Frugiferous (frugifer) bringing forth fruit, fertile, profitable.

Fruiterie (Fr.) a place to keep fruit in.

Fruitiges or Fruitices (from frutex) branched work in Sculpture, as fucillage
is in Painting or Tapestry.

Frimenty (from frumentum, i. wheat) so called, because it is a kind of pottage
made of milk and wheat.

Frustrate (frustro) to deceive, to disappoint, to do in vain.

Frustulent (furstulentus) full of Gobbets, and small pieces.

Frutication (fruticatio) sprouting out of young sprigs, a springing forth.

Frythe or Frith (Sax.) a wood. Chaucer. Or rather a plain between woods.

Fucate (fuco) to lay on a color, to paint, to counterfeit.

Fucator (Lat.) he that paints or colors.

Fugacity (fugacitas) a readiness to run away, inconstancy, an inclination to
flight.

Fugalia (Lat.) a Feast aunually solemnized by the old Romans in remembrance of
the expulsion of the Kings out of Rome. According to which pattern, the joyful
English having cleared the Country of the Danes, instituted the annual sports
of Hock tide, the word (in old Saxon) importing the time of scorning or
triumphing. This Solemnity consisted in the merry meetings of the neighbors on
those days, during which the Festival lasted, and was celebrated by the younger
sort of both Sexes, with all manner of Exercises and Pastimes in the streets,
as Shrovetide yet is. But now time has so corrupted it, that (the name
excepted) there remains no sign of the first institution. Heyl. Verstegan
thinks this Hock-tide may come from the Teutonick, Heugh-tide, i. A time of
gladness or joy.

Fugation (fugatio) a putting to flight, or driving away.

Fugue (Fr.) a chase or report of Music; as when two or more parts chase one
another in the same point.

Fugtiv (fugitivus) flitting, ready to run away.

Fugitives goods (bona fugitivo^um) are the proper goods of him that flies upon
felony which after the flight, lawfully found, belong to the King, Coke vol. 6.
fo. 109. b.

Fulcible (fulcibilis) which may be under-set or propped.

Fulciment (fulcimen) a prop or underset. Math. Mag.

Fulge^ (fulgens Fulgid (fulgidus shining, glistering, bright.

Fulgidity (fulgiditas) brightness, shining, glory.

Fulgor (Lat.) idem.

Fulgural (fulguralis) belonging. to fulgur or lightning.

Fulguration (fulguratio) the lightning to be seen in the clouds.

Fulra^s, certain reformed Monks, or religious persons, following St. Bernard
as their Patron, and St. Bennet as their Patriarch. Spir. Conflict.

Fuliginous (fuliginosus) full of soot, smoaky.

Fullonical (fullonicus) belonging to a Fuller of cloth.

Fulminate (fulmino) to lighten or strike with lightning.

Fulminatory (fulminatorius) thundering, lightning, destroying, terrible.

Fulvid (fulvidus) yellow.

Fumid (fumidus) smooky, or that smoaketh.

Fumidity (fumiditas) smoakiness.

Fumiferous (fumifer) that brings smoke.

Fumigation (fumigatio) a smoking or perfuming with smoke.

Function (functio) the exercise, or executing of some office or charge.

Funambulant (funambulus) a Dancer on the Rope, a Rope, Walker. Du Bartas.

Fund (fundus) land or soil; also a foundation or bottom.

Funditor (Lat.) a slinger, or one that in battle or otherwise casts out stones
or darts out of a sling.

Funeorous Funerous (funebris) mournful, belonging to the Funerals of the dead,
sorrowful.

Fungosity (fungositas) a light and hollow substance, such as we see in
Spunges, Mushromes, Fuss-balls, etc.

Funnel (infundibulum) an instrument, through which liquor is poured into
vessels; also a Tunnel or Funnel of a Chimney.

Furacity (fura^citas) theevishness, theft.

Furbishing (Fr. Fourbisseure) a scouring, polishing or burnishing.

Furcation (from furca) a forking, a hanging on a Gallows. Vul. Er.

Furus (furiae) three imaginary Fiends or Spirits in Hell, having Snakes
growing on them instead of hairs.

Poets feign them to be the Daughters of the River Acheron and Night, and to
have the o^tice of tormenting the souls of murderers and wicked men; their
names were Alecto, i. uncessantly tormenting; Megaera, i. enraged; And
Tysiphone, i. the Avenger of murder.

Futina, The Goddess of Thieves.

Furlong (of two Fr. words, Fort-long, i. very long, or quasi furrow-long) is a
quantity of ground, containing twenty Lugs, Roods, or Poles in length, and
every Pole sixteen foot, and a half, eight of which Furlongs make a mile, An.
35. E. 1. ca. 6. It is otherwise the eighth part of an Acre. See Acre. In the
former signification the Romans call it [Stadium], in the latter [Jugerum] This
measure which we call a Pole, is also called a Perch, and differs in length,
according to the custom of the Country. See Perch, Stade.

Furole (Fr.) a little blaze of fire appearing by night on the tops of
Soldiers Lances, or at Sea, on Sail-yards, where it whirles and leaps in a
moment from one place to another; some Mariners call it St. Hermes fire; if it
come double, it is held a sign of good luck; if single, otherwise.

Furtive (furtivus) that is done by stealth, filching, theevish, felonious.

Fuscation (fuscatio) a darkning or clouding.

Fusibility, meltableness, that may be molten. Sir Hen. Wotton.

Fusibl^ (fusilis) that is or may be molten.

Fusil (Lat. fusillus) a little Spindle: It is also a term in Heraldry, and
signifies that in a Coat of Arms, which is in a manner like a Spindle, as in
that of Sire de Montagu (a French name) il port dargert, trois fusillees en
fasse de gueules. Min. The Fusil is longer then the Lozenge^ or Mascle, having
its upper and lower part more acute, then the other two collateral middle
parts. Gwill. fol. 358.

Fusion (fusio) a melting or pouring forth.

Fustigate (fustigo) to beat with a staff, to cudgel.

Futility (futilitas) lightness, babbling, folly, vanity.

Futurition Futurity (from futurus) the being to come of any thing.

G
GAbardine (from the Fr. Gaban or Galleberdine) a rough Irish Mantle or
Horse-mans coat; a long Cassock.

Gabel (Ital. gabella) toll, Tribute, Custom, or Impost.

Gabion (Fr.) a defense for Canoneers, made of great Baskets filled with earth.

Gabriel (Hebr.) strong with God; the name of an Angel.

Gad (from the Sax. Gaad, i. the point of a Spear) is a quantity of steel, of
about two or three ounces.

Gaffe (Fr.) an iron hook wherewith Seamen pull great fishes into their ships.

Gage (Fr.) a pawn or pledge. In our Law, use has turned the G into W, as to
Wage deliverance (Gager deliverance) to give security that a thing shall be
delivered. Sea men Gage their Gask, that they may know the bigness of it, or
how much is leaked out, which is done by putting down a stick at the Boong, and
that by the wetness will show how much liquor is in it. Also when they would
know how much water a Ship draws when she is afloat, they stick a nail into a
pike or pole, and put it down by the Rudder, till it catch hold under the
Rudder; and this they call Gaging a ship.

Gager. See Gawgeor.

Galactite (galactites) a precious stone of a white color.

Galage (solea) a kind of a Paten or Shoo, so called, having nothing on the
feet but latchets.

Galatia, a Sea Nymph, for whose love Polyphemus slew himself.

Galaxy (galaxias) a bright circle in the Sky, caused by the reflection of the
Stars, the milky way in the Firmament.

Galenue or Galenist, one that studies or follows the Aphorisms of Galen, the
ancient great Physician.

Gallicism, the form of speech or custom of the French.

Gallion (Fr.) a great ship of War.

Gallihalpens, were a kind of Coin forbidden by the Statute, An 3 H. 5. c. 1.

Galliote (Fr.) a small Gally or Gally-like vessel, having twenty Oars on a
side, and two or three Rowers to an Oar, much used by Turkish and Moorish
Rovers. Cotg. See Brigantine.

Gallant (Fr.) goodly, noble, virtuous. But it is now substantively applied to
that person, who is Servant or Platonic to a Lady.

Gallego (Spa.) a man of Galitia. How.

Gallon (Span.) the same with Gallion, also a measure containing with us four
quarts.

Gallug, a River in Phrygia, the water whereof made men mad.

Galoches (Fr.) wooden shoos, or patens made all of a piece, without any
latchet or tie of leather, and worn in France by the poor Clowns in Winter.
What our English Galoches are, and by whom worn, every one knows.

Gamahez (Arab.) as Talismans are Images or figures made by art under certain
Constellations; So Gamahez are such figures found so wrought by nature, held to
be of greater virtue, being therefore worn by some persons.

Gambade (from the Ital. Gamba, i. a leg,) is a kind of leather instrument
affixed to the Saddle in the place of Stirrops wherein we put our legs when we
ride, to preserve them from dirt and cold.

Gambol^s (Fr. Gambade, stal. gamba, i a leg, because gamboles, or (as we call
them) Christmas gamboles are properly games or tumbling tricks played with the
legs.

Gammot, an incision knife.

Gammut or Gamut, the first note in Music, from whence the whole number of
notes take denomination. As the Greek Cross-row is called Alphabet from the two
first letters, Alpha and Beta.

Ganching (from the Fr. Ganche) is a form of putting Offenders to death in
Turkey, which is to let them fall from on high, upon hooks or stakes pointed
with iron, and there to hang till they dye, by the anguish of their wounds, or
more miserable famine.

Gangick, of or pertaining to Ganges a great River in India Oriental, the
breadth of it being in the narrowest place eight, in the broadest twenty miles,
and the depth never less then a hundred foot. Heyl.

Gang-week. See Rogation week.

Gangreen (gangraena) dead flesh in the body of a botch, an eating Ulcer that
will quickly infect all the body.

Gantlope (Ghent Lope) a punishment of Soldiers, happily first invented at
Ghent, or Gant in Flanders, and therefore so called; or it may be derived from
the Dutch gaen looper, i. to take ones heels or run; and Lope in Dutch
signifies running; for the Offender is to run through the whole Regiment with
his upper part naked, and every fellow-Soldier to have a whip at him, etc.

Ganymede (Ganymedes) the name of a Trojan Boy, whom Jupiter so loved (say the
Poets) as he took him up to Heaven, and made him his Cup Bearer. Hence any Boy,
loved for carnal abuse, or hired to be used contrary to Nature, to commit the
detestable sin of Sodomy, is called a Ganymede, or Ingle.

Garb (Ital garbo) comeliness, gracefulness, or good fashion; Also a sharp or
piquant taste, applied of late to Wine or Beer, that has a kind of pleasing
piquantness in its relish.

Gargarize (gargarizo) to garble or wash the mouth and throat.

Gargarism (gargarismus) a liquid potion to wash the mouth and throat with,
which is not suffered to go down, but to bubble up and down the throat.

Gargantua, great throat; Garganta in Spanish signifies a throat; It is usually
taken for some feigned Giant or Monster.

Garamantick (Garamanticus) belonging to Garamus a King of Lybia.

Gardmanget (Fr.) a Sellar or Storehouse, where meat is kept.

Garnish or Garnishment (from the French Garnir, i to provide, furnish, fill
with) it is commonly taken for a certain Fee or quantity of good liquor which
Prisoners either give their follow Prisoners or else their Keepers at their
first admittance into Prison. The word properly signifies a furnishing,
storing, or supplying, and sometimes a giving assurance.

Garnishee is the party in whose hands money is attached, and so used in the
Sheriff of Londons Court.

Garnison (Fr.) store of furniture, provision, preparation.

Garrulity (garrulitas) babbling, busy talking, or overmuch prating.

Garrulous (garrulosus) ever chatting, full of talk.

Garter King at Arms, the chief of the three Kings at Arms, the other are
called Clarentius and Norroy; this Garter was instituted and created by Henry
the fifth. Stows Ann. p. 584. See Harold.

Gasper, one of the three Wisemen which came from the East to worship our
Savior, vulgarly called the three Kings of Collen. See Balthazar. It is also
an usual Christian name among us.

Gastrimythe (Gr.) a belly-God.

Gastroclite (gastroclites) he that gets his living by handycraft.

Gastremarcy (gastromantia) divination by the belly.

Gastrotomy, The Section or cutting up of the belly.

Gaudiloquen^ (gaudiloquens) he that speaks with joy.

Gaudy or Grand days. In the Inns of Court there are four of these in the year,
that is, one in every Term, viz. Ascension day in Easter Term, Midsummer day in
Trinity Term, All Saints day in Michaelmas Term, and Candlemas day in Hillary
Term; these four are no days in Court, and on these days double Commons are
allowed, and Music on all Saints, and Candlemas day, as the first and last of
Christmas. The Etymology of the word may be taken from Judge Gaudy, who (as
some affirm) was the first institutor of those days, or rather from gaudium,
because (to say truth) they are days of joy, as bringing good cheer to the
hungry Students. In Colleges they are most commonly called Gaudy, in Inns of
Court Grand days, and at Court they were called Collar days. See Collar days.

Gav^lkind, a custom whereby every son or heir male inherits a portion alike in
his Ancestors estate, and is derived of three Sax. words, gif^, call, cyn, that
is, given to all the kin, quasi, omnibus Cognatione proximis data haereditas.
Dodd. Or rather from gafel, i. tributum, pensio, and cynd, genus, conditio.

Gaulonitee (Gaulonitae) were a certain Faction or Sect among the Jews, and had
name from one Judas, who was called Judas Gaulonites, sometimes Judas
Galilaeus, of whom Gamaliel speaks Act. 5.37. he and his followers opposed the
tribute raised by Cyrcenius, under Augustus. Joseph. Antiq.

Gawgeor, An Officer having Authority to give a mark of allowance to all Tuns,
Hogsheads, Pipes, Barrels, etc. of Wine, Oil, Honey and Butter, before they
ought to be sold; it comes from the Fr. Gawger, i. a Gager or Measurer of
Casks, etc. Of this Office see the Stat. 27. E. 3. c. 8.

Gazel (Gr.) a certain Venetian Coin scarce worth our farthing; Also a Bill of
news or short relation of the general occurrences of the time, forged most
commonly at Venice, and thence dispersed every month into most parts of
Christendom. Cotgr.

Gazul, All Egypt where the Nile arrives not, is nothing but a whitish Sand
bearing no grass, but two little weeds called Suhit and Gazul, which burnt to
ashes, and conveyed to Venice, make the finest Crystal glasses. Sir H. Blunt
in his Levant. Voyage.

Gebaltark or Gebaltarec (corruptly called the Streights of Gibralthar)
situate in the Mediterranean Sea, on the north side whereof stood Mount Calpe,
on the south mount Abila, on which Hercules, placed his so memorized Pillars,
with this inscription, Nil ultra. The name comes from Gebal, which in Arabic
signifies a Mountain, and Tarec the son of Abdalla, who having transported his
Barbarians over the Straight, secured his Army with the natural fortifications
of the place.

Gehenna, Properly signifies a place in a valley, in the Tribe of Benjamin,
terrible for two sorts of fires in it; that wherein the Israelites sacrificed
their children to the Idol Moloch; Secondly for another fire there continually
burning, to consume the dead carcasses and filth of Jerusalem; Hence it was a
type of Hell fire, and more usually taken for hell it self. David Kimchi, Psalm.
27.13.

Geideor Gelt (Dutch) money or tribute.

Gelid (gelidus) cold as ice, frosty.

Gelicide (gelicidium) a frost.

Gelidity (geliditas) coldness, frostiness.

Gement (gemens) groaning, lamenting.

Geminate (gemino) to double, to increase.

Gemineis (Gemini) twins, pairs, matches, or likes.

Gemites, a kind of precious stone, qui veluti candidas manus inter se
complexas habet.

Gemote, the Hundred-Court. See Sir Richard Bakers Chronicle, fol. 38.

Gemmated (gemmatus) set or bedecked with precious stones.

Gemmery, a Jewel-house or place to keep Gemms in, a Cabinet.

Gemmiferous (gemmifer) that bears or brings precious stones.

Gemmosity (gemmositas) abundance of precious stones.

Gemony (gemoniae scalae) a place in Rome where condemned persons were cast
down by a pair of stairs headlong into the River Tibet. Tacitus.

Gend-atme (Fr.) a man of Arms, a horseman armed at all points, one that serves
in complete armor, and on a great horse.

Genealogy (genealogia) a description of ones lineage, stock or pedigree.

Generative (generativus) ingendring, of an ingendring faculty or breeding
power.

Generical (from Genus) pertaining to a Kindred, stock, kind, or gender, or to
the beginning of ones birth.

Generosity (generositas) nobleness of mind, gentleman-like courage.

Genesis (Gr.) a generation. The first Book of Moses is so called in Greek and
Latin, because it declares the Creation and Generation of all things. In Hebrew
it is bereschith, i. in principio, and took its name from the first words of
the first Chapter of the said Book, as do many other books of the Old
Testament. Min.

Genethliacal (genethliacus) pertaining to the casting of Nativities.

Genethlialogy (genethlialogia) telling or casting of Nativities.

Genethliaques, casters of men's fortunes by the day or hour of their birth; or
books treating of that subject.

Genial (genialis) full of mirth: pertaining to marriage; the marriage bed was
of old called the Genial-bed, quasi Genital-bed.

Genital (genitalis) serving to engender, or for breed.

Genitals (genitale) the privy members of any creature.

Genitive (genitivus) natural ingendring, of an ingendring faculty, that has
power to engender.

Genitor (Lat.) a Father, a beginner, a begetter; also the stones of man or
beast.

Genius (Lat.) a good or evil Angel, the spirit of man, nature it self, natural
inclination.

Genii, were supposed to be (...), and Pararii, Brokers, as it were, between
men and the gods, or rather Interpreters, and Salutigeruli, Messengers between
of a middle nature betwixt the one and the other. Coelius Rho. l. 2. c. 3. But
according to Empedocles, each one was thought to have his Angel from the very
day of Nativity, to whom they used to sacrifice on their birth day, as to their
Guardian; also every place had their peculiar Genii, and then they were called
Lares, as Rurales and Permarini, in Livie.

Gentilitious Gentilitial (gentilitius) that pertains to a stock; an use or
property taken from ancestors; of the same kindred.

Gentil (gentilis) among the Jews all were Gentiles that were not of one of the
Twelve Tribes: Now commonly we call them Gentiles that profess not the faith of
Christ.

Gentilesse (Fr.) Gentry, Gentility, Nobility.

Gentilism (gentilismus) the opinion or belief of the Gentiles; Paganism,
Heathenishness.

Gentleman (generosus) seems to be compounded of two words, the one French (
gentile, i. honestus, vel honesto loco natus;) the other Saxon mon, as if you
would say, a man well born. The Italian follows the very word, calling those
Gentil-homini, whom we call Gentlemen.

Genuflexion (genuflexi) the bowing of the knee.

Genuine (genuinus) proper, peculiar, natural.

Genus (Lat.) the beginning of ones birth; a kindred, stock, lineage; a kind or
fashion, etc. a Gender. Also a term in Logic; And it is the first of the five
Predicables; When the Predicate comprehends the full Answer to a Question, it is
called a Species; but if it only contains a part, so that other common
considerations are comprehended under it, it is called a Genus. See Mr. Whites
Perip. Institutions, p. 17.

Geodesie (geodaesia) the art of measuring Land.

Geodesian (geodaetes) a measurer of Land.

Geography (geographia) is a description of the earth by her parts and their
limits, scituations, Inhabitants, Cities, Rivers, fertility, and observable
matters, with all other things annexed thereunto. Heyl. Geographiae proprium
est unam and continuam terram cognitam ostendere quemadmodum se habeat natura
and positione. Ptolemie.

Geographer (geographus) a describer of the earth.

Geomantie (geomantia) divination by points and circles made on the earth, or
by opening the earth.

Geometry (geometria) an art of due proportion, consisting in Lineaments,
Forms, Distances, and Greatness: there are four Principles hereof, to wit, 1. A
prick or point. 2. A Line. 3. A Superficies or outside. 4. A Body. It has
properly the name from measuring the earth, being first found out in Egypt,
and was of great estimation among the Ancient Grecians.

Geometrician (geometres) one skilful in Geometry.

Geometrical (geometricus) pertaining to Geometry.

To Geometrize, to play the Geometrician, to hold a due proportion, to observe
order.

Geoponical (from the Greek (...)) of or belonging to Husbandry and Tillage.

Georgians, A Sect of pernicious Heretics, so called from one David George,
born at Delft in Holland; he held that the Law and Gospel were unprofitable for
the attaining Heaven, etc, That he was the true Christ and Messiah, etc. with
other such damnable Tenets, he died in the year, 1556. Heyl.

Also a sott of Christians, inhabiting a Country called Georgia, lying between
Colchos, Caucasus, the Caspian Sea and Armenia, heretofore Iberia and Albania;
they are so called not of St. George (as some write) their selected Patron, but
of their said Country, so named long before the time wherein he is supposed to
have lived; yet they bear much reverence to this St. George, the Cappadocian
Martyr (the same whom the Knights of the Garter have formerly so much honored
in England) always carrying his image in their Standards, etc. These in some
points of their Religion, agree with the Roman Catholics, but in others they
follow the Grecians; they have a Metropolitan of their own, for their spiritual
guide, whom they obey most punctually, and who has his seat on Mount Sina, in
the Cloister of St. Katherine the Virgin Martyr. Sands.

Georgicks (Georgica) books entreating of the tillage of the earth.

Gerah, was the least silver Coin among the Hebrews, it is valued of ours 1 d.
ob. Exodus 30.13.

Gerent (gerens) bearing or carrying.

Germanity, (germanitas) brotherhood.

Germinat^on (germinitio) a springing or budding.

Gerone. See Gyron.

Gertrude or Gartrude (a woman's name) compounded of the old Saxon Gar, i. All;
and trude, i. Truth or Troth; for [d] was sometimes by our Ancestors
indifferently used instead of [th] So that Gertrude, is as much as All truth.
Verstegan.

Gerunds of Verbs (Gerundia) a gerenda duplici significatione, nempe activa and
passiva sub una voce, etc. Min.

Gests (gesta) noble acts of Princes or people; Exploits.

Gestation (gestatio) a bearing or carrying. Vul. Er.

Gesticulate (gesticulo) to use much gesture, to make signs of mirth; also to
dance by measures.

Gesticulation (gesticulatio) a representing any man by countenance, hands or
other parts of the body.

Gestion (gestio) a doing of a thing.

Geules, a term among Heralds, and signifies a Vermilion color.

Gewgawes, trifles, See Gugaw.

Gibralter. See Gebaltark.

Gibbosity (gibbositas) crookedness of the back or shoulders; bunchedness.

Gibbous (gibber) that has a crooked back, hog-backed, bunch-backed. Vul. Err.

Gigantomachy (gigantomachia) the fighting or warring of Giants.

Gigantine (from Gigas, antis) of or pertaining to a Giant, or as big as a
Giant.

Gig-mills, were Mills used in the Fulling of cloth, which with iron cards are
prohibited by the Statutes of 3. Ed. 6.2. 5 Ed. 6.22.

Gigot (Fr.) a minced meat mingled with Sewet, a Hache.

Gilbertines, a Religious Order begun by one Gilbert at Terington and
Sempringham in Lincolnshire, about the year of Christ 1148. Pol. Vir. This
Gilbert lived to see 13 Monasteries and 1700 persons of his Order in England;
he was Canonized by Pope Innocent the third. And commemoration is made of him
on the 13 of October. Nova leg. S.S. Ang. fol. 167.

Gild (Sax. Gildan, i. solvere) signifies a tribute or payment, and sometimes
an amercement; or thirdly a fraternity or company combined together by Orders
and Laws made among themselves by the Princes License. And Gildhal is conceived
to be so called, there being a fraternity or Commonalty of men gathered into
one combination, supporting their common charge by a mutual contribution.

Gildable, Mr. Camden, page 349. dividing Suffolk into three parts, calls the
first Gildable, because tribute is thence gathered.

Gimlet (Fr. Gimbelet) a piercer to broach a vessel with; such as Butlers and
Tapsters use.

Gippon (Fr.) a short coat or Cassock, some corruptly call it a Jump.

Gipsony (from gipsum) belonging to lime or plaster.

Girasole, a precious stone of the kind of Opsals, that yields an eye-like
luster, which way soever you turn it, unless it be toward the Sun, and then it
casts forth beams like the Sun.

Girl, a Row Buck of two years.

Gitomantie (Gr.) Divination by Circles.

Gisarmes. An. 13. E. 1. Stat. 3. cap. 6. is a kind of weapon. Fleta writes it
Sisarmes l. 1. cap. 24. I take it ought rather to be written Bisarmes, a double
weapon or a weapon with two pikes. Min.

Giste (Fr.) a Bed, Couch, lodging place to lie on or rest in; hence came the
Gists of the Kings Progress, that is, a writing containing the names of the
houses or Towns where the King or Prince intended to lie or rest every night
through his progress.

Gisting. See Agist.

Glacial (glacialis) where ice is, freezing, cold.

Glaciate (glacio) to congeal or freeze, to turn to ice.

Gladiator (Lat.) a sword-player, a Master of Fence.

Gladiature (gladiatura) the feat of fighting with swords.

Glandiferous (glandifer) bearing Mast.

Glandage (Fr.) Mast; also Mastage, the season of turning hogs into the woods;
the feeding of hogs by Mast.

Glandulous (glandulosus) full of kernels, kernelly.

Glaibe (Brit.) a weapon like a Halberd, a Hook or Bill.

Glandulosity, fullness of kernels. Vul. Err.

Glaucitate (glaucito) to cry like a whelp.

Glebe Land (from Gleba, a turff or piece of eath) is that Land, meadow or
Pasture which belongs to a Parsonage, besides the Tithe.

Glebosity (glebositas) fullness of clods or turffs.

Glede (Sax.) a burning coal; also a Kite so called.

Glister (Glyster) a liquor made sometime with sodden flesh, sometime with
decoction of herbs or other things, which by a Pipe is conveyed into the lower
parts of the body. It is written, that the use hereof was first learned from a
bird in Egypt called Ibis, much like a Stork, which bird does often with her
bill, open her hinder parts, when nature her self does not expel what is
needful. Bull.

Globosity (globositas) roundness like a Globe.

Globular, Round, like a Globe, Bac.

Glome (glomus) a clue or bottom of thread, Rel. Med.

Glomerate (glomero) to wind round, to assemble, to gather or heap round
together.

Glomerous (glomerosus) round as a bottom, swarmed together.

Glossator (Lat.) a Glosser or Interpreter, one that writes a Gloss or Comment
upon a Text.

Glossomatical (gloss^maticus) that makes a Comment or Gloss upon a book or
text.

Glossographer (glossographus) he that interprets strange words.

Glutinate (glutino) to glue or join together.

Glutinosity (glutinositas) gluiness, clamminess.

Gnarity (gnaritas) experience, skilfulness.

Gnathonical (gnathonicus) flattering, deceitful in words; soothing ones humor
to get by him.

Gnathonize, to play the smel-feast, to flatter.

Gnavity (gnavitas) activity, lustiness, quickness.

Gnomical (from gnoma) pertaining to measure.

Gnomological, pertaining to the art of Dialling.

Gnostics, a Sect of Heretics (their first, according to the more common
opinion, was Carpocras) sprung about the year of Christ 125. in time of Pope
Xistus the first, and the Emperor Adrian the first; they arrogated to
themselves a high degree of skill and knowledge in all things, and therefore
were called Gnostici, from the Gr. (...), cognitio; they were also called
Borboritae or Borboriani for abominable foul practices they had among them:
They held the soul of man to be of Gods substance; they held two Gods, one
good, the other bad; they denied the future judgment, so to gain more liberty
to their vices, and progress to their Doctrine, with other absurd errors.

Gnomonick (gnomonice) the art of Dyalling; consisting in the knowledge of the
situation, lying, or measure of any place or Country.

Gobonated, a term in Heraldry, when a Bordure is so divided into two colors,
as if it were cut into small Gobbets.

God-bote (Sax.) a fine or amerciament for crimes and offenses against God;
also an Ecclesiastical or Church fine.

Goetie (goetia) the Black Art; Divellish Magic or Witchcraft.

Gog and Magog. Gog by interpretation of the Hebrew word is tectus, covered;
and Magog is uncovered. In Scripture by Gog and Magog are understood certain
Nations, (some Expositors take them to be the Aquilonar Scythians, Iberiads,
and Muscovites) or Princes that with their Nations shall more fiercely then
other concur with Antichrist in persecuting the Church of Christ. Ezekiel. 38.39
Rev. 20.8. To be a Gog. See Gogue.

Gogo a Gogo (Fr.) with full contentment or his belly full.

Gogue (Fr.) a sheeps panch, etc. To be a Gogue, is to be frolic, lively, or
in a merry mood.

Golden number, a number which changes every year, by adding one to the Golden
number of the year going before, until it grow as high as Nineteen, and then
the Golden number returns to one again. For example, This year 1659 the Golden
number is seven, the next year therefore it will be eight, etc. This Golden
number was devised to find out the Feast of Easter. See Cycle.

Golden-Jeece, The Gold in grains, which is found in Rivers and purling Brooks,
they used in some parts to gather with the help of sheepskins, that had the
wool on them, etc. from which manner of trying or finding gold, the Fable of
the Golden-fleece was invented, which Jason and his Argonautes sailed for to
Pontus, and was nothing else but a robbing the Colchians of that gold which
they had found out and gathered, with such Wool-skins. First part of the
Treasury of Times.

Golgotha (Syriac) a place of dead men's skuls. It was at Jerusalem on the North
side of Mount Sion, and so called, because there lay the skuls of offenders put
to death.

A Gol^e (Spa.) at a blow; also a slash. Cabala.

Gomer, a Hebrew measure, containing our Gallon and almost a Pint. The
Israelites when they were fed from Heaven with Manna in the Desert, received
every one this measure full, for a days allowance.

Gomorrhean (from Gomorrha) a Sodomite, a Buggerer.

Gondolot or Gondola, A Venetian Wherry-boat.

Gonorrhea (Gr.) a disease called the running of the Reins; the flux of natural
seed of man or woman unwittingly.

Gord (Fr. Gourd, Lat. Gurges) a Whirl-pool, or deep hole in a River or other
waters.

Gordian knot, is a knot which cannot be loosed: The phrase arises from this
old story. Gordius (a King of Phrygia Major) being raised from the Plow to the
Scepter, placed the furniture of his Wain and Oxen in the Temple of Apollo tied
in such a knot, that the Monarchy of the world was promised to him that could
untye it: which when Alexander had long tried, and could not do, he cut it with
his sword. Heyl.

Gorgon (Gr.) a terrible fighting woman. Poets feign there were three such,
daughters to King Phorchus, their names were Medusa, Schenio, and Euryale.

Gormand (Fr. Gourmand) a Glutton, great-eater, a belly-god.

Gormandize (Fr. Gourmander) to ravine, devour, glut, or gluttonize it.

Gospel (from the Saxon Godspel) is compounded of God and Spel, the word God
among the Saxons signifying good, as well as God, and no difference being
discernable in the writing of these two words among them; unless, when it is
taken for God, it has an (e) after it. (Spel) seems to signify ( word or
mystical speech) among the Saxons, as when Bigspel ( Deuteronomy. 28.37.) signifies a
byword or Proverb, or (as it is used in the North) By-spel. Some remains of
the use of this word are still among us, as when a Charm, carmen, (...),
indifferently a verse or word, one or more lines of Scripture or otherwise,
either spoken or written, and hung about ones neck, on design to drive away a
disease (according to the superstitious belief and practice of some of our
Ancestors) is still called a Spel, from the ancient use of it, as in
Propertius, (Sunt verba and voces, quibus hunc lenire dolorem Possis --)

So this word Godspel and by Euphony, Gospel, signifies the word of God; the
mystical speech or good tidings, delivered first by an Angel, after by the
Evangelists, etc. Dr. Hammonds Annotat. p. 3.

Gossip (from the Sax. Godsib) our Christian Ancestors (understanding a
spiritual affinity to grow between the Parents and such as undertook for the
Child at Baptism) called each other by the name of Godsib, which is as much to
say, as they were Sib together, that is, of Kin through God, or a Cosen before
God; And the child in like manner called such his Godfathers or Godmothers,
etc. Verst.

Gossymeare or Gossomor (Sax.) the white and cobweb-like exhalations, which fly
abroad in hot sunny weather. Chaucer.

Gourd, a kind of plant, not much unlike a Cucumber.

Gracility (gracilitas) leanness, smalness, slenderness.

Graces (Charites) three Sisters Poetically supposed the Daughters of Jupiter
and Venus: They were called Aglaia, Thalia, and Euphrosyne: The moral was, to
express the mutual love, and cheerful conversation, which ought to be among
friends; for they were painted naked, to signify friendship ought to be plain
without dissimulation; smiling and merry, to show men should do good willingly;
young, and maiden-like, to teach, friendship should consist in honest things;
and holding hands together in a round ring, to show a benefit bestowed, returns
again to the giver.

Gradatorie (Gradatorium) the space containing the ascent out of the Cloister
into the Quire of a Church or Religious house, was so termed: Also any place,
whereto we ascend by steps or degrees.

Gradual (graduale) that part of the Mass which was said or sung between the
Epistle and the Gospel, as a grade or step from the first to the later,
signifying that the profession of a Christian is to be ascending from the
Epistle to the Gospel, from the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles to that
of Christ; from one degree of virtue to another.

Gradual Psalms, are fifteen Psalms so called, that is, those fifteen together
from the 118. to 133. or from the 119. to 134. they are so called from a custom
the Jews observed of singing them, as they ascended up those fifteen steps or
stairs (in Latin gradus) which were between the women's Court and the men's of
Solomon's Temple, upon which steps the Levites sung those fifteen Psalms, on
each step a Psalm. Rab. Da. Kim. Ps. 120.

Graduality that by which a thing is constituted intrinsecally, in the being
Gradual.

Graduate (Graduatus) he that has taken degree of learning in an University.

Gradation (gradatio) a going by degrees as up stairs.

Gramineal (gramineus) of grass; green.

Graminous (graminosus) overgrown with grass.

Granadil ( granadillo Spa.) a little Pomegranate, the diminutive of granado.

Granado (Span.) a Pomegranate, an Apple filled with delicious grains; there is
also a warlike Engine that being filled with Gunpowder and other materials is
wont to be shot out of a wide mouthed piece of Ordnance, and is called a
Granado, for the likeness it has with the other Granado in fashion, and being
fully stuffed as the other Granado is, though the materials are very different.

Grand days. See Gaudy-days

Grandevity (grandaevitas) great age, antiquity.

Grandeza (Span. in Ital. Grandezza) bigness, greatness, largeness,
magnificence, great state.

Grandiloquence (grandiloquentia) stately eloquence; high style.

Grandiloquent (grandiloquus) that uses great words; that has a high style.

Grandimoniensers, an order of religious persons, begun by Steven of Avern in
Aquitane or Guyen about the year of our Lord 1076. under Pope Alexander the
Second, and had their title of the mountain where their Abbey stood. Pol. Vir.

Grandinous (grandinosus) full of hail, subject to hail.

Grandity, (granditas) excessive greatness.

Grand Sergeantie, is in our Common Law, where one holds Lands of the King by
service, which he ought to do in his own person, as to bear the Kings Banner,
or his Spear, etc. See Littl. tit. Serg.

Grange (a grana gerendo) is a great Farm, not only where corn is laid up, but
where are Stables for Horses, Stals for Oxen, and other Cattle, Styes for Hogs,
and other things necessary for Husbandry. Linw. These did of old belong to
Religious Houses, and the Overseer thereof was called Prior of the Grange.

Granite (Ital.) a kind of speckled stone or marble very common at Milan, and
other parts of Italy.

Graniferous (granifer) that bears grains or kernels.

Granivorous (from Granum and vorans) that eats or devours grain or corn.

Graphical (graphicus) cunningly wrought, perfect, excellent.

Granule (dim. of granum) a little grain, or Barley corn.

Grassation (grassatio) a robbing, killing, assailing.

Grateolent (grateolens) well savouring, smelling pleasantly.

Gratification (gratificatio) a gratifying, or the doing a pleasure, in lieu of
a pleasure done.

Gratis (Lat.) freely, without reward or desert.

Gratulate (gratulor) to rejoice and be glad in ones behalf, to thank.

Grav^ (Belg.) a Lord or Ruler, an Earl. Sax. Gerefa.

Graveolence (graveolentia) an evil smell, a stinking savor.

Graveolent (graveolens) that has an ill savor or smell.

Gravidity (graviditas) greatness with child, or with young.

Gravid (gravidus) great with child or young.

Graviloquence (graviloquentia) a grave speech, or a speaking gravely.

Greaves (Fr. Greves) boots; or armor for the legs.

Grecians (Graeci) are used by St. Paul to signify all the Heathen people, and
stand in opposition with Hebrews, in the General acception containing both the
Grecists or dispersed Hebrews, and also those of Palestina; the Grecists were
both by birth and religion Hebrews, standing in opposition with Hebrews, in the
strict acception, taken for those of Palaestina. Moses and Aaron.

Grecism (graecismus) the form or speech, or custom of the Grecians.

Greek Church differs from the Roman Catholic. 1. Denying the Holy Ghost to
proceed from the Father and the Son. 2. Denying Purgatory, but praying for the
dead. 3. Believing that holy men enjoy not the presence of God before the
Resurrection. 4. Communicating in both kinds; but using leavened bread, and
mingling warm water with wine, which both together they destribute with a
spoon. 5. Receiving children of seven years old to the Sacrament, because then
they begin to sin. 6. Forbidding extreme Unction, Confirmation, and fourth
Marriages. 7. Admitting none to Orders, but such as are married, and
prohibiting marriage to them that are actually in Orders. 8. Rejecting carved
Images, but admitting the painted. 9. Observing four Lents in the year. 10.
Reputing it unlawful to fast on Saturdays. So Heylin. But others relate the
differences to be otherwise, as may be seen in Authors that write thereof.

Grees^ or Grise (gradus) a stair, step, or degree.

Gregal (gregalis) of the same flock or company, common.

Gregorian, a Cap of hair; so called from one Gregory, a Barber in the Strand
that first made them in England.

Gregorian Account so called from Pope Gregory the thirteenth. See Julian
Account.

Gremial Gremious (gremiosus) pertaining to the lap or bosom.

Griffe-Graffe (Fr.) by hook or by crook, catch that catch may, any way.

Grilliade (Fr.) a broiled mess, or meat boiled on a Grid-iron.

Grithbreach, Is a breach of peace, for Grith is a word of the old Angles or
Saxons, signifying peace, Roger Hoveden. par. poster. suorum annal. fol. 346. b.

Grobianism (Fr.) slovenliness, unmannerly parts or precepts. Cotg.

A Groop (minthorium) a dunging or pissing place.

Gromatick (gromaticus) pertaining to the art of casting out the ground for the
Quarters, fortifying the Camp, and choosing places of advantage in the field.

Grotesques (Fr. from the Ital. Grotesca) pictures, wherein (as please the
Painter) all kind of odd things are represented, without any peculiar sense or
meaning, but only to please the eye Hence taken for any rude misshapen thing.

Grot (from the Ital. Grota) a Cave.

Grovelling, lying on the face.

Grouppade (Fr.) a certain lofty manage, which must be beaten with a lively
and settled measure, the turn being more wide, and the horses hinder parts more
raised, then in an ordinary Curvet.

Grumosity (grumositas) fullness of clods or lumps.

Grumous (from Grumus) that is full of clots or Hillocks.

Gryffen or Gryffon (Gryps) a strange Bird (as some ancient Authors affirm)
with four feet, armed with cruel claws, being from the breast upward fashioned
like an Eagle, but of purple color, with red fiery eyes, and whitish wings,
and in the hinder part black, made much like a Lion. This Bird nests in the
high mountains, and is exceeding hard to be taken, except very young, for he
will adventure on any man, and is so fierce, that he often kills Elephants; he
is most enemy to horses; for which cause Virgil in his eighth Eclog. brings in
the shepherd Damon, who wondered at a strange Marriage, speaking thus; Junguntur
jam Gryphes Equis --

But modern Authors, as Aldrovandus, Michovius, and others say there is no such
Animal extant. Vul. Err. fol. 129.

Guadsane, a River in Spain which runs under ground the space of fifteen miles:
Hence the Spaniards brag that they have a Bridge whereon 10000 cattle daily
feed. Hist. of Spain.

Guastaliens, an order of Religious People, consisting both of men and women,
and instituted the year 1537. by the Countess of Guastala, a Mantuan Lady. Cotg.

Gubernator (Lat.) a Master of a ship, a Guide, a Ruler.

Gugh^ (from the Hebr. Gnugabh) a Jews Harp or trifle for children to play with.

Guerdon (Fr.) recompense, reward, remuneration.

Guidon (Fr.) a Standard, Ensign or Banner, under which a Troop of men of Arms
serve; Also he that bears it.

Gules. See Geules.

Gule, or Yule of August, (may come from the Brit. Gwil, i. festum, or from the
Lat. jubilum) the first day of August, called in old Almanacks St. Peter
advincula, and in our later Almanacks, Lammas day. An. 27. E. 3. Stat. 3. cap.
unico. Fitz. not. br. fo. 62.1 called Gule of August, alias Goule de August. ^.
Plow. casu Mines, fo. 316. b. It is the very day of St. Peter ad vincula, which
was wont and is still, within the limits of the Roman Catholic Church,
celebrated upon the very Calends of August. It is by some conjectured that Gule
comes of the Latin Gula, or the Fr. Gueule, the throat. The reason of this
conjecture is (in Durands rationali divinor. l. 7. ca. de festo S. Petri ad
vincula) That one Quirinus a Tribune, having a Daughter who had a disease in
her throat, went to Alexander then Pope of Rome, the sixth from St. Peter, and
desired him to borrow or see the chains that St. Peter was chained with under
Nero: which request obtained, his said Daughter kissing the said Chains, was
cured of her disease, and Quirinus, with his family were baptized. Tun^ dictus
Alexander Papa (says Durand) hoc festum in Calendis Augusti celebrandum
^instituit, and in honorem beati Petri Ecclesiam in urbe fabricavit, ubi
vincula ipse reposuit, and ad vincula nominavit, and Calendis Augusti
dedicavit. In qua festivitate, populus illic ipsa vincula hodie osculatur. So
that this day being before called only the Calends of August, was upon this
occasion afterward termed indifferently, either of the instrument that wrought
this miracle, St. Peter's day ad vincula, or of that part of the Maiden, whereon
the miracle was wrought, the Gule of August. See Lammas day.

Gulosity (gulositas) gluttony.

Gulf (sinus) is a part of the Sea, insinuating and embosoming it self within
the land, or between two several lands; As the Gulf of Venice, the Persian
Gulf, the Red Sea, Sinus Mexicanus, Vermilius, Gangeticus.

Gurgitate (gurgito) to swallow or devour.

Gurgitive (gurgitivus) belonging to a Gulf or stream.

Guttulous (guttosus) pertaining to or full of drops.

Gust (gustus) the sense of tasting, a taste.

Guttural (from guttur) pertaining to the throat.

Gultwit, seems to be compounded of Gult, i. noxa, and wit, a termination of
words in the Saxon tongue, signifying nothing in it self, but as dome or hood,
Christendom, Childhood, Manhood, etc. Others say, and it is true, that wit
signifies blame or reprehension. Gultwit (as Saxon in his description of
England, ca. 11. interprets it) is an amends for trespass.

Gustation (gustatio) a tasting or smacking; also a little knowledge of, or
experience in.

Gustatory (gustatorium) a place where men were wont to banquet.

Guidage (guidagium) is that which is given for safe conduct through a strange
territory; Cassanaeus de consuetud. Burgun. p. 119. whose words are these, Est
Guidagium quod datur alicui, ut tuto conducatur per loca alterius.

Guzes, The ball of the eye; a term in Heraldry.

Gyges Ring; Gyges was King of Lydia, and his Ring said to have this property,
that being on the finger, and turned to the inside of the hand, the wearer went
invisible; but turning it to the outside, then he was visible again, as before.
Plat. in lib. de Repub. will tell you how Gyges came by this Ring.

Gymnase (gymnasium) a place of all kind of exercise, either of body or mind, a
School, a College, or Hall in an University.

Gymnastick (gymnasticus) belonging to the place of wrestling or other
exercise, which was performed naked.

Gymnasticks, books treating of Exercise.

Gymnasiarch (gymnasiarcha) the head Master of the place where Champions did
exercise; also the chief Master of a School.

Gymnosophists ( gymnosophistae, from gymnos, naked, and sophos, wisdom)
certain Philosophers in India that went always naked, and lived solitary in
woods and deserts, feeding on herbs, the first beginner of which Sect was (as
St. Hierome reports, Cont. Jovinian.) called Buddus. These Gymnosophists were
to the Indians, as the Druides to the Brittans, and are by them called
Brachmans. See Brachmans. Strabo says there were two kind of Gymnosophists, one
dwelling in Deserts, etc. termed Hermanes; The other frequented Kings Courts,
Cities, etc. and were called Brachmans.

Gynecocraty or Gynecretic, feminine Rule or Authority, the Government of a
woman.

Gypsation (gypsatio) a plaistering or pargetting.

Gyre (gyrus) a circuit or compass, a cariere; a bound or end of a course or
race.

Gyration (gyratio) a turning about, or dizziness.

G^ro^ (Fr.) a Geron, a term in blazonry, and signifies half a Square or
quarter in an Escoucheon, cut off by an oblique or diagonal line thus El. of Ar.

H
HAbeas Corpus, is a Writ, which a man, (indicted of some trespass before
Justices of Peace, or in a Court of any Franchize, and upon his apprehension
being laid in prison for the same) may have out of the Upper Bench, thereby to
remove himself thither at his own costs, and to answer the Cause there, etc.
Fitz not. br. fo. 250. h.

Habergion or Haubergion (Fr. the diminutive of Hauber) a little coat of Mail,
or only Sleeves and Gorget of Mail. It is used in Scripture, Rev. 19.9.

Habilitation, a making of one able or capable. Bac.

Habitiment (Fr.) apparel, clothing, array, attire; Also Armor or Harness.

Habit (habitus) the outward attire of the body, whereby one person is
distinguished from another; a^ the Habit of a Gentleman is different from that
of a Merchant, and the Habit of a Handy-crafts-man from both. Sometimes it
signifies a quality or constitution in the body or mind, not natural, but
gotten by long custom or infused by God: As an Orator still exercised in making
Orations, has gotten a habit of eloquent speaking. And the holy Apostles had a
habit to understand and speak languages without study. Bull.

Habitable (habitabilis) that may be inhabited or dwelt in.

Habitacle (habitaculum) a dwelling place, or habitation.

Habitual (habitus) grown to a habit by long custom, customary.

Habitude (habitudo) the habit, state, or disposition of the body, custom, use.

Hach, Hachis or Hac^ee (Fr.) a dish made ordinarily of cold meat cut in little
pieces, and stewed or boiled on a Chaffing-dish with crumbs of Bread, Wine,
Vinegar, sliced Nutmeg, and Orange pills. Cotg.

Hagard (Fr.) wild, strange, froward, unsociable.

A Hagard Faulcon, a Faulcon that preyed for her self before she was taken. See
Ramage.

Haggs (flammae lambentes) are made of sweat or some other vapor, issuing out
of the head; a not unusual sight among us, when we ride by night in the Summer
time: They are extinguished, like flames, by shaking the horse Mains; But I
believe rather it is only a vapor reflecting light, but fat and sturdy,
compacted about the Mains of horses or men's hairs. Per. Institutions, p. 149.

Hagiographer (Hagiographus) he that writes holy things. S. Wa. Ra.

Hail to you, or all Hail to you, a Saxon word, ab all, i. omnis and heile, i.
sanitas vel salus, and so is as much as all health to you.

Halcyon (Gr.) a kind of small Bird called by some a Kings-fisher, and breeding
on the Sea-shoar about the winter solstice, which time, being about fourteen
days, there is no tempest or storm. Hence it is we call peaceable or quiet times,
Halcycon or Halcyonian days. Two notable properties are observed in the Nest of
this Bird, which she makes with the foam of the Sea; The first is, That the
Architecture of it is so strong, so durable, that it cannot be broken, nor cut,
even with the violent stroke of iron. The second, That it is so proportioned to
the Bird, as if it were sewed to her body, in such manner as no creature can
therein be received, but the Architect himself. Caussinus. See more in Vul.
Err. p. 128. and 129.

Halicuticks (halieutica) books treating of fishes or fishing, whereof Oppianus
wrote five.

Haliographie (Gr.) a description of the Sea.

Hallage (Fr.) the Toll that is due to the Lord of a Fair or Market, for such
commodities as are vended in the Common Hall of the place. Also a Fee due for
clothes brought for sale to Blackwel-Hall in London. Cok. vol. 9. fol. 62. b.

Halleluiah. See Alleluiah.

Hallucination (hallucinatio) a being mistaken or deceived in judgment, an
error of opinion, a blindess of mind. If vision (says Dr. Brown) be abolished,
it is called C^ecitas or blindness; if depraved, and receive its objects
erroneously, Hallucination, etc. p. 153.

Halsier (halsiarius) he that hales and draws a Ship or Barge along the River
by a Rope or Halser.

Halm^ (culmus) the stem or stalk of the corn from the root to the ear.

Halymore alias Healgemot is a Court Baron. Manwood part 1. of his Forest Laws,
p. 111. And the Etymology is the meeting of the Tenants of one Hall or Manor.

Halo^ or Halo (Gr,) a circle about the Stars, but especially about the Moon.
Lo. Bacon's New Atlantis.

Hal^, or to make an halt, is a term of War, and comes from the Fr. fair
halte, i. to stop, stay, or make a stand or pause.

Hamadryade (hamadryades) Nymphs of the woods.

Hames of a Horse-Collar (from the Lat. hamus, a hook) are two crooked pieces
of wood, made of purpose to compass the Horse-Collar to keep it close to the
neck.

Hambles, is the plural of the French (hable) signifying as much as a Port or
Haven of the Sea. This word is used An. 27. H. 6. cap. 3.

Hamkin, A pudding made upon the bones of a shoulder of Mutton, all the flesh
being first taken off.

Hamlet, is a diminutive of Ham, which in Saxon signifies a Town.

Hause (Fr.) a Company, Society or Corporation of Merchants (for so it
signifies in the Book of the Ordonnances of Paris) combined together for the
good usage, and safe passage of Merchandise from Kingdom to Kingdom. This
Society was, and in part yet is endued with many large privileges of Princes,
respectively within their Territories. It had four principal seats or Staples;
where the Almain or Dutch Merchants, being the erectors of it, had an especial
house, one of which was here in London, called Gildhalda Teutonicorum, or in
our common language the Steelyard. But in Germany we read of seventy two Hanse
Towns, as Lubeck, Hambourg, Magdenbourg, etc. See more of this in Ortelius in
the Index of his additament to his Theater, verbo Anciatici.

Handful, Is four Inches by the Standard. An. 33. H. 8. c. 5.

Hansel (from the British Honsel) he that bestows the first money with a
Tradesman, in the morning of a Fair or Market, is said to give him Handsel.

Hans-en-kelder, is in Dutch, as much as Jack in a Cellar; and by metaphor it
is taken for the child in a woman's belly.

Hansiatick, belonging to, or free of the Hanse Towns, or Hanse Merchants.
Lustra. Lud.

Haque, is a Hand-gun of about three quarters of a yard long, A. 33 H. 8. ca.
6. and A. 2. and 3. E. 6. c. 14. There is also the half Haque or demi Haque.

Haquebut (Fr.) the same with Harquebuse; a Caleever. An. 2, and 3. E. 6. ca.
14. and An. 4, and 5. Ph. and Ma. ca. 2.

Harange (Fr. Harangue) an Oration, Declaration, or set speech. Bac.

Haracana or Hero-cane (perhaps from the Span. Arancar, to weed up or pull up
by the roots) an impetuous kind of Tempest or Whirlwind, happening in the
Indies, and those remote Countries, which comes with such violence that it
overturns trees by the roots, blows down houses, etc. and continues sometimes
thirty days; Mariners and Seamen stand in great fear of it at Sea; for it
infallibly wrecks their ships. And some affirm, the Devil appears often to the
Pagans in these Haracanes. Mr. Herb. says it happens in some Countries but once
in nine years.

Hariant, A term in Heraldry, when a fish is painted standing upright.

Harasse (Fr. Harasser) to tire or toil out, to spend or weaken, weary, or wear
out; also to vex, disquiet, etc.

Hariot. See Heriot.

Hariolation (hariolatio) a foretelling or South-saying.

Harmonical (harmonicus) melodious, harmonious, musical, proportionate.

Harold Heralt or Herald (Ital. Heraldo, Fr. Herault, vel quasi herus altus, a
high Master) with us it signifies an Officer at Arms, whose function is to
denounce War, to proclaim Peace, or to be employed by the King in Martial
Messages or other businesses. Their Office with us is described by Polydore
lib. 19. thus, Habent insuper apparitores ministros, quos Heraldos dicunt;
quorum praefectus Armorum Rex vocitatur. Hi belli and pacis nuncii, Ducibus,
Comitibusque a Rege factis, insignia aptant, ac eorum funera curant. They are
the Judges and Examiners of Gentlemen's Arms, marshal all the solemnities at the
Coronation of Princes, manage Combats, and such like. There is also one and the
same use with us and with the French Nation. See Lupanus cap Heraldi. With us
the three chief are called Kings at Arms; and of them Garter is the principal,
instituted and created by Henry the Fifth. Stow. Annal. p 584. whose Office is
to attend the Knights of the Garter at their solemnities, and to marshal the
Funerals of all the Nobility. And in Plow. cas. Reneger and Fogossa, is found
that Edw. 4. granted the Office of the King of Heralds to one Garter, cum
feudis and proficuis ab antq. etc. fo. 12 b. The next is Clarentius, ordained
by Ed. 4. for he attaining the Dukedom of Clarence by the death of George his
Brother, whom he put to death for aspiring the Crown, made the Herald, which
properly belonged to the Duke of Clarence, a King at Arms, and called him
Clarentius; his Office is to marshal and dispose the Funerals of Knights,
Esquires, etc. through the Realm on the South side of Trent. The third is
Norroy or Northroy; whose Office is the same on the North side of Trent, as
that of Clarentius on the South, as may well appear by his name, signifying the
Northern King, or King of the North parts. Besides these, there are six others,
properly called Heralds, according to their original, as they were created to
attend Dukes, etc. in Marshal Executions; viz. York, Lancaster, Somerset,
Richmond, Chester, Windsor. Lastly, There are four others called Marshals or
Pursuivants at Arms reckoned after a sort in the number of Heralds, and
commonly succeed in the place of the Heralds, as they die, or are preferred,
and those are Blew-mantle, Rouge-cross, Rouge-dragon, and Percullis.

Fern in his Glory of Generosity, p. 151. says, Herald is composed of these two
Dutch words Here and auid, which is as much as to say, an old Lord, or an
ancient Sir.

But Verstegan says, Heralt comes from the ancient Teutonick Here-h^alt, and
signifies the Champion of the Army, or a most courageous person, p. 251. Mr.
Stow in his Ann. p. 12. derives it from Hero.

Harlot, Metonymically from Arletta or Harlotha, Concubine to Robert Duke of
Normandy, on whom the Duke begat William the Bastard Conqueror, and King of
England; in spite to whom, and diigrace to his Mother, the English called all
Whores Harlots, a word yet in use among us, Came.

Harmonicks (harmoniacus) melodious, or that pertains to harmony, which is the
accord of diverse sounds or notes, or an apt proportion.

Harpyes (harpyae) monstrous and ravenous birds, which Poets feign to have had
women's faces, hands armed with Talons, and Bellies full of ordure, wherewith
they infected all meat they touched; They lived in Stymphalis a lake of
Arcadia, and were named Aello, Ocypete, Celeno, and Thyella. Thus the Poet.

Tristius haud illis monstrum nec saevior ulla
Pestis and ira Deum, Stygiis sese extulit undis:
Virginei volucrum vultus, foedissima ventris
Ingluvies, uncaeque manus, and pallida semper
Or a fame --
Virg. 3. Aen. Hence it is we usually apply the name of Harpyes to avaricious,
griping and usurious men.

Harpocrates, the God of silence.

Heart, is a Stag of five years old complete. Budeus de Philologia lib. 2. And
if the King or Queen hunt him, and he escape a live, then he is called a Heart
Royal. And if the beast by the King or Queens hunting be chased out of the
Forest, and so escape, Proclamation is commonly made in the places thereabout,
That in regard of the pastime the beast has showed the King, none shall hurt
or hinder him from returning to the Forest, and then he is a Heart Royal
proclaimed.

Hatches or Scutles of a ship, are the Overtures or Trap-doors, whereat things
are let down into the Hold.

Haubergeon (Fr.) the diminutive of Haubert ( i. a coat of Mail) a little coat
of Mail.

Hauriant. See Hariant.

Hausible (hausibilis) that may be drawn or emptied.

Haust (haustus) a draught in drinking, a soop. D. Ham.

Haw (unguis) a disease in the eyes so called.

Hawkers, Are certain deceitful fellows, that go from place to place buying and
selling Brass, Pewter, and other Merchandise, that ought to be uttered in open
Market. The Appellation seems to grow from their uncertain wandering, like
those that with Hawks seek their Game where they can find it. You have the
word A. 25. H. 8. ca 6. and An. 33. ejusd. ca. 4. Those people which go up and
down the streets crying News-books, and selling them by retail, are also called
Hawkers; and the women that sell them by whole sale from the Press, are called
Mercury-women.

Hayboot, seems to be compounded of Hay, i. sepes, and bote, i. compensatio,
the former is French, the second Saxon. It is used in our Common Law for a
permission to take thorns and frith, to make or repair hedges.

Hayward alias Haward, seems to be compounded of two French words, ha^t, i.e.
sepes, a hedge, and (Guard, i. custodia) and signifies with us, one that keeps
the common Herd of the Town; and the reason may be, because one part of his
Office, is to look that they neither break nor crop the hedges of enclosed
grounds. It may likewise come from the German word ( Herd, i. armentum) and
Bewarren, i. custodire;) he is a sworn Officer in the Lords Court, and the form
of his oath you may see in Kitchen, fol. 46.

Headborow is compounded of two words ( Heosed, i. caput) and Borhe, i. pignus)
and signifies him that is chief of the Frank pledge: And him that had the
principal Government of them within his own pledge. And as he was called
Headborow, so was he also called Burow-head, Thirdborow, Burshoulderz
Tithingman, Chief Pledge or Burrow-Elder, according to the diversity of speech
in diverse places. Of this see Mr. Lamberts Explication of Centuria, and his
Treatise of Constables, and Smith de Repub. Ang. l. 2. ca. 22. It now signifies
Constable.

Heame. See Secundine.

Heave-Offerings of the threshing-floar and of the dough, were First fruits
paid to the Priest, Numb. 15.20. See Moses* and Aaron, p. 219.

Hebdomade (hebdomada) the number of seven; as seven years, seven months or
ages, but most commonly seven days or a week. Dr. Br.

Hebetude (hebetudo) dullness, bluntness.

Hebrews, signifies the people which came of Heber, the fourth from Shem, in
whose Family the ancient language of the world, called Hebrew from his name,
continued; And about the birth of his Son happened that division in the rest of
the Languages of the world, whereof he was called Peleg or Phaleg, i. division.
See Genesis 11.18. Wilsons Dict.

Hecatomb (hecatombe) a sacrifice wherein were killed an hundred beasts.

Heck, Is the name of an Engine to take fish in the River Owse by York. A. 23.
H. 8. c. 18.

Hectic (hectice) a Fever inflaming the heart and soundest parts of the body.

Hector, Priams son by Hecuba, who was a terror to the Greeks besieging Troy;
he was slain by Achilles, who despightfully dragged his dead carcass about the
walls of Troy, because he had before slain his friend Patroclus. Hector in our
modern acception, signifies, a roaring Boy, that frequents Taverns, etc. and
lives chiefly by the reputation of his sword.

Hederal (hederalis) of or pertaining to Ivy; the Hederal Crown or Garland was
given to Poets, and excellent Musicians. Fern. 27.33.

Hederiferous (hederifer) that bears Ivy.

Hedonick. See Cyreniack.

Hegesians, a Sect of Philosophers, so called from Hegesias, Disciple to
Paraebates.

Hegira, or year of deliverance, the Epoch of the Turks, their account of time,
which some call the Hagaren Account. It fell out 16. July, An. 622. of the
Incarnation; from whence they reckon their years. See Epoche.

Helchesaites (so named of a false Prophet called Helchesaus) divulged their
heresy in the time of Pope Fabian the first: These men did altogether reprove
the Apostle St. Paul, renewing the errors of Cerinthus, Ebion and the
Nazarians; saying it was no sin to deny Jesus Christ in the time of
persecution, etc. Eusebius. in hist. Eccles. l. 6. ca. 28. Nicephor. in lib. 5.
ca. 24.

Helcysm (helcysma) the froth and filth of silver; the dross and scum of that
metal. Pliny.

Heliacal (heliacus) belonging to the Sun. We term that the Heliacal emersion
of a star, when a star, which before, for the vicinity of the Sun was not
visible, being further removed begins to appear. Vul. Err. 224.

Helical (helicus) pertaining to the sign called Vrsa Major, or Charles Wain.

Helicon, a hill of Phocis not far from Parnassus, and much of the same
bigness, consecrated to Apollo and the Muses. Hence

Heliconian, pertaining to that hill.

Hellebore (helleborum) an herb whereof there are two kinds, the one called
Bearsfoot, the other Neeswort, medicinal for the Frenzy.

Heliotrope Heliotropy (heliotropium) the herb Turnsole or Waterwort; also a
precious stone mentioned in Pliny, and so called from the Greek, because being
put into a vessel of water, it will seem to turn the rays of the Sun into the
color of blood.

Heliotropian, pertaining to that herb or stone.

Helispherical (Gr.) round as the Sun.

Helioscopy, from the Gr. (...), Sol, and (...), meta, and so may signify the
furthest point of the Suns course, in his ascension or descension; also a kind
of Spurge tree or Plant.

Hellenism. See Grecism.

Hellenize (from hellenes) to play the Grecian.

Hellenistical, pertaining to Greece, or the Grecians.

Hellespout (Hellespontus) the narrow Sea by Constantinople, dividing Europe
from Asia, betwixt Propentis and the Aegean Sea. It is now called Brachium
Sancti Georgii.

Heluation (heluatio) a devouring gluttony.

Helm of the Rudder of a ship, is a handle of wood, put on the Rudder for the
Steersman to govern the same, and direct the ship; which may be so called of
Helm or Helmet; For as a Helmet saves the head; so does that by good guidance
preserve the ship from dangers; or as a Helmet is the top Armor piece for the
head; so is the Helm the top of the Stern or Rudder. And in French Heaume, one
word signifies both. Min.

Helvetian, of or pertaining to Switzerland; otherwise called Helvetia.

Hemerobaptists (hemerobaptistae) daily Baptists; a Sect so called, because
they did every day wash themselves. Epiph. l. 1. Tom. 1. chapter 17.

Hemerologe (hemorologium) a Calendar or Register declaring what is done every
day, a Day-book.

Hemi (Gr.) half: a word used only in composition; as,

Hemicade (hemicadium) a half Hogshead.

Hemicircular, half round.

Hemicranick (hemicranicus) subject to the sickness called Megrim or Hemicrain.
See Megrim.

Hemicycle (hemicyclus) half a circle, a compass or half round chair.

Hemiplexy (hemiplexia) the palsy in half the body.

Hemisphere (hemisphaerium) half the compass of the visible heavens.

Hemistick (hemistichium) half a verse.

Hemorrhagy (Gr.) an abundant Flux of blood. Cotg.

Hemorrhoide (hemorrhois) a disease in the Fundament, like Teats or Warts by
the swelling of the vein, out of which issues blood, called Piles; corruptly
called Emrods.

Henchman or Heinsman is a German word, signifying' a Domestic or one of a
family; it is used with us for one that runs on foot, attending on a person of
honor. A. 3. E. 4. c. 5. An. 24. H. 8. ca. 13. Hence comes our word hine or
hind, a servant for husbandry.

Hepatical Hepatarian (hepatarius) of or pertaining to the Liver.

Hepatiques, obstructions of the Liver, or books treating of the Liver.

Hepta (Gr.) Septem, seven; Hence

Heptagon (Gr.) that has seven angles or corners.

Heptagonal, Pertaining to a Heptagon.

Heptaphony (heptaphonia) the having seven sounds*

Heptarchy (heptarchia) a kind of Government, where seven rule; as in England
when there were seven Kings (viz.) 1. The King of Kent. 2. Of South Saxons. 3.
Of the West Saxons. 4. Of the East Saxons. 5. Of Northumberland. 6, Of Mercia.
7. Of the East Angles. Of which see more in Sir Rich. Bakers Chroniele, fol. 6,
7.

Herald, Heralt. See Harold.

Herbage (Fr.) signifies in our Common Law, the fruit of the earth provided by
nature for the bit or mouth of the Cattle. But it is most commonly used for
that liberty a man has to feed his Cattle in another man's ground, as in the
Forest, etc. Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 197.

Herbalist or Herb^st (herbarius) one that understands the nature and temper of
herbs, one cunning in Simples.

Herbenger (from the Fr. Herberger, i. to harbor or lodge) signifies with us an
Officer of the Princes Court, that alots the Noblemen, and those of the
Household their lodgings. It signifies also in Kitchen, an Inkeeper, fol. 176

Herbert (Germ.) signifies famous Lord, bright Lord, or glory of the Army. Came.

Herbiferous (herbifer) bringing forth herbs or grass.

Herbosity (herbositas) abundance of herbs or grass.

Herbulent (herbulentus) full of grass or herbs.

Hercules Pillars, On the North side of the Straight called of old Fretum
Herculeum, was Mount Calpe, on the South, Mount Abila, on which Hercules placed
his so memorized Pillars, with the Inscription Nil Vltra, because that was then
conceived to be the most Western bound of the world. But Charles the fifth,
after the discovery of America, coming that way caused Plus Vltra to be
engraven, either on the old Pillars, or else on new erected in their places.
Hercules is said to have fallen into the Falling Sickness, by over much eating
Quails, which disease has ever since been termed Hercules sickness. Dr. Muffet.

Herculean Herculane (Herculeus) of or belonging to Hercules, pertaining to a
valiant fellow; difficile, hard, invincible; So

Herculean labor, a Proverb, signifying a work of great difficulty, or almost
impossible to be achieved, which took beginning from the twelve labors of
Hercules, of which see Rider.

Here de Caesar, i. the Monarchy of Caesar. An ancient account of time, used
instead of the year of our Lord, in Spain especially; as also among the Arabs
and Sarrazens. It took date 38 years before Christ's Nativity, and was used in
Spain till the year 1383. which was of Here de Caesar. 1421.

Heremitical. See Eremitical.

Heresy ((...) haeresis) an opinion contrary to some point of faith, whereof
Eusebius, Platina, St. Austin, and other learned Authors make mention of very
many since our Saviors time; As, Simonians, Menandrians, Ebionites,
Cerinthians, Nicholaitans, Saturnians, Carpocratians, Gnostics, Valentinians,
Marcionites, Cleobians, Dorothians, Gorthenians, Masuberthians, Encratites,
Basilides, Cataphrygians, Arabes, Helchesaites, Novatians, Catharians,
Sabellians, Manicheans, Arrians, Pelagians, Helonitians, Hermoginians,
Peputians, Quintillians, Colliridians, Priscillianists, Hemerobaptists,
Anthropomorphits, Chilliasts or Millenarians, Massilians, Dimocrites,
Garasians, Paterons, Poor men of Lions, Aquarians, Speronists; Fraticelli,
Adamites, Orebites, Taborites, Noetians, Hydroparastates, Artotyrites,
Ptholemaites, Stacioicques, Phibionites, Helionites, Heracleonites, Antitades,
Perades, Phrygians, Colarbasians, Docites, Borborians, Zacheans, Naasanians,
Phemionitaius, Sethranians, Caynians, Codians, Ophites, Severians, Paulianists,
Catabaptists, Arbigeois, Archontiques, Hierarchites, Seileutians, Felicians,
Nestorians, Jacobitans, Monothelitanes. The Acephalick Sects of Barcotobas,
Cerdon, Tatian, Redon, Apelles, Basilicus, Sirenus, Montanus, Theodorus, Paulus
Samosatenus, Ogdoades, Artemon, Natalis, Galien, Berillus, Nepos, Liberius,
Macedonius, Helvidius, Ethicianus, Hermogenes, Epiphanes, Pontinus, Sinerus,
Prepon, Pithon, Cleobulus, Praxeas, Asclepiodotus, Hermophilus, Apolonides,
Themison, Theodotus, Florinus, Blattus, Isidorus, Secundus, Portitus,
Bardesianus, Symmachus, Theodocion, Lucius, Apolinarius, Acatus, Donatus,
Olympius, Adimantius, Alogios, Bertoldus, Paliardus the Philosopher, Almerick,
Guillaume of holy love, Hermand, Durcine; Quintinists, Severists, Campanists,
etc. with infinite more. See Prateolus. In this latter age those that have most
abounded, are, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Brownists, Socinians, Arminians,
Erastians, Quakers, Adamites, Anti-Trinitarians, Anti-Scripturians, etc. with
many others, of which see Mr. Ross his View of all Religions.

Heresy (as the Fathers define it) is a mis-belief in some points of Faith,
contrary to the Doctrine universally received in the Church. Cressy.

Heresiark (haeresiarchus) an Arch-Heretick, a principal Heretic, a
Sect-Master.

Heretic (haereticus) a person wilfully and stiffly maintaining false opinions
against the Scriptures and Doctrine of the Church after due admonition. Tit.
3.10. Will. Dict.

Heretoga (Sax.) was our ancient appellation for the chief Conductor of an
Army, for which we have long since used our borrowed French word Duke, from the
Latin Dux. Here in the ancient Teutonick, is an Army, and toga signifies to
draw or train forward. The Netherlanders for Duke do yet use the name Herrogh,
and the Germans write it Herirog. Verst.

Herility (herilitas) Mastership.

Hericano. See Haracan^a.

Heriot alias Hariot (heriotum) in the Saxon Heregeat from here, i. exercitus)
it signified in our Saxon time a tribute given to the Lord, for his better
preparation toward war. The name is still retained, but the use altered; for
whereas by Mr. Lamberts opinion, it signified as much as Relief does now with
us; it is taken now for the best Chattel that the Tenant has at the hour of
his death, due to the Lord by custom, be it Horse, Ox, or any such like.

Hermaphrodite (hermaphroditus) one that is both man and woman.

Hermes sire. See Furole.

Hermetical, pertaining to, or like Hermes or Mercury.

Hermitress, A woman Hermit or Eremite, one who lives in a wilderness.

Hermopaly (hermopolium) a place where Images are sold.

Heroical (heroicus) noble, stately, excellent, the three Heroical virtues are,
1. Moderation of Anger. 2. Temperance in Covetousness. 3. The despising of
Pleasures.

Heroic Poem, so called, for that it treats of the manners of Heroes or
heroic persons, not natural Causes; manners presented, not dictated, and
manners fained (as the name of Poesy imports) not found in men. The part of an
heroic Poem is to exhibit a venerable and amiable Image of heroic virtue.
Mr. Hobbs. See Poesy.

Hesperides, the daughters of Hesperus, brother to Atlas, called Aegle,
Arethusa and Hesperethusa: They had Gardens and Orchards, that bore golden
fruit, kept by a vigilant Dragon, which Hercules slew, and robbed the Orchard.
From this story, we find often mention of the Gardens and Apples of Hesperides.

Heteroclite (heterocliton) that is declined otherwise then common Nouns are.

Heteroclital, belonging to an Heteroclite.

Heteriark (heteriacha) the Captain of the Bands of the Allies and Ayds; also
an Abbot.

Heterodox (Gr.) that is of another or different opinion.

Heterodoxy (Gr.) different opinion, variety of judgment.

Heterogen^al (heterogeneus) of another kind.

Heterogencity (from the Gr.) the being of another kind. Dr. Charleton.

Heteroscians (heteroscii) those people that dwell under either of the
temperate Zones: so called, because their shadows at noon bend still but one
way, either North or South.

Hexagonal (hexagonus) that has six corners or angles.

Hexameter (Lat.) a Verse consisting of six feet, all either Dactyls or
Spondees, save that a Dactyl is proper to the fifth place, and a Spondee to the
last: other places are capable of either foot, as O^ia damnantur quae nulla
negotia tractant.

These are also called Heroiques, and were used to represent the memorable
actions of those the Ancients called Demigods. This Hexameter the Latins found
most grave and decent for their Epique Poems; instead of which we use the line
of ten syllables, recompencing the neglect of their quantity with the diligence
of Rhyme. Hobbs.

Hexastick (hexasticum) six Verses together, or a sentence contained in six
Verses.

H.S. See in I. I.S.

Hiation (hiatio) a gaping.

Hibernian, of or pertaining to Ireland

Hichel (Sax.) a certain instrument with iron teeth to k^mb flax or hemp.

Hidage or Hydage, was an extraordinary tax to be paid for every Hide of Land.
See Bract. lib. 2. cap. 6.

Hide or Hyde of Land, (hida terrae) Saxonice Hide^andes, is a certain measure
or quantity of Land, by some men's opinion, that may be plowed with one Plow in
a year. Terms of Law. By others it is an hundred Acres. By Beda (who calls it
familiam) it is as much as will maintain a family. Crompt. in his Juris. fol.
220. says, it consists of an hundred Acres; And again, fol. 222. A Hide of
Land contains a hundred Acres, and eight Hides, or eight hundred Acres contain
a Knights Fee. Of this read more in Mr. Lamberts explication of Saxon words, in
Hida terrae.

Hidromel. See Hydromel.

Hierarchy (hierarchia) an holy governance or principality. The Hierarchy or
Holy Order of Angels contains (as some affirm) nine degrees, and is a mystical
resemblance of the Blessed Trinity, there being in nine, thrice three, and in
every three, thrice one. So that there are three superior, three inferior, and
three middle degrees. The superior are Seraphins, Cherubins, and Thrones; the
middle, Dominations, Principalities and Powers; the inferior, Virtues,
Archangels, Angels. Bull.

Hierarchical (hierarchicus) pertaining to a holy Governnour or government.

Hieratical (hieraticus) sacred, holy, destined to things sacred. As Hieratick
Paper, fine Paper, dedicated only to Religious Books.

Hieroglyphics (hieroglyphica) mystical Letters or Ciphers (among the
Egyptians) by Images, signifying holy Sentences, which were to them instead of
writing; As for a Month they painted a Palm Tree, because at every New Moon it
sends forth a bew branch. For God, a Faulcon, as well for that he soars so
high, as that he governs the lesser birds. They described Envy by the Eele,
because it never keeps company with other fishes. The liberal man was figured
by a right hand wide open: As contrariwise, the avaritious niggard, by a left
hand close gripped, etc.

Hierograms (from the Gr.) sacred Letters or writings.

Hierographie (Gr.) a description or pourtraying of divine things. Rerum
divirarum adumbratio per quaedam signa. Scap.

Hierome (Gr.) a holy name. St Hierome a Reverend Father of the Church, much
honored for translating the Bible, lived in the year of Christ, 384.

Hi^rommi^ns, a Religious Order that had their beginning of St. Hierome, who
leaving his Native Country, went into Jury, and there, not far from Bethelem,
lived in a Monastery very devoutly, the latter end of his life, and died in the
91 year of his age, and of Christ 421. The Monks of this Order wear their
Clothes of a brown color, and a Cope plaited over their Coat, girt with a
leathern Girdle. There were also certain Hermites called Hieronimians, of the
foundation of one Charles Granel of Florence, who (about the year of Christ,
1365) became an Hermit in the Mountains of Fessulus.

Hierosolymilan (from Hierosolyma) of or pertaining to Jerusalem.

Hilarity (hilaritas) mirth, pleasantness, cheerfulness.

Hi^u^m (Hebr.) praises; a Song sung at the Jews marriages, by the Bridegrooms
intimate friends.

To Himple (Sax.) to halt, used in the North of England.

Hine, seems to be used for a servant at Husbandry, and the Master Hine a
servant that oversees the rest. An. 12. R 2. cap. 4. See Henchman

Hinnible (hinnibilis) that can neigh as a horse, apt to neigh.

Hipocras or Hippocras, a compound Wine mixed with several kinds of Spices; so
called from Hippocrates the Physician said to be the first inventer of it.

Hipparch (hipparchus) the Master of the horses. See the quality of this Office
among the ancient Athenians, in part 1. Treas. of Times, p. 115.

Hippiedes (Gr.) images of women on horseback.

Hippiaticks (Gr.) books treating of horses.

Hippicon or Hippicun (Gr.) a measure of ground, containing eight miles, or
rather four furlongs. Hist. of Philos.

Hippocent^ure (hippocentaurus) a Monster, having in part the shape of a horse.
See Centaur.

Hippona, the Goddess of horses.

Hippodrome (hippodromus) a Tilt-yard, a place where horses are broken, or
exercised in running, a horse-race.

Hippogryph (hippo-gryps) a kind of feigned beast, in part horse, in part
Griffin.

Hippomachy (hippomachia) a justing or tilting on horseback.

Hircine (hircinus) goatish, of a Goat.

Hirculation (hirculatio) a disease in the Vine, when it bears no fruit.

Hirsuts (hirsutus) rough, hairy, full of bristles, sharp.

Hirundinous (from ^hirundo, inis) of or pertaining to a swallow.

Hispanian (Hispanus) of or belonging to Spain; born in Spain*

Hispid (hispidus) bristled or rough-haired; terrible.

Historiography (historiographia) the writing an History.

Histriographer (historiographus) an historian, a writer of Histories.

Histrionick (histrionicus) player-like, fit for, or belonging to a
Stage Player, or Stage Play.

Histrionically, after the manner of a Stage Player.

Hithe (as Queen-Hithe in London) is a petit Haven to land wares out of vessels
or boats. New Book of Enteries, fol. 3. Col. 3.

Hoane (Sax.) a fine kind of Whetstone, softer then that which is most commonly
called a Whetstone.

Hoblers (hobellarii) In Ireland there were certain Knights so called, because
they were wont to serve in the wars upon Hobbies; also with us certain persons
who were by their tenure tied to maintain a little light Nag (which in Ireland
they call a Hobby, and hence we say a Hobbyhorse) for the certifying of any
invasion made by Enemies, or such like peril toward the Sea side, as
Portsmouth, etc. Of these you shall read A. 18. Ed. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 7. and An.
25. ejusdem Stat. 5. cap. 8. Antiq. Hib^rn. p. 35.

Hocktyde or Hockstyde, of old thus. Hardiknute the last King of the Danes in
this Nation dying suddenly at Lambeth in the year 1042, his death was so
welcome to his Subjects, that the time was annually celebrated for some
hundreds of years after, with open pastimes in the streets, and called
Hockstide (in some parts of this Nation not yet out of memory, but observed the
week after Easter) signifying scorning or contempt, which fell upon the Danes
by his death. Sir Rich. Baker. See Fugalia.

Hocus-pocus, a Jugler, one that shows tricks by slight of hand.

Hodiernal (hodiernus) of to day, or at this time.

Hodgee (Persian) a holy man, a Priest among the Persians. Herb.

Ho-goo (in true Fr. Hautgoust) a high taste, smatch, or savor; it is usually
taken for any dish of meat that has some more then ordinary taste or savor.

Hogshead (Brit. Hogsed) is a measure of Wine or Oil, containing the fourth
part of a Tun, that is 63 Gallons. A. 1. R. 3. cap. 13.

Holocaust (holocaustum) a Burnt-Offering, a Sacrifice wherein the whole beast
was offered, and no part reserved.

Holographical (holographicus) wholly written with his own hand, from whom it
is sent.

Homage (Fr Hommage, i. fides clientularis) service, fidelity. In Court Barons,
the Jury sworn to enquire of matters, is so called. It signifies also a servile
ceremony of duty by some Tenants to their Lords, after this manner. The Tenant
that holds Lands by Homage, kneeling on both knees before the Lord (who sits
and holds the Tenants hands between his) says as follows, I become your man
from this day forth for life, for member and for worldly honor, and shall owe
you my faith, for the Land I hold of you; saving the faith I owe to our
Sovereign Lord the King, and to my other Lords.

And then the Lord, sitting, must kiss the Tenant. An. 17. Ed. 2. Stat. 2.
Glanvile, lib. 9. cap. 1.

Homageable, that is subject to, or ought to do homage.

Homeology (homoeologia) likeness of speech.

Homerical, after the manner of Homer, Homer like. Bac.

Homicide (homicida) a murderer, a manslayer.

Homicide (homicidium) the slaying of a man; and is divided into voluntary and
casual; homicide voluntary, is that which is deliberate and committed of a set
mind and purpose to kill: And this is either with precedent malice or without;
the former is murder, and is the fellonious killing, through malice prepensed,
of any person living in this Realm under the Kings protection. West par. 2.
Sym. tit. Inditements, sect. 37, etc. usque ad 51. where you may see diverse
subdivisions of it. See also Glanvile l. 14. ca. 3. Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2.
cap. 4.15, and 17. Brit. cap. 5, 6, 7. Also a sort of knives so called. Act.
1656. ca. 20.

Homily (homilia) a familiar speech of men together; a kind of Sermon, properly
of an inferior kind, such as is delivered out of a Book or Manuscript, by those
that are not able to preach otherwise.

Homodox ((...)) that is of the same opinion with another.

Homogeneal (homogeneus) of one or the same kind, congenerous.

Homography (homographia) like writing or painting.

Homologation (homologatio) an admission, allowance, or approbation, a consent
unto.

Homology (homologia) an agreement, a confession.

Homonymy (Gr.) when diverse things are signified by one word or name; as Heart
signifies a beast, and a prinicipal Member of the body; a likeness or sameness
of name: It is a term in Logic. Holy War.

Homonymous (Gr.) whose name only is common, their essence diverse, doubtful,
ambiguous.

Honi soit qui maly ^ense. (Fr. signifies, Evil or shame be to him that evil
thinks; it is the Motto belonging to the Order of Knights of the Garter.

Honor, does sometimes signify the most noble sort of Seigniories, on which
other inferior Lordships or Manors depend by performance of some Customs or
Services to the Lords of such Honors. And it seems there are no Honors, but
such as did originally belong to the King, and have since been given in Fee to
Noble men. Of this sort are the Honors of Windsor, Greenwich, Tickhil, etc. And
Courts there held are called Honor-Courts. 37 H. 8.18.33 H. 8.37.

Honor point, In Heraldry the upper part of an Escoutcheon is so called, when
its breadth is divided into three even parts.

Honorary (honorarius) pertaining to honor, which is made for honor, more then
use

Honorificabilitudinity (honorificabilitudinitas) honorableness.

Honorifical (honorificus) that brings or causes honor.

Hon^-moon, applied to those married persons that love well at first, and
decline in affections afterward; it is honey now, but it will change as the
Moon. Min.

Hogu^ton (Fr.) a fashion of short Coat, Cassock, or Jacket without sleeves.

Horary (horarius) of the space of an hour, hourly.

Hoplochrism (from the Gr. (...), arma, and (...), unguentum) an anointing of
arms or weapons, as they do in the use of the weapon salve. Dr. Charl.

Hoplochristical, pertaining to the Weapon-salve.

Horcentrick (Fr.) out of the Center; clean without the Compass of;
Mathematicians apply this word to the Sun, when his Center, being at the full
height of his Epicycle, is farthest from the Center of the earth. Cot.

Horizon (Gr.) a Circle immovable, dividing the half-Sphear of the Firmament
which we see, from the other half we see not; it has the name of (...), i.
termino, to bound or limit, because it limits our sight. For example, imagine
you stood upon Highgate or the Tower Hill at Greenwich, so far as you may see
round about, as in a Circle, where the Heaven seems to touch the earth, that is
called the Horizon; the Poles whereof are, the point just over your head,
called Zenith in Arabic; and the other under your feet, passing by the Center
of the world, called Nadir. The Sun rising and going down is ever in this Line
or Circle. Peach.

Horisontal (from Horizon) of or pertaining to the Horizon.

Horngeld (cornellatum) is compounded of Horn and Geldan or Gelder, i. solvere;
it signifies a Tax within the Forest to be paid for horned beasts. Crompt.
Jurisd. fol. 197. And to be free of it, is a privilege granted by the King.
Hugh Lupus E. of Chester gave to one Nigel, the Barony of Haughton, and the
Castle to be cornellatum; i. Tributum, quod a cornutis animalibus exigitur.
Vale-Royal. f. 97. and Spelmans Gloss.

Horologe (horologium) an hourglass, clock, dyal, or like instrument, to tell
what hour of the day it is.

Horological (horologicus) of or pertaining to a Clock or Dyal.

Horologiography, a writing of, or describing Clocks or Dyals: There is a late
Book entitled Azimuthal horologiography, treating of that subject.

Horometry (Gr.) the measure or measuring of hours.

Horoscope (horoscopus) any thing wherein hours are marked, as a Dyal; or the
calculation of ones nativity, wherein the hour of birth is chiefly observed.
See Ascendant.

Horridity (horriditas) trembling for fear.

Horripilation (horripilatio) the standing up of the hair for fear, a growing
rough with hair; a sudden quaking, shuddering or shivering.

Horrisonant (horrisonus) roaring, having a terrible sound.

Horror (Lat.) a quaking for fear and cold, an astonishment.

Hortolages (Fr.) things growing in Orchards or Gardens; Garden-stuff.

Hort-yards (from Hortus, a Garden) Garden-yards.

Hortative (hortativus) that belongs to exhortation and moving; exhorting or
apt to exhort.

Hosanna (Heb.) vel Osanna, save now, or O Lord save me; originally taken for
the burden of Willow branches which the Jews carried to the Feast of
Tabernacles. Hosanna to the Son of David, Mat. 21-9.

Hospital (hospitalium) a house erected of Charity, for entertainment and
relief of poor, sick, and impotent people. The Emperor Constantine the Great
first began the building of Hospitals.

Hospiticide (hospiticida) he that kills his guest.

Hospitious (hospitus) that receives guests friendly, also strange.

Hostage (Fr.) a pawn, surety, or pledge.

Hostle (Fr. hostel) a house, Inn, lodging; a Hall or Palace. This word in
French is commonly a mark of greatness; inferior houses being termed Maisons
and Logis.

Hosticide (hosticida) that conquers or kills his enemy.

Hostility (hostilitas) enmity, feud, mortal hatred.

Hotchpot (Fr. Hochepot. Belg. Hutspot, i. flesh cut into pretty pieces and
sodden with herbs or roots, not unlike that which the Romans called Farraginem,
a Gallimaufrey.) Littleton says it literally signifies a Pudding mixed with
diverse ingredients; but metaphorically a commixtion or putting together of
Lands, for the equal division of them, Examples you have diverse in him, f. 55.
And see Britt. f. 119.

Hoti and ^oti (Gr.) two terms used in Logic, the one is the quid, and the
other the propter quid: the one the thing it self, and the other the cause or
teason of it. Arist.

Housebote (is compounded of house and bote, i. compensatio) it signifies
Estovers out of the Lords wood to repair and uphold a Tenement or house. Or
Housebote is necessary Timber, that the Lessee for years or for life, of common
right, may take upon the ground, to repair the houses upon the same ground to
him leased, although it be not expressed in the Lease, and although it be by a
Lease Parol; but if he take more then is needful, he may be punished by an
Action of Waste.

Hom^l (Sax.) the ministering Sacraments to a sick man in danger of death. Bull.
The receiving the Sacraments. Rider.

Hugh. Aventinus derives it from the German word Houg^n, that is, slasher or
cutter. But whereas the name Hugh was first in use among the French, and Otfrid
in the year 900 used Hugh for comfort, I judge this name to be borrowed thence,
and so is correspondent to the Greek names Elpidius and Elpis.

Huguenot^ (Fr.) Calvinists, Reformists, French Protestants. At first termed
thus, of a gate in Tours called Hugon, near to which they assembled, when they
stirred first, or of the beginning of their first Protestation, Huc nos
venimus, etc.

Huguenotism (Fr. Huguenoterie) French-Calvinism, the Faith or Profession of a
Huguenot.

Huke, A Dutch attire; covering the head, face and all the body.

Humectate (humecto) to make moist, to water.

Humectation (humectatio) a making moist. Bac.

Humerous (humerosus) that has great shoulders.

Humid (humidus) wet, rainy, moist, liquid.

Humidate (humido) to moisten.

Humiferous (humifer) waterish, that brings moisture.

Humiliate (humilio) to make low or humble.

Humiliates, A Religious Order, instituted about the year 1166. by certain
persons exiled by Fredericus Barbarossa, who, when they were restored to their
Country, apparelled themselves in white, and lived by a kind of Vow, in
Prayers, penury and working wool, and were admitted by Innocentius the Third,
and other his Successors. Pol. Vir.

Humor (Lat.) moisture, water, juice or sap.

Humorosity (humorositas) moistness.

Humfrey or Humphrey (Ger.) for Humfred, i. house-peace, a lovely and happy
name, if it could turn home wars betwixt man and wife into peace. The Italians
have made Onuphrius of it in Latin. Came.

Hundred, Is a part of a Shire so called originally, because it contained ten
Tythings, each Tything consisting of ten houshoulds, called in Latin decennas.
These were first ordained by King Alfred the twenty ninth King of the West
Saxons. Stows Annal page 105. In Wales it is called Cantred or Cantref.

Hurlebats (adides.) See Whorlebats.

Hu^ngs, may seem to come from the French Haul-ser, i. to raise, elevate or sit
aloft; for it signifies the principal and highest Court in London. An. 11. H.
7. cap. 21. and Fitzh. not. br. fol. 23. See An. 9. Ed. 1. Cap unico. Other
Cities and Towns also have had a Court of the same name, as Winchester,
Lincoln, York, Sheppey, etc. where the Barons or Citizens have a Record of such
things as are determinable before them. Flet. l. 2. c. 55.

Hyacinth (hyacinthus) a violet or purple colored Lilly: or a purple flower
called Crowtoes; also a kind of precious stone called a Hyacinth. See Jacinth.
Also smoke which is of color like a Hyacinth, to wit blew and red, Rev. 9.11.

Hyacinthine (hyacinthinus) of violet or purple color.

Hyaline (hyalinus) of Glass-colour.

Hybernal Hybernian (hybernus) pertaining to winter, rough, rainy.

Hyde of Land. See Hide.

Hydra (Lat.) a monstrous Serpent in the Lernean Lake, which having one head
cut off, had forthwith two other growing up in the place, Hercules is said to
have fought with and slain this Monster.

Hydragogy (hydragogia) the bringing water into a place by channel.

Hydrargyrous (hydrargyrus) of, or pertaining to quicksilver. Vul. Err.

Hydraulick (hydraulicus) pertaining to Organs, or to an Instrument to draw
water, or to the sound of (running) waters. Bac.

Hydrography (hydrographia) is the delineation of the Sea, by her several
names, Promontories, Creeks and affections, as also of Springs and Rivers. In
general, a description of the water.

Hydrographical, belonging to the description of the Sea or water.

Hydriatiqu^s, Books treating of water, or of water-Engins.

Hydromantic (hydromantia) divination by causing Spirits to appear in the water.

Hydromantick (hydromanticus) of or pertaining to that kind of divination.

Hydromel (hydromeli) a kind of Metheglin, or drink made of water and honey
sodden together; Galen says that Mede should be made of rainwater, and
Hydromel of fountain water. This is a usual drink in Russia, Muscovy and
Tartary.

Hydrophoby (hydrophobia) an extreme fear of water and of every kind of liquor;
caused by melancholy or by the biting of a mad dog.

Hydrophobical, pertaining thereto, or that is troubled with that fear. Dr.
Charl.

Hydropick (hydropicus) sick of, or subject to the Dropsy.

Hydropotist (hydropota) he that always drinks water.

Hyemation (hyematio) a wintering.

Hyemal (hyemalis) belonging to Winter, ^interly.

Hyena, a beast like a woolf having a Main, and long hairs over all the body.
It is the subtillest (as some say) of all beasts, and will counterfeit the
voice of a man, to draw shepherds out of their houses in the night, to the end
he may kill them. It is said he changes sex often, being sometimes male, and
sometimes female.

Hygiastick (Gr.) pertaining to the conversation of health.

Hymen (Gr.) the God of marriages, or a song sung at marriages. The Greeks at
their marriages were wont to sing Hymen, Hymenaee; as the Romans did Talassio,
Talassio.

Hymniferous (hymnifer) that brings Hymns.

Hymnigrapher (hymnigraphus) a writer of Hymns.

Hymnist (hymnista) a singer of Hymns.

Hypallage (Gr.) a figure when words are understood contrariwise.

Hyper (Gr.) i, super, above. Hence,

Hyperbole (Lat.) a figure when one speaks a great deal more then is precisely
true, or above all likelihood of truth; excess in advancing or repressing.

Hyperbolic (hyperbolicus) that passes all likelihood of truth; beyond belief.

Hyperboreans (hyperborei) a people of Scythia so called, because the North
wind called Boreas blows over them.

Hypercritick (hypercriticus) above, or passing the common sort of Critics, a
Mr. Critic.

Hyperion. The Sun.

Hypermeter (Lat.) a verse having a redundant syllable, or one syllable above
measure, called by some a Feminine Verse.

Hyperphysical (hyperphysicus) that is above physic, supernatural,
metaphysical.

Hypocaust (hypocaustum) a Stow or Hot-house.

Hypocondriack Hypocondriacal (hypocondriacus) of or pertaining to the forepart
of the belly and sides about the short ribs, and above the Navel, under which
lies the Liver or Spleen. Also that is troubled with a windy Melancholy in
those parts.

Hypocrisy (hypocrisis) dissimulation, fained holiness; the cloaking of
infidelity and sin, with a show of faith and repentance, Mat 23.28.

Hypocrite (hypocrita) properly signifies one that assumes or takes upon him
the gesture or person of another, and covers or disguises his Judgment; but
commonly taken for a dissembler, that with feigned holiness would seem better
then he is indeed.

Hypocritical pertaining to an Hypocrite, dissembling, counterfeit.

Hypogastrick (from Hypogastrium) belonging to that part of the belly, which
reaches from the Navel to the privy members.

Hypoge (hypogaeum) a vault or cellar, or such like underground room, arched
overhead.

Hypogran^ (Gr.) a subscription, or any writing subscribed.

Hypospadians or Hippospadians, a sort of monstrous persons that abuse
themselves with a Horse or Mare. In Febr. 1652. one of these (who went by the
name of Margaret Rain) was convict before the Judges at Edinborough in Scotland
for some beastiality with a Horse or Mare; and both she and the Horse were
burnt according to the Mosaical Law; this person by an Inquest of Chyrurgions,
was found to be one of that sort (says the relation) whom the Philosophers call
Hypospadians.

Hypostatical (from Hypostasis) belonging to suppositality, subsistence or
personality. The Hypostatical Union, is the union of humane nature with Christ's
divine person.

Hypothecary (hypothecarius) pertaining to a pledge or gage

Hypothenusal (Gr.) the Hypothenusal line is that side of a Rectangle triangle,
which is opposed to, or subtends the right Angle. A term in Trigonometry.

Hypothesis (Gr.) a supposition or condition; sometimes it is taken for a
position of something, as it were demonstrated, and granted by another. Scapula.

Hypothetical (hypotheticus) In Logic those Propositions, which have a
Conjunction in them, and so consist of two parts, are called Hypothetical
Propositions; as in saying, If the Sun be in our Hemisphear, it is day.

Hysterical (hystericus) troubled with fits of the Mother.

Hysterology (hysterologia) an altering the order of speech, by placing that
first which should be last.

Hysteron Proteron (Gr.) the same with Hysterology, it is sometimes used in
derision of that which is spoken or done preposterously or quite contrary. The
common phrase is, The Cart before the horse.

I.
JAcent (jacens) lying along, slow, sluggish.

Iacinth (hyacinthus) a precious stone found in Aethiopia, whereof there are
two kinds, the one of a pale yellow color, the other of a clear bright yellow,
or inclineable to red, which is accounted the better. It is cold of nature,
comfortable to the body, and provokes sleep.

Jacob (Heb. i. a tripper or supplanter) whose name (because he had power with
God, that he might also prevail with men) was changed into Israel by God. See
Genesis cap. 32. Philo de nominibus mutatis.

Iacobins, The Friars of St. Dominicks Order are so call in France, because
their Monastery in Paris (formerly an Hospital) is dedicated to St. James, and
is seated in the street called Riie St. Jacque.

Iacobites (so called from Jacobus Syrus, who lived An. 530.) a sort of
Heretics, who 1. acknowledge but one Will, Nature, and Operation in Christ. 2.
Use Circumcision in both Sexes. 3. Sign their children with the sign of the
Cross, imprinted with a burning iron. 4. Affirm Angels to consist of two
substances, Fire and Light, etc. The Patriarch of this Sect is always called
Ignatius, and a Monk of St. Anthonies Order, he keeps his residence at ^arami
in Mesopotamia, and is said to have 160000 families under his jurisdiction.
Biddulph.

Jacobs Staff, a Pilgrims Staff, so called from those who out of devotion go on
pilgrimage to the City St. Jago, or St James Compostella in Spain, where some
of St. James' Relics are. It is sometimes taken for a Staff that has a dagger
or little sword in it. Also an instrument in Geomery so called. Min.

Jacobs Ladder, the journey of Jacob, wherein God would be present with him in
favor by his Angels, to lead him forth well and happily; also to bring him
back again, Genesis 28.12. There stood a Ladder. See ver. 15, and 20. Wilson.

Iactator (Lat.) a cracker or boaster.

Iactitation (jactitatio) a vain boasting.

Iaculabi^ (jaculabilis) fit to be thrown, that may be cast or darted.

Iaculatory (jaculatorius) that which is suddenly cast from one, like a dart;
as Jaculatory Prayers, sudden, extemporary Prayers.

Iambes (Fr.) with us it is used for the Posts sustaining both sides of the
door; the side-posts of a door.

Iamb-stone, is properly a stone that supports a Chimney or other part of a
house, the Mantletree-stone.

Iambick (Iambus) a measure or foot in verse, having the first syllable short,
and the other long, as sa^lu^s. Also a kind of Verse consisting usually either
of four or six feet, as, Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit.

This kind of Verse is said to be first invented by Archilochus a Greek Poet,
and was applied by the Ancients to Invectives.

James, is wrested from Jacob. See Jacob.

Iampnorum, as so many Acres Jampnorum, used in Fines, is a made word from the
Fr. jaulne, i. yellow, because the bloomings of Furze are yellow, and Jampnum
in our Law books and Fines, signifies Furze.

Ia^zaries ( i. the new Soldiery) are the Turks principal foot Soldiers, that
are of his Guard, who for the most part by original being Christians, are
chosen by the Turkish Officers every five years, out of his European Dominions,
or are taken Captives in their childhood.

Iannes and Iambres, two Egyptian Sorcerers of chief note, who resisted Moses,
2 Timothy 3.8*

Iannock (avenacenum) a loaf of bread made only of Oaten meal, so called in
the North of England.

Iansenism or Iansenianism The Tenets and Opinion of Cornel. Jansenius late
Bishop of Ypres, whose writings seemed to hold forth these five Propositions.

1. Some Precepts of God are impossible to just men, willing and endeavoring,
according to the present power they have; Grace also is wanting to them,
whereby they might be possible.

2. In the state of lapsed nature, there is no resistance made to interior
Grace.

3. To merit and demerit in the state of lapsed nature, there is not required
in man liberty from necessity, but liberty from coaction is sufficient.

4. The Semi-Pelagians did admit the necessity of interior preventing Grace to
every act, even to the beginning of faith; and in this they were heretics,
because they would have that Grace to be such, as the will of man might resist
or obey.

5. It is Semi-Pelagianism to say, that Christ died or shed his blood for all
men without exception.

These Propositions (though much defended in France and Flanders) were
condemned by Pope Innocent the tenth; in the Calends of June, 1653.

Ianus was the God to whom the year was dedicated, and therefore it began with
his festival, and the first month was nominated from him, for which cause he
was represented with two faces, to show he looked both backward on the time
past, and forward on that to come, and sometimes with four faces; to signify
perhaps (for I know other reasons are given) the sour seasons of the year.

Annorum nitidique sator pulcherrime Mundi,
Publica quem primum vota precesque canunt.
Mart. To this god, Numa built a Temple, which in time of peace was shut, and
in war open. Mr. Cowley.

Iar (Span. Jarro, i.e. an earthen pot) with us it is most usually taken for a
vessel of Oil containing twenty Gallons.

Iargon (Fr.) gibbrish, fustian-language, Pedlers-French, a barbarous jangling.

Jasper (jaspis) a precious stone of diverse colors, but the best is green,
transparent with red veins, and shows fairest being set in silver: it is good
to stop any issue of blood.

Iasponyx (Gr.) a kind of Jasper white of color with red strakes, not much
unlike the nail of a man's hand.

Iatraliptick (jatraliptes) a Physician or Chyrurgeon that cures only by
outward application of ointments or frications.

Iatromathematique (from (...), medicus, and mathematicus) may signify a
Physician that is also a Mathematitian, or a Physician that cures in a
mathematical way.

Iaveline (Fr.) a weapon of a size between the Pike and Partisan.

Ibis (Lat.) a tall strong bird in Egypt with a long bill, which does much good
there in killing Serpents, and when he is sick, he gives himself a Clister of
salt water; some write, that Hippocrates first learned of this bird to give
Clisters. Min.

Icarian Sea, so called from Icarus, who (as the Poets will have it) flying
from Creet with his waxen wings, and not following his Father Daedalus
directly, was there drowned. Thus Ovid.

Dum petit infirmis nimium sublimia pennis
Icarus, Icariis nomina fecit aquis.
Whilst Icaru's weak wings too high did soar,
He fell, and Christened the Icarian shore.
Ich dien, the true old Sax, was Ih or Ic^thian, or thiene, i. I serve; some
will have it come from the British Etch din, i. your man, in that language; it
is the Motto belonging to the Devise of the Princes of Wales, which we
commonly, though corruptly call the Princes Arms; the figure is three Ostrich
feathers, which (says Cambden) Edw. the Black Prince won at the battle of
Cressy, from John K. of Bohemia, whom he there slew, whereto he adjoined this
old English Motto, alluding to that of the Apostle, The heir while he is a
child differs nothing from a servant. These feathers were an ancient ornament
of military men, and used for Crests, as is evident by that of Virgil.

Cujus olorinae surgunt de vertice pennae. Ichnography (ichnographia) a plot of
a house to be built, drawn out in paper, or the description of any work
according to its tract or tracery on the ground, as it were the footsteppings
of the work. For Ichnographia in Gr. is, quasi vestigii descriptio; or
descriptio operis futuri.

Ichthyology (ichthyologia) a discoursing or description of fishes. Br.

Ichthyonomancy (Gr.) a divination by fishes.

Ichthyophagie (Gr.) fish-eating.

Iconical (iconicus) belonging to an Image; also lively pictured.

Iconism (iconismus) a true and lively description.

Iconomical belonging to Images, or after the manner of Images.

Iconoclast (Gr.) a demolisher or breaker of Images; also a Sect so called,
sprung up about the year of Christ 719 in time of Pope Gregory the second, and
Leo the third Emperor, who, for casting holy Images and Statues out of the
Churches, and causing them to be burnt or broken, was surnamed the Iconoclast
or Iconomachus. Against which was gathered the seventh Nicene Synod consisting
of 350. Bishops, who decreed against, and condemned it for heresy, etc.

Idea (Gr.) the form or figure of any thing conceived in the mind or
imagination; a pattern. The Platonists define Idea an eternal exemplar of
things which are according to nature.

Ideal (idealis) pertaining to an Idea, imaginary, conceived in the
imagination, only in fancy.

Ideated (from Idaea) made by or for a pattern; figured in the imagination.

Ides (Idus) eight days in every month so called. In March, May, July and
October, these eight days begin at the eighth day of the month, and continue to
the fifteenth; in other months they begin at the sixth day, and continue to
the thirteenth.

Sex Maius Nonas, October Julius and Mars;
Quatuor and reliqui; tenet Idus quilibet Octo.
^nde dies relics omnes die esse Kalendas.
Where note, that the last day only is called Ides: and the first of these
days the eighth Ides; the second, the seventh Ides; that is the eighth or
seventh day before the Ides, and so of the rest. Therefore when we speak of the
Ides of such a month in general, it is to be understood of the fifteenth or
thirteenth day of that month.

They are so called of an old word Idus, to divide; for that they commonly fall
out near the midst of the month as aforesaid; according to Horace,

-- Idus tibi sunt agendae,
Qui dies mensem Veneris marinae
findit Aprilem.
Identification, the making two things to be the same.

Idemity, (from idem) sameness, or being the very same.

Idiosyncrasy (Gr.) natural property, or peculiar temperament of any thing.

Idiopathy (idiopathia) proper passion or particular affection.

Idiograph (idiographum) a private writing; or of ones own hand writing.

Idiotical (from the Gr. (...)) private, or belonging to private men; also
belonging to an Idiot.

Idiom (idioma) a proper form of speech, a Dialect. See Dialect.

Idiot (idiota) one that is naturally born so weak of understanding, that he
cannot govern or manage his Inheritance. The King by his Prerogative has the
Government of their Lands and Substance, that are naturally defective in their
own discretion; 17 E. 2. cap. 8. An Idiot, and he that afterward becomes of
insane memory, differ in diverse cases. Coke fol. 154. b. lib. 4.

Idiotism (idiotismus) natural folly, simplicity, sottishness; also the same
with Idiom, a form of speech taken up by the vulgar.

Idolatry (idololatria) a giving divine worship to that which is not God; an
Idol signifies properly a shadow, or rather a vain vision, or false
representation of a thing that is not. Eustachius upon Homer. Pol. Virg.
affirms Idolatry to have begun in the time of Belus King of the Assyrians, who
reigned An. Mun 3180. whom the Babylonians first worshipped for a God.

Idoneity (idoneitas) fitness, propriety.

Idoneous (idoneus) proper, fit, meet, convenient.

Idyl ( idyllium or idyllion) a Poem consisting of few Verses.

Jehovah (Hebr.) is Gods proper name of his own imposition, and incommunicable
to any creature, of what rank or quality soever; a name of such immoderate
reverence among the eldest Jews, that it was forbidden to be written right, or
pronounced at all in this world, but by the High Priest, and but in one place,
the Sanctum Sanctorum, and but at one time of the year, in the day of
expiation. Gregory, p. 5.

Iehu-match, a speedy quick march, such as that was of Jehu, King of Israel,
who, marching with a troop of men toward Jezreel, stopped the messengers that
were sent to him out of the Town, to learn whether he came as a man of peace, a
friend, or a foe? whereof you may read more, 4 King. 9.10.

Iejune (jejunus) greedy, hungry, bare, barren, empty, nothing, copious.

Iejunity (jejunitas) slenderness of style, barrenness, nakedness.

Ie-ne-scay-quoy (four French words, contracted as it were into one, and)
signifies, I know not what, we use to say they are troubled with the Je-ne-scay
quoy, that feign themselves sick out of niceness, but know not where their own
griefs lies, or what ayls them.

Ieofaile, is compounded three French words, I'ay faille, I have failed; and
signifies in our Common Law an oversight, failing, or defect in pleading. See
New terms of Law.

Jeremy (Heb.) high of the Lord.

Iesuats, an Order of Monks (begun at Siena in Italy by John Columbanus and
Fran. Vincent, A. 1365) so called from their often having the name of Jesus in
their mouths. Pope Urban the fifth approved them, and enjoined them to wear a
white garment, a white cover for their head, a leather girdle, and to go
barefoot, using only wooden soles; these were afterward called Apostolici.
Drantzius and Surius.

Iesutes, Those of the Society of Jesus, a Religious Order first founded by St.
Ignatius Loyola, born in Biscay, in the year 1492. Pope Paul the third
confirmed this Order, Sep. 15. 1540. To the three Vows of Poverty, Obedience,
and Chastity, common to all other Orders, St. Ignatius at the institution
hereof, added the Vow of Mission, which is this. -- And further we judge it
expedient for our greater devotion to the Sea Apostolic, and more full
abnegation of our own wills and pleasures; that the professed of this Society,
besides the common bond of the three Vows, be further tied by special Vow; so
as that whatsoever the Roman Bishop for the time being shall command,
pertaining to the salvation of souls, and propagation of the Faith, they shall
be bound to execute, without tergiversation or excuse; whether they shall be
sent unto Turks or Infidels, yea even unto those that are commonly called the
Indians, or unto any other Heretics or Schismatics whatsoever.

Iesuah (Heb.) salvator; by that name and by Jehoshuah, which signifies Deus
salvabit, our Savior Christ was foretold, in the Old Testament; From the
Hebrew Jesuah comes the Greek (...), which the Latins write Jesus.

Jesus (Lat.) the proper name of our Savior Christ, designed him from heaven
by the Angel Gabriel, and the reason of its imposition is given by those words
of the said Angel, ( Matthew. 1.) And his name shall be JESUS, because he shall
save his people from their sins; the word Jesus signifying a Savior. In Gr.
(...) per Anagramma est (...), i. tu es ovis illa, i. ovis illa pro peccatis
nostris immolata, Agnus mactatus ante jacta mundi fundamenta. In abbreviation
this sacred name is usually written thus, I H S. which middle letter some take
to be an h, when as it is in truth the Greek H, Eta, or E longum. Jesus in the
China tongue signifies the rising Sun. Greg.

Ietson. See Flotson.

Iews-ears, An Excrescence about the root of Elder, and concerns not the Nation
of the Jews, as some imagine, Br.

Ignaro (Ital.) one that is ignorant; A fool, or dunce, an Ignoramus.

Ignify (ignifacio) to burn.

Igniferous (ignifer) that bears fire.

Ignipotent (ignipotens) mighty by fire.

Ignis Fatuus (Lat.) foolish fire, or (as the Country people call it) Will of
the Wisp, is a certain viscous substance, reflecting light in the dark,
evaporated out of a fat earth, and flying in the air. It commonly haunts
Churchyards, Privies and Fens, because it is begotten out of fatness; it flies
about Rivers, Hedges, etc. because in those places there is a certain flux of
air; it follows one that flies it, and flies one that follows it; because the
air does so. Per. Instit. It is called Ignis fatuus, because it only fears
fools. Hence it is, when men are led away with some idle fancy or conceit, we
use to say an Ignis fatuus has done it.

Ignitible (ignitibilis) that may be turned into fire, combustible. Vul. Er,

Ignition (ignitio) a burning or firing of a thing.

Ignivomous (ignivomus) that spits out fire; as the hills Aetna and Vesuvius
are said to do:

Ignominy (ignominia) discredit, reproach, slander, rebuke, dishonor.

Ignominious (ignominiosus) infamous, reproachful, dishonorable.

Ignoramus, the first person plural of ignoro, signifies properly we are
ignorant; but it is commonly used as a Noun. As when we say such a one is an
Ignoramus, i. a fool or a dolt. In our Common Law it is properly used by the
grand Enquest, empannelled in the Inquisition of causes criminal and public;
and written upon the Bill, whereby any crime is offered to their consideration,
when they mislike their evidence, as defective or too weak to make good the
Presentment. The effect of which word so written, is, that all farther inquiry
upon that party, for that fault, is thereby stopped, and he delivered without
further answer; It has a resemblance with that custom of the ancient Romans;
where the Judges, when they absolved a person accused, did write A, upon a
little Table provided for that purpose, i. Absolvimus: If they judged him
guilty, they writ C. i. Condemnamus: if they found the cause difficult and
doubtful, they wrote N.L. i. Non Liquet. Alex. ab Alexandro. Genial. dierum
lib. 3. c. 14.

Ignoscible (ignoscibilis) tolerable, to be pardoned.

H.S. This Character, compounded of two Capital II. and the letter S. thus
coupled together, signifies Sestertius, i. a silver coin among the Romans
consisting of two Asses and a half, whence it has the name Sestertius, quasi
semistertius, i. two and half the third: and therefore you see the numeral note
of two, and S for semis, which is half; it is the fourth part of the Roman
Denarius, and in value among us three half pence farthing. q.

Ike^uld street, is one of the four famous ways the Romans made in England,
taking denomination, ab Icenis, which were the inhabitants of Norfolk,
Suffolk, and Cambridge-shire, Came. Brit fol. 343. See Watling-street.

Iliad (ilias, adis) Homers Poem of the destruction of Troy; so when we say an
Iliad of evils or sorrow, is meant as many mischeifs, or as much grief, as
befell the Trojans, at the Seige and destruction of their City; also a Poem of
evils, or sorrow.

Isles (ilia) the flanks, that part of the entrals, which contains the three
first or small guts, so termed by Anatomists.

Iliacal Iliaque (iliacus) of or belonging to the Isles or small guts.

Illabora^e (illaboratus) done or made without labor, plain, unlaboured.

Illacerable (illacerabilis) that cannot be torn or rent in pieces.

Illachrymation (illacrymatio) a weeping or bewailing.

Illaqueate (illaqueo) to bind, snare or entangle.

Illatebration (illatebratio) a hiding, or seeking of corners.

Illation (illatio) an inference, conclusion, a reason or allegation that
inforceth; a bringing in of a matter.

Illatration (illatratio) a barking against one.

Illecebrous (illecebrosus) that enticeth or allureth.

Illegitimate (illegitimus) unlawful, base-born, bastard.

Illepid (illepidus) without delectation or grace, unpleasant.

Illiciteus Illicite (illicitus) unlawful, without warrant.

Illigation (illigatio) an inwrapping or intangling.

Illimitable, that cannot be limited or bounded.

Illogical, not logical, not according to the rules of Logic.

Illucidate (illucido) to enlighten or give light, to clear or explicate
clearly.

Illuminous (illuminosus) without light.

Illusion (illusio) a mocking or scorning.

Illusory (from Illusor, a mocker) that mocketh or scorneth.

Illutible (illutibilis) that cannot be purged from filth.

Imbargo or Embargo (Span.) a stop or stay; an usual word among our Merchants,
when their ships or Merchandises are arrested upon any occasion.

Imbecility (imbecillitas) weakness, feebleness. And ^ome use the word
imbecillate or weakened or enfeebled.

Imbellick (imbellis) unaccustomed to war^, nothing manly, cowardly. Felth.

Imber days, or Imber weeks (quatuor tempora) which weeks are four in the year,
and anciently, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday in each week were fasts
according to these old Verses, Post cineres, Pentec. post crucem, postque
Luciam,
Mercurii, Veneris, Sabathi, jejunia fient.


That is, the next Wednesday, etc. after Cineres or Ash Wednesday, after
Pentecost, i. Whit-sunday, after holy-rood-day, or the exaltation of the Cross;
and the next after St. Lucies lay in December. See Ember.

Imbibe (imbibo) to receive in, to drink in.

Imbibition (from imbibe) a drinking or receiving in.

Imbosk (Fr. Embosquer) to side or shroud ones self in a wood. Schism. Disp.

Imbossement. See Embossement.

Imbossed work in metal or stone, is made with bosses or bunches, and comes of
the German word Imbessieren, i. caelare formam aliquam. Min.

Imbricate (imbricatus) square and bent like a roof or gutter-Tile, which the
Latins tall Imbrex; also coverd with such a Tile.

Imbrication (imbricatio) a covering with Tile.

Imbrocado. See Brocado.

Imitative (imitativus) made or done by imitation, apt to imitate.

Immanity (immanitas) outragiousness, cruelty, excess.

Immansuete (immansuetus) ungentle, untractable, outrageous, wild.

Immanuel. See Emmanuel.

Immarcessible (immarcessibilis) incorruptible, unwitherable, immortal.

Immaturity (immaturitas) untimeliness, unripeness.

Immedicable (immedicabilis) that cannot be cured.

Immemorable (immemrabilis) unworthy remembrance, that is to be forgotten, that
cannot be remembered.

Immersible (immersibilis) that cannot be drowned.

Imminution (imminutio) a diminishing or making less.

Immission (immissio) a sending or putting in, a setting or graffing. Bac.

Immolate (immolo) to offer, to sacrifice.

Immolation (immolatio) a Sacrificing or Offering.

Immunity (immunitas) freedom from any thing; liberty.

Immusical, that has no music or harmony.

Impacable (impacabilis) that cannot be appeased.

Impacted (impactus) dashed or beaten against; cast or put into.

Impale (Fr. Empaler) to spit on a stake, to thrust a stake in at the Fundament
and out at the mouth (a manner of death inflicted on offenders by the Turks)
Also a term in Heraldry, signifying, as it were the halfing a Coat of Arms;
when a Coat is quartered, the Escotcheon is divided into four parts; when
impaled, into two.

Impanation (impanatio) the turning another substance into bread.

Imparlance. v. Emparlance.

Impe, a term most usual among Falconers, and is when a Feather in a Hawks wing
is broken, and another piece imped or graffed to the stump of the old. But may
be handsomely used in a metaphorical sense to other purposes; As to Impe the
Feathers of time with several recreations. Sir P.S. Himp or ^imp in the
British language is surculus, a young graff or twig, thence impto the Verb, to
incculate or graff. Hence the word to imp is borrowed by the English, first
surely to graff trees, and thence translated to imping feathers.

Imparity (imparitas) inequality, unlikeness.

Impeachment of Waste, (from the Fr. Empeschement, i. impedimentum) signifies
with us a restraint from committing waste upon Lands or Tenements.

Impeccable (impeccabilis) that cannot offend or do amiss.

Impeccability (impeccabilitas) an impossibility to sin.

Impedient (impediens) letting, staying or hindering.

Impeditive (impeditus) that lets or hinders.

Impend (impendo) to spend or lay out moneys, to bestow, to employ.

Impendious (impendiosus) too liberal, that spends more then needs.

Impenetrable (impenetrabilis) that cannot be pierced or entered, invincible.

Impennous (impennatus) without feathers, that has no feathers. Vul. Er.

Imperative (imperativus) that commands, or that is commanded.

Imperceptible (imperceptus) that cannot be taken or conceived.

Imperil (from periculum) to hazard or put into danger.

Imperforation (ab in and perforo) a closing or shutting up for want of boring
or piercing.

Impersonal (impersonalis) that has no person.

Impervestigable, that cannot be sought or found out.

Impervious (impervius) that cannot be passed or gone through.

Impetiginosity (impetiginositas) scabbiness.

Impetrable (impetrabilis) that may be obtained by desire, or prayer.

Impetration (impetro) an obtaining by request and prayer.

Impetuous (impetuosus) boisterous, violent, furious, most forcible, sweeping
away whatsoever is before it.

Impetuosity (impetuositas) boisterousness, great violence, over-bearing fury.

Impiated (impiatus) defiled, not purged from sin, stained.

Impicate (impico) to cover with pitch.

Impignerate (impignero) to lay to pledge or pawn.

Impigrity (impigritas) quickness, diligence.

Impigrous (impiger) diligent, quick, ready, not slow.

Impinge (impingo) to hirl or throw against a thing; to beat or dash; to run on
ground or against a Rock.

Impinguate (impinguo) to make fat.

Impinguation, a making fat. Bac.

Implacable (implacabilis) that cannot be pleased or reconciled, obstinate.

Implacability (implacabilitas) frowardness; not to be pleased.

Implead, is a Law word, and signifies to sue, arrest, or prosecute by course
of Law.

Implements (from impleo, to fill up) is used for things of necessary use in
any Trade or Mystery, without which the work cannot be accomplished; and also
for the Furniture of a house, with which the house is filled.

Implication (implicatio) a wrapping or intangling within, annoyance,
encumbrance.

Implicit (implicitus) wrapped or tied fast together, mixed one with another,
encumbered.

Implicitly (implicit) obscurely, intricately; a thing is said to be implied,
or expressed implicitly, when it is folded or mixed with another, and does not
appear in express terms.

Implore (imploro) to desire lamentably with tears, to beseech, to call upon
for help.

Impluvious (impluvius) wet with rain.

Impolite (impolitus) not polished, rude, rough.

Imporcation (imporcatio) the making a balk in plowing Land.

Importuous (importuosus) without port or haven.

Imporous (imporosus) without pores or holes.

Imposititious names (nomina imposititia) primitive or radical names. Varro.

Impositive (impositivus) unnatural; imposed or given to.

Impositor (Lat.) the Impositor or Monitor in a School; also he that imposes
the pages into a form for the Press, after the Compositor has set the Letters
into pages.

Impost (Fr.) Imposition, Tallage, Custom, Tribute; and more particularly it
signifies the tax received by the Prince for such Merchandises as are brought
into any haven from other Nations. Ann. 31. Eliz. c. 5. And I think it may in
some sort be distinguished from Custom, because Custom is rather that profit
which the Prince makes of wares shipped out of the Land; yet they may be
confounded.

Impostor (Lat.) a cousener, deceiver, jugler, a seller of counterfeit wares
for current.

Imposture (impostura) cousening, deceit, juggling.

Impostume (apostema) a quantity of evil humors, gathered into one part of the
body; whereof there are two kinds, one when inflamed blood, being turned to
corrupt matter, fills some place; the other, when without any inflammation,
nature thrusts those humors into some part apt to receive them. Bull.

Imprecate (imprecor) to wish some evil to come, to curse.

Impreciable (from precium) unpriseable, unvaluable.

Impregnable (Fr. imprenable) unexpugnable, which cannot be forced.

Imprescriptible (from in and praescriptus) without the compass of
prescription, which by no length of time can be aliened or lost. Cotg.

Imprese (from the Italian Verb imprendere, i. to undertake) is a Devise in
picture with his Motto or word, born by noble and learned personages, to
notify some particular conceit, design, or undertaking. See Devise.

Impressed money. See Pressed money.

Impression (impressio) a printing, stamp or mark; an Impression of Books is
usually taken with us for 1500 copies; in France 1250 is the usual Journee or
days-work.

Improbate (improbo) to disallow, to dispraise or dislike.

Imprimings (from imprimis) beginnings, first Essays Sir H. Wotton.

Improcerous (improcerus) low, not tall.

Improlifical (from improles) that begets not issue, without young, not apt to
have issue.

Impromiscuous (impromiscuus) unmingled, not confused.

Improperate^ (impropero) to upbraid a man with some fault; also to make haste
to go in.

Impropriation (appropriatio) a Parsonage or Ecclesiastical Living, coming to
one by inheritance. See Appropriation.

Impulse (impulsio) a motion, a persuading to a thing, a stirring.

Impunity (impunitas) lack of punishment, pardon of punishment.

Imputrescible (imputrescibilis) that will not rot; uncorruptible.

Inadulable (inadulabilis) that will not be flattered.

Inaffable (inaffabilis) not affable, discourteous.

Inalimental, which has no nourishment, or nourishes not. Bac.

Inambulate (inambulo) to walk up and down in a place.

Inamissible (inamissibilis) that cannot be lost.

Inaniloquent (inaniloquus) that speaks vainly, a babbler.

Inanimate (inanimatus) that has no soul, without life.

Inanity (inanitas) emptiness, voidness; also vanity.

Inarable (inarabilis) not arable, that cannot be plowed.

Inauspicuous (inauspicuus) hard to be seen, invisible.

Inaudible (inaudibilis) that is not to be heard.

Inaugurate (inauguro) to ask counsel of the Augures what shall follow, to
dedicate to soothsaying; also to dignifie or ennoble one, to invest one with an
Office or place of honor.

Incalescence (from incalesco) a being or waxing very hot, lusty, or fierce.

Incandescence (from incandesco) a being or waxing very angry, or greatly
inflamed.

Incanescence (from incanesco) a waxing hoary or white-headed.

Incantator (Lat.) a charmer or enchanter.

Incarcerate (incarcero) to imprison or put in prison.

Incarnadin (Fr.) properly a deep, rich or bright Carnation.

Incarnation (incarnatio) the bringing on of flesh, a being made of flesh, an
assuming flesh. An Incarnate color, is a Carnation color, a flesh color, or
of the color of our Damask Rose.

Incarnative, is a certain Salve or Medicine, to cause flesh to grow.

Incastellated (Fr. encastelle) narrow-heeled (as a horse.)

Incendiary (incendiarius) a firebrand, a setter of houses on fire; one that
sows divisions. See Boute-feu.

Incense (incendo) to set on fire, to inflame, to stir up to anger. Incense (a
Noun) signifies the best Frankinsense or a kind of excellent perfume; used in
Churches for sacred uses.

Incension (ab incendo) a burning or inflaming.

Incension (ab incino) melody of instruments, or of men singing together.

Incensory (Fr. Incensoir) a Church-Vessel to burn Incense in; a censing or
perfuming pan.

Incentive (incentivum) a provokement, assay or trial; a thing that will
quickly take fire.

Incentive (Adjectively) that moves or provokes unto.

Incentor (Lat.) he that sings the descant. In singing there are three degrees,
the first Succentor, the second Incentor, the third Accentor. Also a makebate,
or Boutefeu.

Inception (inceptio) a beginning or enterprise.

Incerning (incernens) sifting, trying by sifting, looking narrowly into.

Incessantly (incessanter) without intermission, continually.

Incession (from incedo) a going or walking.

Incest (incestus) did signify all kind of pollution, committed by undoing or
untying the girdle called Cestus or Zona, but now in a more strict acceptance
it signifies only that kind of naughtiness, which is committed between two of
near kin. Godwin.

Incestuous (incestus) that defiles one of near kin, polluted, unchaste.

Inchoate (inchoo) to begin, or to take his beginning.

Inchoative (inchoativus) beginning, or that begins.

Enchantment (incantamentum) a Charm. See Conjuration.

Incident (incidens, ab in and caedo) cutting off, letting or hindering.

Incident ( incidens, ab in and cado, a circumstance or by-matter, a thing
which comes indirectly into a fact or question, or (being not properly of the
substance thereof) arises from it collaterally or sideways; Also a chance,
accident, casualty. Cotgr. In Law it signifies a thing necessarily depending
upon another, as more principal. For example, a Court Baron is so incident to a
Manor, and a Court of Pie-powders to a Fair, that they cannot be severed by
Grant: Or if a Manor or Fair be granted, these Courts cannot be reserved.
Kitch. fol. 36.

Inciperable, that is not reducable to ashes or cinders.

Incine (...) (from in and cinis) a reducing or converting into Ashes, Imbers
or Cinders. Mont.

Incipati^ (from incipio) a beginning or going about.

Incision (incisio) a cutting or lancing; also a short pointing of a Sentence.

Incisur^ (incisura) a cut or gash, a lancing or slitting.

Inclusion (inclusio) a shutting or closing in.

Incogitabi^ (incogitabilis) that which is not thought of, or which cannot be
comprehended by thought; foolish, rash, unadvised.

Incogitancy (incogitantia) rashness, unadvisedness.

Incohible (incohibilis) that cannot be restrained.

Incolumity (incolumitas) healthfulness, safety, freedom from danger.

Incomity (incomitas) discourtesie.

Incommeable (incommeabilis) unpassable.

Incommensurable (from in and commensus) that has not an equal proportion or
measure, o^ that cannot be measured with another thing

Incommisc^ry (from in and commisceo) that cannot be mixed or mingled together.

Incommunicable (incommunicabilis) not in common to other, not to be attributed
or imparted to other.

Incommutative (incommutatus) not to be changed or altered.

Incompatible (ab in and compatior) disagreeing, not enduring one another; that
will not suffer together, irreconcilable.

Incompossible, a term in Logic, and is when one Proposition affirms what
another denies. Perip. Inst.

Incomprehensible (incomprehensibilis) that cannot be comprehended or numbered.

Incomputrible (incomputribilis) that will not rot or decay, incorruptible.

Inconcinnity (inconcinnitas) an ill grace, unfitness, unhandsomness,
disproportion.

Incongelable (incongelabilis) that cannot be frozen.

Incongruous (incongruus) disagreeable, unmeet.

Inconsolable (inconsolabilis) that cannot be comforted or assuaged.

Incontinency (incontinentia) lack of moderation in affections and lusts.

Incordiate (incordio) to put into a man's heart, to persuade him.

Incorporate (incorporo) to mix two or more substances together.

Incorporeal (incorporeus) that has no body.

Incrassate (incrasso) to make thick or gross. Br.

Incremable, that cannot be burnt.

Increment (incrementum) increase, augmentation, a waxing bigger. Br.

Incressant (from incresco) a term in Heraldry, signifying the Moon past the
prime, and yet not come to the full.

Increpate (increpo) to make a noise, to creak; Also to reprove or chide.

Incrustation (incrustatio) a pargetting, rough-casting, a crustiness, or thick
scabbedness.

Incubation (incubatio) a lying, sitting abroad, hatching. Br.

Incubus (Lat.) A Devil that sometimes in man's shape lies with women, as
Succubus does with men. Also a disease called the Nightmare, when a man in his
sleep supposes he has a great weight lying on him, and feels himself almost
strangled; in such sort that he cannot turn himself, nor sit up, nor call for
help. The vulgar think it some spirit, but Physicians affirm it to be a natural
disease, caused by humors undigested in the stomach, which fuming up to the
brain, do there trouble the Animal spirits, stopping their passage into the
sinews, so that the body cannot move. Bull.

Inculcate (inculco) to pour or thrust in, to repeat often, to beat into the
memory.

Inculpable (inculpabilis) blameless, unreprovable.

Incumbent (incumbens) leaning, lying, falling or resting upon.

An Incumbent in our Common Law, is he that is presented, admitted, and
instituted to any Church or Benefice with Cure, who is therefore called the
Incumbent of that Church, because he bends all his study to the discharge of
the Cure there. Terms of Law.

Incursion (incursio) a meeting of things together, a hitting one against
another.

Incussion (incussio) a dashing together.

Indagation (indagatio) a searching, or diligent seeking out.

Indefatigable (indefatigabilis) that cannot be wearied or tired.

Indefinite (indefinitus) not determined, not defined, not limited or bounded,
not decreed.

Indeleble (indelebilis) that cannot be put or raced out; perpetual.

Indemnity (indemnitas) eschewing of damage, escaping without hurt,
damagelesness.

Independents, are so called, because they depend upon the arbitrament of no
National Church, nor Civil State, but order all things belonging to Doctrine,
and Church Government within their private Congregations. See
Congregationalists.

Indeprecable (indeprecabilis) that will not be entreated, or moved to yield.

Indeprehensible (indperehensibilis) that cannot be deprehended or taken.

Indesinent (indesinens) without ceasing, continual.

Indeterminately (indeterminate) not precisely this, but either this or another.

Index (Lat.) the Table of a Book, a Summary; a mark, sign or token. And in the
plural number Indices.

Indication (indicatio) the mark whereby the Chyrurgeon is directed to the
remedy that will best fit his Patient; also a commending or prizing of sale
Wares, a showing.

Indicative (indicativus) that whereby any thing is showed and declared.

Indiciduous (from indicium) that shows or detects; or that pertains to the
signs, whereby one may judge of any thing; also not apt to fall.

Indico, a stone brought out of Turkey, wherewith Diers use to Dye Blew.

Indiction (indictio ab indicendo) the space of fifteen years, by which account
Charters and public writings are dated at Rome; every year still increasing
one till it come to fifteen, and then returning to one again.

These Indictions (as Bede notes) began the 24 day of September, and were
devised (as he thinks) to avoid confusion in Chronology. Indiction is most
properly said de Tributo indicto, as appears by the title in the Code ( lib.
10. Tit. 16.) And these Indictions began at the very dismission of the Nicen
Council; succeeding (says Onuphrius) in place of the Olympiads, which as
unchristian, the Emperor had forbidden. Greg. See Epoche.

Indictive (indictivus) that which is declared, appointed or solemnly uttered,
whereunto the people were wont to be called by Proclamation.

Indigenous Indigenital (from indigena) born in the same Town or Country;
natural.

Indigent (indigens) that is in necessity, needy, poor, penurious.

Indigence (indigentia) need, want, poverty.

Indigestible (indigestibilis) not able to be digested.

Indigitate (indigito) to signify or show, with pointing the finger; to call
by name.

Indignation (indignatio) disdain, scorn, anger, wrath.

Indignity (indignitas) unworthiness, dishonesty, lack of reputation, infamy.

Indissoluble (indissolubilis) that cannot be loosed or undone.

Individual (individuus) that may not be divided, inseparable.

Individuality Individuity (individuitas) inseparableness, unpartableness.

Individuum (Lat.) one singular thing; that which cannot be divided, a body
inseparable, a Moat; Also a term in Logic, when we directly express and seem
to point to that thing which we speak of: As in saying, This Horse, that Man;
for though the words [ horse or man] may be applied to any horse or man, yet
being so expressly pointed at, they cannot then be drawn to signify other then
those two.

Individuum Vagum, a singular thing not determined to be this or that in
particular.

Indivisible (indivisibilis) that cannot be divided.

Indocility (indocilitas) unaptness to learn.

Indoctrinate (indoctrino) to teach or instruct.

Indomable (indomabilis) that cannot be tamed.

Indolency ( indolentia, Fr. indoleance) no apprehension of grief, no feeling
of sorrow, unsensibleness of, or want of sense in pain.

Indorsation (from in and dorsum) an indorsing; or writing on the backside; a
bearing, or laying on the back.

Indubitate (indubitatus) without doubt, for certain.

Induciary (induciarius) pertaining to truce or league. Sir Hen. Wotton
(speaking of the times of Queen Elizabeth) calls King James (then King of
Scotland) induciat heir of this Imperial Crown. Rel. Wot. p. 13.

Induction (inductio) a drawing, entry, or leading into; an inducement,
alluring or persuasion unto; also a form of argument from particulars,
proceeding to universals. We take Induction (says my Lord Bacon) to be that
form of demonstration, which supports sense, presses nature, and is instanced
in works, and in a sort mingled therewith.

Indue (induo) to put on a garment or other like thing.

Indulcate Indulciate (indulco) to make sweet. Felth.

Indulgence (indulgentia) pardon, favor, gentleness in suffering. If you desire
to know the nature and quality of Indulgences in the Roman Catholic sense, See
Mr. Cressies Exomologesis, p. 444.

Indulgiat^ (from indulgeo, es) to be merciful, to make too much of one, to
pardon. Felthams Resolves.

Indult (indultus) a Grant or favor; a written instrument of a grant or favor
made by a Pope or Prince.

Indument (indumentum) a Garment or Vesture.

Indura^ (induratus) hardened, unrelenting.

Induration (induratio) a hardening or making hard.

Induciated (induciatus) clothed with a Petticoat, Waste-coat or Shirt.

Inebriate (inebrio) to make drunk, to be drunk.

Ineffable (ineffabilis) unspeakable, unutterable, which no tongue can tell, no
speech deliver, no terms express.

Ineffugible (ineffugibilis) inevitable not to be avoided.

Inept (ineptus) unapt, foolish, fond, out of season.

Ineptitude (ineptitudo) unaptness, fondness, foolishness, trisling, vainness.

Inequitable (inequitabilis) that cannot be rid through.

Inertitude (inertitudo) sloathfulness, dullness, without Science or any craft.

Inestuate (inaestuo) to be very hot, to boil vehemently.

Inexaturable (inexaturabilis) that cannot be filled.

Inexhauribility, a disability to draw out or empty.

Inexorable (inexorabilis) that cannot or will not be entreated, churlish,
obdurate.

Inexpiable (inexpiabilis) that cannot be purged, cleansed or satisfied for.

Inexplicable (inexplicabilis) that cannot be declared or expounded,
unexpressible, undisplayable, intricate.

Inexpugnable (inexpugnabilis) that cannot be forced or won, invincible,
impregnable.

Inextinguible (inextinguibilis) that cannot be quenched, unquenchable.

Inextirpable (inextirpabilis) that cannot be rooted out, or pulled up.

Inextricable (inextricabilis) so confused or difficult that one cannot wind
himself out of it, whereof one cannot be rid.

Inexuperable (inexuperabilis) that cannot be passed or overcome, invincible.

To Infame (infamo) so slander or speak ill of, to defame.

Infandous (infandus) so great, so heinous, or villainous, that it may not be
spoken, exceeding wicked.

Infanta of Spain every Daughter of that King, not being Heir, whether first,
second, or third, etc. the Heir is called Princesa, and the rest Infanta's; so
the Sons are called Infantes and the Heir Principe, of the Latin Infans a
child.

Infanterie (Spa.) the Footmen, or Foot Soldiers of an Army.

Infanticide (infanticidium) a slaying or killing of Infants, child-murthering;
such was that of Herod, soon after our Saviors birth.

Infatigable (infatigabilis) that cannot be wearied or tired.

Infatuate (infatuo) to make foolish or besot.

Infaustous Infausting (from infaustus) unlucky, unfortunate, dismal. Lo. Bac.

Inferial (inferialis) belonging to Funeral Obsequies.

Infernal (infernalis) belonging to Hell, low, neathermost.

Inferrible (from infero) that may be inferred, brought or carried in, or
concluded.

Infestive (infestivus) unpleasant, nothing sportful.

Inficial Inficiatory (inficialis) that pertains to denial, negative.

Inficiation, a denial, a negation.

Infidous (infidus) unfaithful, not to be trusted, false.

Infimous (infimus) the lowest, the meanest, very humble.

Infinitive (infinitivus) that has no end, innumerable, without measure.

The Infinitive Mood, so called, because it is without end or time; it defines
neither number nor person, as other Moods do, as Amare to love.

Infirmarie (infirmarium) that place or part of a Monastery, wherein the sick
had the benefit of Physic and attendance private to themselves; Also an
Hospital for sick or maimed people.

Inflammation (inflammatio) a kindling, inflaming or setting on fire.

Inflation (inflatio) a breeding of wind in the body, a puffing up, or a windy
swelling.

Inflexible (inflexibilis) that cannot be bowed, unruly.

Influence (influentia) a flowing or running into; most commonly it is taken
for the power which Planets and Stars have in moving inferior things.

Influx (influxus) the same with Influence.

Infoliate (from in and folior) to blossom or bud forth leaves, to be full of
leaves, to be enleaved or wrapped with leaves. How.

Informity (informitas) deformity, want of shape or fashion.

Informous (informis) without fashion, ill-favored, rude. Br.

Infragible (infragibilis) not soon broken or discouraged, durable, strong,
infrangible.

Infriction (infriction) a rubbing in, a chafing.

Infringe (infringo) to break in pieces, to tear, to diminish.

Infusion (infusio) a pouring or filling in; And (in Physic) a conveyance of
some liquid medicine into the body by Clister, or other instrument; Also a
steeping of Drugs, etc. in a convenient liquor, that their virtue may pass into
it.

Ingannation (from the Ital. Ingannare to deceive) deceit or cousenage. Br.

Ingeminate (ingemino) to double, or repeat often.

Ingenerable (ingenerabilis) which cannot be born or begotten.

Ingenio, in Barbado's they call the house or mill where they make Sugar, by
this name. Hist. of Barb.

Ingeniosity (ingeniositas) wittiness.

Ingest (ingero) to carry or pour in, to bring into. Bac.

Ingenuity (ingenuitas) the state of a free and honest man, freedom, a liberal
nature or condition.

Ingle (Span. from the Lat. Inguen, i. the groin) a boy kept for Sodomy. See
Ganymede.

Ingluvious (ingluviosus) gluttonous, ravenous, devouring.

Ingot (Fr. Lingot, a linguae forma) a small mass, or little wedge of fined
gold after it is moulten; it is sometimes taken for the trough wherein it is
moulten.

Ingrate (ingratus) unpleasant, unacceptable, unkind, unthankful. Bac.

Ingresse Ingression (ingressus) a beginning, an entrance, or going in, a
walking.

Ingurgitate (ingurgito) to devour or raven gluttonously, to stuff or fill
himself with, to dash in, as it were, to a great stream or bottomless pit.

Ingustable (from in and gusto) that cannot or may not be tasted, untasteable.
Br.

Ingrosser (from the Fr. Grasseur, or Grossier) signifies in our Common Law one
that buys Corn growing, or dead victuals to sell again, except Barley for
Malt, Oats for Oatmeal, or victuals to retail, badging by license, and buying
of Oils, Spices, and and Victuals, other then fish or salt. An. 5. Ed. 6. ca.
14. A 5. Eliz. ca. 14. An. 13. Eliz. ca. 25. These are Mr. Wests words, part.
2. Symbol. tit. Indictments, Sect. 64. Howbeit this definition rather belongs
to unlawful engrossing, then to the word in general. See Forestal. See Acts
1650. ca. 31.

Inhalation (inhalatio) a breathing in or upon.

Inhesion (inhoesio) a cleaving in, or sticking fast unto.

Inherent (inhaerens) sticking to, or abiding in.

Inhibition (inhibitio) a forbidding or stopping. It is also a Wit to inhibit
or forbid a Judge from further proceeding in the cause depending before him.
See Fitz. not. br. fol. 39. where he puts prohibition and inhibition together.

Inhibition is most commonly a Writ issuing out of a higher Court Christian to
a lower and inferior, upon an Apppeal, An. 24. H. 8. ca. 12. And Prohibition
out of the Kings Court to a Court Christian, or to an inferior temporal Court.

Inhospital (inhospitalis) unapt for entertaining, harborless.

Inidoneous (inidoneus) unfit, improper.

Injection (injectio) a casting in or upon; also (in Physic) a squirting or
conveying a liquid medicine, by Siringe, etc. into some part of the body, or
into a hollow or fistulous ulcer.

Inimicitial (inimicitialis) despightful, envious, enemy-like.

Inimitable (inimitabilis) that cannot be counterfeited or followed,
incomparable.

Initiate (initio) to enter or begin.

Initiative Initiated (initiatus) which has ended his Apprentiship, or is a
young beginner in the first principles; licensed or admitted to.

Injunction (injunctio) is a Writ issuing out of the Chancery; sometimes to
give possession to the Plaintiff, for want of the Defendants appearance;
sometimes to stay proceeding in a Cause at Common Law upon suggestion made,
that the rigor of the Law, if it take place, is against equity and conscience
in that case. See West. part. 2. Symb. tit. Proceeding in Chancery. Sect. 25.

Inlagary (inlagatio) is a restitution of one outlawed, to the Kings
protection, and to the benefit or estate of a subject. Bract. l. 3. tract 2. c.
14. numb. 6, 7, 8. Britton. ca. 13.

Inlapidate (from in and lapis) to make hard, stony, or like a stone. Bac.

Inlay (Sax.) a term among Joyners, and signifies a laying of colored wood in
Wainscoat-works, Bedsteds, Cupboads, etc. See Marquetry. It is also used by
Goldsmiths, Cutlers and others, as to Inlay with Gold or Silver.

Inmates, those that are admitted to dwell for their money jointly with another
man, though in several rooms of his Mansion house, passing in and out by one
door, and not being able to maintain themselves; which are inquirable in a
Leet. Kitch. fol. 45. where you may read him at large, who are properly Inmates
in the intendment of Law, and who not.

Innatable (innatabilis) that cannot be swimmed in.

Innavigable (innavigabilis) that cannot be sailed in, that will not bear a
ship or boat.

Inns of Court or Chancery. See Templaries and Moot-men.

Innitent (innitens) endeavoring or assaying.

Innocents day, or Childermass day, a Feast celebrated by the Roman Catholics
on the 28 of December, in memory and honor of those innocent children Herod
slew, not long after our Saviors Nativity, when he sought for Christ himself,
thinking to destroy him.

Innocuous (innocuus) hurtless; also safe, that is not hurt.

Innominable (innominabilis) not to be named.

Innovate (innovo) to make or become new, to renew or change his old fashions.

Innovator (Lat.) he that makes alteration, or brings in new customs.

Innoxious (innoxius) wherein there is no danger, that has no harm; Also safe.

Innubilous (innubilus) fair, without clouds, serene.

Innuendo, is a Law term most used in Declarations and other pleadings; and the
office of this word is only to declare and design the person or thing which
was named uncertain before; as to say, he ( innuendo the Plaintiff) is a Thief;
when as there was mention before of another person.

Innutrition (innutritio) a nourishing or bringing up.

Inocciduous (inocciduus) that never uses to fall, never sleeps, never sets or
goes down, as some stars do.

Inoculat^ (inoculo) to graff a bud, by cutting a round hole in the bark of
another tree, and setting it on with clay: or when an hole is bored in a tree,
and a kernel put in with a little loam.

Inominal (inominalis) unlucky, unhappy.

Inopacous (inopacus) open, not shadowed.

Inopinate (inopinatus) unthought of, unlooked for, not hoped for, strange or
contrary to the common opinion.

Inopious (inopiosus) poor, needy, destitute.

Inoptable (inoptabilis) not to be wished for.

Inorganic^l (inorganicus) that has no organ or instrument. A body is said to
be inorganical when it wants right dispositions for the operations of the soul
whereunto it is ordained.

Inorganity (inorganitas) the want of such dispositions.

Inquination (inquinatio) a staining or defiling; a disgracing.

Inquisition (inquisitio) a diligent search or enquiry, strict examination.

Spanish Inquisition, was first created, and called the Sacred Council of
Inquisition, about or not long after the year, 1492. at which time the Empire
of the Moors ended in Spain by the valor of Fardinand the Catholic. Such
Moors, as after the decay of their Kingdom, staid in Spain, were by a Statute
in that case provided, to be christened. And that they might be known to be, as
they professed, this Inquisition was ordained, consisting of a President (and
he always an Ecclesiastical person, as the Archbishop of Tolledo, or Sevil)
assisted by twelve other Counselors, who deal altogether in matters
appertaining to Religion.

Insanity (insanitas) madness, disease of mind.

Insanguin'^ (from in and sanguis) bloodied, dipped or dyed in blood.

Insative (insativus) that is not planted; sown or graffed, that which comes
forth of its own accord.

Insaturable (insaturabilis) that cannot be filled or contented, insatiable.

Insc^ous (inscius) ignorant, not knowing, unskilful.

Inscription (inscriptio) a note, title or mark written or engraven, a
superscription; Such was that the Jews put upon the Cross when they crucified
our Savior, JESUS NASARENVS REX JVDEORVM, for which words these letters are
ordinarily used over the head of a Crucifix. J. N. R. J.

Inscrutable (inscrutabilis) unsearchable, bottomless, mystical, not to be
sounded or known.

Insecable (insecabilis) that cannot be cut or parted.

Insect (insecta) a small fleshless and bloodless vermin divided (in some sort)
between the head, body and belly, as an Ant, Fly, Be, etc. under which, the
Earth-worm, Caterpillar, etc. are also comprehended. Lord Bacon uses Insecta's
for creatures bred of putrefaction, Not. Hist. 143.

Insectation (insectatio) a railing against one with all the evil words he can
use.

Insection (insectio) a declaration, Treatise, or long continued talk; also a
cutting.

Insensate ( insensatus foolish, senceless. Felth.

Insident (insidens) sitting on or in, remaining, continuing.

Insidiate (insidior) to lay wait, deceive, or ensnare.

Insidious (insidiosus) full of wiles and deceitfulness, crafty, dangerous.

Insinuate (insinuo) to put in his bosom, to put in ones mind covertly, to
wind, steal, or convey himself into, to creep by little into ones favor; to
give a slight touch of a thing.

Insipid (insipidus) unsavory, without taste or relish, also weak of Judgment.

Insipience (insipientia) dotage, folly, indiscretion, ignorance.

Incision (incisio) a grafting or sciencing.

Insolation (insolatio) a bleaching, or laying a thing in the Sun. Br.

Insoluble (insolubilis) that cannot be loosed or undone, indissoluble,
indissolvable.

Insomnious (insomniosus) troubled with dreams, that dreameth much in his sleep.

Inspection (inspectio) a prying or looking into, a viewing or looking on,
speculation, over-seeing.

Insperable (insperabilis) that no man would look or hope for.

Inspersion (inspersio) a sprinkling or casting on.

Inspissate (inspisso) to make thick, gross, or massy. Bac.

Instability (instabilitas) inconstancy, unsteadiness, fickleness.

Instauration (instauratio) a restoring, renewing, repairing, re-edifying.

Instigate (instigo) to move, stir, or prick forward, to provoke or egg on.

Instillation (instillatio) a gentle infusion, a letting or falling in drop by
drop, a pouring in by little and little.

Instinct (instinctus) an inward stirring, motion, or persuasion, an
inspiration.

Institute (institurum) an Ordinance or Instruction, a precept, preparing a way
to some art; a good manner or custom. As Justinians Book of Institutes, so
called because they are, as it were, Instructors to the ignorant, and show an
easy way to the obtaining the knowledge of the Civil, as my Lord Cokes
Institutes do of the Common Law.

Insubid (insubidus) rash, without consideration, heady.

Insular (insularis) belonging to an Island.

Insulsity (insulsitas) foolishness, unsavoriness, lack of grace, and
pleasantness.

Inculture (incultura) a springing or leaping in or upon, a triumphing in
words, a boasting.

Insuperable (insuperabilis) that cannot be overcome, invincible,
unvanquishable.

Intabulate (intabulo) to write in Tables.

Intarissable (Fr.) not to be withered or dried up.

Integument (integumentum) a covering, a cloak; a thing spoken covertly and
darkly. Bac.

Intellect (intellectus) the virtue or faculty of understanding: Also
understanding, apprehension, capacity, judgment, knowledge, discretion.

Intellectualist, one exceeding in the faculty of understanding; a quick
apprehender.

Intelligible (intelligibilis) that may be understood.

Intempestive (intempestivus) out of due time and season, abortive; disordered;
also unlucky or ill presaging.

Intenebrate (intenebro) to endarken or obscure.

Intenerate (from in and tener) to make tender or soft, to make merciful or
pliant.

Intense (intensus) set or fixed, intentive, diligently bent to a thing.

Intensively. See Appreciatively.

Intentable (intentabilis) that cannot be tempted.

Intentation (intentatio) a menacing or threatening.

Intercalarity (intercalaritas) the burden of a Song; the putting between, as
the burden is between the verses.

Intercalation (intercalatio) an interlacing, a putting or setting an odd thing
between even ones; most commonly spoken of the odd day of Leap year inserted in
February, and called dies intercalaris. See Julian Account.

Intercident day (intercidens dies) the extraordinary, and preternatural
critical day forced by the malice of the disease.

Intercision (intercisio) a cutting off in the midst.

Interclusive (interclusus) enclosed, shut in, stopped.

Intercolumniation (a term in Architecture) signifies the distance between two
columns, or a placing some work between two Pillars. S.H.W.

Intercostal (intercostalis) between the ribs.

Intercurrent (intercurrens) running or going between.

Intercutaneous (intercutaneus) that which is within the skin.

Interdict (interdictum) an injunction, prohibition or forbidding.

Interdiction (interdicto) the same. It is used in the Common Law, as in the
Canon, where it is thus defined, Interdictio est censura Ecclesiastica
prohibens administrationem divinorum. c. quod in te de paenitent. and remiss.
In the Decretals. And thus it is used, Ann. 24. H. 8. ca. 12.

Interdicted of water and fire were in old time those, who, for some crime,
were banished. Which Judgment, although it was not by express sentence
pronounced, yet by giving order, that no man should receive such an one into
his house, but deny him fire and water (the two necessary Elements of life) he
was condemned (as it were) to a civil death; and this was called Legitimum
exilium. Livie.

Interduct (interductus) a space between full sentences in printing or writing.

Interemption (interemptio) a killing or slaying.

Interequitate (interequito) to ride between*

Interfaction (interfactio) an interrupting of ones tale, a speaking whilst
another speaks.

Interfeir. See Enterfeir.

Interfection (interfectio) murder, a killing or slaying.

Interfluent Interfluous (interfluus) that flows or runs between.

Interjacercy (from interja^eo) a lying or being between.

Interim (Lat.) in the mean time or season. Also a Book so called, compiled at
Ausperge, by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, comprehending a form of doctrine to
be observed till the next General Council.

Interjected (interjectus) put, cast, or placed between; being as it were a
mean between. S.H.W.

Interition (interitio) a decaying, a perishing.

Interlocution (interlocutio) an interposition, or interruption of speech, a
speaking between.

Interlopers, Leapers or runners between; it is usually applied to those that
intercept the Trade or Traffic of a Company, and are not legally authorized.

Interlucation (interlucatio) a cutting off boughs, where they let or hinder
the light.

Interlude (interludium) a Play or Comedy.

Interlunary (interlunis) belonging to the season, between the going out of the
old, and coming in of the new Moon, when the Moon gives no light.

Intermedian (intermedius) that lies or is between two.

Intermeate (intermeo) to go or flow between, to pass through.

Intermicate (intermico) to shine in the midst or among.

Interminant (interminus) boundless, borderless, uncertain.

Intermit (intermitto) to leave or put off for a time, to cease or discontinue.

Intermural (intermuralis) that is betwern two walls.

Internecion (internecio) an universal slaughter, al killing or slaying, so
that one is not left alive.

Internigrant (internigrans) having black interlaced among other colors.

Internodial (from inter and nodus) that is between knots or joints. Br.

Internunciate (internuncio) to go in message between two parties.

Interpel (interpello) to interrupt, to disturb or trouble, to demand or
require a thing.

Interpellation (interpellatio) a let in ones business, a disturbing and
interruption, a calling one when he is speaking or doing.

Interpolation (interpolatio) a new dressing or polishing a thing, a scouring
or furbishing.

Interpose (interpono) to put or set between, to intermeddle, or intermingle.

Interposition (interpositio) a putting or setting between, an intermedling.

Interpunction (interpunctio) a distinction by points.

Interregency (interregnum) the space of Government between the death or
deposition of one King or Chief Magistrate and the Coronation or Election of
another.

Interrex (Lat.) a Regent, Viceroy or Protector, that governs a State from the
death or deposition of one Prince, to the entrance or election of another.

Interrogation (interrogatio) a question or demand. An Interrogation point is
made thus [?] and is used at the end of a question asked.

Interscindent (interscindens) that cuts in the midst or hews asunder.

Interscript (interscriptum) an interlacing of a line; an interlining.

Intersection (intersectio) a cutting off in the middle or between.

Intersonant (intersonans) that sounds between, or in the mean season.

Interspersed (interspersus) bestrewed, scattered or sprinkled between.

Interspiration (interspiratio) a breathing between.

Intersti^e (interstitium) a distance or space between.

Interstitial, that has a distance or space between. Br.

Interval (intervallum) a space between, a pause, a respite; also a Rest in
Music. It signifies any distance either of place or time, as appears by that
of Tully, Intervallo locorum, and temporum disjuncti. Cic. Ep. fam. lib. 1. Ep.
7.

Intervenient (interveniens) that comes, flows or runs between.

Intervert (interverto) to take away craftily, to convey away falsely that was
lent one, or committed to his charge; to deceive or beguil; also to turn upside
down.

Intervigilant (intervigilans) that is watchful, or that awakes now and then,
or between whiles.

Intestable (intestabilis) that by the Law can make no Testament, or that
cannot be taken in witness, not to be believed.

Intestate (intestatus) that dies without a Will or Testament; also one that no
man will take for a witness.

Intestine Intestinal (intestinus) that belongs to the inward parts, hidden
privy, deadly, spightful.

Inthronize (inthronizo) to install in the seat of honor, to place in a Royal
Throne.

Intimate (intimo) to show, to signify, to denounce; also to love entirely.

Intimidate (from in and timidus) to fear, scare, affright or make fearful.

Intinction (intinctio) a dying or coloring.

Intone (intono) to thunder or make a rumbling; also to speak earnestly.

Intoxicate (intoxico) to poison.

Intrado or Entrado (Spa.) an income or yearly revenue; also an entrance.
Fuller.

Intraneous (intraneus) that is within, inward.

Intribution (intributio) contribution or lot-money paid for Lands.

Intrinsecal (intrinsecus) inward, secret, familiar.

Intrique (Fr.) an intricacy, labyrinth, maze, encumbrance, difficulty. Cressey,

Introclude (introcludo) to shut within.

Introgression (introgressus) a going in.

Introit (introitus) an entry, a place to enter by, a going into, a beginning
of. The first part of the Mass, which begins Introibo ad Altar Dei, is so
called.

Intromission (intromissio) a letting in.

Introruption (introruptio) an entering or rushing in by violence.

Introvenient (introveniens) a coming in.

Introversion (introversio) a turning inwards; in mystical Divinity it
signifies a recollecting ones thoughts from external to inward considerations.

Intrusion (intrusio) a wrongful thrusting into the possession of a vacant
thing.

Intuitive (intuitus) seeing or apt to see or behold clearly. An intuitive
Vision is a clear sight of a thing, as it is in it self.

Intuition (from intueor) a looking upon or beholding a thing clearly and
distinctly.

Intumescence (intumescentia) a swelling, puffing or uprising.

Invaginate (invagino) to shealth or put into a sheath.

Invalid (invalidus) weak, feeble, impotent, forceless.

Invective (invectivus) a railing, biting, opprobrious discourse or bitter
speech against one.

Inventory (inventorium) is a description or repertory, orderly made, of dead
men's Goods and Chattels prized by four credible men or more, which every
Executor or Administrator ought to exhibit to the Ordinary, at such times as
he shall appoint the same. West. part. 1. Symb. lib. 2. Sect. 696. Where
likewise you may see the form: This Inventory proceeds from the Civil Law: for
whereas by the ancient Law of the Romans, the Heir was tied to answer all the
Testators debts, by which means Heritages were prejudicial to many; Justinian,
to encourage men the better to take upon them this charitable Office, ordained,
that if the heir would first make and exhibit a true Inventory of all the
Testators substance coming to his hand, he should be no further charged then to
the value of the Inventory. l. ult. Co. de Jure de liberando.

Inversion (inversio) a turning inside out, or upside down, a mis-placing words
or matter.

Invest (investire) to give or put into possession; Investitura propria dicitur
quando hasta vel aliquod corporeum traditur a Domini; ut ait Feudista, lib. 2.
tit. 2. with us we use likewise to admit the Tenant, by delivering a verge or
rod into his hand, and ministering him an oath, which is called Investing:
others define it thus, Investitura est alicujus in suum jus introductio.

Investigable (investigabilis) which cannot be found out.

Investigation (investigatio) a searching out, a diligent enquiry.

Inveterate (inveteratus) confirmed by long use, settled by continuance, ancient.

Invid (invidus) that has envy, that spighteth or is malicious.

Invigilate (invigilo) to watch diligently, to take good heed.

Inviolable (inviolabilis) that cannot be broken or violated.

Invious (invisus) not seen, without ways or paths, untract.

Invitiate (invitio) to mar, to spoil, to defile.

Invitatory, any thing that inviteth, a Summons.

Inumbrate (inumbro) to cast a shadow upon, to give a shadow to.

Inundate (inundo) to overflow, to cover with water, to run or stream into.

Invocate (invoco) to call in or upon, to ask or require help.

Involvent (involvens) wrapping or folding in, covering, or overwhelming.

Inure (from in and Ure, use or custom) a Law term used much in Conveyances,
and signifies to take place or effect, to be available. Example, a Release
shall inure by way of extinguishment. Littleton cap. Release. And a Release
made to a Tenant for term of life, shall inure to him in the Reversion.

Inusitate (inusitatus) not wont, unaccustomed, that has been seldom used,
strange.

Invulnerable (invulnerabilis) that cannot be wounded, unwoundable.

Invulnerability, unwoundableness, the power of being shot-free.

Ioab (Heb.) Fatherhood.

Ioachim (Heb.) preparatian of the Lord.

Ioannitiques, an order of Monks that wear red habits, and the presentation of
a Chalice on their breasts.

Job (Heb.) sighing or sorrowing.

Iocatory (jocatorius) pertaining to jesting.

Iocosity (jocositas) merriness in jesting.

Ioculary (jocularius) that is spoken in jest, a jesting matter. Bac.

Ioculatory (joculatorius) merry, pleasant, sporting.

Iocund (jocundus) merry, pleasant, cheerful.

John (Hebr.) gracious, Thought to be an unfortunate name for Kings; For that
John King of England well near lost his Kingdom, and John King of France was
long Captive in England, and John Baliol was lifted out of his Kingdom of
Scotland. And John Stewart, when the Kingdom of Scotland came to him, him,
renouncing that name, would be proclaimed King Robert. Iuon is used by the
Welsh, and Sclavonians for John, and in this Realm about the Conquerors time,
John was rarely found, but Iuon, as Cambden observes.

Jonathan (Heb.) Gods gift.

Jonah or Jonas, the name of that Prophet which was sent to Ninive, Jon. 1.2.
It signifies in Hebrew a Dove.

Ioncade (Fr.) a certain Spoon-meat, made of Cream, Rose Water and Sugar.

Ionick-work, is a sort of Pillars in Architecture. See Tuscan.

Ionick (Ionicus) a certain foot in a verse consisting of two long syllables
and two short; also wanton; as Jonica Saltatio, a wanton or effeminate dance.
Also pertaining to Jonia, a Region of Greece.

Ionick was also a Sect of Philosophers, of which Thales and Anaximander were
chief, the first whereof was an Ionian by birth; whence the Sect took name.
Hist. of Philos.

Iopaean (Gr.) a voice or song of rejoicing. See Paean,

Joseph (Heb.) increasing, or increase of the Lord.

Jordan. See Iurden.

Josias (Heb.) fire of the Lord.

Jot or Iod (Iota, littera Graeca) a thing of very little or no value; so
called from the Hebrew letter Jod, which is the least in that language.

Vnum de titulo tollere Iota potes Iotacism (Iotacismus) is when the letter ( I
or Iota) sounds much, or gives beginning to many words in the same sentence; as
if we say, Juno Jovi irascitur. It is also sometimes taken for an error in
pronouncing the letter I.

Iournal (Fr.) a Diary or Day-book. Also as much land as a Team of Oxen can
plough in one day. In our times (says my Lord Bacon) Journals are in use only
in Navigations and Expeditions of War; among the Ancients it was a point of
honor for Princes to have the Acts of their Court referred to Journals.

Iouisance (Sax.) mirth or jollity. Spencer.

Iournchoppers, were Regrators of yarn. Stat. 8. H. 6. c. 5.

Iournee (Fr.) a day or whole day; a day of Battle; also a days work or labor,
a days travel or journey.

Ipsissime (ipsissimus) even the very same.

Ippocrasse. See Hipocrasse.

Iracundious (iracundus) soon angry, inclining ^o passion or wrath, teasty,
soon displeased.

Irascible (from irascor) choleric, soon angered, subject to anger. H. Court.

Iris (Gr.) Juno's Messenger; the Rainbow, which foretells a shortly ensuing
shower.

Ironical (ironicus) that which is spoken in jest or mockingly, when one speaks
contrary to the signification of the word.

Ironie (ironia) a figure in speaking, when one means contrary to the
signification of the word, or when a man reasons contrary to what he thinks,
to mock him, whom he argues with; a derision or dissimulation.

Irradiate (irradio) to shine upon, to cast his beams upon, to enlighten.

Irrecuperable (irrecuperabilis) irrecoverable, wholly lost, not to be
recovered.

Irredivivous (irredivivus) that cannot be revived or repaired.

Irrefragable (irrefragabilis) invincible, unbreakable, undeniable.

Irregularity (irregularitas) disorder, going out of rule; in the old Canon Law
it is taken for an impediment which hinders a man from taking holy Orders; as
if he be base born, notoriously defamed of any notable crime, maimed or much
deformed, or has consented to procure another death, with diverse other.

Irremiable (irremiabilis) that from which one cannot return again, intricate.

Irreligious (irreligiosus) ungodly, without fear of God, without religion, not
devout.

Irremissible (Fr.) unremittable, unpardonable.

Irreparable (irreparabilis) that cannot be repaired, or restored,
irrecoverable.

Irreposcible (irreposcibilis) that cannot be required again.

Irreprehensible (irreprehensibilis) that cannot be reprehended, faultless,
blameless.

Irrevocable (irrevocabilis) that cannot be called back, unrecallable.

Irrigate (irrigo) to water ground, to bring water out of a River into the
fields, to moisten.

Irriguous (irriguus) that is, or may easily be watered, washed, moist.

Irrision (irrisio) a laughing or mocking to scorn, a flouting or scoffing at.

Irritate (irrito) to provoke, to kindle wrath, to move or stir.

Irrite (irritus) void, of no effect, force or weight.

Irroborate (irroboro) to make strong, to corroborate.

Irrorate (irroro) to sprinckle or wet with dew, to moisten.

Irruent (irruens) running hastily, or rushing in violently.

Irrugation (irrugatio) a wrinkling, or making wrinkles.

Irrumpent (irrumpens) entering in by force, rushing in violently.

Irruption (irruptio) a bursting in, a forced entrance.

Irus, a beggarly fellow of Ithaca, whom Ulysses killed with his fist. Hence
the Proverb Iro pauperior, as poor as Job.

Isagogue (isagoge) an introduction.

Isagogical (Isagogicus) of or pertaining to an introduction or beginning.

Ischiatick (ischiacus) that has the ache in the Hip, or the Hip-gout, or
Sciatica; which is a pain arising of humors gathered together in the hollowness
of that joint.

Isikle (from the Belgic Iisel) a drop of water frozen, as is often seen at
the Eaves of a house, when, after a thaw, comes a sudden frost.

Ismaelite, one descended from Ismael (son to Abraham by his wife Agar) of whom
it was foretold before his birth, hic erit ferus homo, manus ejus contra omnes;
and manus omnium contra eum, Genesis 16. One like to Ismael in conditions and
manners. Ismael by interpretation of the Hebrew word is exauditio Dei, a
merciful hearing or granting of God.

Isonomy (isonomia) an equality of government under the same Laws,
indifferently ministered to all persons; an equality of right, which all men
enjoy in one State.

Israel (Hebr.) seeing the Lord, or prevailing in the Lord.

Isthme (isthmus) a neck, a narrow piece of land betwixt two Seas almost
meeting; also the neck of the wesand Est angustia illa intermedia inter
Peninsulam and Continentem, and veluti quaedam Cervix, quae a Continente, velut
a corpore gracilescens Peninsulam cum Continente tanquam Caput cum reliquo
corpore connectit. See Peninsula.

Isthmian games (isthmii) one of the four solemn games which were celebrated
every fifth year in Greece, instituted by Theseus in honor of Neptune; they
took name from the narrow piece of ground in Greece that Corinth stood in,
where the games were celebrated.

Italianize (ab Italia) to speak Italian, play the Italian, or do like an
Italian.

Italionated, turned or fashioned like an Italian; that speaks or writes like
an Italian.

Iterate (itero) to do a thing again, to repeat, to tell or say again, to
double.

Itenerary (itinerarium) a Commentary concerning things fallen out in Journeys;
also the Calendar of miles, with the distance of places, and the times of abode
in every place; like the gifts of Princes, a Directory for the way. It is also
used Adjectively, as pertaining to a journey.

Itinerate (itineror) to travel, to take or make a journey.

Iubilation (jubilatio) a great shout for joy, a great rejoicing, much gladness.

Iubile (jubilaeus annus) a year of rejoicing or remission. Among the Hebrews
every fiftieth year, was called the year of Jubilee; for then were bondmen of
their own Country made free, possessions returned again to the first owners,
neither was it lawful to plant or sow any thing that year. Among Christians
this solemnity of keeping a year of Jubilee, was first instituted by Bonifacius
the Eighth, in the year of our Lord 1300, who ordained, that it should be
observed every hundredth year. After this Clement the sixth, instituted it to be
kept every fiftieth year; and lastly Sixtus the fourth brought it to be
celebrated every twenty fifth year, beginning it first in the year of our Lord
God 1475, and so it continues. The word is derived from the Hebrew Jobel, which
signifies a Ram or a Rams horn, so called (as Masius helps it out) from Jubal,
the Father of those who play on the Harp and Organ, Genesis 4.21. And when the
Jubilee came a great sound of Trumpets, and Rams horns was to be made through
all Israel, in sign of the Remissions. Greg.

Iucundity (jucunditas) mirth, pleasure, rejoicing.

Iudaick (judaicus) Jewish, pertaining to the Jews.

Judaism (judaismus) the Custom, Religion or Rites of the Jews.

Iudicable (judicabilis) that may be judged or discussed.

Iudication (judicatio) the question come to judgment, the weight of the
matter, that wherein the Judge ought to do justice; sentence-giving.

Iudicatory (judicatorium) a place of judgment, a Judgment Seat.

Judiciary (judiciarius) pertaining to a Judge or Judgment; also that is to be
judged.

Iugal (jugalis) that is yoaked, or pertaining to yoaks, Matrimony or Wedlock.

Iugament (jugamentum) a thing that fastens or couples like a yoke.

Iugulars (venae jugulares) See Veins.

Iujubes, certain plumbs of Italy, sold here by Apothecaries. This fruit is in
color white or red, in fashion round or like an Olive, in taste sweet, having
a hard long stone, like an Olive stone, but much less. If these plumbs be kept
long, they wax dry and full of wrinckles. They are temperate in heat and cold,
good against the Cough, roughness of the throat, and all exulcerations and
inflammations of the Kidneys and Bladder: but being eaten for meat are of hard
digestion. Bull.

Iulep (Arab.) a Physical drink, made either of destilled waters or Syrups
mixed together, or of a decoction sweetened with honey or sugar, or else mingled
with Syrrops, and ministered commonly as a preparative to open the passage of
the inward parts, and fit the humors for a purgation. Some affirm this to be a
Persian word, and to signify properly a sweet potion.

Iulio, an Italian Coin, of value with us about six pence, so called because it
was first made in the Papacy of Pope Julius.

Julius (Gr.) soft-haired or mossie-bearded, so it signifies in Greek. It was
the name of Aenea's son, who was first called Ilus.

Ilus erat dum res stetit Ilia regno The old English in the North parts turned
Julius into Joly, and the unlearned Scribes of that time seem to have turned
Julianus into Jolanus, for that name often occurs in old Evidences. Came.

July (Julius) this month was so called in honor of Julius Caesar, the
Dictator, either because he was born in that month, or because he triumphed in
that month, after his Naval Victory over Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, and her
husband Antony. It being before called Quintilis or the fifth month from March,
which according to Romulus, was the beginning of the year.

Julian Account, so called from Julius Caesar, who forty four years before the
birth of Christ, observing the falseness of the Account then in use, ordained
the year to consist of 365 days and six hours, which six hours in four years
made 24 hours, or a day civil, and were added to the end of February; by reason
whereof every fourth year contained 366 days, and was called Annus Bissextilis,
the Bissextile or Leap-year, because the sixth of the Calends of March was
twice written, and the thing it self was called Intercalation. This Account for
many years seemed to have no sensible error; yet in progress of time it was
discovered to be not so exactly agreeable with the natural motion of the Sun;
For the Julian year exceeding the true Solar year 10 minutes and 48 seconds,
caused the Equinoxes and Solstices yearly to change their places and slye back
so many minutes and seconds. Whereupon Pope Gregory the thirteenth, by the
advice and direction of Antonius Lilius and other excellent Mathematicians, in
the year of Christ 1582, corrected the Calender, making the year to consist of
365 days, five hours, 49 min. 12 seconds. And that the vernal Equinox, which
then was on the 11 of March, might be reduced to the 21 of March, as it was at
the time of the first Nicene Council; he commanded ten days in October. viz. from
the fourth to the 14, to be left out, so as the fourth day of the month was
accounted for the 14 day. Hence it comes to pass, that the new, sorraign Lilian
or Gregorian account is 10 days before the old, the English or Julian account.
Buchol. Ind Chro. and al.

Iument (jumentum) a laboring beast, a horse. Br.

Iumentarious (jumentarius) that belongs to such cattle.

Iuncture (junctura) a joining or coupling together, a yoaking, a joint.

Iungible (jungibilis) that may be joined.

Iunonick Iunonian (junonius) of or pertaining to the Goddess Juno, the wife of
Jupiter.

Iunta or Iunto (Span) a meeting together of people, it is most commonly taken
for a joining or meeting of men to sit in Council.

Ivory (ebur) Elephants teeth; it is of a binding nature, and the scraping
thereof is good against sores, growing under the roots of the nayls.

Jupiter (Lat.) a feigned God of great esteem among the Paynims, etc. Also a
Planet. See Planet and Saturn.

Iuration (juratio) an Oath.

Iurats (Fr.) Jurats de Bourdeaux, are as the Eschevins or Sheriffs in other
Cities; we have Officers of that name at Maidston and Feversham in Kent.

Iurden or Jordan (matella) a double Urinal or Chamberpot. In some places it is
taken for that Chamberpot which did serve both the husband and his wife. In
Walsingham hist. p. 308. we read of Duae ollae quas Jordanes vulgo vocamus.

Iuridick Iuridical (juridicus) of or belonging to the Law; also actionable, or
which may be put in suit, also just, judicial, orderly.

Jury (jurati) signifies in our Common Law a company of men as twenty four, or
twelve, sworn to deliver a truth upon such evidence as shall be delivered them,
touching the matter in question. Of which see more in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 165.
D.

Jurisdiction (jurisdictio) power or authority to minister, and execute Laws.

Iurist (from jus, juris) a Lawyer.

Iurisprudence (jurisprudentia) the skill or knowledge of Laws: also the style
or form of the Law

Iuss^i (minutal) meat made with diverse things chopped together. Rider.

Iu^ulent (jussulentus) that which is sod or stewed in pottage or broth

Iu^s (from the Fr. Joustes) Tilting or contentions between Martial men with
Spears on horseback. An. 24. H. 8. ca. 13. For particulars, see Stows Survey,
fol. 421.

Iusticier (Fr.) a Justicer or Justice of Peace; an administer of Justice.

Iustifical (justificus) that executes or does Justice.

Iusti^iable (Fr.) under jurisdiction, subject to suit or Laws, that is to do
his suit to the Court of another.

Iusti^ (Lat. quasi iuris statio) a stay or ceasing from ministration of
Justice in matters judicial. (Dr. Br. uses it in his Vul. Err.) This may not
unfitly be called a Lawsteed, as Solstitium, the Sunsteed.

Iustitians, a religious Order instituted by Lewis Bardus a Venetian, in the
Abbey of St. Justine (whence they took name) at Padua, about the year 1412 in
the time of Pope John the three and twentieth. There were also Nuns of the like
Order.

Iustinia^i^ts, Students of the Civil Law, Civilians; so called from
Justinianus, a Roman Emperor, that gathered the sum of the Civil Law. See Code.

Iuvenile (juvenilis) of or pertaining to youth, youthful, young.

Iuvenility (juvenilitas) youth, also courage or lustiness.

Iuventes, the Goddess of youth, also young age.

Ixion, begat the Centaures on a Cloud, as the fable goes, and was afterward
cast into Hell by Jupiter, for boasting that he had lain with Juno, where he
was bound to a wheel, and the wheel turned without ceasing. Hence the Fable of
Ixions wheel.

K
KAbbala. See Cabala.

Kalends. See Calends.

Kamp-fight or Camp-fight. See Ordeal.

Karavan or Karaban (Spa.) See Caravan.

Kardiognostick. See Cardiognostick.

Kare^a (among Chemists) is the twentieth part of a drop.

Kalends. See Calends.

Karobe or Karoble, the fruit of the Carobe tree. Also the twenty fourth part
of a grain, one of the least weights used by Goldsmiths.

Kenne (Sax.) to see, or know; within ken, i. within view.

Kenodoxy ((...)) the love, study, or desire of vainglory. Scapula.

Kern in Ireland is a kind of Foot Soldier, lightly armed with a Dart or
Skeyn. Antiq. Hibern. p. 33. and 57. We take a Kern most commonly for a Farmer
or Country Bumpkin.

Ketchef (from the Fr. Couver chef. i. to cover the head) a linen cloth that
old women wear on their heads; and hence Handkerchef, though improperly.

King of Heralds (Rex Herald^rum) is an Officer at Arms, who has the
pre-eminence of this Society. See Harold. This Officer among the Romans was
called Pater Patratus.

Kings Evil, A disease or swelling so called. Edward the Confessor King of
England was of that holiness of life that he received power from above to cure
many diseases; among others, this of the King's Evil. A Prerogative that
continues, as some think, hereditary to his Successors of England. Heyl.

Ke^l (Belg. Kiel) the bottom of a ship.

Ke^e Sax.) pottage, a word still used in the north of England and in Scotland;
So Kelemu^t signifies Pottage-hearb, which we to this day corruptly call
Cole-worts. Verstegan.

Kichel (Sax.) a Cake, which Horace calls Libum.

Vtque sacerdotis fugitivus liba recuso. It was of old with us called a Gods
Kichel, because Godfathers and Godmothers used commonly to give one of them to
their Godchildren, when they asked blessing. Chaucers Interpret.

Kilderkin (from the Belg. Kindeken, Kenneken, octava Cadi pars) Dioscorides
says, it is eleven Gallons, and a Quart: Agricola and Junius, thirteen Gallons
and a half.

Kym-Kam. See Camoise.

Kin, the ancient diminutive of our Saxon tongue, as Perkin, is as much as
little Peter; Comk^r, little Thomas, and the like.

Kintal (Span. Quintal) is a certain weight of Merchandise to the value of an
hundred, or something under or over according to the diverse uses of sundry
Nations. This word is mentioned by Plowden in the Case of Reniger and Fagossa.

Knave (Sax. Cna^a, a boy or child) was not of old used as a name of disgrace,
or contempt (as now it is) but as the name of some kind of Servant or Lacquey;
as Scyld-Knapa was he that carried a noble persons Shield, etc. Verst. See
Esquire.

Kit-Kaies, The fruit of the Ashen tree; they are little narrow husks hanging
together in clusters, wherein is contained the ^eed of the Ash, which is
bitter: This provokes Urine, and is sought by some for other purposes. Bull.

Knight, a title of dignity, was heretofore by our Ancestors written Cnight,
and in the modern Teutonic it signifies Rider, and answers to the French
Chevalier, which may be Englished a Horseman, and so agrees with Eques in
Latin. Verst.

Knights Fee (feudum militare) is so much inheritance as is sufficient yearly
to maintain a Knight with convenient Revenue, which in Henry the thirds days
was but fifteen pounds. ( Came. Brit. p. 111.) But Sir Tho. Smith, in his Repub.
Angl. l. 1. ca 18. rates it at forty pounds. And I find in the Statute for
Knights, A. 1. E 2. ca. 1. that such as had twenty pound per an. in Fee, or for
life might be compelled to be Knights. Stow in his Annals, p. 285. says, There
were found in England at the time of the Conqueror 60211 Knights Fees: Others
say 60215. whereof the Religious houses before their suppression were possessed
of 28015

Knights Fee, is sometime used for the Rent that a Knight pays for his Fee to
the Lord of whom he holds; and this an uncertain sum, some holding by forty
shillings the Shield, some by twenty shillings, as appears by Bracton. lib. 5.
Tract. 1. cap. 2. My Lo. Coke, in his ninth Book of Reports, says, A Knights
Fee is estimated by the value of the Land, viz. 20 l. annual. An Hide of Land
is as much as one Plough can break up in a year: Relief the fourth part of the
annual value of the Land, viz. of a Knight 5 l. of a Baron 100 Marks, an Earl a
100 l. a Marquis, 200 Marks, a Duke 200 l.

Knighten gyld, was a Gyld in London, consisting of nineteen Knights, which
King Edgar founded, giving them a portion of void ground lying without the City
wall, now called Portsoken Ward. Stows Annals, p. 151.

Knights service, an ancient tenure of Lands, by which a man was bound to bear
Arms in War for defense of the Realm. But is now abolished by Act 1656. ca. 4.

Knipperdollings, a sort of Heretics who took name from one Knipperdolling,
who lived in Germany about the year 1535, was contemporary with John of Leyden,
a follower of Muncer in matters of doctrine. Lo. Herb. H. 8.

Knoll (Sax. Cnoll^) the top or cop of a Hill or Mountain, a familiar word in
Herefordshire, as Birchers Knoll. etc. And in Scotland they call those Knolls
of peace, which are Mounts cast up by the labor of men, in Latin Dumi pacis.

Korban. See Corban.

Kyrie eleison ( omnibus linguis, a Gr. (...), i. domine, and (...), i.
miserere, ab (...), i. misericordia, q. miserere Domine) Lord have mercy on us.
So Christ eleison, i. Christ have mercy on us. In the Greek Church these words
are of great esteem, and often repeated by their Priests; and are also used in
the Latin Church, both in the Mass and Litany.

L
LAbarum (Gr. (...)) a Church Banner, a Flag or Streamer for the War.

Eusebius Pamphilus ( lib. 1. de vita Constantini) describes this peculiar
Standard very curiously. The common form you may see in the 163 page of the
Elements of Armories. In the Labarum these things are more. First, The Banner
was of purple, where the pictures of the Emperor and his Children were wrought
in gold, and stones of wonderful value and beauty; above the cross beam, or
traverse Staff of the Banner stood the two first Greek Capitals of Christ's
name, and on the point or top of the Lance or Staff Imperial was advanced a
Crown of gold set with precious stones. All in honor of his miraculous
conversion upon the apparition of the Cross.

Labdacism^ (labdacismus) or rather lambdacismus, from the Greek Letter (...),
or (...)) is when the Letter L is pronounced with too much force, as when one
says, ellucet, for elucet.

Labefaction (labefactio) a weakening or enfeebling, a loosening or destroying.

Labial (from labium, a lip) pertaining to the lips.

Labile (labilis) unstable, unconstant, that will soon or or easily fall.

Laboriferous (laborifer) that takes pains, that endures labor, painful*
difficult.

Laboriosity (laboriositas) painfulness, laboriousness, or laborosity.

Labrador (Spa.) a laborer, a Ploughman, a Country Swain.

Labrous (labrosus) that has a brim, bank, or border; Also that has great
lips.

Labyrinth (labyrinthus) a Maze or intricate building, or place made with so
many turnings, and windings, entries and doors, that whoever went into it,
could never get out, without a perfect guide, or a thread to direct him, the
end of which thread must be tied at the door where he enters. Some heathen
Princes bestowed infinite charge in building such Labyrinths, whereof there
were four principal ones in the world. The first in Egypt, near the Pool
Mirios, made for a Sepulcher for their Kings, or (as some write) in honor of
the Sun. The second in the Island of Candy, built by Daedalus at the command of
King Minos. The third, in the Isle Lemnos. The fourth in Italy, built by
Porsenna King of the Hetrurians, of freestone, and vaulted, for his own
Sepulcher.

Labyrinth, also signifies metaphorically any intricate or difficult matter.

Lacca (Arab.) a kind of red gum coming forth of certain trees in Arabia, and
sold here by Apothecaries, good against diseases of the breast, and comfortable
to the Liver. Painters also and Diers use it.

Lacerable (lacerabilis) that may be torn or rent in pieces.

Lacerate (lacero) to rent, tear or dismember.

Lacert (lacerta) a Lizard, or an Ewt, Evet, or Eft.

Lacession (lacessio) a provoking or stirring to anger.

Lachanopolist (lachanopoles) a seller of herbs.

Laches (from the Fr. Lasche, i. remiss, or slow) signifies, in our Common Law,
negligence. As no Laches shall be adjudged in the heir within age. Littl fol.
336. and old not. brev. fol 110.

Lachesis, one of the three Destinies; Atropos and Cloth^ are the other two.

Lachrimable (lachrymabilis) lamentable, to be bewailed, or wept for.

Lachrymate (lachrymo) to weep, to drop with moisture.

Lachryma^ory, a place to weep in; also a Tear-bottle, sometimes buried with
ancient Urnes. Dr. Br. in his Hydriotaphia.

Lachrymae Christi, a kind of Wine so called, made at or near the Visuvian
Mountain.

Laconical (laconicus) that speaks briefly or pithily. So

Laconiz^, to imitate the Lacedaemonians either in short and pithy speech, or
in hard life.

Laconism (laconismus) a short speech, containing much matter.

Lactary (lactarium) a Dairy-house; and may be used for a a Dairy-man,
Milk-man, or Chees-monger. Br.

Lacteous (lacteus) of or like milk, whittish, milky.

Lactifical (lactificus) milk-breeding, milk-making, milk-yielding.

Ladanum. See Laudanum.

Lagophthalm^ (lagophthalmia) a disease in the eyes, when one sleeps like a
Hare with his eyelids open, and cannot well shut them.

Lake, a fair red color used by Painters.

Laical (laicus) belonging to the Laity, not of the Clergy.

Laire, the place where any Deer harbors by day; a term of hunting.

Lais, a famous Harlot of Corinth, who toook so great a price for the
prostitution of her body, as made Demosthenes cry, Tanti non emam Lais
poenitere, (I will not buy repentance so dear) and occasioned the old verse,
Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum.

Lambi^ive (from Lambo) that licketh with the tongue, or lappeth, that touches
a thing softly. Br.

Lami^ae (Lat.) were spirits and specters of the female kind, called by some,
Ladies of the Fairies.

Howbeit Div. Chrysostom says, there are certain living creatures, or wild
beasts inhabiting the utmost and desert places of Africa, which from the face
to the navel, were excellently beautiful, and their fashion was to lay open
their Alabaster necks and breasts to the view of men, that so they might allure
and draw them near, and then devour them. And to this purpose the Prophet
Jeremy says, The Lamiae have discovered and drawn forth their breasts, and
shown their dugs, Lam. 4. The Hebrew Doctors interpret them Devils of the
Desert, in expounding that word of Isay, Tsijim ( Isa. 13,) that it should
signify Lamioe. Tr. of Specters.

Lammas day, the first of August, otherwise called the Gule or Yule of August,
which may be a corruption of the British word Gwyl Aw^, signifying the Feast
of August; or may come from Vincula, that day being called in Latin Festum St.
Petri ad vincula. It is called Lammas day, because on that day after Mass, the
Priests in former times were wont to make an end of gathering their Tithe
Lambs. But Dr. Hammond, in his Resolution to six Queries. p. 465. derives it
from the Sax. L^fmess, i.e. loaf-mass, or bread-mass; so named, as a Feast of
thanksgiving to God for the first fruits of the Corn, and seems to have been
observed with bread of new wheat; and accordingly it is a usuage in some places
for Tenants to be bound to bring in wheat of that year to their Lord, on or
before the first of August. Others say, it is a corruption of the Fr.
Lien-mess, whick relates to Vincula.

Lamina (Lat.) a thin plate of any metal, most commonly such as Sculpters use
to engrave upon.

Lampasse or Lampreyes (Fr. Lampass) a disease in the mouth of a horse or
beast; It is cured by burning with a hot iron.

Lanarious (lanarius) of or belonging to wool.

Lanciferou^ (lancifer) that bears a Lance; a Demilancer.

Lancepesado or Lancepresado (Fr. Lance-pessade) he that commands over ten
Soldiers, the lowest Officer in a Foot Company.

Landcape, an end of land that stretches further into the Sea then other parts
of the Continent.

Landgrave or Landsgrave (Belg. Landtgrave, Landtgraef; landt, i.e. terra, and
grave or graef, i. comes, q. Comes terrae vel regionis ab Imperatore dono
datae) the Earl or Count of a Province, whereof in Germany there are four.

Langraviate, that Region or Country, which belongs to a Landgrave, such is
that of Hessia in Germany.

Landloper (Belg. Landelooper) a Vagabond, or a Rogue that runs up and down the
Country. Bac. Hen. 7.

Landscape (Belg.) Parergon, Paisage, or By-work, which is an expressing the
Land, by Hills, Woods, Castles, Valleys, Rivers, Cities, etc. as far as may be
showed in our Horizon. All that in a Picture which is not of the body or
argument, is Landscape, Parergon, or By-work. As in the Table of our Saviors
Passion, the picture of Christ on the Rood (which is the ancient English word
for Cross) the two Thieves, the blessed Virgin Mary, and St. John, are tht
Argument: But the City Jerusalem, the Country about, the clouds, and the like,
are Landscape. El. Arm.

Langate. See Magdaleon.

Langued, a term in Heraldry, as Langued Gules, whose tongue is red, from the
Fr. langue, a tongue.

Languid (languidus) faint, weak, feeble, sick, of little estimation.

Languifical (languificus) that makes faint or weak.

Languor (Lat.) faintness, feebleness, want of spirit

Laniferous (lanifer) that bears Wool or Cotton.

Lanifical (lanificus) that makes or weaves woollen cloth, pertaining to the
working in wool.

Lanionious (lanionius) of or belonging to a Butcher.

Lanipendious (lanipendius) that spins or makes Yarn, that weighs wool.

Lanuginous (lanuginosus) mossy, covered with Cotton or soft hair, soft like
Wool or Cotton.

Lantgrave. See Landgrave.

Laodicean, pertaining to the City Laodicea in Phrygia Pacatiana, where a
Council was held in the year 320 under Pope Silvester, and not about the year
364 under Liberius, as by some affirmed, and is called the Laodicean Council.

Lapicide (lapicida) a digger or hewer of stones; a Stone-cutter or Free-Mason.

Lapidable (lapidabilis) that may be stoned.

Lapidary (lapidarius) a Jeweller, or one that works with or in stones, or that
sells, polishes, or is skilled in stones.

Lapidarious (lapidarius) pertaining to stones.

Lapidation (lapidatio) stoning; One of the four sorts of death among the Jews;
the other were Burning, Beheading and Strangling. See Moses and Aaron. p. 198.

Lapideous (lapideus) hard like a stone, stony.

Lapidescence (from lapidesco) a waxing hard like a stone.

Lapidifical (lapidificus) that makes or breeds stones.

Lapidification, a making stony, or hard like a stone.

Lappacean (lappaceus) of or like a bur.

Lappise, a term of hunting, when Hounds open their mouths in the Liam or
string, or a Greyhound in his course.

Lapse (lapsus) a fall, sliding, or a slip. In our Laws it is a slip or
departure of a right of presenting to a void Benefice, from the original
Patron, neglecting to present within six months to the Ordinary; For we say
that Benefice is in lapse or lapsed, whereunto he that ought to present, has
omitted or slipped his opportunity. Ann. 13. Eliz. cap. 12. etc.

Laqueary (laquear) the roof of a Chamber vaulted.

Larceny (from the French Larcin, i. theft) is defined by West. part. 2. Symb.
tit. Inditements, to be theft of personal Goods or Chattels in the owners
absence; and in respect of the things stolen, it is either great or small. Great
Larceny is, when the things stolen, though severally, exceed the value of twelve
pence; and Petit Larceny is, when the Goods stolen exceed not the value of
twelve pence. Hitherto Mr. West. But he differs from Bracton lib. 3. Tract. 2.
ca. 32. number. 1. Of this see more in Stawnf. Pl. Cor. l. 1. ca. 15, 16, 17, 18,
19.

Lare (Lar) an Idol that the Heathens worshipped; sometimes taken for a god of
the fields or ways, sometimes for a domestic or home-god; a familiar spirit.

Largess (Fr.) bounty, liberality; handfuls of money cast among people, or a
Donative bestowed on Soldiers.

Largifical (largificus) that bestows bountifully, that gives frankly, liberal.

Largiloquent (largiloquus) full of words, that is liberal of his tongue.

Largitional (largitionalis) an Officer that looks to the bestowing of gifts.

Larval (larvalis) belonging to a night-spirit, goblin or masker, haggish,
ghastly, dreadful.

Lascivate (from lascivia) to play the wanton, to give ones self to lust and
lechery.

Lascivious (lascivus) wanton in behavior, dishonest, lecherous, womanish.

Laske (laxitas intestinorum) the looseness of the inward guts, the
Wherry-go-nimble, a Flux.

Lassitude (lassitudo) weariness, laziness, a disease like the Green Sickness.
Br.

Last (Sax.) signifies a burden in general, as also particularly a certain
weight; for as we say a Last of Herrings, so they say Ein last Corns, Last
Wines, etc. thence comes Lastage, which see in Lestage. A Last of Herrings
contains ten thousand. An. 31. Ed. 3. Stat. 2. ca. 2. A Last of Pitch and Tar,
or of Ashes contains fourteen Barrels, An. 32. H. 8. ca. 14. A Last of Hides
An. 1. Jac. ca. 33. contains twelve dozen of Hides or Skins. A Last of Corn is
ten Quarters. Dalton.

Latebrous (latebrosus) that is full of holes, and dens to hide in.

Latent (latens) lurking, hiding, or lying hid.

Lateran, one of the Popes Palaces in Rome, so called from Lateranus, a
Partician of Rome, whose house was given by Constantine to the Pope and his
Successors, and so continues.

Lateral (lateralis, a latus) belonging to the side.

Lateral motions are movings to a side, contradistinguished from Circular
motions, which mount upright, or descend downward.

Laterality, the side-being, or being side-ways of a thing.

Lateritious (lateritius) made of brick, or like brick.

Latifolious (latifolius) that has broad leaves or folio's.

Lation (latio) a carrying, bearing, ordaining, giving.

Latirostrous (from latus and rostrum) that has a broad or flat bill,
Latirostrous birds are Ducks, Geese, and such like. Dr. Brown.

Latitancy (from latito) a lying hid, a lurking. Br.

Latitat (the third person of latito, to lie hid) is the name of a Writ,
whereby all men in personal actions are called originally to the Upper Bench.
Fitz. not. br. fol. 78. M. And it has the name from this, because in respect
of their better expedition, a man is supposed to lurk, so as not to be found
upon a former Writ; and therefore being served with this Writ, he must put in
security for his appearance at the day; for Latitare, est se malitiose
occultare animo fraudandi creditores suos agere volentes. L. Fulcinius.

Latitude (latitudo) breadth, largeness, wideness, prolonging in speech.

In Geography the latitude of a place is the Arch of a Meridian contained
between the Equinoctial, and the Zenith of the place that was given. The
latitude of a Star is the Arch of a great circle, drawn by the Poles of the
Ecliptic, contained between the Star and the Ecliptic. Wrights use of the
Sphere.

Latomy (latomia) a Quarry of stones.

Latonian (latonius) belonging to Latona, on whom Jupiter (say the Poets) begot
Apollo and Diana; hence we use Latonian lights, for the Sun and Moon ( Latona's
children.)

Lator (Lat.) a bearer, a Porter, a Messenger.

Latrocination (latrocinatio) theft, robbery.

Lavatory (lavatorium) a vessel or place to wash in; such is that at the
Buttery door of the Inner Temple, where the Gentlemen wash their hands; also a
Laundry.

Lauds (lauds) praises; but more particularly, they are a part of those
prayers used by Roman Catholics, called our Ladies Office, or of the Priests
Office, which is between the Nocturns and the Hours. They are called Lauds from
the Psalms, Laudate Dominum de coelis, etc. and Laudate Dominum in sanctis
ejus, etc. therein contained, etc. Vide Primer.

Laudanum, Ladanum* or Labdanum (Lat. Ladanum) a sweet smelling transparent
Gum, gathered from the leaves of Cistus Ledon a shrub, of which they make
Pomanders; it smells like wine mingled with Spices. It is hot and dry, and being
anointed on the head with oil of Myrtles, it strengthens the skin, and keeps
hair from falling off.

Laudative (laudativus) of or belonging to commendation, wherein praise is
contained; sometimes used substantively.

Lave (lavo) to wash, to rinse, to purge.

Laverna, a Goddess to whom Thieves were wont to supplicate.

Lancelot or Lancelot (from lan^ea) a Fleam or Chyrurgeons Instrument which is
used in letting blood; also a man's name.

Launcepesado. See Lancepesado.

Lavolta (Ital.) a Dance so called; also a course held in sailing or wandering.
See Volta.

Laureate or Laureated (laureatus) crowned with Laurel, wearing a Garland of
Bays. Laureated letters, were Letters bound up in Bay leaves, which the Roman
Generals sent to the Senate, when their contents were Victory and Conquest,
newly by them obtained.

Laurel (laurus) a Bay Tree. In ancient Rome the Triumphers used to be crowned
with Laurel, and the Captain that triumphed carried a branch of it in his hand.
So is the Triumph of Scipio Affricanus described by Appianus Alexandrinus,
Plin. lib. 6. The Laurel was consecrated to Apollo, because on mount Parnassus
there grew great store of it. Some affirm it has the property not to be hurt by
lightning, therefore the Cock resorts thereto in Tempests, as Natural
Historians testify; conform to which, is the Imprese of him, who caused to be
painted a Cock under a Laurel with this Motto, SIC EVITABILE FVLMEN.

Lauriferous (laurifer) that bears Bays or Laurel.

Law of Arms (jus militare) is a Law that gives precepts and rules how rightly
to proclaim War, to make and observe Leagues and Truce, to set upon the enemy,
to retire, to punish offenders in the Camp, to appoint Soldiers their pay, to
give every one dignity to his desert, to divide spoils in proportion, and such
like: for further knowledge whereof read those that write de Jure Belli.

Laws of the Twelve Tables. See in Tables.

Lawless man, is he qui est extra legem, an Outlaw. Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. c.
11. number. 1.

Law of Marqu^ or Mart: This word is used 27. Ed. 3. Stat. 2. c. 17. and grows
from the German word March. i. limes, a bound or limit. And the reason of this
appellation is, because they that are driven to this Law of Reprizal, take the
Goods of that people (of whom they have received wrong and can get no ordinary
Justice) when they can catch them within their own Territories or Precincts.
See Reprisal and Marque.

Law Merchant, is a Privilege or special Law, differing from the Common Law of
England, and proper to Merchants, and summary in proceeding. An. 27. Ed. 3.
Stat. 8, 9, 19, and 20. An. 13. Ed. 1. Stat. 3.

Lawing of Dogs. See Expeditate. Mastiffs must be lawed every three years.
Crom. Jurisd. fol. 163.

Laxation (laxatio) an easing, releasing or freeing.

Laxity (laxitas) looseness, wildness, liberty.

Lazer (so called of Lazarus mentioned in the Gospel) a poor man full of soars
and scabs.

Lazule^ (lazulus) a bluish stone, a kind of marble, of which they make the
color Azure; it is sometimes also used in Physic, and is in operation hot and
dry.

Lazzareto (Ital.) an Hospital for sick folks, a Pesthouse.

League (Ital. and Span. legua, Lat. leuca, from the Gr. leucos, i. white,
because they did in old time, pitch white stones at every leagues end from the
City.) The difference of miles in several Countries is great, but it will be
enough to know, that the Italian and English are reckoned all for one (though
some hold the Italian to be the lesser) and four of these make a German mile,
two a French league, three and somewhat more a Spanish league; the Swedish or
Danish mile consists of five English miles, and somewhat more; a league at Sea
is usually held to be three English miles.

Leander, a young man of Abidos who was in love with Hero.

Lectern or Lectorn, with Chaucers Interpreter, is a Desk; I suppose he means a
Reading-Desk in a Church, which in old Latin is called Lectrinum.

Lectistern (lectisternium) was (among the ancient Romans) the solemn Ceremony
of trimming and setting out a bed not for repose, but repast, wherein they laid
the Images of their Gods, reared upon Bolsters and Pillows; The principal
whereof was that in the honor of Jupiter at the Epulum Jovis, whereon Jupiter
was laid; Juno and Minerva sitting on either side by him. Livie.

Lector (Lat.) a Reader.

Lecture, a Reading.

Leero, corruptly from Lyra, is a way of tuning, or playing on the Viol,
different from that of Alphonso.

Leet, Is otherwise called a Law day. Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 2. ca. 18.
This Court in whose Manor soever it is kept, is accounted the Kings Court, and
is commonly held every half year, etc. See more Kitch. fol. 6.

Legacy. See Devise.

Legality (legalitas) the keeping the Law; also lawfulness.

Legation (legatio) an Embassage, the Office of an Ambassador.

Legate (legatus) an Ambassador, an Orator, a Leiger; The Popes Ambassador has
most usually this tittle. See Nuntio.

Legatary (legatarius) the party to whom a Legacy is given or made.

Legend (from lego) a writing; also the words that are about the edge of a
piece of coin, The golden Legend, so called, is a book of the lives of Saints.

Legerdemain (Fr. Legier de main, i. light of hand (swiftness of hand;
cousenage, Hocus, Pocus tricks.

Legible (legibilis) that may be read.

Legiferous (legifer) that makes or gives Laws.

Legion (legio) an Army or Band of men. At first Romulus his Legion consisted
of 3000 footmen and 300 horse, after of 4200 foot, and 300 horse, and after
that 5000 foot, and 300 horse. Isid 9.3. says, a Legion consisted of 6000
armed men, which number is seldom or never exceeded, as it appears by Sigonius
de jure Romans l. 1. cap. 15. The Romans did very seldom enroll into their
universal Army, above four Legions, and in an ordinary Legion, ten Cohorts,
every Cohort containing three Maniples, every Maniple two Centuries, every
Century 100 Soldiers. Goodw. p. 175.

Legionary (legionarius) of or pertaining to a Legion.

Legislator (Lat.) a Lawgiver or Lawmakers.

Legislative (legislatus) that has power or authority to make or give Laws.

Legister (Lat.) a Lawyer. Chaucer.

Legitimate (legitimus) lawful, right, meet, just.

Leguminous (from legumen) belonging to pulse or pease.

Leman (pallaca) a married man's Concubine.

Lemnian (lemnius) pertaining to the Isle Lemnos; Lemnian-earth is Vermilion,
or Red-earth.

Lenity (lenitas) softness, smoothness, meekness, easiness to please.

Lenitude, the same.

Lenitive, that is apt to soften, assuage, or pacify.

Lenonian (lenonius) belonging to a Bawd.

Lentiginous (lentiginosus) that is full of freckles, or pimples like Lentils.

Lentil (lens) a kind of small pulse, growing in hot Countries, round and flat,
of color sometimes black, sometimes white, and sometimes brown; being boiled
but once, they loose the belly, but at the second boiling in another water,
they are of a binding nature, being then good to stop the bloody Flux, or any
looseness of the body.

Lentiscine (lentiscinus) of or belonging to the Mastick tree.

Lent (Sax.) The Spring-Fast; a time of fasting for forty days next before
Easter; so called from Lenct-mona^, or length month, by which name the old
Saxons called March, because then the days began first to exceed the nights in
length: And they call this Fast, Lent, from the name of the said month,
because the most part of it falls within the compass of this month. Verst.

Lent was first commanded to be observed in England by Ercombert, the seventh
King of Kent before the year of our Lord 800. Sir Rich. Bakers Chron. fol. 7.
But Mr. Fuller says the first Lent kept in England was in the year 640. Cent.
7. fo. 81.

Lentisk (lentiscus) a tree growing in diverse hot Countries, which bears the
notable Gum called Mastick: Its Leaves and Bark stop all looseness and issues of
blood.

Lentour (lentor) a clammy or glewish humor. Bac.

Lentous (lentus) soft, tender, pliant, or limber; idle.

Lenvoy (from the Fr. Envoy, or L'envoy) a message or sending; also the
conclusion of a Sonnet or Ballade, in a short Stanza by it self, and serving
often times as a dedication or repetition of the whole. Cot.

Leonine (leoninus) of or pertaining to a Lion, Lion-like.

Lepid (lepidus) neat, pleasant, jocund, of a good grace.

Lepidity (lepiditas) delectableness, or good grace in speech.

Leporean Leporine (leporinus) of or pertaining to an Hare; delicate, delicious.

Leprosity, full of the Leprosy or leprous disease.

Lernean (lerneus) of or belonging to the water-Serpent called Lerna.

Lesion (laesio) a hurting or annoying.

Lesbian Rule or Square, The Lesbians were such perfect workmen, that they
made Rules and Squares by their work, and not their work by the rule, and hence
the phrase. Dub.

Lestage or Lastage (from the Saxon Last, i. onus) is a custom challenged in
Fairs and Markets for carrying of things. Rastals Exposition of words: Or a
custom challenged in Cheapings or Fairs. Saxon in the description of England,
ca. 11. Lastage. An. 27. R. 2. ca. 18. seems to be the balance or Ballast of a
Ship, and so the French use it. Fleta terms it Lesting, saying, Quod significat
acquietantiam Lestagii. lib. 1. ca. 47.

Lessee, Lessor, terms in our Law; Lessee is he to whom the Lease is made for
term of years, life or will; and the Lessor, he that Leaseth, or makes the
Lease.

Lesses (Fr.) the dung of a ravenous beast, as Bear, Bore, or Wolf.

Lessian, pertaining to Lessius, a modern Writer, who wrote a Rule of severe
temperance, wherein he prescribed fourteen ounces every day, whence that is
called a Lessian Diet.

Lestrigons (lestrigones) a kind of Giants or fierce people of Sicily, often
mentioned in Homers Odysses.

Lethal (lethalis) mortal, deadly, noysom, pestilent.

Lethality (lethalitas) mortality, frailty.

Lethargy (lethargus) a disease contrary to Frenzy; for, as Frenzy is caused
by hot Humors inflaming the Brain; Lethargy is by cold Phlegmatic Humors
oppressing it in such sort that the Patient can do nothing but sleep, whereby
he becomes forgetful, with loss (in a manner) of Reason, and all the Senses.
This disease is by some called the Drowsy evil.

Lethargick (lethargicus) pertaining to, or sick of that disease; also dull,
sleepy, forgetful.

Lethe (Gr.) a feigned River of Hell, the water whereof being drunk, causes
forgetfulness of all that is past; Hence it is used for Oblivion or
forgetfulness.

Lethean (letheus) forgetful Also Lethean (from Laetheus) deadly, mortal,
pestiferous.

Lethiferous (lethifer) that brings death, deadly.

Letifical (letificus) that makes glad, or rejoices.

Letters of Mart. See Law of Marque.

Letters Patents. See Patent.

Levant (Fr.) the East, the East wind or Country.

Levant, and Couchant, is a Law term, when a strangers Cattle have been feeding
and lying down in another man's ground, or have remained there a good space of
time.

Levation (levatio) an easing, or diminishing of grief or pain.

Leucophlegmatick (leucophlegmaticus) a dropsy arising from white Phlegm.

Level-Cotle (from the Fr. lever le Cul, i. to raise or remove the Buttock) is
when three play at Tables, or other Game, where only two can play at a time,
and the loser removes his Buttock and sits out, and therefore called also
Hitch-Buttock.

Levigation (laevigatio) a levelling, smothing, or making plain.

Levisomnous (levisomnus) watchful, soon waked.

Leviathan (Hebr.) a great water-Serpent, or a kind of Whale; Sometimes it is
taken for the Devil.

Levites (Levitae, ex filiis Levi) those of the Tribe of Levi in the old Law,
which Tribe was particularly allotted for the Church, and whose maintenance was
from the Tenths, First Fruits, Offerings, and Sacrifices of the people; Josh.
18.17. The Priesthood of the Lord was their inheritance. There were of them
four kinds. First, Punies, or Tirones, who from their childhood to the five and
twentieth year of their age, learned the duties of their Offices. Secondly,
Graduates, who having spent four years in the study of the Law, were able to
answer and oppose in it. Thirdly, Licentiates, who did actually exercise the
Priestly function. And fourthly, Doctors ( Rabbis they used to call them) who
were the highest in degree.

Levi had three Sons, Gershon, Cohath and Merari, and accordingly the whole
company of the Levites were distinguished into three Orders, Gershonites,
Coathites, and Merarites. Moses and Aaron, p. 19.

Lexicon (Gr.) a Dictionary of words; a vocabulary.

Lex talionis. See Talion, and Retaliate.

Libament or Libation (libamen) a Sacrifice, any thing tasted and offered;
especially liquid things.

Libanomancy (libanomantia) Divination by Incense or Frankincense.

Libe^ (libellus) literally signifies a little book; but by use it is the
original Declaration of any Action in the Civil Law* An. 2. H. 5. ca. 3. and A.
2. Ed. 6. ca. 13. It signifies also a defamatory Scrol, slanderous writing or
invective of any man cast abroad, or otherwise unlawfully published, but then
for distinction sake it is called an infamous Libel, famosus Libellus.

Libertinage (Fr.) Epicurism, sensuality, licentiousness, dissoluteness.

Libertine (libertinus) one that is manumitted, or one that is born of him that
was once bound, and is now free, a freeman; also one of loose life, or careless
of Religion.

Libertinism, Libertinage, or Libertinity (libertinitas) the state of him that
of Bond is made free; Licentiousness, Epicurism. In Divinity it is thus
defined. Libertinism is nothing else but a false liberty of belief and manners,
which will have no other dependence but on peculiar fancy and passion. It is a
strange monster, whereof it seems Job made description under the figure of
Behemoth; as much to say, as a creature composed of all sorts of beasts, of
which it bears the name, Job 40. Causs. in his Maxims.

Libethrides (Dict. a Lebethra Magnesiae font) the Muses so called.

Libidinist (from libido, inis) a Sensualist, or one that gives himself over to
lust or unlawful desires. Felth.

Libidinous (libidinosus) lustful, lascivious, incontinent.

Libidinosity (libidinositas) lustfulness, lasciviousness, luxury, incontinency.

Libitude (libitudo) will, pleasure. Ad libitum, at will or pleasure.

Libitina, the Goddess of funerals, and after a sort the superintendent of
Sepulchers, in whose Temple were all things to be sold necessary for the
interring and burial of the dead; whereupon they also who were employed to
carry forth and bury Corpse, were called Libitinarians, as well as Vespilons.
Livie.

Libra (Lat.) the balance, or one of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac. This
Sign is so called, because when the Sun enters it, the day is in equal balance
with the night, not one longer or shorter then another. Virg. Geor. 1.

Libra die, somnique paresubi fecerit horas. Libral (libralis) that is or
pertains to a pound weight, or measure; also belonging to the Sign Libra.

Librarious (librarius) pertaining to books.

Licanthropy ( licanthropia, or lycanthropia) a frenzy, or melancholy,
wherewith some being haunted, think themselves turned into Wolves, fly the
company of men, and hide themselves in caves and holes, howling like Wolves.

Licentiate (licentiatus) one that has license in any Faculty; most used in
Divinity. In the Common Law, an Utter-Barrister. Before he comes to be a
Licentiate in the Civil Law, he must have studied five years: Also the third
degree among the Levites. See Levites.

Licentious (licentiosus) rash, unruly, dissolute.

Lich-fowle, the reputed unlucky Night-Raven, so cal^ed, from the Saxon Lic or
Lick, i. a dead corpse; Country people by corruption call these Scritch-Owles,
or Lich-Owls.

Licitation (licitatio) a setting out to sale; a prizing or cheapening.

Licite (licitus) lawful, granted.

Lictor (Lat.) a Sergeant, There were twelve Lictors or Sergeants among the
ancient Romans, who, with bundles of Rods and Axes, always went before the
Magistrate, so called (as Fastus thinks) quod fasces virgarum ligatos ferant.

Lictorian (lictorius) pertaining to a Sergeant or Lictor.

Lief-^ebber (Dutch) a Lover, Bishop Derrys Answer to Militiere.

Liege (from the Ital liga, a League or Obligation) is a word borrowed from the
Feudists, and has two significations in our Common Law, sometimes being used
for Liege Lord, An. 34. and 35. H. 8 ca. 1. and An. 35. ejusdem, ca. 3. And
sometimes for Liege man, An. 10. R. a. ca. 1. and An. 11. ejusdem, ca. 1. Liege
Lord, is he that acknowledges no Superior. Duarenus in commentar de consuetud.
Feudorum, ca. 4. nu. 3. Liege-man is he that ows Ligeancy to his Liege Lord.
See more of this in Skene de verborum significatione, verbo Ligiantia.

Ligeancy (ligeantia) is such a duty or fealty as no man may owe or bear to
more then one Lord. See Skene number. 4. This word is used in the Statutes of our
Realm as the Kings Liege people. An. 14. H. 8. ca. 2.

Ligation Ligature (ligatio) a binding, also the tongue-tying in children
especially.

Ligament (ligamentum) a ty-band or string: especially the insensible string
that is seated either within or near a joint, and is termed by Anatomists, a
Ligament, and is between a Cartilage and a Membrane, appointed firmly to knit
the joints.

Ligneous Lignean (ligneus) of wood or timber, wooden, full of wood.

Lignicide (lignicida) a wood-cutter.

Lignum-vitae (Lat.) the wood called Aloes, by the Arabians Calambuco, which
for its sweet savor is valued at its weight in pure Silver, as being not only
serviceable for the pompous Funerals of Princes, but also for Bathes. And with
the Indians (among whom it grows) it is held an unparalled medicine for many
dangerous maladies. Heil.

Ligue (Fr.) a League or Confederacy, a Complot or Combination of sides or
parties which have been divided, an Agreement made, or Alliance contracted.

Ligurion (ligurio) a devouter, a spend-thrift.

Ligurition (liguritio) a gluttonous devouring; immoderate appetite.

Lilith, was held by the Jews to be a kind of she-Devil, that killed children.
Clossa Talm. in Nidda. fol. 24. b.

Limaceous (from limacia) snaily, snail-like, full of, or resembling a snail.

Limation (limatio) a filing or polishing.

Limenark (limenarcha) the Warden or Governor of a Port.

Liminarie (Fr. liminaire) set before the entry or at the beginning of,
dedicatory, forerunning. Cot.

Limosity (limositas) abundance of mud, muddiness.

Limous (limosus) full of mud or slime, muddy. Br.

Limpid (limpidus) clear, bright, pure, transparent.

Limpitude Limpidity (limpiditas) clearness, brightness.

Linament (linamentum) linen thread, lint, a tent for a wound.

Lincoln's Inn, one of the four Inns of Court, and in antiquity next the
Temples; it was for the most part purchased of Sir Edw. Suliard of Essex, by
the Benchers and Gentlemen of that house; But it took denomination from Sir H.
Lacy Earl of Lincoln; to whom part of this House was given by Edw. the first.
See more in Stow. Chron. p. 1072.

Lineament (lineamentum) the feature or proportion of the face or of any other
part, a line drawn in painting.

Linear (linearis) pertaining to a line, lineal.

Linguacity (linguacitas) talkativeness, verbosity.

Linigerous (liniger) that bears flax or linen.

Liniment (linimentum) a thin ointment.

Linosity (linositas) abundance of flax.

Lintearious (lintearius) of or belonging to linen.

Lintel (from the Fr. Linteau) the headpiece of a door, the upper posts.

Lippitude (lippitudo) a dropping, waterishness or bloodshot of the eyes,
blearedness of the eyes.

Lipothymie (lipothymia) a fainting or souning, when the vital spirits being
suddenly oppressed, a man sinks down as if he were dead. Hist. of K. Cha.

Liquable (liquabilis) which may melt, or become soft, or liquid.

Liquation (liquatio) a melting.

Liquefaction (liquefactio) a melting, or making soft, or liquid, a dissolving.

Liquescency, the same.

Liquid (liquidus) soft, moist, wet, pure, clear.

Liquids (liquidae) are four (viz.) L, M, N, R, and so called, Quia
pronunciatione liquescunt ore, etc. because in the pronunciation they melt as
it were, or become liquid in the mouth, and are more softly uttered then other
Consonants. Min.

Liquidate (liquido) to make moist or clear.

Litany (litania) an humble supplication or prayer; the Gr. from whence the
word is derived, importing as much.

Literality (from litera) learning, knowledge of letters.

Literature (literatura) learning, cunning, grammar, knowledge of letters.

Litargy or Lithargy (lithargyros) white lead, or the foam that rises from
lead, when tried. It is cold of operation, and used by Chyrurgeons in ointments
and Plasters, being of a gentle, drying, clensing, and binding nature.

Lithomancy (lithomantia) divination by casting Pibble stones, or by the
Lode-stone, whereby, as Tretzes in his Chiliads delivers, Helenus the Prophet
foretold the destruction of Troy.

Lithotomy (lithotomia) a Masons Workhouse, or Quarry; also a Prison. Dr. Br.

Lithontri^tick (from the Gr. (...), lapis, and (...), tritus) that wears,
breaks, or cuts a stone. Dr. Br.

Litigatio^ (litigatio) a strife, a suit or pleading.

Litigious (litigiosus) contentious, full of strife, wrangling.

Litispendence (litispendentia) the hanging of a suit, till it be tried or
decided.

Litoral Litorean (litoralis) of or belonging to the Seaside or shore.

Liturate (lituro) to blot with the pen, to dash out.

Liturgy (liturgia) public service, or a form of public prayers.

Liturgick (liturgicus) pertaining to such a Liturgy; ministerial.

Livery (Fr. Liuree) has several significations. 1. It is used for a Noble or
Gentleman's Cloth, or colors worn by his Servants or Followers, with Cognizance
or without. A. 1. R. 2 c. 7. and A. 20. ejus. c. 1, 2. A. 8. H. 6. c. 4. A. 8.
E. 4. c. 3. etc. 2. It signifies a delivery of possession. 3. It is the Writ
which lies for the heir to obtain the possession or seisin of his lands at the
Kings hands, which see in Fitzh. not. br. fol. 155. Also we call that a Livery
stable, where strangers horses are admitted at an allowance of so much by the
week, or by the day and night for Hay and Oats. And this sense the Fr. Liuree
does also bear, as Liuree des Chanoines, for their Corady, stipend or daily
allowance in victuals or money.

Livery of Seisin (deliberatio seisinae) is a delivery of possession of Land or
Tenement, or other things. West. part. 1. Symbol. lib. 2. Sect. 169. calls this
a Ceremony in the Common Law, used in the conveyance of Lands or Tenements,
etc. where you may see the usual form of it set down.

Livid (lividus) black and blew, wan, of the color of lead; also malicious,
envious, backbiting.

Lividity (lividitas) blewness, the color appearing upon a stroke, a dead,
earthly, leaden color.

Livor (Lat.) a black and blew mark in a body, coming of a stroke or blow; also
blackness of the eyes coming of humors; also envy, malice.

Lixiviated (from lixivia) of or like, or washed with Lee or Lie, made of
ashes. Dr. Br.

Lixor (Lat.) a Water-bearer.

Lizard (lacertus) a little beast much like our Evet, but without poison,
breeding in Italy and other hot Countries; whose dung is good to take away
spots in the eye, and clear the sight; And its head being bruised and laid to,
draws out thorns or any thing sticking in the flesh.

Lobbe, is a great kind of North-Sea-fish. An. 31. Ed. 3. Stat. 3. ca. 2.

Local (localis) pertaining to a place. It signifies in our Common Law, as much
as tied or annexed to a place certain. Example, the thing is local and annexed
to the freehold, Kitch. fol. 180.

Locality (localitas) the being of a thing in a place.

Location (locatio) a placing or setting in a place; Also a letting out to
hire, or setting out work by the great.

Loche. See Lohoc.

Lococession (from locus and cedo) a giving place.

Locomotion ( locus and motio) a moving or stirring from one place to another.
Dr. Br.

Loculament (loculamentum) a little place of bords made with holes for Pigeons
or Conies; a Coffin for a Book; also the several places wherein the seeds lie,
as in Poppy heads. Dr. Charl.

Locuplicity (locuplicitas) abundance of wealth.

Locuplete (locuples) rich, wealthy, well-stored.

Locust (locusta) a kind of flying insect, or Fly (which the French term
Cigale) of which we have none in England. See Dr. Brown in his Vul. Err. lib.
5. ca. 3. There were diverse kinds of these; some hurtful and venomous, others
comodious for meat, Mat. 3.4. His meat was locusts, which some conceive to be
the tops of herbs and plants.

Lodemanage, is the hire of a Pilot for conducting a ship from one place to
another, and comes from the Dutch Loot, i. lead, and in the same Dutch, the
Pilot is called Lootsman or Pi^loo^, the man of lead, or casting out his lead
to save the Ship from danger. Min.

Chaucer would have this word signify the skill or art of Navigation. See
Pilot.

Lodestar, a Star that guides Mariners, the north star.

Lodestone (magnes) a stone of the color of rusty iron, which has an
admirable virtue not only to draw iron to it self, but to make any iron on
which it is rubbed, to draw iron also. This stone is found in the Indian Sea,
and in the Country Trachonitis; and is of greatest use in Navigation; For by it
Sailors find out the certain course of their Voyage, the needle in the Compass,
tempered herewith, still standing directly toward the North and South. Read
more of this stone in Dr. Br. Vul. Err. l. 2. c. 2.

Locution (locutio) a saying or speaking.

Lod^works, one of the works belonging to the Stanaries in Cornwall, for which
see Came. Brit. in the title Cornwall. See Stremeworks.

Log, the name of an Hebrew measure, as the Sextarius Atticus was among the
Greeks.

Logarithmes (logarithmi) a term in Mathematics, signifying numbers, which,
being fitted to proportional numbers, retain always equal differences. Wingate.

Logic (logica) the Art of Logic, the Art of reasoning or disputing. Logic
(according to my Lord Bacon) professes the preparation and contrivance of Aids
and Forces for the understanding. Arts Logical or intellectual are four; Art of
Enquiry or Invention; Art of Examination or Judgment; Art of Custody or
Memory; and Art of Elocution or Tradition, etc. See his Advancement of
Learning, fol. 218, 219.

Logician (logicus) one skilled or learned in the Art of Logic.

Logism, the due and judicious understanding of a thing formerly considered and
esteemed of, according to reason. Cot.

Logist (logista) he that causes presidents or notable ^ayings to be
registered, a caster of accounts. The Logists among the Athenians (says
Harpocration) were ten men, elected out of the Tribes, to whom all such as had
ended their Office of Magistracy (within thirty days of their Authorities
expiration) were to render an account of all such affairs as they had then
administration of; They not only kept account of the moneys, but of all other
matters that appertained to the Kings revenue, etc.

Logistick (logistice) the Art of counting or reckoning, the practice of
Arithmetic, or that part thereof which contains Addition, Substraction,
Multiplication and Division.

Logographers (logographi) Lawyers Clerks, they that write Pleas and Causes in
the Law or Books of Account.

Logomachy (logomachia) a contention in, or strife about words, a verbal
altercation.

Lohoch or Loch, a Physical word, and is a thick Syrrup, or other soft
substance, or confection, which must not be swallowed, but suffered to melt of
it self in the mouth, that so it may gently slide down, and thereby have the
more virtue against diseases of the Breast, Lungs and throat. Culpepper says, it
is an Arabic word, and simply signifies a thing to be licked up.

Lollard^ (Lollardi) a Sect that abounded in England in the days of Edw. 3. and
Hen. 5 An. 2. H. 5. ca. 7. of these read Stows Annals p. 425. Tritemius, in his
Chronicle, deduces the name from one Gualter Lolhard, a German, as the first
author of that Sect, living about the year 1315. And Chilian says, Lollardus
fuit Alexianus Monachus, and Lollardus quoque dicitur Haereticus Valdersis.
These Lolhards were much consenting with the Wicklevites in opinions; they
began in time of P. Innocent the sixth, and Charles the fourth Emperor of that
name, (says another Author.) See their Tenets in B. Spotswoods hist. of Scotl.
fol. 61.

As for the word Lollard retained in our Statutes since the Reformation, it
seems now as a generical name, to signify such who in their opinions oppose
the settled Religion of the Land, in which sense the Sheriffs are bound by their
oath to suppress them.

Lombardeer, an Usurer or Broaker; so called from the Lombards, a people of the
hither part of Italy, who were great Usurers; they were called Lombards alias
Longobards from their long Beards which they wore. Hence our word Lumbar, which
signifies refuse Housholdstuff.

Lombard, is also, by the same reason, used for a bank for Usury or Pawns;
Hence Lombardstreet, which is still full of Goldsmiths, and Moneyers. See
Causines.

Lome (lutum) dirt, mud, or mortar.

Longevity (longaevitas) long or old age.

Longanimity (longanimitas) long-suffering, patience, forbearance. In Divinity
it is thus defined; Longanimity is an untired confidence of mind in respecting
the good things of the life to come.

Longinquity (longinquitas) long distance of place, length of time,
continuance, long lasting, or long life.

Longitude (longitudo) length of place, time or any other thing. The Longitude
of a Star is the arch of the Ecliptic, contained between the beginning of
Aries, and the circle of the stars latitude. In Geography the longitude of a
place is the arch of the Equinoctial Circle contained between two Meridians,
whereof one goes by the Canary Islands, the other by the place that is given.
Wrights use of the Sphere.

Lootsman. See Pilot and Lodomenage.

Loquacity (loquacitas) much talking, babbling, or prating.

Loray-Law. In the Memorials of the Chamber of Accounts in France, is found an
Article to this effect. Si homines de Loraico vadia duelli temere dederint,
etc. If a combat were once accepted, and after, by consent of the Lord of the
Fee, were taken up, each of the parties should pay 2 s. 6 d. But if it we
performed, then the party vanquished should forfeit 112 s. and upon this custom
grew the French Proverb, when any man has had a hard and unjust Judgment, they
say he was tried by the Law of Loray or Bern, ou Ie batu pay l' amends, where
the vanquished gives the recompense. Sir W. Ral.

Lordane. See Lourdain.

Lore (Sax. Late) doctrine or learning.

Loricated (loricatus) armed with a coat of Mail or Brigandine. Dr. Charl.

Lorimets (Fr. Lormier) A. 1. R. 2. ca. 12. is one of the Companies of London,
that make bits for horse bridles, spurs, and such like small iron work; The
name seems to be taken from the Lat. Lorum, and is elsewhere written Loriners.

Loseng (Sax.) Herbert Bp. of Thetford (after of Norwich) A. 1094. was
nicknamed Loseng that is the flatterer; our ^old English word Leasing, for
tying, retains some affinity hereto, and at this day we call an insinuating
fellow, a glozing Companion. Full.

Losenger (Sax.) a flatterer or liar. Chaucer.

Lotion (lotio) a washing or rinsing.

Loover or L'overt, a tunnel on the top of a roof or house (from the Fr.
l'overt, i. apertus) a place made open to let out the smoke on the top of the
house; so we say pound overt, a Pound open at the top, that men may see the
Cattle impounded, and cast in sustenance to them.

Lourdane or Lordane (Fr. Lourdin) sottish, dunce-like, heavy, dull, blockish.
But Sir R. Baker in his Chron. fo. 18. gives this etymology; when the Danes
Lorded it in England, the English were fain to till and ear the ground, whilst
the Danes sat idle, and ate the fruit of their labors, and yet in every place,
for very fear, were called Lord-Danes, which afterward became a word of
derision, when one would signify a Lazy-Lubber.

Louvre (Fr.) is the royal Seat of the Kings of France in Paris, famous
throughout all Europe. The front (which is of Masonry, enriched with Pillars,
Frizes, Architraves, and all sorts of Architecture with excellent symmetry and
beauty) was begun by Francis the first; finished by Hen. his Son, and afterward
increased by Francis the second, Charles the ninth; Last of all made the wonder
of all other works, by that long and beautiful Gallery, the work of Henry the
fourth.

Lozenge (Fr.) a little square-Cake of preserved flowers, herbs, etc. also a
quarry of a glass window, or any thing of that form; A term in Heraldry. See
the difference between a Fusil, a Lozenge, and a Mascle, in Gwillim fol. 358.

Lubrefaction, a making slippery, stirring or quick. Bac.

Lubrical Lubricious (lubricus) slippery, deceitful, uncertain; stirring,
wanton, lascivious.

Lubricity (lubricitas) slipperiness, incertainty, wantonness, incontinency.

Lucetus, a beast almost as big as a Wolf, breeding in Muscovia and Russia, of
color between red and brown, mingled with black spots; its skin is a very rich
Fur, A. 24. H. 8. ca. 14:

Lucible (lucibilis) that is light of it self, that is apt to shine.

Lucid (lucidus) clear, bright, shining.

Lucidity (luciditas) brightness, clearness.

Lucifer (Lat.) properly the Star arising before the morning, as messenger of
daylight, the Day Star: but figuratively the King of Babylon, Nebuchadnezar;
an arch Devil.

Luciferous (lucifer, a, um) that brings or causes light.

Luciferians, a sort of Heretics, so called from their Author Lucifer, Bishop
of Calaris in Sardinia in time of Pope Liberius, and the Emperor Constantius,
about the year of Christ 365. they held the soul of man was propagated out of
the substance of his flesh, etc.

Lucina, Juno and Diana so called, because they ruled the travel of women, and
helped them in that business.

Lucrative (lucrativus) taken with gain or advantage; whereof great profit is
made.

Lucr^ce, a chaste woman; so used from Lucretia, a chaste woman of Rome, the
wife of Tarquinius Collatinus, who slew herself, because Sextus Tarquinius had
ravished her.

Lucrificate (lucrifico) to gain, or get, to seek after gain.

Lucrous (lucrosus) full of gain or lucre, profitable.

Luctation (luctatio) wrestling, striving, much contending.

Luctiferous (luctifer) that causes sorrow or mourning.

Luctisonant (luctisonus) that signifies sorrow or waiting.

Lucubration (lucubratio) a study or work by candlelight.

Lucubrator^ (lucubratorius) of or belonging to study, or working by
candlelight.

Luculency (luculentia) brightness, beauty.

Luculent (luculentus) full of light, clear; beautiful, famous.

Ludible (ludibilis) apt to play, sportive.

Ludibrious (ludibriosus) reproachful, shameful, ridiculous.

Ludicr^l Ludicrous (ludicer) pertaining to play or mirth, mocking, light,
childish. Greg.

Ludification (ludificatio) a mocking, deceiving or beguiling.

Lues Venerea (Lat.) Morbus Gallicus, or Neopolitanus, the Venerean Murrain, or
French Pox.

Lugent (lugens) mourning or lamenting.

Lugubrous (lugubris) lamentable, sorrowful, pertaining to grief and mourning.

Luttion (luitio) a paying a ransom.

Luminaries (luminaria) great lights or Lamps; conspicuous Stars, the Sun and
Moon; Also the Feast of light, the Feast of Christ's Nativity or Christmas, was
so called in the Western or Latin Church; because they used many lights and
candles at this Feast; or rather, because Christ the light of all lights, that
true light, then came into the world.

Luminous (luminosus) full of light, lightsome.

Lunar (lunaris) pertaining to the Moon.

Lunatic (lunaticus) that is wood or frantic, at a certain time of the moon.

Luracy, that disease.

Lupet^al (Lat.) a place dedicated to the God Pan, from Lupa; because there a
she-Wolf nourished Romulus and Remus. So the Sacrifices and Plays dedicated to
Pan were called Lupercalia or lupercal Sacrifices, and the Priests of Pan
(luperci) who, on the day of their Sacrifices ran up and down the City naked,
and stroke the hands and bellies of women great with child, with a Goats skin,
thereby to signify both fruitfulness and easy deliverance. Rider.

Lupires (lupinum) a little flat pulse, almost like a small bean, but much less
and bitter in taste; They are not very good meat, but are sometimes used in
Physic against worms in children, and the decoction of them takes away spots
and freekles of the face.

Lurcation (lurcatio) a greedy eating or gluttonizing; derived from Lura, a
great leathern bottle.

Lurdane. See Lourdain.

Lurid (luridus) pale, wan, black and blew.

Luscition (luscitio) dimness, pore-blindness of the eyes.

Lushbrbogh, a base coin in the days of Edward the third

Lusion (lusio) a playing, game, or pastime.

Lustration (lustratio) compassing, viewing or going about on every side; a
purging by Sacrifice, which was done every five years. Bac.

Lustrifical (lustrificus) that has power to purge or make holy, pertaining to
purging.

Lustium (Lat.) a Den or Cave for wild beasts; a purging by Sacrifice; also
the space of fifty months, or five years The Romans sometimes kept their
account of time by these Lustiums, which were so called because they did once
in every five years revolution, Lustrare exercitum Romanum, by sacrifice purge
the Roman Army. Hence we use sometimes, two Lustrums, for ten years, three
Lustrums fifteen years, etc.

Lutheranism, the doctrine or Tenets of Martin Luther, who (being an Augustine
Monk) forsook his Monastical course of life, about the year 1515, and from him
Lutherans took denomination: These differ from the Calvinists, chiefly in
maintaining consubstantiation in the blessed Eucharist, with omnipresence, and
eternal predestination, to be out of a foreseen faith, and good works, and not
absolute; which tenants are impugned by the Calvinists. Heil

Luteous (luteus) that is made of clay, ^eam, mortar, or earth; filthy, muddy.

Lutulent (lutulentus) miry, dirty, filthy.

Luxate (luxo) to put out of joint, to loosen.

Luxation (luxatio) a loosening or putting out of joint.

Luxuriate (luxurio) to exceed, to be riotous or wanton, to grow rank.

Luxurious (luxuriosus) riotous, given too much to pleasure, excessive.

Lycanthropy (lycanthropia) a frenzy or melancholy, which causes the patient
(who thinks he is turned Wolf) to fly all company, and hide himself in dens and
corners. See Were-wolf.

Lyceum, Aristotle's famous School near Athens; Also Cicero's School, in his
Manor at Tusculum.

Lydian Music (Lydius modus) doleful and lamentable music.

Lymphatick (lymphaticus) allayed or mixed with water; Also mad, furious,
bestraught.

Lydford Law, is to hang men first, and indite them afterward.

Lyncean Lynceous (lynceus) pertaining to the beast Lynx; also quick-sighted,
from Lynceus one of the Argonauts, who was admired for his quickness of sight.
He could see the new Moon, the first day when it was in the sign Aries, etc.

Lynx (Lat.) a spotted beast like a Wolf, having a very perfect sight. This
beast breeds chiefly in the Eastern Countries, and is often found in the woods
of Almain and Sclavonia. Hence the phrase of a Lynx-like-eye, for one that is
well and perfect sighted.

Lypothumy. See Lipothumy.

Lyrick (lyricus) a Poet that makes verses to be sung to the Harp or Lute. The
best of these among the Grecians was Pindarus; among the Latins Horace. Lyrick,
taken adjectively, is pertaining to a Harp, that plays on a Harp, or to Lyrick
verses, which the ancients applied to Songs and Hymms.

Lyrist (lyristes) a Harper, or one that sings to the Harp.

M
MAbel (Mabilia) a Christian name for women; from amabilis, i. lovely.

Mac in Irish is as much as Filz in French, or as Son in English; as
Mac-William, or Mac-Adam, i. the Son of William, or Adam.

Macaleb, the bastard Coral or Pomander; of whose sweet and shining black
berries, Bracelets are made.

Macaronique (Fr.) a confused heap, or huddle of many several things.

Macarons (Fr.) little Friter-like Buns, or thick Lozenges compounded of Sugar
Almonds, Rose Water, and Musk, pounded together and baked with a gentle fire.
Also the Italian Marcaroni, lumps or gobbets of boiled paste, served up in
butter, and strewed over with spice, and grated cheese; a common dish in Italy.

Macedonians (Macedones) people of Macedonia, a large Country of Europe.

Macellarious (macellarius) pertaining to the Butchers Row or Shambles.

Macellator (Lat.) a Butcher, or Slaughter-man.

Macerate (macero) to make lean; to mortify, weaken, bring down; also to
allay, soak or steep in liquor.

Machiavelian, a subtle Statesman, or cunning Politician; So taken from
Nicholas Machiavel, Recorder of Florence, whose Politics have poisoned almost
all Europe.

Machevalize or Machiavelianize, to practice Machiavelianism, or subtle policy.

Machine (machina) an instrument or engine of War, a frame, tool or device; a
subtle shift to deceive.

Machina^ (machinor) to devise or plot, to imagine or contrive, to invent
craftily.

Macilent (macilentus) lean, thin, barren.

Macritude (macritudo) leanness, barrenness.

Macrocosmus (Gr.) the great world.

Macrology (macrologia) prolixity in speaking; long and tedious talk or speech,
to little or no purpose. It is a figure among Rhetoricians; As, Vivat Carolus
Augustus, and non moriatur, etc.

Mactator (Lat.) a killer or murderer.

Maculatures (from macula) blotting or waste papers.

Maculate (maculo) to stain, spot, or defile; to defame.

Madid (madidus) wet or washed, moist, imbrued; also drunken.

Madidate Madiffe madido madefacio to wet or moisten, to make wet, to wash or
bath.

Madidity (madiditas) moisture, or fullness of moisture.

Mador (Lat.) moisture; also sweat.

Madrigal (Ital. madrigali) a kind of song.

Magazine (Fr. Magazin, quasi mansio gazae, i. locus ubi gazae and thesauri
reponuntur) a public Storehouse or Warehouse, most commonly appropriated to
appurtenances of War.

Magdaleon (magdaleo) a Langate, or long plaster like a Rowler. Dr. Br.

Magellanick Sea, so called from Ferdinando Magellanus.

Magi, or the Wisemen of the East. See Balthazar.

Magician ( magus, a Persian word primitively) the Persians call those Magos or
Magicians whom the Grecians call Philosophos; the Latins Sapientes; the Gauls,
Druyds: the Egyptians, Prophets or Priests; the Indians, Gymnosophists; the
Germans Die Pfaffen; we English, Wisemen, Wisards, Cunning-men, South-sayers or
Enchanters. Cham. otherwise called Z^roaster, K. of the Bactrians (who reigned
800 years after the siege of Troy) is said to be the first inventer of Art
Magic. Magia, among the Persians, was taken for sublime sapience, and a
Science of the harmony and contents of universals in Nature. Bac. And see Sir
Walt. Ral. l. 1. f. 171.

Magic Art (magia) in general, is wisdom, or contemplation of heavenly
Sciences, and is twofold; Natural, which is lawful, and is the ground of all
true Physic, and the occult wisdom of nature, without which all man's Reason
and Knowledge is Ignorance; The other is Diabolical, superstitious and
unlawful, and is called Necromancy; whereby men attain to the knowledge of
things by the assistance of evil spirits. Chym. Dict.

Magistery (magisterium) mastership, the rule or office of a Master: Dr. Br.

Magistral Mag^sterial (magistralis) pertaining to, or done by a Master or
Magistrate; master-like, artificial. In Physic it signifies a Plaster, Salve,
or Pill prepared after the best manner.

Magna Charta, the great Charter, contains a number of Laws ordained the ninth
year of Hen. 3. and confirmed by Edw. 1. We have no ancienter written Law then
this, which though it consist of not above Thirty seven Charters or Laws, yet
is it of such extent, as all the Law we have is thought in some sort to depend
of it.

Magnalia (Lat.) great things to be wondered at. As Magnalia Dei (mentioned Act.
2.11) the great works of God.

Magnality (from magnalia) an admired greatness.

Magnanimity (magnanimitas) courage, greatness of mind, nobleness of spirit,
stoutness of heart.

Magnanimous (magnanimus) generous, of a great mind, of a stout spirit.

Magnete (magnes, etis) a loadstone. See Lodestone.

Magnetic (magneticus) belonging to the Lodestone, or that which draws unto or
attracts.

Magnify (magnifacio) to make great account of, to honor much.

Magnificence (magnificentia) stateliness, sumptuousness, high achievement,
great performance.

Magnificat, part of the Even-song among the Romanists, or the song of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, Luke 1.46. beginning thus Magnificat anima mea. etc. My
soul does magnify our Lord, etc. At saying of which, they use to stand up, as
being a Canticle or Song of joy, for the delivery whereof, that posture is most
proper.

To correct magnificat (an English Proverb) signifies to attempt to amend
Scripture, or that which is beyond correction.

Magnifico (Ital.) a great or honorable Personage: The chief Noblemen of Venice
are by a peculiar title, called Magnifici, or Magnifico's. And the Rectors of
the Academies in Germany are honored with the same Title.

Magnificent Magnifical (magnificus) (that atchieveth worthy acts, noble,
sumptuous, acting great matters, majestical.

Magniloquy Magniloquence (magniloquentia) a lofty manner of speaking, or a
discourse of great matters.

Magniloquent (magniloquus) that uses a stately manner of speaking or writing.

Magnitude (magnitudo) greatness, largeness, nobleness, valiantness.

Magog (mentioned in Ezekiel. 38.) Gog in the Hebrew signifies (says St. Hierom)
tectum, or a covering of a house. And Pintus, upon Ezekiel affirms, that by Gog
is meant Antichrist; For (says he) Antichristus erit Diaboli tegumentum sub
specie humana; That Antichrist shall be the covering of the Devil under humane
form. He adds that Magog, is as much to say as Gog, the letter [M] being an
Hebrew Preposition and imports as much as of or from, so he takes Magog for
those people that follow Antichrist. See more in exposition of these two words
in Sir Walt. Ral. hist. lib. 1. fol. 136.

Mahm or Maim (from the Lat. mancus) signifies a corporal hurt, whereby a man
loses the use of any member, that is or might be any defense to him in battle.
The Canonists call it Membri mutilationem, as the Eye, the Hand, the Foot, the
scalp of the Head, the fore tooth, or (as some say) any finger of the hand.
Glanvile. lib. 14. ca. 7. And Vgolinus de irregularit. ca. 4. sect. 3, 4, 5.

Magonel, an instrument to cast stones. Chauc.

Mahumetism or Mahumetanism, the Religion and profession of Mahumet and the
Turks; which see in Alchoran, Mahumets Law-book.

Mahumetan, one that professes that Religion.

Maid-Morsan. See Moriseo.

Majestative (majestativus) that is full of majesty or majestical.

Mainour or Manner (from the Fr. Maniere, i. the Manner) signifies in our
Common Law, when a Thief has stolen, and is followed with Hue and Cry, and
taken with the Manner, that is, having the thing stolen about him, which is
called the Mainour; and so we say when we find one doing an unlawful act, that
we took him in the mainour or manner.

Mainpernable (a Law word, and) signifies bailable, or that may be bailed; and
Mainpernors, are the Sureties for one that is mainprized to appear at a certain
day, etc. yet Mr. Manwood, 1. part. For. Laws, p. 167. makes a difference
between Bail and Mainprize, viz. that he that is mainprised has a greater
liberty, then he that is bailed, etc.

Main-sworn, in our Northern Dialect, signifies foresworn or perjured.

Major (Lat.) the greater. The major proposition of a Syllogism. See in
Syllogism.

Majorate (majoro) to make greater.

Majoration, a making greater. Bac.

Malachite (malachites) a stone of a drak green color.

Malacissation (malacissatio) a kneading or making soft* Bac.

Malacy (malachia) a calm, or still time on the Sea; also the inordinate
lusting of women with child.

Malaga or Malaca Sick, so called from a City of that name in Andalusia in
Spain, where that kind of wine is made.

Malady (Fr.) a sickness or disease.

Malanders, a disease in horses, from the Span. (malander) i. to go ill; for so
the disease makes them.

Maldisant (Fr.) an evil speaker, a backbiter.

Malediction (maledictio) evil-speaking, a curse, banning, imprecation,
execration.

Malefactor (Lat.) an evil-doer, an offender.

Malefice (maleficium) an evil deed, an ill act, a shrewd turn; hurt,
displeasure.

Maleficence (maleficentia) evil doing.

Maleficiate (malefacio) to do wrong, to offer abuse, to do evil. Bac.

Maletent, in the Statute called the Confirmation of the Liberties of, etc. An.
29. Ed. 1. ca. 7. is interpreted to be a Toll of forty shillings for every sack
of wool. Stow in his Annals p. 461. calls it a Maletot (from the Fr. maletoste
or Maletote) See also the Stat. de Tallagio non concedendo.

Malevolence (malevolentia) ill will, heart-burning, spite.

Malignity (malignitas) malice prepensed, ill will, grudge, despite, villainy.

Malleable (from. malleus) tractable, hammerable, which may be wrought or
beaten with the hammer.

Malleated (malleatus) wrought or beaten with the hammer or beetle.

Malkin, Maukin, or Scovel to make clean an oven (the Italians call it Scovola
di forno, i. the broom or besome of the oven) the Lat. is Peniculus, or
Penicillus, dim. a pene, i. a tail; because they were in times past, made of
the tails of beasts, as now they are of old clouts. Min.

Malmesy, a sort of wine so called from Arvisium, a promontory, in the Island
Chio, vulgarly called Marvisia, or Malvisia, whence comes the best of this kind.

Maltesian, an Inhabitant of the Island Malta, called in Scripture Melita.

Mamaluke, a light-horseman (in the Syrian and Arabian tongues) the Mamalukes
were an order of valiant horsemen in the last Empire of Egypt. Cot.

Mammeated (mammeatus) that has Paps or Teats.

Mammon, is a Syriac word, signifying riches, or the god of Riches. Hierom sup.
Matthew. cap. 17. The Mammon of iniquity, is expounded to be wealth unjustly
detained from them to whom it is due. Greg.

Mammonist (from mammon) may be taken for a worldling, or one that seeks after
riches.

Mamm^oda, a coin among the East Indians of equal value with our shilling.

Manation (manatio) a flowing, or running, a trickling down.

Manbote (Sax.) a pecuniary compensation for killing a man. Lambert in his
exposition of Saxon words verbo, Aestimatio. Of which read Roger Hoveden also
in his Annals, fol. 344.

Manche (Fr.) a sleeve; a term of Heraldry. Also any thing in form of a sleeve.

Mancipate (mancipo) to deliver possession, to give the right to another, to
sell for money.

Mancipation (mancipatio) a manner of selling before witnesses with sundry
ceremonies, etc. so called a manucaptione, from taking that which is sold into
ones hands or possession. See Emancipate.

Manciple (manceps) a Caterer, or one that in Colleges or Hospitals buys
victuals and common provision into the house.

Mancuse (mancusa) of the ancient pence (which weighed about three pennies of
our money) thirty (as Alfric Archbishop of Canterbury, in his Saxon Grammar,
notes) made a Mancus, which some think to be all one with a Mark; for that
Manca, or Mancusa is translated in ancient Books, by Marca; and Manca (as
appears by an old fragment) was quinta pars unciae. These Mancuse or Mancus
were reckoned both in gold and silver. For about the year of our Lord 680. In a
King of the West Saxons, as we read in Malmsbury, enforced the Kentish men to
redeem their peace at thirty thousand Manca's of gold. In the notes upon
Canutus Laws, I find this difference, that Mancusa was as much as a Mark of
silver, and Manca was a square piece of gold commonly valued at thirty pence.
Came. Rem. fo. 181.

Mandate (mandatum) a commandment, a message, commission, or any thing that one
is commanded to speak or do. In our Common Law it is a commandment judicial of
the King or his Justices to have any thing done for the dispatch of Justice,
whereof you shall see diversity in the table of the Register judicial. Verbo,
Mandatum.

Mandatary (mandatarius) he to whom a commandment or charge is given; or he
that comes to a Benefice by a Mandamus.

Mandible (mandibilis) eatable, or that may be eaten.

Mandible (from mandibula) the Jaw.

Mandilian or Mandilion (from the Fr. Mandil or Mandille) a loose Cassock, such
as Soldiers use to wear.

Mandrake or Mandrage (from the Gr. (...), i. a Den or Hole, because it uses
to grow about Dens or Caves) a strange plant bearing yellow round apples, the
root of it is great and white like a Radish root, and is divided into two or
more parts, growing sometimes like the legs of a man. This root, especially its
bark, is extremely cold and dry, even to the fourth degree. It is therefore
very dangerous to receive inwardly, for that the least quantity too much, will
quickly kill a man. Chyrurgeons use to steep this root in wine, and give it to
be drunk by such as they must cut, saw, or burn in any part; for its cold
operation causes sleep, and makes the body insensible for a time. See the
confutation of many false conceptions concerning this plant Mandrake, in Dr.
Br. Vul. Er. l. 2. ca. 6.

Mandrakes, lovely or amiable, so in the Hebrew; The Greek translates them
Apples of Madragoras or Mandrake Apples; they were such things as gave a smell,
Genesis 30.14. Cant. 7.13. Wilson.

Manducable (from Manduco) eatable, that may be chewed or eaten.

Manducation (manducatio) a chewing or eating.

Mandy Thursday. See in Day.

Mangonize (mangonizo) to polish, paint, or trim up a thing.

Mangonism, the craft of pampering, trimming or setting out saleable things.

Maniable (from manus) that may be managed by the hand, tractable. Bac.

Maniack (maniacus) mad, frantic, brainsick, wilde-headed.

Manichees, a sort of Heretics so called from one Manes a Persian the first
broacher of that Heresy. They held a fatal necessity of sinning, etc. with
other damnable Tenets. This Manes affirmed himself to be both Christ and the
Paraclet too, and sent out his twelve Disciples about the world, to spread
abroad his heretical Dogms, etc.

Manicies (manicae) hand-Fetters, or Gives wherewith Pris^ners are bound by the
hands; from manus, a hand.

Manifesto (Lat.) an open or public declaration, most commonly of some Prince
or Commonwealth, concerning public matters.

Maniple (manipulus) a gripe, a handful, a bundle; But more particularly, it is
a Fannel or Scarf-like ornament worn about the lest Wrist of of a sacrificing
Priest. Also a file of ten Soldiers under one Captain and Tent; so called
because their handstrokes in fighting went together; Or because they fought sub
eodem manipulo foeni (an handful of hay being used at that time instead of a
flag.) Ovid.

Pertica suspensos pendebat longa manipsos,
Vnde maniplaris nomina miles habet.
But I find in some Authors, that the ancient Roman Maniple consisted of 200
Soldiers. See Legion.

Manipular (manipularis) belonging to a band of men.

Manna (Gr.) man, or the dew of heaven; a delicate food, wherewith God fed the
children of Israel, it falling from heaven in manner of a dew, white, and
somewhat like Coriander seed; with which the Israelites lived forty years in
the Wilderness, till they came to the Borders of the Land of Canaan. At first
sending hereof the people were in such admiration that they said to each other,
manhu? i. quid est hoc? what is this? which seems to be the cause why it was
afterward called Manna. In Physic it is taken for a kind of dew, or grained
Manna, which, falling in hot Countries upon trees and herbs before break of
day, does there congeal, almost like crumbs of white bread, and is gathered and
choicely kept, as a gentle purger of Choler; it is sweet of taste; the best
comes from Calabria, where they gather it from the leaf of the Mulberry Tree.
Not. hist. 165. It is also taken for any sweet matter extracted out of any
thing.

Mansion (mansio) a tarrying, a baiting, an abiding. Also (as Bracton defines
it, lib. 5. cap. 28. number. 1.) it is a dwelling consisting of one or more houses
without any neighbor; And yet he grants forthwith that Mansio Mansioni possit
esse vicinata. I find it most commonly used for the Lords chief dwelling house
within his Fee, whether it have neighbors adjoining or not, otherwise called
the capital Message, or the chief Manor place. Mansio among the ancient
Romans was a place appointed for the lodging of the Prince or Soldiers in
their journey or march, furnished, with convenient entertainment by the
neighbors adjoining, etc.

Manslaughter (homicidium) is the unlawful killing a man without prepensed
malice; As when two, that formerly meant no harm to one another meet together,
and, upon some sudden occasion falling out, the one kills the other. West.
part. 2. Symb. titulo Inditements. Sect. 44. It differs from murder, because
it is not done with prepensed or foregoing malice; And from Chancemedley,
because it has a present intent to kill; and this is Felony, but admits Clergy
for the first time. Stawnf. pl. Cor. lib. 1. ca 9. and Britton. ca. 9. It is
confounded with murder in the Stat. 28. Ed. 3. ca. 11.

Mansuete (mansuetus) gentle, courteous, meek, mild, humble, tractable.

Mansuetude (mansuetudo) gentleness, meekness, tractableness, humility.

Manticulate (manticulor) to do a thing closely, as to pick a purse.

Manticore or Manticorn, (Ital. Manticora) a ravenous and mankind-Indian beast,
that has three ranks of very sharp teeth, a face like a man, and body like a
Lion. Plin. l. 8. ca. 21.

Mantile or Mantle (Lat. mantile, Br. Mantel) a kind of cloak which Soldiers
in times past used in Winter, a long hanging Cloak; it is taken for a long
robe, An. 24. H. 8. ca. 14. Now it is called a Leaguer-Cloak; and the Ladies
have appropriated the name to a kind of cloak which they wear. Also a term in
Herauldry, and was anciently a kind of Cloak or Mantle, encompassing the Coat
armor, but now is that flourish which proceeds from the Wreath, and Helm, and
descends externally on each side the Escotcheon.

Manual (manualis) that fills the hand, that one may fold, cast or carry in the
hand. Also used substantively; as

a Manual (manuale) a small portable volume, a book which may be carried in
ones hand. Manuel, in Law is a thing whereof persent profit may be made.
Stawnf. Praerog. fol. 54.

Manuary (manuarius) gotten by handy labor, or that fills the hand.

Manucaption (manucaptio) a taking by or with the hand.

Manuduction (manuductio) a leading or guiding by the hand.

Manumission (manumissio) a deliverance out of bondage, an enfranchisement, a
making free.

Manumit or Manumisse (manumitto) to enfranchize, to make a Slave or Bondsman
free, which was in old time thus. The Lord of the Slave holding him by the
head, arm, or other part, said before witness, I will that this man go free,
and in so saying, shoved him forward out of his hand.

Manutention (from manu tenere) a holding with the hand. Lo. Herb. H. 8.

Maran-atha (Syriac, i.e. adventus Dei, vel Deus venit) a curse mentioned 1
Cor. 16. Anathema Maranatha the third and highest degree of Excommunication.
The Jews called it Schammatha. See Dr Ham. Annot. fol. 600.

Maravedis, a little Spanish coin, whereof thirty four make but the Royal or
six pence sterling.

Marchasite or Marquesite (marchasita) a stone participating with the nature of
some metal, yet in so small quantity, that the metal cannot be melted from
it, but will vapor away in smoke, the stone turning to ashes; those Marchasites
are commonly in color like the metal mixed with them, whether it be Gold,
Silver, Brass, or any other. Some affirm a Marchasite to be any stone out of
which fire may be stricken.

Marcessible (marcessibilis) apt or easy to rot or putrify.

Marcgrave or Martgrave (Germ.) a County or Earl of the Borders, or Marches:
with us a Marquess.

Marches from the Germ. March, i. a border, or from the Fr. Marque, i. a Mark)
the borders, bounds or limits of any place, Region, or Country, as between us
and Wales, or between us and Scotland, An. 24. H 8. ca. 9.

Marcheta, Eugenius the third King of Scotland did wickedly ordain, that the
Lord or Master of the ground or land, should have the first nights lodging with
every married woman within the same; which Ordinance was afterward abrogated
by King Malcome the third, who ordained, that the Bridegroom should have the
sole use of his own Wife, and therefore should pay to the Lord, a piece of
money called Marca. Hect. Boethius, l. 3. ca. 12. Spotsw. Hist. fol. 29. Mr.
Skene says, that Mercheta mulieris is the raid of the woman, or the first
carnal copulation with her. page 93.

Marchioness, the wife of a Marquess.

Marcid (marcidus) withered, rotten, feeble, lither.

Marcidious (marcidiosus) very rotten, feeble, etc.

Marcionists, old condemned Heretics, so called of their first Master Marcion,
a Stoic Philosopher, who held a detastable opinion, that Christ was not the
Son of God.

Marcor (Lat.) rottenness, withering pining away.

Mare-maid. See Mer-maid.

Nightmare, a disease in the night, that troubles one so in his sleep, that he
can scarce breath. See Incubus.

Mareshal. See Marshal.

Margaratiferous (margaritifer) that brings forth, or has plenty of pearls or
Margarites, which are found in the shel-fish, especially in Oysters; the best
are brought out of India; yet they are also found in our English and Flemish
Seas, but not in such perfection.

Marginal Marginean (marginalis margineus) belonging to the brim or margin,
written in the margin.

Marine Maritan (marinus) belonging to, or near the Sea; also strange, as from
beyond Sea.

Marital (maritalis) belonging to marriage or Wedlock, on the Husbands part.

Maritime (maritimus) belonging to, or near the Sea; wavering and changeable.

Mark, is with us 13 s. 4 d. In Scotland but 13 d. ob. See Marcheta.

Marmoration (marmoratio) a building with marble.

Marmorean (marmoreus) of marble, or that is like it in color, hardness, etc.

Maronean wine, wine of such virtue and strength, that if twenty times so much
water be put to it, it will still keep his virtue. And is so called from
Maronea or Marogna a City of Ciconia where it is made. Rider.

Maronites (so called from one Maron, who is mentioned in the fifth Act of the
Constantinopolitan Council) a sort of Christians, only found in Mount Libanus
in Syria; they have a Patriarck, whose name is always Peter; they were a limb
of the Jacobites; but received the Roman Catholic Religion in the Papacy of
Clement. 8. who sent them a Catechism printed at Rome in the Arabian language.
Sands.

Marque (seems to a French word, signifying notam, vel signum, or else to come
from the Germ. March, i. limes, or from Marc, a Britan word (used not only by
the now Welsh, but also by the Armoricans) signifying as much as note or
character) signifies in the ancient Statutes of our Land, as much as Reprisals;
as A. 4. H. 5. c. 7. Marquis and Reprizals are used as Synonima; and letters of
Marque are found in the same signification in the same Chapter. See Law of
Marque

Marquetry, is a most curious work wrought in wood of diverse colors, and
diverse sorts, into the shape of knots, flowers and other devices, with that
excellency of cunning, as they seem all to be one piece, and rather the work of
Nature then Art; Chequer-work, Inlaid-word. Marquetrie, properly belongs to
Joyners, as Mosaique to Masons and Stone-cutters, though some Authors confound
them. See Mosaique.

Marquess or Marquis (narchio) by the opinion of H^tom. comes of* the Germ.
March, i. limes, signifying originally as much as custos limtis, or comes and
praefectus limtis, etc. These are with us, in honor and place next Dikes. See
Cassau. de consuet. Birg. p. 15. See Marcgrave.

Marquisate (Fr. Marquisa^) a Marquiship or Marqusdom, the Territories of a
Marquess.

Marrow (Fr marauld) a fellow, a Knave, or Rascal.

Mars, the Heathen god of War; taken for War or Battle it self. Also one of the
seven Planets. See Saturn.

Marshal (Fr. Marshall) with us there are diverse Officers of this name; but
one most noble of all the rest, who is called Lord or Earl Marshal of England,
of whom mention is made in diverse Statutes, as An. 1. H. 4. ca, 7. and 14. and
An. 13. R. 2. ca. 2. His Office consists especially in matters of War and Arms,
as well with us, as in other Countries, whereof you may read in Lupanus de
Magistratibus Franciae, lib. 1. ca. Marschallus, and Tilius lib. 2. ca. de
Conestabili, Mariscallo, etc. The next to this is the Marshal of the Kings
house, then the Marshal of the Justices in Air, Marshal of the Upper Bench
Prison in Southwark, Marshal of the Kings Hall, Marshal of the Exchequer, etc.
whereof see Cowel.

In every Regiment of Soldiers there is a Marshal, whose Office is to look to
Prisoners of War, and to put in execution all sentences or orders of the
Council of War upon offenders, etc.

In Francis the firsts time there were but two Lord Marshals of France, now
there are ten, who having their several Provinces assigned them by the King,
ride Circuits, are present at all general musters, to see how military
Discipline is observed in Garrisons, view the Fortifications and reparations of
Frontier Towns, the munition and victual of Arsenals and Storehouses, and
lastly, provide for the punishment and suppression of all vagrant and idle
Rogues; And as they (under the Constable) command all Dukes, Earls, Barons,
Captains and Gensdarms; so may they neither give battle, make Proclamation, nor
muster any men, without his commandment. Cotgr.

In the old Saxon it was Marscalc; Mate being the general name for a Horse,
male and female: and Scalc signified a kind of servant, as Scalco still does in
Italian: So that Marscalc (now Marshal) was with our Ancestors Curator equorum,
one that had the charge of horses; and in France a Farrier is still called
Marshall. Verst.

Martgrave. See Marcgrave.

Martial (martialis) born under the Planet Mars; warlike.

Martial Law, is that which depends on the voice of the King, or the Kings
Lieutenant, or of the General or his Officers in Wars. Smith de Repub. Angl. l.
2. c. 3. See Law of Arms.

Martichore, a beast found in the Indies, which has the face of a Man, and the
body of a Lion, which counterfeits the sound of Flutes to charm passengers, and
then entraps and kills them.

Martingale (Fr.) a Thong of leather, the one end whereof is fastened under the
chops of a horse, and the other to the fore-Girth betwixt his forelegs, to
make him rein well, and hinder him from casting up his head.

Martyrologe (martyrologium) a book that treats of the acts, names, and
sufferings of Martyrs.

Mascle (Fr. macle) a short Lozenge, having a square hole in the midst; a term
in Blazon.

Masculine (masculinus) of the male kind, manly.

Mass, from the Lat. missa, but whether missa be derived from the Hebrew, or
be a Latin word corrupted, is no small controversy; They that derive it from
the Hebrew, conceive it comes from (...) Missah, which signifies an Oblation or
Offering; They that account it a Latin word corrupted, conceive the Fathers
used it instead of missio, a sending aeway: For in ancient times when the Mass
or public Service was ended, and the Communicants addressed them selves to be
partakers of the holy Eucharist, it was a custom to send away the younger for,
such as were not yet fully instructed and catechized; hence missa was taken for
and signfied a Sacrifice, an Oblation or Offering.

The old Saxons called al holy days Mass days; because they were obliged to
hea^ Mass on those days. Christian Caveat in part. See Lammas.

Massicot (Fr.) Oaker made of Ceruse, or white lead.

Massilians. See Messalians

Mastication (masticatio) a^ eating or chewing.

Mastick (mastiche) a white and clear gum, of a sweet savor, and grows on the
Lentisk tree in the Island Chios. It Is temperate in heat, and of a dry binding
nature, wherefore it strengthens the stomach, stays vomiting, and stops any
issue of blood. Some use to rub their teeth with it, as well to whiten them, as
to fasten such as are loose.

Masticine (masticinus) of, or pertaining to, or of the color of Mastick.

Mastigophorer (mastigophorus) a fellow worthy to be whipped; also an Usher,
who with whips removed the people, where there was much press.

Mastruke (mastruca) a garment that men of Sardinia used; a Robe made of Wolves
or Deers skins, which the Nobles in old time were wont to wear in Winter.

Mateologie (mataeologia) vain enquiry, or overcurious search into high
matters and mysteries.

Mateotechnie (mataeotechnia) the vanity which is in science or craft, vain
knowledge.

Materia prima (Lat.) the first matter or subject of all substantial forms,
whereof all natural bodies consist.

Materiation (materiatio) the felling of timber for building, preparing of
timber wood for service in War. Dr. Br.

Maternal (maternus) of or belonging to a mother, on the mothers side, motherly.

Maternity (maternitas) motherhood, the being a mother.

Mathematical (mathematicus) of or pertaining to the Mathematics, or to a
Mathematician.

Mathematics (mathematica) Sciences or Arts taught by demonstration, and
comprehend four of the Liberal Sciences (viz.) Arithmetic (wherein Algaebra is
comprehended) Geometry, Music, Astronomy; wherein the Egyptians and Caldeans
first excelled.

Mathematician (mathematicus) one skilful in the Mathematics.

Mathurins, Friars so called, being of the order of the Holy Trinity, whose
principal institute is to redeem poor Christian Captives from the slavery of
the Turk; to which purpose they beg alms, and depute a person of their own to
go to Argier, etc. to carry the price of their redemption.

Matines (matutinum) one of the Canonical hours for prayer in the Roman
Catholic Church, which begins at three of the clock in the morning; morning
prayers.

Matricide (matricidium) the killing of ones mother; if from Matricida, then it
is a Matricide, or one that kills his own mother, as that cruel Tyrant and
monster of men Nero was.

Matrice (matrix) the place in the womb, where the child is conceived.

Matrices of Letters or Characters, are those Moulds or forms, in which the
Letters and Characters which Printers use are formed and fashioned by the
Letter-founder.

Matriculate (Ital. matriculare) to register names. It comes of matter, a
mother; For then are young Scholars in an University said to be Matriculated,
when they are sworn and registered into the Society of their Foster-mother of
Learning, the University.

Matrimonial (matrimonialis) of or belonging to matrimony, or Wedlock.

Maturated (maturatus) hastened, soon finished, made ripe. Dr. Br.

Maturative (maturativus) apt, or helping to ripen.

Maturity (maturitas) ripeness, fullness of age, fitness of time, perfection.

Matutinal (matutinalis) belonging to the morning, or morning prayer.

Maugre (Fr. maulgre, i. animo iniquo) in spite of ones heart or teeth,
against ones will; As the Wife, maugre the Husband, Littl. fol. 124. that is,
wether the Husband will or not.

Maund (Fr. mande) a Flasket, open Basket, or Pannier having handles; a
Handbasket.

Maundy Thursday (dies mandati) This was the Eve or day next before our
Saviors crucifixion; and usually called Holy Thursday. See more in Day.

Mausoleum (Lat.) a famous Sepulcher, built by Queen Artemesia in honor of her
Husband Mausolus King of Caria, and accounted one of the Worlds Wonders, it
being twenty five Cubits high, supported with thirty six curious Pillars, and
consisting of 411 foot in circuit, all of Marble, and of famous sculpture, of
which Martial, Aere nam vacuo pe^dentia Mausolaea
Laudibus immodicis Cares ad astra ferunt.


Hence any sumptuous Monument, Tomb, or Sepulcher, is called a Mausoleum.

Maxillary Maxillar (maxillaris) belonging to the jaw bone. Bac.

Maxim (maxima) a rule that may not be denied, a proposition, an Aphorism or
principle in any Art.

Maxims in Law are the foundations of it, and the conclusions of Reason, which
ought not at any time to be impeached or impugned: As for example, it is a
Maxim, that if a man have issue two Sons, by diverse women, and the one of them
purchase lands in Fee, and die without issue, the other brother shall never be
his Heir, etc. with diverse like.

Maximity (maximitas) exceeding greatness.

Mazar or Mazer (Belg. Maeser or Maser, i. a Maple, or the knob in the Maple) a
broad, flat, standing cup to drink in; so called because such cups are often
made of Maple, or of the knots of it: There is also a kind of small Cherries so
called.

Maze, an astonishment; sometimes a device, like a Labyrinth, made in some
Gardens in manner of a knot, with so many intricate turnings, wherein if one be
once entered, it is hard getting out.

M^ad (Belg. Mede, Sax. Meed.) See Hydromel and Bragget.

Meander (Maeander) a river in Phrygia, now called Madre or Palazzia, having
many turnings, etc. Hence any oblique turning or crooked winding is called
Meander; and Meandrous is used for crooked, or full of turnings.

Mea^, the Tenor in Song or Music; it is an inner part between the Treble and
Base, so called, because medium locum obtineat.

Mease, a measure of Herring: Also taken by some for a Message or House (
Kitch. fol. 239) from the Fr. maison. See Mese.

Measure of length three barley corns measured from end to end make an inch,
twelve inches a foot, three foot a yard, five yards and a half, a Rood, Pole,
or Perch; forty Roods in length and four in breadth make an Acre of land,
according to the Statute; forty Roods in length only make a Furlong, eight
Furlongs an English mile; which is 1760 yards, 5280 foot, 63360 inches, or
190080 barley corns.

A step is two foot and an half, the fadom seven foot, an English Ell three
foot, and nine inches; which measures differ from other Countries that have a
Geometrical measure; as four baley corns in thickness make a Finger or measure,
four Fingers a Hand, four of those Hands in breadth a Foot, five of those Feet
a Geometrical Pace, and 125 Paces a Furlong; eight Furlongs, or 1000 Paces,
five foot to a Pace, make an Italian mile; 3000 Paces make a league, 4000 a
common Dutch mile, and 5000 Paces make a German or great Dutch mile.

Measondue (Fr. maison de dieu) an Hospital or Religious house.

Mecaenas (Mecaenas) a Patron or Benefactor to learned men: so called of
Mecaenas a noble Roman, who being in great favor with Augustus the Emperor, was
a special friend to the Poets Virgil and Horace, and generally a supporter of
all learned men.

Mechanic (mechanicus) a Handicrafts man, a man of Occupation, a Tradesman.
The seven Mechanical Arts are, first, Agriculture, or Husbandry. 2. Clothing.
3. Navigation. 4. Hunting. 5. Architecture. 6. Medicine. And 7. Military
discipline.

Mechation (maechatio) fornication, whoredom, strumpeting.

Medalia Medal (Fr. medaille) an ancient and flat Jewel, or a piece of ancient
coin or plate, wherein the figure of some notable person, or some ingenious
device is cast or cut; examples of the first are common; of the later, we read,
that when some dislikes grew between the English and States of the United
Provinces, they, fearing it might tend to the hurt of both, caused to be
imprinted upon a Medalia, two pitchers floating on the water with this motto,
Si collidimur, frangimur. Came.

Medallion (Fr. medaillon) a little Medal, Ouch or Brouche.

Mede (Belg. or medea) a drink made of water and honey. See Bragget and
Hydromel.

Medea, a notable Sorceress, whom Poets feign to have had the power or skill to
renew youth, and make old men young, etc. and this was nothing else but that
from the knowledge of Simples, she had a Receipt to make white hair black, and
reduce old heads into the tincture of youth again.

Median (medius) the middle, half, mean; not deserving praise or dispraise.

Mediastine (mediastinum) a partition made in the body by certain thin skins,
which divide the whole breast, from the Throat to the Midriff into two hollow
bosoms. Cotg.

Mediation (mediatio) a deviding in the middle, an entreating or beseeching, an
intercession, an arbitrating a controversy.

Medicable (medicabilis) that can heal or be healed, curable.

Medical month, consists of twenty six days, and twenty two hours, etc. See
Month.

Medicament (medicamentum) a Medicine, Drug, Physic, or certain Salve.

Medicaster, a pedling Physician, a smatterer in Physic.

Medicinable (medicinabilis) that may be cured or healed.

Medicine (medicina) Physic; which (according to Plato) is of five kinds. 1.
Pharmaceutic, cures diseases by application of medicaments. 2. Chirurgic, by
incision or cauterizing. 3. Diaetetic, by Diet. 4. Nosognomonick discerns
diseases. 5. Boethetic removes them.

Medick (medicus) a Physician.

Mediety (medietas) the middle, the half.

Medimnum, a certain measure containing six bushels.

Mediocrity (mediocritas) a mean, competency, indifferency, temper, moderation.

Medisance (Fr. mesdisance) reproach, obloquy, detraction.

Meditative (meditativus) apt to meditate, or cast in the mind.

Mediterranean (mediterraneus) in the middle of the Land; far from the Sea.

Mediterranean Sea (so called because it has its course in the midst of the
earth) is that which stretches it self from West to East, dividing Europe,
Asia, and Africa.

Medullar (medullaris) pertaining to the marrow.

Meducean (pertaining to Medusa) a woman of great beauty, whose locks (of gold
color) Minerva turned into snakes, because she lay with Neptune in Minerva's
Temple, etc.

Mien (Fr. mine) the countenance, look, gesture, or posture of the face; also
the feature, outward face or show.

Megacosine (Gr.) the great world.

Megaera, one of the Furies. See Furies.

Megalesian or Megalensian Plays (megalesia) were Plays or Games at Rome, in
honor of Cybele the Goddess.

Megalopsychie (megalopsychia) magnanimity.

Meganologie (Gr.) a speaking or discourse of magnitude or greatness.

Megarick, a Sect of Philosophers instituted by Euclid, who was born at Megara,
a Town near the Isthmus, and thence took name.

Megrune or Migrame (Hemicrania) a pain coming by fits in the temples of the
Head, from (...), i. semi, half, and (...), i. the skul, or brainpan. It is a
disease that pains only the one half of the brain at once, and therefore
called Megrime, or Hemicrain.

Melancholy (melancholia) black choler caused by adustion of the blood; also
sadness, pensiveness, solitariness. Melancholy is by Physicians reckoned for
one of the four humors of man's body, and resembles the Earth, as Choler does
the fire; Blood the air; Phlegm the water. It is said to be the grossest of all
four, which, if it abound too much, causes heaviness and sadness of mind.

Melampod (melampodium) the herb called Hellebore.

Melchior, The name of one of the three Kings of Gullein. See Balthazar.

Melchiorists, a sort of Heretics, so called from one Melchior, their first
founder.

Melchites, a Sect in Syria so called, who are subject to the Patriark of
Antioch, and are of the same Tenets with the Grecians, except only that they
celebrate divine service, as solemnly on the Saturday as Sunday; They take
their denomination from Melchi, which in the Syriac signifies a King, because
in matters of Religion, the people followed the Emperors Injunctions, and were
of the Kings Religion, as the saying is. Heil.

Meliorate (melioro) to wax better then before.

Melioration (melioratio) an improvement, a bettering, a making or growing
better.

Meliority (melioritas) betterness, improvement.

Melitism (melitismus) a drink made of honey and wine.

Mellation (mellatio) the time of taking honey out of the Hives.

Mellean Melleous (melleus) of or like honey, sweet, yellow.

Melliferous (mellifer) that brings or bears honey.

Mellificate (mellifico) to make honey.

Mellifluent Mellifluous (mellifluus) sweet as honey, that out of which honey
flows: Also eloquent of speech.

Melliloquent (melliloquus) that speaks sweetly.

Melliturgie (Fr.) the making of honey, Bees-work.

Mellona or Mellonia, the Goddess of honey.

Melody (melodia) harmony, sweet singing, a musical or sweet air.

Melpomene (Gr. i. cantans) one of the Muses, who first made Tragedies.

Membrane (membrana) the upmost thin skin in any part of the body, whereof
there are many and of several appellations. As the Pleuretique membrane, which
is large and twofold, through whose doubles pass all the Sinews, Veins, and
Arteries, which are between the ribs; the inside whereof (as also the breast or
bulk) it wholly covers. Also a skin of parchment, or the pill or pilling
between the bark and tree.

Membranatick (membranaticus) of or pertaining to a membrane.

Membrature (membratura) a setting or ordering of members or parts.

Memorandum (Lat.) a common word; signifying a note or token of what we would
have remembered; the word importing as much.

Memorial (memoriale) that which puts one in mind of, a Remembrancer, a Record,
or book of remembrance.

Memorious (memoriosus) that has a good memory.

Memphians Memphists Egyptians so called from the City Memphis in Egypt.

Mendaciloquent (mendaciloquus) that tells lies or untruths, false speaking.

Mendicant (from mendico) a Beggar, also begging.

Mendicity (mendicitas) beggary, poverty, the state of a beggar.

Menial servant (from moe^ia, walls) a servant that lives within the walls of
his Masters dwelling house, a domestic servant. Perhaps from the old English
word Men^, which signifies family, and so it is one of of the family.

Menings (meninx) two thin skins that compass or enwrap the brain, the one
called dura matter, the stronger of the two, and next the scul; the other pia
matter, which is within the first, being more tender and fine, and close
wrapping the brain it self; if either of these skins be wonded it causes
speedy death.

Menologe (menologium) properly a speaking of months: The Greek Menologe (a
book so called) is their Martyrologe, or a Collection of the Saints days of
every month in their Church.

Mensal (mensalis) of or belonging to a Table.

Mension (mensio) a measuring.

Menstrual (menstrualis) belonging to, or during a month.

Menstruosity (menstruositas) the monthly flux of women, an abundance thereof.

Menstruant Menstruous (menstruosus) that abounds with such monthly flowers, or
which belongs thereto.

Mensurate (mensuro) to mete or measure.

Mental (from men's) that which is only thought in the mind. Mental Prayer. See
Vocal.

Mentition (mentitio) a lying, forging or telling untruths.

Mephitick (mephiticus) stinking, dampish, as the stink, or ill savor of the
earth.

Meracity (meracitas) clearness, or pureness, without mixture.

Mercable (mercabilis) that may be bought.

Mercative (mercativus) belonging to Chapmanry.

Mercature (mercatura) the Trade of Merchandise.

Mercedary (mercedarius) is used both for him that gives wages for labor, or
for him that receives it.

Merchenlage, was one of the three sorts of Laws out of which the Conqueror
framed ours, mingled with those of Normandy. Came. Brit. p. 94. who also p. 103,
shows, that in An. 1016. this land was divided into three parts, whereof the
West Saxons had one, governing it by the Laws called West Saxon Laws, or
West-Saxonlaeg, and that contained these nine Shires, Kent, Southsex, Southrey,
Barkshire, Hampshire, Wiltshire, Sommerset, Dorset, and Devonshire.

The second by the Danes, which was governed by the Law called Danelaeg, and
that contained these fifteen Shires, Tork, Darby, Nottingham, Leicester,
Lincoln, Northampton, Bedford, Bucks, Hartford, Essex, Middlesex, Northfolk,
Southfolk, Cambridge, and Huntington.

The third was possessed and governed by the Mercians, whose Law was called
Merchanlaeg, which were these eight, Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, Warwick,
Oxford, Chester, Salop, and Stafford.

Mercury (mercurius) the Son of Jupiter and Maia; he was the messenger of the
gods, the god of Eloquence, Merchandise, Chivalry, and Thievery; also author of
the Harp, and guider of the way; he was said to have wings on his arms and
feet. It is commonly used for a swift messenger, or for a book of news, because
such books are (as it were) the messengers of the news.

Mercury with the Alchymists is Quicksilver. Also one of the seven Planets. See
Saturn.

Mercury-women. See Hawkers.

Mercurial (mercurialis) of Mercury, born under the Planet Mercury; hence
humorous or fantastical; Also prating, talkative; subtle or decitful.

Mercurialize, to be humorous or fantastical, to be light-footed; to prattle or
babble; Also to be eloquent, as Mercury was.

Merdiferous (merdifer) that farmeth dung, a Gold-finder.

Mere (Fr. mer, Lat. mare) the Sea; But in a restrained sense, it signifies a
standing water that cannot be drawn dry; therein differing from a Pond. Of
these there are several in Shropshire, of above a mile in compass, and are the
same which in Ireland they call Leaughs.

Meretricious (meretricius) whorish, pertaining to whoredom.

Meridian (circulus meridianus) is an immovable, and one of the greater circles
passing through the Poles of the world; it is called the Meridian of Merides,
noontide, because when the Sun, rising from the East, touches this Line with
the center of his body, then it is noon to those over whose Zenith that circle
passes, and midnight to their Antipodes. The number of Meridians, are 180
(allowing two to every degree in the Equinoctial) which all intersect in either
Pole, and are the utmost bounds of longitude. Peacham.

Meridian Meridional (meridianus) of, or belonging to midday, or to the South.

Meritot, a sport used by children by swinging themselves in Bel-ropes, or such
like till they be giddy; In Latin it is called Oscillum, and is thus described
by an old Writer, Oscillum est genus ludi, scilicet cum funis dependitur de
trabe, in quo pueri and puellae sedentes impelluntur huc and illuc. Chauc.

Mermaid (from the Fr. Mer, the Sea) or Maremaid (from mare, the Sea) Seamaid,
or Siren, whereof the Poets had three, Parthenope, Leucosia and Ligaea; the
first used her voice, the second a Citern, the third a Pipe; and so are said to
entice Mariners and Seamen to them, by the sweetness of their music, and then
to destroy them. The upper part of their bodies, was like a beautiful Virgin,
the nether was fishy. By these Sirens, pleasures are emblematically
understood, from which unless a man abstain, or at least use moderately, he
shall be devoured in their waves. See Neriad and Sirens.

Mersion (mersio) a drowning or overwhelming.

Mese (from the Gr. (...), i. medium) a Mese of Herrings is Five hundred, or
the half of a thousand, used in the north of England. Also the middle string,
or mean of a musical instrument.

Mesentery (mesenterium) the middle of the bowels and entrals, a certain thick
and fat skin; or the double skin that fastens the bowels to the back, and each
to other, and also wraps and encloses a number of veins (called Meseraick or
Mesenterick Veins) being branches of the great carrying vein, by which both the
guts are nourished, and the juice of the meat concocted, is conveyed to the
Liver to be made blood.

Mesenterick Arteries or Veins. See in Artery and Vein.

Mesn (medius) seems to come from the Fr. maisne. i. minor natu, younger by
birth. It signifies in our Common Law, him that is Lord of a Manor, and
thereby has Tenants holding of him, yet holding himself of a superior Lord.

Mesnagerie (Fr.) husbandry, Huswisry, and the use or practice thereof.

Mesnalty, (medietas) comes of Mesn, and signifies nothing but the right of the
Mesn; As the Mesnalty is extinct. Old not. br. fo. 44. if the Mesnalty descend.
Kitch. fol. 147.

Messalians or Massilians (Messalini) a sort of Heretics, who (among other
gross absurdities) held the B Sacrament of the Eucharist and Baptism did
neither good nor harm to the Receivers. And that Prayer alone was sufficient to
salvation, etc. which Heresy was impugned by St. Augustine and Epiphanius.

Messiah (Hebr. Mashiahh) signifies as much as Christ in Gr. i. Anointed. Our
Savior is often so called; because he was anointed with the oil of gladness
for those that believe in him. St. Augustine says, Messiah signifies in the
Punick Language, as much as Anointed.

Messile or Missil (from misseo, to mingle) a kind of bearing, so called in
Blazon, because of the intermixture of one color with another.

Messor (Lat.) a Reaper or Mower.

Messorious (messorius) belonging to reaping.

Mestier (Fr.) a Trade, Occupation or Mystery; also need or necessity.

Mestifical (moestificus) that makes heavy or sad.

Met^, is a Greek Preposition, which being set before several Cases, has
several significations. Scapula.

Metacism (metacismus) a fault in pronouncing.

Metachronism (Gr.) an error in the connection of things or times, by reckoning
or accounting short or beyond the truth. Greg.

Metaleptick (metalepticus) that has the power of participating, or pertains
to the figure Metalepsis; whereby a word is put from his proper or common
signification.

Metalliferous (metallifer) that brings forth metals.

Metalline or Metallic (metallicus) pertaining to metals.

Metamorphosis (Gr.) a transformation, a changing of one likeness into another,
or of one shape and figure into another. Hence

To Metamorphize, to transform, or change shape.

Metaphor ( metaphora, i. translatio) is the friendly and neighborly borrowing
one word to express another, with more light and better note; or when a word is
changed from his own signification into some other near unto it; as laetas
segetes, luxuriantia prata, etc. Swords hungry of blood; Heads disinherited of
their natural Seigniories, etc. This, of all other figures, is the most used
and useful.

Metaphorical (metaphoricus) spoken by Metaphor.

Metaphysics ( metaphysica, a (...), post vel trans, and (...): quasi
trans-physica, quod rerum physicarum cognitionem transcendunt) a Science which
lifting it self above the changeable nature of things, considers of such as
subsist in their own essence, not subject to any alteration, dealing only with
Universals, abstracting from Individuals; School Divinity is the highest part
of it, consisting chiefly in contemplative knowledge of God, Angels, souls of
men, etc. Physic (says my Lord Bacon) is that which enquires of the efficient
cause, and of the matter; Metaphysick, that which enquires of the form and end.
Advanc. of Learn. fol. 143.

Metaplasm ( metaplasmus, i. transformatio) a figure in Rhetorique, when by
reason of the verse, etc, some thing is necessarily changed.

Metathesis (Gr. i. transpositio) when one letter is put for another.

Metempsychosis (Gr.) a passing of the soul from one body to another;
Pythagoras his error. Hence

Metempsychosed, that so passes, or is passed.

Me^a^or (Lat.) a planter or setter in order, a mesaurer out of the place for a
Camp to pitch in, a measurer of Land.

Meteor (Gr. (...), i. sublimis) an apparition, or any imperfect mixed substance
engendered on high, in the air; as Rain, Snow, Thunder, Hail, Lightning,
Blazing-Stars, Clouds and Wind; all which are made of vapors or exhalations
drawn up from the Earth and Sea, by the attractive virtues of the Sun. Vide
Aristot. Meteorolog.

Meteorology (Gr.) a discoursing of Meteors or sublime things.

Meteorologist (meteorologus) one that studies or speaks of high matters, as of
Meteors, Stars, and other celestial things.

Metheglin (Br. Meddiglin) a kind of drink in Wales made of Wort, Herbs, Spice,
and honey sodden together.

Methodist, one that puts things into a method or ready way, or one that treats
or writes of methods, a good disposer of things into their proper places: The
Galenists are usually so called, Bac.

Methodical (methodicus) pertaining to a method, or a ready way to teach or do
any thing.

Methridate. See Mithridate.

Methuselah (Hebr.) the name of the oldest man before the flood, who lived 969
years. Hence it is used proverbially, to live the years of Methuselah, for a very
old age.

Meticulosity (meticulositas) fearfulness, timerousness.

Meticulous (meticulosus) fearful, timorous.

Metient (metiens) measuring, esteeming.

Metonymie (Gr. transnominatio) a putting one name for another; a figure, when
the cause is put for the effect, the subject for the adjunct, or contrarily.

Metonymical (metonymicus) pertaining to that figure.

Metopes (metopae) a term in Architecture, and signifies the distance or space
between Dentieles and Triglyphes, which is either left plain, or garnished with
Lances, Bones, Bullheads, Binding-bands and Labels. Vitruvius.

Metopomancie (Gr.) a divination by the face, or forehead.

Metoposcopy (Gr.) the Art of telling men's natures and inclinations by looking
on their faces.

Metrical (metricus) pertaining to a meeter or verse.

Metropolis (Gr.) the chief, head, or Mother City or Town.

Metropolitan (metropolitanus) an Archbishop, so called because his Sea is in
the Mother City of the Province. Of these we had two in England, viz. the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and York. The style of the first was (by the Popes
decision) Metropolitanus and Primas totius Angliae; of the later,
Metropolitanus and Primas Angliae. F^llers Church hist. lib. 3. p. 39.

Miasm (Gr.) a defiling or pollution; a flagitious act, a sin. Dr. Charl.

To Miche (from the Fr. Muser, i. otiari, cessare) secretly to hide or absent
ones self as Truants do from School.

Mickle or Miccle (Sax. Micel, Scot. Meikil, Hebr. Michlol, Gr. (...)) much.

Microcosmus (Gr.) properly signifies a little world. This word is sometimes
applied to man, who is therefore called a Microcosmus, or little world, as
being a Compendium of all other creatures, his body being compared to the baser
part of the world, and his soul to the blessed Angels.

Microcosmical, pertaining to a little world or to man.

Micrologie (micrologia) curiosity about things of no value; a speaking or
treating of potty affairs.

Midas, a rich King of Phrygia, who desired of Bacchus that whatever he touched
might be turned into gold, etc. Hence Midas is used proverbially for a rich,
covetous man.

M^d^iff (diaphragma) a sinewy skin passing over thwart in man's body, which
divides the Heart and Lungs from the Stomach, Guts and Liver, lest the vital
parts should be offended with any ill vapor coming from them. See Diaphragm.

Migrame. See Megrime.

Migration (migratio) a flitting or removing by travel.

Mile (milliare) is with us a quantity of 1760 yards, otherwise described to
contain eight Furlongs, and every Furlong forty Lugs or Poles, and every Lug or
Pole to contain sixteen foot and a half. An. 35. Eliz. 6. See League and
Furlong.

Militant (militans) going to war, fighting. Church Militant, is the Church
here on earth, subject to trials, combats and temptations.

Militia (Lat.) Warfare, or all implements of war.

Millenarians, a sort of Heretics. See Chiliasts.

Mimical (mimicus) belonging to wanton tricks, scoffing, apish.

Mimick, a wanton Jester, a counterfeit fool, that imitates the gests and
countenances of others; a fool in a Play; also certain Poems or Plays more
lascivious then Comedies.

Mimographer (mimographus) a writer of wanton matters.

Minacity (minacitas) threatening by words or signs, menacing.

Minature (from minator, he that treatneth) threatening.

Mine. See Mien.

Mineral (minera) any thing that grows in Mines, and contains metal.

Mineralist, one that is well skilled in Minerals.

Minerva, the Goddess of Wisdom, and of all the Arts; the President of Learning.

Minerval (Lat.) a reward given to Masters for teaching; and properly a Banquet
or Supper before a vacation.

Miniature (from minium, i. read lead) the art of drawing Pictures in little;
being commonly done with red lead.

Minime (Fr.) a slow time in Music.

Minims, religious persons. See Bonhomes.

Miniographer (miniographus) he that paints or writes with Vermillion, or any
red color.

Minion (Fr. Mignon) a Darling, the best beloved, a Favorite; also a piece of
Ordnance so called.

Minious (minius) red, of the color of Vermillion.

Ministry (ministerium) service, labor, the charge of a work, commonly taken
for that of the Church.

Miniver or Meniver, a fine white Fur made of the bellies of Squirrils: some
say it is the skin of a little white Vermin, breeding in Muscovia.

Minnyng days (from the Sax. Gemynde, i. the mind, q. Mynding days) Bid hist.
lib. 4. ca 30. Commemorationis dies; days which our Ancestors called their
Months mind, their Years mind, and the like, being the days whereon their
Souls (after their deaths) were had in special remembrance, and some Office or
Obsequies said for them; as Obits, Dirges, etc. This word is still retained in
Lancashire; but elsewhere more commonly called Anniversary days.

Minor (Lat.) the lesser, younger or smaller. The minor or assumption of a
Syllogism. See Syllogism.

Minoration (minoratio) a making less or diminishing.

Minorative (minorativus) that which diminishes, or is apt to make less.

Minorites. See Bonhomes.

Minority (minoritas) nonage, underage.

Minors. See Friar.

Minos, a King of Creet, who for his great justice is feigned to have been made
a Judge in hell, etc. Hence, as just as Minos, proverbially.

Minotaur (Minotaurus) a Poetical monster, half like a Man, half like a Bull,
was kept in the Labyrinth of Candy, and fed with man's flesh, where at last he
was slain by Thesus, through the help of Ariadne. This Fable was built upon
this foundation; that one Taurus, a Servant of Minos got his Mistress Pasiphae
with child, from whence the Infant was named Minotaurus.

Minster (Sax.) a Monastery; Hence the Minster-Church, so called, because it
formerly belonged to some Monastery.

Minute ( minutus adj.) diminished, small or little, mean, or simple.

Minution (minutio) a diminishing or making less.

Mirabilary (from mirum) may be taken for a book of wonders; as vocabulary, a
book of words. Bac.

Miradical (miradicus) that speaks strange things.

Mirifical (mirificus) mavelous, wonderfully done, strangely wrought.

Mirmillon (mirmillo, onis) a challenger at fighting with swords; one sort of
Gladiatores, called also Galli, upon whose crests was portraited a fish.
Perottus.

Mis, is a Particle in composition, which for the most part signifies to err,
or do ill: As to mis-interpret, to err in interpreting.

Misanthropie (misanthropia) an hating of men.

Misanthropist (misanthropos) he that hates the company of men.

Miscellanies (miscellanea) a hotch pot of sundry collections, without any form
or method; a mixture of things together, without order.

Miscellaneous (miscellaneus) mixed together without order.

Miscreant (q. mis-croyant) a mis-beleever, an Infidel.

Miser^ick Vein. See Vein.

Miserer, i. have mercy; It is the name and beginning of one of the Penitential
Psalms; and is commonly that Psalm, which the Judge gives to such guilty
persons as have the benefit of the Clergy allowed by the Law, and is caled the
Psalm of Mercy.

There is also a disease called Miserere mei, which is a voiding of the
Excrements upwards, coming of the obstruction of the small guts, and is very
painful, the patient imagining that his guts are pulled out and broken.

Misi^enn^g, is a changing of speech in Court; Saxon in the description of
England, cap. 11. But Stow defines it thus, Est quietum esse de amerciamento
pro querela, coram quibuscunque, in transumptione prolata. Survey fol. 919.

Misogamie (misogamia) hating of marriage.

Misogynie (misogynia) the hate or contempt of women.

Misogyuist (Gr.) a hater of women. Fuller.

Misprision (from the Fr. Mespris, i. contempt, despising) signifies in our
Law, negligence or oversight. As for example Misprision of Treason or Felony,
is a neglect or light account showed of Treason or Felony committed, by not
revealing it, when we know it to be committed. Stawnf. Pl. Cor. lib. 1. ca. 19.
Misprision of Treason incurs imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, loss of
goods and profits of lands during life. Misprision of Felony, seems only
finable by the Justices, before whom the party is attainted. Misprision
signifies also a mistaking. 14. Ed. 3. Stat. 1. c. 6.

Missal (missale) the Massbook.

Misseiden Messeito, or Me cidine, (from the Belg. Mistei) a plant having
slender branches and green thick leaves, and never grows upon the ground, but
upon other trees; the best is that which grows on the Oak; its leaves and fruit
are good to soften and ripen any cold hard swellings. Of the berry of this
vegetable, Birdlime is made. But that the Thrush eating these berries, and not
able to digest them, and so from her inconverted muting this plant should arise
(as the Ancients afirmed) is doubted by Dr. Brown, fo. 98. From this conceit
(that the Thrush did cack Misselto, which made Birdlime the bane of the bird)
arose that old proverb,

Turdus sibi malum cacat. Appliable to such as are authors of their own
misfortune.

Missil (missile) a dart, stone, arrow, or other thing thrown or shot; a term
of Heraldry.

Missionatics, persons sent; commonly spoken of Priests, sent to unbelieving
Countries to convert the people to Christian Faith. Also a particular institute
in France, called the Fathers of the Mission; who go by pairs, in imitation of
the Apostles, preach and catechize, and perform other pastoral Offices, in
assistance of the Clergy, and with obedience to the Bishop.

Mission (missio) a sending away, license or leave to depart.

Mission (in the Roman Catholic sense) is a giving Orders, Jurisdiction and
power to preach that Doctrine, which is taught by the Catholic Church, and to
administer the Sacraments.

Missive (missus) a cast or hurl, a sending, or that which witnesses ones
being sent; It is also used adjectively.

Mithridate or Methridate (mithridatum) a strong Treacle or preservative
against poison, devised at first by the Pontian King Mithridates, from whom it
took name.

Mitifle (mitifico) to pacify, or make quiet.

Mitral (from mitra) pertaining to a Mitre.

Mi^tim^s (i. we send) is a warrant made to send an offender to prison. Also a
precept sent by the King out of his Bench, to those that have the custody of
Fines levied, that they send them by a day assigned by his Bench. West. par. 2.
Symb. tit. Fines sect. 138. F. and 154. B. See also the Tables of the Regist.
Orig.

Mixolidian, lamentable, and pitiful, meet for Tragedies. Plutarch.

Mize, is a certain Tribute or Fine of 3000 Marks, which the Inhabitants of the
County Palatine of Chester paid at the change of every owner of the said
Earldom, for the enjoying of their Liberties. Vale Royal fo. 15.

Mizmor (Span. mazmorra) a Dungeon.

Mnemosyne (Gr. i. memoria) the Mother of the Muses.

Mobb^, a certain drink, used among the English in the Barbado's and is made of
Potato roots.

Mobility (mobilitas) moveableness, changeableness, inconstancy.

Mob^e^r, a School term, and signifies the manner or qualification of a thing
in abstracto.

Modder (from the Belg. Modde, i. puella,) a Wench or young Girl.

Moderator (Lat.) a discreet Governor or Ruler; he that keeps both parties from
running into extremes.

Modiation (modiatio) a measuring by the Bushel; Also a measuring of liquid
things.

Modicum (Lat.) a little thing, a small pittance.

Modify (modifico) to measure, moderate, qualify or limit.

Modifiable, qualifiable.

Modification (modificatio) a qualification, measuring, or limitation.

Modulation (modulatio) a pleasant tuning, a singing or playing by number or
measure.

Moguntine, belonging to Moguntia or Mentz a City in Germany, where Printing
was first invented by John Gutenburg. An. 1440.

Mohatra (Span.) a taking up money upon usury.

Moiles (mullei) a kind of shoes with a high soal, used in ancient times by
Kings and great persons. Moile is also used by Chaucer, for a dish made of
Marrow and grated bread.

Moiety (Fr. moitie) the half of any thing.

Molar teeth (dentes molares) the back teeth, cheek teeth, or grinders, which
are five of each side the mouth, both above and beneath.

Molendarious or Molendinarious (molendarius) of or pertaining to a Mill.

Moliminous (from molimen, inis) that has force, or uses endeavor to do any
thing; difficult.

Molinists, followers of Molina, a learned Jesuit of Spain, who read Divinity
at Conimbra, and especially maintained, that God did not pre-move the Will in
free acts, and are the great opposers of the Jansenists.

Molition (molitio) an endeavor, practice, attempt, or undertaking.

Mollificative (mollificativus) that mollifies or makes soft, tender or supple.

Mollitude (mollitudo) softness, niceness, tenderness, effeminateness,
wantonness.

Moloch or Molech (Heb.) a King or Prince. It was the name of an Idol, in the
Valley of Gehinnom or Tophet, to which the Israelites abominably offered their
children in sacrifice of fire. This Idol was represented by a man-like brazen
body, bearing the head of a Calf. See more in Sir Wall. Ral. l. 2. fol. 294. and
in Moses and Aaron, p 143.

Molochite (molochites) a precious stone, having a thick greenishness in
color, like Mallows.

Moly, a kind of herb, whose root to dig up, the Ancients supposed to be
hazardous to the life of the digger; Hence that of Homer, (...)
(...),
The Gods it Moly call, whose root to dig away
Is dangerous to man, but Gods they all things may.


Momus, the carping god, or god of reprehension; And is taken for any one that
backbites others. Hence the proverb, Momo satisfacere; to content one whom no
man can please.

Monas (Gr.) the number one, unity.

Monial or Monachal (monachalis) belonging to a Monk, or one that lives alone,
solitary.

Monachism, the state or condition of a Monk, or of a lonely person.

Monarchy (Monarchia) is where a Prince rules alone without a Peer; or it is
the government of one man over many.

Monasterial (monasterialis) belonging to a Monastery or Monk.

Mond, or Ball of gold, is one of the Ensigns belonging to an Emperor, because
he challenges the title of Majesty over the whole world.

Monks (from the Greek monos, because they live alone or solitary) a sort of
religious people, whereof there are diverse kinds, as those of St. Benedict, St.
Bazil, St. Hierome, etc.

Months (Sax. monaths) however taken are not exactly divisible into Septuaries
or weeks, which fully contain seven days, whereof four times make completely
twenty eight; For besides the usual or Calendary Month, there are but four
considerable, that is the Month of Peragration or Apparition, of Consecution,
and the Medical or Decreto^ial month; whereof some come short, others exceed
this account. A Month of Peragration, is the time of the Moons revolution from
any part of the Zodiac, unto the same again, and this contains but twenty
seven days, and about eight hours. The Month of Consecution or (as some term
it) of Progression, is the space between one conjunction of the Moon with the
Sun, unto another; and this contains twenty nine days and a half. A Month of
Apparition is the space wherein the Moon appears (deducting three days, wherein
it commonly disappears; and being in combustion with the Sun, is presumed of
less activity) and this contains but twenty six days, and twelve hours. The
Medical Month, not much exceeds this, consisting of twenty six days, and
twenty two hours, etc. See more in Dr. Br. Vul. Err. fo. 212.

Monger or Manger (Sax.) was our ancient name for a Merchant; it is now only
used as an addition to diverse Merchantable Trades, as Iron-monger, Fish-monger,
Wood-monger, and the like.

Monition (monitio) a warning or admonition.

Montior (Lat.) an admonisher, warner, or Councellor.

Monos (Gr.) alone. Hence

Monochord (Gr.) that has but one string.

Monocular Monosculous (from monos and oculus) that has but one eye, one eyed.

Monodie (monodia) a lamentable or funeral song, where one sings alone.

Monodical, pertaining to such a song.

Monogamie (monogamia) a marrying of one only wife all the life time.

Monogdoon (Gr.) an eighth, or one out of eight. Fuller.

Monogram (Gr.) a letter that stands alone; a picture drawn with one line, a
sentence in one line, or an Epigram in one verse. As Pauper videri Cinna vult,
and est pauper.

Mart.

Monologie (monologia) singing always one tune, speaking still of one matter; a
long tale of one thing.

Monomachie (monomachia) a combat or fighting of two hand to hand.

Monophagie (monophagia) a meal made of, or a living always with one kind of
meat.

Monopoly (monopolium) is when a man ingrosses or gets Commodities into his
hands, in such fashion that none can sell them, or gain by them but himself.

Monopolist (monopola) he that does so ingross Commodities, or he that has the
grant of a Monopoly.

Monops (Gr.) a kind of beast in Peonia (by some called a Bonasus) as big as a
Bull, being narrowly pursued, it voideth a kind of sharp Ordure, deadly to such
as it lights upon.

Monoptick (monopticus) that sees only with one eye.

Monoptote (monoptotum) a word having but one Case.

Monostick (monostichon) which consists of one only verse.

Monasyllable (monosyllabus) that has but one syllable.

Monothelites (monothelitae) certain Heretics that lived in the year of Christ
640, and were within five years after condemned by a Council; They held there
was but one will in Christ, etc.

Monstrable (monstrabilis) that may be shown or declared.

Monstrosity (monstrositas) which is done against the course of nature,
monstrousness.

Montanists, a sort of Heretics, so called from Montanus their first Author,
they held the Holy Ghost was not given to the Apostles, but only to them, etc.

Montanous (montanus) belonging to the Mountains.

Monteflasce, a kind of delicious wine, so called from Montefiascone, a City in
Italy where it is made.

Montera (Span.) a hunters or Seaman Cap, which was (not long since) much in
request with us,

Monticulous (monticulosus) full of hills or mountains.

Montivagant (montivagus) that wandreth on the mountains.

To Moor or More a ship (from moror, to stay) is to lay out her Anchors, as is
most fit for the ship to ride by in that place where she is, and of this there
are several ways among Seamen; but a ship cannot properly be said to be Moored,
with less then two Anchors a ground.

Moot, a term used in the Inns of Court, and signifies the handling or arguing
a Case for exercise; As in the Universities there are Disputations, Problems,
Sophisms, and such like Acts; It seems to be derived from the French word (Mot)
i. verbum. Quasi, verba facere, aut Sermonem de aliqua re habere.

Mootmen, are those Students that argue Readers cases in houses of Chancery
both in Terms and grand Vacations; Of Mootmen after some years study are chosen
Outward Baristers; of which degree after they have been Twelve years, they are
commonly chosen Benchers, or Ancients, of which one of the younger sort, reads
yearly in Summer Vacation, and is called a single Reader; and one of the
Ancients that have formerly read, reads in Lent Vacation, and is called a
double Reader, and it is usual between his first and second Reading nine or ten
years; some of these Readers are afterward called ad statum and gradum
Servientis ad legem, and of Sergeants are constituted the honorable Judges and
Sages of the Law.

For the entrance of the young Student (who commonly comes from one of the the
Universities) were first instituted and erected eight Houses of Chancery, to
learn there the Elements of the Law; (viz.) Cliffords-Inn, Lions-Inn,
Clements-Inn, Bernards-Inn, Staple-Inn, Furnivals-Inn, Davies-Inn, and New Inn;
And each of these Houses consist of forty persons or more. For the Readers,
Utter-Baristers, Mootmen, and inferior Students, there are four famous and
renowned Colleges or Inns of Court; called. 1. The Inner Temple, to which the
first three Houses of Chancery appertain; Grayes-Inn, to which the next two
belong; Lincoln's Inn, which enjoys the last two saving one; and the Middle
Temple, which has only the last. Each of these Houses of Court consist of
Benchers above twenty, of Utter Baristers above thrice so many, of Young
Gentlemen about the number of 160 or 180, who there spend their time in study
of Law, and commendable Exercises. The Judges of the Law and Sergeants, being
commonly above the number of twenty, are equally distributed into two higher
and more eminent Houses called Sergeants Inns. All these are not far distant
one from another, and all together make the most famous University for
profession of Law only, or of any one human Science in the world, and
advances it self above all others, Quantum inter viburna cupressus. Lo. Coke.

Mopsical (mopsicus) that cannot see well; Hence perhaps comes our phrase
mop-ey'd.

Moral (moralis) of or belonging to manners or civility. The four Moral or
Cardinal Virtues are, 1. Prudence, 2. Justice. 3. Temperance. 4. Fortitude; and
are so called, because they concern the manners or behavior belonging properly
to the actions of man, only as he is man.

Moralize (moralizo) to expound morally, to give a moral sense unto. As in the
Fables of Aesop, the parties named are Foxes, Asses, and such like Beasts; with
Birds and Fishes, yet there is a latent moral sense therein, appliable to the
persons of men and women, and which may serve for rules of good manners, and
this is called the moral or morality of the Fable.

Moration (moratio) a staying or tarrying.

Morbidezza (Ital.) tenderness, softness. Sir H. Wotton.

Morbifical (morbificus) that causes disease or sickness.

Morbulent (morbulentus) full of diseases; sickly.

Morbus Galicus, otherwise called Morbus Indicus, Neopolitanus, Hispanicus (in
Lat. Lues Venerea) the French Pox or the great Pox. In the City of Naples about
the year 1494. This disease was first known in Christendom, and is said to be
brought thither out of America. See American disease. The French report, that
at the siege of Naples, certain wicked Merchants barrel'd up the flesh of some
men that had been lately slain in Barbary, and sold it for Mummy, and upon that
foul and high nourishment, was the original of this disease. Lo Bac. not. hist.

Mordacity Mordancie (mordacitas) biting; sharpness of speech, detraction,
bitted terms.

Mordicate (mordico) to hurt with biting.

Mordicative (mordicativus) biting or stinging.

Moresk work (Fr. Moresque) a rude or Antic painting or carving, wherein the
feet and tails of beasts, etc. are intermingled with, or made to resemble a
kind of wild leaves, etc. Cotgr.

Morglay (mot-glaive) a killing or mortal sword; Glaive in old French
signifying a sword. Cleiv. Poems.

Morigerous (morigerus) obedient, dutiful, doing as he did.

Morling alias Mortling seems to be that wool which is taken from the skin of
dead sheep, whether dying of the rot or being killed. En. 27. Hen. 6. ca. 2.
This is written Morkein. An. 3. Jac. cap. 8. See Morkein.

Morion (from the Ital. Morione) a Headpiece or Cap of steel.

Morisco (Span.) a Moor; also a Dance so called, wherein there were usually
five men, and a Boy dressed in a Girls habit, whom they call the Maid Marrion,
or perhaps Morian, from the Ital. Morione a Headpiece, because her head was
wont to be gaily trimmed up. Common people call it a Morris-Dance.

Morkein or Morkin (from mors, death) among Huntsmen is a Deer that dies by
some disease or mischance. See Morling.

Morology (morologia) a foolish speaking.

Moromantie (Gr.) foolish divination.

Morosity (morositas) frowardness, waywardness, peevishness, aversness to
please.

Moraus (morosus) wayward, froward, pensive, teasty, hard to please.

Morphew (from the Gr. (...) i. forma) certain whitish spots in the bodies of
some persons, so called.

Morpheus (somni minister) sleep or the God thereof.

Morta, one of the destines.

Mortal sin, See Venial.

Mortgage (Fr. mort. i. mors, and gage, i. pignus, merces) signifies in our
Common Law, a pawn of Land or Tenement, or any thing movable laid or bound for
money borrowed, peremptorily to be the Creditors for ever, if the money be not
repaid at the day agreed on; And the Creditor holding such Land or Tenement is
called Tenant in Mortgage.

Mortiferous (mortifer) deadly that brings death.

Mortification (mortificatio) a mortifying, a queling, taming or punishing the
flesh, a deading the appetite, a killing of lust.

Mortmain (Fr. i. a dead hand) signifies in Law, an alienation of Lands or
Tenements to any Corporation, Guild, or Fraternity and their Successors; As
Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, etc. which may not be done without license of the
King, and the Lord of the Manor, etc. See more of this in Cowel.

Mortress, a meat made of boiled Hens, crumbs of bread, yolks of eggs, and
Saffron, all boiled together. Chauc.

Mortuary (mortuarium) is a gift left by a man at his death to his Parish
Church, in recompense of his personal Tithes and Offerings not duly paid in
his life time. Heretofore, if a man had three or more Cattle of any kind, the
best being kept for the Lord of the Fee, as a Herriot; The second was wont to
be given to the Parson in Right of the Church. But by the Statute of 21 H. 8.
ca. 6. a rate in money is set down for Mortuaries, viz. three shillings four
pence, where the goods of the deceased are above the value of twenty Nobles,
and under thirty pound; six shillings eight pence, where the goods exceed
thirty pound and under forty pound; and ten shillings, where the goods amount
above the value of forty pound. etc. These Mortuaries are due but in some
particular places, and were also called Corse or Corps-presents.

Mosaique or Musaical work (Mosaicum, musaeacum vel Musivum opus) is a most
curious work wrought with stones of diverse colors, and diverse mettles, into
the shape of knots, flowers, and other devices, with that excellency of
cunning, that they seem all to be one stone, and rather the work of Nature then
Art. Sir Henry. Wotton describes it thus, Mosaique is a kind of painting in
small Pebbles, Cockles, and shells of sundry colors; and of late days, likewise
with pieces of glass, figured at pleasure; An ornament, in truth, of much
beauty, and long life, but of most use in Pavements and floarings. El. of
Archit. p. 261.

St. Marks Church in Venice, abounds with curiosity of this Work, of which the
Venetians vaunt themselves to be the Authors. See Marquetry.

Mosaical of or pertaining to Moses: or to Mosaic work.

Mosche or Mosque, a Temple or Church among the Turks and Saracens, the
Persians call it a Moschea.

Motable (motabilis always moving, still in motion.

Motacism (motacismus) the dashing out a letter.

Mother, a disease in women, when the womb rises with pain, for which the
smelling to all sweet savors is harmful; as contrarily, to all strong and
loathsome, good.

Mot (Fr.) Motto (Ital.) a word; But in a restrained sense it is properly taken
for the Word or short sentence applied to an Imprese or Devise. See Devise.
There are also Motto's belonging to the Coats of Arms of most of the Nobility
and Gentry, which are seldom in the English tongue. Mot, is also a Note, which
a Huntsman winds on his horn.

Motet (Fr.) a verse in Music, or of a Song, a P^sie, a short-lay.

Mountain of Piety (mons pietatis) is a stock of money raised by the charity of
good people, who, observing the poor ruined by the usury of Jews, voluntarily
contributed good store of treasure to be preserved and lent to them, whereby
they, upon security, might have money at a low rate to relieve* their wants;
which, because the mass is great and the thing pious and charitable in it self,
is called a Mountain of Piety; But in respect the Officers and incident charges
cannot be had without some emolument, therefore the borrower pays somewhat by
the month for the loan of that he receives. Cajet. opusc. de monte Pietat. c.
1.

Mountebank (Ital. Montimbanco. Span. Saltaenbanco. Fr. Charlatan. Tent.
Landstreicher. Belg. Quaksalvar.) a cousening Drug-seller, a base deceitful
Merchant (especially of Apothecaries Drugs) that, with impudent Lying, does,
for the most part, sell counterfeit stuff to the common people.

Mucc^l^ginous comes from the Latin muccago, or muccus, or mucus snot or
snivil) snivilish, snotty, filthy, and thence flegmy, and the like. Dr. Br.

Mucculent or Muculent, (muculentus) full of snot or snivel.

Mucid (mucidus) sinued, ho^ry, moldy, filthy.

Mucor (Lat.) hoariness, filthiness.

Mue (from the Fr. Muer, to change) a kind of Cage, where Hawks are wintered or
kept when they mue or change their feathers; whence those great Stables
belonging to Whitehall took denomination, that place having been anciently full
of Mues where the Kings Hawks were kept.

Mufti ( i. an Oracle, or answerer of doubts) a chief Priest among the Turks
(who is created by the Emperor) and has four several orders or Sects
subordinate to him (viz.) 1. The Calenderim. 2. The Haggiemlar. 3. The
Torlocchi. 4. The Dervislar, etc. See Sir Hen. Blounts Voyage into the Levant,
p. 79. See Brachman.

Mugient (mugiens) lowing, bellowing, crying.

Mulato (Span.) the son of a woman Blackmore, and a man of another Nation, or e
contra; one that is of a mongril complexion. Dr. Br.

Mulcible (mulcibilis) which may be appeased.

Mulct (mulcta) a fine, an amerciament, a punishing by the purse.

Muleto, a Moil or great Mule, a beast much used in France for carrying
Sumpters, etc. It may also be taken for a diminutive of (Mule) and so signifies
a little Mule.

Muliebrity (muliebritas) tenderness, delicateness, womanliness.

Mulier (Lat.) signifies a woman that has had the company of a man; but in our
Law it signifies one that is lawfully begotten and born; contradistinguished to
Bastard.

Mulierosity (mulierositas) unlawful lust after women, properly married or
defiled women.

Mullar (from the Lat. molo, to grind) is the upper stone which Painters and
Limners use to grind their colors; the nether stone is called the grinding
stone. The French call it a Moulleur.

Mullet (mullus) a kind of dainty fish; Also a term in Heraldry signifying a
Star-like spot, and divided into five corners or ends, and is the distinction
for a third Brother.

Mulse (mulsum) water and honey sod together; also sweet wine.

Mulsulmans (Arab.) the Turks or Mahumetists so called; the word signifies as
much as a people faithful in their Law or Religion.

Multatitious (multatitius) gotten by fine or forfeit.

Multifarious (multifarius) diverse in conditions, many ways divided. Lo. Bac.

Multiferous (multifer) bearing much or many; fruitful.

Multifidous (multifidus) having many slits or clefts, divided into many parts,
manifold.

Multiformity (multiformitas) diversity of form, shape or figure.

Multiloquent (multiloquus) full of speech, that has many words.

Multinominal (multinominis) that has many names.

Multiparous (from multus and pario) that brings forth much or abundantly.

Multiplicious (multiplex, icis) manifold, of many or diverse sorts or ways,
variable, changeable, handling diverse matters.

Multiplicable (multiplicabilis) that may be multiplied or augmented.

Multipotent (multipotens) that may or can do much.

Multiscious (multiscius) knowing much, skilful.

Multisonant (multisonus) that has many or great sounds, that makes a great
noise.

Multitudinous (from multitudo, inis) pertaining to a multitude; that has a
great number, or great store of.

Multivagant (multivagus) wandering or straying much abroad.

Multivilous (multivius) that has many ways, manifold.

Multivolent (multivolus) of many or diverse minds, mutable, wishing one while
this, another that.

Multure ( molitura Lat. Fr. moulture) the Grist or Corn ground; or the Toll or
Fee which the Miller takes for grinding corn.

Mumial, of or pertaining to Mumie.

Mumie or Mummie (Lat. Mumia. Ital. Mummia) a thing like pitch sold by
Apothecaries; It is hot in the second degree, and good against all brusings,
spitting of blood, and diverse other diseases. There are two kinds of it, the
one is dug out of the Graves, in Arabia and Syria, of those bodies that were
embalmed, and is called Arabian Mummie. The second kind is only an equal
mixture of the Jews Lime and Bitumen, in Greek Pissasphaltum, in Latin
Pici-bitumen, and of the Simplicists, Cera monta^a, Cera terrestris,
Pissalsphaltum nativum, and numia nativa. Genesis Practice of Physic.

Mummerie (Fr.) a masking or personating others in antic habits.

Muncerians, a sort of Anabaptists, so called from Tho. Muncer, who was their
Prophet, Senator and General, when they rose in Rebellion in Suevia and
Franconia, etc.

Mund^ne (mundanus) worldly.

Mundanitie (mundanitas) worldliness.

Mundifie (mundifico) to make clean, to purge.

Mundifica^e (mundificativus) mundifying* purging, purifying, apt to cleanse.

Mundivagant (mundivagus) wandering through the world.

Munerate (munero) to reward or recompense.

Municipial Municipal (municipalis) proper or peculiar to one only City, or to
the right of Freedom in a City.

Muniferous (munifer) that carrys a gift.

Munificence (munificentia) liberality, bounty, largess.

Munifical Munificent (munificus) bountiful, liberal.

Muniment (munimen) a Fortress or Fence, a Fort or Hold: A Muniment house (in
Cathedrals, or Collegiate Churches, Castles, Colleges, or such like) is a
house or little room of strength purposely made for keeping the Seal, Plate,
Evidences, Charters, etc. of such Church, College, etc. such Evidences being
called in Law Muniments, (or corruptly miniments) from munio, to defend;
because a man's inheritance or possession is defended by them.

Munite (munio) to fortify, strengthen or defend.

Munited (munitus) armed, fenced, made strong, prepared.

Murage, is a Toll or Tribute to be levied for the building or repairing
public Edifices or Walls. Fitz. not. br. fol. 227. d. It seems also to be a
liberty granted by the King to a Town for gathering money toward walling it.
A. 3. Ed. 1. ca. 30.

Mural (muralis) belonging to a wall. The Mural Crown was one of the rewards
given by the old Romans to their Soldiers, with which he only was honored, who
did first scale the walls, and enter the Enemies City.

Murcid (murcidus) cowardly, unadvised, sloathful.

Mure^gers (from murus, a Wall) Officers yearly elected in the City
Westchester, who have a care of the City Walls, and see them repaired.

Muricide (muricida) he that kills Mice; a Coward or sloathful fellow, fitter
to kill Mice then men.

Murnival, the number Four.

Musach Cassa, a Chest or Church-Box in the holy Temple of Jerusalem, wherein
Kings were wont to cast their Offerings. Min.

Musaph (omnibus linguis) a book among the Turks that contains all their Laws.

Muscadel (Fr.) or Muscadine (Vinum Muscatum) a kind of wine so called, because
for sweetness and smell it resembles Musk. This wine comes for the most part
from the Isle Creta or Candy; whence (as Ortelius reports) 12000 Butts of it
are yearly transported. Others say it takes name from Monte Alcino in Italy.

Muscheto, a kind of Gnat. Herb. tr.

Muscle ( musculus, dimin. a mus, because a Muscle is like a flead Mouse) an
instrumental part of the body, serving for voluntary moving the fleshy part of
it, compassed in with the Strings and Sinews to move withal, interlaced with
Veins and Arteries, the first for distribution or nourishment, the other for
preserving natural heat. Min.

Muscosity (muscositas) abundance of Mice; also mossiness, or abundance of moss.

Mu^culous (musculosus) full of Muscles or Sinews; hard, brawny.

Muses (Musae) the feigned Goddesses of Poetry and Music, which were nine in
number, and Daughters to Jupiter and Mnemosyne; of whom thus Virgil.

1 Clio gesta canens transactis tempora reddit.
2 Melpomene tragico proclamat moesta beatu.
Comica lascivo gaudet sermon 3 Thalia.
Dulciloquis calamos 4 Euterpe flatibus inflat,
5 Terpsichore affectus cytharis movet, imperat, auget.
Plectra gerens 6 Erato saltat, pede, carmine, vultu.
Carmine 7 Calliope libris Heroica mandat.
8 Urania coeli motus scrutatur and astra.
Signat cuncta manu, loquitur 9 Polyhymnia gestu.
Mentis Apollineae vis has movet undique Musas.
In medio residens complectitur omnia Phoebus.
Musive. See Mosaical.

Musk (moschos) the Barbarians call it Pat) is brought out of India, and other
hot Countries, the best of all is yellowish or of a gold color. It comes from
a beast like a Roe or wild Goat, in which beast the Musk grows in a little
bag, or bladder. Some say it comes from a little beast like a Mouse. It is
comfortable to the heart and brain, and hot and dry in operation.

Mussitation (mussitatio) a mumbling, or speaking between the teeth.

Mussulman. See Mulsulmans.

Mustachio Mustache (Gr. (...), Fr. moustache. Span. mustachos) that part of
the Beard which grows upon the upper lip.

Mustaphis Musapheis Doctors or Prophets, men of the greatest regard for
learning among the Turks.

Must (mustum) new wine, or that is first pressed out of the Grape; any thing
fresh or new.

Musteline (mustelinus) of or like a Wheesel.

Mustulent (mustulentus) sweet as Must; also fresh, new, green.

Mutes (mutae) these letters b, c, d, g, h, k, p, q, t, are so called, because
they have no sound, without the assistance of a vowel, as (s) has which makes
a little hissing, before it is joined in speech with a vowel.

N^tilate (mutilo) to maim, cut off, diminish, take away or make imperfect.

Nyunyng. See Minnyng days.

Myrobalane (myrobalanus) an East-Indian plumb, or the nut of Egypt, so called,
whereof there are diverse kinds.

Myriad (myrias, adis) the number of ten thousand.

Myriarck (myriarches) a Captain of ten thousand.

Myrmidons (myrmodones) certain people of Thessaly, that accompanied Achilles
to Troy.

Myro^olist (myropola) a seller of sweet Oils, Ointments or Perfumes.

Myrrh (myrrha) a gum brought out of Arabia and Assyria, of color between
white and red; It is hot and dry in the second degree, or (as son^e write) in
the third, and is often used in Physic, being of an opening, cleansing, and
dissolving nature.

Myrrhine Myrrhean (myrrhinus) of myrrh, made of myrrh, seasoned with myrrh.

Myrtle (myrtus) a little low Tree, growing in hot Countries, having small dark
leaves, and bearing berries, which are of a binding nature, good to stop any
issue of blood. It is a tender plant, not able to endure cold, and was wont to
be worn by the Roman Captains, Garlandwise in triumph, when they had obtained
any victory, without slaughter of men.

Mystagog^ca^ (mystagogicus) that interprets mysteries, or ceremonies, that
has the keeping and showing of Church-Relicks to stranges. Treatise of bodies.

Mystag^gue (mystagogus) he that has that office.

Mysteriarck (mysteriarches) the master of holy mysteries, a chief Prelate.

Mystical (mysticus) secret, hidden, sacred.

Mystical Theology, is nothing else in general but certain Rules, by the
practice whereof, a virtuous Christian may attain to a nearer, a more familiar,
and beyond all expression comfortable conversation with God, by arriving unto,
not only a belief, but also an experimental knowledge, and perception of his
divine presence, after an unexpessible manner in the soul, etc. Cress.

Mythologie (mythologia) a declaration of fables, an expounding or moralizing
upon a tale. Hence

Mythologize, to expound or moralize a fable, or Poetical History.

N
NAdir (Arab.) the point of heaven directly under our feet, opposite to the
Zenith which is over our heads. A term in Astronomy.

Naiad^s, Nymphs or Fairies of the Rivers and Fountains. They have their name
from (...), to flow or bubble, as the water does.

Naiant (Fr. nageant) a term in Heraldry, and signifies swimming or floating.

Naif (Fr.) lively, quick, natural, kindly, proper, no ways counterfeit.
Jewellers when they speak of a Diamond that is perfect in all its properties,
as in the water, shape, cleanness, etc. say it is a Naif stone; others account a
Naif stone to be one that is found growing naturally in such perfection, as if
it had been artificially cut, and therefore most esteemed.

Napaeae, Nymphs or Goddesses of the Woods and Mountains; from the Greek Nape,
a wood.

Napthe (naptha) a kind of marly or chalky clay, whereto if fire be put, it so
kindles, that if a little water be cast thereon, it burns more vehemently;
liquid or soft bitumen.

Narcissus (Gr.) an herb called white Laus tibi, or white Daffodil. Poets
feign that Narcissus, a fair Boy, being in love with himself, was turned into a
Lilly.

Narcissine (narcissinus) of or pertaining to a white Daffodil.

Narcotique (narcoticus) that makes a member senceless, stupefactive,
benumming, depriving of sense. As Narcotic Medicines, which make the Patient,
or some of his members senceless.

Nard (nardus) a plant growing in India or Syria, called Spikenard.

Narration (narratio) a report of a thing, a discourse, declaration, or
relation.

Narrative (narratus) declarative, reporting, relating, expressing. It is also
used substantively, as Narration.

Nasicornous (from nasus, a nose, and cornu a horn) that has a horn on his
nose, or a horned, or horny nose. Dr. Brown in his Vul. Err. p. 166. speaks of
those four kinds of Nasicornous Insects or Beetles, described by Muffe^us.

Natal (natalis) native, natural, of or belonging to a nativity or birth.

Natal or Natalitious gifts (munera natalitia) among the Grecians, the
Midwives, the fifth day after the childs birth, ran about a fire made for the
same purpose; using that ceremony, as a purification of themselves and the
child; on this day the neighbors also sent in gifts or small tokens; from which
custom, that among Christians of the Godfathers sending gifts to the baptized
Infant, is thought to have flown; and that also of the neighbors sending gifts
to the mother of it, as is still used in Northwales.

Natation (natatio) a swiming.

Nated (natus) born, bred, brought forth, framed of nature. Felth.

Nathaniel (Heb.) the gift of God.

Naturalist (Fr.) a natural Philosopher, one skilled in the Reason, and causes
of natural things.

Naturalize (Fr. naturalizer) to make a natural Subject; to admit into the
number of natural Subjects. At Rome there were two sorts of Citizens; some
Cives nati; Citizens by birth; others Civitate donati, Citizens by donation or
gift, who because they were added unto and registered with the first sort of
Citizens, were thence called Adscriptitii Cives.

Naval (navalis) of or belonging to ships, or a Navy of ships. The Naval Crown
was given to him, who first entered the enemies ship in a Sea Fight.

Naucifie (naucifacio) to set naught by, to dis-esteem.

Nave (Span.) that part of a Cart or spinning Wheel, wherein the Spokes are
set, and in which the Axletree runs.

Naufrage (naufragium) wrack on the Sea, loss, detriment, shipwreck.

Navicular (navicularis) pertaining to ships.

Navigable (navigabilis) where ships may pass, sailable, that will bear a ship.

Navigerous (naviger) that will bear a Vessel or Ship.

Navigator (Lat.) a Sayler. We use to say, Sir Francis Drake was the first that
sailed round the world, which may be true in a mitigated sense; viz. that he
was the first Captain or person of note that achieved this enterprise (
Magellanus perishing in the midst of it) and therefore is reported to have
given for his Devise a Globe with this Motto, Tu primus circumdedisti me. This
Navigation was begun Ann. 1577. and in two years and a half with great
vicissitude of fortune, finished.

Navitie (navitas) diligence, stirring, quickness.

Naulage (Fr.) the freight or passage money, for transporting any person or
thing over the Sea or a River.

Naumachie (naumachia) a war, or battle at Sea; also the place where such
battle is fought.

Nauseate (nauseo) to have an appetite to vomit; also to loath or abhor.

Nauseative Nauseous (nauseosus) loathsome, against the stomach, that makes one
ready to cast.

Nautical Nautick (nauticus) belonging to ships or Mariners.

Nazal (Fr.) the nose-piece of a Helmet; the part thereof that covers the nose.

Nazarite (Heb.) signifies a man separated or divided. The Jews so called those
that had vowed themsel^es for some time to God: And these Nazarites, while
their vow lasted, were to abstain from Wine and Grapes either green or dry, and
generally, from whatever came from the Vine Tree, or might make a man drunk.
They also cut not their hair, and observed diverse other ceremonies. The date of
their vow being expired, they presented themselves to the Priest, who offered a
Sacrifice for them, and then their hair was cut, and burnt with the Sacrifice;
after which it was lawful for them to drink wine as before. See Numb. 6.2.21.
The Disciples were first called Nazarites (as the Mahumetans still call them)
from Jesus of Nazareth (a Village in Galilee) as now, Christians from Christ;
which name was first given them at Antioch by Evodus, Patriack thereof, who
immediately succeeded St. Peter. Also certain Heretics so called. Of which see
Moses and Aaron, p. 32.

Neades, beasts in Samos, whose bones are so big, they are kept for a marvel,
and their voice so strong, it shakes the earth.

Neap Tides, In the Seamens Dialect are, the ebbing or small Tides, which
happen when the Moon is in the middle of the second and last Quarter; The Neap
is opposite to the Spring, and there are as many days allowed for the Neap or
falling of the Tides, as for the Spring or rising of them. The Tide never runs
so swift in Neaps as in Springs. Note that as the highest of the Spring is
three days after the Full or Change of the Moon; So the lowest of the Neap is
four days before the Full or Change, and then they say it is Dead-neap. When a
ship wants water, so that it does not flow high enough to bring her off the
ground, or out of a Dock, they say she is be-neaped. See Spring-Tides.

Nebule (a term in Heraldry) being a representation of the clouds; as Nebule of
six pieces, Or and Sable is the Blounts Arms.

Nebulon (nebulo) a Knave, Rascal, Villain, Scoundrel, one of no estimation.

Nebulosous (nebulosus) cloudy, misty, foggy; full of clouds.

Necromancy (necromantia) a divination practiced by conjuration and calling up
Devils or dead men's Ghosts; which we read practiced by King Saul (1 Reg. cap.
28.) when he required a Sorceress to call the spirit of Samuel to him.

Necromancer (necromantes) he that practices that wicked Art, a Master of the
Black Art, one that seeks to the dead; or consults with Satan in the shape of a
dead man. The Hebrews describe him thus; he made himself hungry, and then
lodged among the Graves, that the dead might come to him in a dream, and make
known to him that which he asked, etc. Others there were that clad themselves
with clothes for that purpose, and spoke certain words, burned Incense, and
slept by themselves, that such a dead person might come and talk with them in a
dream. The difference between Necromancers and Witches King James (in his
Demonologie) has taught in a word; the one (in a sort) command, the other obey
the Devil.

Necromantick (necromanticus) pertaining to Necromancy.

Nectar (Gr.) a pleasant liquor, feigned to be the drink of the Gods.

Nectarine Nectarean (nectareus) immortal, divine, pleasant, like Nectar.

Nefandous (nefandus) horrible, heinous, mischeivous, not to be spoken or named.

Nefarious (nefarius) cursed, unworthy to live, wicked, detestable.

Negative (negativus) that denies or gain-says, Two Negatives make an
Affirmative; as he did not give nothing, for, he gave something.

Negative pregnant, in our Common Law, implies also an Affirmative. As if a
man, being impleaded to have done a thing upon such a day, or in such a place,
denies he did it, Modo and forma declarata, which implies nevertheless, That in
some sort he did it.

Negatory (negatorius) of or belonging to denial, inficiatory, negative.

Negotiation (negotiatio) buying and selling, traffic, merchandising, managing
of business.

Ne^otious (negotiosus) full of business, ever in action, much employed.

Negro (Ital. and Span.) a Neger or Blackmoor, whom the Dutch call a Swart.

Neif or Nief (from the Fr. naif, i. naturalis) signifies in our Common Law a
Bondwoman, An. 1. Ed. 6. c. 3.

N^maean Games (nemaea) so called from Nemaea, a Town in Greece, where Hercules
slew the Lions, and in honor of this memorable exploit, were instituted these
Nemaean games, which continued famous in Greece for many ages. The exercises
were, running with swift Horses, Whorlebats, running on foot, Quoiting, Darting,
Wrestling, Shooting.

Nemesis, the Goddess of Revenge, called also Adrastia.

Nemoral (nemoralis) pertaining to a Wood or Grove, enclosed or beset with
Woods.

Nemorivagant (nemorivagus) wandering in the Wood.

Nemorous (nemorosus) full of Woods, Groves or Trees, shadowed with Trees.

Neogamist (neogamus) one newly married, a Bridegroom.

Neophyte (neophytus) any thing lately planted or set; one newly entered into
any profession, most commonly taken for one lately converted to the faith. The
Neophyte or new Convert (says Mr. Gregory, p. 111.) received a Taper lighted,
from the Mystagogus; which for the space of seven days after, he was to hold in
his hand at Divine Service, sitting in the Baptistery.

Neopolitan disease. See Morbus Gallicus.

Neoterical (neotericus) that is of late time, newly.

Nepenthe (Gr. Nepenthes) a kind of Herb, which, being put into Wine, drives
away sadness. Some take it for Bugloss. Plin. l. 2. c. 21.

Nephritick (nephriticus) that is troubled with a pain in the Reins of the back.

Nepotation (nepotatio) a wasting or riotousness.

Neptune (Neptunus) the god of the Sea, Son to Saturn and Ops. Hence

Neptunian (Neptunius) belonging to that Sea god, or to the Sea.

Nequient (nequiens) not being able, disable.

Neread (Nereides) a Maremaid or Fish like a beautiful Woman down to the
Girdle, the rest like a Fish: The Males of these are called Tritons.

Nireides, are also taken for Nymphs, or Fairies of the Water, and comes from
Heb. Nahar, i. a Flood or River.

Nercus, a God of the Sea.

Nero Domitius, an Emperor of Rome, infamous for his cruelty and tyranny; he
murdered his mother Agrippina, his Brethren, and his Wife Octavia, his Master
Seneca, and the Poet Lucan, etc. Hence Tyrants are called Nero's.

Nerve (nervus) a Sinew, strength, force, power, stoutness, and constancy of
mind. Nerve is that by which the Brain adds Sense and Motion to the Body.

Nervy (nervosus) having great or many Sinews, strongly made in Body, pithy.

Nervosity (nervesitas) the having Sinews or strength, fullness of Sinews.

Nescience (nescientia) ignorance, want of knowledge.

Nescient Nescious (nescius) that knows not, ignorant of.

Nestor, a man of great wisdom and eloquence, that lived almost 300 year. Hence
proverbially, we use Nestor for a man of great age.

Nestorians (so called from Nestorius, a German, their first Founder) a sort of
Heretics, that held (among other enormities) that in Christ were two Persons,
as well as two Natures, etc. This Heresy was condemned by the General Council
at Ephesus; And Nestorius his tongue rotted in his mouth, for having bin the
Author of such Blasphemy; he lived in the days of Theodosius; and was by him
made Bishop of Constantinople. Sands.

Nethinims (Hebr.) were hewers of wood and drawers of water for the House of
God, Ezra 2.43. See Moses and Aaron. p. 22.

N^vosity (naevositas) speckedness, fullness of moles or freckles.

Neutral (neutralis) neuter, belonging to neither.

Neutrality, the not siding with either part, indifferency.

New years Gift, or a gift given the first day of the new year: The usage came
first from the ancient Romans: For the Knights used every year, on the first
day of January, to offer New-years-gifts in the Capitol to Augustus Caesar,
though he were then absent: Which custom has descended to us, albeit in sundry
kinds; for in Italy the greatest persons give to the meanest; and in England
the meanest to the greatest.

Nexible (nexibilis) that may be knit or tied.

Nexility (nexilitas) fastness, pithiness, compactness of speech.

Niaiserie (Fr.) simplicity, silliness, childishness, want of experience,
Schism. Dispat.

Nais Hawk (Fr. Niais) a Nestling or young Hawk; or any Hawk taken out of the
Nest, before she preyed for her self.

Nicean, pertaining to Nice, a City in Bithinia, where the first general
Council was held, Ann. 314. to which there assembled three hundred and eighteen
Bishops, to beat down the Arrian Heresy.

Nices or Niches (from the Italian Nichi) the hollow places in a wall, wherein
Statues or Images are set. A term in Architecture.

Nicete (Fr.) sloth, idleness, slackness, simplicity; hence our word nicety,
which we commonly use for coyness, daintiness, curiosity.

Nicholaitans (so called from Nicholas, the Proselyte of Antioch, one of the
seven Deacons, which were instituted with Saint Stephen by the Apostles) a sort
of Heretics that held it lawful to have their wives common, etc. St. John
makes mention of them in his Apocalypse, where (speaking of the Church of
Pergamus) he says, Thou have them that hold the doctrine of the Nicholaitans.

Nicholas (Gr.) Conqueror of the people.

Nicodemites, a sort of late Reformists in Switzerland, so called, because they
profess their Faith in private, as Nicodemus did to Christ.

Nicotian (Fr. Nicotiane, Span. Nicociana) Tobacco. so called from John Nicot,
who first sent that weed into France from Portugal, where he was Ambassador
Leiger for the French King, about the year 1560. Near which time, and at which
place he made that great French and Latin (called Nicots) Dictionary.

Nictation (nictatio) a winking or twinkling with the eyes.

Nidgeries (Fr. Nigeries) fopperies, fooleries, trifles.

Nidifice (nidificium) a Nest, such as Birds make.

Nidifie (nidifico) to build or make a Nest.

Niding (old English) signifies an abject, base-minded, false-hearted coward.
In former time this word was of great force in England: For when there was a
dangerous Rebellion against King William Rufus, etc. after he had but
proclaimed, that his Subjects should repair to his Camp upon no other penalty,
but that who ever refused, should be reputed a Niding; they swarmed to him
immediately from all sides in such numbers, as he had in few days a great Army,
and the Rebels were so terrified therewith, that they forthwith yielded.

Nidor (Lat.) the savor of any thing burned or roasted; sometimes brightness.

Nidulation (nidulatio) a building or making a Nest.

Nightmare. See Incubus.

Nigrifie (nigrefacio) to make black.

Nihilifie (nihilifacio) to set nothing by, to dis-esteem, to make no account
of.

Nigromancy. See Necromancy.

Nihil dicit, is a failing to put in answer to the Plea of the Plaintiff, by
the day assigned; upon which failure, Judgment passes against him, as saying
nothing why it should not.

Nil (Belg. niet, i. nihil) the sparkles or ashes that come of Brass, tried in
the Furnace.

Nilus, a great River running through Ethiope and Egypt, famous for the virtue
of its water, which overflowing this Country, makes it wonderful fertile many
years after. This River is in length almost three thousand miles.

Nimbiferous (nimbifer) that brings storms or showrs.

Nimbot (Fr.) a Dwraf, Dandiprat, or little Skipjack.

Nimietie (nimietas) too great abundance.

Nimious (nimius) too much, excessive, overgreat, superfluous.

Ningid or Ninguid (ninguidus) where much snow is.

Nisi prius, is a Writ Judicial, which lies in case where the Enquest is
panelled and returned before the Justices of the Bank; the one party or the
other making Petition, to have this Writ for the ease of the Country, etc. It
is called Nisi prius, of these words contained in the same Nisi die Lunae apud
talem locum prius venerint, etc. See Assize.

Nitid (nitidus) clean, neat, gay, trim, fair, bright.

Nitidity (nitiditas) cleanness, brightness, trimness.

Nitor (Lat.) the same.

Nitre (nitrum) a Salt-resembling substance, of color ruddy and white, and
full of holes like a Sponge; some late Writers mistake it for Saltpeter.

Nitrou^ (nitrosus) having the savor of Nitre, having stuff in it whereof Nitre
is made, full of Nitre.

Nival (nivalis) Niveous (niveus) pertaining to Snow, white or cold like Snow,
snowy.

Nixu, the gods of Childbearing.

Nobless (Fr.) Nobility, Gentry, Generousness.

Nobili^ate (nobilito) to make noble, to promote to Dignity,

Noce^t (nocens) that has done a trespass or injury, that hurts or
endamageth; a person guilty, or that has offended.

Nocive (nocivus) that does harm, hurtful, noyous.

Noctiferous (noctifer) that betokens or brings night, the evening Star.

Noctivagant (noctivagus) that wandreth by night.

Nocturnal (nocturnus) belonging to the night, nightly, or in the night time.

Nocturne (nocturnum) a part of the Office, or certain Psalms and Prayers so
called, because they are said Nocturno tempore, about midnight.

Nocument (nocumentum) hurt or damage.

Nocuous (nocuus) that does harm, hurtful.

Nodosity (nodositas) knottiness, knobbiness.

Nodous (nodosus) knotty, full of knots, knurs, joints or difficulties; curious
or scrupulous.

Noli-me-tangere, i Do not touch me. An Herb so called, because its seed being
ripe, fpurts away so soon as it is touched: Also a disease of that name, being
a piece of flesh growing in the Nostrils, in such sort, as it often stops the
wind, and the more it is touched, the worse it grows.

Nomarck (Nomarcha) he that has the pre-eminence in the ministration of Laws,
as a Major or other like Officer.

Nomarchie (nomarchia) a jurisdiction or Majoralty, a Law, a County or Shire, a
Territory about some City.

Nombreil (from the Fr. Nombril, i. a Navel) in Heraldry it signifies the lower
part of a Scutcheon, divided by the breadth into three even parts. The Fesse
being the middle, and the Honor Point the upper part. Guill.

Nomenclator (Lat. Quasi nominis calator) he that knows the names of things,
and calls them thereby; a common Crier in a Court of Justice; a Bedel, or like
Officer, to whom it belongs to know by heart, the names, offices, and crafts of
all the Citizens, thereby to instruct such as among the Romans did stand for
any Office, that they might speak to them more gently. Thomasius.

Nomenclature (nomenclatura) the numbering of names or Surnames of sundry
things; the office of the Nomenclator.

Nominal (nominalis) of or belonging to a name.

Nominalia, A Feast among the Romans: to Females they gave the name on the
eighth day, to Males on the ninth, which they called Dies lustricus, as it were
the cleansing day, on which they solemnized this Feast; and (as Turtullian
notes) Fata adscribenda advocabantur, that is (as I conceive) their Nativities
were set. The Athenians gave names on the tenth day, others on the seventh.

Nomination (nominatio) a naming or appointing; it is used both by the Common
Lawyers and Canonists for a power that a man by virtue of a Manor or
otherwise, has to appoint a Clerk to a Patron of a Benefice, by him to be
presented to the Ordinary.

Nomographer ((...)) a Writer of the Law; a Legislator.

Nomothesie (Gr.) the making, publishing, or proclaiming a Law.

Nona, Decima and Morra, the three fatal Ladies, whom the Greeks call Clotho,
Lachesis and Atropos.

Nonability, is in our Law, an exception against any person that disables him
to commence a Suit.

Non est factum (Lat.) is an usual Plea to a Declaration, whereby a man denies
that to be his Deed, whereon he is impleaded.

Nonage (Fr. non aage, i. non aetas) not yet of age; minority; that is all the
time of a man's age under One and twenty years in soml cases, and Fourteen in
some, as marriage. See Brook. tit. Age.

Non compos mentis, i. not in his right wits, is of four sorts; 1. He that is
an Idiot born; Next he that by accident wholly loses this wits. 3. A Lunatic,
that has sometime his understanding and sometimes not; Lastly, he that by his
own act deprives himself of his right mind for a time, as a Drunkard.

None of the day, is the third quarter of the day beginning at Noon, and
lasting till the Sun be gone half way toward setting.

Nones (nonae) in March, May, July and October, are the six days next following
the first day, or the Calends; In other months they are the four days next
after the first; But the last of these days is properly called Nones, and the
other reckoned backward, according to the number distant from the Nones, as the
third, fourth or fith Nones. They are called Nones, because they began the
ninth day before the Ides. Hoptons Conc. p. 70.

Non liquet, i. It appears not, it is not clear, it likes not. Also a Verdict
given by the Jury, signifying, that the matter was to be deferred to another
day of trial; Ignoramus with us, or a Reprie, it was wont to be put down in a
Scrowle or Tablet by these letters (N.L.) As guilty, or Condemnatio by (C)
Quitting by (A) i. Absolutus. Carol. Sigon. de Judiciis.

Non obstante (Lat.) notwithstanding, nevertheless; a word much used in our
Statutes, Patents and other writings, etc.

Non plus (Lat.) no more; a term often used, when a man can say no more, nor
answer an Ojection; then he is said to be at a Nonplus.

Non-residency, unlawful absence from the place of his charge, most commonly
spoken of Ministers and their Cures.

Nonsuit, is a Renunciation of the Suit by the Plaintiff or Demandant, when
the matter is so far proceeded in, as the Jury is ready at the Bar to deliver
their Verdict. A. 2. H. 4. ca. 7. See the New book of Entries, verbo, Nonsuit.
The Civilians term it, Litis renunciationem.

Nonupla, a quick time in Music peculiar to Gigs and such like; having nine
Crotchets between Bar and Bar.

Nook of Land. See Yard.

Normal (normalis) right by rule, made by the Square or Rule.

Nortel ware, corruptly so called in some part of England for Lorimers. See
Lorimer.

Norrey or Norroy, King at Arms. See Harold.

Nosognomonick (Gr.) a part of Physic. See Medicine.

Nostoch (says Dr. Charlton in his Paradoxes) is the nocturnal pollution of
some plethorical and wanton star, or rather excrement blown from the nostrils
of some rheumatick Planet, falling upon plains and sheep pastures, of an
obscure red or brown tawny, in consistence like a gelly, and so trembling if
touched; which the Philosophy of the clouted shoo affirms to be the ruins of a
star fallen. Some there are (says Dornaeus) who by Nostoch intend wax, but by
the favor of a metaphor.

Notary (notarius) a Scribe or Scrivener, that only takes notes, or makes a
short draught of contracts, obligations or other instruments; these notes he
may deliver to the parties that gave him instructions, if they desire no more;
but if they do, he must deliver them to a Tabellion, who draws them at large,
ingrosses them in parchment, etc. and keeps a Register of them, but this is not
generally observed; for in many Towns of France, the Notaries are also
Tabellions. Cotg.

Notification (notificatio) information, signification, advertisement.

Notion (notio) knowledge, understanding; acquaintance.

Novatians, a sort of Heretics whereof one Novatus was first Author about the
year 215. he condemned second Marriages, and held that such as had once fallen or
were in Apostasy, ought no more to be received into the Church, although they
were repentant therefore, etc. This Heresy was condemned by a Council at Rome.
See Catharians.

Novator (Lat.) he that makes a thing new, a renewer.

Novels of the Civil Law are in number 168. into which the 91 Collations of the
Authenticks (which were set out after the Codex by Justinian, then Emperor, and
brought into the body of the Civil Law) were divided. They were called Novelles
(says Cujatius) quod novissime promulgatae sint post Codices.

Novenary (novenarius) of nine, that consists of nine.

Novendial (novendialis) of nine days space or continuance.

Novennial (novennis) of nine years.

Novae tabulae (Lat.) was an easement proposed in favor of debtors at Rome,
whereby the old debt books and obligations were cancelled; or the nomina dashed
out; Among the Athenians this practice was called Sisacthia, i. an easing of
burden, or Cre^opia, a cutting off or striking out of debts. Livie.

Novercal (novercalis) of or pertaining to a Stepmother, or mother in Law.

Novice (from the Lat. Novus) a young Monk or Nun, before they are professed;
one that is but newly entered into a Religious house, and has not passed his time
of probation; also a youngling or beginner in any profession.

Novity (novitas) newness, strangeness, novelty.

Nowed, a term in Heraldry (from the Fr. Nove) knotted, or tied in a knot.

Noxious (noxius) hurtful, noysom, offensive.

Nubiferous (nubifer) that brings or carries clouds, cloudy,

Nubilous (nubilosus) full of clouds, cloudy, stormy, tempestuous.

Nubivagant (nubivagus) passing through or among clouds.

Nuceous (nuceus) of or pertaining to a Nut.

Nudation (nudatio) a making bare.

Nude (nudus) bare, naked, uncovered, void, empty, destitute, poor.

Nude contract (nudum pactum) is, in our Law, a bare contract or promise of a
thing, without any consideration given therefore, ex quo non oritur actio.

Nudity (nuditas) bareness, nakedness, want of any thing, poverty.

Nugal Nugatory (nugatorius) trifling, vain, of no force.

Nugator (Lat.) a trifler.

Nugation (nugatio) a trifling. Bac.

Nuisance. See Nuisance.

Nullifidian (from nulla fides) one of no faith, Religion or honesty; a Seeker.

Nullity (nullitas) nothing, annihilation, the being void, nothing, or of no
effect.

Nullo, a Cipher, or nonsignificant character.

Numeral (numeralis) of or belonging to number.

Numerical, belonging to number; Also a term in Logic; as when we say a
numerical difference, that is to say, the last difference, by which one
individual thing is distinguished from one another.

Numerist (numerarius) he that numbereth; an Officer in the later Emperors time
belonging to the Office of Praefectus praetorio; A kind of Register, Notary, or
Auditor.

Nun ( nonna q. non nupta. Teut. Nunn. Belg. Nonne) is a holy or consecrated
Virgin, or a woman that by vow has bound her self to a single and chaste life,
in some place and company of other women, separated from the world, and devoted
to an especial service of God, by prayer, fasting and such like holy exercises.
St. Hierom makes (nonna) originally an Egyptian word, as Hospinian records of
him, in his book de origin and progressu monachatus, fol 3. Of these there are
several Orders. Scholastica (the Sister of St. Benedict) was the first that
collected them into companies, and prescribed them orders. Heyl.

Nuncupate (nuncupo) to name, to call by some name; also to pronounce, tell by
name or rehearse.

Nuncupative (nuncupativus) called, named, pronounced, expressly declared by
word of mouth.

A Will Nuncupative, is when the Testator makes his will by word of mouth (not
by writing) before sufficient witnesses.

Nundinal Nundinarie (nundinarius) pertaining so Fairs or Markets.

Nundination (nundinatio) a trafficking in Fairs or Markets, buying and selling.

Nuncio (Ital. and Span. from the Lat. Nuncius) a Legate or Ambassador from the
Pope.

Nuncio differed from a Legate, almost as a Lieger from an Extraordinary
Ambassador.

Nuptial (nuptialis) pertaining to a Wedding, Marriage or Bridal.

Nuptial gifts were certain tokens, which the Husband sent his Mistress before
the betrothing.

Nuptialist (from nuptiae) a Bride or Wife; or a Bridegroom or Husband; Also
one that makes Marriages.

Nuisance (Fr. nuisance) hurt, offense, annoyance, damage, trespass. In Law it
is, where any man erects any wall, stops any water, or does any thing upon his
own ground to the unlawful hurt or annoyance of his neighbor; he that is
grieved may have thereof an Assize of Nuisance.

Nutation (nutatio) nodding, as one does when he sits sleeping.

Nutriment (nutrimentum) nourishment.

Nutritive Nutritious (nutritious) pertaining to nourishment.

Nymph ( Nympha, Brit. Nymph) a Bride or new married Wife. Hence those Virgin
Goddesses of the Woods, Mountains and Waters had this name, as the Napaeae,
Oreades, Dryades, Hamadryades, Naiades, Nereides, etc.

Nymphal Nymphous (from Nympha) of or belonging to a Nymph or Bride; Nymph-like.

Nymphet (Fr.) a little Nymph.

O
OBacerate (obacero) to stop ones mouth, that he cannot tell out his tale.

Obambulate (obambulo) to walk against another, or about, to range or stray
over.

Obduction (obductio) a covering or laying over.

Obdurate (obduratus) hardened, also unrelenting.

Obedientials (from obedientia) those that execute an Office under Superiors,
and with obedience to their commands.

Obeisance (Fr.) obedience; a dutiful observing of, an obsequious yielding unto.

Obelise (from obelus or obeliscus) to make a long stroke in writing, to
signify somewhat to be put out; to race out. Mr. White.

Obelisk (obeliscus) a great square stone broad beneath, and waxing smaller
toward the top. There were diverse of these in Egypt consecrated in honor of
the Sun; whereof four were principally erected by King Sochis, of wonderful
height; many Obelisks were likewise at Rome in time of the Roman Emperors. The
difference between an Obeliske and a Pyramid was this; the Obelisk was all of
one entire stone or piece, and therefore of no such height as the Pyramids,
which were of diverse stones; and again the Obelisk is apiece, whereas the
Pyramid may be of other figure.

Obequitate (obequito) to ride about.

Obesity (obesitas) fatness, grosness.

Objectator (Lat.) he that reproaches or lays to ones charge.

Obit (obitus) the death, dying or decay of one; the setting or going down of
the Sun. Also sometimes taken for an Elegy or Funeral Song.

Objuration (objuratio) a binding by oath.

Objurgation (objurgatio) a chiding, rebuking, reproving, or blaming.

Objurgatory (objurgatorius) pertaining to chiding, checking or rebuking.

Oblat (Fr.) a Soldier, who, grown impotent or maimed in Service, has
maintenance or the benefit of a Monks place assigned him in an Abbey; Also the
means or place of a Monk, or such Soldier.

Oblation (oblatio) an offering; an aid or Subsidy money. Oblations are thus
defined in the Canon Law. Oblationes dicuntur quaecunque a piis fidelibusque
Christianis offeruntur Deo and Ecc^esiae, sive res soli, sive mobiles sint. Nee
refert an legentur Testamento, an aliter donentur. Cap. Cler. 13. quaest. 2.
See Duaren. de Sacr. Eccles. Minister. ac Benef. cap. 3.

Oblatration (oblatratio) a barking or making exclamation against one.

Oblectation (oblectatio) recreation, delight, pleasure.

Oblesion (oblaesio) an hurting or annoying.

Obligatory (obligatorius) which binds or obliges; also taken substantively,
for an obligation.

Oblimation (oblimatio) a dawbing or covering over with mud or soft clay.

Obliquation (obliquatio) a crooking or turning away or aside.

Oblique (obliquus) crooked, aw^y, bowed, bended traver.

Obliquity (obliquitas) crookedness, wriness.

Obliterate (oblitero) to scrape out, to put out of remembrance, to abolish.

Oblivion (oblivio) forgetfulness, unmindfulness.

Oblocutor (Lat.) an evil reporter, a backbiter, a detracter.

Oblong, is a Geometrical term for a Quadrangular figure, whose length exceeds
its breadth, of which the most proper (distinguished by their several terms)
are these six. 1. Sesquialter, which is when half the height is added to its
length. 2. Sesquitertia, when a third part is added to its length. 3.
Sesquiquarta, when a fourth part is added. 4. Diagonia, when the Oblong is
increased to the length of the Diagonal of the single Square. 5. Superbitiens
tertias, so called (quasi super bis tertias) because the length thereof is
increased by two thirds. 6. Dupla, which is a double square. Enchir of fortif.

Obloquy (obloquium) a speaking against, an evil report.

Obmutescence (from obmutesco) a holding ones peace, a being silent or
tongue-tied.

O^nection (obnectio) a fast knitting, as in marriage.

Obnoxiety (obnoxietas) obnoxiousness; liableness to danger, or to the lash,
punishment.

Obnoxious (obnoxious) that has deserved to be punished, guilty, or condemned,
in danger of, subject to.

Obnu^ilate (obnubilo) to make clouds, or dark with clouds, to make heavy and
sad in countenance.

Obnunciate (obnuncio) to tell or show ill tidings, or things unpleasant and
unlucky.

Obnunci^tion (obnunciatio) a forbidding a thing upon foreknowledge, conjecture
or likelihood of its ill success. As the ancient Romans were wont to dissolve
their Assemblies (which dissolution they called obnunciation) when soever any
evil token was seen or heard, either by the Magistrate or Augur. Godwin.

Obole (obolus) a Coin, variable according to the Country, with us it is a
halfpenny: Junius takes it for a penny farthing of our money; others, for an
small Coin worth seven pence. Also a halfpenny weight, twelve grains among
Apothecaries, and fourteen among Mintmen and Goldsmiths. Obolus terrae, five
soot in breadth, and ten in length.

Obreption (obreptio) the creeping or stealing to a thing by crafty means, the
getting or obtaining it by dissimulation or private cousenage.

Obrogate (obrogo) to check or interrupt one in his tale, to gainsay. To
obrogate a Law, is to proclaim a contrary Law, for taking away the former.

Obrumpent (obrumpens) breaking or bursting.

Obscene (obscoenus) all things that are to be eschewed, filthy, unclean,
unchaste, dishonest.

Obscenity (obscoenitas) villainy in acts or words, ribaldry, baudiness,
filthiness.

Obsecrat^ (obsecro) to beseech heartily, to pray, to desire for Gods sake.

Obsequious (obsequiosus) officious, dutiful, serviceable, observant, obedient.

Observants or Observantin^, a branch of the Order of Grey-Fryers, commonly
called Franciscans, instituted by St. Francis of Assisium, distinct from the
Minims or Bonhomes, instituted by St. Francis de Paula. These Observants were
instituted by one Bernard of Siena, about the year 1400. See Friars.

Obsession (obsessio) a laying siege, a beleaguring or compassing about: A man
is said to be obsest, when an evil spirit hants him, troubling him often, and
seeking opportunity to enter into him.

Obsibilate (obsibilo) to make a whistling noise, as Trees stirred with winds.

Obsidian stone (obsidianus) a precious stone, mentioned in Pliny. Gondibert.

Obsidional (obsidionalis) of or pertaining to a siege.

The Obsidional Crown (Corona obsidionalis) was given only to him that
relieved a City or Town besieged: This Crown was made of green Leaves, or of
the Grass and Herbs of the same Field, where the enemy had been over-thrown, or
forced to flight. The great Quintus Fabius received this Crown, for defending
and delivering Rome from the siege of Hannibal.

Obsolete (obsoletus) decayed, old, grown out of use, worn as a Garment, when
it is thredbare.

Obstetricate (obstetrico) to do the office of a Midwife.

Obst^trici^us (from obstetricium) pertaining to the Ministry of Midwives, or
their Feat.

Ostipate (obstipo) to stop chinks.

Obstreperous (obstreperus) that makes a noise, roars, or cries out against.

Obstrigillation (obstrigillatio) a reprehension, a resisting or repugning.

Obstruction (obstructio) a shutting or stopping up, a ^amming up.

Obstupifie (obstupefacio) to make abashed or astonished.

Obtenebrate (obtenebro) to make cloudy or dark.

Ob^est (obtestor) humbly to beseech, to desire for Gods sake.

Obtestation (obtestatio) an humble desiring, a taking God to witness for a
thing, a hearty beseeching.

Obticence (obticentia) silence, holding ones peace.

Obtorted (obtortus) wreathed, wrested or wrenched.

Obtrectation (obtrectatio) detraction, depravation, backbiting, slandering.

Obtrite (obtritus) worn, bruised, trod under foot.

Obturation (obturatio) a stopping or shutting up.

Obtuse (obtusus) dull, dim, blunt, without spirit.

Obvention (obventio) a meeting with, a coming against, happening, or chancing
unto; Also revenue or rents.

Obvert (obverto) to turn against, back, or about.

Obviate (obvio) to meet with one, also to resist or withstand.

Obvious (obvius) that which meets with one, meeting in the way; gentle and
easy.

Obumbrate (obumbro) to shadow over and over; also to make dark, obscure, or
dim.

Obuncous (obuncus) very crooked.

Obundation (obundatio) a flowing against.

Obvolate (obvolo) to fly against.

Occident (occidens) the going down of the Sun; the West part of the world. And
(adjectively) declining, decaying, falling, going down.

Occidental (occidentalis) pertaining to the West, western, westernly.

Occiduous (occiduus) that goes down, that will decay.

Occipital (from occiput) belonging to the Noddle, or hinder part of the head.

Occision (occisio) a slaughter or death of men or Cattle, a killing or slaying.

Occlusion (occlusio) a shutting up fast, a stopping.

Occular. See Ocular.

Occulcation (occulcatio) a treading on or spurning.

Occult (occultus) hid, privy, not known very secret.

Occultation (occultatio) a hiding, or keeping close, a concealing.

Occupative (occupativus) that is busied, employed, or Possessed of, or that
busieth. An Occupative Field, is that which, being deserted by its proper owner
or tiller, is possessed by another.

Occur (occurro) to meet with, come in place, be in the way, or offer it self.

Oceanick Oceanine (oceaninus) belonging to the Ocean or main Sea, encompassing
the world.

Ochlocracy (Gr.) a kind of Government, wherein the multitude or common rout
bear rule.

Ocious (ociosus) idle, careless, restful, at ease, that has little to do,
unemployed.

Octangular (octangulus) that has eight corners, eight-cornered.

Octave (octavus) an eighth in Music, a proportion or the number of eight.

Octaves (octavae) an usual term in Courts of Justice, and in the Roman
Calender, and signifies the eighth day, next after some principal Feasts of the
year, called also the Vtas. D. Aug. Epist. 118. See Vtas.

Octennial (octennalis) that is done every eighth years.

Octonary (octonarius) the same with Octave.

Octogon (Gr.) a figure consisting of eight Angles.

Octostic. See Ogdastic.

Ocular (ocularius) pertaining to the eyes or sight.

Oculate (oculatus) full of eyes or holes, quick of sight, circumspect; as
Oculate Faith, that is, confirmed by the eyesight, or such a Faith as
represents the thing believed, as it were to the eye; a seeing Faith.

Oculist, one skilled in curing the diseases of the eyes, or in preserving the
eyesight.

Oculus Christ^ (so called because it conduces much to the cure of the
infirmities of the eyes) an Herb called Wild Clary. Gerard.

Ode (oda) a Song, or Poem pronounced with singing.

Odelet (Dimin. of Ode) a small or short Ode.

Odible (odibilis) odious, worthy to be hated.

Odor (Lat.) savor, sent, smell.

Odoramincu^ (from Odoramen, inis) smelling sweet, fragrant, odoriferous,
pertaining to odor.

Odoriferous (odorifer) sweet in savor, bringing spices and sweet smelling
things.

Oeconomie (oeconomia) the guiding and ordering of things pertaining to
household; also an order in doing a thing.

Oeconomical (oeconomicus) pertaining to the order or government of an house or
family.

Oeconomist, one that orders or rules a family.

Ecumenical (oecumenicus) universal, general, pertaining to the whole world.

Oed^stine (oedastinus) that is cunning in the knowledge of weights and
measures.

Oedematous (from Oedema) full of or subject to a slegmatick and painless
sweling, which being pressed down with the finger, retains the impression
thereof, and is called an Oedeme. Br.

Oenopolist (oenopola) a Vintner or seller of Wine.

Offertory (offertorium) an offering, or place where offerings are offered or
kept; also a part of the Mass so called.

Official. (officialis) of or belonging to offices or duties. It is a word
diversely used; some apply it to such as have the sway of temporal Justice,
others to the Minister or Apparitor of a Magistrate or Judge. In the Cannon Law
i^ is especally taken for him, to whom any Bishop generally commits the charge
of his Spiritual Jurisdiction; and in this sense, one in every Diocese is
(Officialis Pricipalis) whom the old Statutes and Laws of this Nation call
Chancelors. An. 32. Hen. 8. cap. 15. And are sometimes termed Commissaries; the
difference of the two powers, you may read in Lindwo^od, tit. De sequest.
posses. cap. 1. Verbo Officialis. But this word Official in our Statutes and
Common Law, signifies him whom the Archdeacon substitutes for executing his
Jurisdiction.

Officinator (Lat.) an Artificer or Crastsman. Vitruvius ( lib. 6. cap. 11.)
distinguishes the Officinator from the Architect; this designs the Idea of the
whole work; that is but a second superintendent over all the under-Art sins.

Officine (officina) a Shop or Workhouse.

Offuscate (offusco) to make black or dark, to shadow or make dim or duskish.

Ogdastick (ogdastichon) a Sentence or Epigram comprised in eight verses, or a
Stanza of eight verses.

Ogive or Ogee (Fr. Augive or Ogive) a wreath, circlet or round band in
Architecture.

Oisteriot, a weed so called, as it were, laid among Oisters. Min.

Oak, a measure among the Turks, near the bigness of our quart. How.

Oleaginous (oleaginus) of an Olive Tree, or of the color of an Olive Tree.

Oleity (oleitas) the time of gathering Olives, or the Olives when they are
gathered to make oil of; also oyliness.

Olfactory (olfactorium) a Posie or Nose gay, any thing to smell to.

Oleron Laws, or Laws of Oleron; so called for that they were made by K.
Richard the First, when he was there. Cok Inst. par. 1. p. 260 b. This Oleron
is an Island near Rochel, belonging to the French.

Olidous (olidus) which has a strong savor, whether good or bad; rank of smell.

Oligarchy (oligarchia) the state of a Commonwealth, where a few persons, and
those properly of the wealthier sort, have all the authority.

Olimpiad. See Olympiad.

Oliver, a name fetched from the peace-bringing Olive, as Daphnis and Laurence,
from the triumphant Laurel.

Olivaster, a wild Olive tree; also like, or of the color of an Olive; in
which last sense the Lord Bacon uses it in his Not. Hist.

Oliviferous (olivifer) which bears or brings forth Olives.

Olivity (olivitas) the time of gathering Olives, or making Oil; see Oleity.

Olla (Span.) a Pot to boil meat in; and by figure is taken for the meat it
self boiled in it.

Olla podrida, a Hotchpot of several ingredients; Mr. Howel, in one of his
Letters describes it thus. The Olla podrida has Intellectuals and Senses:
Mutton, Beef, and Bacon, are to her as the Will, Understanding and Memory are
to the Soul; Cabbage, Turnips, Artichocks, Potatoes, and Dates, are her five
Senses, and Pepper the common Sense: She must have Marrow to keep life in her,
and some Birds to make her light, and by all means she must be adorned with
some chains of Sausages, etc. This dish is much in request with us, and is
commonly pronounced Ollia; the second l in Spanish being melted in the
pronunciation like an i. It has some Analogy with that the French call a
Bisque.

Olympiad (olympias, adis) the space of five years, or of eighty months,
thirty days to a month, which was the Epoch of the Grecians; and so used from
the time of celebrating their Olympic Games, which was every fifth year, and
the interval was called an Olympiad. See more of this in Mr. Greg. de Aeris and
Epoch. c 7.

Olympic Games (olympia) Games instituted by Hercules in honor of Jupiter;
they were celebrated every fifth year in the Plains of Elis, a City of
Peloponnesus, and the Exercises were five; Running, Wrestling, Leaping,
Quoiting, and Whorle-bats. The reward to those that overcame in these feats of
activity was nothing but a Garland of Olive branches, lest covetousness, rather
then virtue, should make them strive for victory. They took name from the City
Olympia, otherwise Pisa. Sir Wat. Ral. lib. 2. fol. 490.

Olympias (Gr.) heavenly; a woman's name, but some use Olympha.

Ombrage. See Vmbrage.

Omega (Gr. (...), i. O magnum) the last letter in the Greek Alphabet; and by a
Metaphor taken for the last part or end of any thing. See Alpha.

Omelet (Fr.) a Pancake of Eggs, a Froise.

Ominous (omninosus) lucky or unlucky, that portends good or ill luck.

Omneity (from omnis) the all-being of a thing. Rel. Med.

Omnifarious (omnifarius) sundry, diverse, all manner of ways.

Omniferous (omnifer) that bears or brings forth all things, or of all
kinds.

Omnigenous (omnigenus) of every kind.

Omnimode (omnimodus) of all manners or fashions, of every way.

Omniparent (omniparens) which bears or brings forth all things; Father or
Mother of all things.

Omniregencie (from omnis and rego) the having the sole rule or authority in
ones hands.

Omnipotency (omnipotentia) almightiness.

Omnipresent (omnipresens) that is present every where.

Omniscient Omniscious (omniscius) that knows all things.

Omnitenent (omnitenens) that contains all things.

Omnitenerant, that travels every where, that journeys into all places.

Omnivagant (omnivagus) wandering every where, that runs up and down in all
places.

Omnivalent (omnivalens) that is able to do all things.

Omnivolent (omnivolus) that wills or desires all things.

Omnivorous (omnivorus) that devoures and eats all kind of things.

Omologie (omologia) a congruence, proportion, or agreeableness; confession.

Onagre (onager) a wild Ass; also an Engine to fling or shoot great stones, as
the Balista did arrows.

Onerate (onero) to load, charge or burden, to overcharge, to weary.

Onocrotal (onocrotalus) a Bird like a Swan, braying like an Ass; thought to be
a Bittour.

Onomancie (onomantia) divination by names; also the skill of repeating many
names by the art of memory. The Pythagoreans judged the even number of vowels
in names to signify imperfections in the left sides of men, and the odd number
in the right.

Onomantical, pertaining unto, or skilful in that kind of Divination.

Onamatopeious, pertaining to the Figure Onomatopoeia, which is a faining a
name from any kind of sound.

Onymancy (Gr.) Divination by oil and wax.

Onyx (Gr.) a precious stone found in the mountains of Arabia of the color of
a man's nail. Some write, that it is congealed of a juice dropping from a tree
called Onycha, which is the cause it smells sweet being cast into the fire; also
that it is often found with diverse pictures in it, being easily therein
fashioned, before the stone be thoroughly hardened. This stone is called by some
the Chalcidonie.

Opal (opalum) a precious stone of diverse colors, wherein appears the fiery
shining of the Carbuncle, the purple color of the Amethyst, and the greenness
of the Emerald very strangely mixed together. Plin. lib. 37. ca. 6.

Opacitie (opacitas) shadow of trees, umbrage.

Opaque Opacous (opacus) shadowed, in the shade, dark, obscure, black.

Opera (Lat.) a work, labor; diligence, study, etc. In Italy it signifies a
Tragedy, Tragi-Comedy, Comedy or Pastoral, which (being the studied work of a
Poet) is not acted after the vulgar manner, but performed by Voices in that
way, which the Italians term Recitative, being likewise adorned with Scenes by
Perspective, and extraordinary advantages by Music. The common Plays (which
are not Opera's) are performed ex tempore by the Actors, and are but in the
nature of Farces, wanting the abovementioned adornments.

Operarious (operarius) pertaining to the workman, done with labor.

Operator (Lat.) he that works; a workman.

Operiment (operimentum) a covering.

Opertaneous (opertaneus) done within doors, in secret or in covert.

Ophthalmie (ophthalmia) an inflammation of the uttermost skin of the eye
called Aduata, proceeding either of fullness of the body, or of the sharp
choleric humor, or of gross humors, and windiness puffing up the place. Tho.

Opiferous (opifer) which aids or helps, succoring.

Opifice (opificium) work, or workmanship.

Opimous (opimus) fat, gross, in good liking or plight; rich, plentiful; well
furnished.

Opinable (opinabilis) that is or may be conceived in opinion. Bac.

Opinator (Lat.) a supposer, one that never affirms any thing.

Opinative or Opiniative (opinatus) that stands in his own opinion, addicted to
an opinion, apt to have opinions, wedded to his own humor, wilful.

Opiniatrety (from the Fr. opiniastrete) opiniativeness, obstinacy a
headstrong maintaining of, or persistance in an ill opinion.

Opiparous (opiparus) sumptuous, magnificent, very rich, royal.

Opisthograph (opisthographum) a book written on the backside, or paper
written on both sides.

Opisthographical, that is written upon on both sides.

Opitulat^ (opitulor) to help, succor, or aid.

Opobalsamum (Gr.) the Gum of the Balm tree. See Balm.

Oppication (oppicatio) a covering with pitch.

Opium (Lat.) or Opiate, the juice of black Poppy, sold dry by Apothecaries. It
is sometimes used in Physic to cause sleep, or to assuage excessive pain, but
then it must be mixed with other things, and given with great discretion; for,
taken alone, it will cast one into a deadly sleep; being cold and dry in the
fourth degree. Bull.

Oppidan (oppidanus) a Citizen or Townsman.

Oppignorate (oppignoro) to lay in pledge, to gage or pawn.

Oppilation (oppilatio) an obstruction or stopping the Liver, or other chief
entrals.

Oppilative (oppilatus) obstructive, stopping, shut up.

Oppletion (oppletio) a filling up.

Opportune (opportunus) meet, for the purpose, fit, convenient, in due time,
and as it ought to be.

Opposite (oppositum) a contrary. Aristotle makes four kinds of Opposites;
first, those that are relative opposita, as the Husband and Wife, the Master
and Servant, etc. which have reference each to other. Secondly, those which are
Contraria; as Right and Wrong; Ignorance, and Science, etc. Thirdly, Those that
are privative opposita, as Light and Darkness, Sight and Blindness, which
succeed and deprive one another. The fourth and last kind of Opposites are
those which in Propositions and Clauses are Contradicentia, the one affirming,
and the other negative, etc. J. Doderidge.

Opprobrious (opprobriosus) reproachful in words, upbraiding, reviling,
taunting.

Oppugn (oppugno) to assault, to batter, to lay seige unto, to fight against;
Also to reason against a thing earnestly.

Opsimathie (opsimathia) a learning when one is old.

Opsonator (Lat.) a buyer or purveyor of meats; a Cater, a Manciple.

Optable (optabilis) that is to be desired, wished, or looked for.

Optation (optatio) choice, opinion, wishing, desiring.

Optative (optatum) a wish or desire. It is also used adjectively, as wishing
for or that desires.

Optic Optical (opticus) pertaining to the sight. Optic sinews are those
which bring the virtue of seeing to the eyes. So the Optic Science is that by
which the reason of sight is known; Art speculative.

Optimacy (from optimates) a Government in a Commonwealth, by noble or other
chief persons.

Optimitie (optimitas) utility, great profit, excellency.

Option (optio) choice, or election.

Optive. See Adoptive.

Opulencie (opulentia) riches, abundance, plenty, wealth.

Opulent (opulentus) rich, plentiful, wealthy, abundant.

Opuscule (opusculum) a little work, a little labor.

Or (Fr.) Gold; In Heraldry it signifies gold color.

Ore (ora) the end or extreme part of any thing; a Region, Land or Country:
Thus Lempsters Ore is that fertile part of Herefordshire, which lies about two
miles round that Town.

Oracle (oraculum) a Sentence, Council or Answer given by God; also a notable
saying or judgment; a Prophecy or Prediction. Among the Gentiles these
Oracles were but illusions of the Devil, who answered for the most part
doubtfully in Idols, to questions made to him. As a great Prince, going to the
Wars, and demanding of the Oracle what success he should have, had this
ambiguous answer given him, Ibis redibis nunquam per bella peribis. Which he
thus commaing, Ibis, redibis, nunquam per etc. ventured on the War, and was
slain.

There were two principal places of Oracles, one of Ammon in Lybia, the other
at Delphi in Booetia; at the first Jupiter, in this Apollo were said to give
answers. These Oracles ceased at the coming of our Savior.

Oracular, pertaining to an Oracle.

Oral (from Os, oris) pertaining to the Mouth, Visage, face, look, favor or
voice.

Oratory (oratorium) a place wholly dedicated to prayer; a Closet, a private
Chapel to pray in.

Oratorians, a Religious Fraternity or Order instituted the last age by St.
Philip Nerius, a Florentine Priest; They took name from the place first
frequented by them for their exercises of Preaching, and Catechizing, which was
the Oratory of St. Hierom in Rome.

Orbation (orbatio) a depriving or bereaving one of his goods, or of any other
thing; poverty.

Orbical Orbicular (orbicus) round like a circle, circular, Globie.

Orbiculated (orbiculatus) made round in the form of a circle or compass.

Orbitie (orbitas) the want of children on the Parents part, the want of
parents on the childrens part; any want or privation.

Orchal (orca) a stone like Alum used sometimes by Dyers to raise a red color.

Ordael or Ordeal (ordalium) signifies as much as judgment, and is compounded
(as some say) of two Saxon words Or, a privatitive, as [A] in Greek, and dael,
i. ^ars, q Expers. But it is artificially used for a kind of purgation,
practiced in ancient times, whereby the party purged was judged Expers
criminis, called in the Common Law, Purgatio vulgaris, and utterly condemned by
Pope Steven the second. There was of this four sorts, one by Kampfight (not
unlike our Duel.) The second called Fire-Ordeal, which was for the accused to
pass blindfold with bare feet over hot Plowshares, etc. (of which see Mr.
Fullers hist. Cent. 11. p. 141.) The third was hot water-Ordeal, by putting his
arms up to the elbows in seething water, etc. The fourth was cold water-Ordeal,
like the late used trial of Witches. Of these at large, see Verstegan, p. 50,
51. and Lambert in his explication of Saxon words, Verbo Ordalium, where he
expresses such superstitions as were used in it. Mr. Manwood part 1. page 15.
But Hotom. especially, disput. de feud. ca 41, etc.

Ordalian Law, was that Law which instituted the Ordael aforesaid, and was long
before the Conquest, but did continue of force in England till the time of King
John, in whose days it was abrogated; as Pol. Vir. Holinshed and Supplimentum
Chronicorum, witness.

Ordinal (ordinale is properly a Book of Direction for Bishops, to give holy
Orders, and for other things belonging to their Function; but sometimes used
for a Book containing the Orders and Constitutions of a Religious House or
College.

Ordinary (ordinarius) though in the Civil Law, whence the word is taken, it
signifies any Judge that has authority to take knowledge of Causes in his own
right; as he is a Magistrate and not by deputation, yet in our Common Law it is
most commonly and usually taken for him that has ordinary Jurisdiction in
causes Ecclesiastical. See Brook and Linwood hoc titulo.

Oreads (oreades) Fairies of the mountains.

Oredelf, is a liberty whereby a man claims the Ore found in his own ground. It
properly signifies Ore lying under ground; as a Delf of Coal, is coal lying in
veins under ground, before it is dug up.

Orfraies (aurifrisium) frizled cloth of gold, made and used in England both
before and since the Conquest, worn both by the Clergy and the Kings
themselves, as may appear out of Math. Paris, where he speaks of the Ornaments
sent by the Abbots of England to the Pope; and also by a Record in the Tower,
where the King commands the Templars to deliver such Jewels, Garments, and
Ornaments, as they had of his in keeping; among which he names Dalmaticum
velatum de Orefreis, that is a damask garment guarded with Orfraies. Of old the
Jackets or Coat Armors of the Kings Guard, were also termed Orfrais, because
they were covered with Goldsmiths work.

Orgal, The Lees of wine dried, used by Dyers, to make their cloth drink in
their color thoroughly.

Organical (organicus) that which consists of diverse substantial parts and
members; instrumental, used as a means; pertaining to Instruments or Organs.
Our body is said to be organical, because the Soul performs her operations by
the parts thereof, as instruments.

Organist (organista) an Organ-player.

Orgeis An. 31. Ed. 3. Stat. 3. ca. 2. is the greatest sort of North-Sea fish,
now adays called Organ Ling.

Orgies (orgia) rude Ceremonies instituted by the Poet Orpheus, to be kept
every third year to the honor of Bacchus.

Orient (oriens) the East part where the Sun rises.

Oriental (orientalis) of or belonging to the East.

Orientalitie, the luster of the East, the being Eastward of a thing.

Orifice (orificium) the mouth, brim, or entrance into any thing; the outward
hole in a wound.

Oriflambe (oriflammeus) the great and holy Standard of France, having in the
top a purple Ensign or Flag, born at first only in Wars against Infidels; But
afterward used in all other Wars, and at length utterly lost in a Battle
against the Flemmings. Cotg.

Origin or Original (origo) an offspring, Pedigree or birth; a Stock or
kindred; a beginning or fountain; An Original is also the first, authentic, or
true draught of a writing.

Original sin. See Venial.

Oriol (oriolum) the little waste room next the Hall in some Houses, and
Monasteries, were some particular persons dined.

Orison (from the Fr. Oraison) prayer; also speech or communication.

Ornomancy (Gr.) divination by the moving of birds.

Orphean, belonging to Orpheus the Thracian Poet, who is feigned to have played
so excellently on the Harp, that he drew Stones, Woods and Trees after him,
etc. Hence, an Orphean Harp.

Orque (orca) a Hulk or huge Ship; Also a Sea Monster so called, enemy to the
Whale.

Orpiment Orpment (auripigmentum) a soft yellow kind of Arsenick, like
Brimstone, found very deep in the earth; commonly taken for Ratsbane.

Orthodoxal Orthodox (orthodoxus) that has a good or right opinion, faith^ or
belief.

Orthodoxie (orthodoxia) the right opinion of faith.

Orthogonal (orthogonius) that has right or even corners.

Orthographie (orthographia) the form of true writing, or the art of writing
words truly; As, to lose (perdo;) to loose or unty (solve.) Lest (as lest such
a thing should happen (ni,) and least, as the least of all (minimus) etc. It is
also a plat of building, drawn out with the figure or order of the whole work.

Orthographize (from orthographia) to write or use true Orthographie.

Ortive (ortivus) East, easterly; as the Ortive Sun, the Sun rising.

Osanna. See Hosanna.

Oscillate (oscillo) to move the mouth, to bow down, to way or swing up and
down.

Oscian Play, was a light sport among the ancient Romans, pleasing the peoples
humors. Tacit.

Oscines (oscines, ab os and cano) are those kind of birds, by whose chirping,
singing o^ voices the Augures foretold things to come; As the Crow, Pie,
Chough, etc.

Saepe sinistra cava praedixit ab ilice Cornix.

Virg. To this kind of Divination may be ascribed that old womanish
observation with us, That when the Pie chatters, we shall have strangers.

Oscitation (oscitatio) yawning or gaping; negligence or idleness.

Osculate (osculo) to kiss, to love heartily, to embrace.

Ossicle (ossiculum) a little bone.

Ossifrage (ossifraga) a kind of Eagle, having so strong a Beak, that therewith
she breaks bones, and is therefore called a bone-breaker or Ossifrage.

Ossifragant (ossifragus) that breaks bones.

Ossuary (ossuaria) a shrine or like thing where bones are kept; a Charnel
house.

Ostensional (ostentionalis) a Soldier attending the Prince in public shows.

Ostent (ostentum) every thing that comes against nature; a monster, wonder or
strange thing.

Ostent (ostentus, ab ostendo) a pointing at, or mocking; a telling, declaring
or showing.

Ostentation (ostentatio) bragging, vaunting, showing forth vainglory,
boasting.

Ostentatitious (ostentatitius) set out for show or vainglory.

Ostentiferous (ostentifer) that which brings monsters or strange sights.

Ostiarie (ostiarius) an Officer to keep unworthy persons out of the Church, a
Doorkeeper.

Ostomachie (ostomachia) a playing or fighting with bones.

Ostracism (ostracismus) a kind of banishment among the Athenians for ten
years, which was done by delivering a shell (ostratos) with the condemned
persons name written in it; it was used not so much to punish other offenses,
as to abate the immoderate power of Noblemen, and was ordained first by
Clistenes, who for his labor was first condemned.

Ostration (from ostratos) shelliness for being made of shells. Br.

Ostriferous (ostrifer) that breeds or brings forth Oysters.

Oswold (Germ.) House-Ruler or Steward; for Would in old English, and high Dutch
is a Ruler; but for this the Normans brought in Le Despencer, now Spencer. The
holy life of St. Oswold King of Northumberland, who was incessantly in prayer,
has given much honor to this name.

Otraqua, a kind of drink in the Mollucca's and Philipines that comes from a
nut.

Oval (ovalis) belonging to the triumph called Ovation; also round-shaped like
an egg.

Ovation (ovatio, ab ovo, as) a small triumph of a Prince or Captain for a
Victory obtained without slaughter of men, in which he did either go on foot or
ride on horseback with his Soldiers about him, singing or shouting for joy,
and wearing on his head, a Garland of Myrtle. Tho. See Triumph.

Ovation (ovatio, ab ovum) the season when hens lay eggs, or a laying of eggs.

Ouch (Sax.) a kind of collar of gold, or such like ornament, which women did
wear about their necks. It is mentioned An. 24. H. 8. c. 13. And is sometimes
used for a Boss or button of gold. Chauc.

Overt. See Loover.

Oviarie (oviaria) a flock of sheep.

Oviparous-Animals (oviparae) Birds, Beasts, or Fishes that breed by eggs or
spawn.

Ounce (uncia) twelve ounces make a pound weight Troy; sixteen, a pound
Averdupois) twenty penny weight make an Ounce; twenty four grains make a Penny
weight; twenty Mites make a Grain; twenty four Droits make a Mite; twenty
Perits make a Droit; twenty four Blanks make a Perit. Act of Parl. 1649.43.

Ourage (Fr. ouvrage) a work; also work or labor.

O^lawrie (utlagaria) is the loss or deprivation of the benefit belonging to a
Subject, that is, of the Kings protection and the Realm. Bract. l. 3. tr. 2. c.
11. number. 1, and 3. Foris facit utlagatus omnia quae pacis sunt.

Owen (Lat. Audoenus) if it be the same with St. Owen of France. But the
Britans will have it from old King Onous Father in Law to Hercules; others,
from Eugenius, i. noble, or well-born; Certain it is the Country in Ireland
called Ter-oen, is in Latin Records Terra Eugenii, and the ^ri^ Priests know no
Latin for their Oen but Eugenius, as Rothericus for Rock. And Sir Owen Ogle in
Latin Records (as I am informed) was written Eugenius Ogle. Came.

Oxgang of Land (Bovala terrae) six Ox-gangs of land seem to be so much as six
Oxen will plough. Cromp. Iurisd. fol. 220. But an Ox-gang seems properly to be
spoken of such as lies in Gainour. Old not. br. fol. fol. 117. Mr. Skene de
verbor. signif. verbo (bovata terrae) says an Ox-gang of land should always
contain thirteen Acres, and that four Oxen-gates extended to a pound land of
old extent.

Oxymel (Gr.) a Potion or syrrup made of honey, vinegar and water sod together,
good to cut and cleanse gross phlegmatic humors; sometimes there are boiled
certain roots and seeds with it, and then it is called Oxymel composi^um;
sometimes it made with honey, vinegar and the Sea Onion, and then it is named
Oxymel Scylliticum, which also is of two sorts, to wit, simple and compound.
See Dioscor. l. 1. c. 22. Galen l. 4. de sanit. tuend.

Oxyporopolist (oxyporopola) he that sells meat in sharp sauce or syrrup.

Oyer and Terminer (audiendo and terminando) in true French Ouir and Terminer)
is, in the intendment of our Law, a Commission especially granted to certain
persons, for hearing and determining one or more causes. This was wont to be in
use upon some sudden outrage or insurrection in any place. Crompt. Jurisd. fo.
131. See Assize.

Oyes (a corruption from the Fr. Oyez, i. hear ye) and is used by Criers in our
Courts of Law, when they make Proclamation of any thing.

Ozena (Gr.) a disease or sore in the Nose, causing a stinking savor.

P
PAbular Pabulous (pabularis) pertaining to Fodder, Provender, Forage, or meat
for Beasts. Br.

Pabulatory, the same.

Pacal (pacalis) that brings or signifies peace, peaceable.

Pacator (Lat.) a pacifier, asswager or quieter.

Pace (passus) a pace in going, a step or stride; of these there are two sorts,
Passus minor vel simplex the measure of two feet and a half; which is usually
the distance from the toes of the fore-foot to the heels of the hinder foot.
Passus major sive Geometricus, a Pace or fathom of five foot, and by this Pace,
miles are measured. In some places they reckon three foot and an half to the
Pace. Tho.

Paciferous (pacifer) that brings peace and quietness.

Pacification (pacificatio) a pleasing, peacemaking, quieting or appeasing.

Pacifiqu^ Pacificatory (pacificatorius) of or belonging, or serving to make
peace and quietness.

Paction (pactio) an accord, bargain or agreement. That Truce, which in time of
war is concluded upon and accepted of both sides for a certain limited space of
time, is properly called Paction.

Pactitious (pactitius) done by bargain, or upon condition or agreement.

Pactolus, a River in Lydia, having sandy gravel like gold; therefore feigned
to have gold in its waters.

Paddock (from the Belg. Padde) a Toad.

Paean (Gr.) a hymn or song of praise made to Apollo, at such time as any
plague or pestilence raged; and also after the obtaining some victory or
triumph, as Jo Paean (Ovid) an exclamation or outery uttering the joy which one
has by any prosperity or welfare.

Paduen^ag^ (Fr.) common of pasture in one or diverse parishes. Cotg.

Paganalian (from Paganalia of or belonging to Wakes, Plough-mens Feasts, or
Country Holy Days.

Paganical (paganicus) pertaining to the Country, or to Villages.

Paganism (paganismus) Heathenism, Gentilism, the religion or state of the
Gentiles; also the custom of Country men.

Page (pagina) the side of a leaf in a book; some confound folio and page; when
as a folio or leaf, properly comprehends two rages; others cite a Book by
folio's, when it is in a large volume; and by pages, when in a small.

Paginal (from pagina) of or belonging to a page.

Paged, an Idol or false god among the East Indians, so called.

Paillardise (Fr.) Lechery, Whoredom, Venery; also villainy, wickedness, any
filthy or beashly humor.

Paillardiz^ (Fr. paillarder) to lecher, haunt Bawdy-houses, to commit Whoredom.

Paisage (Fr.) Landscape, Country work See Landscape.

Paladin (Fr.) a Knight of the round Table; also a sort of Nobility in some
Countries so called.

Palate (palatum) the upper hollow part of the mouth, wherein the sense of
tasting lies, as in the tongue.

Palati^a^, pertaining, to or that pleases the palate.

Palatinate, or County Palatine, is a principal County or Shire, having as it
were the same authority, as the Palace or Kings Royal Court has. Of these
County Palatines there are four in England, viz. Lancaster, Chester, Durham and
Ely. An* 5 Eliz. 1. cap. 23. But An. 33. H. 8. ca. 10. mention is made of the
County Palatine of Hexam. Vnde quaere. See Cassan de consuet. Burg. p. 14.

Palatine (Fr. Palatin) a general or common appellation or title for such as
have any special Office or Function in a Sovereign Princes Palace. This is the
title of the Prince Elector Palatine of Trevers, and had its origin a magno
Palatio Treverensi. Min.

Palatine (from palatum) of or belonging to the Palate or roof of the mouth.
Hence, Palatine letters are such as are pronounced by the help of the Palate,
as G, T, R, etc.

Palatine (palatinus) of or belonging to a Palace or Princes Court. It may also
be taken for the Hill Palatinus in Rome, of which see Esquilinus.

Paleated (paleatus) made or mingled with chaff, full of chaff or straw.

Pale Matlle (Fr.) a game wherein a round bowl is with a Mallet struck through
a high arch or iron (standing at either end of an Alley) which he that can do
at the fewest blows, or at the number agreed on, wins. This Game was heretofore
used at the Alley near St. Jameses, and vulgarly called Pel-Mell.

Paleous (from palea) of or belonging to chaff, corn or straw. Br.

Pales, a Goddess of the Shepherds.

Palestrical (palaestricus) of or pertaining to wrestling, that uses or
teaches wrestling; also that which is done decently, with comely gesture of
the body.

Palindromes (Gr.) are those sentences or verses, where the syllables are the
same backward as forward. As a noble Lady in Queen Elizabeth's days, being for a
time forbidden the Court, for too much familiarity with a great Lord in favor,
gave this Devise, the Moon covered with a cloud, and underneath this Palindrome
for Motto, Ablata, at alba.
Roma tibi subito motibus ibit amor.
And this in English, which is more difficult to compose;
Lewd did I live and evil I did dwell.


Palingenesie (palingenesia) regeneration, new birth, or second nativity.

Palinode Palinodie (palinodia) a recantation, a contrary song, an unsaying
that one has spoken or written, the sound of the retreat.

Palizado (Span Palizada, Fr. Palissade) a defense or wall of Pales or Stakes,
or the pointed Stakes in a Fortification, to hinder the enemies scaling the
Work; a term in War; Also taken for great posts set up in the entry to a Camp,
for a defense against great shot.

Pall (pallium) a Mantle, such as the Knights of the Garter wear; a long
Garment or Robe which Philosophers wore. But it is most used for a Pontifical
Vesture made of Lambs Wool, in breadth not exceeding three fingers, and having
two Labels hanging down before and behind, which the Pope gives or sends to
Archbishops and Metropolitans, and they at the Altar, wear it about their
necks, above their other Ornaments. The Pall was first given to the Bishop of
Ostia, by P. Marcus the second, An. 336. Also the velvet laid over a dead body
is called the Pall.

Palladion (Spa.) Lat. Palladium) an Image of Pallas, which the Trojans fondly
believed was sent to preserve their City and Estate, etc. which sottish belief
St. Augustine ( lib. 9. de Civ. Dei) very well reproved, when he said, The
Trojans were keepers of the Palladion, but not the Palladion of the Trojans.
However, this word is still used for a preservation or sure defense.

Pallas, the Goddess of Wisdom, otherwise called Minerva, etc. In the Poetical
story of Perseus staying Medusa, Pallas furnished him with a shield for that
purpose, and with a Looking-glass; Mercury with wings for his feet, Pluto with
a Helmet, etc. see the Fable at large in L. Bacons Advancem. of Learning, fol.
120. Hence it is we use Pallas shield, for a shield of Wisdom and Providence.
For so his Lordship means when he says, In Wars the Shield of Pallas prevails
more then the sword of Mars; that is, wisdom and stratagems prevail more then
down right blows.

Palled (Fr. palle) pale; also dead, without spirit. Bac.

Palliardize. See Pailliardize.

Palliate (pallio) to hide or cover, to conceal or cloak.

Palliation (palliatio) a cloaking, covering, or hiding.

Palliative, that cloaketh, covers or concealeth; as Chyrurgeons call that a
Palliative cure, when a wound is healed outwardly, and festers underneath; or
where a show only is made of a perfect cure without searching to the root or
cause of the disease.

Pallid (pallidus) pale, bleak, sometimes yellowish, fearful, whitish.

Pullification (a term in Architecture) piling of the ground plot. Sir H.W.

Pallor (Lat.) a pale color, paleness, wanness.

Pallizado. See Palizado.

Palmar (palmaris) pertaining to victory, or to a hand breadth, or to the palm
of the hand.

a Palm in measure (palmus) the breadth of a hand or four fingers, and this is
called the minor Palm; the Palm major is a span, or, according to some, a
shaftment.

Palm Sunday (Dominica Palmarum) the sixth Sunday in Lent, and the next before
Easter; so called because, on that day the people went to meet our Savior with
boughs of Palm and Olive branches in their hands, when he entered solemnly into
Jerusalem, riding on an Ass.

Palm Tree (Palma) is that which bears Dates, growing plentifully in the Holy
Land; Its branches were wont to be carried as a token of victory.

-- Palmaque nobilis
Terraru^ Dominos evehit ad Deos
Hor. Od. 1. Because it naturally shoots upward, though oppressed with never so
great weight, and its leaves never fall; of this Tree there is male and female;
the male bears only blossoms and no fruit, the female bears both; but not
unless the male grow by it.

Palmer (ferula) a Feruler, so called, because in Schools the palms of Boys
hands are struck therewith; It is also called a Palmatory from the Span.
Palmatoria, which has the same signification. Min.

Palmer (from the Span. Palmero) a poor Pilgrim, that visits all holy places;
so called from a staff or boughs of Palm, which they were wont to carry with
them. See Pilgrim.

Palmer (eruca) a worm with many feet; so called from the Palm tree, which it
gnaws and eats; a Caterpillar.

Palmiferous (palmifer) bearing or yielding Palm or Date Trees; also victorious.

Palmipedous (palmipes, edis) that has a plain and flat foot; Palmipedous
birds, i.e. whole-footed, such are most water-sowl. Br.

Palto^ster (chiromantes) a Diviner by the palm of the hand, one that tells the
fortune of others by looking in their hands.

Palmestry. See Chironantie.

Palmeto Wine, is a sweet and pleasant juice (like Muscadine or Alicant) coming
from the Palmeto Tree in the Isle Mauritius. Herb. Tr.

Palpation (palpatio) flattery, cogging, fair speaking, soothing.

Palpitation (palpitatio) panting, beating often; quick moving up and down, as
the heart when it throbs.

Pal^sgrave (Belg. and Pfalizgraff Teut. from Palis or pfaliz, i. Palatium, and
Grave or Graff, i. comes, Lat. Comes Palatinus) the title of the Prince Elector
Palatine of the Rheine. See Falatine and Archdapifer.

Paludament (paludamentum) a Coat-armor or Horsemans coat, a Soldiers garment,
an Heralds Coat of Arms. Among the ancient Romans, it was a Military garment,
worn by none but the Lord General or Chief Captains. Alex. Genesis Dier. lib. 5.
cap. 18.

Paludiferous (paludifer) that causes a Fen or Marsh.

Palumbine (alumbinus) of or belonging to a Wood-culver or Ring-dove.

Pamphil^, a kind of great Boats in Italy, having 140, or 160 Oars of a side.

Pampination (pampinatio) a cutting or pulling off superfluous leaves and
branches from Vines.

Pampinean (pampineus) of or belonging to a young Vine, Branch, or Leaf, full
of Vine-Branches.

Pan, the god of Shepherds; in Greek it signifies All.

Panade (Span. Panada or Empanada; Fr. Panade) a kind of meat made of crumbs of
bread, and Currants boiled in water; or (as some will have it) of grated Bread,
Milk, Sugar and grated Cheese.

Panage. See Paunage.

Panatetus (Gr.) that contains all virtues. Silvester makes it the title of one
of his Books, wherein he bewails the loss of Prince Henry.

Panathenate, belonging to the Solemnity called Panathenaea, held at Athens,
once every year, which was the less, and once every fifth year, which was the
greater.

Pancat^ (Fr.) a paper containing all the particular rates of Tolls or Customs
due to the French King; Thus termed because commonly hung up in some public
place, either single or with a frame. Cotg.

Panchaia, a sandy Country of Arabia, where is store of Frankincense. Hence
Dubartas and others, use Panchaian Fumes for incense or sweet perfumes. So also
Odor Panchaique for the smell of Arabian Frankincense.

Pancratiast (Gr.) one that is skilful in wrestling, and other feats of
activity.

Pancratical (pancraticus) expert at all feats of activity, cunning at all kind
of Games and Exercises, stout, like a wrestler. Br.

Pandarism, the function or employment of a Pandar, which is to make or set
lecherous matches; Ruffianism, Baudery.

Pandects ( pandectae, a (...) i. omne, and (...), hale^) Books which contain
all matters, or comprehend all parts of the subject whereof they entreat; or
Books of diverse Arguments. The Volume of the Civil Law called Digestes, is also
called the Pandect.

Pandiculation (pandiculatio) a gaping or stretching ones self with all his
body, as they do that gape for, or come from sleep, or at the approach of an
Ague.

Pandor (from the Belg. Pander, that is, he that takes a pawn or pledge: for
the souls of such, as make use of him, are pawned into his hands, as to
Asmodeus his Chamberlain) a He-Baud.

Pandora fained (by Hesiedus) to be the first woman, and made by Vulcan; endued
by all the gods, with several excellent gifts; but afterward by Jupiter, in
displeasure sent to her Spouse Epimetheus, with a box full of all manner of
miseries. Hence Pandora's Box is taken for misery, calamity, and the like.

Pandurist (panduristes) he that plays on a musical instrument called a Rebech,
or on a Violin.

Panegyric (panegyricum) a licentious kind of speaking or oration, in the
praise of Kings, or other great persons; Also any Feast, Game or Solemnity
exhibited, before the General Assembly of a whole Nation.

Panegyrist (Gr.) a praiser or flatterer, one that writes in commendation of,
etc.

Panick fear (panicum) a sudden fear, wherewith one is dis-straught, and put
beside his wit, coming without known cause. So taken from the god Pan, who had
power to strike men with terrors.

Panicle (Dim. of panis) a little Loaf.

Panifice (panificium) the craft of baking or making Bread; also Bread it self
or a Loaf of Bread.

Pannades (Gr.) the curvettings, prauncings or boundings of lusty Horses.

Pannic^e ( panniculus, Dim. of pannus) fine cloth, a little piece or gobbet of
cloth. The fleshy Pannicle (panniculus car^osus) the fleshy membrane or skin,
which lies next under the fat of the outward parts, and is the fourth covering
that enwraps all the body from the head to the sole of the foot. Tho.

Pannier ( Panarium, Fr. Panier) a Bin, Hutch or place to keep Bread in, a
Basket to carry bread in, a Dosser.

Pannier-man, in the Inns of Court, is one whose Office is to blow the Horn for
Dinner, and wait at the Barristers Table, and has the refuse bread and meat for
his vails, which he collects in a Pannier or Basket.

Pannonian (from Pannonia) of or belonging to the Country of Hungary. Bac.

Panomphean (from Panomphaeus, a name of Jupiter pertaining to Jupiter.

Panop^ (panoplia) complete Harness. Armatura totum corpus militis tegens. Scap.

Panoplique (from panoplia) completely armed, in complete armor. Rel. Med.

Panpharmacon (Gr.) a medicine for all diseases.

Pansophy (Gr.) an all-discerning Wisdom, wisdom or knowledge in all things.

Partagruelist (Fr.) a merry Greek, faithful drunkard, good fellow. Cot.

Pantheology (Gr.) the whole sum of Divinity.

Pantheon (Gr.) a Heathenish Temple of all the gods, in Rome; after by Pope
Boniface the Fourth, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary, and all Saints.

Pantherine (pantherinus) of a Panther, or spotted like a Panther; this Beast
has a fair spotted skin, and is the female to the Libard.

Pantomime Pantomimick (pantomimus) an Actor of many parts in one Play, one
that can represent the gesture and counterfeit the speech of any man, a Dizzard
or common Jester.

Pantometrie (Ga.) a measuring of all kind of quantities: It is the title and
subject of a Mathematical Book, set forth by one Mr. Digs.

Panurgy (panurgia) craftiness, subtilty, deceit, guile; a meddling in all
matters.

Papacy (from Papa) the Popedom; the reign or dominion of the Pope.

Papal (papalis) of or belonging to the Pope.

Stephen Pasquier, in his Recherches de la France, observes that the word Papa,
i. the Pope, comes from an old contraction of Pater Patriae, written thus Pa.
Pa. as we have it in many Coyns.

Papality (papalitas) the Popedom, the Dominion of the Pope, Popishness.

Papaverous Papaverean (papavereus) of or belonging to Poppy or Chestoul.

Papian Law (Lex Papia, Poppoea) a Law made, among the ancient Romans, against
single life; that if any forbore from the privileges of Parents, and had no
children, the people (who was the common Father of all) should inherit their
goods. Tacit.

Paphian (paphius) of or belonging to Paphos, a City of Cyprus, dedicated to
Venus, and built by Paphus. Hence Paphos Archer is taken for Cupid; Paphian
fire or shot, for the fire or Arrows of Love.

Papulosity (papulositas) fullness of pimples or blisters.

Papyriferous (papyrifer) that bears or brings forth Paper, or the Rush Papyrus.

Papyropolist (papyropola) a Seller of Paper.

Parabien (Span.) a welcoming, a bidding of joy, a congratulation. Ariana.

Parable (parabola) a resemblance, a parable, a similitude, or comparison.

Parabolical, of or belonging to a Parable.

Paracelsian, a Physician that follows the method of Paracelsus, and his manner
of curing; which was by exceeding strong oils and waters extracted out of the
natures of things. Bull.

Paraclete (paracletus) an Advocate or Patron; a comforter. The third person of
the Blessed Trinity is most commonly so called in Scripture; and Jesus Christ
also, 1 Jo. 2.1.

Paraclyte (paraclytus) a man defamed, ill reported of* that has an ill name.
Hence

Paraclytical, that is defamed, or has an ill name.

Paracmastical (paracmasticus) pertaining to a kind of continual hot and
burning fever, wherein the heat, when it is at the greatest, by little and
little diminishes till it totally cease.

Parade (Fr.) an appearance or show, a bravado or vaunting offer; Also a term
of War, and is commonly used for that appearance of Soldiers in a Garrison
about two or three of the clock in the afternoon, to hear prayers, and after
that to receive Orders from the Major for the Watch and Guards next night.

Paradigm (paradigma) an example of some ones fact and saying. Hence

To Paradigmatiz, to bring or cite such examples, to draw the form or figure of
a thing, or to exemplify. Dr. Ham.

Paradox (paradoxum) a wonderful and strange thing to hear, such as is contrary
to the common opinion. Hence

Paradoxal Paradoxical strange, odd, against common opinion, incredible.

Paradoxology, a speaking by, or of Paradoxes. Br.

Paradrome (paradromis) an open Gallery or Walk, that has no shelter over head.

Paragogical, of or pertaining to the figure Paragoge, which is when a letter
or syllable is added to the end of a word.

Paragon (Fr. ex par and ago) a peerless one, the most complete, most absolute
in any kind whatsoever; it is also used verbally, as to Paragon, to equal,
match or compare with.

Paragraph (paragraphus) a Pilcrow, whatsoever is comprehended in one sentence;
where the line is broken off (which Printers call a Break) there ends the
Paragraph. Books are most commonly divided into Chapters, those into Sections,
and Sections again into Paragraphs.

Paralipomenon (Gr.) left out, not spoken or written of; There are two books in
the Old Testament so called, because many worthy Histories omitted in the books
of Kings are there related.

Paralels or Parallels (Gr. (...), i. aequaliter distans) lines running of an
equal distance from each other, which can never meet, though they be drawn
infinitely in length, thus (...)

In Astronomy there are five such imagined lines, running circle-wise about the
round compass of the Heavens. The first is the Aequinoctial Line, just in the
middle of the World, between the two Poles. The second northward from the
Aequinoctial, is the Tropic of Cancer, to which sign the Sun comes about the
eleventh day of June. The third (yet more northward) is the northern Circle,
within twenty three degrees and fifty minutes of the North Pole. The fourth
Line is the Tropic of Capricorn, declining southward from the Aequinoctial, as
much as the Tropic of Cancer does northward, and to this Line the Sun comes
about the twelfth of December. The fifth and last Line, is the Southern Circle,
being as near the South Pole, as the Northern Circle (before spoken of) is to
the North Pole. These Parallels are also called Aequidistants. There is another
sort of Parallels (two of which go to a Clime) called Artificial Parallels,
because they show the differences of artificial days, etc. Heyl.

To Parallel, to compare or match.

Parallelogram (parallelogrammus) having lines every where a like distant, a
long square.

Paralogism (paralogismus) a deceitful conclusion, or captious reasoning, a
manner of arguing, which seems true when it is not; As in saying, He that
affirms Peter to be a living creature, says true; He that affirms Peter to be
a Bear, affirms him to be a living Creature. Therefore he that affirms Peter to
be a Bear says true.

To Paralogize, to reason captiously, argue deceitfully, conclude falsely. Br.

Paralysis (Gr.) a resolution of the sinews, a depriving of the feeling or
moving, or of both in any part of the body; the Palsy.

Paralytick (paralyticus) sick of the Palsy.

Paraments, Robes of state, or the place where they are kept. Chauc.

Paramount (from the Fr. par, i. per, and mounter, i. ascendere) is in our Law,
the highest Lord of the Fee; For there may be a Tenant to a Lord that holds
over of another Lord; the first of these is called Lord Mesn, the second Lord
Paramount, etc.

Paramor (peramator) a Lover, he or she, a Sweetheart.

Paranymph (Paranymphus) an Orator, who a little before the Commencement of
Doctors, etc. makes a public Speech in commendation of their sufficiency; also
an overseer of a Wedding, a Bride-dresser; or he or she that bears all the sway
at the Bridal.

Parapet (Ital. Parapetto, q. propter pectus) a Wall or Defense brest-high, on
the upper part of a Rampire, to defend from the enemies shot.

Paraph (Fr. paraphe) the flourish or peculiar knot or mark set unto, after, or
instead of, a name in the signing a Deed or Letter, and generally any such
graceful setting out of a man's hand or name in writing; also a subsignature or
signing under.

Paraphonalia, is used in our Law, but in the Civil it is Paraphernalia, which
are those goods a Wife brings her Husband, over and besides her Dowry or
Marriage-money; as, Furniture for her own Chamber, her own Apparel, and Jewels,
if she be of quality; all which she must have, and not the Executors of the
Husband, etc. Shep. Fa. Counc. 122.

Paraphrase (paraphrasis) a free manner of exposition or interpretation,
wherein a man ties not himself to express every word as it lies in the Copy,
but to explicate and adorn the matter more at large, or to abridge it, yet still
keeping the Authors sense. Any such Exposition is called a Paraphrase or
Paraphrastical Exposition.

Paraphrast (paraphrastes) a Paraphraser; one that expounds a Text by other
words then it is written in.

Parasang (parasanga) a measure of ground, containing thirty Stades, i.e. three
miles and three quarters of ours.

Parasite (parasitus) a flatterer, a Trencher-friend, a smel-feast; one that is
full hanging on some rich man, feeding his humor with flattery, to the end to
partake of his good Cheer. Hence

Parasitical, pertaining to a Parasite. Those Plants or Supercrescences are
called Parasitical plants, that live upon, the stock of others (as Parasites
do) such are Misseltoe, Polypody, Moss, and others.

Paratragediate (paratragoedio) to help to set forward a Tragedy; to make a
matter much worse, then indeed it is.

Parature (paratura) the matter whereof any thing is made.

Parcae, the three Ladies of destiny; Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos. The first
bears a Distaff, the second spins the thread of man's life, the third cuts off
the same thread, etc. with like fabulous stories.

Parceners Parcinary See Coparceners.

Parciloquy (parciloquium) a sparing or nigardly speech.

Parcity (parcitas) scantness, nearness, niggardliness, thrift, frugality.

Pard (Pardus) the Beast called a Libard.

Pareasse (Pareas) a Serpent having to the greatness of his body, but a small
head, yet such a wide mouth, that he is able to swallow a whole Pigeon, and as
he creeps, makes a Furrow on the ground with his tail.

Parellelisation, or rather Parallelisation, a making Parallels, or likes; a
comparison; El. of Armories.

Parellelogram. See Parallelogram.

Parenetick (paraeneticus) containing such fatherly or Masterly admonitions or
exhortations, as may not be gainsaid. Hence

Parenetick (paraenetica) are taken for verses full of precepts or admonitions.

Parent (parens, a pareo) obedient, dutiful, serviceable.

Parental (parentalis) of or pertaining to our Ancestors or Parents.

Parentation (parentatio) a celebrating Funerals or Obsequies, properly of
parents.

Parenthesis (Gr.) a word or clause, comprehended within another sentence, in
such sort, that it may be left out, yet the sense still remain whole; and is
commonly enclosed with two half circles (thus) as in Virgil.

Aeneas (neque enim patriam consistere mentem
Passus amor) rapidum ad naves praemittit Achatem.
P^rent^de (parenticida) he that murders his Father, Mother or dear Friend.

Par^rg^ ^ergon or Parer^m (Gr.) Parergue Fr.) an addition or acce^s; a thing
put unto, though no part of the matter, any thing that is beside the principal
question, point or purpose in hand; see Landscape.

Pat^ Marble, a sort of pure white Marble, had from the Isle Paros, and
therefore so called.

Pariation ( pariatio evenness of account, where, as much is laid out as
received.

Paricide (Paricida) a murderer of his Father, Mother, or any of his near
Kindred; any heinous murderer; and (from Paricidium) it signifies the Act it
self.

Paricidal (paricidalis) belonging to such murder, cruel.

Pa^ie^t (pariens) traveling with young, lying in travel, bringing forth young.

Parilian Palilian Feasts (parilia) Feasts or Festival days dedicated to the
goddess Pales for the preservation of Cattle.

Parility (parilitas) likeness, evenness, equality, resemblance.

Parish (parochia) a multitude of neighbors (within a certain compass of
ground) pertaining to one Church. This Land was first divided into Parishes by
Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year of our Lord 637. Came. Brit. Of
these Parish Churches there are in England and Wales 9285. according to Speed.

Parisyllable (parisyllabus) an equal syllable.

Parisyllabical (parisyllabicus) that has equal syllables; those words are
called Parisyllabical, which have no more syllables in one then another, as
fama, mensa, etc. So likewise we say in Grammar, the first decle^sion of Nouns
is Parisyllabique, because all the Cases of such Nouns in the singular number
especially have even syllables, as Gemma, gemmae, gemmae, gemmam, gemma, gemma,
etc.

Parity (paritas) likeness, equality, evenness.

Paritude, Pariture or Parture (from pario) a breeding or ingendring, the time
of travail or deliverance of child or young.

Parliament or Parliament (Fr. q. Parler le meant) or Parliament, from the Italian
and Spanish Parlamento. With us it was anciently the Assembly of the King, and
the three Estates of the Realm, viz. The Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and
Commons, for debating matters touching the Commonwealth, and especially the
making and correcting Laws; which Assembly or Court is of all other the
highest, and of greatest authority, as you may read in Sir Tho. Smith, de
Republ. Angl. l. 2. c. 1, 2. In France, those high Courts of Justice where men's
causes and differences are publicly determined, without further Appeal,
whereof there be eight, in eight capital Cities, viz. Paris, Grenoble, Tholose,
Dyon, Roven, Aix, Rhemes, and Bourdeaux) are called Sedentary Parliaments; and
their Assembly of States General is only equivalent to our Parliament.

Parmaceti, an excellent ointment; so called either from Parma, a City of
Italy, or from Sperma ceti, the seed of the Whale, a principal ingredient.

Parmesan, a kind of excellent Cheese, made at or near Parma in Italy, and
therefore so called: It is also sometime taken for an inhabitant of that
Country.

Parnassian, of or belonging to Parnassus, a Mountain in Greece, sacred to
Apollo, and the Muses.

Parochial (parochialis) of or pertaining to a Parish.

Parole (Fr.) a word, a term; also a speech or saying. Lease Parol, that is
Lease per Parol, a Lease by word of mouth, not written. It is also a term of
War, when a prisoner is permitted to go at liberty for procuring another
Soldier, prisoner with the enemy, to be exchanged for him, or for raising such
a ransom by a day agreed on, or upon any other occasion or agreement; and in
default, the prisoner gives his Parole, i. his word, to return* during which
time, we say, the prisoner is upon his Parole.

Paronymous (Gr.) pertaining to words or terms that have denomination from the
same thing, but differ in case or termination.

Paroxysm (paroxysmus) the first coming, or the coming again of an ague, the
fit or sharp assault of it.

Parricide; see Paricide.

Parsimony (parsimonia) thriftiness, good-husbandry; brevity or sparingness in
the use of words.

Parsimonious, sparing, frugal, thrifty.

Partage (Fr.) Partition or parting; a sharing or dividing.

Parthenian (parthenius) belonging to virginity, or to a Maid.

Parthian, belonging to Parthia, a Country in Assyria.

Partiary (partiarius) a partaker, a follower, a copartner: It may also be used
adjectively for partial, or that has respect to persons. Hence To Partialize,
to side, bandy, be partial or factious; to take parts.

Participate (participo) to give or take part, to be partaker, or of counsel.

Particle (particula) a small part, a parcel, a portion, a member.

Participle (participium) a part of speech among Grammarians, so called,
because it participates both of the Noun and Verb; any thing that partakes of
another.

Partion (partio a pario) a birth, a breeding, a lying in; a laying of Eggs, a
sitting on brood.

Partitor (Lat.) a divider, a parter, a sharer out, a distributer.

Partisan (Fr.) a partner, partaker, accessory, confederate, or adherent.

Also Partisan (from the Germ. Parthisan, or Fr. Pertuisane) a Leading staff, a
weapon like an Halberd, a Javelin.

Parturient (parturiens) the traveling or being in labor, with child or young.

Parvity (parvitas) smalness, littleness, slenderness, under-age, nonage.

Pas a pas (Fr.) by little and little, by line and leisure, by degrees: Poco a
Poco, as the Spaniard says, or Pian piano as the Italian.

Pascage (Fr.) grazing, feeding or pasturing of Cattle.

Pascal (pascalis) feeding here and there abroad, belonging to pasture.

Pasche (pascha) a Passover, the Feast of Easter; so named of ^oster, a Goddess
of the old Saxons, whose Feast they kept in April. Came. To find out Easter*
Post Martis nonas, ubi sit nova Luna requiras:
Et cum transierit bis septima, Pascha patebit.


Or thus: Inde dies Solis tertia Pascha venit.

The Jewish Passover was a holy action ordained of God in the killing and
eating a Lamb, partly to the end the Jewish Church might keep in memory the
benefit which God did for them, in passing over the houses of the children of
Israel in Egypt, and smiting them not, Exodus 12.11. Also to be a Type of Christ
the true Paschal Lamb. See Moses and Aaron. p. 103.

Verstegan says, Easter was by the old Saxons, called Oster, and at this
present in Saxony Ostern, which comes from Oster-monat, their and our old name
of April.

Paschal (paschalis) of or belonging to the Passover or Easter.

Pascuous (pascuus) serving for pasture, or for feeding, or grazing of Beasts.

Pasquil or Pasquin, (from the Italian Pasquino) a Libel clapped on a Post or
Image; so called from Pasquil or Pasquin, an old Statue or Image in Rome,
whereon Libels, Detractions, and Satirical Invectives are fixed, and on him
fathered as their Author: There is also in Rome, another old Statue called
Morforeo, whereon they affix answers to those Pasquils.

Passade (Fr.) an alms, benevolence, or entertainment given by, or to a
Passenger: The manage of a Horse backward and forward.

Passant (Fr.) passing, going; it is a term in Heraldry, as when we say, a Lion
passant, that is, a Lion drawn, as if he were going or passing along

Pase-port (Fr. q. pass par tout) a Pass or safe conduct. See Safe Conduct.

Passibility (passibilitas) suffering, or ableness to suffer.

Pass^e (passus, a patior) which has suffered, endured, sustained.

Passover. See Pasche.

Pastern (talus) the ankle or huckle-bone of a Beasts foot.

Pastilicate (pastilico) to make in form of little round Balls, to minister
Pills.

Pastinate (pastino) to delve or dig in a garden.

Pastoral Pastoritions (pastoralis) belonging to a Shepherd or Pastor,
Shepherdly, Rural.

A Pastoral (pastorale carmen) a song of Herdsmen or Shepherds.

Pasturable, which may be turned into, or put unto pasture, which may be fed on.

Pasvolant (Fr. Pass volant) the Artillery called a Base; but most commonly a
hireling whom a Captain on muster-days, foisteth into his company; and
generally any such Skipjack or base-fellow.

Patart, a Low Country coin worth a Sol tournois, or the Stiver, five whereof
amount to six pence sterling.

Patavinity (patavinitas) the property of, or relation to, the City Padua. Livy
was censured by Asinius for Patavinity in his writings, by which was meant that
he had too much used the phrases or affectations of Padua, and neglected those
of Rome; or (as others will have it) that the flourishing verdure, or
overflowing of his style was in some sort agreeable to the fertility and
redundancy of the soil of that City and Country.

Patefaction (patefactio) a declaring, discovering, or making manifest, an
opening, a Declaration.

Patelin (Fr.) a Cogger, Colloquer, flatterer, soother, cousener, pratler.

Paten (from the Fr. Patin, Br. Pattyr, or rather from the Greek (...), i.
calco, because it is always trod upon) a kind of Wooden-shoo with an iron
bottom, well known; see Patin.

Patent (patens) open discovered or uncovered appearing, manifest.

Letters Patents (Litterae patentes) Writings sealed with the Broad Seal of
England, whereby a man is authorized to do or enjoy any thing, that otherwise
of himself he could not, Anno 19. Hen. 7. cap. 7. And so termed, because they
are Patentes, viz. open, with the Seal hanging ready to be showed for
confirmation of the Authority given by them. The Kings Letters Patents are
called Letters Patents Royal, for difference; because common persons may grant
Patents, or Letters Patents, etc. Fitz. not. br. fol. 35. E. 2. Hen. 6. cap. 10.

Patency (patentia) a lying open, or uncovered.

Pater-guardian, a Father-guardian; a title given to the chief of the
Franciscan Friars in their monasteries.

Paternal (paternus) of or belonging to a Father, fatherly.

Pathetical (patheticus) passionate, persuasive, that moves affection.

Pathologie (Gr.) that part of Physic which entreats of the causes, qualities,
and differences of diseases.

Pathologists (Gr.) writers on the diseases and symptoms incident to the body
of man. Dr. Charl.

Pathologick, pertaining to Pathologie.

Patible (patibilis) that may be suffered or endured.

Patibulated (patibulatus) hanged on a Gibbet, Gallows or Cross.

Patin (patina) a kind of large Vessel, wherein they both sod meat and brought
it to the Table; a great Platter, a Charger, a Basin to wash in. Also the
little Hat Sawcer or Plate used by Priests with the Chalice at Mass.

Patration (patratio) the finishing and perfecting a thing; a doing or making
it.

Patriark (patriarcha) a chief Father, or the first Father of a Family or
Nation, in which sense the Jews reckoned Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. It is also a
principal dignity in the Church whereof there were anciently five, as of Rome,
Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Antioch.

Patriarchal, of or belonging to a Patriarch.

Patriarchate Patriarchy (patriarchatus) the dignity and estate of a Patriarck,
a Patriarkship.

Patriciate (patriciatus) the dignity and estate of them that descend of
Senators.

Patricide (patricida) a murderer of his Father, near Cosen, or dear friend.

Patricide (patricidium) the murdering of ones Father.

Patricians (patricii) those in Rome that descended of the Race of Senators,
whose Fathers and Ancestors bore that Office, the sons of Senators. Hence the
name of Patrick, given originally to those, who could cite their Fathers as men
of honor. Came.

Patrimonial (patrimonialis) of or belonging to the inheritance, goods, or
Patrimony, left by a Father to his Children.

Patrizare ( patrizo, from the Gr. (...)) to resemble his Father, to do as his
Father did, to be the Fathers own child in condition.

Patrocinate (patrocinor) to defend those that are poor and falsely accused, to
uphold, bear out, and maintain ones right and quarrel. Liberty of Prophesying.

Patronal (patronalis) of or belonging to a Patron, Advocate or Defender; done
in remembrance of a Patron.

Patronymical (patronymicus) derived from the Fathers or Ancestors name.

Patulicate (patulico) to be opened, or made wide.

Pauciloquent (pauciloquus) that speaks little.

Paucitie (paucitas) small number, fewness, brevity.

Pa^efie (pavefacio) to make afraid, to fright.

Pavice (from the Ital. Pavese) a great large Shield, or Target, that covers
the whole body. Sir Tho. More.

Pavid (pavidus) fearful, timorous, quaking, starting.

Pavidity (paviditas) dread, fear, timerousness.

Pavillion (Lat. Papilio, Fr. Pavillon) a Tent for war, a Tabernacle.

Pavin (Fr. Pavane) a kind of Dance; perhaps so called a pavienda terra, of
paving the ground. Min.

Paul (Hebr.) wonderful, or rest; But the learned Baronius drawing it from the
Latin, makes it little or humble. Came.

Paunage (from the Fr. panage or pasnage) signifies, in our Common Law, the
money taken by the Agistors for feeding Hogs with the Mast of the Kings Forest.
Cromp. Juris. fol. 165. Agistment (says Manwood) is properly the common of
herbage of any kind of ground, Land or Woods, or the money due for the same;
and Pawnage is most properly the Mast of the Woods or Hedgerowes, or the money
arising by it. Mr. Skene calls it Pannagium, and defines it to be the Duty
given to the King for the pasturage of Swine in the Forest.

Pavoisade (Fr.) any Target-fence, that of Galleys, whereby the slaves are
defended from the small shot of the enemy. Cot.

Pavonine (pavoninus) of or belonging to a Peacock or a Peahen.

Pavor (Lat.) great fear and dread.

Pausade (Fr.) a pausing, resting, or reposing; also a resting seat or place.

Perch or Perch ( pertica Fr. perch) a Rod or Pole whereby land is measured,
the most usual contains sixteen foot and a half in length; whereof forty in
length, and four in breadth make an Acre of ground. Cromp. jurisd fol. 222. But
in several Countries they are of several lengths, as in Staffordshire twenty
four foot; in the Forest of Sherwood twenty five foot. See more in Skene.
Verbo Partica ta terrae.

Pearl, the least Character for Printing; see Character.

Peccadillo (Span. Fr. peccadille) a little crime, a small fault, a venial sin.

Peccaminous (from peccamen, inis) full of sins.

Peccator (Lat.) a sinner or offender.

Pec^a^t (from pecco) I have sinned, offended or done amiss.

Pecorous (pecorosus) full of Cattle, or where many Cattle are.

Pectn^s (from pecten, a comb) Dr. Br uses it for such fish, whose ribs are
straight, as Soals, Thornback, Flounders, etc. because their backbone and ribs
do in some sort resemble a comb.

Pectinate (pectino) to kemb, to harrow corn, while it is in grass, to rake
corn together.

P^ctoral (pectorale) a brestplate or defense for the breast, a Peitrel,
Poitrel, or Stomacher. In Physic it signifies a Lozenge or Medicine, good for
the stomach.

Pectoral (pectoralis) that belongs to the Breast or stomach.

Pecuarious (pecuarius serving for, or belonging to Beasts or Cattle.

Peculator (Lat.) that robs the Prince or common Treasure.

Peculiar (peculiaris) private, proper, ones own, particular, pertaining to
some one.

Peculiate (peculio) to punish by the purse, to take away a man's goods; also to
enrich.

Pecuniary (pecuniarius) pertaining to money. The Heathens say, the Impress of
a sheep was stamped on their first coin, and from thence their money was called
pecunia, from pecus. Greg.

Pedage (pedagium) signifies money given for the passing, by foot or horse,
through a Forest or other place Shep. Epit.

Pedagogue (paedagogus) a bringer up of children, a Tutor, Scoolmaster, Pedant.

Pedagogism, the office of a Pedagogue.

P^dal (pedalis) of a foot, measure or space.

Pedality (pedalitas) ableness of foot; a measuring by or going on foot.

Pedaneous (pedaneus) that goes on foot.

Pedant (Fr.) an ordinary Schoolmaster, a Teacher of A, B, C.

Pedanteries (Fr.) pedantick humors, phrase affectings, Inkhorn terms. Br.

Pedantism (Fr.) the Office or function of a Pedant.

Pedition (pedatio) a staking, propping or setting up vines.

Pedatur^ (pedatura) a proportion of digging, building, etc. of so many foot
assigned to Soldiers or workmen.

Pedee (from pes) a (Commanders) Footboy.

Pederastie (paederastia) the loving of young boys, commonly taken in the ill
part, as signifying the abuse of them against kind.

Pedestal (pedestella) the foot or basis to support a pillar or any piece of
work: a footstal, a stirrup.

Pedestrial (from pedester) that goes on foot, belonging to the foot.

P^diculous (pediculosus) lousy, or full of lice.

Pedid (paedidus) filthy, sluttish, slinking.

Pedicle (pediculus) a little foot; also the stalk of a leaf, or any fruit.

Pedo-Baptism (paedo-baptismus) the baptizing of Children; Infant Baptism.

Pedomancy (Gr.) a kind of divination by the lines of the soles of the feet.

Pedor (paedor) sluttishness, uncleanness; stink and filthiness in such as are
in, or come out of Prisons.

Pedatribe (paedotriba) an instructor of children, teaching them how to
exercise their bodies, and to make them fair and strong.

Peer (Fr. pierre) seems properly to be a Fortress made against the force of
the sea, for the better securing ships that lie at Harbor in any Haven; so is
the Peer of Dover described in Came. Brit. p 259. You shall read the word often
in Sands Travels, and comes from Petra; because of the congestion of great
stones, to the raising up of such a Pile.

Peers (pares) equals; also the House of Lords in Parliament, was otherwise
called the House of Peers, and their condition and dignity, Peerage, which word
may also signify an Imposition for maintenance of a Sea-Peer.

Pegasus (Gr.) a winged horse, a Post. Hence

Pegasean, is used for swift or speedy. Feltham.

Pejerate (pejero) to forswear, not to do that he has sworn to do.

Pejorate (pejoro) to impair, to make or grow worse.

Peitrel; see Pectoral.

Pelagi^ns, an ancient sort of Heretics, who (among other damnable Tenets)
taught that man of his own free will might without the Grace of God, keep the
Commandments, and merit eternal life, etc. This Heresy took name from Pelagius
its first brocher, and was condemned by a general Council held in the Island of
Malta, by P. Innocent the first, at which St. Austin was present, and 214
Bishops.

Pelagick (pelagicus) of the Sea, or that lives in the Sea.

Pelion and Ossa two high mountains in Thessaly, we say proverbially, to mount
Pelion upon Ossa, when we use our utmost endeavor to overcome any difficulty;
or attempt an impossibility.

Pell^cator (Lat.) a deceiver with fair words.

Pelliculation (pelliculatio) a deceiving with fair words, an alluring.

Pellicie (dim. of pellis) a little Skin, Hide, Fell, or Pelt, a small or thin
rhind.

Pellucid (pellucidus) clear, shining, bright, that may be seen or discerned
through.

Pe^-M^l (Fr. Pesle Mesle) confusedly, hand over head, all on a heap, one with
another.

Peltif^rous (peltifer) that wears or bears a Target like a half moon.

Pelusian Foar^, used by Dubartas for the great River Nilus in Egypt; and is
taken from Pelusium, one of the mouths of that River.

Penarious (penarius) of or belonging to provision for victuals.

Pendent (pendens) hanging, bending, depending, uncertain what to do.

Pe^diloches (Fr.) jags, danglings, or things that hang danglingly; with
Jewellers they are the lowest part of jewels which hang in that manner.

Pendulosity (pendulositas) the hanging state of a thing; ambiguity,
doubtfulness. Br.

Pendulous (pendulus) that hangs or stoopeth; also doubtful, staggering.

Pen^ian W^l^ Tempe, a most pleasant valley in Thessaly, on the Verge of the
River Peneus, and therefore so called.

Penelope (Gr.) the name of the most patient, constant and chaste Wife of
Ulysses, which was given her, for that she carefully loved and fed those birds
with purple necks called Penelopes. Came.

Penetrab^lity (from penetro) ability to pierce or penetrate, power which
nothing can resist.

Penetrable (penetrabilis) that may pierce or be pierced, or penetrated.

Pen^s^ (peninsula) quasi, pe^e^ insula, almost an Island) is a tract of land,
which being almost encompassed by water is joined to the firm, land by some
little Isthmus, narrow place or entrance; as that vast Continent of Peru and
Brasile in America were an Island, but for that strait or neck of land, between
Panama and Nombre de Dios.

Penitencer Penitenciary (from penitentia) the Priest, etc. that enjoins the
offender his penance. Penitentiary is sometimes taken for that place in Rome,
where certain Priests, endued with faculties to absolve from reserved cases are
appointed to sit, ready to hear the Confessions of those that from sundry
places repair to them for that purpose.

Penitentiary Priests, or Priests of the Penitentiary, are those that belong to
the aforesaid place, over whom there is one styled Chief Penitentiary, who for
the most part, if not always, is one of the Cardinals, who admits and gives
faculties to the rest.

Penitential (penitentialis) very penitent, most sorrowful or repentant; The
seven Penitential Psalms of David, are so called, because they are very
efficacious in moving sinful souls to repentance.

Pennigerous (penniger) feathered, winged, bearing or having wings and feathers.

Pennant, a rope to hoise up the boat, or heavy Merchandise aboard a ship.

Pennipotent (pennipotens) mighty in flying, strong of wing, well winged or
feathered.

Penon (Fr pennon) a Flag, Banner or Streamer born in war. We read this A. 11.
R 2. ca. 1. A term in Heraldry.

Penoncels, little Penons.

Pensitate (pensito) to weigh, ponder, consider, pay, and recompense often.

Pentas (Gr.) the five, the cinque; a word much used in composition; as

Pentagamist (Gr.) one that has had five wives.

Penta^lottical (from pentas and glottos, lingua) that has five Tongues, or is
skilled in five several Languages.

Pentagon (pentagonus) any thing that has five corners, a Pentangle.

Pentahedrical (Gr.) that has five sides.

Pentam^ter (Gr.) a verse consisting of five feet: In the first part it has
two feet either Dactyles or Spondees, with a long syllable; In the later part
also two feet, but always Dactyles, and a long syllable, As Res est solliciti
plena timoris amor.

Pe^taptotes (pentaptota) nouns declined only by five Cases.

Pentarck (pentarchus) a Captain of five men.

Pentastick (pentastichus) that consists of five verses; also a Porch having
five rows of Pillars.

Pentateuch (pentateuchus) a volume of five Books; the five Books of Moses,
viz. Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numeri, and Deuteronomi, so called.

Pentecontarck (pentecontarchus) a Captain of Fifty men.

Pentecost (Gr. Pentecoste, i. the fifteenth) the Feast of Pentecost or
Whitsontide, so called because it is the fiftieth day from the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ; see Whitsonday. And for the nature of this Feast among the a^ient
Hebrews, see Moses and Aaron, p. 115.

Pentireme (pentiremes) a Galley that has five Oars in a seat or rank, or a
Galley wherein every Oar has five men to draw it; see Quinquereme.

Penulator (Lat.) a Furrier.

Penurious (from penuria) extreme needy and necessitous, that wants all
necessaries.

Peplographi (peplographia) the description of the vail, called Peplum, which
was an embroidered Vesture or hood to cover the head, now used for a kercher,
worn especially by women, going to be churched. Tho.

P^ptick (pepticus) that comforts the stomach, and helps it to digest the meat
in it, concoctive, digestive.

P^r, the Preposition, being compounded with another word, renders it more
powerful and efficacious; as Amo, to love; put (per) to it, and it signifies to
love thoroughly or perfectly. Valid is valiant or strong; pervalid, very
valiant, etc. Which being premonished, the Reader, knowing the simple words,
will easily understand the compound, and so save a labor of repeating them.

Peraction (peractio) an accomplishing, performing, ending or dispatching.

Peragration (peragratio) a going about, a traveling over, a wandering through.

Peragration month; see in Month.

Perambulate (perambulo) to go or walk through, about, or over and over.

Perarate (peraro) to till all through, to ear over and over, to plough or make
furrows all over.

Pe^ch; see Perch.

Perceptible (from percipio) perceivable, apprehensible, takable, receivable.

Percival, is thought at first to have been a surname, and after (as many other
a Christen name, fetched from Percheval, a place in Normandy. One by allusion
made it, Per se valens. Came.

P^rcontation (percontatio) an enquiring, searching, demanding or questioning.

Percolation (percolatio) a straining through or out.

Percruc^ate (percrucio) to torment greatly, to vex thoroughly.

Percullis, the name of an Office of one of the Pursuivants at Arms; see Harold.

Pe^cussion (percussio) a striking, beating or hitting.

Perdition (perditio) destruction, losing.

Perduction (perductio) a bringing, or leading through.

Perdu (Fr.) lost, perished, forlorn, past hope of recovery, cast away. Hence

Perdues (enfans perdues) the Forlorn-hope of a Camp, which are commonly
Gentlemen of Companies, and are so called, because they are given for lost men,
in respect of the danger of their service.

Perdu^llion or Perduellism (perduellio) treason against the King and Country.

Peregrination (peregrinatio) going or being abroad in a far or strange
Country; a pilgrimage, a voyage.

Peregrine (peregrinus) strange, outlandish; a stranger or alien: It Is
sometime used for a man's Christen name, as Peregrina for a woman's.

Perendinate (perendino) to put off for a day, or till the next day after to
morrow.

Perennity (perennitas) continuance, long-lasting, perpetuity, eternity.

Perenticide (perenticida a pera) a Cutpurse; alluding to Parenticide.

Perfidy (perfidia) falsehood against promise or trust, untruth, disloyalty,
false-dealing, trea^on.

Perflatio (perflatio) a flowing vehemently or strongly, a blowing quite
through.

Perforate (perforo) to pierce or make a hole through to bore through, as with
a Piercer; to thrust into.

Perfretation (perfretatio) a passing over, or through the Sea.

Perfriction (perfrictio, a perfrico) a rubbing or chafing hard or thoroughly.

Perfriction (perfrictio, a perfrigeo) a great, through, or quaking cold, a
shivering for cold, which goes before the Fit.

Perfunction (perfunctio^ a doing or enduring a thing to the end, an
accomplishing or finishing a matter.

Perfunctor^ (perfunct^us) that which is done on^ for a fashion or neglig^ or
which passes lightly ^ way.

Perfusion (perfusio) a shedding upon, or a pouring all over, a wetting through.

Pergamenous (from pergamena) of or belonging to, or full of, Parchment or
Velum; so called from Pergamus a City in Anatolia, where Parchment was invented.

Pergraphical (pergraphicus) very cunningly made or done, artificial,
workman-like.

Pericardian, belonging to the Perichard, which is a membrane or thin skin,
involving the whole heart, like a case.

Periclitancy Periclitation (periclitatio) a proving, adventuring, trying,
jeoparding, or putting in hazard.

Pericranion (Gr.) the skin compassing and covering all the skul; the hairy
scalp. For Peri in Greek, signifies about, and cranion, a skul

Perigee (perigaeum) that point of the Heaven, wherein the Sun or any other
Planet, is nearest the center of the earth, being the opposite point to the
Apogee.

Perillus Bull. See Phalaris.

Perimeter (Gr.) above measure; a verse that has a syllable above measure; the
utmost line of any solid body, the Compass or bounding Tract.

Perioch (periocha) a brief argument, containing the sum of a whole matter or
discourse.

Period (periodus) the term of time, wherein any thing is finished; an end, the
end of a perfect sentence, marked commonly with a full point thus (.) See
Semi-colon.

Periodical (periodicus) ended, finished, concluded; also that goes or comes by
course or fits. An Ague is called a Periodical disease, because it keeps a just
time of its return.

Peripatetical ( peripateticus, from (...), i. ambulo) that disputes or teaches
walking, as Aristotle did; from whence he and his Scholars were called
Peripateticks.

Periphelium (Gr. peripheli^u) is that point, wherein the Earth, or any other
Planet is least distant from the Sun.

Periphery (peripheria) a circumference, a carrying or going about; the crooked
line wherewith a circle is bounded, or compassed ^n.

Periphrase (peripirasis) circumlocution; one word expressed by many.

Periphrastical (periphrasticus) that which is spoken by many words, and may be
said by fewer.

Peripneumonical (peripneumonicus) sick of a Peripneumony, which is an
inflammation or imposthume of the Lungs, with a shortness of breath, and a
redness of the Cheeks. Dub.

Periscians (periscii) that have their shadows cast round about them; as those
that dwell in the cold Zones; for to them the Sun, after it is once risen, goes
round about their Horizon, and so casts the shadows round, as it were Spokes in
a wheel. Tho.

Perissology (perissologia) superfluous speaking.

Peristat^ick (Gr.) that has the force or power to strain, gripe, or press
together. Among Physicians it is commonly applied to the quibling motion of the
Guts. Galen.

Perit, a certain small weight. See Ounce.

Permagies, a sort of little Boats among the Turks. Sands.

Permeant (permeans) going over, passing through.

Permiscible (permiscibilis) which may be mingled.

Permissible (permissibilis) which may be permitted or suffered.

Perner. See Pernor.

Perniciable (perniciabilis) bringing destruction, causing death, mortal,
dangerous.

Pernicious (perniciosus) deadly, mortal, dangerous, causing death.

Pernicity (pernicitas) swiftness, quickness, nimbleness.

Pernoctation (pernoctatio) a tarrying or lodging out all night.

Pernor of profits (from the Fr prendre, i. to take) signifies (in our Law) him
that takes the profits. A. 1. H. 7. c. 1.

Peroration (peroratio) the conclusion or last part of an Oration, wherein the
affections of the hearers are chiefly moved.

Perpend (perpendo) to examine or consider diligently; to weigh a matter
thoroughly.

Perpenders, or Perpent stones, stones made just as thick as a wall, and
showing their smoothed ends on either side thereof.

Perpendicular (perpendicularis) that is directly downright.

Perpendicle (perpendiculum) a plumb line, such as Carpenters have with lead at
the end.

Perpensation (perpensatio) a due weighing and examining.

Perpession (perpessio) an enduring, suffering or abiding.

Perpetra^ (perpetro) to do, make, commit or atchieve.

Perpetuat^ (perpetuo) to continue a thing on without ceasing, to abide for
ever, to make everlasting.

Perpetuity (perpetuitas) everlastingness, continuance, eternity, endlesness.

Perplexable (perplexabilis) doubtful, ambiguous; hard to conceive and
understand.

Perplexity (perplexitas) doubt, intricacy, incertainty.

Perplication (perpli^atio) a folding to and fro.

Perquisite (perquisitum) signifies in Bracton any thing purchased, as
Perquisitum facere, lib. 2. ca. 30. number. 3. and lib. 4. cap. 22. Perquisites of
Courts are those profits, that accrue to the Lord of a Manor, by virtue of his
Court Baron, over and above the certain and yearly rents of his Land, as Fines
for Copy-Holds, Waifs, Estraies, and such like.

Perquisitor (Lat.) an enquirer or diligent searcher.

Perreptation (perreptatio) a creeping into every corner, a diligent searching.

Perscrutator (Lat.) a Searcher, a Commissary or Harbinger in War to provide
victuals.

Perseverance (perseverantia) a fixed abiding in a thing reasonable, constancy,
stoutness.

Perside (persideo) to sit by, to abide still.

Personality (personalitas) the being in person. Also in in our Law an Action
is said to be in the personality, when it is brought against the right person, or
when the Action is properly personal, not real or mixed.

Personate (persono) to sound out, or perfectly, to make a great noise; But
Personato (from persona) is more commonly taken to represent the person of
another.

P^rspective (from perspicio) the Art of advantaging the sight by the help of
glasses and other contrivances.

Perspicacy Perspicacity (perspicacia) quickness of sight, understanding, or
perceiving a thing, ready apprehension.

Perspicience (perspicientia) perfect knowledge, full perceiving a thing.

Perspicuity (perspicuitas) clearness, plainness, properly in words and
sentences.

Perspirable (from perspiro) that may, or is able to breath through. Br.

Perspiration (perspiratio) a breathing through; It is, as it were, a breathing
or vaporing of the whole body through the skin. Bac.

Perstringe (perstringo) to wring hard, to touch a thing sharply in speaking,
or writing, etc. Also to deceive.

Perterebrate (perterebro) to pierce or bore through with a wimble.

Pertical (perticalis) belonging to a Perch or Pole.

Pertinacy (pertinacia) obstinacy, stubbornness, stiffness in opinion;
sometimes it is taken in the good part for perseverance, constancy.

Pertinge^ (pertingens) extending, reaching, or joining near unto.

Pertingency, a reaching or joining near unto.

Pervade (pervado) to go and enter over all, through or into; to escape or pass
through or by. Dr. Charl.

Pervagation (pervagatio) a straying up and down, a wandering through or about.

Perversity (perversitas) maliciousness of nature, where we do overthwartly
that we ought not to do, frowardness.

Pervert (perverto) to overthwart, to turn upside down; to subvert, corrupt,
destroy.

A Pervert, one that is turned from good to evil; as Convert is the contrary.

Pervicacy (pervicacia) obstinacy, ^teadiness, stiffneckedness; sometimes
perseverance, constancy.

Pervise (pervisum) a Bar; also a conference in former time called the Pervis
among the young Counselors, Pleaders, Attorneys, or Students of the Law, such
as at this day might resemble the course in the Inns of Court, or Chancery,
called Moots and Bolts, wherein the form of pleading and arguing a case is
exercised; for so does Fortescu ( chap. 51.) commending those Laws, prove, when
he says, That, after the Judges were risen at eleven of the clock, from
hearing Causes at Westminster, Placitantes tunc se divertunt ad Pervisum, and
alibi consulentes cum Servientibus ad legem and aliis Conciliariis suis.

Pervious (pervius) that may be gone in or through, that is easy to be passed
over or through.

Perwick or Perwig (from the Belg. Perru^ck, or Fr. perruque, i. a tuff or lock
of hair) a cap of false or counterfeit hair.

Peruvians, people of Peru in the West Indies, so called.

Pessary (pessus) is made of soft wool, in form of a finger, and is a kind of
suppository for the secret parts of women. Br.

Pessundate (pessundo) to tread or cast under feet, to put down, or to the
worst, to cast to the ground, as a horse does his rider.

Pestarable Wares, seem to be such Wares, as pester and take up much room in a
ship. An. 32. H. 8. c 14.

Pestiferous (pestifer) deadly, unwholesome, that brings death, pestilence and
destruction.

Petalism ( petalismus from (...), 1. a leaf) a kind of banishment for five
years among the Siracusians; practiced by writing the parties name, whom they
would be rid of, in an Olive leaf, as at Athens they wrote upon shells.

Petard or Petarre (Fr. petart) an Engine of War made like a Bell or Mortar,
wherewith strong Gates are burst open.

Petaurist (petaurista) a Dancer on the Ropes, a Tumbler, a runner upon Lines.

Petauristick, pertaining to tumbling, vaulting or dancing upon Ropes.

Peter (Gr.) for which the French use Pierre, and our Ancestors used Pierce) a
name of high esteem among Christians, since our Savior named Simon the son of
Jona, Cephas; which is Syriack, and by interpretation a [stone] John 1.42. But
fool-wisely have some Peter's called themselves Pierius. Came.

St. Peter ad vincula; see Gule of August.

Peter Pence (Denarii sancti Petri) otherwise called in the Saxon tongue
Rome-feo^, i. the fee of Rome, or due to Rome, and also Rome-scot and
Rome-penning) was a tribute given by Ina King of the West Saxons, being in
pilgrimage at Rome about the year of our Lord 626. which was a penny for every
Chimney that smoaked in England. Lamberds Explication of Saxon words, verbo,
Nummus. Whom see also fol. 128. in St Edw. Laws, number. 10. See also King Edgars
Laws, fol. 78. c. 4. Stow in his Annals, p. 76. says, He that had thirty penny
worth of Goods of one kind in his house of his own proper, was to give a penny
at Lammas yearly; see Rome-scot.

Petitory (petitorius) belonging to a Petition, or request.

Petrel; see Pectoral.

Petrification (petrificatio) a making stony, a turning into stone; also a
disease in the eye and eyelids.

Petrifie (from Petra) to make become stonish, or of a hard nature. Br.

Petrobrusiany, a sort of Heretics that held Christians ought not to keep or
observe Feasts, etc.

Petrol (petroleum) a kind of Marle or Chaulky Clay, or rather a substance
strained out of the natural Bitumen: It is for the most part white, but
sometimes black, and being once set on fire can hardly be quenched; see Napthe.

Petronel(Fr. petrinal) a horsemans piece, first used in the Pyrenean
Mountains, which was hanged at the Breast ready to shoot.

Petti-fogger (from the Fr. petite, and Belg. Foken vel F^yken, i. convasare) a
silly Advocate, a petty Attorney or Lawyer, or rather a Trouble-Town, having
neither Law nor Conscience.

Petty Sergeanty, a tenure of Land holden of the King by yielding him a
Buckler, Arrow, Bow, or such like; see Capite.

Petty Treason (Fr: petit Trahison) Treason in a lesser or lower kind. If a
Servant kill his Master, a Wife her Husband, a Secular or Religious man his
Prelate, these are Petit Treasons, An. 25. Edw. 3. cap. 2. Whereof see more in
Stawnf. Pl. Cr. l. 1. c. 2. Cromp. J. of Peace f. 2. For the punishment of
Petit Treason, see An. 22. H. 8. cap. 14.

Petulanc^ (petulantia) wantonness, malepertness, impudency, reproachful
speaking.

Petulant (petulans) wanton, dishonest, reproachful, fawcy.

Pexi^y (pexitas) the long roughness of the Web.

P^oe^omenon (Gr.) an appearance either in Heaven or in the Air. Sir H. Wotton.

Phag^denick (phagaedenicus) that has or pertains to a kind of Pock or running
Cancer* which frets through the skin, and eats the flesh.

Phalanx (Lat.) a military Squadron consisting of eight thousand footmen, set
in such array, that they might encounter with their enemies foot to foot, man
to man, shield to shield. Polybius l. 5. says the Phalanx contained above
twenty thousand; but these numbers still altered.

Phalangarians (phalangarii) Soldiers of the Army Phalanx.

Phalangeary Phalangeous of or pertaining to Phalanx. Br.

Phalaris Bull: Phalaris was a Tyrant of Sicily, who tormented Perillus, the
Artificer first in the brazen Bull, he made for the destruction and torture of
others, whereupon aptly Ovid, -- nec enim lex justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.


So this Bull is applied to those that make a rod for themselves.

Phalerated (phaleratus) trapped, or dressed with Trappings, as horses use to
be.

Phalusick Verse (phaluceum carmen) a verse consisting of eleven Syllables,
viz. a Dactyle, a Spondee, and three Trochee's.,,.

Phanatick or Phantick, (phanaticus) that has vain visions; a crack-brain, one
deluded with fond apprehensisions; see Fanatic.

Fantasy (phantasia) the image of things conceived in the mind, a Vision,
Representation, Imagination, Fancy.

Phantasm ( phantasma, the French say phantosm) a vain vision, or false
representation. Phantosm (says Suidas) is an imagination of things, which are
not indeed, and does proceed of the senses being corrupted.

Phare ( pharus or pharos) a Tower or high place by the Sea coast, wherein were
continually lights and fires, which served Seamen to see the Haven, and the
safest entrance; a sea-mark.

Pharetriferous (pharetrifer) that bears a Quiver of Arrows.

Pharisaism or Pharaisism, the religion or profession of the Pharisees;
Hypocrisy. Feltham.

Pharisee, a Sect of Jews, professing more holiness then the common sort, they
held contrary opinions to the Saduces, and wore Phylacteries, or Scroles of
parchment bound about their heads, wherein were written the Ten Commandments,
vainly so interpreting that of Deuteronomy. 6.8. Movebuntur super oculos tuos; they
owe their name to the Hebr. phares or pharesk, i. seperare, explicare, as being
both Interpreters of the Law, and Separatists (by their feigned devotion) from
the rest of the Jewish Church. Mat. 5.20. Luke 18.11. See Moses and Aaron p.
36, and 45.

Pharmaceutick (from pharmaceutice) pertaining to that part of Physic, that
cures with medicines.

Pharmaceutie or Pharmacy (pharmaceutice) that part of Physic which cures
with Medicines or Drugs; or it is an Art, showing the way; 1. To select. 2. To
prepare. 3. To mix medicaments. Renodaeus.

Pharmacopolist (pharmacopola) a seller of Medicines, an Apothecary.

Pharmaceutical Pharmatical (from pharmacum) of or pertaining to Medicines or
Drugs, or curing by them.

Phoenix. See Phoenix.

Phasm (phasma) a horrible vision or light. Dr. Ham.

Pheon, a term in Heraldry; and signifies the head of a dart, or arrow.

Phial. See Vial.

Philadelphia (Gr.) a woman's name, and signifies brotherly or sisterly love.
And lovers of brothers or sisters', are called Philadelphians.

Philanthropie (philanthropia) a loving of men, or mankind; humanity.

Philanthropal, full of love to mankind.

Philargyrous (Gr.) covetous, greedy after silver.

Philautie (philautia) self-love, self-liking.

Philibert (Germ.) a proper name for a man, signifying much bright fame, or
very bright and famous, as Polyphemus in Greek. Rhenanus.

Philip (Gr.) a lover of horses; also a valiant, hardy, or warlike person.

Philippicks (philippica) invectives; so called from Demosthenes biting
Orations against Philip K. of Macedon.

Philippick fields (campi Philippici) are those that lie near the City
Philippolis in Macedonia, built by Philip Alexanders Father, famous for the
Roman Civil Wars, there decided in two Battles; the first between Caesar and
Pompey, the other between Augustus and Mark Anthony, against Brutus and Cassius.

Philippus, a coin of gold worth about three shillings sterling. Also a coin of
silver worth four shillings.

Philyrian Scout, used for the sign Sagittarius in Dubartas; perhaps from the
leathern Quiver or Case he carries on his back to hold his arrows; Philyra
signifying a thin skin or parchment.

Phillis (Gr. a woman's name) and signifies lovely, as Amie in French.

Philodespot (philodespetus) he that loves his Master.

Philologer (philologus) a man given to study, a lover of learning, talk, or
communication.

Philologie (philologia) love of learning, study, or talk.

Philomathy (philomathia) the love or desire of learning.

Philomel (philomela) a Nightingale.

Philomusus (Gr.) a lover of the Muses or of learning.

Philopolite (philopolites) a lover of his Country or City.

Philosophaster (Lat.) a smatterer in Philosophy; a counterfeit philosopher.

Philosophy (philosophia) the love or desire of wisdom; a deep knowledge in the
nature of things; there are three different kinds of it. 1. Rational
Philosophy, including Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric; and this dives into the
subtilty of disputations and discourse. 2. Natural Philosophy, searching into
the obscurity of natures secrets, containing besides, Arithmetic, Music,
Geometry, and Astronomy. 3. Moral Philosophy, which consists in the knowledge
and practice of civility and good behavior.

Philosopher (philosophus) is he who takes denomination from Philosophy, as a
Musician from Music; a lover or studier of wisdom.

Philosophical (philosophicus) pertaining to philosophy.

Philostorgie (philostorgia) the love of parents toward their children.

Philotimie (philotimia) love of honor.

Philtre (philtrum) an amorous potion; a love-procuring drink or medicine; also
the hollowness or gutter in the upper lip under the nostrils.

Philtre-charmed, i. enchanted with love potions. Dub.

Phlebotomie (phlebotomia) the cutting a vein to let blood. Physicians (as it is
written) learned this practice first of a beast called Hyppopotamus, living in
the River Nylus, and being of a ravenous nature, therefore often overcharged
with much eating, is wont to seek in the banks for some sharp stub of a Reed,
upon which pricking his leg, he thereby eases his full body; stopping the
bleeding afterward with mud.

Phlegeton, a River in Hell, that always burns.

Phlegmatic (phlegmaticus) belonging to an humor in man, cold and moist; full
of, or subject unto Phlegm.

Phlegmon (phlegmone) an inflammation of blood; a swelling against nature being
hot and red.

P^oebus, Apollo, or the Sun; Phoebe, Diana, or the Moon.

Phoenix (Lat.) the rarest bird in the world, and is commonly described thus;
There was never any but one of this kind living at once; and that only in
Arabia, of the bigness of an Eagle, of a purple color, having a bright collar
of gold about his neck, a goodly fair tail, and a tuft of feathers upon his
head; he lives above 600 years, and being old builds him a nest of Cinnamon,
and the twigs of Frankincense, which he fills with spices, and then with the
laboring of his wings in the Sun, setting it on fire, is there consumed; out of
whose ashes there grows a worm, and of the worm another Phoenix; This, I say,
is the common received opinion, as you may see in Tacitus, and other Authors;
but Dr. Br. in his Vul. Err. makes question whether there be any such Animal in
nature, whom you may read at large upon this subject; fol. 131.

Phospher (phosphorus) the day star.

Phrenetick (phreneticus) that has the Frenzy (which is the chiefest and
greatest mischief that can come to the brain) frantic.

P^rygian (phrygius) pertaining to Phrygia, a Country in the lesser Asia,
bounding upon Caria, Lydia, etc.

A Ph^ygian Garment (phrygia vestis) is a Garment wrought with needle work, or
made of cloth of Baudkin. Phrygian wisdom is taken for After-wit; According to
Ne sero sapias, sic sapuere Phryges.

Phthisick (phthisicus) an (incurable) ulceration of the Lungs, accompanied
with a consumption of the whole body; the cough of the Lungs; a consuming
sickness.

Phylacist (phylacista) the keeper of a Prison.

Phylactitians, certain Sorcerers, who were condemned in the year 6 2. for a
kind of Magic, relating in some sort to Phylacteries. Moses and Aaron, p. 44.

Phylactery (phylacterium) a place where any thing is kept, a preservative
against poison, and fascination. Also a Scrole or Frontlet of Parchment, having
the commandments of God written in it, which the Pharisees wore about their
heads and arms. Also a thread or band of blew silk in the fringes of a garment,
by the beholding whereof the memory of Gods Precepts was kept and preserved.
Deuteronomy. 6.8. Matthew. 23.5 see Pharisee, and see Dr. Ham. Annotat. fol. 121.

Phylark (phylarchus) the chief over a Tribe, a Ruler of the people.

Physiark (physiarcha) the Governor of nature, God Almighty.

Physic. See Medicine.

Physics (physica) books treating of Physic or natural philosophy.

Physi^n (Physicus) The sense of this word in the common acceptance is well
known, yet we vulgarly abuse it, for a Leech or Medicus, but not altogether
intolerably, because it is a trite and true saying, That ubi desini^
Philosophus, incipit medicus, where the Naturalist (for there the word
Philosopher stands for a Physiologer) ends, there the Medicus begins: So, as if
an expert Leech, must needs be skilled in the Physics

Plagiarian Law (plagiaria lex) a Law made against those men, etc.

Plaint (Fr.) a complaint, moan or lamentation; in our Common Law it is used
for the propounding any action personal or real in writing. So it is used in
Brook. tit. Plaint in Assize; and the party making this Plaint is called
Plaintiff. Kitch. fol. 231.

Planet ( planeta whereof there are seven; bearing the names of seven several
Deities, which you may remember in their order by this verse.

Post SIM, SUM sequitur, ultima Luna subest.
Would you count the Planets soon,
Remember Sim, Sum, and the Moon.
The first letter S. for Saturn, J. for Jupiter, M. for Mars, S. the Sun, V.
Venus, M. Mercury, lastly, the Moon; They are also called wandering Stars;
because they never keep one certain place in the Firmament.

Planetary (planetarius) a caster of Nativities, because the Planets are said
to have some power over earthly Bodies.

Planetary Planetick of or belonging to a Planet.

Planiloquent (planiloquus) that speaks his mind plainly and freely.

Planimetry (Gr.) the measuring of Planes, as board, glass, or any flat thing.

Planisphere (planispherium) a plain Sphere; or a sphere projected in plano; as
an Astrolabe.

Plantigerous (plantiger) that bears Plants or Graffs.

Plasmator (Lat.) a Potter, or maker of earthen Images.

Plasmature (plasmatura) the forming or making any thing of earth.

Plastique (plastice) the craft of working and making things in earth.

Plastique is not only under-Sculpture, but indeed very Sculpture it self; with
this difference, that the Plasterer makes his figures by addition, and the
Carver by substraction. Sir Hen. Wotton.

Plastic (plasticus) pertaining to that craft.

Plastography (plastographia) a counterfeiting or false writing.

Platanine (plataninus) belonging to a Plane tree.

Plateasm (plateasmus) a fault in speech, when it is over-broad and full.

Platonic love, is a love abstracted from all corporeal, gross impression and
sensual appetite, and consists in contemplation, and Idaea's of the mind, not
in any carnal fruition; or it is a love of friendship, without any admixture of
sensuality. So called from Plato the Divine Philosopher.

Platonical year (annus platonicus) is every 36000th year, when some
Philosophers imagined, all persons and things should return to the same state
as now they are.

Platonist, a Philosopher of the Sect of Plato.

Plaudite (from plaudo) clap ye hands for joy, is the literal signification;
but it is often used substantively in the same sense.

Plau^ible (plausibilis) received favorably, with joy and clapping hands,
acceptable.

Plausidical (plausidicus) that speaks plausibly, eloquent.

Plausor (Lat.) that claps his hands in token of joy, or in giving praise.

Plea (placitum) signifies in our Common Law, that which either party (but most
commonly the Defendant) alleges for himself in Court, etc.

Pleb^ian (plebeius) of or pertaining to the common people, poor, base, of
little value, of the common sort.

Plebeity (plebeitas) the commonalty, vulgar people.

Plebicolist (plebicola) a favorer of the common people.

P^ebiscite (plebiscitum) a Law, Statute or Ordinance, made only by the
consent of the people without the Senate.

Pledge (from the Fr. pleige) a surety or gage. To pledge one drinking, had its
original thus; when the Danes bore sway in this Land, if a Native did drink,
they would sometimes stab him with a Dagger or Knife; Hereupon people would not
drink in company unless some one present would be their pledge or surety, that
they should receive no hurt, whilst they were in their draught; Hence that
usual phrase, I Will pledge you, or be a pledge for you. Others affirm the true
sense of the word was, that if the party drunk unto was not disposed to drink
himself, he would put another for a pledge to do it for him, else the party who
began would take it ill.

Pleget or Splege (splenium) a long plaster of cloth or leather; a linen
cloth dipped in any water, to wash or lay to a sore place.

P^eiedes (Gr.) the seven stars that appear in a cluster about mid-heaven.

Plenary (from plenus) full, ample, large; wealthy, abundant.

Plenarty, is an abstract of the adjective plenus; and is used by our common
Lawyers in matters of Benefices; wherein plenarty and vacation are merely
contrary. Stawnf. Praerog. cap. 8. fol. 32. West. 2. ca. 5. An. 13. Ed. 1.

Plenilunary (from plenilunium) of or pertaining to the new Moon. Br.

Plen^otentiaries (from plenus and potentia) Ambassadors or Commissioners, that
have full power and authority from their King, or those by whom they are sent,
to treat and conclude with an enemy or other person upon all or such points as
are contained in their Commission, etc.

Plenitude (plenitudo) fullness, solidity, thickness, grosness.

Pleonasm (pleonasmus) a figure whereby something superfluous is added. Hence,

Pleonasmick, superfluous, redundant.

Plero^horie (Gr.) a fullness or perfection of any thing; by some, especially
appropriated to knowledge or persuasion.

Plethorical or Plethorick (plethoricus) fat, corpulent, over full of humors,
or good juice. Plethorical state of the body, is when it being full of blood
and other humors needs evacuation.

Pleurisy (pleuritis) a disease, when the inward skin of the ribs in man's body
is inflamed with too much blood, flowing unnaturally to it; In this disease
there is a difficulty to fetch breath, a cough, a continual Ague, and a
pricking pain about the Ribs.

Pleuritick (pleuriticus) that has or is subject to the Pleurisy.

Plicature (plicatura) a folding or plaiting.

Plo^ket ( Ann. 1. R. 3. ca. 2.) is a kind of woollen cloth.

Plottons (a term of war) are small divisions; every Plotton being eight in
front, led off by a Captain, and every division after him led up by a
sufficient Officer. Barif. p. 172.

Plumage (Fr.) Feathers, or a bunch of feathers; also pluming as a Hawk does
upon a Pinio^, where there is more feathers then meat.

Plumassery (from pluma) a plume or bunch of feathers.

Plumbagin (plumbago, inis) pure lead, turned almost into ashes by the
vehemence of the fire; This is the artificial Plumbagin, and comes of lead put
into a furnace with Gold or Silver Oar, to make them melt the sooner (by which
employment it gains some part in the worth of those metals;) There is also a
natural or mineral Plumbagin, which (as Matthiolus thinks) is no other then
Silver mingled with Lead, Stone, or Oar. Cot.

Plumbean Plumbeous (plumbeus) of the color and property of lead; leaden; also
dull, blunt.

Plumigerous (plumiger) that bears feathers.

Plumosity (plumositas) fullness of feathers.

Plunder (from the Germ. plu^deren) to rob, spoil or take away by force, as
Soldiers do in time of war. This word was first known in England in the year
1642.

Plurality (pluralitas) mereness, more then one.

Plural Pluralitive (pluralis) that contains many.

Plurifarious (plurifarius) of diverse fashions.

Pluto, the God of Hell and Riches, The Helmet of Pluto is said to have had
power to make men invisible

Pluvial (pluvialis) of rain, like to rain, rainy, waterish.

Pluvio^s (pluviosus) very rainy, full of rain, that has much rain.

Pneumatical (pneumaticus) spiritual, windy.

Pneumaticks (from pneuma) books treating of Spirits or the winds.

Pneumology (Gr.) a speaking or treating of spirits or winds.

Pocilla^or (Lat.) he that waits on a great persons cup, a Cup Bearer.

Poco a poco (Spa.) by little and little, by degrees; see Pian Piano.

Poculent (poculentus) all things that may be drunk.

Podagrical (podagricus) that has the gout in the feet, gouty footed.

Podemetry (Gr.) foot measure, or a measuring by the foot.

Podestate (Ital. podesta) a man of power; a Judge in Civil causes; a Governor
or Magistrate; In most of the Cities under the State of Venice there is a
Podesta, who represents the Senate, and executes their power.

Poesi^ (poesis) a Poets work, Poetry; there are six sorts of Poesy; the
Heroic Poem Narrative is called an Epique Poem; the Heroic Poem Dramatique,
is Tragedy; the Scommatick Narrative, is Satyr; Drammatick, is Comedy; the
Pastoral Narrative, is called simply Pastoral (anciently Bucolique) the same
Dramatique, Pastoral Comedy. The figure therefore of an Epique Poem, and of a
Tragedy ought to be the same; for that they differ no more, but that they are
pronounced by one or many persons. Mr. Hobbs.

Poetaster (Fr. Poetastre) a counterfeit or ignorant Poet; an unlearned fellow,
that pesters the world with idle vanities.

Poitrel. See Pectoral.

Polar or Polary (polaris) belonging to the Pole. The Polar Circle, is that
Circle which is described by the Pole of the Zodiac, being carried about the
Pole of the world.

Polarity, the likeness, or belongingness of a thing to the Pole.

sicks (that is in those speculations, which concern the works of nature) the
nearest word to fall with our tongue, yet not far from the thing, was
Physician, for Medicus could not well brook any flexion among us. El. Ar.

Phisiognomer Physiognomist (physiognomon) one that professes to know the
manners and natures of some men, by the view of their body, eyes, face, and
forehead.

Physiognomy (and by contraction Physnomy, Physiognomia) an Art, which
discovers the dispositions of the mind by the lineaments and features of the
body. And sometimes the feature is called Physiognomy.

Physiology (physiologia) a searching out natural things; a reasoning of the
nature of any thing; also Anatomizing Physic, or that part of Physic, which
treats of the composition or structure of man's body. Cot.

Physiologer (physiologus) he that searches out, or disputes of natural
things, a natural Philosopher.

Piacle (piaculum) a Sacrifice, and all other things that are done, and given
for the purging and satisfaction of some grievous sin and offense; also the
offense it self.

Piacular Piaculous (piacularis) serving for the purging of, or that has power
to purge, some faults or offenses; also that portends some sorrowful thing.

Pia matter (Lat.) the inmost skin which incloseth the brain round about, the
Gaul or film of the Brain.

Pian piano (Ital.) in the same sense the Spaniard says, Poco a poco, the Fr.
Pas a pas, and we in English, By little and little, soft and fair.

Piation (piatio) a sacrificing or purging by Sacrifice.

Piazz^ (Ital.) a Marketplace or chief street; such is that in Covent Garden,
which the vulgar corruptly call the P.H, The close Walks are not o properly the
Piazza, as the ground enclosed within the Rail. Note, when two z's happen
together in Italian, the first is pronounced as t; so we truly pronounce it
Piatza.

Picards or Picardites (Picardi) people of Picardy in France are said to have
first got that name of their great and most accustomed use of Pikes. Also a
sort of Heretics (so called from one Picardus) that held the same opinions, or
little differing from the Adamites.

To Picardize, to speak or do like a Picard.

Pickadil ( a Belg. Pickedillekens, i.e. Lacinia. Teut. Pickedel) the round
hem, or the several divisions set together about the skirt of a Garment, or
other thing; also a kind of stiff collar, made in fashion of a Band. That
famous Ordinary near St James called Pickadilly, took denomination from this,
that one Higgins a Tailor, who built it, got most of his Estate by Picadilles,
which in the last age were much in fashion.

Pic^gu^ (Fr.) by the pronunciation of this word in France, Aliens were
discerned from the native French. As Shibboleth among the Hebrews, Judges 12.6.
So likewise (in Sands his Travels, fol 239.) you may read how the Genoese were
distinguished from the Venetians, by naming a sheep. And in our own History,
the Flemings (in Wat Tylers Rebellion) were distinguished from English by
pronouncing Bread and Cheese, etc. Stows Survey, fol. 51.

Pickage (piccagium) is money paid in Fairs for breaking the ground to set up
Booths or standings.

Pic^r alias Pitle (seems to come from the Italian, piccolo or picciolo i.
parvus, minutus) signifies with us a little small Close or Enclosure.

Picou^ro^ (Fr.) a little Pike, a Javelin or Dart.

Pictor (Lat.) a Painter or Colourer.

Pictorical, Pictorian or Pictural (pictorius) of or belonging to a Picture;
garnished, painted, gaily or trimly set forth. Br.

Pigment (pigmentum) women's painting color; also the figures and colors of
Rhetoric; guile or deceit.

Pignera^e (pignero) to lay a gage or mortgage; also to take in pawn, as the
Usurer does for security.

Pigneratitious (pigneratitius) that which is laid in pledge, or pertaining to
gage.

Pigrit^de (pigritudo) slothfulness, idleness.

Pilaster (Fr. pilastre) a small Pillar (Vetruvius, lib. 5. cap. 1.) Also the
inflammation or swelling of the Uvula, grown thereby all of a bigness.

Pilcro^; see Paragraph,

Pi^rim (peregrinus) one that travels into strange Countries, commonly taken
for him that goes in devotion to any holy place; a Pilgrim and a Palmer
differs thus; the Pilgrim had some dwelling place, the Palmer none: The
Pilgrim traveled to some certain place, the Palmer to all, and not to any one
in particular; The Pilgrim might go at his own charge, the Palmer must profess
wilful poverty; The Pilgrim might give over his profession, the Palmer must be
constant, till he had obtained the Palm; that is, victory over his spiritual
enemies, and life, by death Chauc.

Pilla^e, a kind of ordinanary meat among the Turks* which is no other then
Rice sod with the fat of Mutton.

Pilosity (pilositas) hairiness, roughness. Bac.

Pilot (Ital. Pilota) a Steersman, he that directs the course of a ship; the
Belgic call him a Lootsman; see Lodemenage.

Pilotage or Pilotism, the Office or art of a Pilot, the skilful guiding or
conduct of a ship.

Pimplea^, from Pimplea, a Fount in Macedon, sacred to the Muses, and is
therefore often used as an Epithete for them.

Pin, as, he is in a merry Pin; it was an ancient kind of Dutch artificial
drunkenness, the cup commonly of wood, had a pin about the middle of it, and he
was accounted the man, who could nick the pin, by drinking even to it, whereas
to go above or beneath was a forfeiture. This devise was of old the cause of so
much debauchery in England, that one of the constitutions of a Synod held at
Westminster in the year 1102. was to this effect; That Priests should not go to
public Drinkings, nec ad Pinnas bibant, nor drink at Pins.

Pinguefie (pinguefacio) to make fat or gross; some have used pinguedinize in
the same sense.

Pinguedinous (pinguedinosus) that is fat, gross, rude or unweildy.

Piniferous (pinifer) which bears Pine-trees,

Pinnigerous (pinniger) that has fins; finned like a fish.

Pinsor (Lat.) that brayes or stamps in a Mortar; a Baker.

Pirules, two small Tablets in the Alhidada of an Astrolabe, having in them two
little holes, through which the height of the Sun* etc. is taken; some call
them the sights of the Alhidada. Cot.

Pioner or Pionor (from the Fr. Pionni^r) a laborer in an Army, used to cast
trenches or undermine Forts. Ann. 2, 3. Ed. 6. cap. 20.

Pipation (pipatio) a cry of one that weeps.

Pipe (Fr.) a measure of Wine or Oil, containing half a Tun, that is One
hundred twenty and six Gallons. An. 1. R. 3. cap. 13.

Piepowders Court or a Pourt of Pypoudre (from the Fr. pied, a foot, and
pouldreux, dusty) is a Court held in Fairs for the redress of all disorders
committed there; which because they are most frequented in Summer; the word was
given of the dusty feet of the comers. Of this see Cromp. Juris. fol. 221.

Piquant (Fr.) pricking, sharp, piercing, stinging, nipping. Mr. Montagu in his
Miscel.

Piqueron; see Picqueron.

Piquy; see Character.

Piramid; see in Py --

Piratical (piraticus) of or belonging to a Pirate or Robber on the Sea,
Pirate-like.

Piromantie; see in Py --

Pirenean, of or pertaining to the fountain Pirene at the foot of the mountain
Acrocorinthus, fained to have been made by the horse Pegasus, dashing his foot
against a rock.

Piscary (piscaria) a fish-market, or place where fish are. Piscary, in our
Common Law signifies a liberty of fishing in another man's waters.

Piscation (piscatio) a fishing. Dr. Br.

Piscicle (pisciculus) a little fish.

Piscinal (piscinalis) of or belonging to a Fish Pond.

Pisculent (pisculentus) full of fishes, or that may be fished.

Piss^spha^ (pissasphalium) Pitch mingled with Bitumen, either by accident or
art; the former is much the better, and comes from Apollonia in Epi^s, where it
first received that mixture. Co^.

P^ssu^m^st, or the Stone, is a disease in a Horse, when he would fain stale
but cannot at all; and therefore may well be called the suppression of the
Urine. Markham.

Pistac^oes (pistachia) a kind of small nuts called Pistake nuts that grow in
Syria, and are sold by Apothecaries; The word in the Persian tongue signifies
small nuts.

Pistrius (pistrina) a Bake-house, a Mill or grinding house.

Pistick (pisticus) pressed, or bruised.

Pistillation (from pistillum) a pounding or braying with a Pestil in a Mortar.

Pistorical or pistorian (pistoricus) belonging to a Baker, baking or Pastry.

Pithian Games. See Pyth.

Pituitous (pituitosus) full of phlegm, phlegmatic; waterish. Br.

Pix; see Pyx.

Placable (placabilis) easy to be pleased or appeased, soon qualified.

Placability (placibilitas) when a person is easy to be appeased or pacified,
gentleness.

Placard (Fr. plaquard) an Inscription set up; a Table wherein Laws, Orders,
etc. are written and hung up; also a Bill or Libel set upon a post. In our
Common Law it is taken for a license, whereby a man is permitted to maintain
unlawful Games. 2, and 3 ^h. and Mar. ca. 7.

Placidity (placiditas) quietness, peaceableness.

Placid (placidus) gentle, patient, mild, peaceable.

Placit (placitum) a firm consent or opinion; a Decree or Ordinance.

Plagiary (plagiarius) one that steals or takes free people out of one Country
and sells them in another for slaves; a stealer or suborner of men's children or
servants, for the same or like purpose, (in which sense we term him a
Slockster) also a Book-stealer or book thief, one that fathers other men's works
upon himself. Cot.

a Court kept in Haven Towns; as Swainmot in the Forest. It is sometimes called
the Portmoot Court. An. 43. Eliz. 15.

Portsale. Ann. 35 H. 8. cap. 7.1. sale of fish presently upon return in the
Haven. Among the ancient Romans, those things were rightly sold in Portsale,
which were publicly sold Per Praeconem sub hasta. i. by the Crier, under a
Spear sticked up for that purpose, and some Magistrate making good the sale by
delivery of the goods, which were sold to him, who would bid most for them.
Sigonius.

Posade (Fr.) a lighting down of Birds, a laying down a burden, a breathing,
pause, resting or resting place, from the Span. Posada, an Inn.

Pose, a Physical term, signifying a rheum or humor, which falls into the
Nose, stopping the Nostrils, and hindering the voice.

Possessive (possessivus) pertaining to possession or property.

Posterganeous (posterganeus) belonging to the backside or hinder part of the
body.

Posteriority (posterioritas) the being or coming after, or behind. It is a
word of comparison and relation in tenure, the correlative whereof is priority;
for a man holding Lands or Tenements of two Lords, holds of his antienter Lord
by priority, and of his latter by posteriority. Stawnf. Praerog. fol. 10.11.

Posthume (posthumus) a child born after the Fathers death; and by Metaphor, a
Book published after the Authors death. It is sometimes used for a man's
Christen name.

Posthumian (postumus) following or to come, that shall be.

Postick (posticus) that dwells on the backside, that is behind us.

Postil (postillum) a short exposition upon the Gospel, wherein more is
observed, then has been by others; so called from these words Postillos dies,
which are very frequent in holy Writ.

Postulon (Fr) he that rides upon the sixth Coach-horse; a guide or Post-boy.

Postlimintage (postliminium) a return of one who was thought to be dead, and
so restored to his house, not by going over the threshold, but by making a hole
in the wall; a Law whereby one recovers again that was lost in war, or taken
from him by any unlawful means.

Postliminious (from Postliminium) pertaining to Postliminiage.

Postmeridian (postmeridianus) done in the afternoon.

Postnate (postnatus) born after; taken substantively, it may be the same with
Posthume.

Postpone or Postpose (postpono) to set behind, to esteem less, to omit or
leave.

Postposure (from postpono) a setting behind or esteeming less. Mr. Montagu.

Postriduan (postriduanus) done the next day after or following.

Po^vene (pos^venio) to come or follow after.

Postulate (postulatum) a request, demand or suit.

Postul^to^ (postulatorius) of or belonging to a request or demand.

Potable (potabilis) drinkable, or which may be drunk.

Pote^als (from potentia) things apt to breed or give power, strength or
ability.

Potentially (potenter) powerfully, mightily, substantially, effectually.

Pot^states (potestates) men in authority, Rulers, great Magistrates.

Potorious (potorius) of or belonging to drink, drinking.

Potulent (potulentus) any thing that may be drunk; also half drunk.

Pouldabis, Oulderness, Medrinacles; the course Canvas wherewith Tailors
stiffen Dublets, or whereof Sails of ships are made. An. 1. Jac. 24.

Poundage, is a Subsidy granted to the King of all manner of Merchandises of
every Merchant, Denizen and Alien, carried out or brought into this Realm by
way of Merchandise, to the value of twelve pence in every pound. An. 12. Ed.
6.13. An. 31. Eliz. cap. 5. and 1 Jac. 33.

Pourcoutrel. See Polypus.

Pourmenade (Fr.) a Walk.

Poursuivant (Fr.) a pursuer, suitor or follower; but more particularly, a
Messenger attending the King in Wars or the Council Table, Exchequer, etc. to
be sent upon any occasion or message. Those that are used in Marshal causes,
are called Pursuivants at Arms. Anno 24. H. 8. cap. 13. whereof there are four
of special names, which see in Herald.

And Stow, speaking of Richard the Thirds end (p. 784.) has these words, For
his body was naked to the skin, not so much as one clout about him, and was
trussed behind a Pursuivant at Arms, like an Hog or Calf, etc. The rest are
used upon other Messuages in time of Peace, especially in matters touching
Jurisdiction. Also a sort of mean persons, that procure Commissions to
prosecute the Romanists on the account of Religion.

Pourpresture (from the Fr. Pourpris, i. a close or enclosure) is thus defined
in Glanvile; lib. 9. cap. 11. Pourprestura est proprie, quando aliquid super
Dominum Regem injuste occupatur, etc. Cromp. in his Jurisd. fol. 152. defines
it thus. Pourpresture is properly when a man takes to himself or incroaches any
thing that he ought not, whether it be in any jurisdiction, Land, or Franchise,
and generally when any thing is done to the Nuisance of the Kings Tenant, etc.

Pourtrait (pourtractus) an Image, Picture, counterfeit or draught of.

Pourtraiture (Fr. Portraicture) a drawing or deliniating.

Powers, the third order of the second Hierarchy of Angels, so called by reason
of their peculiar Jurisdiction over Fiends and all infernal spirits. See
Hierarchy.

Poynings Law, is an Act of Parliament made in Ireland. 10 Hen. 7. and was so
called, because Sir Edw. Poynings was Lieutenant of Ireland when that Law was
made; whereby all the Statutes of England were made of force in Ireland. For
before they were not, neither are any now in force in Ireland, which were made
in England since that time. Cokes 12 Rep. fol. 109.

Practick (Gr.) pertaining to the practice or actual exercise of any Art or
Science.

Pragmatical (pragmaticus) that is expert in doing things, practiced in the
Law, and in many matters.

Pragmatic (Span. Pragmatica) a Proclamation or Edict; sometimes used for a
kind of agreement or paction between a secular Prince, and the Pope, or some
other Bishop, etc.

Prandicle (prandiculum) a Breakfast, a little Dinner, a small pittance or
repast.

Pransorious (pransorius) belonging to, or serving for, dinner.

Pratique (from the Span. practica) practice, or a thing done by practice; but
among Merchants it is a License to Traffic; as in the Ports of Italy, and the
Streights, if the Mr. of the ship brings a Bill of Health, that is, a
Certificate that the place from whence he came is not infected with any
contagious disease, then the Chief Magistrate or Signors of Health grant him
Pratique, that is, leave to come in and Traffic. Sands.

Pratical (from the Span.) done by practice or experience.

Pravity (pravitas) crookedness, overthwartness, lewdness, naughtiness.

Prebend (from praebeo, to give) is the portion which every member or Canon of
a Cathedral Church, receives in right of his place, for his maintenance.

Prebendary (praebendarius) he that has such a Prebend; and is called so, a
Praebendo auxilium, and consilium Episcopo; for to that end were Prebends
ordained in Cathedral Churches, that the Prebendaries thereof should be
assistants, and of Council to the Bishop in his Episcopal Function.

Pre(Lat. prae) a Preposition signifying before, or in comparison, often
compounded.

Prebition (praebitio) a giving, a showing, an offering, a setting before one.

Precaution (praecautio) a preventing a thing before it comes, a foreseeing.

Precention (praecentio) a singing before; the onset or flourish of a Song.

Precarious (praecarius) granted to one by prayer and entreaty, to use so long
as it pleases the party, and no longer.

Precedential (from praecedens) that goes before or surpasses; that gives a
precedent, or shows the way.

Precell^cy (from praecello) an exceeding, surpassing, excellency. Bac.

Precen^or (Lat.) the chanter, he that begins the Tune. It is used in an Act
of Parliament of 31 July, 1649.

Preceptiv^ (praeceptivus) of or belonging to precepts.

Preceptor (praeceptor) a Master, a Teacher, an Instructor.

Precidaneous (praecidaneus) that which goes before, or is cut or killed before.

Precinct (praecinctus) is used for a Territory or certain parcel of Land,
encompassed with some River, Hedge, or other mark, to distinguish it from other
lands adjacent.

Pr^cipice (praecipitium) a steep place, dangerous to go upon, a downright
pitch or fall.

Precipitate (praecipito) to hurl or cast down headlong* to do unadvisedly or
rashly. It is also the name of a corrosive powder, commonly called Red Mercury,
used by Chyrurgeons to eat corrupted flesh.

Precocity (from praecox, ocis) early ripeness, forwardliness in ripening,
over-has^iness in ripening. Dod. Grove.

Pr^cognition (praecognitio) foreknowledge, prenotion, or former notice of.

Preconious (praeconius) of or belonging to a Common-Crier; also to praise or
commendation.

Preconsultor (Lat.) a Pre-adviser; there is a College of these at Venice; see
Rel. Wotton. p. 170.

Precursor (Lat. praecursor) a fore-messenger, a fore-rider, a forerunner, or
goer.

Predatory (praedatorius) of or belonging to robbing, spoiling, and piracy.

Predestination (praedestinatio) fore-appointment, an ordaining before what
shall come after. It is most used in Divinity, and is thus defined by Sir Walt.
Ral. in his first Book fol. 16. We can (says he) difference Predestination no
otherwise from Providence and Prescience, then in this, That Prescience only
foresees, Providence foresees and cares for, and has respect to all creatures,
even from the brightest Angels of Heaven to the unworthiest worms of the earth;
And Predestination is only of men, and yet not of all to men belonging, but of
their salvation properly (in the common use of Divines)

Pole (polus) the end or point of the Axletree, where* on Astronomers imagine
Heaven to be moved, that part of the Heaven which never moves; There are two
such Poles, one in the North, noted by a Star called Polus Arcticus, visible to
us far above the earth, the other in the South named Antarcticus, far out of
sight, being as much under the earth in the South as the North Pole is above
it. It is also taken for Heaven, and so used by Poets.

Point Blank (Fr.) perfectly even, precisely to the purpose, the nail on the
head; Poinct in Fr. signifies a point, center or period, etc. and Blank the
white or mark of a pair of Buts, etc.

Polemark (polemarchus) a Lord Marshal of the field, a chief Officer of War.
One of the nine chief Magistrates in the popular State of Athens.

Polemical (polemicus) pertaining to War, warlike, military.

Polemicks (from the Gr. (...)) verses treating of war, or treatises of war, or
strifes; disputations.

Policy of Assurance or Ensurance, is a course taken by those, who adventure
wares and merchandise by Sea, whereby they (unwilling to hazard their whole
adventure) give to some other a certain rate or proportion, as ten in the
hundred, or such like, to secure the safe arrival of the ship, and so much
wares at the place agreed on; so that, if the ship and wares miscarry, the
Ensurer makes good to the Venturer or Ensured, so much as he promised to
secure, as 50. 100. more or less; and if the ship arrive safely he gains that
clearly, which the Venturer compounds to pay him, and for the more even dealing
between them in this case, there is a certain Clerk or Officer ordained, to set
down in writing the sum of their agreement, that they afterward differ not
between themselves upon the bargain. This term you have An. 43. Eliz. ca 11.
and in course Latin called Assecuratio.

Politics (politica) books treating of the Government of a City or
Commonwealth.

Politure (politura) a polishing, trimming or decking.

Pollicar (pollicaris) of or belonging to a thumb or toe; of an inch in length
or breadth.

Pollicitation (pollicitatio) a free and willing promise.

Pollinarious (pollinarius) pertaining to fine flower or meal.

Pollinctor (Lat.) he that washes and anoints the dead body with sweet
ointments.

Pollincture (pollinctura) the dressing, chesting, or embalming of dead bodies.

Poltron (Fr.) a Knave, Rascal, Varlet, Scondrel; also a Dastard, or lazy
Coward. Hence the term of Poltry fellow one that deals couseningly or dodgingly.

Polus (Gr.) signifies multus, numerosus, much or many; and is often used in
composition; as

Polychrests (Gr.) things of much use, fit for many uses, or diverse ways
profitable. Bac.

Polygamy (polygamia) the having of many Wives, or of more then one.

Polyglet (Gr.) that speaks many Languages, a Linguist.

Polygarchy (polygarchia) a Monarchy divided into sundry parts; or such a
division; a Government of many; opposite to Monarchy, which is a Government of
one.

Polygon (polygona) a Geometrical figure, that has many corners.

Polygraphy (polygraphia) a diverse manner of writing.

Polyh^stor (Gr.) he that knows much, or many things, and describes them.

Polyloquent (polyloquus) that speaks much.

Polymathicks (Gr.) men learned in, or books treating of many Disciplines.

Polymnia or Polyhimnia, one of the Muses.

Polymorphean (polymorpheus) of many forms or fashions.

Polypharmacal (polypharmachus) that has many Medicines.

Polyphon (Gr.) multiplicity of sounds; also a musical ininstrument so called,
having many strings, and by consequence several sounds.

Polypheme, generally taken for a Giant, or any big, overgrown,
disproportionate fellow; so used from Polyphemus a Giant, that had but one eye
in his forehead, which Ulysses put out.

Polypragmatick, that is very pragmatical, or busy.

Polypragmon (Gr.) a factious or pragmatical fellow, one that will have an Oar
in every man's boat, a busy body.

Polyprote (polyproton) that has many cases.

Polypus, a fish called Pourcontrel, or many feet; it changes color often,
and is sometime metaphorically applied to inconstant persons; also a disease in
the Nose, called Noli me tangere, breeding a piece of flesh that oftentimes
stifleth the Nose, and stops the wind.

Polysillable (polysillabus) a word that has many syllables

Polysillabical, that has many syllables.

Pomary (pomarium) a place set with Fruit trees, an Orchard; also an Apple Loft.

Pomarious (pomarius) of or belonging to an Orchard, or to fruit in general,
but most commonly Apples.

Pomery (pomoerium) a certain space about the walls of a City or Town, a
Precinct.

Pomeridian (pomeridianus) q. post meridiem. After noon.

Pomiferous (pomifer) that bears fruit.

Pommade (Fr.) Pomatum or Pomata, an ointment used by Ladies; also the Pomada,
a trick in vaulting.

Pomona, the Goddess of Fruits.

Pompatick (pompaticus) solemn, or done with pomp.

Ponderize (from pondus, eris) to ponder, weigh, poise, or consider. Herb. Tr.

Ponderity (ponderitas) weightiness, heaviness, ponderosity.

Pon^ge (Fr.) is a contribution toward the maintenance or re-edifying of
Bridges. Westminster. 2. cap. 25. Anno 13. Ed. 1. It may also signify Toll taken for
that purpose of those that pass over Bridges. An. 39. Eliz. ca. 24. An. 1. H.
8. ca. 9. And see the Statute of 22. H. 8.5.

Pontick (ponticus) of or pertaining to Pontus, a part of Asia. So the Pontick
Sea, is that Sea which adjoyns to Pontus. Pontick Nut, is a Filberd or
Hazle-nut.

Pontif (pontifex) a Bishop or Prelate. Bac.

Pontifical Pontificial (pontificalis) pertaining to a Bishop; sumptuous,
stately, Prelate-like.

Pontificalibus (the Ablative case plural of Pontificalis) a Bishop is said to
be in his Pontificalibus, when he is vested in his Episcopal Ornaments, to say
or sing Divine service, upon some Festival day. We commonly say such a one is
in his Pontificalibus, when he is in rich attire, or his best apparel.

Popinal (popinalis) of Cookery, or belonging to riot or places of riot, as
Alehouses, Taverns, etc.

Po^litick (from poples, it is) belonging to the Ham of the Leg. Poplitick
Vein, is that Vein which runs under the Knee.

Populace (Fr.) the Populacy, the ^ascal people, base multitude, meaner sort of
the vulgar.

Population (populatio) a wasting, destroying, or unpeopling a place.

Populiferous (populifer) thal bears Poplar trees.

Populosity (populositas) fullness of people. Br.

Porcellane or China Dishes, brought out of China, are made of a Chalky Earth,
which (beaten and steeped in water) affords a Cream or fatness on the top, and
a gross subsidence at the bottom; out of the Cream or superfluitance, the
finest Dishes are made, out of the residence the courser; which being formed,
they gild or paint, not after a hundred years, but presently commit to the
Furnace. To which Dishes (or the finer sort of them, which they say are
forbidden to be carried out of the Kingdom) Scaliger and others ascribe these
properties, That they admit no poison; strike fire; will grow hot no higher
then the liqour in them arises. Dr. Br.

Porcine (porcina) of or belonging to an Hog, hoggish.

Porculation (porculatio) feeding or fatting of Swine, bringing up of Hogs.

Pores (pori) small and unsensible holes of the skin, whereby the sweat and
vapors pass out of the body.

Porose or Porous (porosus) full of pores or little holes. Bac.

Porosity (porositas) poriness, or the being full of pores.

Porphyry (porphyrites) a dark red Marble, spotted with white.

Porphyry Chair, a Chair of Porphyry Marble in the Cloister of St. John Lateran
at Rome, called Seeds Stercoraria; because when the Pope takes possession of
his Episcopal See in that Church, at the intoneing the Verse, Suscitans de
terra inopem and de stercore erigens pauperem, Psalm. 113. he was carried from a
side Chapel to the high Altar, in that Chair; to signify that God had raised
him from a low condition, to that supreme Dignity. The usual tale of this Chair
is a mere fiction.

Porphyretick (porphyreticus) belonging to red Marble, or purple.

Porrection (porrectio) a stretching or reaching out.

Porsyllogism, is as it were an Auxiliary Syllogism, to prove the main one.

Portable (portabilis) that may be born or carried.

Portate (portatus) a bearing or bringing.

Portculits (from the Fr. port, and coler, i. delabi) a faling gate or door to
let down, to keep enemies from, or in a City.

Portegue (Fr. Portugaise) a golden chain worth about 4 l. 10 s. sterling.

Portend (portendo) to signify before a thing happens, to foretell, to betoken.

Portentifical (portentificus) which works wonders, or whereby strange things
are done.

Portentous (portentosus) monstrous, betokening some mischance or fortune to
come.

Portglaive (Fr.) a Sword Bearer.

Portgreve (compounded of Port and greve or grave, i. perfectus) signifies with
us the chief Magistrate in certain Port Towns. And (as Came. says in his
Britan. p. 325,) the chief Magistrate of London was termed by this name;
instead of whom, Richard the first ordained two Bailiffs; but presently after
King John granted them a Major for their yearly Magistrate.

Porteguidon (Fr.) an Ensign-bearer to a troop of men at Arms.

Portmanteau (Fr. from the Span. Portar, to carry, and Mantea) a Cloakbag or
Male.

Portmote (compounded of Port, and the Fr. Mot, i. dictio) (...) or perdition,
as some have used it, etc.

Predial or Prediatory (praedialis) of or belonging to Lands or Manors.

Predial Tithes, are of those things which arise yearly of the fruit and profit
of the earth, as of Wood, Corn, Hay, etc. See Mr. Shep. Epit. fol. 1004.
Predial in French relates properly to a Meadow.

Prediator (Lat. Praediator) a Lawyer that is expert in Actions real, or cases
concerning Lands.

Predicable (praedicabilis) that may be told or spoken of abroad. In Logic
there are five Predicables, otherwise called Porphyries five Terms; viz. Genus,
Species, Differentia, Proprium, Accidents; and are called Predicables, a
praedicando, because they are Attributes of all things.

Predicament (praedicamentum) a term in Logic, whereof there are Ten, in which
every limited and bounded nature is ranked and disposed; The first called
Substance, includes all substances whatsoever, as the four Elements, and all
other creatures. The second, Quantity, contains all quantities, as 10, 20; a
yard, a furlong, a mile. The third, called Quality, has under it all qualities,
as Wisdom, Art, Fortitude, Diligence, Sloth: The fourth named Relation, ss
properly of such words as depend mutually one upon another, as a Husband and
Wife, a Master and Servant. The rest are 5. Action or doing. 6. Passion or
suffering. 7. Where. 8. When 9. ^cituation or place. 10. The Habit or outward
covering of a thing. See Peripatetical Institutions. Les. 3.4.

Predicament is sometimes used in ordinary discourse, for state, condition,
order, or the like.

Predicate (praedico) to publish, to say or tell openly, to noise abroad. In
Logic it is used substantively, and signifies the later part of a Proposition,
as in saying, John is a Scholar; the word [Schollar] is called the Predicate,
because it is spoken or affirmed of the subject John.

Prefect (praefectus) a Ruler, Governor or President; a Captain, a Provost, a
Lord Mayor. In old Rome, the Prefect of the City had the hearing of all matters
between Master and Servant, Buyer and Seller, Orphans and their Overseers, etc.
But afterward he did assume to himself authority to hear all causes whatsoever
within a hundred miles of Rome.

Prefecture (praefectura) a Captainship, a Lieutenantship, an Authority or
Rule, an Office, or little Jurisdiction.

Preference (from praefero) preferment, advancement, account before, place
above others.

Prefinition, a determination before.

Pregnant (praegnans) great with child or young; full of good sap and juice;
pithy, ripe, lively, strong.

Pregression (praegressio) a going before, an out-going or over-passing, a
preventing.

Pregustation (praegustatio) a tasting or assaying before.

Preignotary; see Protonotary.

Prejudicate (praejudicatus) fore-judged; determined, or condemned before.

Prelation (praelatio) a carrying or setting before, preferment, preference.

Prelect, Either from praelectus, read before; or from praeelectus, one chosen
before another.

Preliminary; see Liminary.

Preludium (Lat. praeludium) an entrance to a matter, a proem; In Music, a
voluntary before the Song, a flourish or preamble, and (as you would say) signs
and proffers.

Prelusion praelusio) a playing before, a flourish, the same with praeludium.

Premature (praematurus) ripe before other, or ripe before due time and season;
untimely, coming too soon.

Premeditate (praemeditor) to muse and think on a thing before hand.

Premious (praemiosus) rich in money, gifts, presents and rewards.

Premission (praemissio) a sending before.

Premium (praemium) a reward given to him that does any thing, a recompense. It
is used in Schools, for a reward given to that Scholar that says his Lesson,
or performs his Exercise well. And among Merchants it is used for that sum of
money, as Eight or Ten per Cent. which the Ensured gives the Ensurer for
ensuring the safe return of any Ship or Merchandise.

Praemunire (more properly Praemonere) when any man for an offense committed,
shall incur a Praemunire, it is meant, he shall incur the same punishment,
which is inflicted on those that transgress the Statute made Anno 16. Ric. 2.
cap. 5. (commonly called the Statute of Praemunire) and is to be out of the
Kings protection, to forfeit Lands and Goods, and to be imprisoned, etc. See
more in Fullers Hist. p. 148.

Premunition (praemunitio) a fortifying or fencing beforehand.

Prenotion (praenotio) a fore-knowing of a thing; foreknowledge.

Prenuncious (praenuncius) that first brings tidings, that goes before and tells
news, that signifies a thing to be at hand.

Preominate (from prae and omen) to presage or foretell. Dr. Br.

Preoccupate (preoccupatus) prevented, overreached, taken aforehand.

Prepensed (from the Fr. pre-pense) forethought; as malice prepensed, in our
Common Law, is malice forethought.

Preponderate (praepondero) to poise or weigh more; to ponder or examine
before; to be of great price, or more worth.

Preposition (praepositio) a putting or setting before; a part of speech so
called.

A Prepositor in a School.

Preposterous (praeposterus) overthwart, out of order, contrary to all good
fashion; froward.

Preproperous (praeproperus) very quick or hasty; over hasty, rash.

Prepuce (praeputium) the foreskin that covers the head or nut of a man's Yard;
which the Hebrews use to cut off in circumcision.

Prerogative (praerogativa) an advantage, a preheminency, authority, and rule
above others.

Presbyterians, are those that profess the doctrine of Calvin, condemn
Episcopacy ^n the Church, and govern it partly by Lay Elders; and were not much
known among us by that name till the long Parliament, that began 3. November.
1640, took the Scottish Kirk for a pattern in reforming.

Presbytery, that kind of Government in a Church

Prescience (praescientia) foreknowledge, an understanding beforehand of a
thing ere it come to pass; see Predestination.

Prescind (praescindo) to cut or tear before; to divide or break first. Dr. Ham.

Prescription (praescriptio) a limiting or limitation; an appointing or
determining; a Rule or Law; a long possession or continuance in possession; the
course or use of a thing for a long time.

Presentaneous (praesentaneus) present, ready, speedy, forceable, effectual,
etc.

Presentation (praesentatio) is used properly for the act of a Patron offering
or presenting his Clerk to the Bishop, to be instituted in a Benefice of his
gift; The form whereof see in the Regist. orig. fol. 222. a.

Presentment, is a mere denunciation of the Jurors themselves, or some other
Officer, as Justice, Constable, Searcher, Surveyor, etc. (without any
information) of an offense inquireable in the Court, whereunto it is presented;
see Lamberds Eiren. lib. 4. ca. 5. page 467.

Preside (praesideo) to have authority or rule, to have the protection or
tuition of any thing, place, or people, before others, to have the oversight
or charge.

Presidial (praesidialis) pertaining to a Lieutenant, Viceroy, chief Ruler or
President.

Presidie (praesidium) a Garrison, all manner of aid and defense; help, comfort.

Presidiary (praesidiarius) that is ordained to be an aid to another,
pertaining to a Garrison of Soldiers; also as Fresidial.

Pressed or Impressed money, (from the Fr pressed, i. ready) for that it binds those
that have received it to be ready at all times appointed, is a kind of an
earnest money given commonly to a Soldier when he is Imprested, or commanded to
be ready to serve in War.

Prestiges (praestigiae) deceirs, impostures, delusions, cousening tricks

Prestigation (praestigatio) a juggling, cousening or playing Legerdemain.

Prestigious (praestigiosus) pertaining to a Jugler or Imposter, that deceives
with Legerdemain, or deludes the eye(...).

Presto (Span.) quickly; a word used by (...), in their Hocus Pocus tricks.

Preterition (praeteritio) a going over, a passing by or beyond, a surpassing.

Pretermission (praetermissio) an omitting, a leaving out, a letting a thing
pass, a forgetting.

Praetor ( praetor, so called a praecundo) an Officer in old time, having the
Rule of an Army, the General; afterward he had authority in Judgment, and was
a chief Justice, having other Judges sitting under him, as Asconius says, to
the number of seventy one, others write seventy three, in process of time there
were so many Praetors chosen, as there were Countries subject to the Empire.
Tho. At first the names of Consul, Praetor and Judges were all one.

Pretorian (praetorius) of or belonging to, or attending on a Praetor; the
Pretorian guard of Soldiers in old Rome were first established by Augustus, and
consisted of Ten thousand, every one having double the wages of a Legionary
Soldier, and were in the same nature to the Emperors, as the Janissaries are to
the Great Turk, or as the Mamalukes were to the Sultans of Egypt.

Prevaricate (praevaricor) to make a semblance or show to do a thing, and do
quite contrary, to betray a cause, to swerve from truth, to go out of the right
way. See Calumniate.

Prevaricator (praevaricator) he that leaves the right way, or betrays a cause;
a false dealer, one that pleads by covin; a transgressor.

Prevenient (praeveniens) coming or going before, preventing.

Previdence (previdentia) foreseeing or fore-casting.

Previous (praevius) that goes before, or leads the way.

Priapism (priapismus) is a disease when the Yard is stretched out in length
and breadth, nothing provoking the Patient to lust and desire; if it come with
a beating or panting of the Yard, then the evil is called Satyriasis.

Pricker, a Huntsman on horseback.

Pricket, a fallow Male Deer, bearing that name when he is a year old complete.

Pridian (pridianus) of the day before.

Primacy (from primus, or from the Fr. primace) excellency, chief rule, highest
estate; and particularly an Ecclesiastical dignity or command over the
Archbishops and Bishops of a Kingdom or Province; and he who has this dignity
is called a Primate or Metropolitan.

Pr^ge, is a duty due to the Mariners and Sailers for ^oading any Ship at the
setting forth from any Haven. A. 32. H 8. ca. 14.

Prime (primus) first, principal, chief. Also the first hour of the day, in
Summer at four of the clock, in Winter at eight. Also one of the Canonical
hours of Prayer among the Romanists, which begins at six of the clock in the
morning and holds till nine. The Third begins at nine and holds till twelve.
The Sixth holds from twelve to three. The Ninth or None from three to six at
night. Then begins the Vesperas which holds till nine; from nine the Compline
holds till twelve at night. Bellarm. de bonis oper. lib. 1. cap. 10.

Primer, a Prayer Book of the Romanists so called; containing the Office of the
Virgin Mary; which is divided into seven several hours (as a memorial of the
seven principal parts and Hours of our Saviors Passion) viz. the Mattins and
Lauds; the Prime or first hour, the Third hour, the Sixth hour, the Nineth
hour, for morning. The Evensong and Compline for the Evening; and these seven
Hours are composed of Psalms chiefly, Hymns, Canticles, Antiphones, Versicles,
Responsories and Prayers.

Primevous (primaevus) the elder, or of the first age.

Prim^ces (primitiae) first fruits.

Primigenious (primigenius) that comes naturally of it self, that has not the
beginning of another, the first, or original.

Primipotent (primipotens) of chief power.

Primitial (from primitiae) belonging to first fruits.

Primitive (primitivus) that has no beginning of other, the first.

Primogeniture (from primogenitus) the first begetting or bringing forth. Br.

Primordial (primordium) a first beginning, offspring, original. Bac. It is
also used adjectively.

Primum mobile (Lat.) in the Pagan Philosophy, is the upper Heaven, supposed to
give motion to all the rest.

Principality (principalitas) the estate or seat of a Sovereign Prince;
Sovereignity, Dominion, Seignory.

Principalities, are the second Order of the second Hierarchy of Angels.

Princock (praecox) a ripe-headed young Boy, or one that is soon or overhasty
ripe; Non amo puerum Praecocis ingenii, I love not a Boy of too early a wit;
says the Poet.

Prisage (Fr.) prizing, praising, rating, valuing; also that custom or share,
that belongs to the King out of such Merchandise, as are taken at Sea by way of
lawful prize. An. 31. Eliz. ca. 5.

Prisage of Wines, Ann. 1. H. 8. ca. 5. is a word almost out of use, now called
Butlerage, it is a custom whereby the Prince challenges, out of every Bark
laden with Wine, containing less then forty Tun, two Tun of Wine at his price.
See Butlerage.

Priscilla (a diminutive of prisca) one of this name was a great follower of
Montanus the arch Heretic, and one of his devilish Prophetesses, circa An.
Christi, 181.

Priscillianisis, a Sect of Heretics that had their name from Priscillianus
about the year 388, who held two gods, one good, another bad, the Creator of
all things; and denied the persons of the Blessed Trinity, with other gross
absurdities.

Prismatical Glasses (from the Gr. Prisma) are certain triangular solid
glasses, in which you may see variety of fine colors, etc. Mr. White.

Prism (Gr. (...)) the powder or dust of those things that are cut with a Saw:
also a Geometrical figure so called.

Pristine (pristinus) old, ancient, accustomed, wonted.

Privado (Span,) a Favorite, a private friend.

Privation (privatio) a depriving, bereaving, a withdrawing, a want or wanting.

Privative (privativus) that deprives, bereaves or takes away; substantively,
it is a name for such monasyllabical words which being compounded with simple
words, do deprive and take away the proper sense or meaning of them, as in
Latin de, dis, di, ex, in, etc. are called Privatives, so are dis, un, in, etc.
in English.

Probate of Testaments, (probatio Testamentorum) proving of Wills, is the
producting and insinuating of dead men's Wills before the Judges appointed for
that purpose by Act 1653. cap. 2. and 1656. cap. 10. This Probate is made in
two sorts, either in common form (which is only by the Executors oath) or by
witnesses.

Probational Probatical (probaticus) apt to try or prove.

Probatick Pond (piscina probatica) a Pond at Jerusalem, where those sheep were
washed, that were by the Law to be sacrificed; it was otherwise called the Pool
Bethesda.

Probationer (probator) an approver of some deed or sact, a prover, or trier;
Also he that is to be approved or allowed in the University for his learning,
before he be admitted a Fellow.

Probatum est (Lat.) it is approved or allowed of, it has been tried.

Probe or Proof (the Fr. call it curette) a Chyrurgeons Instrument, wherewith
he tries the depth of wounds, sounds the Bladder, and gathers together such
gravel, congealed blood, or other filth, as remains in it after a stone taken
out.

Probity (probitas) goodness, honesty, virtue, integrity.

Problem (problema) a proposition or sentence proposed, with a question
annexed. In Mathematics it is opposed to Theoreme, and signifies such a
proposition, as is especially referred to practice, or the doing of something.
Tho.

Problematical (problematicus) belonging to a Problem or hard Question.

Proboscide (proboscis) the long snout of an Elephant.

Procacity (procacitas) malepertness, sawciness, wantonness in craving,
scoffing.

Procatatetick (Gr.) which foregoeth or gives beginning to another. Dr. Ham.

Procere (procerus) high, long, tall. Dodonas Grove.

Procerity (proceritas) length, height, tallness.

Procession (processio) a going on, proceeding, progress, passing forward; Also
in the late Bishops time, it was the custom for Clergymen to go in Procession
in Rogation week, they sung Psalms, prayed for the fruits of the earth, and
visited the bounds of their several Parishes; now disused.

Processional (from processio) pertaining to process or proceeding.

Prochronism (Gr.) an error in the connection of things or computation of time,
by saying or setting down too much.

Procidence (procidentia) a falling down of a thing out of his place.

Prociduous (prociduus) that falls out of his right place.

Procinct (procinctus) the state of an Army ready to give battle; Provision
before any thing is done, readiness.

Proclive (proclivis) ready to fall, inclined, subject, or bent unto.

Proclivity (proclivitas) inclination or disposition to any thing, easiness to
fall, facility.

Proconsul (Lat.) he, who having been Consul, went out of his Magistracy at the
years end, with an extraordinary Consular power, into his Country to govern it;
It is sometimes taken for a Deputy, or one instead or place of a Consul; under
the Emperors those Governors of Provinces, who were appointed by the Senate and
people, were called Proconsuls. Godw.

Procrastinate (procrastino) to drive off from day to day, to prolong the time,
to delay.

Procreate (procreo) to engender, to beget, to bring forth

Proculcation (proculcatio) a treading or trampling under foot.

Procurator (Lat) a Proctor, Factor, or Solicitor, one that looks to another
man's affairs. Procurator, is also used for him that gathers the fruits of a
Benefice for another man. And Procuracy, for the specialty, whereby he is
authorized. An. 3. Ric. 1. Stat. 1. ca. 2. They are at this day in the West
parts called Proctors. In the Republic of Venice the Procurator is the second
person in dignity.

Prodigence (prodigentia) prodigality, wastefulness, riot, unthriftiness.

Prodigy (prodigium) a thing seldom seen, which signifies some great good or
evil to follow; a wonder.

Prodigious (prodigiosus) monstrous, wonderful, mavelous, contrary to the
common course of nature.

Proditorious (preditorius) belonging to a Traitor; Traytor-like. Sir H. Wot.

Prodrome (prodromus) the forerunner or news bringer of another man's coming, a
preparer of the way.

Producate Product (produx) that which is produced or brought forth out of
another; a term in Arithmetic.

Production (productio) the making a thing long, a driving off, a bringing
forth.

Proeme (prooemium) a preface or a beginning to any matter.

Profection (profectio) a passage or setting forth toward a Voyage, a
departing, a going forth.

Profectitious. See Adventitious.

Proficient (proficiens) helping, profiting, doing much good; also used
substantively, as when we say A. is a good Proficient in learning, that is, one
that profits or proceeds well in it.

Profile (Ital. profilo) that design which shows the side, with the rising or
falling of any work; as a place drawn sideways, that is, so as only one side
or moiety of it may be seen, is called the Profile; and is a term in Painting.

Profligate (profligo) to overthrow, to drive away, to undo, to bring to
destruction, to put to slight.

Profluence (profluentia) abundance, plenty, flowing, store of.

Profundeur (Fr. Profondeur) profundity, depth, deepness.

Profundity (profunditas) deepness, of great receip^.

Profusion (profusio) a pouring out, spending, a needless wasting.

Progeny (progenies) Issue, Offspring, success in blood.

Progenitor (Lat.) a Grandfather, Fore father, or Ancestor.

Prognostics (prognostica) tokens or signs of a thing to come; Books treating
of Prognostication; or things to come.

Progression (pregressio) going forward, a proceeding, a progress. A month of
Progression; see Month.

Progressional (progressus) that has passed or gone forward. Br.

Prohibitio^ (prohibitio) a forbidding. Also a Writ framed for the forbidding
any Court either spiritual or secular, to proceed in any cause there depending,
upon suggestion that the cognition thereof belongs not to the said Court. Fitz.
not. br. fol. 39. G.

Prohibitory (prohibitorius) that belongs to forbidding.

Projectitious (projectitius) cast out, and nourished of a stranger, flung
away, as of no account.

Projecture (projectura) the jutting or leaning out in Pillars, or other
buildings; the coping of a wall.

Prolatation (prolatatio) a delaying, an enlarging, a deferring or prolonging.

Prolation (prolatio) a speaking or pronouncing, a showing or bringing forth, a
delaying.

Prolegate (Prolegatus) a Deputy Legate, or one that stands for a Legate.

Prolepsie (prolepsis) a natural foreknowledge conceived in the mind; hence a
figure in speaking whereby we prevent and avoid what another intended to
allege against us.

Proleptical, belonging to the figure Prolepsis, or to fore knowledge.
Proleptical time, is that which is fixed in the Chaos. Greg.

Proletarious Proletaneous (proletarius, proletaneus of a poor and base
condition, that has many children, and little maintenance, or that gives
nothing to the Commonwealth but only a supply of children.

A Proletarious Speech (proletarius sermo) the common and vulgar speech,
complement or words of course; as when one says to his friend; Pardon my
boldness, and the other answers. You are not so bold as welcome, or the like.
Tho.

Prolifical (prolificus) fruitful, that breeds or brings forth issue apace.

Prolification (prolificatio) a making fruitful. Br.

Prolix (prolixus) long, large, high, liberal sumptuous.

Prolixity (prolixitas) length, largeness, abundance.

Prologue (prologus) a preface, a fore-speech. The Prologue is such, as either
opens the state of the Comedy or Fable; or such as commends it, or the Poet to
the people; or such as refutes the objections and cavils of adversaries.

Prolog^utor (Lat.) he that speaks before or for others, or that speaks at
length; The Speaker or Chairman of each Convocation-house, or of a Synod, is
so termed. His Office is to command the Clerk to call the names of such as are
of that House, when he sees cause, to cause all things propounded to be read by
him, to gather the suffrages, and such like.

Prolusion (prolusio) an Essay or flourish, made to try what one can do, before
he fight indeed; a Proof.

Prolyte (prolyta) a Licenciate of the Laws, or one that has studied the Law
four years.

Promenade; see Pourmenade.

Prometheus, son to Japetus, who for stealing fire out of Heaven, to make life
in his Images, was by Jupiter bound to Caucasus, where an Eagle gnawed his
heart, etc. Hence the fire of Prometheus, Poetically used.

Prominence (prominentia) the extending or jutting of a thing out or over; a
Penthouse. By this word Anatomists understand what portion soever notably
surmounts the parts circumjacent in thickness, as a hill in the plain

Prominent (prominens) appearing or standing out further then another, or above
and before others, extending to, hanging over.

Promiscuous (promiscuus) confused, mingled, common to many; indifferent,
mixed, without order or consideration.

Promissary, he to whom a promise is made. Mr. White.

Promentor^ (promontorium) q. mons in mari prominens) a hill lying out, as an
elbow of land into the Sea; a Mountain or head of land butting out upon the Sea.

Promoters (Promotores) are those who in popular and penal actions defer the
names, or complain of Offenders, having part of the profit for their reward.
These were called among the Romans; Quadruplatores or Delatores. They belong
especially to the Exchechequer and Upper-Bench. Smith de Repub* Angl. l. 2. c.
14.

Promptitude (promptitudo) readiness, quickness, proneness

Promptuary (promptuarium) a Cellar, a Storehouse, a Spense, a Buttery.

Promulgation (promulgatio) a publishing, a proclaiming, a noising abroad. The
Law was hanged up publicly in the Marketplace, for three Market days; which
kind of publishing the Law, was termed, Legis Promulgatio, quasi, provulgatio.

Pro-nephew (pronepos) a Nephews son.

Prone (pronus) having the face down, inclined, stooping downward, ready, easy.

Propagate (propago) to cut down an old Vine, that of it many young may be
planted, to make to spread; to extend or dilate.

Propelled (from propello) driven or put away a far off, thrust or set forwards.

Propension (propensio) inclination of mind, readiness, proneness, propensity.

Propense (propensus) heavy, greatly inclined, very ready and prone to.

Properate (propero) to go quickly or hastily, to say or do quickly, to make
haste or speed.

Prophetize (propheto) to prophecy or foretell things to come, to sing praises
to God; To preach or interpret.

Prophylactic (prophylacticus) preservative, or that serves instead of an
Antidote. Dr. Ham. Paraen.

Propination (propinatio) a drinking to one, a bidding one drink.

Propinquity (propinquitas) nearness, Neighborhood; also Affinity, Alliance,
Kindred.

Propitiate (propitio) to reconcile and appease God with Sacrifices, to please,
to pacify; also to assuage or mitigate.

Propitiatory (propitiatorium) the place where God is pacified; also a Table or
Cover set on the Arc of the Old Testament, on either side whereof was a
Cherubin of Gold, with the wings spread over the Propitiatory, and their faces
looking one toward another. It is also used adjectively, as belonging to such
a Sacrifice.

Prop^tious (propitius) not displeased, merciful, favorable, propice, gentle.

Proposition (propositio) that whereby we show what we will speak or prove, a
sentence or matter propounded, a Question or Position. In Logic the first part
of a Syllogism is called the Proposition or Major; and this has three parts,
Subjectum, Praedicatum, and Copula; as Peter is a man; Peter is the Subject,
Man is the Predicate or Attribute, and the Verb [is] is the Copula, or tying
them together.

Propraetor (Lat.) a Lieutenant appointed by the Emperor to govern a Province
with the Authority of a Praetor, a Lord Justice. The Translator of Livie says,
it is more properly he, who having been Praetor, went out of his Magistracy at the
years end, and was sent into his Province again, with full authority of Praetor.

Proprietary (proprietarius) he to whom the property of a thing belongs; It is
most commonly used for him that has the fruits of a Benefice to him and his
Heirs or successors, as in time past Abbots and Priors had to them and their
successors; see Appropriation.

Propudious (propudiosus) that is filthily abused in leachery, or full of
shameful infamy.

Propugnacle (propugnaculum) a Fortress, a strong-hold, a Bulwark, a Defense, a
Blockhouse.

Propugnator (Lat.) a defender, a maintainer, one that fights in defense of
some person.

Propulsation (propulsatio) a putting away, a driving back, a chasing forward,
a repelling.

Propulsory (propulsorius) that serves to put away or drive back.

Prorepsion (prorepsio) a creeping forward, a stealing forward by little and
little, a growing, spreading, or coming forth. Icon. Basil.

Proter (Lat.) a Viceroy, he that in the Kings absence supplies his place, and
represents his person.

Proritate (porito) to provoke to allure, to stir up, to exasperate.

Prorogue (prorogo) to prolong, defer, or put off till another day, to
continue. As we say the Parliament is Prorogued, when it is adjourned or put
off for some time, but not ended. The Romans (if they did impose a law to be
made by the people) were said rogare legem, because of asking, moving or
persuading to enact the same, velitis jubeatisne Quirities, etc. from whence
came Prorogare legem, to continue a Law which was in being, for a longer time,
and abrogare to repeal or abrogate it for the time to come, unless, upon some
further consideration, it were thought fit to be restored.

Prosaick (prosaicus) that is in Prose and not in Meeter, pertaining to Prose.

Proscission (proscissio) a cutting up, a tilling, a ploughing, a manuring land.

Proscription (proscriptio) the manner of condemnation, when it is Proclaimed,
that who ever finds a man, may lawfully kill him, and have a reward; a
designing or exposing to slaughter; also public sale.

Proscript (from proscribo) an Outlaw, a man designed or exposed to slaughter,
a proscribed or attainted person. Those were termed Proscripti, who were not
only exiled and banished their Country, but had their goods seized and
confiscated.

Proselyte (proselytus) a stranger turned to our fashion of living, or
converted to our Religion. It signified of old, one converted from Heathenism
to the Religion of the Jews. ( Acts 2.10. and 13.43.).

Prosimetrical (prosimetricus) consisting partly of Prose, partly of Meeter or
Verse.

Prosody (prosodia) the art of accenting, the rule of pronouncing words truly,
long and short.

Prosodian, one skild in that art.

Prosoporae^a (Gr.) a disguising, a feigning of a person to speak.

Prospect (prospectus) a view or sight a far off.

Prospicience (prspicientia) providence, foresight.

Prospicuous (prospicuus) goodly, or fair to see or behold, or which may be
seen afar off.

Prosternation (from prosterno) an overthrowing, a falling flat, a vanquishing,
a laying along.

Prostitute (prostituta) she that for money suffers herself to be abused by all
that come, a common Harlot.

Prostrate (prostratus) lying flat, over-thrown, destroyed.

Protasis (Gr.) a Proposition or Declaration; also the first part of a Comedy;
see Catastasis.

Protatick, pertaining to Protasis; also he that lays open the argument, or
speaks the Prologue in a Comedy, and appears no more, is called Protatica
persona.

Protend (protendo) to set, cast, or stretch forth; to spread abroad, to defer
or prolong.

Protestants, were first so called from their Protestation made at the Imperial
City of Spires in the Palatinate of Rhene in Germany, in the year 1529. Heyl.

Proteus, a God of the Sea, who as Poets feign, was able to turn himself into
any shape. Hence the Proverb, Proteo mutabilior, More changeable then Proteus.

Protos (Gr.) Primus, the first or chief, and is often used in composition. As

Protocol (protocolum) that is first made and needs correction; the upper part
of a leaf of a Book, bearing out above the rest, wherein the name or title is
written.

Protofole (protofolium) the first leaf.

Protomartyr (Gr.) the first Martyr or Witness, which was St. Stephen of the
New Testament; for St. John Baptist died before the consummation of the old Law.

Protonotary (protonotarius) a chief Scribe or Secretary; a Chief Clerk, of
which there are three in the Common Pleas, and one in the Upper-Bench.

Protoplast (protoplastus) first formed or made; an Attribute or Epithete most
properly for Adam. If from Protoplastes, it may signify Almighty God, the
first framer of all things.

Prototype (prototypus) the first pattern, or the original type, model or form.

Prototypographer (Prototypographus) the chief Printer.

Protractor (Lat) a prolonger or drawer out; also a Mathematical instrument,
made of brass, used in surveying land.

Protreptick (protrepticus) doctrinal, or instructive.

Protrude (protrudo) to thrust forward, to thrust into ones lap or bosom. Bac.

Protuberant (protuberans) swelling or puffing up.

Protrusion (protrusio) a thrusting forward. Br.

Protype (protypum) that is made for an example or copy; an image or form
whereof moulds are made, in which things of metal or earth are cast.

Provan^o, an instrument made of Whalebone, to cleanse the stomach.

Prov^ditor (Ital. from provideo) a foreseer, one that takes order for; it is
an Officer among the Vinetians; In War their General (being most commonly a
stranger) is supervised by two Proveditors, without whom he may not attempt any
thing.

Providence; see Predestination.

Proverbial (proverbialis) belonging to a Proverb, Adage, or old saying.

Providore, the Governor of the Island Zant, so called; see Proveditor.

Provincial (provincialis) pertaining to a Province; which is most usually
taken for the circuit of an Archbishops jurisdiction. Among Friars, and other
Religious, he who is the chief of his Order in such a Province, is their
Provincial. A 4. H. 4. ca. 17.

Proviso (Lat.) is a condition inserted into any Deed or other matter, upon the
observance whereof, the validity of the whole consists.

Provisional, only for a season, continuing but for a time; done by way of
Proviso, or foresight.

Proul, to pilfer or steal small things in the night.

Prow (Fr. prove) the forepart or forecastel of a ship; also a Point advancing
it self out of a building, as the Prow out of a ship.

Provost (Fr. Prevost) the President of a College, or Cathedral Church; also a
principal Magistrate or Judge in a good Town. In France there are several sorts
and degrees of Provosts, of which see Cotgrave in Prevost.

Provostal, of or pertaining to a Provost.

Proximity (proximitas) the nighest degree of Kindred, Lineage, neighborhood,
nearness, a near likeness of.

Pruden^iality (from Prudentia) prudence, or an aptness to breed prudence. Br.

Pruinous (pruinus) frosty, endanger to be hurt with frost.

Prunella's, a fruit like small figs, restorative, and good to comfort the heart.

Prurient (pruriens) having the itch; also having a lust or desire to a thing.

Pruriginous (pruriginosus) full of the itch.

Prutenicks or Prutenic Tables, are certain Tables framed, for finding out the
celestial motions, by Erasmus Beinholdus a Mathematical Professor in
Wittenburg, first published in the year 1551. and dedicated to Albertus Marquis
of Brandeberg, and D. of Prussia, whence they took name.

Psallocitharist (Psallocitharista) a singer to the Harp.

Psalm (Psalmus) a song made of short verses, and sentences, where many
superfluous words are cut off: It comes of an Hebrew word, which has the
signification of pruning or cutting off superfluous twigs.

Psalmist (psalmista) he that makes or sings Psalms; an attribute usually and
most properly given to King David.

Psalmody (psalmodia) a singing or playing together on an instrument; a singing
of Psalms together.

Psalmography (psalmographia) the writing of Psalms.

Psaltery (psalterium) a musical Instrument like a Harp, with ten strings, but
more pleasant; some call it a Shalm, to play holy Hymns upon, and to sing unto
in playing; others say, it was an Instrument three square, of 72 strings, and
of incomparable sweetness. As Mersenius describes it.

Psephism (psephisma) a decree, Statute, Law or Ordinance.

Pseudos (Gr. (...)) false or counterfeit; and is often used in composition; As

Pseudodox (Gr.) false glory, or that is falsely glorious.

Pseudography (pseudographia) false or counterfeit wr-iting, or a writing of a
forged matter; also false spelling words in writing. Fuller.

Pseudologer (pseudologus) a false teacher, a liar.

Pseudomancy (pseudomantia) a false or counterfeit Divination. M. White.

Pseudomartyr (Gr.) a false witness or martyr.

Pseudonymal (pseudonymus) that has a false or counterfeit name.

Pseudoprophet (pseudopropheta) a false Prophet or Teacher.

Psorophtholmy (psorophtholmia) scurviness of the brows, with an itch.

Psychomachy (psychomachia) a war betwixt the soul and body.

Ptisane (ptisana) barley husked and sodden in water, Frumenty; or (as some will
have it) a kind of Physic drink or pottage made of barley meal.

Puberty (pubertas) the age of 14 years in men, and 12 in women; youth, or the
blossoms of it.

Pubescent (pubescens) beginning to have a beard or hair; or coming to fourteen
years of age in man, and twelve in women.

Publican (publicanus) he that farms or collects the common Rents and Revenues
of the King or People One who bought or farmed (by great) the Emperors Tribute.
It was an odious name among the Jews, because they were commonly men of ill
conscience, that exercised that Office. See Moses and Aaron, p. 6.

Publication (publicatio) a publishing or making common. In Chancery we say a
cause is come to Publication, when the Plaintiff has exhibited his Bill, the
Defendant answered, and witnesses are examined, then the Court either by
special order, or of course, grants Publication, or a publishing of the Proofs,
that is, liberty for both parties to take out the Depositions of the Witnesses
whereby to prepare for a Hearing.

Pu^lage (Fr.) Virginity, Maidenhead.

Pudify pudefacio) to make ashamed, to make to blush, to be ashamed.

Pudibund Pudibundous (pudibundus) shamefaced, bashful, modest, honest.

Pudicity (pudicitia) chastity, honesty, cleanness of life, purity.

Pudor (Lat.) bashfulness, chastity, virginity, moderation.

Puerility (puerilitas) childishness, boyishness, trifling simplicity.

Puerperous (puerperus) that bears children; or causes to bear and bring
forth, or be delivered of a child.

Pugil (Lat.) a Champion, a strong fighter, one that fights with the fist.

Pugil (pugillus) a little fist, a little or small handful. Among Physicians it
is as much as may be holden betwixt three fingers.

Pugillation (pugillatio) the exercise of Champions, or of those that fight
with fists.

Pugnacity (pugnacitas) a sharp desire or appetite to fight; contention,
fighting.

Pugnatory (pugnatorius) of or belonging to a fighter.

Pulchritude (pulchritudo) beauty, fairness, tallness of person.

Pulicine (pulicinus) pertaining to a Flea.

Pulicosity (pulicositas) abundance of Fleas.

Pullation (pullatio) a hatching or bring up Chickens.

Pullulate (pullulo) to spring, to cast forth buds, to become young.

Pulmentarious (pulmentaris) of or belonging to, or made with Pottage or Gruel.

Pulmonarious (pulmonarius) diseased in the Lungs.

Pulp (pulpa) the brawn of flesh, or fleshy part of the body; The substance or
hard pith of any thing.

Pulsation (pulsatio) a beating, striking or thumping; a striking of strings,
or playing on Instruments.

Pulsator (Lat.) one that knocks or strikes.

Pultifical (pultificus) wherewith Pottage, Pap, or such like meat is made.

Pulverize (pulvero) to break or dissolve into dust, to reduce or beat into
powder.

Pulvereous Pulverulent (pulvereus) dusty, of dust, full of dust.

Pumicate (pumico) to polish, to make smooth with, or like, a Pumice.

Pumice stone (Pumex, icis) is spongious and full of little holes, and is used
to make parchment smooth, and to rid away hairiness.

Pumpet-bal (Fr. Pompette) the Ball wherewith Printers beat or lay ink on the
Form of Letters.

Pungency (from pungo) a pricking, grieving or nipping. Mr. Montagu.

Punick (punicus) red as Scarlet. Punick Faith (punica fides) falsehood,
perjury, breach of promise.

Punition (punitio) punishment, chastisement, correction.

Puncto (Ital.) a point a little prick, the least portion of a thing.

Punctillo (dim. of puncto) a very little point, a thing of no moment.

Puny (from the Fr. puisne) younger, born after; also that has studied less
time, or been fewer years in an University.

Pupil (pupilla) the ball or apple of the eye, the sight of the eye; also a
woman-child within age, that has no Mother alive, a Ward.

Pupil (pupillus) a fatherless child, a man-child within age, and under Ward,
an Orphan; In the Universities it is taken for a young Scholar, under the
tuition of another.

Purgatory (purgatorium) a purgation or state of purging. The Council of Trent,
Sect. 15. defines, that there is a Purgatory, and that the souls detained there
are benefitted by the prayers of the faithful. And the Roman Catholics hold,
that the souls of Christians, not dying in a perfect estate, remain in a
condition which may be eased and meliorated by the Prayers, Oblations and
Charity of the living; and they cite St. Augustine for it, de verbo Apost. Ser.
32.

Purification (purificatio) a purifying, cleansing or purging.

Purim, a Lottery or the Feast of Lots, among the ancient Jews; so called from
the Persian word Pur, which signifies a lot. It was instituted by Mordecai, in
remembrance of their delivery from Haman. Moses and Aaron, p. 138.

Purine (from the Fr. pur, i purus, and lieu, i. locus) is all that ground near
any Forest, which being made Forest by Hen. 2. Ric. 1. or King John, was, by
perambulations granted by Hen. 3. severed again from the same. In which Purlue
it was lawful for the owner of the ground to hunt, if he could dispend forty
shillings per annum of Freehold, etc. See Manwood part. 1. p. 151.157.

Purp^rean (purpureus) of purple* fairlike purple, bluish

Purulent (purulentus) full of matter and filthiness; as is an Imposthume or
other running sore; filthy, irksome, mattery.

Purveyor (Fr. Pourvoyeur) An Officer of the King or other great Personage,
that provides Corn and other Victual for the house of him whose Officer he is;
a Provider.

Pusillanimous (pusillanimis) faint-hearted, cowardly.

Pusilanimity (pusillanimitas) faint-heartedness, cowardice.

Pustule (pustula) a blister, Push, little Wheal, Bladder, or Blain; also small
Pox.

Putative (putativus) reputed, imaginary, supposed, esteemed. Bac.

Putatory (putatorius) belonging to the cutting, dressing or pruning Trees.

Puteal (putealis) of or belonging to a Pit or Well.

P^id (putidus) that has an ill savor, stinking; with too much affectation.

Putor (Lat.) a stink, or ill savor.

Putrescence (from putresco) rottenness, corruption. Br.

Putrid (putridus) rotten, corrupt, running with water or matter.

Pygmachy (pygmachia) a fighting with Hurlbats or clubs.

Pyker alias Pycar, a kind of ship. Anno 31. Ed. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 2.

Pygmies (Pygmaei) a Dwarfish people in the uttermost Mountains oi India, in
height not passing one cubit, their women bring forth children at Five years,
and at Eight are accounted old. Fame goes, that they have continual war with
Cranes, by whom they are often worsted, etc. But Dr. Brown in his Vul. Err.
chap. 21. with good reason, makes doubt whether there are or ever were any such
creatures.

Pyladio^, a kind of Song; see Bachyllion.

Pyramid (pyramid, idis) a great building of stone or other matter, broad and
four square beneath; upwards, the higher it goes the smaller and sharper, till
it ends in a point like our spire Steeples; see Obelisk.

Pyramidal or Pyramidical (pyramidicus) of or like a Pyramid, broad beneath and
sharpning upwards.

Pyramidography (pyramidographia) a writing, treating, or describing of
Pyramids; whereof Mr. Greaves has wrote a Book.

Pyratical; see Piratical.

Pyre (pyra) an heap of wood (as Cypress, Fir, Larix, and Yew) made for the
burning a dead body. Dr. Br. in his Hydriotaphia.

Pyrtheraean Mountains, (Pyrenaei Montes) are those great hills which divide
France from Spain.

Pyrrhonian, belonging to Pyrrho; a Skeptic Philosopher of Greece, who thought
nothing certain; Hence Phyrrhonian incredulity

Pyromancy (pyromantia) divination by fire.

Pythagorical (pithagoricus) of or pertaining to Pythagoras the Philosopher, or
his opinion of the transmigration of souls from one body to another.

Pythagoricism, the Tenets, or opinion of Pythagoras.

Pythian Games (Pythia) certain Games instituted in Greece to the honor of
Apollo, in memory of his vanquishing the great Dragon Python, sent by Juno to
persecute his mother Latona.

Python (Gr.) a man that prophecieth, and tells things to come, by a devilish
spirit in him; Also a Serpent.

Pythonesse (pythonissa) she that is possessed with such a spirit; a Prophetess.

Pythonical (pythonicus) that is possessed with such a spirit.

Pyx (pyxis) a box, properly made of Box-tree, But among Roman Catholics it is
the vessel, or resting place of the blessed Sacrament, which is exposed on the
Altar on Corpus Christi day, and during the Octaves.

Q
QVacksalber (Belg.) a pedling Chyrurgeon; one that cures with Simples; a
Simple Physician, a Mountebank.

Quadragenarious (quadragenarius) of or belonging to forty years.

Quadragesimal (quadragesimalis) pertaining to Lent, or to the first Sunday in
Lent, which is also called Quadragesima Sunday.

Quadran (Fr.) a Sun Dial,

Quadrain (Fr.) a Stanza or Staff of four Verses.

Quadrangle (quadrangulus) a square plot or figure, having four angles or
corners, and four sides.

Quadrangular (quadrangularis) four cornered, four square.

Quadrant (quadrans) the fourth part of a pound, or of any number or measure;
Also a Mathematical Instrument so called, being the quarter of a Circle.

Quadrantal (Lat.) a figure square every way like a Dye; Also used adjectively
from Quadrantalis, four fingers thick or three inches.

Quadrat (quadratum) a Geometrical square, whereby the distance and height of a
place is known a far off, by looking through certain sights fixed thereon. Min.

Quadrate Quadratick (quadratus) squared, four square, great and strong; A
square number is that which is made by multiplying some one number in it self,
as four of two, and nine of three.

Quadrature (quadrature) a square, or the squaring of any thing.

Quadricornous (quadricornis) having four horns.

Quadriennial (quadriennis) of four years.

Quadr^gamist (quadragamus) a man four times married.

Quadrigariou^ (quadrigarius) pertaining to a Chariotman.

Quadrigenarious (quadrigenarius) of forty that contains forty.

Quadrilateral (quadrilaterus) that has four sides.

Quadrigenarious (quadrigenarius) that contains four hundred.

Quadripartite (quadripartitus) divided into four parts.

Quadrir^me (quadriremis) a Ship or Galley with four Oars in a seat; or rather
a Galley wherein every Oar has four men to draw it. See Quinquereme.

Quadrisyllable (quadrisyllabus) that has four syllables.

Quadrivial (quadrivialis) consisting of four ways, or that has four turnings
or partings.

Quadrupedant (quadrupedans) that goes on four feet.

Quadrupedal (quadrupes, edis) a general name for any thing that has four feet.

Quadruple (quadruplus) four times so much, fourfold.

Quadruplication (quadruplicatio) the doubling or folding a thing four times, a
repeating or making four times over.

Quadruplicate (quadruplico) to make four times so much as it was, to double
four times.

Quakers, a modern Sect, not much differing from the old Enthusiasts, and took
name from their trembling and quaking, when in their Raptures and Enthusiasms,
they vainly pretend the Spirit of God comes upon them.

Quandary, a man is said to be in a Quandary, when he is in a study, or doubt
what to do, or when to act what he has in thought; and it is conjectured to
come from quando ara, for that in the time of Heathenism, people would ask,
quando ara? when shall the sacrifice be made? or when will the Altar be ready?

Quaranty ( quarenta Spa.) forty; see Quarantain.

Quardicue (Fr. quart d' escu) the fourth part of a French Crown; a silver coin
in France, worth about eighteen pence of our money.

Quarantam (Fr.) Lent; also a term of forty days, during which, prayers, or
other devotion are in some places poured out for the dead; sometime it is taken
for forty days truce or cessation; sometime for an indulgence or releasing of
forty days penance.

Quarentine (from the Fr. Quarantaine) is a benefit allowed by the Law of
England, to the Widow of a landed man deceased, whereby she may challenge to
continue in his chief Mansion house by the space of forty days after his
decease. Of this see Bract. l. 2. cap. 40. And if the Heir or any other attempt
to eject her, she may have the Writ de Quarantina habenda. Fitz. not. br. fol.
161.

Quarry (besides that of stones) signifies among Hunters a reward given to
Hounds after they have hunted; or Venison it self taken by hunting.

Quarril (Fr.) the fourth part of a Spanish Real; a small coin worth our three
halfpence.

Quartane (quartanus) belonging to the fourth; As a Quartane Ague, so called
because it comes every fourth day.

Quartary (quartarius) the fourth part of a Sextary; also a quarter of a pound.

Quarter (among Timbermen and Carpenters) is a piece of timber commonly four
square, and four inches thick, as it were a quarter or fourth part of a Beam.
Of Corn or Malt it is eight Strikes.

Quartil Aspect, a term in Astronomy; see Aspect.

Quassation (quassatio) a shaking, or bruising; a brandishing.

Quater Cosens, those that are in the last degree of kindred, or fourth
Cousens; But we commonly say such persons are not Quater Cos^ns when they are
not good friends.

Quaternary (quaternarius) containing four in number.

Quate^nion (quaternio) four, or any thing divided by the number four. A Quire
with four sheets, or a sheet folded into four parts.

Quaternity (quaternitas) the number four, which (says, Dr. Brown) stands much
admired, not only in the quaternity of the Elements, which are the principles
of Bodies, but in the Letters of the name of God, which in the Latin, Greek,
Arabian, Persian, Hebrew, and Egyptian, consists of that number, and was so
venerable among the Pythagorians, that they swore by it. Vul. Er. 206.

Quaver in singing (from quatio, to shake; Quia vox cantando quatitur) and
semiquaver are the quickest times in Music.

Quercine (quercinus) oken, made of Oaks.

Querculane (querculanus) the same.

Querimonious (from querimonia) that complains or makes mean.

Querpo; see Cuerpo.

Querulous (querulus) that complains, or is full of complaints; sounding,
singing, chirping, shrill.

Questuary Questuarious (quaestuarius) that exercises a craft, to the end to
gain thereby. Br.

Qu^rn (Belg.) a hand mill; as a Pepper Quern, a Mill to grind Pepper.

Quest (from the Lat. quaero) an inquiry, search, inquisition, or seeking.

Questmen; see Sidemen.

Questor (Lat. Quaestor) a Treasurer of the common Treasure, or of Wars; also a
Judge of Criminal matters.

Quiddity (quidditas) the essence, being or definition of a thing; a term in
Philosophy; also a Querk or subtle question.

Quaditative (quidditati^) essential, intrinsecal, or belonging to the inmost
being of a thing. Per. Inst.

Quid pro quo, is an artificial speech in our Common Law, signifying as much as
the Greek (...), among the Civilians, which is a mutual Protestation or
performance of both parties to a Contract; as a Horse and Ten pound, between
the buyer and seller. Kitch. fol. 184. And used in our common speech, One for
another; as to render one Quid proquo, i. to give him as good as he brings. And
is used by Apothecaries, when, instead of one thing they use another of the
same nature.

Quietus est, he is quiet or acquit; it is commonly used for an acquittance or
discharge upon an account.

Quincuncial, pertaining to Quincunx, which is five ounces; also an exact
planting of trees in an Orchard, that is, the Rows and orders so handsomely
disposed, or five trees so set together, that a regular angularity, and
through-prospect is left on every side. Dr. Br. Cyrus Garden.

Quincupedal (Lat.) a measure or rule of five foot long.

Quindecimvir (Lat.) one of the Fifteen Magistrates that governed a
Commonwealth, and were jointly in Office.

Quingenarious (quingenarius) of five hundred, or weighing five hundred pound.

Quinquagesima Sunday, is always that which we vulgarly call Shrove-Sunday; so
called either because it is the fiftieth day before Easter, or the fifth Sunday
before Passion Sunday; see Sexagesima.

Quinquangle (quinquangulus) five cornered, having five angles or corners.

Quinque-libral (quinque-libralis) of five pound weight.

Quinquennal Quinquennial (quinquennalis) that lasts five years, is done from
five years to five years, or is five years old.

Quinquepartite (quinquepartitus) divided into five parts.

Quinquereme (Quinqueremis) is a Galley, wherein every Oar has five men to
draw it; the Quadriremes had four to an Oar; and the Triremes, three. Some have
thought that the Quinqueremes had five ranks of Oars, one over another, and the
other Galleys ratably fewer; but had this been so, they must then have had five
Decks, each over other, which has seldom been seen in ships of a thousand Tuns;
nor could the third, fourth or fifth ranks have reached the water with their
Oars. Sir Wat. Ral. Hist. l. 5. Also a little ship or Galley that has five Oars
on a side.

Quinquevit (Lat.) one of the five that are in the like Office and Authority.

Quinquiplicate (quinquiplico) to multiply by fives or double five times.

Quintage (from quintus) a fifth part, or a laying out of the fifth part of an
inheritance for younger Brethren.

Quintain or Quintin, a game or sport still in request at Marriages, in some
parts of this Nation, specially in Shropshire; the manner now corruptly thus, a
Quintin, Buttress or thick Plank of Wood is set fast in the ground in the
Highway, where the Bride and Bridegroom are to pass; and Poles are provided,
with which the young men run a Tilt on Horseback; and he that breaks most
Poles, and shows most activity, wins the Garland. But Stow in his Survey of
London, p. 76. says, That in Ann. 1253. the Youthful Citizens, for an exercise
of their activity, set forth a game to run at the Quintin, and whosoever did
best, should have a Peacock for prise, etc.

Quintal (Span.) a certain weight; see Kintal.

Quintessence (quinta essentia) the virtue, force or spirit of a thing; it is a
certain subtle and spiritual substance, extracted out of a thing, by
separation from its corruptible Elements, differing really from its essence; as
Aqua vitae, of the spirit of Wine, etc.

Quintessential (quintessentialis) belonging to quintessence.

Quintile (quintilis) the month July, the fifth month from March, reckoning
it for one; see July.

Quintuple (quintuplus) five times so much, five fold.

Quinzain (Fr.) a term or delay of fifteen days; also a staff of fifteen verses.

Quirinal (quirinalis) of or pertaining to one of the seven Hills of Rome
called Quirinalis, or to Rome it self; see ^squilinus.

Quirister, a Singer in a Quire, a Quire-man, a Chorister.

Quiritation (quiritatio) a crying, bewailing, a calling for succor, properly
of the Romans.

Quod-libet (Lat.) what pleases; a quirk or quiddity, In some Schools there
are Quodlibets, or Quodlibetical Questions disputed pro and con, wherein a man
may hold what part of the controversy he pleases; in which disputations, are
many witty quips, jeers, jests, etc. for entertainment of the Auditors. Thence
some may call a Q^ip, that pleases some, though it offend others, a Quodlibet.

Qu^dlibicaries (from quod libet) those that run after their own fancy or
imagination, and do what they list.

Quorum, is a word of distinction used in Commissions to Justices of the Peace,
and other Officers, whereby direction is given that some business of importance
shall not be done, but before them or one of them, and it is thus expressed,
Quorum te A B. unum esse volumus. Hence it is we say such a Justice or
Commissioner is of the Quorum.

Quotidian (quotidianus) done daily, that happens every day, ordinary.

Quotie^t (from quoties) that part or portion, which (in the division of a
thing, among many) falls to every ones share; a term in Arithmetic.

R.
RAbbi. About the time of our Saviors nativity titles began to be multiplied
among the Jews, and among the rest those of Rab, Rabbi and Rabban were in
special use; they are all derived from (...) Rabab, signifying multiplicatus
fuit, and they sound as much as (...), that is, a Master or Doctor, eminently
gifted with variety of knowledge. Moses and Aaron, p. 29.

Rabbinical, Rabbi-like, of the Rabbis or Doctors.

Rabbinist, one that studies, or is cunning in the works of the Rabbis;
sometimes used for a Dunce.

Rabdoma^cy (Gr.) Divination by Twigs or small Wands.

Rabet^n^s (a term in Navigation) the letting in of the Planks to the Keel of a
Ship.

Rabid (rabidus) Wood, or mad as a Dog; furious, raging.

Racemation (racematio) a gathering Grapes after the great clusters are gone; a
gleaning of Grapes.

Racemiferous (racemifer) that bears kernels, or clusters of Grapes.

Raca or Racha (from the Hebr. Rach, i. to spit; or from Ric, i. lightheaded or
empty) an imperfect or broken speech proceeding from an angry mind; a word of
reproach, signifying as much as a vain or empty fellow. Matthew. 5.23. Hence
perhaps that opprobrious word of ours, a Rachil, or Rake-hel, i. such a one as
if one should rake hell, his like would not be sound.

Rachel (Hebr.) a Sheep or Lamb; a woman's name.

Rack Vintage (31. H. 8. cap. 14.) is a second Vintage or Voyage by our
Merchants into France, etc. for Racked Wines, i. Wines so cleansed and purged,
that they may be, and are drawn from the Lees.

Radamanth; see Rhadamanth.

Radiant (radians) shining bright, casting beams of light, glittering.

Radiation (radiatio) a brightness, and casting forth bright beams.

Radical (radicalis) of, from, or belonging to, a root.

Radical moisture (humidum radicale) the natural moisture spread like a dew in
all parts of a living body, wherewith the parts are nourished; which is so
united with natural heat, that the one maintains the other, and both preserve
life.

Radicality, the belongingness of a thing to a root.

Radicate (radicor) to take root, to be rooted.

Raf^nage (Fr.) the refinement or quintessence of.

Raf^ (Fr.) a game with three Dice, wherein he that throws the greatest
Pair-Royal, wins; also a risling.

Raf^ (Fr. Radeau) a Float-boat of Timber.

Ragot, the name of a cunning French-begger, who made a Book of all his own
subtilties, and died very rich, some say worth 3000 l.

Raillery (Fr.) jesting, boording, sport, merriment; also a flout or scoff.

Raing^r; see Raunger.

Raife (Germ.) contracted from Radulph, which, as Radulph, signifies
help-council, not differing much from the Greek Eubulus.

Rally (Fr. rallier) to reassemble, reunite, gather dispersed, or close
dis-joynted, things together; it is most used among Soldiers, when scattered
troops are rallied or reunited.

Ramage (Fr.) Boughs, Branches, or any thing that belongs thereto. Hence a
Ramage Hawk or Faulcon, is such a one, as has been long among the Boughs and
Branches, preying for himself; a Hagard.

Ramagious, belonging to the branches, wild.

Ramberge (Fr) a fashion of a long ship or sea-vessel, narrower then a Galley,
but swift and easy to be governed.

Rambooz, a compound drink, at Cambridge, and is commonly made of Eggs, Ale,
Wine and Sugar; but in Summer, of Milk, Wine, Sugar, and Rose water.

Ramist, one that holds the same opinion with Ramus, a late famous Writer in
diverse Sciences.

Ramosity (ramositas) fullness of Boughs, boughiness.

Rampant (Fr. rempant) creeping, crawling, trailing along, or climbing; a term
in Heraldry, when a Lion or other Beast is painted tearing up with his right
fore-foot directly against the dexter point of the Escotcheon, as it were ready
to combat with his enemy.

Rampire (Fr. Rempar, Belg. Rampard) the Wall of a Fortress, or Bulwark.

Rancid (rancidus) mouldly, musty, putrified, stinking, unsavory.

Rancidity, mouldiness, mustiness.

Rancor (Lat.) a rotten or stinking savor, malice, hatred, inward grudge,
rankling, despite.

Ranger; see Raunger.

Ransom (Fr. rencon) a Redemption, most commonly by paying a sum of money for
redeeming a Prisoner of War.

Ranters; see Family of Love.

Rapacious (rapax, acis) ravenous, extorting, greedy covetous, devouring.

Rapacity (rapacitas) ravening, pilling, and polling, extortion, greediness.

Rave (rapus vel rapa) is a part of a County, signifying as much as an Hundred;
as Southsex is divided into six parts; which by a peculiar name are called
Rapes, viz. The Rape of Chichester, of Arundel, of Brember, of Lewis, of
Puensey, of Hastings. Came. Brit. p. 225. Whom also see page 229. These parts
are in other places called Tythings, Lathes, or Wapentakes. Smith de Rep. Angl.
lib. 2. c. 16.

Rape (raptus) is a Felony committed by a man, in the violent deflouring a
woman, be she old or young. Brit. c. 1. This offense is with us Felony in the
principal and his aiders, Anno 11. H. 4. cap. 23. Anno 1. Edw. 4. cap. 1. West.
2. cap. 13.

Rape Wine (Fr. rape) a very small Wine, coming of water cast upon the mother
of Grapes, which have been pressed; also the Wine which comes from a Vessel
filled with whole and sound Grapes (divided from the cluster) and some Wine
among, which being drawn out is supplied by the leavings of good Wine, put into
the Vessel, and revived and kept in heart a whole year by the said Grapes.

Raphael (Heb.) the Physic of God,

Rapid (rapidus) sudden, quick, swift, violent, vehement ravenous.

Rapidity (rapiditas) suddenness, swiftness, hastiness, quickness.

Rapine (papina) robbery, pillage, plunder, taking by force. To take a thing
secretly, is properly called theft; openly, or by violence, is Rapine.

Rapinous (from rapina) ravenous, greedy, violent, covetous, ravishing.

Rapport (Fr.) a report, relation; recital; also a resemblance.

Rapsody (rapsodia) an improper collection, a confused heaping up of many
sentences.

Rapsodist, one that makes or recites such collections.

Rapture (raptura) a ravishing, the snatching or taking away a thing violently.

Rarefie (rarefacio) to make more subtle, light and thin.

Rarefaction (rarefactio) a making or becoming rare or thin.

Raspe or Raspatory (Fr. Raspatoire) an Instrument of scraping or filing, such
as Butlers use to rasp French Bread with, and differs from a File, being more
gross.

Rasure (rasura) a scraping, a shaving.

Ratiocination (ratiocinatio) a discoursing, discussing, arguing, reasoning or
debating a matter.

Ratiocinative (ratiocinativus) belonging to reasoning or debating a matter in
Argument.

Rational (rationalis) reasonable, that has the use of reason, done with
reason. The soul has three parts. 1. The Rational, the principle whereby we
judge, discourse, and the like. 2. The Concupiscible, whereby we desire meat,
coition, etc. 3. The Irascible, whereby we are emboldened, joyed, grieved, etc.

Rational (rationale) an Ornament, which the High Priest of the Jews wore on
his Breast, when he executed his Function, being apiece of the length of a
span, made curiously of gold and twisted silk of diverse colors, wherein were
set 12 precious stones in four ranks of gold, and in every stone one of the
names of the twelve sons of Jacob, was graven. Rationale, is also used in
English, for a thing done by, or with reason; or which shows the reason of
another thing.

Rationary (rationarius) of or belonging to account or reckoning.

Rationality (rationalitas) reasonableness, or the power of reasoning.

Ravage (Fr.) havoc, spoil, a violent and sudden ransacking or forraging.

Raucity (raucitas) hoarseness.

Ravishment (Fr. ravissement, i. direptio, raptus, etc.) signifies in our Law
an unlawful taking away, either a woman or an heir in Ward: Sometime it is used
also in one signification with rape, (viz.) the violent deflouring a Woman.

Raunger (from the Fr. Rang, i a rank, row, list, order) is an Officer of the
Forest, but not within the Forest, having no charge of vert, but only of
Venison, that comes out of the Forest into his charge, or part of the
Pourallee, to safe conduct them back again, etc. See Manw. part. 1. p. 50. and
part. 2. c. 20.

Re, of it self has neither signification nor use (other then as a Musical or
singing Note) in composition it commonly signifies again, mutually or back
again: As to reassume (reassumo) to take again; To re-edifie (reaedifico) to
rebuild or build again; To repel (repello) to thrust or put back, etc.
Sometimes it alters not the sense; as to remonstrate, relinquish, etc.
Sometimes it gives an energy to the simple word; as to redargue, to reclaim,
etc. And sometimes a contrary sense; as to reprove, etc.

Reach, is the distance of any two Points of Land, which bear in a right line
to one another; which term is most commonly used in Rivers; as Lime-house
Reach, Greenwich Reach. etc. The Reach being counted so far, as you can see the
Reach to lie in a straight line.

Real (Span. Ab armis Regis, monetae huic impressis) a Spanish Coin of equal
value with our six pence.

Ream of Paper (from the Teut. Riemer, i. lorum) as much as conveniently can be
tied with one string, which is twenty Quires, and to every Quire twenty four or
twenty five sheets.

Rea^ize (Fr. realizer) to make of a real condition, estate or property, to
make real or essential.

Rebate, is a term most used among Merchants and Tradesmen: As when a Merchant
sells Wares to a Shopkeeper for one hundred pounds, to be paid at six months
end; if the Shopkeeper will at any time before the end of the six months, pay
him the one hundred pounds, the Merchant commonly rebates for the time, that
is, allows him so much as the interest of the 100 l. amounts to, for the time
of such anti-payment. See Chamfering. And see Law of Conveyances, p. 206.

Rebecca (Hebr.) fat and full; a woman's name.

Rebeck (Fr. Rebec) a Fiddle, or musical Instrument of three strings. Chaucer
uses it for an old Trot.

Rebesk work; see Arabesque.

Rebus (Lat.) Whereas (says Camden) Poesy is a speaking Picture, and Picture a
speechless Poesy, they who wanted wit to express their conceit in speech, did
use to depaint it out as it were in Pictures, which they called Rebus, by a
Latin name, well fitting their devise. These our English in Edward the Thirds
time, learnt of the pregnant Picardes, and were so well liked and entertained
here by all degrees, that he was no body that could not hammer out of his name
an invention by this wit-craft.

John Eagleshead (to notify his name about his Arms, as I have seen (says
Came.) in an old Seal with an Eagles head) set down this Verse, Hoc Aquilae
caput est, signumque Figura Johannis.

Nor are these inventions altogether laid aside at present: For one Mr. Yates,
has three Yates or Gates in his Seal, and the Motto, Sit quarta Coeli. And I
have seen some Signs in London, that near amount to Rebusses, as one whose name
is Choppington, has for his Sign an Ax, Chopping a Tun. But Rebusses may be of
other matters as well as names; and therefore may be defined to be
Representations of ordinary or odd things, accompanied with equivocal Motto's
or words, which as they stand, seem to make a Sentence, but pronounced without
stop, describe the things represented. For example, a Fool being painted
kneeling, with a Horn at his mouth, and the words Fol age nous trompe, near
him; pronounce them another way, and you have Fol a genous trompe. See Peacham,
l. 3. p. 155.

Recalcitrate (recalcitro) to kick or strike with the heel.

Recant (recanto) to sing after another, to uncharm, to revoke or unsay a thing.

Recapitulate (recapitulo) to rehearse, relate, or make a short repitition of a
long discourse.

Recargaison (Fr.) a backfraught, or the lading of a ship home.

Recede (recedo) to recoil, retire, to go or swarve from, to return.

Recent (recens) new, fresh, lusty, newly or lately made.

Resensement (Fr.) or Recension (recensio) a reckoning, rehearsing, reviewing
and numbering, an examination or trial of an account or number.

Receptacle (receptaculum) a Storehouse or Warehouse, any place fit for the
receiving and safe keeping of things.

Receptary (Fr. Receptaire) a note of Physical Receipts.

Receptitious (receptitius) that is received, kept, or reserved to ones use
from another.

Recepti^ity (from recipio) an aptness or capableness to receive or take in.

Recesse (recessus) a recoiling, retiring, going away, back, or further off, a
retreat; see Access.

Rhechabites, a sort of Sectaries, so called, from Rechab their Father. Jerem.
35.2, 3, 4, etc. These neither drunk Wine, nor sowed Seed, nor built Houses,
nor planted Vineyards; but like strangers lived all their days in Tents. Ross.

Rechear, the name of one of those Lessons which Hunters use in winding a Horn;
perhaps from the Fr Rechercher, i. to seek diligently; because often times when
they wind this Lesson, the Hounds have lost their game, or hunt a game unknown.

Recidivation (recidivatio) a backsliding; a relapse or falling back into a
sickness.

Recipr^cal (reciprocus) that has a recourse, respect or return from whence it
comes, that ebbs and flows, mutual, interchangable, one for another.

Reciprocation (reciprocatio) a returning, mutual, yielding, or interchanging.

Recision (recisio) a cutting off, away, or again.

Recita^i^e (recitativus) that has openly read, or rehearsed aloud. Among the
Italians it is an artificial way of singing. See Opera.

Recluse (reclusus) closely kept in, or shut up, as a Monk or Nun, retired;
also disclosed.

Recogitate (recogito) to weigh and consider in mind earnestly, to think and
think again upon some thing, to revolve, to ponder in mind.

Recognition (recognitio) a knowledge, a considering, a calling to remembrance,
a reviving, or over-looking.

Recognizance (recognitio) is defined in our Common Law to be a Bond of Record,
testifying the Recognisor to owe to the Recognisee a certain sum of money, and
is acknowledged in some Court of Record, or before some Judge, or other Officer
of such Court, having authority to take the same: As the Masters of the
Chancery, the Judges of either Bench, Barons of the Exchequer, Justices of
Peace, etc. And those that are mere Recognisances are not sealed but enrolled;
and Execution by force thereof, is of all the Recognisors Goods and Chattels,
except his draught Beasts, and Implements of Husbandry, and of the moiety of
his Lands. West. part. 1. Symb. lib. 2. Tit. Recognizances. sect. 149.

Recognize (recognosco) to call or bring into remembrance, to take notice or
acquaintance of, to know again.

Recollects, a Branch of the Franciscan Friars.

Recopilation (Span.) a picking out, a collection, a gathering here and there,
the best of things. Seldom.

Recordation (recordatio) a remembrance, a calling to mind.

Recre^nt (Fr.) he that denies his own challenge, or eats his word; wearied,
faint-hearted, spent.

Recrement (recrementum) any superflous thing, as dross, scum of metals,
dregs, or dross of perfume, that which is cut or pared away.

Recriminate (recriminor) to lay a fault to his charge, that blames others.

Rectangle (rectangulus) a straight or even Angle, a corner whose lines are
joined so, as no part falls longer or shorter then other.

Rectanguled, that has right Corners or Angles; a term of Heraldry.

Rectification (from rectus and facio) a rectifying or making right or straight.

Rector (Lat.) a Governor, a Ruler, a Guider. In the Common Law, Rector
Ecclesiae Parochialis, is he that has the charge or cure of a Parish Church.

Rectorial, Rector-like, belonging to a Rector.

Rectus in Curia, is he that stands at the Bar of a Court of Justice, and no
man has any offense to object against him; an upright person. Smith. ^de Repub.
Angl. lib. 2. cap 3. See A. 6. Rich. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 11.

Recuperate (recupero) to recover, rescue or get again.

Recuperatory (recuperatorius) belonging to recovering, or to Judges delegate.

Recurrent (recurrens) returning hastily, running again or back quickly, having
recourse to; Also a kind of verses called Recurrents.

Recurvate (recurvo) to bow or bend back, to make crooked.

Recusant, was by Statute Law, any person that refufed to come to Church and
hear the Common Prayer read; but the word is now almost wholly appropriated to
the Roman Catholics.

Redamancy (from redamo) a loving of him, or her that loves us, a loving again,
a mutual loving. Montagu.

Redargue (redarguo) to reprehend, reprove or blame, to control or disprove by
argument or reason.

Redargution (redargutio) a reprehending, checking or reproving.

Reddition (redditio) a restoring, rendering or giving again.

Redditive (redditus) delivered, restored; apt to give again or repay.

Redhibition (redhibitio) restitution of a thing to him that sold it, the
causing of one by Law to take that again, which he sold.

Redient (rediens) returning, coming or going back; the Redient moon (luna
rediens) the new Moon.

Reditio^ (reditio) a returning, a coming again.

Redintegrate (redintegro) to begin again, to renew, to make again, to refresh.

Redintegration (redintegratio) a renewing, a beginning afresh.

Redituaries (Fr. Redituaires) an order of Franciscan Friars, which have Lands
and Revenues; therein differing from the Mendicants or begging Friars, who are
to possess nothing.

Redol^n^ (redolens) fragrant, sweet smelling, yielding a savor or scent,
odoriferous.

Redonate (redono^) to give again a thing that is taken.

Red Sea. See Erythraean ^ea.

Redubbors; are those that buy cloth, which they know to be stolen, and turn it
into some other form or fashion. Britton. cap. 29.

Reduction (reductio) a leading or bringing home again, a reducing or bringing
back.

Redulcerate (redulcero) to begin to make sore again, to renew a wound.

Redundancy (redundantia) excessiveness, overmuch, superfluity, surcharging.

Reduplicate (reduplico) to re-double, or double often.

Reduplication (reduplicatio) a redoubling. It is a figure in Rhetoric, when
the same word that ends one part of a verse or sentence, is repeated in that
which follows; As -- Facietis maxima Gallo,
Gallo cujus Amor --
Virg.

And, Magna Reipub. spe sita est in juventute; In juventute inquam illa. Cic.

Reeve or Reve alias Greve from the Sax. Gere^a, a Governor, and that by
rejecting the first syllable, which among the Saxons is usual. It signifies
with us, the Bailiff of a Franchize or Manor, especially in the West parts.
Kitch. fol. 43.

R^evo (by corruption from the Span. Arriva, i. above As Arriva Castiliano, Up
Castilian.

Refectorn (refectorium) a place in Monasteries or Colleges, where the Company
Dine and Sup together; a Hall; a refreshing or baiting place.

Refection (refectio) a rereshing, a recreation; a repast; a repairing or
mending a thing that is worn and decayed.

Refel (refello) to prove false, to disprove, to refute; to confute by reason
and argument,

Referendaries (referendarii) Officers under Comes Dispositionum; who made
relation of Petitions or Requests, exhibited to the Emperors, and his answer or
pleasure rouching the same. The like Officers are under the Pope; as also under
the Masters of R^quests in France; and are there otherwise called Rapporteurs.

Refocillate (refocillo) to comfort, refresh, revive, make lusty again.

Reformado (Span.) reformed. Un Capitan reformado, a reformed Captain, one that
having lost part of his men has the rest taken from him and put under another,
himself being either casheired or continued in pay, either as an inferior
Soldier, or for what he has done formerly.

Refractory (refractorius) wilful in opinion, froward rebellious, stubborn.

Refracted (refractus) broken open, weakened.

Refraction (refractio) a breaking open; also a rebound.

Refret (Fr. refrain) the Burden or Down of a Song or Ballad.

Refrigerate (refrigero) to cool, refresh, comfort; to mitigate or assuage.

Refuge (refugium) a sanctuary or succor; a place of resting or safety.

Refund (refundo) to melt, to dissolve, to melt again; to re-flow; to cast out
again, to pay back.

Refusion (refusio) a pouring back again.

Regal (regalis) Royal, Sovereign, Majestic, Princely, pertaining to a King;
also a certain Musical Instrument, so called. Also a Jewel or Ring of great
value, which a King of France offered at St. Thomas shrine at Canterbury,
called the Regal of France, which Henry the Eighth, upon the dissolution, took
thence, and wore on his own finger.

To Regale (from the Span. Regalar) to make as much account, and take as great
a care of ones self, as if one were a King; to feast or entertain with rarities.

Regaita, the Rights of a King, which the Civilians say are six, viz. 1. Power
of Judicature. 2. Power of Life and Death. 3. All kind of Arming 4. Masterless
goods. 5. Sessments. 6. And the value of money.

Regalo (Span.) a costly dainty, a curiosity fit for a King.

Regality (regalitas) Kingliness, the Estate or Authority of a King.

Regardant (Fr.) a term in Heraldry, when a beast is painted looking back at
one.

Regarder (Fr. Regardeur, i. Spectator) is an Officer of the Forest, appointed
to surview all other Officers, etc.

Regenerate (regenero) to engender again, to renew; also to resemble in nature
and property.

Regeneration (regeneratio) new birth, after we are once born naturally, to be
born again spiritually; renovation, Tit. 3.5.

Regent (Regens) a Governor or Ruler: Also a Reader, Teacher, Moderator of a
Form in a College; or a Professor in some of the Liberal Sciences.

Regerminate (regermino) to burgen again, to spring anew, to grow afresh.

Regible (regibilis) easy to be ruled.

Regifical (regificus) Royal, Princely, pompous, sumptuous.

Regiment (regimentum) Government, Rule; a Regiment of Soldiers, is the proper
command of a Colonel: If it be of Horse, it commonly consists of five, six,
seven, or eight Troops: If of Foot, it usually has eight, nine, ten, eleven or
twelve Companies.

Reglutinate (reglutino) to unglue, or glue again.

Reguardism (Fr.) Fox-like subtilty, sliness, crastiness, falseness; and to
Regnardise, to play the Fox.

Regrater (Fr Regrateur, i. a Huckster, or one that trims up old Wares for
sale) in our Law did anciently signify such as bought by the great, and sold
by retail. Ann. 27. Ed. 3. Stat. 1. cap. 3. But now it signifies, him that
buys and sells any Wares or Victuals in the same Market or Fair, or within
five miles thereof. Anno 5. Ed. 6. ca. 14. Ann. 5 Eliz. ca. 12. and 13 Eliz.
cap. 25.

Regratulate (regratulor) to rejoice again in ones behalf, to be glad again, to
return thanks.

Regresse Regression (regressus) a returning, recoiling or going back.

Regret (Fr.) desire or humor unto; also grief, sorrow, repentance. To do a
thing with regret, is to do it unwillingly, or with an ill stomach.

Regulars; see Secular Priests.

Re-imbosce (from the Spa. Emboscar, to lie in ambush) to lie again in ambush,
or return to the Wood.

Reintegrate; see Redintegrate.

Reioynder (from the Fr. Rejoindre, i. to rejoyn, or join again) signifies in
our Common Law, as much as Duplication with the Civilians, that is, an
Exception or Answer to a Replication: For first, the Plaintiff exhibites his
Bill, the Defendant answers, then the Plaintiff replies to that Answer, which
is called a Replication, to which the Defendant rejoyns, which is called a
Rejoinder, especially in Chancery-Westm. part. 2. Symb. Tit. Chancery. Sect. 56.

Reiver (Fr.) a Swartrut^r, or Ruyter, or German Horsman: Also a fashion of
long Cloaks, usually worn by them; see Swart-Ruiter.

Reiterate (reitero) to repeat, to do or say a thing again.

Relatist (from refero) one that rehearses or relates; a reporter.

Relative (relativum) which has relation to some other thing.

Relaxate (relaxo) to loose, to set at large, to release, to undo, to refresh.

Relay (from the Fr. Relais) a term of Hunting, when they set Hounds in
readiness, where they think a Deer will pass, and cast them on, after the other
Hounds are past by.

Relief (from the Lat. relevo) a certain payment, which some Heirs (being at
full age, at the death of their Ancestor) made to the Lord, of whom their Lands
were holden, at their entrance. Bract. l. 2. c. 36. Now taken away by Act 1656
ca 4. and a rent to be paid in lieu thereof.

Relegation (relegatio) a banishing, a sending away, a severing or exiling.
Where abjuration is in our Common Law, a forswearing the Realm for ever;
Relegation is taken for a banishment for a time only. Shep.

Relent (relentesco) to wax soft or limber; also to grow pitiful or
compassionate.

Relevate (relevo) to raise or list up again; also to relieve or assuage.

Relict (relictum) a thing left or forsaken; a remnant or arrearage; It is
commonly applied to a Widow, who is called the Relict of such a one, her
deceased Husband.

Religate (religo) to tie hard or again, to bind fast.

Reliquary (Fr. reliquaire) a Coffin, Casket, or Shrine, wherein Relics are
kept.

Relique^ (reliquiae) things left or remaining. Sometimes taken for the bodies,
or some part of the bodies, or somewhat which has touched the bodies of Saints
now in Heaven.

Reliquator (Lat.) he that is behind in payment, or in arrear; he that has in
his hands some part of that which should be paid.

Reluctate (reluctor) to contend, strive, struggle, or wrestle against.

Remai^der (remanentia) signifies a power, hope or possibility to enjoy Lands,
Tenements or Rents, after the estate of another expired. For example, a man may
let Land to one for term of his life, the Remainder to another for term of his
life. Littleton, chap. Atturnment, fol. 113.

Remancipate (remancipo) to sell again any thing to him, who first sold it to
us, or to put again into his hands of whom we bought it.

Remansion (remansio) an abiding, a tarrying behind, a remaining.

Remigation (remigatio) a rowing, or sailing back.

Remigration (remigratio) a returning, a going back, a coming again.

Reminiscence (reminiscentia) remembrance of things which were once before in
mind.

Remissible (from remitto) remittable, pardonable, forgiveable, releaseable.

Remissionary (Fr. remissionaire) whose offense is remitted.

Remonstrance (from remonstro) a warning, admonition, declaration, a showing or
giving reasons. Also an instrument so called by the Romanists, and made of
silver or gold, to expose the blessed Sacrament on the Altar.

R^mons^rant^; see Arminians.

Remora (Lat.) a little fish, called a Suckstone or Sea Lamprey, which,
cleaving to the Keel of a ship, hinders the course of it; Also a tarrying,
hindering or letting.

Remorse (remorsus) the worm or sting of conscience, staggering of mind,
repentance for somewhat said or done.

Remunerate (remunero) to recompense, reward or requite, to give one gift for
another received.

Renardism; see Regnardism.

Rencontre (Fr.) a hap or adventure; also a second meeting or encounter (as of
adverse Troops, which on a sudden or by chance, fall foul one on another) an
accidental getting or obtaining; Also an apt or unpremeditated jest, conceit,
or witty saying.

Rendevous (Fr. Rendezvous, q. rendez vous a le General) a place appointed for
the Assembly or meeting of Soldiers.

Renegado (Span. Renegat, Fr.) one that abjures his Religion, or forswears his
Profession; a Soldier that revolts or runs away from his own party to the
enemy.

Renitence or Renitency (from renitor) a resistance, a hard thrusting or
endeavoring against; It may also come from reniteo, and then it signifies a
bright shining or glistering Mr. Mont.

Renodate (renodo) to undo, or unknit a knot; also to knit fast or again.

Re^ovate (renovo) to renew or make again; to refresh, or recreat, to begin
again.

Renversed (Fr. Renverse) over-turned, over-thrown, turned inside out, or
upside down; perverted. Renversed eyes, are taken for decayed eyes, or those
that stand in the head.

Renumerate (renumero) to pay money again that was received; to retel, to
recount, to number again.

Renunciate (renuncio) to make relation, to bring word again, to report; to
proclaim or declare openly, to tell what is done.

Renvo^ (Fr.) a sending back, a dismission; a referring from one to another.

Repandous (repandus) bent, bowed, broad beneath.

Repartie (Fr.) a subdivision or re-division; also a reply.

Repast (repastus) properly a feeding or eating again; but in the Inns of Court
it signifies a single meal taken in the Hall by any one of the Society, who is
not in Commons that week.

Repastinate (repastino) to dig again about Vines, to alter grounds with often
digging and laboring.

Repatriate (repatrio) to return again to ones Native Country.

Repensation (repensatio) a making recompense.

Repentine (repentinus) sudden, unlooked for, unawares.

Repercussi^e (repercussus) stricken or striking again, beaten or cast back,
that which redoubles, reflects, or resounds; or that has power to drive back.

Repercussive (from repercutio) a Medicine that repels or drives pain from the
place whereto it is applied.

Repertible (from reperio) which may be found, gotten, or recovered.

Repertitious (repertitius) that is found by adventure, and sometimes by advice.

Repertory (repertorium) an Inventory of ones goods, a Register, List, Roll, or
Index.

Repignerate (repignero) to redeem a pledge or gage; also to replevy a distress.

Replete (repletus) full, fat, replenished, filled.

Re^ievy (Plevina) is the bringing of the Writ called Repligiari facias, by him
that has his Cattle or other goods distrained by another for any cause, and
putting in surety to the Sheriff, that upon delivery of the thing distrained,
he will prosecute the Action against the distrainer. It is also used for the
bailing a man. Pl. Cor. fol. 72, 73, 74.

Replication (replicatio) an unfolding, a replying, a confirmation of ones
saying with new allegations. See Rejoinder.

Report, is a Relation of the opinion or judgment of a Referree, upon any case
or difference referred to his consideration by a Court of Justice, most
commonly the Chancery.

Reportator (Lat) he that carries back.

Reposition (repositio) a putting or setting again in his place; a restitution.

Reposition of the Forest, was an act whereby certain Forest grounds being made
Purlieu upon view, were by a second view laid to the Forest again. Manw. part.
1. page 178.

Repository (repositorium) a Storehouse or Warehouse to keep things in.

Reprisal (Fr. Reprisaille) a taking, a resting, or seizing on, for a distress
or pledge; also a Prize. Reprisals are all one in the Common and Civil Law; Est
potestas pignorandi contra quemlibet de terra debitoris data creditori pro
injuriis and damnis acceptis. This among the ancient Romans was called
Clarigation (from clarigo, i. res clare repeto.) It is called in the last
Statute of 27 Ed. 3. cap. 17. Law of Marque. And the reason may be, because one
destitute of Justice in another Territory, redresses himself by the Goods
belonging to persons of that Territory, taken within his own bounds; see Law of
Marque; and see Acts 1649.38. and 1650.7.

Reprise Fr.) a taking back or again; But in our Law, Reprises signify
deductions, and duties, that are yearly paid out of a Manor; as Rent-charges,
Pensions, Annuities, Fees of Stewards or Bailiffs, etc. Hence we say the Manor
of A. yields so much clear yearly rent Vltra Reprisas, besides all Reprises.

Rep^ (from the Lat. reprendere, to take back) is properly to take back or
remand a Prisoner, and respite the execution and proceeding of the Law against
him for that time. It is also used substantively.

Reprobate (reprobus) wicked, naughty, cast out of Gods favor. Also used
substantively.

Rept^le or Reptitious (reptitius) that creeps; or, by privy means, gets to
high estate.

Repudiable (from repudio) refuseable, rejectable, forsakeable.

Repudiate (repudio) to forsake as one does his wife, to refuse or put away.

The ancient Romans had three kinds of separation in Marriage; The first they
called Repudiation, which was done by the man against the will of the woman;
And the first man that thus repudiated his wife was Spurius Carvilius, because
she was barren, etc.

The second manner was called Divorce, and this was done with the consent of
both, and to either of them, it was permitted to require it; the party suing
for it, used these words, Res tuas tibi habet^, vel, Res tuas tibi agito.

The third manner was termed Direption, and this was done according to the
Princes will 1 part Tr. of Times,

Repudious (repudiosus) villainous, dishonest, reproachful, that one refuses
and abhors much.

Repugnancy (repugnancia) contrariety, disagreement of things one with another.

Repullulate (repullulo) to bud out, to cast forth buds, to burgen and spring
again.

Re^umicate (repumico) to raze with a Pumice, to make slick or smooth.

Requiem (the Accusative Case of requies, i. rest or ease) as to sing a Requiem
for the dead, whereby is understood a Mass for the dead, which begins chiefly
with these words, Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine, and lux perpetua luceat
eis.

Rescind (rescindo) to cut or break down, or in sunder; to take away, to
destroy; to repeal an Act or Law.

Rescission (recissio) a cutting again, an undoing or making a marriage void.

Recissory Rescissorian (recissorius) that makes void; as recissoria actio, an
Action that fore-doeth or makes void a thing.

Rescous (Fr. rescousse) redemption, delivery; the rescuing or taking an
engaged thing from, as an arrested person out of the hands of Bailiffs.

Rescribendary (from rescribo) an Officer in some of the Courts of Rome, who
taxes or valueth supplications.

Rescript (rescriptum) a writing back, or answer given to other Letters; and
hence the answer of a Petition, the return of a Writ.

Resentment; see Ressentiment.

Reseration (reseratio) an opening or unlocking.

Resiance (from resideo) signifies a man's abode, or continuance in a place. Old
not. br. fol. 85. Whence also comes the Participle [resiant] that is
continually dwelling or abideing in a place. Kitch. fol. 33. It is all one with
Residence, but that custom of speech ^es Residence only to persons
Ecclesiastical.

Recedentiary (from resideo) one that resides or abides in a place; also the
place where.

Resignation (resignatio) a resigning, an unsealing, a surrendering or yielding
up. It is used particularly for the giving up a Benefice or spiritual Living
into the hands of the Ordinary.

Resilience (from resilio) a leaping or skipping back, a rebounding; a going
from ones word. Bac. The French use Resiliment in the same sense.

Resinous (resinosus) full of rozen or gum. Dr. Br.

Resipiscence (resipiscentia) repentance, a returning to understanding, a
second thinking, wiser then the first.

Resonant (resonans) sounding or ringing again with an Echo, roaring.

Respiration (respiratio) a breathing, refreshing or resting.

Respite or Respight of Homage (respectus Homagii) was the forbearing of Homage
which ought first of all to be performed by the Tenant, that held by Homage;
which Respite was paid upon diverse good reasons, but most frequently by such as
held by Knights service in Capite; who because the Prince could not be at
leisure to take their Homage, did pay into the Exchequer, every fifth term,
some small sum of money for respite till the Prince might be at leisure to take
it in person. This is now abrogated, with the Court of Wards, by Act 1656. c. 4.

Response (responsum) an Answer, an Oracle, a Prophecy.

Responsory (as Cantus responsorius, where one verse or line answers another;)
answerable, responsible, or that answers.

Responsion (responsio) an answering, a Surety, or Suretiship, an Assurance.

Respondent (respondens) he that answers to Interrogatories at Doctors Commons,
is so termed by the Civilians.

Ressentiment (Fr.) a full taste, a true feeling, a sensible apprehension of a
resentment.

Restagnant (restagnans) running over, overflowing.

Restoration (restauratio) a restoring, a reinstalling, a renewing or
repairing.

Restible (restibilis) which hears every year, that is sown or delved every
year, that springs up again, and quickens after it was thought to be dead.

Restipulate (restipulo) to make answer to an Action, by waging the Law, to lay
in a Pledge or Gage to answer in the Law.

Restive or Rest^ (Fr. restif) stubborn, drawing backwards, that will not go
forward.

Restiveness, stubbornness, drawing backward.

Restriction (restrictio) a restraint, a straitning or binding, a moderation.

Resudation (resudatio) a sweating or sweaty dropping.

Resverie (Fr.) a raving, idle talking, dotage, trifling; folly, vain fancy.

Resumption (resumptio) a taking again.

Resupination (resupinatio) a turning upwards or upright; a tumbling upside
down. Sir H. Wott.

Resuscitate (resuscito) to raise or set up again, to renew, to set in the
former strength.

Retailler (Fr.) to shred, pare, slip, or cut often; for so do Retaillers, or
those that sell by Retaile, in selling their Wares or Commodities in pieces or
parcels; contrary to those that sell in gross, by the great, or by wholesale,
as they call it.

Retainer (from retineo) is taken for a Servant, not menial, nor domestic,
that is, not continually dwelling in the house of his Lord or Master; but
attending him on Festival days, or at such time only, when he is thereunto
required.

Retaliate (retalio) to requite, or do like for like.

Retard (retardo) to stop, stay or hinder, to fore-slow.

Retent (retentus, a retineo) kept or holden back, stayed, retained, kept in.

Retent (from retento) unbent.

Retention (retentio) a holding, a retaining, a staying back, a restraining, a
keeping in ones hands.

Retentive (from retineo) the retaining force of nature, wherein food is held
in the Stomach, till it be fully concocted; retaining, holding back.

Retiary (retiarius) he that casts a net, properly in fighting to take his
enemy.

Reticence (reticentia) silence, concealment, councel-keeping, when one holds
his peace, and utters not the thing he should tell.

Reticle (reticulum) a little Net, a Casting-net.

Reticulate (reticulatus) made like a Net or Lettice.

Retinacle (retinaculum) a stay or hold, any thing whereby another is retained
or held back.

Retorted (retortus) twisted again, thrown or wrested back, returned or writhen
again violently.

Retract (retracto) to call or draw back, to revoke a thing that is done, or
unsay what one has said.

Retribution (retributio) a rendering or giving again, a recompencing, a
restoring.

Retriment (retrimentum) the dregs of a thing, the dross of metal, all kind of
supersluities and rubbish.

Retrive (from the Fr. Retrover, to find again) is a term in Hawking, when the
Partridges have been once sprung' then to spring or find them again, is called
to Retrive; but may be properly used upon other occasions.

R^tro (the Latin Adverb) signifies, back, behind or backward; and is often
used in composition.

Retroactive (retroactus) casting or driving backward.

Retrocede (retrocedo) to give back, to retire, to recoil.

Retrocession (retrocessio) a going back, or retreating.

Retrocopulation (retrocopulatio) a joining or coupling backward. Br.

Retroduction (retroductio) a bringing, leading or drawing back.

Retrograde (retrogredior) to go backward, to recoil, or return back.

Retrogradation (retrogradatio) a going back.

Retrogression Retroition the same.

Retromingents (from retro and mingo) is used by Dr. Brown, for such Animals,
as Urine or Piss backward; such are all female Quadrupedes. And Retromingency,
for a staling or pissing backward.

Retrospection (retrospectio) a looking back.

Retusion (retusio) a dulling or making blunt.

Reve; see Reeve.

Revelation (revelatio) a revealing, a discovering, opening, or disclosing.

Revels (from the Fr. Reveiller, i. to awake from sleep) are with us sports of
Dancing, Masking, Comedies, and such like, still used in the Inns of Court, and
Houses of some great Personages; and are so called, because they are performed
by night; There is also an Officer, called, The Master of the Revels, who has
the ordering and command of these pastimes.

Revene (revenio) to come again, to return.

Reverberate (reverbero) to strike or beat back again, to reflect.

Reverbitory or Reverberatory (reverbitorium) a Lymbeck, or Furnace, in which
materials are calcined by the fire or flame. Paracel.

To Revere (revereor) to fear, and have in honor and reverence.

Reverie; see Resvery.

Reverential (reverens) that does reverence, honor and fear; reverent, full of
reverence.

Reverse (Fr.) a back-blow, or stroke, a blow with the back of a hand or sword;
the back or backside of any thing

Reversed (reversus) turned back, or upside down. A term in Heraldry, when
Arms, or any part of them are turned the lower part upward.

Revert (reverto) to return, to come again to a place or thing.

Reverticle (reverticulum) a place to return unto.

Revestiary (from revestio) a Vestry in a Church, where the Priest Vests or
Clothes himself; a Revestry.

Reviviction (from revivisco) a recovering life, a reviving, a coming to the
old state again.

Revocable (revocabilis) that may be revoked or called again.

Revolution (revolutio) a returning back to the first place or point, the
accomplishment of a Circular course.

Rewish, earnest in copulation, spoken of the Pigeon.

Revulsion (revulsio) a pulling up, or plucking away; also the drawing or
forcing humors from one part of the body into another.

Rhabdomancy (rhabdomantia) a divination by a Rod or Staff.

Rhadamant, taken for a severe Judge; from Rhadamanthus, a feigned Judge in
Hell, Qui severus fuit Justitiae executor.

Rhapsodie; see Rapsodie.

Rhedarious (rhedarius) of or serving for a Cart or Chariot.

Rheuish Wine, so called from the River Rhine in Germany, upon whose banks grow
those Grapes which make it; see Baccharach.

Rhetoric (rhetorice) the Art and Science of Eloquence, or of speaking well
and wisely; first invented by Empedocles. It is the force or faculty of
perceiving or finding out that, in any matter, which is most persuasive.
Isocrates says, the Office of a Rhetorician is, Ex parvis magna, ex magnis
parva efficere.

Rhetorical (rhetoricus) skilful in Rhetoric, that speaks eloquently.

Rhomb (rhombus) a Spining Wheel, Reel, or Whirle; also a figure that has equal
sides, and unequal Angles; as a quarry of glass, etc. Rhombi are also the
points of the Mariners Compass; see Rumbe.

Rhomboidal, pertaining to, or like a Rhomb.

Rhonchisonant (rhonchisonus) which imitates the noise or sound of snorters,
and pertains to mocking.

Rhyparographer (rhyparographus) a painter of trifles or base things.

Rhythmical (rhythmicus) made in rhyme or meeter, that speaks in meeter,
number, harmony or proportion.

Rialto, is to Venice, as the Royal Exchange to London.

Ribadavis, a mild kind of White Wind, made at a Town so called among the
Mountains of Galicia, but not of body enough to bear the Sea.

Ribauldry (from the Ital. ribalderia, or Fr. ribauldise) Roguery, Ruffianism,
Whoredom, Whore-hunting.

Ribolla, a sort of excellent strong Wines (so called) both white and red, made
in the Island Zant. Sands.

Richero (Sax) powerful and rich disposition, as Richer, an ancient Christian
name, signified powerful in the Army, or rich Lord, and was but Herric
reversed; Aventinus turns it, treasure of the Kingdom.

Ricture (rictura) the gaping of bruit beasts.

Riding^, are the names of the parts or divisions of Yorkshire, being three
(viz) West Riding, East Riding, and North Riding.

Rye is a Saxon word, signifying as much as regnum in Latin. Came. Brit. p. 346.

Rigation (rigatio) a watering, a sprinkling, a moistening or wetting.

Rigid (rigidus) cold, frozen, stiff; hard, cruel, fierce, rough, sturdy.

Rigor (Lat.) a very great cold; severity, roughness, rudeness, extremity.

Rimmon (Hebr. i. a Pomegranat) an Idol among the ancient Hebrews; mentioned 2
Kings 5.18.

Rimosous (rimosus) full of chincks, chaps, or clefts.

Ring-walk, a round walk made by Hunters.

Riot (Fr. Riote, i. a bralling or contention) signifies the forcible doing an
unlawful act, by three or more persons assembled together for that purpose.
West. part. 2. Symbol. Tit. Indictments, Sect. 65. P. The differences and
agreements between a Riot, Rout, and unlawful Assembly. See in Lamb. Eiren.
lib. 2. cap. 5, etc. see the Stat. 1. Mar. 1. cap. 12. Kitch. fol. 19. and
Cromptons Justice of Peace, fol. 53.

Riparious (riparius) that uses or abides in the water banks.

Ripiers (from Ripa, i. a bank or shore) are those that use to bring fish from
the Seacoast to the Inner parts of the Land. Came. Brit p. 234.

Rision (risio) a laughing, a mocking, a scorning.

Risque (Fr.) peril, jeopardy, danger, hazard, chance.

Ritual (ritualis) of or belonging to Custom or Rites, customary, ceremonious.

Rituals (rituales libri) Books so called, which contain and prescribe the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Roman Catholic Church, with the manner of them.

Rivage (Fr.) the Seashore or coast; a water-bank or Seaside.

Rivals (rivales) they that haunt, or dwell by, have interest or fetch water
from, the same River or Brook: But it is most commonly used Metaphorically for
those that love and woo the same woman; Corivals.

Rivality (rivalitas) the envy between two persons loving one woman.

Rivulet (rivulus) a little River, a Brook.

Rixation (rixation) a chiding or brawling.

Robert (Germ.) famous in Council; for it is written most anciently Rodbert:
^ad, Red, and Rod, signifying Council. Came.

Robertines, a Religious Order (if not the same, not much different from the
Mathurins) which owes its original to one Robert Flower, son of Took Flower,
who had been twice Mayor of York, who, forsaking the fair lands left him by his
Father, betook himself to a solitary life about the Rocks in Nisdale in
Yorkshire, and at Knaresborough was erected the first and last House of his
Order.

Robiginous (robiginosus) much blasted, rusty.

Robigus, a God among the Romans, that kept Corn from blasting; to whom, and to
that end, those Feasts called Robigalia were sacred.

Robur, a place in the Prison of the old Romans, from whence Malefactors were
thrown headlong.

Roborean (roboreus) made of Oak, or such like strong Timber.

Roburnean (roburneus) of or belonging to Oak.

Robusteous (robusteus) strong like Oak, made of Oak, Oaken.

Rochet (Fr.) a Frock, loose Gaberdine, or Gown of Canvas, worn by a Laborer
over the rest of his Clothes; Also a Prelates Rochet.

Rod (pertica) is otherwise called a Perch, and is a measure of land
containing sixteen foot and an half long; see Perch.

Rodage (Fr.) a certain Toll exacted by some Country Lords in France, upon
every Wain that passes (though in the Highway) near their Seigniories, whether
it be laden or no; if it be, they will be paid both for the Load, and for the
Cart. Cot.

Rode (from the Belg. Ree or Reed, i. statio navium) a Station, Bay, or Harbor
for ships.

It may come from the Fr. Rade) from Radenda terra, in which sense, is that of
Virg. 7. Aeneid.

Proxima Circeae raduntur littora terrae. Rodomond (Fr.) a Bragger, a boaster,
a vainglorious fellow, one that uses Rodomontades.

Rodomontade (Ital. Rodomontada) a brag, boast, crack, vainglorious bravado.

Rogalian Rogal (rogalis) of or pertaining to a great fire; Ignis rogalis, a
Bonfire.

Rogation (rogatio) a Question or Demand; a Desire or Request, a Praying.

Rogation week (Sax. Gangdagas, i. days of perambulation) is always the next
but one before Whitsonday; and so called, because on Monday, Tuesday and
Wednesday of that week, Rogations and Litanies were used; and fasting, or at
least abstinence, then enjoined by the Church to all persons, not only for a
preparative to the joyful remembrance of Christ's glorious Ascension, and the
Descention of the Holy Ghost in form of Cloven Tongues shortly after; but also
to request and supplicate the blessing of God upon the Fruits of the Earth. And
in this respect the solemnization of Matrimony is forbidden from the first day
of the said week, till Trinity Sunday. The Belgians call it Cruys-week, i.
Cross-week, and so is it called in some parts of England because of old (as
still among Roman Catholics) when the Priests went on Procession this week,
the Cross was carried before them. The first institution of this weeks
solemnities, is by Historians referred to Claudius Mamertus, Bishop of Vienne
in France.

In the North of England it is called Gang-week, from the Ganging or going on
Procession, etc. for Gang there, as in the old Saxon, signifies to go. In the
Inns of Court it is called Grass-week, because the Commons of that week consist
much of Salads, hard Eggs and Green-sauce upon some of the days.

The Feasts of the old Romans called Robigalia and Ambarvalia (quod victima
arva ambiret) did in their Heathenish way somewhat resemble these institutions,
and were kept in May in honor of Robigus.

Rogatists; see Circumcelians.

Rogitate (rogito) to bid, entreat, require often, or beg.

Roger (Germ. Ruger) quiet, the same with tranquillus in Latin. Frodoard writes
it always Rotgarius or Rodgarus, so it seems to signify, all Council, or
strong Council.

Rolls, a terms among Bookbinders; as Books in Rolls are those which have a
Roll of Gold on the edges of the Cover; and in Fillets, is when they have Lines
or Fillets of Gold on the outside of the Cover.

Romanize (romanizo) to imitate the speech or fashion of Rome, or the Romans.

Romance (Span.) a feigned History, either in Verse or Prose in the Vulgar
Language; the first news we heard of this word, was from a Poem writ in French,
by John Clopinel alias Meung, entitled Le Roman de la Rose, and afterward
translated into English by Chaucer; but we now give the name Romance most
commonly to a feigned History writ in Prose.

Romancist (from the Spa. Romancista) one that composes such Romances.

Romant, the most eloquent French, or any thing written eloquently, was in old
time termed Romant of the Roman, or most eloquent Language. In the confines of
Germany and Lorain, the Language that is not German, is at this day called
Romant. Cot.

Romescot, was a tribute paid to Rome, first granted by Ossa, a Saxon King.

Rondach (Fr.) a round Target or great Buckler.

Rondacher (Fr.) a Targettier, or one that serves with a Rondache.

Rondelier (Fr.) a maker of Bucklers, or of round Targets; also a Soldier that
serves with one of them.

Rood (roda terrae) is the fourth part of an acre of Land. An. 5. Eliz. cap. 5.
See Perch.

Rood (Sax.) a Cross, or an image of Christ on the Cross. Hence the Invention
of the Holy Cross by St. Helen, 3. May. and the exaltation of it, 14. September.
are called Holy Rood-dayes.

Roodloft (Sax.) a Shrine whereon was placed the Cross of Christ. The Rood was
an Image of Christ on the Cross, made generally of wood, and erected in a Loft
for that purpose, just over the passage out of the Church into the Chancel.
Fuller.

Roral (roralis) of or belonging to dew, dewy, that may be sprinkled like dew.

Rorid (roridus) dewy, moist.

Roriferous (rorifer) that makes or brings dew.

Rorulent (rorulentus) covered with, or full of dew.

Rose, when we desire to confine our words, we commonly say, they are spoken
under the Rose, and the German custom describes a Rose in the Seeling over the
Table; the original whereof Lemnius and others have thus recorded; The Rose was
the flower of Venus, which Cupid comsecrated to Harpocrates, the God of
Silence, and was therefore an Emblem thereof, to conceal the pranks of Venery,
as is declaed in this Tetrastick.

Est Rosa flos Veneris, cujus quo facta laterent,
Harpocrati Matris, dona dicavit Amor;
Inde Rosam Mensis hospes suspendit Amicis,
Convivae ut sub ea dicta tacenda sciant.
Rosary (rosarium) a Garden or bed of Roses, a place where Roses grow; a
Garland of Roses; an ordinary Limbeck for distilling Rose Water; also a pair of
Beads, called Fifteens, containing Fifteen Pater Nosters, and 150 Aves; much
used by such Romanists, who are of the Archconfraternity of the Rosary,
instituted by St. Dominick; Also an ancient coin so called.

Roscid (roscidus) wet or moistened with dew, dewy.

Rosion (rosio) a gnawing, a griping, a biting, a nibling.

Rot, a term of war; six men (be they Pikes or Musketeers) make a Rot or File;
see Brigade.

Rotal (rotalis) of or belonging to a wheel.

By Rote (rotatim) rowllingly, roundly; when one has a lesson by heart, and
says it as roundly and perfectly as a wheel runs in his (rota) track. The
French say, Par rotine:

Rotundity (rotunditas) roundness.

Rouge Cross and Rogue Dragon, the names of two Pursuivants at Arms; see,
Harold.

Roundel, a kind of Ball or such like round substance in Blazon, of which
Heralds reckon nine sorts. Guillim.

Roundelay, a Shepherds dance; sometimes used for a Song.

Roundlet, a certain measure of Wine, Oil, etc. containing eighteen Gallons
and an half.

Rounds, Statues and their fragments are so called by Painters.

Rowland or Rolland (Ger.) whereas it was anciently written Rodland, it may
seem to signify Council for the Land; and the first I find so named was
Landwarden in France, under Carolus Magnus against the Piracies of the Normans.
The Italians use Orland for Rowland, by Metathesis.

Royalist (Fr.) one that takes the Kings part, a Lover of Kingship.

Royalty, the right or prerogative of a King, the Royalties of a Manor are,
the Waifs, Strays, Fishing, Fowling, etc.

Rubefy (rubefacio) to make red, to make one blush.

Rubicon, the name of a River in Italy over which Julius Caesar passed in the
beginning of his Expedition against Pompey; whence to pass the Rubicon, is used
proverbially, to undertake a great and dangerous exploit.

Rubicundous (rubicundus) very red or ruddy, blood red.

Rubid (rubidus) reddish, somewhat red or ruddy.

Rubiginous (rubiginosus) foul, musty, blasted.

Rubor (Lat.) shamefacedness, redness, blushing.

Rubric (rubrica) a special title or sentence of the Law, or of any book
written or printed in red; the Calender of Saints and festivals is commonly so
called, because the chief of them are printed in red letters; In the Cannon
Law, the arguments of every Chapter, were written with red Letters, which was
called the Rubric, and the Text with black.

Rubricate (rubrico) to make or color red with Oaker.

Rubrificative, a Plaster of so strong, or strongly drawing Simples, that it
ulcerates, or at least makes red the place it is applied to. Cot.

Ructation (ructatio) a belching or breaking wind upward.

Rudiment (rudimentum) the first teaching or instruction; a beginning, a
principle.

Rugosous (rugosus) full of wrinckles, crumples, or plaits, rough, riveled,
withered.

Rumbe (rhombus) a term in Geometry, and signifies a whole line in the Compass
consisting of two winds, as the Line of North and South, or that of East and
West. The Spaniards first gave that name, as Peter of Medina takes it upon
them, yet not out of their own Language, but fancying to themselves that the
Lines of the Compass (as indeed they do) much resembled the spars of a Spinning
Wheel, which in Lat. is called Rhombus, from the Gr. (...), to turn about, they
call that Rumbus, and the word has taken. Greg. 283.

Rumia, a Goddess that ruled over sucking children, and women's Paps.

Rumidge, to remove any Goods or Luggage out of a place. Seamen use it for
removing and clearing things in the ships Hold, that Goods and Victuals may be
well stowed and placed.

Rumiferate Rumigerate (rumifero) (rumigero) to disperse a rumor, to carry
tidings abroad, to tell tales or blaze abroad reports.

Ruminate (rumino) to chew the Cud, as Neat do; also to call to remembrance,
and consider with ones self, to study, and think on matters.

Runcina, the Goddess of weeding.

Running of the Reins; see Gonorrhaea.

Ruption (ruptio) a bursting, tearing, or breaking; a Rupture.

Ruptor (Lat.) a breaker or tearer in pieces, a destroyer, he that violates.

Ruptory (Fr. Ruptoire) a Corrosive or Potential Cauter; that which has
strength to break.

Rural (ruralis) of or belonging to the Country or Village; rustical.

Rurigene (rurigena) born, dwelling or abiding in the Country; Country people.

Rustication (rusticatio) a dwelling or abiding in the Country.

Rusticity (rusticitas) churlishness, rudeness, clownishness.

Rutilate (rutilo) to shine or glare* to make to shine or glister like gold, to
make bright or yellow.

Ruttier (Fr. Routier) a Directory for the knowledge or finding out of courses,
whether by Sea or Land; also an old Traveller, one that by much trotting up and
down, is grown acquainted with most ways; and hence an old beaten Soldier, or
an old crafty Fox, etc.

Ryparographer; see in Rhy --

S.
Sabbath, Sabbath, Sabbath or Sabbath (Lat. Sabbatum, from the Hebrew, (...),
Scabath, (i. quievit) a day of rest, or a time set apart for holy rest, which
is Friday among the Turks, Saturday among the Jews, and Sunday, or our Lords
day, among us Christians; which instead of the Saturday or Jewish Sabbath, was
instituted by the Apostles to be kept festival, in honor and memory of Christ's
Resurrection on that day; and so has been observed ever since; see Moses and
Aaron. p. 97.

Sabbath, in all the Tongues, is also an Attribute the Hebrews gave to God,
Lord of Hosts, of Armies and Powers, and comes of the Hebr. Tsabaoth,
signifying Armies or Powers.

Sabbatical (Sabbaticus) pertaining to the Sabbath or Seventh day, that keeps
the Sabbath. A Sabbath days journey, was (among the Jews) 2000 cubits; now
taken for two miles by some, by others but for one.

Sabbatical year, was the ^eventh year, in which the Jews rested from Tillage,
and discharged their Debtors, whence it was called Shemita Laihova, The Lords
release, Deuteronomy 15 2. Levit. 25.1.

Sabbatism (Sabatismus) the celebration of the Sabbath, a time of Holy Rest.

Sabbatarians, a sort of Heretics, who celebrate the Jewish Sabbath, and not
our Lords Day.

Sabellians (a Sect of Heretics, so called from Sabellius their first Founder,
who held, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were only one Substance and one
Person, having three Names, etc. See Antitrinitarians.

Sable (Fr.) black color in Blazon. It is also a rich Fur of a Beast, so
called, like and near as big as a Polecar, of color between black and brown,
and breeds in Russia, but most in Tartaria.

Sacerdotal (sacerdotalis) belonging to Priests or Churchmen, Priestly.

Saccus cum brochia, seems to be a service of finding a Sack, and a Broach to
the King, by virtue of a Tenure, for the use of his Army. Bract. lib. 2. cap.
16. numb. 6.

Sack of Wool (saccus Lanae) is a quantity of wool containing six and twenty
stone and fourteen pound. An. 14. Edw. 3. Stat. 1. cap. 21 See Sarplar.

Sacramental (sacramentalis) pertaining to a Sacrament or Oath.

Sacramentaries (Sacramentarii) Protestants, Huguenots, or Calvinists, in the
Doctrine of the Sacrament.

Sacrary (sacrarium) the Place wherein holy things are laid, a Sextry, or
Vestry in a Church.

Sacre (sacro) to dedicate, to hallow, to make immortal.

Sacriferous (sacrifer) that bears holy things.

Sacrificial (sacrificialis) belonging to a Sacrifice, Offering or Oblation.

Sacrileg (sacrilegium) the robbing a Church, or other holy consecrated place,
the stealing holy things, or abusing Sacraments or holy Mysteries.

Sacrilegious (sacrilegus) that robs the Church; wicked, extremely bad.

Sacristy (sacristia) a Vestry in a Church; see Sacrary.

Sacrist or Sacristan (sacrista) a Sexten or Vestry-keeper in a Church, or
Relious house.

Sadduces, a Sect among the Jews, who dis-beleeved the being of Angels or
Spirits, the Resurrection of the body, and Holy Ghost; they received only the
Pentateuch, and in many other things agreed with the Samaritans, etc. The
derivation of their name is variously delivered by Authors; some take it from
Sadoc, who is said to have lived about the time of Alexander the Great, and to
be Author of this Sect; Others, from Tsedech or Zaddichim, both which signify
Justice; others deduce the name from Sedah a Chaldean word, signifying to part
or divide; see Moses and Aaron. p. 46.

Safe Conduct (salvus Conductus) is a Security or Protection given by the
Prince under the Broad Seal, or by any other person in authority, most commonly
for a strangers quiet coming in, and passing out of the Realm. Touching which
you may see the Statutes, An. 15. H. 6. ca. 3. and An. 18. ejus. cap. 18. and
An. 28 H. 8. cap. 1. The form of this, see in the Regist. Orig. fol. 25.

Sagacious (sagax, acis) witty, that perteives and foresees quickly; wise,
skilful, quick of scent, taste or sight.

Sagacity (sagacitas) sharpness of wit, quickness, or liveliness of spirit or
understanding.

Saginate (sagino) to frank, to make far, to cram.

Sagittal (sagittalis) the future or seam that runs straight on the top of the
head, distinguishing the right from the left side of the head; Also belonging
to an arrow.

Sagittarius, or the Archer, one of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, in form of
a Centaure or Archer.

Sagittiferous (sagittifer) that bears or wears Arrows.

Sagit^ipotent (sagittipotens) that can do much by shooting with Arrows, a
cunning Archer.

Saguntin^ (^aguntinus) belonging to the City Saguntus, situate beyond Iberus
in Spain.

Saint Anthonies fire (Erysipelas) a disease rising of hot choleric blood,
which beginning first with a blister grows after to a soar or scab like a
Tetter.

Saker (Fr. Sacre) a Hawk so called; Also a piece of Ordnance of that name.

Salacia, The Goddess of water.

Salacious (salax, acis) that is very much inclined and bent to lechery, hot in
lust.

Salacity (salacitas) lechery, or rather an instinction, tickling, or
provocation to it.

Salade; see Salet.

Salamander (salamandra) a four-footed beast, in shape like a Lizard, full of
spots, it will for a time resist a flame, until its moisture be consumed, but
not live in, or quench the fire, as some authors have affirmed; see Dr. Br.
Vul. Err. fol. 138.

Salarian (salarius) of or belonging to salt.

Salarian Verse, a kind of Song, which Mars his Priests, among the old Romans
were wont to sing. Tacitus.

Salary (salarium) is a recompense or consideration made to any man for his
pains or industry bestowed on another business; wages given to servants, a
stipend. So caled from sal, i. salt, both being a like necessary.

Salebrity (salebritas) ruggedness, or unevenness.

Salebrous (salebrosus) uneven, rough; also harsh, unpleasant, hard to
understand.

Salet (Fr salade) a Helmet or Headpiece, A. 4 and 5. Phil. and Mar.

Saliant (saliens) a term in Heraldry) when the Lion is leaping and sporting
himself.

Salinous (from salina) of or pertaining to salt or a salt-pit. Br.

Salique Law (Lex Salica) is a Law whereby the Crown of France cannot be
inherited by a woman, cannot fall from the Lance to the Distaff, as their
saying is; Which Law, one, undertaking to prove out of Holy Writ, urged that
place of Matthew; where it is said, Mark the Lillies (which are the Arms of
France) and see how they neither labor nor spin. This Law they pretend was made
by Pharamond their first King, and that the words, Si aliqua, so often
mentioned, gave it the name of Salique Law; Others say it took denomination
from the name of the place Salethani, where it was made, o^ from the name of
^algast, who was Chancellor to Pharamond, and one of the chief in making this
Law.

Hailan says, It was never heard of in France till the days of Philip the
fair, 1321. Others say it was framed by Charles the Great, after his Conquests
in Germany, where the incontinency of the women, living about the River Sala
(in the Country now called Misnia) gave both occasion and name to this Law; the
words are these, De terra vero Salica nulla portio haereditatis mulieri veniat,
sed ad virilem sexum tota terrae haereditas perveniat. Seldom.

Salivarious (salivarius) clammy and thick like spettle.

Salivation (salivatio) a continual having of much spettle in the mouth, or a
drawing of humors to the mouth, and a delivery of them from thence in manner of
spettle.

Sally (from the Span. Salir) to go or issue out; most commonly applied to
those that are besiedged in a Town or Castle, when they sally or issue out upon
the besiegers.

Salmacian Salmacidan Spoils (Salmacida Spolia) Spoils or Conquests got
without blood or labor; from Salmacis a Fountain of Caria, which is said to
enfeeble all such as either drank of it, or bathed in it; Hence that of Tully,
Salmacida spolia sine sanguine and sudore, and there used for effeminate or
venerial Conquests.

This Salmacida Spolia was the Motto of the Scene or Frontispiece of a Mask at
Whitehall in Anno 1636, or 1637.

Solomon (Hebr.) peaceable.

Salsamentarious (salsamentarius) belonging to salt, or any salt thing.

Salsipotent (salsipotens) that has power of the Sea.

Salsure (salsura) a salting or seasoning brine, liquor to powder in.

Salt^t^on (saltatio) a dancing, leaping, jumping, or vaulting.

Saltatory (saltatorius) belonging to dancing, vaulting, etc.

Saltimbance (Ital.) a Mountebank, a Quacksalver, a pedling Physician.

Salture saltura) a leaping or dancing.

Salvage Money, is a recompense, allowed by the Civil Law, in lieu of all
damages sustained by that ship that rescues another ship; which was set upon by
Pirates or Enemies, mentioned in Acts of Parl. 1648. c. 12. 1639. 21. 1650. 28,
33.

Salubrity (salubritas) health, wholesomness, healthfulness.

Salver (from salvo, to save) is a new fashioned piece of wrought plate, broad
and flat, with a foot underneath, and is used in giving Beer, or other liquid
thing, to save or preserve the Carpit or Clothes from drops.

Salus (Fr. salut) was a Coin of Gold stamped by King Henry the sixth in France
and worth some five shillings sterling, which only Coin, with another of
Blancks of eight pence a piece, were current in those places of France where
King Henry was obeyed. Stow.

Salutary (salutaris) wholesome, healthful, profitable, comfortable.

Salutatory (salutatorium) a place where men stand to salute a Prince.

Salutiferous (salutifer) that brings health, salvation or safty,

Salutigerous (salutiger) that brings commendation from another, or that is
sent with How-d'yees.

Samaritans, people of Samaria, a Country and City of Syria. Also a Sect among
the Jews not allowed to commerce with them, nor to be Proselytes. They
rejected all the Scripture, save only the five Books of Moses. Denied the
Resurrection; but held that there were Angels, etc. See Epiphan. Haeres. 9. and
14. and Moses and Aaron, p. 48.

Sambenito (Span.) or Sanbenito, properly santo Benito, St Benet, but it is
usually taken for a coat of course Sackcloth, in which Penitents in Spain are
reconciled to the Church. And in that respect it may be called Sanbenito, quasi
Saco benedicto, a blessed Sackcloth.

Sambu^ (sambuca) an instrument of Music, which we commonly take for a
Dulcimer; Also an Engine of War, set by a rolling Tower, which by Ropes and
Pullies clapped the Bridge suddenly from the Tower to the besieged walls.

Samian (samius) of or pertaining to the Isle Samos, or to an earthen pot, or a
Whetstone; because there were good ones in that Isle.

Samplar (a corruption from Examplar) a pattern or copy to imitate, an extract
or draught; most used for a pattern of several sorts of needlework.

Sampson (Heb.) there the second time.

Samuel (Hebr.) placed of God.

Sanable (sanabilis) that may be healed, curable.

Sanative (sanativus) healing, curing. Bac.

Sance Bell (campana sancta) the sanctus Bell, a little Bell, formerly in every
Church, which was rung when the Priest said Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, Dominus
Deus Sabbath.

S^tification (sanctificatio) a hallowing, sanctifying or making holy; a
separation of things or persons from common or profane use.

Sanctiloquent (sanctiloquus) that speaks holily.

Sanctimony (sanctimonia) holiness, devoutness, religiousness.

Sanction (sanctio) a Law, a Decree established; also a penal Statute.

Sanctuary (sanctuarium) a holy or sanctified place, as Temple, Church or
Chapel. In the old Law it was the most holy place of the Tabernacle wherein
God gave visible tokens of his presence. Psalm. 20.2. And more particularly, it
is a place privileged by the Prince, for the safeguard of offenders lives,
being founded on the Law of Mercy, and on the great reverence and devotion,
which the Prince bears to the place, whereunto he grants such a Privilege. Of
this you may read Stawnf. pl. Cor. lib. 2. ca. 38. This seems to have taken
beginning from the Cities of Refuge which Moses appointed them to fly unto for
safeguard of their lives, that had casually slain a man, Exodus 21. In bastardly
imitation whereof, first the Athenians, then Romulus erected such a place of
immunity, which they, and he after them called Asylum. The Emperors of Rome
made the places of their own Statues or Images, and Churches also places of
Refuge, as appears, Cod. l. 1. tit. 15. But among all other Nations, the
ancient Kings of England seem to have attributed most to these Sanctuaries,
permitting them to shelter such, as had committed both Felonies and Treasons,
so that within Forty days they acknowledged their fault, and submitted
themselves to banishment; During which time, if any man expelled them, if he
were Lay, he was Excommunicated; if a Clerk, he was made irregular; but after
forty days no man might relieve them, see Fleta lib. 1 cap. 29. And how by
degrees they have been taken away, you may read partly in him, and partly in
several Statutes.

Sanctum Sanctorum ( i.e. the Holy of Holys) was the holiest place of the Jews
Temple, where the Ark was kept, and whereinto none entered, but the High Priest;
and he but once a year.

Sandal (Heb. sandal, Lat. sandalium) a Slipper or Pantofle; also a kind of old
fashioned shoo, open and fastened with Latchets on the Instep, such as religious
persons wear. Also

Sandal or Saunders (santalum) a precious wood brought out of India, whereof
there are three kinds, to wit, red, yellow, and white Saunders. They are all of
a cooling nature, especially the red, which is often used in Physic against
hot diseases.

Sandarack (sandaracha) the best red Arsenick or Orpine; a bright Painters red,
whereof there are two kinds; one (the right and better) found in Mines of Gold
and Silver; the other made of burned Ceruse.

Sanglant (Fr.) bloody, bleeding, embrued, or full of blood.

Sanglier (Fr.) a wild Bore, five years old.

Sanguinary (sanguinarius) cruel, thirsty, bloody, desirous of, or delighted
in, shedding blood.

Sanguine Sanguineous (sanguineus) bloody, full of blood, cruel, red. Sanguin
color, is a blood red color, or my Ladies Blush. Sanguin in Heraldry
signifies a murrey color; but is commonly taken for a complexion, most
inclineable to blood.

Sanguin flesh (caro sanguinea) is that which is engendered of blood; of which
sort is the flesh compounded in the Muscles, the Heart, and the rest of Sanguin
Substance; the Anatomists call it the proper flesh; and Exanguis the improper.

Sanguinolent (sanguinolentus) bloody, full of blood, merciless.

Sanhedrim or Sanhedrin, (Hebr.) Synedrion or Synedrium (Gr.) signifies
generally the place where Counselors meet to consult of, and determine
matters; also the Assembly it self; But, by an appropriation of the word, it is
commonly taken for the highest Court of Judicature, or supreme Council of the
Jews, which consisted of the High Priest, and seventy Seniors or Elders; from
which number it was called by them in Hebrew words, signifying, Domus judicii
septuaginta unius, i. a Court of seventy and one Judges; and it was (as it
were) their Parliament, to consult about, to judge and decide the greatest
matters that could arise in their Ecclesiastical or Civil Commonwealth; as, to
determine the Controversies that might happen concerning their High Priest,
true and false Prophets, differences betwixt Nation and Nation, Tribe and
Tribe, etc. This High Court was first (by the commandment of God) instituted in
the Wilderness by Moses, whilst under his conduct, the children of Israel were
on their journey out of Egypt, toward the Land of Promise; and afterward it
continued still in vigor till our Saviors Passion.

Besides this great Sanhedrim called, Sanhedrim Gedola, the Jews had two lesser
or inferior to it; the one consisting of three Judges; to the Examination and
Decision of which Court, the most petty actions were subject; As private
Quarrels, Thefts and the like; this they called by words of their Language,
signifying, Domus judicii trium virum, The Court of three Judges. The other
consisted of twenty and three, and so was termed, Domus judicii viginti trium,
to whose Court belonged the Decision of weightier Suits and capital Causes.

These Courts were erected in several places, according to the exigence and
commodity of their Country, whereas their other supreme Court, after their
possession of the Land of Promise, and the settlement of their Commonwealth,
was only held in Jerusalem; Jews might appeal from those inferior Courts, to
this; but from this there lay no appeal. Four kinds of death were in their
power, Stoning, Burning, Sword, Strangling; and they fasted all that day when
they condemned any to death. See Moses and Aaron, p. 189.

The Talmudists use the word Sinhedriin for the aforesaid great Council.

Synedrians (synedri) are the Counselors, Judges or Members of that Court.

Sanity (sanitas) health, soundness, good estate of wit and memory.

Saniacks or Sansiakes, are Governors of Cities among the Turks.

Sante, Santo^, or Sancton (Span.) a holy man, a great Saint.

Sapphire (sapphirus) a precious stone, so called, brought out of India; the
best are of a deep sky color; This stone is said to be of a cold nature.

Sapid (sapidus) well seasoned, savory, that has a smack.

Sapidity (sapiditas) pleasantness of taste or savor; also pleasantness of talk.

Sapientipotent (sapientipotens) mighty in wisdom, or that by his wisdom and
prudence, is able to bring great things to pass.

Sapor (Lat.) see Sapidity.

Sapphique Verse (so called from Sappho, a famous Poetess, held to be the first
inventor of them) consists of eleven syllables, and has a Trochee, a Spondee,
a Dactyle, and two Trochees immutably; as Nuncius celso veniens Olympo.

After three Verses is inserted an Adonique, of a Dactyle and a Spondee.

Rara juventus. Saraband (Ital. Zarabanda) a kind of lesson in Music, and a
Dance so called.

Sarah (Hebr.) Lady, Mistress or Dame.

Sarcling time, or time of Sarkling, is the time when the Country man weeds
his Corn; and comes from the Lat. (sarculare) or from the Fr. (sarcler) both
which signify to rake or weed.

Sarcasm ( sarcasmus a biting taunt, bitter jest, a manner of scoffing
nippingly.

Sarcinatious (sarcinarius) of or belonging to Packs, Fardels, etc. serving to
carry burdens or loads.

Sarcinate (sarcino) to load with Fardels or Packs; also to patch or sew.

Sarcophage (sarcophagus) a Grave, a Sepulcher, a Tomb; also a stone called
Eat-flesh, because it consumes in forty days, the dead Carcasses enclosed
within it, the Teeth excepted.

Sarcotique (from sarcoma) breeding or belonging to new or superfluous flesh.

Sarculate (sarculo) to rake, to weed up with a hook or other Instrument.

Sardonian Gem (sardonius lapis) a precious stone of a black color, being a
kind of Onyx, and called a Corneol, the best whereof are found in Sardinia, and
therefore so called.

Sardonian Laughter (risus Sardonius) a long and causeless laughter, whereof
the end is sorrowful; so used from the Herb Sardoa, which being of a poisonous
nature, causes men to dye with such a convulsion or contraction of their
sinews, that they seem to grin or laugh. This Herb is like Smalage, and is
found in Sardinia.

Sarmentitious (sarmentitius) belonging to twigs or branches.

Sarplar (sarplera lanae) is a quantity of Wool. This in Scotland is called
Serplathe, and contains fourscore stone; for the Lords of the Council in Anno
1527. decreed four Serpliathes of packed Wool, to contain sixteenscore stone.
The Merchants use now to pay fraught for their goods to Flanders by the Sack;
to France, Spain and England, by the Tun; and to Dantzick, and the Eastern
Seas, by the Serpliath. Skene.

With us in England, a load of Wool (as I have been informed) consists of
eighty Tod, each Tod consisting of two stone, and each stone of fourteen pound.
And that a Sack of wool is in common account equal with a load; and a Sarplar
(otherwise called a Pocket) is half a Sack: Further, that a Pack of Wool is a
Hors-load, which consists of seventeen stone, and two pounds; see Fleta lib. 2.
c. 12.

Sartor (Lat. a Sartio) a Tailor, a Botcher, a Mender of old Garments.

Sassafras, a Tree of great virtue, which grows in Florida of the West Indies,
the Rind whereof has a sweet smell like Cinnamon; it comforts the Liver and
Stomach, and opens Obstructions of the inwards parts, being hot and dry in the
second degree. The best of the Tree is the Root, next the Boughs, then the
body, but the principal goodness of all rests in the Rind. Bull.

Sassinate; see Assassinate.

Satan (Heb.) (Gr. Satanas) an adversary, the Devil, enemy to God, and all
goodness. The Devil took this name from the Hebr. Sitnah, which signifies
hatred or spightfulness.

Satanical (from Satan) devilish, pertaining to the Devil.

Satellite (satelles, itis) one retained to guard a man's person; a Yeoman of
the Guard; a Sergeant, Catch-pole, one that attacheth.

Satiate (satio) to fill, to satisfy, to cloy.

Satiety (satietas) plenty, fullness, glutting, so much as one desires.

Sation ( satio, from sero) a sowing of seed, a planting.

Satisdation (satisdatio) a putting in of Surety or Bail sufficient for
performance of Covenants, or for payment of moneys.

Satorious (satorius) belonging to a Sator, or to him that sows, sets, or
plants.

Satrap (satrapa) a great Ruler, a Peer of a Realm, a Lieutenant, Governor or
President of a Country.

Saturate (saturo) to fill or satisfy with any thing superfluously, to cloy or
glut.

Saturity (saturitas) fullness, plenty, excess.

Saturnals (saturnalia) Feasts dedicated to Saturn, in December, when Servants
had freedom. Macrobius his Saturnals, are Books entreating of the Colloquies
and Passages at some of those Feasts.

Saturn (Saturnus) has the first place among the Planets, but is slowest in
motion, not finishing its course under thirty eight years space. The ancient
Mathematicians attributed Sterility and Mortality, to this Planet; to Jupiter,
happy times, and the beginning of life; To Mars, the cause of all Debates,
Garboils, and War; To Sol, Riches and Treasure; To Venus, Loves and Marriages;
To Mercury, Eloquence and Knowledge; To Luna, the Empire and command over Humid
matters.

Saturn with Alchymists, is used for Lead; with Heralds for Sable.

Saturnian or Saturnine (from Saturnus) barren, dull, heavy, melancholy; also
unlucky or unfortunate.

Satyr (satyra) a kind of Poetry, whereof there seems to have been two kinds;
the one more ancient, which consisted only in variety of Verses; the other more
modern, containing an open reprehension of men's Vices, without respect of
persons.

Satirical (satyricus) of or pertaining to Satyrs; biting, nipping, reproving.

Satyrist, one that writes Satyrs or invectives.

Satyr (satyrus) a Wood-wose; a strange monster, having the body of a man all
hairy, with legs and feet like a Goat, full of motion, and given much to venery
and jeering, which the Poets were wont to call gods of the Woods; these (as
Pliny testifies, lib. 7. cap. 2.) were found in times past in the Eastern
Mountains of India. And St. Hierome in the life of St. Anthony reports, he saw
one of these in his time: Vidi homunculum (inquit) aduncis naribus, and front
cornibus aspera, cui extrema corporis in caprarum pelles desinebant, etc. But
the truth hereof, I will not rashly impugn, nor over boldly affirm. And Satyrs
shall dance there, Isa. 13 21.

Sauciate (saucio) to hurt, to wound, to cut.

Saul (Hebr.) lent of the Lord, or (as some will) Fox.

Saucige (from the Fr. Saucisse) a kind of pudding, well known. The Bolona
Saucige is made of Beef and lean Bacon in equal quantity, flayed and chopped
small with half as much Lard, and some Pepper, Ginger and Salt; then put into a
clean Ox-gut, half a foot long, and laid in salt for two days together, and
after hung up in the smoke. Cot.

Sauitoir or Sautoir (Fr.) the figure of St. Andrews Cross, in Heraldry.

Saxons (the ancient name of our Ancestors in England) were so called from
their use, and wearing a certain Sword or Weapon, made after the fashion of a
Sith, which in the Neatherlands is called a Saisen. These kind of Swords were
anciently written Seaxen or Seaxes; and the Welshmen wrote them Saisons, as
they yet write us. The learned Engelhusus, of this weapon Seaxe, and name
Saxon, has this Latin Rhyme.

Quippe brevis gladius apud illos Saxa vocatur.
Vnde sibi Saxo nomen traxisse putatur.
Saxifical (saxificus) that turns into a stone, or is made stony.

Saxifragrant (saxifragus) that breaks stones, or is broken against stones.

Scabious (scabiosus) mangy, scabby, scurvy.

Scabrous (scabrosus) rough, ragged, uneven, impolite. As a Scabrous style, an
unpleasant kind of writing.

Scaevola. See Scevola.

Scalado (from the Span. Escalada, and that from the Lat. Scala, i. a Ladder) a
scaling or getting up the Ladder; a term of War, and most commonly applied to
the gaining a Castle or Town; by scaling it with Ladders.

Scalar Scalary (scalaris) leaning one way, ladderwise, not bolt upright.

Scale, an eminent place in the City Zant, where, after fourteen days, one
stands and publicly cites offenders. Sands.

Scalae Gemoniae. See Gemony.

Scalp (pericranion) the skin compassing and covering all the skull.

Scalpture (scalptura) a graving in metal, a cutting or scratching.

Scalper or Scalping Iron (scalprum) a Surgeons instrument, to scrape or take
away corrupt flesh from the bones; a Lance to let blood with.

Scandalize (scandalizo) to offend by giving ill example, to give one occasion
to sin or be offended; also to slander or defame.

Scandalum Magna^um (Lat.) is the special name of a wrong done to any high
personage of the Land, as Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles; as
also of the great Officers of the Realm, by false news, or Messages, whereby
debates and discords betwixt them and the Commons, or any scandal to their
persons may arise. An. 2 R. 2. c. 5.

Scanderbeg, i. Great Alexander; the nick name of that valiant Commander George
Castriot, the late terror of the Turks, who is said in his whole life time to
have slain three thousand of them with his own hands.

Scandular (scandularis) pertaining to wooden Tiles, or Shingles.

Scapular (scapularis) belonging to the shoulder. It is also used substantively
for a narrow and square piece of cloth, etc worn by Monks and Friars over the
rest of their Habit, and falling over the shoulders on both sides from the neck
(which goes through it by a slit or hole made for that purpose) down almost to
the foot.

Scarabee (scarabeus) the black fly, bred commonly in Dung, called a Beetle.

Scarifie (scarifico) to lance or open a soar; to make little incisions and
holes or openings, either that the blood and humor may the easier come out, or
to prepare a place for the better extraction of Cupping-Glasses.

Scarification (sacrificatio) a cutting or lancing; a scraping the skin with a
fleam, that one may bleed the better.

Scatinian Law (Lex Scatinia) was a Law made by Scatinius, wherein the use of
preposterous venery was chastised

Scarpe (Fr. Escarpe) a Scarf, worn by Commanders in the Field; and so named in
Heraldry. Leigh.

Scaturiginous (scaturiginosus) that bursts out, or runs over, out of which
water rises.

Scavage, otherwise called Shewage, is a kind of Toll or Custom exacted, by
Majors, and Bailiffs of Cities and Borough Towns, of Merchants for Wares
showed to be sold within their Precinct, which is forbidden by the Statute of
19 H. 7.8. It comes of the Saxon word (Sceaw) to behold or view, or to show;
and hence the word Sceaw-stow, a Theater or Shew-place, a beholding place.
Verstegan.

Scavenger (from the Belg. Sc^avan, i. to scrape or shave away) an Officer well
known in London, that makes clean the streets, by scraping up and carrying away
the dust and dirt. The Germans call him a Drecksimon, from one Simon, who was
appointed Scavenger of Marpurg.

Scelestique (scelestus) wicked, ungracious, mischievous, full of naughtiness.

Scele^on (Gr.) is that which the vulgar call an Anatomy; the whole Fabric or
dry frame of human Bones; The dry carcass of a man or woman, with bones and
ligaments only: For Sceletos in Greek signifies bony, or dry as a bone.

Scellum or Schellum, (from the Belg. Schelm) a Rogue, Villain, or wicked
person; and some times taken in the same sense with Renegado.

Scene (scena) the front or forepart of a Theater or Stage, or the partition
between the Players Vestry, and the Stage; a Comedy or Tragedy, or the division
of a Play into certain parts, viz. first into Acts, those again into Scenes,
which sometimes fall out more, sometimes fewer in every Act; The definition of a
^cene being mutatio personarum. In old time it signified a place covered with
Boughs, or the room where the Players made them ready.

Scenical (scenicus) of or belonging to a Scene, Stage, or Comedy, or to
Players on Stages.

Scenography (scenographia) is the model or draught of any work presented with
its shadows, according as the work it self shows, with its dimensions,
according to the Rules of prospective. Enchir. of Fort. See Sciagraph

Skeptical (scepticus) that contemplates, or always seeks and never finds. The
Philosophers, called Scepticks, were such as used to search into, and consider
much of things, but leave them in suspense, without any determination;
affirming they know nothing; of this Sect Phyrro was Author.

Sce^ticium, the Doctrine or opinion of the Scepticks.

Sceptriferous (sceptrifer) that bears a Scepter.

S^ev^ (scaevitas) unluckiness, lefthandedness.

Scevola (scaevola) the Surname of Q. Mutius, a noble Roman, who voluntarily
burnt off his own right hand, etc. hence the word is used for a lefthanded man,
or one that has but one hand. Br.

Schammat^a (Hebr.) an Excommunication to death; the same with Maranatha; see
Moses and Aaron, p. 183.

Schediasm (schediasma) a sudden invention, or a work extempore.

Schedical (schedicus) hasty, sudden, extemporary, not labored.

Schedule (schedula) a leaf or scroll of Paper or Parchment, containing the
particulars of goods or other things, an Inventory.

Scheme (schema) the outward fashion or habit of any thing, the adorning a
speech with Rhetorical figures.

Schism (schisma) properly a cutting in two, a disagreeing of minds, a division
in the Church of Christ consisting with an unity in matters of Faith.

Schism (says an Author) is an uncharitable division or recession of any member
from the unity of the whole Church As Here^ie is a departing from the Communion
of the Church in respect of Doctrine; so Schism is a dividing or cutting off
ones self for external things.

Schismatic (schismaticus) one that is divided from the external Communion of
the Church.

Schismatical (schismaticus) of, or pertaining to Schism or such division in
the Church.

Scholastica (Gr.) a woman's name; and signifies, leisure from business.

Scholastic (scholasticus) belonging to a Scholar or School, Schollarly.

Scholy or Scholion (scholium) a close, a short or compendious exposition; a
critical note.

And Scholiast, one that writes such Expositions or critical notes.

Sciagraph (schigrapha) a description of the whole frame and contrivance of
every room; as the Carpenters shows with a Lath how the Work will fall out; a
Platform; see Scenography.

Sciamachy (scimachia) a counterfeit fighting, a privy exercise; a shadow or
image of contention or fighting.

Sciater (Lat.) an instrument used in choosing the situation of Cities.

Sciatherical (from Sciathericon) of or pertaining to a Sun-Dial.

Sciatica (Lat.) a Gout in the Hip caused by gross and phlegmatic humors,
gathered in the hollowness of its joint.

Sciatique Vein (Vena sciatica) is seated above the outward ankle.

Science (scientia) cunning, skill, learning, knowledge. The seven Liberal
Sciences are these, Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, Astrology, Geometry,
Arithmetic and Music.

Scientifical (scientificus) of exceeding skill, or wonderful knowledge.

Scimitat; see Scy --

Scintillation (scintillatio) a sparkling up of fire, or new wine leaping in
the glass.

Sciolu^ (sciolus) a smatterer in any knowledge, one that fancies himself to be
a wit, and to know more then indeed he does.

Sciolous, pertaining to such a Sciolist, or smatterer in learning.

Sci^antie (sciomantia) the part of Necromancy, practiced by shadows.

Scion (a scindendo, quia scinditur ex arbore) a Graff, a young Plant, a shoot
or sprig.

Sciotherical; see Sciatherical.

Schiph (scapha) a ship-boat, commonly all of one piece.

Scipper or Schipper, is a Dutch word, signifying the Master of a ship, Ann. 1
Jac. sess* 1. ca. 34. But we usually take Skippers for common Seamen or
Mariners.

Scirpean (scirpeus) of or pertaining to Bulrushes.

Scirrhous (from scirrhus) pertaining to a hard swelling without pain, grown in
the flesh within the skin, caused through choler, thick, cold or clammy phlegm.
Dr. Br.

Scisile or Scissible (scissilis) easy to cut, or that may be cut or divided,

Scissure (scissura) a cleft, a cut or rent; the division or parting of a River.

Scitament (scitamentum) a kind of meat having a very pleasant taste, Also
pleasantness, or a fine or witty thing set to adorn ones talk.

Site (scitum) an Ordinance, Decree, or Statute.

Scolion; see Scholy.

Scom (scomma) a scoff, a mock, a sentence spoken in mirth, that sounds
otherwise then it is meant, by him that speaks it.

Sconce (from the Teut. Schan^s) a Block-house or Fortification in War; also
taken for the Head, because a Sconce or Block-house is made, for the most part
round in fashion of a Head, whence comes the term in Oxford, to Sconce one
(Lat. Mulctare pecunia) i. to set up so much in the Buttery Book upon his head,
to pay, as a punishment for his offense committed. Min.

Scopelism (from the Gr. (...)) rockiness, or the being full of Rocks.

Scop^icks (from the Gr. (...) cavillor) Jests, Jeers, Flouts, Cavils;
sentences or words spoken in mirth, that sound otherwise then they were meant.

Scopulous (scopulosus) full of rocks, very rocky.

Scorbute (scorbutus) the disease called the Scurvy.

Scorbutical, pertaining or subject to that disease.

Scorpion (scorpio) a venomous Worm with seven feet, bearing his sting in his
Tail, with which he strikes mischievously; they may be killed with fasting
spettle of a sound man. Also one of the Twelve Signs; which Vide in Zodiac.
Also a kind of warlike Engine, wherewith to shoot small Arrows or Darts, called
also an Onager, which you shall find described by Marcellinus, l. 23, cap. 3.
Also a kind of Scourge, mentioned 1 Kings 12.12.

Scorrator (Lat) a whoremonger, a hunter of Harlots.

Scot and Lot ( An. 33. H. 8. cap. 19.) signifies a customary contribution laid
upon all Subjects after their ability. Scot comes from the Fr. Escot, i.
symbolum, a shot. Rastal says, it is a certain custom or common Tallage made to
the use of the Sheriff or his Bailiff. Scot (says Camden) illud dicitur quod ex
diversis rebus in unum acervum aggregatur. And in this sense it is still used;
for when Good-fellows met at the Tavern or Alehouse, they at parting, call for
a Shot, Scot, or Reckoning: And he is said to go Scot-free, that pays not his
part or share toward it.

Scotists (scotistae) those that follow the opinions of Joannes Scotus,
otherwise called John Duns, the subtle Doctor, who was born (as some contest)
in Scotland, as others, in the North of England; he was a Minorite, very
eminent in Scholastic Divinity, and died young at Colen in the year 1308. his
followers are opposers of the Thomists.

Scotomy (scotoma) a disease in the head; with a dimness in the eyes, which
makes all things seem to go round. This word comes from the Greek, and is the
same with Vertigo in Latin.

Scotomatical (scotomaticus) that is troubled with such a whimsey in the head.

Scottering (unde, nescio) in Herefordshire, Boys at the latter end of Harvest
use to burn a wad of Pease in the Straw, which they call a Scottering, and eat
the Pease, being so parched.

Scovel (from the Italian Scovola) a Malkin to make clean an Oven; hence
perhaps our word Shovel.

Scout (Belg. Schouwt, Fr. Escoute) a discoverer or forerunner of an Army, or
one sent out to espy, and bring tidings of the enemies purpose. In Holland they
have an Officer in their Towns called a Scout, who is chosen by the States,
and, with the Balues, have the judging of all criminal matters in last resort,
without Appeal, and have also the determining civil causes, appealable to the
Hague.

Screable (screabilis) that may be spitted out.

Scribes (scribae) mentioned in Scripture, their office was twofold. 1. To read
and expound the Law in the Temple and Synagogues. 2. To execute the office of a
Judge, in ending and composing Actions. Heyl.

Scriptorian (scriptorius) belonging to, or serving for writing.

Scrofulous (from scrofula) pertaining to, or full of Wens or such tumors about
the neck

Scru^, is a kind of fuel, which poor people (when siring is dear) gather up at
^b^ng water, in the bottom of the Thames about London, and (...) of Coal,
little sticks of W^, Cockle-shells, and the like.

Scruple (scriptulum) is of Troy weight seven grains and an half; the third
part of a dram, and a dram, the third part of an ounce. Also doubtfulness or
overmuch fear to offend, in point of conscience.

Scrupular (scrupularis) of or belonging to a scruple, small.

Scrupulosity (scrupulositas) curiousness of conscience, anxiety, doubtfulness.

Scrutable (scrutabilis) that may be searched or traced out

Scrutiny (scrutinium) a search or diligent enquiry; a perusal of Suffrages.

Sculptor (Lat.) a graver or carver.

Sculpture (sculptura) a graving or carving.

Scurrile (scurrilis) pertaining to scoffing or fancy jesting.

Scurrility (scurrilitas) immoderate jesting, saucy scoffing.

Scutage; see Escuage.

Scutchin; see Thole.

Scutchion (from Scutum) a Coat of Arms, or Shield. See Escotcheon. It is
sometimes also taken for the bud of a Tree, cut off with part of the bark for
inoculation.

Scutiferous (scutifer) that bears a Buckler or Shield.

Scutiform (in forma scuti) fashioned like a Scutcheon or Shield.

Scylla, a gulf or dangerous place in the Sicilian Sea; see Charibdis.

Scymitar or Scimitar (Italian Scimitara) a crooked flat backed short sword
used by the Turks and Persians.

Scytale (scytala) a field Mouse, etc. Also a little round staff, which the
Lacedaemonians used to write secret letters on. And in this sense my Lo. Bacon
uses it, in his Advan. of Learning, fol. 268.

Seater, an old Idol of the Saxons, which was honored on the day called
Saturday, which thence took denomination. This Idol was also called Crodo, and
by some mistaken for Saturn.

Scythian Scythick (scythicus) belonging to Scythia, a large Country in the
north part of the World.

Sea-longs, the fervent froth of the Sea. Bac.

Seax, a kind of sword made like a Sith, and worn by the old Saxons, of which
there were two sorts, a longer and a shorter, which last were called
Handseaxes; Of this kind of Handseaxes, Erkin-wine, King of the East Saxons did
for his Arms bear three, Argent, in a field Gules. Verst. See Saxon.

Sebacean (sebaceus) made of tallow or sewet.

Sebastian (Gr.) honorable, or Majestical.

Sebastocrator (Gr.) was a great Officer of the Empire, who (about Constantine
the Greats time) was third in dignity from the Emperor, the second was called
Despot.

Secament (secamentum) that which is cut or shread from a Log or Block, as
chips, and such like.

A Secant, is a right line drawn from the Center, through one extreme of a
given Ark, till it meet with the Tangent raised from the Diameter at the other
extreme of the said Ark.

Secation (secatio) a cutting, sawing, parting, or dividing.

Secerne (secerno) to divide, to lay or separate one from another, to sever, to
choose from among others.

Secession (secessio) a departing from other, a forsaking or going aside; a
separating ones self from another. In ancient Rome it was a general
Insurrection and revolt of the Commons, wherein they left the City, until such
time as they had the authority of their Tribunes strengthened; yea, and certain
Laws enacted and established by a solemn oath, with a curse denounced against
all those that went about to abrogate or abolish the same, which thereupon were
called Sacratae Leges. Livy.

Seclude (secludo) to shut a part from other, to shut out, to put away.

Seclusory (seclusorium) a place where any thing is shut up a part from other;
a Coop.

Secondary; see Secundary.

Secundine (secundae; quasi secunda nativitas) the three skins, wherein an
Infant lies while it is in the womb, or when it comes into the world; the
second or afterbirth in women; in Beasts the Heam.

Sectary (sectarius) one that follows private opinions in Religion, a
Ringleader of a Sect, a seditious, factious person.

Section (sectio) a cutting, dividing or parting.

Books are commonly divided into Chapters, Chapters into Sections, and Sections
into Paragraphs or Breaks, as Printers call them; which is the breaking off at
such a word, and beginning a new line.

Sective (sectivus) that is often, or that may be, cut or divided.

Sector (Lat.) in Geometry is a figure comprehended of two right lines,
containing an angle at the Center, and of the circumference assumed by them.
There is also a Geometrical Instrument having two legs, containing all variety
of Angles, and the distance of the feet, representing the Subtences of the
circumference, which is therefore called a Sector.

Secular (secularis) of or belonging to the space of one hundred years, that is
done or renewed every hundred year, or once in an age.

Secular Plays (ludi seculares) were solemn Games or Plays among the ancient
Romans, performed once in a hundred and ten years, and sometimes every
hundredth year, in honor of Apollo or Diana.

Secular Priests, are those whose ordinary conversation is among men of the
world, and profess the undertaking the charge of Souls, as condistinct from
those that profess a Monastical or Conventual life, under the Rule of some holy
Predecessor, and thence are called Regulars.

Secundary (secundarius) of the second sort, the second, the next to the first.
As the Secundary of the Fine Office, is an Officer next to the chief Officer;
Secundary of the Counter, who is (as I take it) next to the Sheriff in London,
in each of the two Counters, and so of others.

Secundate (secundo) to make lucky or prosperous, to make better or amend a
thing.

Secundine. See Secondine.

Securiferous (sceurifer) that bears an Ax or Hatcher.

Sedateness, quietness, mitigation; the same with Sedation. O. Lo. Prot. Speech.

Sedation (sedati^) an appeasing, mitigating, asswaging, qualifying or quieting.

Sedentary (sedentarius) that sits much, that is done sitting. In France they
have eight Sedentary Parliaments or High Courts of Justice, which are so
called, because they are always sitting. See Parliament.

Sediment (sedimentum) a sinking down to the bottom, or that sinks to the
bottom; grounds, the dregs or dross of perfume. Bac.

Seditious (seditiosus) contentious, mutinous, factious, loving discord. Mr
Feltham, uses Seditiary, for a seditious person.

Seduction (seductio) a seducing, a leading away, aside, or apart, a
misleading, a deceiving.

Sedulity (sedulitas) care and great diligence.

Segador (Span.) a Reaper, a Mower, a Harvest-man.

Segment (segmentum) a morsel, shred, piece or gobbet cut off from any thing, a
partition. Br.

Segmentation (segmentatio) a cutting into small pieces, an embroidering.

Segnity (segnitas) negligence, slowness, slothfulness; also barrenness.

Segregate (segrego) to take out of the flock, to lay apart, to sever or
separate.

Seian horse (so called from Cneus Sejanus, who first backed him) was of
extraordinary bigness and wonderful composure, but had this fatal property, to
bring his Master to some miserable or untimely end. Whence grew the proverb,
Equum habet Sejanum, a man has that which will be his own ruin.

Sejant or Seisant (from the Fr. Seant) a term in Heraldry, when a beast is
painted sitting upright.

Seignior (Fr. Seigneur) a Lord, a Master; a Landlord, or a Lord of
Jurisdiction, a proprietary or owner.

Seigniory Seigniorage (Fr. Seigneury, Seigneuriage) Seignory, Soverainty,
mastery, dominion.

Seigniorage. An. 9. H. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 1. seems to be a Regality or
Prerogative of the King, whereby he challenges allowance of gold and silver,
brought in the mass to his Exchange for coin.

Seisin (from the Fr. Saisine) signifies in our Common Law, possession; and to
seize, is to take possession; Primier seisin, is the first possession, etc.

Sejugate (sejugo) to sever or separate from other, to put apart.

Sejunction (sejunctio) a separating or putting asunder.

Selenites (Gr.) a stone wherein is a white which increases and decreases as
the Moon does; Also lunary men, or people that are held by some to inhabit the
Moon.

Selion (Fr. seillon) a ridge of land lying between two furrows; Sometimes it
contains an Acre, sometimes half an Acre, sometimes more or less. Therefore
Crompton in his Jurisdictions, fol 221. says, a Selion of land cannot be in
demand, because it is a thing uncertain.

Seliander, is a kind of dry scab, growing in the very bent of the Ham of a
horses hinder leg. Markham.

Sellary (sellaria) a place wherein were forms and stools for men to sit on. It
is used by Tacitus in his Annals for that place where Tiberius exercised his
horrid and unnatural lusts.

Semblable (Fr.) like, alike, even such, resembling.

Semblance (Fr.) show, seeming appearance: Also resemblance, likeness, like
form or feature.

Sembrief (q. Semibrief) a slow time in Music.

Sementation (sementatio) a bringing forth seed.

Sementine (sementinus) belonging to sowing, continuing to seed time.

Semi or Semis (from the Gr. (...)) a word much used in composition, for half.

Semicastration (semi castratio) half gelding, the taking away one Testicle. Br.

Semicircular (semicircularis) that has the form of a half Circle.

Semicolon, half a Colon, or a point in writing or printing made thus [;] the
Colon thus [:] most commonly in or near the middle of a sentence; the Period
thus [.] the Comma thus [,] the Admiration point thus [!] as when we say, O
tempora! O mores! The Interogation point thus [?] when we ask any question. A
Circumflex is over the second [a] when we say amasti, for amavisti; An
Apostroph is when some vowel is cut off; 'twas, for it was, and the like.

Semi-cupe, is a half Bath, up to the navel of the patient.

Semidole (semidolium) a vessel containing half a Tun, a Pipe.

Semiferous (femifer) half wild.

Semihore (semihora) half an hour.

Simimarin^ (semimarinus) belonging partly to the Sea, partly to the Land.

Seminality (from semina) a belongingness to seed; an aptness to have or bear
seed. Br.

Seminary (seminarium) a seed plot, a place where plants are set to be removed;
a Nurcery, a tree whereof Plants and Graffs are taken; Also the first beginning
or chief cause of any good or evil; and by metaphor, a College, or Nursery of
young Students.

Seminate (semino) to sow, breed or engender.

Seminifical (seminificus) that causes or brings forth seed for generation.
Males are said to be seminifical and pubescent, at fourteen years of age, as
Aristotle says, bis septem annis exactis, etc. Br.

Semipeda (semipedalis) half a foot in quantity or height.

Semipelagians, a Sect differing from the Pelagians only in this, that grace
was necessary to the perseverance in good works, though not to the beginning of
them; see Pelagians.

Semitate (semito) to make paths, to divide into paths or ways.

Semivowels (semivocales) certain Consonants so called, because they have half
the sound of Vowels, as f, l, m, n, s, Therefore of old s, and still m, in the
end of words before vowels are cut off like vowels; see Not. Hist fol, 46.

Semiustulated (semiustulatus) half burned, half roasted or broiled.

Sempiternal (sempiternus) perpetual, endless, lasting, always, continual,
immortal, eternal.

Semuncial (semuncialis) of or belonging to half an ounce.

Senarie (senarius) that contains or belongs to the number six. A verse of six
feet.

Senatorian (senatorius) of or belonging to a Senator, or Councellor of State.

Senescal (Fr. Seneschal) a Steward. As the High Seneschal or Steward of
England. Pl. Cor. fol. 152. It is also used for the Steward of a Court. Kitch.
fol. 83.

Senescent (senescens) waxing old, gowing in age, wearing away, drawing to the
wain.

Senesce (senesco) to wax old, to grow in age, to begin to decay or wear away.

Senior (Lat.) the elder.

Sensation (sensatio) prudence, intelligibleness, sensibleness; Also the
exercise or art of the Senses.

Sensiferous (sensifer) that brings sense or feeling.

Sensory, the organs or powers of the five Senses, or of apprehending, thinking
or judging. Bac. Not. Hist.

Sensuality (sensualitas) libertinism, epicurism, the pleasing of sense,
contentment given to the appetite, satisfaction to the flesh.

Sententiosity (sententiositas) fullness of sentences, which are concise and
pithy pieces of wit, containing much matter in few words.

Sententious (sententiosus) full of sentences, pithy, full of matter.

Sentinel (Fr.) a Sentry, a Common Soldier appointed to stand and watch in a
certain place.

Separatory (Fr. separatoire) the Chizel or Instrument, wherewith Chyrurgegeons
cut out the pieces of bones, left between the holes, which they bore with a
Trepan.

Separatist (separans) one that separates, severs or withdraws himself from the
communion of the Church.

Sepiment (sepimentum) an hedge, pale, mound or enclosure.

Seplasiator (Lat.) he that makes sweet ointments.

Seposition (sepositio) a putting apart, or laying aside, a separating or
distinguishing.

Sept (septum) a Park or any place enclosed, a fold for sheep.

Septs, are multitudes of the same name, and pretended Family or Lineage in
Ireland, so called.

Septangular (septangulus) that has seven corners, a Septangle.

Septemfluous (septemfluus) divided or flowing into seven branches or streams,
that flows seven contrary ways, that has seven currents.

Septempedal (septempedalis) belonging to seven feet, that is seven foot long.

Septemvirate (septemviratus) the authority of seven Officers in like power.

Septenarious Septenary (septenarius) of or belonging to seven, containing
seven in number.

Septenary, is also used substantively, for a seventh, a proportion or number
of seven.

Septennial (septennis) of seven years space.

Septentrional (septentrionalis) belonging to the North, northern.

Septical (septicus) putrifactive or corrosive; that makes rotten or ripe, as
mattar in a sore.

Septifarious (septifarius) of seven manner of fashions, sorts or ways.

Septifluous; see Septemfluous.

Septimane (septimana) a week or seven-night; also whatsoever falls out on the
seventh day, month, year, etc.

Septimarians, certain Officers in Monasteries, which were chosen every week,
whence they took name.

Septuagenary (septuagenus) pertaining to seventy or threescore and ten.

Septuagesima, is a Sunday certain, being always the next but one before Shrove
Sunday, from which, till the Octaves of Easter, the solemnizing of marriage is
by the Cannon Laws forbidden; that being a time of mourning, for the fall of
Adam, and misery of man thereon ensuing; And Easter with its Octaves is a time
of Christ's glorification, and so of ours also in him, for his, and, by him, our
conquest over death and sin; And that therefore all carnal affection ought
during that space to be wholly mortified in us. See Quinquagesima.

Septuagesimal (septuagesimus) pertaining to the number seventy, or
Septuagesima Sunday.

Septuagints (septuaginta) properly signify the seventy Translators of the
holy Bible out of Hebrew into Greek, who were in truth Seventy two (viz) six
chosen out of every one of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, by Eleazer the
High Priest, at the request of Prolomaeus Philadelphus King of Egypt, for the
richest ornament of his memorable Library. These by compendious speech are
called the seventy Interpreters, as the Centum viri, among the Romans, who were
indeed One hundred and five, three out of a Tribe, and thirty five Tribes.
Budaeus.

Septuary (from Septem) may be applied to any thing composed of the number
seven. Dr. Br. uses it for a week, consisting of seven days.

Septuncial (septuncialis) of seven ounces, or seven parts of the whole.

Sepulchral (sepulchralis) of or belonging to a Grave or Sepulcher.

Sepulchred, buried, put, or made into a Sepulcher. Bac.

Sepuli^ (sepelio) to bury, interr, or lay in the Earth.

Sepulture (sepultura) a laying in the ground, a burying, an interring or
intombing.

Sequel (sequela) the following, consequence, issue, or success of a thing;
also a train or retinue.

Sequences (sequencia) answering Verses, or Verses that answer one another
sequentially; things that follow one another in order.

Seques^er Sequestiate (sequestro) to separate a thing in controversy, from
the possession of both those that contend for it. And this is double, Voluntary
sequestration or Judiciary. Voluntary is that which is used by the consent of
both parties: Judiciary is that which the Judge of his Authority does, whether
the parties will or not. Cow. In what sense it has been of late years used,
very many know by sad experience.

Sequestrator (Lat) is he that puts a thing in controversy into another man;
hand; or rather the third person, who takes a thing in controversy between
two. But it is now usually taken for an Officer, that receives the Rents of
Recusants or Delinquents Estates, for the use of the Commonwealth.

Seraglio (the Turkish word is Serai, borrowed from the Persian Seraw, which
signifies a house) is that place in Constantinople, where the Grand Signor
resides with his Court; the description whereof, you may see at large in Mr.
Rob. Withers Book, published by Mr. Greaves, 1650.

Serain (Fr.) a foggy mist or dampish vapor, falling in Italy about Sunset, at
which time it is unwholsom to be abroad there, especially bare-headed; mildew;
also the fresh and cool air of the evening.

Seraph, a Turkish coin of fine gold, worth about a French crown.

Seraphim (Heb: i. fulgentes aut comburentes; so called for their burning with
divine love and charity) the highest order of the celestial Hierarchy of
Angels. See Hierarchy.

Seraphical (from Seraphin) celestial, inflamed with divine love, like a
Seraphim; also fiery or burning.

Seraphis, a Serpent, worshipped by the Egyptians as a God.

Serenade (Fr.) evening music at the door or under the window of a lovely or
beloved creature.

Serenity (serenitas) fair, and clear weather, quietness, calmness.

Sergeant at Law (or of the Coyf) is the highest degree, taken in that
profession, as a Doctor of the Civil Law, etc. with what solemnity these
Sergeants are created, read Fortescu. c. 50. and Coks Reports.

Sergeanty (from the Fr. Sergeant, or Sergent, i. one retained to guard ones
person) signifies in our Common Law, a service due to the King, from his Tenant
holding by such service; For this service cannot be due to any Lord from his
Tenant, but to the King only. And this is either grand or petit, as you shall
find in Littletons Tenures, and Br. l. 2. c. 26.

Sergreant, a term in Heraldry, applied only to the Griffin, so called.

Sericated (sericatus) clothed with, or attired in silk.

Series (Lat.) an order, succession or process in any matter hanging well
together; a row, an issue or descent of kindred; a race or course.

Sermocinate (sermocinor) to talk or commune with.

Serosity (serositas) the waterishness or thinner parts of the mass of blood
(answering to whay in milk) which floats upon it after it has been let out of a
vein; also the whayish or waterish moisture drawn by the Kidney from all parts
of the body, and, after some concoction, termed urine.

Serous, pertaining to such waterishness, or moisture, etc.

Serotine Serotinous (serotinus) that is in the evening, late, lateward.

Serpentine (serpentinus) of or belonging to Serpents; under which general name
all vermin that creep on the belly, as Snakes, Adders, etc. are contained.
Also winding, wrigling or crooking.

Serpentine verses, are those which do, as it were, run into themselves, as we
see Serpents pictured with tail in mouth: So these verses begin and end with
the same word. As that of Juvenal.

Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. Also a kind of warlike
Engine called a Serpentine or Basilisco.

Serpet, a kind of Basket.

Serred (Fr. serre) compact, contracted, bound fast. Bac.

Servable (servabilis) that may be kept or preserved.

Servet; see Sherbet.

Servile (servilis) pertaining to a servant or bondage; slavish.

Servitude (servitudo) bondage, slavery, thraldom, servility.

Serviteur (Fr.) a servitor, servant, Serving-man, Attendant or Waiter. We use
the word Servitor in our Universities, where the poor or meaner sort of
Scholars (that have not wherewith sufficiently to maintain themselves) execute
the Office of a Servitor or Attendant to those of greater wealth and quality.

Sesquialteral (sesquialter) that which contains one and an half, or the whole
and half again, as six to four.

Sesquipedal (sesquipedalis) of a foot and half in measure.

Sesquipedalian, one that is a foot and a half high. Sesquipedalian words
(verba sesquipedalia) used by Horace for great, stout, and lofty words; words
that are very long, consisting of many syllables.

Sesquitertian (sesquitertius) which contains as much as another, and a third
part more; as twelve to nine.

Session (sessio, a sedeo) a sitting; Sessions are usually taken for the
quarterly sitting of Justices in Court, otherwise called General Sessions. An.
5. Eliz. ca. 4. or Open Sessions. ibid. There are also other kinds of Sessions,
of which see Cromp. J. of P. fol. 109, 110.

Sesterce Sesterc^e (sestertius) a coin among the Romans, whereof Denarius
contained four, and is so called quasi Semitertius, for it contained two and a
half of the brazen coin called As, and it is marked with this figure, H- S.
which signifies two pound and a half. Of our money it valued about three half
pence farthing; Or (as the Translator of ^ Tacitus computes it) three half
pence farthing, and half farthing. This Character H-S. two capital II. and the
letter S thus coupled together, stood for Sestertius, others say the true
character was L L.S.

Sestine (Fr.) a Stanza of six verses.

Sethim or Setim, a tree like a white Thorn, the timber whereof never rots. Of
this tree was made the holy Ark of the Old Testament; see Ark.

Setigerous (setiger) that bears or has bristles on his back.

Severians (so called from Severus their first founder) a sort of Heretics
that condemned marriage, abstained from eating flesh and drinking wine, etc.

Sevidical (saevidicus) that speaks cruel and rigorous words, that threateneth.

Sevil; see Sivil.

Sevocation (sevocatio) a calling a part or aside, a withdrawing from.

Sewel, a paper, clout or any thing hanged up to keep a Deer from entering into
a place. A term of Hunting.

Sewer or Sewar, has two significations, one applied to him that ushers or
comes in before the meat of the King or other great Personage, and places it
on the Table, etc. The other, to such passages or gutters, as carry water into
the Sea or River, in Lawyers Latin called Sewera, A. 6. H. 6. c. 5. And there
are Commissions of Sewers usually granted under the Great Seal, authorizing
certain persons, to see Dreins and Ditches well kept and maintained in the
Marish and Fen Countries, for better conveyance of the water into the Sea, and
preserving the grass for food of Cattle. This word is probably derived from the
Fr. (issue) an issue or going forth, as if we should call them Issuers, because
they give issue or passage to the water, etc. And the Latin word (suera)
sometimes used in these Commissions, is a competent reason for this conjecture.
See Fitz. not. br. in Oyer and Terminer. I have heard of an old French book
containing the Officers of the King of Englands Court as it was anciently
governed, wherein, he whom we now call Sewer, was called Asseour, which comes
from the Fr. (Asseoir) to settle or place, wherein his Office in setting down
the meat is well expressed. And Sewer, as it signifies such an Officer, is by
Fleta Latined Assessor, a setter down, lib. 2. ca. 15.

Sexagesima Sunday, is always the Sunday next before Shrove Sunday, and is so
called either for being the sixth before Passion Sunday, or the second before
Quadragesima Sunday, reckoning backward from Quadragesima to Quinquagesima, and
thence to Sexagesima, and so to Septuagesima.

Sexennial (sexennis) that is six years old, or of six years standing.

Sextant (sextans) a coin less then that called Quadrant by the third part; a
certain weight being two ounces, by some called Obolus, by others the sixth
part of any measure, sum or quantity that is divided into twelve parts; also
two inches. The sixth part of Jugerum. Varro.

Sextantary (sextantarius) belonging to that measure or weight.

Sextary (sextarius) a measure or weight; the Roman Sextary contains of Wine or
wheat, two pound Roman, that is 24 ounces, a pound and an half averdupois
weight, less then the Paris pint by eight ounces. You may try it, following
Glareans rule, by making a measure four inches long, by square three inches
deep, and as many broad, which is the true Sextary; according to this account,
it is just our pint and a half; for in our Wine pint are but sixteen ounces.
Physicians assign but eighteen ounces, or at the most twenty to Sextarius, and
then it is but two or four ounces more then our pint. Sextarius after Geo.
Agricola, contains two Heminae, one pound measure and eight ounces, that is
twenty ounces or inch measures. Sextarius of Oil is sixteen ounces, five drams
and one scruple; of wine 18 ounces and an half, two Siliquies, two grains, and
two third parts of a grain. Tho.

Sexte, a part of the Canon Law, added to the decretals.

Sexten, seems to be corrupt from sacristan, which see.

Sextery; see Sacristy.

Sextile or Sextilian month (Sextilis) the month of August, so called,
because it is the sixth from March, which was the first month of the year with
the Romans.

Shackbolt or Shackle, a prisoners Bolt, a Fetter, or Give.

Sextule (sextula) the sixth part of an ounce, that is a dram and a scruple;
also a measure of Land.

Sextuple (sextuplus) six-fold, or that contains, or is made of the number six.
A time in Music, containing six Crotchets to a Bar, appropriated chiefly to
Sarabands.

Shallop (from the Fr. Schalupe, or Lat. Scapha, a Boat, or perhaps from
shallow-up, because, being a small Vessel, it goes up into shallow places) a
small Boat so called, Also a kind of Shel-fish.

Shamots or Chamois, a kind of wild Goat, whose skin, being rightly dressed,
makes our true Shamois Leather.

Shafment, is a kind of measure used in some parts of England, and is the
breadth of a man's hand, and the length of the thumb.

Shamsheer, the usual Sword among the Persians, not unlike the Turkish
Scymitar; for (Mr. Herb. says) it is crooked like a Crescent, and sharp as a
Razor. Fol. 147.

Shash, is the whole piece (be it long or short) of fine linen, of which the
Turbant is made, but the name of the Linen is Telbent; whence we falsely call
that which a Turk wears about his head a Turbant, whereas the true name is
Saruck, and the Turks themselves so call it; it comes from Sarnack, which
signifies to join about, or to swathe.

Shaw, in the Persian Tongue, is a King; and Potshaw an Emperor. Herb. Tr.

Shekel; see Sicle.

Sherbet or Serbet (in the Persian Tongue, it signifies pleasant liquor) is a
kind of drink in great request, both in Turkey and Persia, and is compounded
of juice of Lemons, Sugar, Amber, and other ingredients; another sort of it is
made of Violets, Honey, juice of Raisons, and the like. Others say Sherbet is
an Arabic word, and signifies drink in general.

Sherry Sack, so called from Zeres, a Sea Town of Corduba in Spain, where that
kind of Sack is made.

Scewage; see Scavage.

Skeyn, a kind of long knife, or short sword, anciently and still used by the
Irish Kernes. Antiq. Hiber. p. 57.

Shibboleth or Schibboleth (Hebr. i. spica) by the pronounciation of this word,
the Galaadites (who fought for, and under Jepthe, the Judge of Israel)
discovered the Ephramites to be their enemies, and not Galaadites, as they
pretended to be for their safety; for when they were taken by the true
Galaadites at the passages over Jordan (through which they endeavored to
escape) they ceuld not pronounce Shibboleth or Schibboleth, but Sibboleth which
cost two and forty thousand of them their lives at that time, Judges cap. 12.
Hence the word is usually taken for a word of trial, to discern Citizens from
Aliens; Friends from Foes. See Pichigni.

Shilo or Shiloh (Hebr i. missus) is mentioned in the Prophecy of Jacob, where
it is said, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come, that is,
till our Savior come, Genesis 49.10. The word signifies a Prosperer or Safe-maker.

Waters of Shiloah; see in Waters.

Shingle (from the Teut. Schindel, and that from Scindo) a Slate or Lath of
wood to cover houses.

Shingles (a cingendo) a disease about the Breast, Belly, or Back, the place
affected, looking red and increasing circle-wise more and more, it is chiefly
cured with Cats blood; if it go round the body, it kills.

Shoud, a Justice of Peace among the Turks

Shrew, a kind of Field-Mouse, which if he go over a beasts back, will make him
lame in the Chine; and if he bite, the beast swells to the heart and dies. Gesn.
From hence came our English phrase, I beshrew thee, when we wish ill; and we
call a cursed woman, a Shrew.

Shrift or Shriving (Sax.) perhaps from Scrinium, quasi revelare peccata, ab
intimo scrinio) was anciently taken for auricular Confession.

Shrove-tide, from the Sax. Shrive or Shrift, and the Belg. Tide, i. tempus, a
time of shriving or confessing sins; for about that time the Roman Catholics
use to confess their sins and receive the Blessed Sacrament, to the end they
may the more religiously observe the holy time of Lent, then immediately
ensuing.

Shrine (scrinium) that which contained the body of a Saint, or the place where
such a body was buried or intombed.

Sialoquent (sialoquus) that spits much in his speech.

Sibilate (sibilo) to whistle or hiss. Bac.

Sibils; see Sybils.

Siccaneous (siccaneus) dry of nature, that has no Rivers or Springs to water
it.

Siccifical (siccificus) that has power to make dry.

Siccity (siccitas) dryness, drouth, lack of sap or moisture, barrenness.

Sicilian Vesperas; see Vesperas.

Sicle or Shekel ( siclus, from the Hebrew shakel, i. librare) as well a kind
of coin both of Silver and Gold, as a weight among the Jews; on one side of the
silver Shekel was carved a pot with Manna, and this Inscription in Hebrew, The
Shekel of Israel; on the other, Aarons Rod, with this, Holy Jerusalem; this
(which was called the Holy Shekel) was worth of our money about two shillings
six pence; the common Shekel half so much, in weight half an ounce, Exodus
30.13. Genesis 23 15, 16. And from thence comes our word Skale, to weigh with; see
Moses and Aaron, p. 265.

Sidelayes, A term of Hunters, and is when Dogs are laid in the way to be let
slip at a Deer, as he passes by.

Sidemen, alias Questmen, those that are yearly chosen according to the custom
of a Parish, to assist the Churchwardens in the inquiry and presenting such
offenders to the Ordinary, as are punishable in the Court Christian.

Sideral (sideralis) belonging to stars or Planets.

Siderated (sideratus) blasted, stricken with a Planet, taken, benumbed. Br.

Sidereal Siderean (siderus) of or like stars, shining, bright; heavenly.

Siderite (siderites) an iron-like stone, which (as some imagine) has power to
set men at variance; Also the Lodestone.

Sigalion, an Image in Egypt, that by pressing his fingers on his lips, seemed
to command silence.

Sigillar (sigillaris) belonging to a seal or mark.

Sigiliative (sigillatus) sealable, that is apt, or has strength to seal, or
mark; made of wax. Bac.

Sigismund (Germ.) victorious, peace, or victory with peace; that Sig signifies
victory, Alfric, Dasipodius and Luther all agree, yet Hadr. Junius turns it
victorious or prevailing speech.

Sigles (siglae) notes, breviatures, initial Letters set for words. As S.P.D.
for Salutem plurimam dicit, etc.

Signacle (signaculum) a sign, seal, mark or character.

Signatory (signatorius) that is used or serves to seal withal; As Annulus
signatorius, a Seal-Ring, a Signet.

Signature (signatura) a subscribing, a sign manual, ones hand or mark set to a
writing, a signing of a Notary. Among Printers the mark or letter they set at
the bottom of every sheet printed, as A, B, C, etc. to tell their Quires by,
and distinguish one sheet from another, is called the Signature.

Signaturist, one that seals, marketh, brandeth.

Signiferous (signifer) that bears a sign, Standard or Image.

Silentiary (silentiarius) an Usher or Crier, who sees good rule and silence
kept.

Silery or Cilery, Drapery or foliage wrought on the heads of Pillars and
Posts, and made as cloth and leaves turning diverse ways; it comes from Siler,
an Osier or small With, because Silery ofttimes resembles it; see Drapery.

Silicious (siliceus) of or pertaining to flint, flinty.

Sillogism; see Syllogism.

Sillographer (sillographus) a writer of scoffs, taunts and revilings; such was
Timon.

Silvestrous; see in Syl --

Silurist (from silures) a Native of, or one that lives in, South Wales.

Simbal; see Cimbal.

Similar Similary parts (parts simulares) parts (of the body) of one
substance, and which (though divided) retain the name of the whole. And
Dissimulary parts differ from the whole, as Nerves, Bones, and the like. See
Dissimilary.

Simitar; see Scymitar.

Simmetry; see Symmetry.

Simon (Hebr.) obedient, listening. Philo.

Simony (simonia) the buying or selling of Church Livings, or other spiritual
things for money. It first took denomination from Simon Magus, a Sorcerer of
Samaria, who offered money to the Apostles, that he might have power to give
the Holy Ghost to any he should lay his hands on, for which attempt he was
sharply reproved by St. Peter.

Simoniakes (from Simon Magus) those that buy or sell Church Livings or other
spiritual things. It is also a general name for all Heretics, because (as St.
Irenaeus says) Simon was the Father of them all.

Simoniacal (from Simonia) pertaining to Simony.

Simous (simus) flat nosed.

Simplis^ (simplista) an Herbalist; one that understands or professes to
understand the nature of Simples, Plants and Drugs.

Simulacre (simulacrum) an Image of a man or woman, the proportion of any
thing, the shadow, figure, semblance or pattern of a thing.

Simulation (simulatio) a feigning, a counterfeiting, a making of resemblance,
a dissembling, a color or pretense.

Simuleaneous (from simultas) that is privily displeased, or hates with
dissembling countenance. Le Str.

Sina, a Mountain in Arabia, where the Law of God was given to Moses; called
also Horeb.

Sinapism (sinapismus) a Medicine, Ointment or Salve, made of Mustard, serving
to raise blisters or wheals on the skin.

Sindic; see Syndic.

Sindon (Gr.) very fine Linen; as Cambrick, Lawn, etc.

Sing-cantor; see Succentor.

Single, the tail of a Deer among Huntsmen.

Sinister (Lat.) pertaining to, or that is on the left hand; unlucky,
unfortunate, contrary.

Sinisterity (sinisteritas) unhandsomness, frowardness, lack of grace in doing
a thing.

Sinon, a perfidious Grecian that betrayed Troy, etc. from whence all
perfidious persons may be called Sinons.

Sinoper (sinopis) a red stone, commonly called Ruddle.

Sinopical (sinopicus) of or belonging to that Stone.

Sion; see Scion.

Siphack (Arabic) the inner Rim of the belly, which is joined to the Cawl,
where the Intrailes are covered. A term in Anatomy.

Si-quis is a little Bill set up in some open place upon a Post or Wall; and is
so called, because it usually begins with Si* quis --. If any one (viz.) has
found, that which is mentioned herein to be lost, let him bring it to such a
place, and he shall be rewarded for his pains.

Sir, a title of dignity given to Baronets and Knights; and not only
attributed to Kings, but to all Gentlemen in discourse; some derive it from the
Hebr. sar, princeps, others from the Gr. (...), i. Dominus, others from the
Brit. Sir or Sire, Domine; others from the Ital. Sere, or Fr. Sire. And
Stephanus deduces it from Cyrus, the Persian word for a Lord or great Prince.

Sirens ( Serenes, from the Gr. (...), i. attrahere) See Mermaides. Alluring
and tempting women, are called Sirens.

Sirenical, pertaining to Sirens, attractive.

Sirenize, to play the Siren, to attract or allure, as Sirens do with singing.

Sir^us, the Dog Star, or Star called Canicula, at whose rising the Dog-dayes
always begin, and took denomination.

Sirocco (Ital.) a South-East-wind, thought to be hurtful and infectious in
Italy.

Sisyphus, a great Robber of Attica, slain by Theseus. Poets say, he rouls a
stone to the top of a Hill in Hell, which still tumbles back again, and so
makes his labor endless, etc. Hence to roll the stone of Sisyphus, is taken for
any endless or insuperable labor.

Sitark (sitarchus) he that has the office to provide Corn, and Victuals
sufficient.

Site (situs) the setting or standing of any place, the seat or situation; a
Territory or quarter of a Country.

Sitient (sitiens) thirsting, coveting, desiring much.

Sittim. See Sethim.

Sivil or Sevil, from the Span. Sevilla, the chief City of Andaluzia in Spain,
from whence we have our Sevil Oranges, and therefore so called.

Sixain (Fr.) a sixth, sixth part; the proportion of six; Hence a Poem or
Stanza of six verses.

Siz^, is a farthings worth of bread or drink, which Scholars in Cambridge
have at the Buttery, noted with the letter S. As in Oxford with the letter Q.
for half a farthing, and Qa. for a farthing; And whereas they say in Oxford, to
Battle in the Buttery Book i. to set down on their names, what they take in
Bread, Drink, Butter, Cheese, etc. In Cambrigde they call it Sizing.

Sizygy; see Syzygie.

Skeleton; see Sceleton.

Skellum; see Scellum.

Skiff or Sc^p^ (scapha) a ship-boat, properly all of one piece.

Skink, is in Scotland a kind of Pottage of strong nourishment, made of
Knuckles and Sinews of Beef long boiled.

Skinker (Dutch Schencker) a Fil-c^p, one that fills bear or wine, a Butler or
Cup Bearer.

Slay (from the Teuton. Slagon, i. to strike) an Instrument of a Weavers Loom,
having teeth like a Comb.

Slockster (Belg. Slocker) one that slocks or inticeth away men's servants. See
Plagiary.

Slot, a term in hunting, and signifies the view or print of a Stags foot in
the ground.

Slough, a damp, such as usually happens in Colepits; also a deep, sinking,
mudy place.

Smaragdine (smaragdinus) belonging to the precious stone called a Smaradg or
Emerald; green, as an Emerald.

Sm^ctym^uans, about the beginning of the long Parliament in the year 1641,
five Ministers wrote a book against Episcopacy and the Common Prayer, in behalf
of the Presbyterian Government, to which they all subscribed their names, being
^tephen Marshal, Edm. Calamy, Tho. Young, Matthew. Newcomen, and Will Spurstow;
the first letters whereof make this word, Smectymnuus; and from thence they and
their Followers were called Smectymnuans.

Smegmatick (smegmaticus) that has the power or strength to scour or cleanse,
as soap.

Smeth or Smoothery; a medicine or physical Ointment to take away hair.

Snap^ynse, a fire-lock, or Gun that strikes fire without the use of a Match.

Sobriquet (Fr.) a surname; also a nickname or by word. See Fuller lib. 3. fol.
30.

Soccog (from the Fr. Soc. i. a Coulter or plough-share) is a tenure of lands
by or for certain inferior or husbandly services to be performed to the Lord of
the Fee. See Institutes of Common Law. 31.

Socin^, a late Sect, begun by Laelius Socinus the Uncle, and made up by
Faustus ^ocinus of Sienna, his Nephew who first dispersed his Errors in
Polonia, Transylvania, and Sarmatia, about the year 1555. They deny the eternal
Divinity of the second Person of the Blessed Trinity, with other gross Errors.
See Mr Chewney's Anti-Socinianism.

Socome, an old Law word, signifying the custom of grinding at the Lords Mill;
and there is Bond-Socome, where the Tenants are bound to it; and Love-Socome*
where they do it freely out of love to their Landlord.

Socord (socordia) Luskishness, sloathfulness, negligence, idleness,
sottishness.

Socratick (socraticus) of or belonging to that excellent Philosopher Socrates,
or to the Sect, whereof he was chief: Hence, wise, prudent, learned.

So^ality (sodalitas) a Fellowship, a Fraternity, a Society, an Assembly, a
Brotherhood, a Company incorporate of any mystery or Craft.

Sodalic^ou^ (sodalicius) belonging to sodality or Fellowship.

Sodomy (sodomia) buggery; so called from the City Sodom in Judaea, which for
that detest^ble sin was destroyed with fire from heaven, Genesis 19.

Sodomite, an Ingler or Buggerer.

Sodomitical, pertaining to Sodomy or Buggery.

Sol, the Sun, one of the seven Planets. See Saturn.

Solace (solatium) comfort, consolation; help, or succor.

Solar (solaris) of or belonging to the Sun.

Solary (solarium) a Sun-Dyal; Also a yearly Pension paid to the Prince, to
live out of common business; or the rent that one pays yearly for an house that
is built upon the soil or land of the Commonwealth.

Soldado (Span. Soldat Fr.) a Soldier, one that follows the wars. Soldado
borado, a cashiered Soldier; a Soldier blotted out of the Muster Roll; perhaps
derived from the Brit. Sawdiwr, i. miles, and that from Sawd, which signifies
praelium or bellum.

Sultan, See Sultan.

Soldures (soldurii) were (as Caesar says) in the Gaulish language, such kind
of men, as destined and vowed themselves to the amity of any, to take part in
all their good and bad fortunes.

Soleated (soleatus) shod, as horses are, or that wears pattens.

Solecism (soloecismus) a false manner of speaking, contrary to the rules of
Grammar, incongruity; Any thing done out of order, or contrary to rule, may be
termed a Solecism. It arose from those, who being Athenians born, and dwelling
in Soli, a City in Cilicia, spoke not pure Attic, but mixed with the Solian's
more barbarous Language.

Solecismical, pertaining to a Solescism, incongruous.

Solegrebe or Solegrob^, an old name of the month Frebruary.

Solennial (solennis) yearly, used or done every year at a certain time,
public, solemn, accustomed.

Solen^, the ancient name of that part of the Sea, which divides the Isle of
Wight from our main Land in Hampshire. Bedes Hist. page 366.

Sol^vetion (from the Span. Solevar. i. sublevare) a lifting or holding up;
Also an aiding, succoring or ass^sting. Lustr. Ludov.

Solidation (solidatio) a making whole or firm, a soldering.

Solide^, Five regular bodies, or figures Geometrical (viz.) the Circle, Cube,
Pyramid, Cilinder, and Dodochaedron.

Solifidian (from sola fides) one that holds faith only (without works)
necessary to salvation, or one that depends upon faith alone.

Soliloquy (soliloquium) talk alone, as of one with one, or one with himself.

Soliped (from solidus and pes) that has a whole or sound foot, not cloven nor
broken, such is that of a Horse. If from solus and pes, then it signifies,
one-footed, or that has but one foot. Dr. Br.

Solisequious (from solemn sequens) following or that follows the Sun. Br.

Solistim (solistimum) a kind of dancing among the Augures, or a Divination
taken by falling of the bread on the ground, which was given to Chickens.

Solitan^ous (solitaneus) solitary, single, alone, without company.

Solivagart (solivagus) that goes here and there alone, and flies company,
wandering all alone, solitary.

Solon, one of the seven wisemen of Greece. The other six were Chilo,
Cleobulus, Thales, Bias, Pittacus, and Periander. V. Hist. of Philos. in
Preface.

Solstice (solstitium, quasi Solis statio) the Sun-stead or stay, when it can
neither go higher nor lower, which is in Summer about mid June, when the days
are at the longest, and in Winter about mid December, when they are at the
shortest; at which time the Sun comes to the Tropic of Capricorn, and in June
to that of Cancer. It is most commonly taken for Midsummer; and Mid-winter is
termed Bruma.

Solstitical (solstitialis) belonging to the Solstice, or stay of the Sun. Also
that continues but a little time.

Soluble (solubilis) which may be unloosed or unbound.

Solve (solvo) to loose, to release, to deliver, to undo, to dissolve, resolve,
etc.

Solute Solutive (solutus) loosed or loosening; set at liberty, quiet, free.

Somniculous (somniculosus) negligent, sleepy, drowzy, sluggish; also that
makes drowzy or sleepy.

Somniferous (somnifer) that brings or causes sleep.

Somnus (Lat.) sleep, sometimes night; also rest, quietness; also the God of
Sleep. Ovid.

Somne quies rerum, dulcissime Somne Deorum. Sonorous (sonorus) loud; making a
great noise, shril, roaring.

Son^ag^, is a tax of forty shillings, laid upon every Knights Fee. Stow, p.
284.

Sontick (sonticus) noysom, hurtful. The Sontick disease (Morbus Sonticus) a
continual and extreme sickness, that hangs long upen a man, and is ended
within* no certain time; and whereby we are disabled to perform our necessary
business. The Falling Evil is such a disease. Sigonius infers, That every
disease which hinders us in the performance of our businesses, is termed
Sonticus.

Soo^er^y, a monster, like a Bat, which some women in Dutchland are said to
have brought forth, as the product of some preternatural conception, Cl. Poems.

Sophia (Gr.) Wisdom; a name peculiarly applied by the Primitive Christians to
our most Blessed Savior, who is the Wisdom of his Father, by whom all things,
were made; and therefore some godly persons do more then dislike the
communicating it to any other. Came.

Sophy (Ar.) the great Lord or King of Persia so called.

Sophism (Sophisma) a crafty or deceitful sentence; an Oration or Sentence,
seeming to be true, but false indeed; a cavil.

Sophist or Sophister (Sophista) He that professes Philosophy for lucre or
vainglory; a deceiver, under an eloquent or crafty speaking; a cunning or
cavilling disputer, who will make a false matter seem true.

Sophisticate (sophistico) to adulterate or falsify, to make counterfeit or
deceitful.

Sophistry (sophistria) the art of quaint beguiling or circumvention, by words
or false Arguments, called also Lulliin.

Sopited (sopitus) laid to sleep, being at rest.

Sopition (sopitio) sleeping, or being at rest.

Soporate (soporo) to bring or induce sleep.

Soporiferous (soporifer) that brings or causes sleep, drowzy.

Sorbition (sorbitio) a supping, as of broth or pottage.

Sorbonist are those learned Doctors and Batchellors of Divinity of the
College of Sorbon in Paris; which took denomination from one Robert de
Sorbonne, who was one of the Almoners and Preachers of St Lewis the Ninth, King
of France, and the Donor and Instituter of this College, about the year 1264.
2 Part Tr.

Sorcelery (Fr.) Sorcery or Sorcellage (sortilegium) charming, enchanting,
witchcraft, divination by lots.

Sordidate (sordido) to make foul, to array sluttishly and filthily.

Sordid (sordidus) filthy, dishonest, unclean, all berayed, sluttish, corrupt.
etc.

Sordine or Sordet (from the Fr. Sourdine) the little Pipe or Tenon, put into
the mouth of a Trumpet, to make it sound low; also a kind of hoarse or low
sounding Trumpet.

Sore a male fallow Deer of four years old.

Sore-el or Sorel, A Male fallow deer of three years old.

Sorites (Gr.) a kind of Argument consisting of diverse Propositions, in which
the Predicate of the former, is still made the subject of the latter, till in
conclusion the last Predicate be attributed to the first subject: A^, Thomas is
a man; a man is an Animal; an Animal is a Body; a Body is a Substance; therefore
Thomas is a Substance.

So^ca^, pertaining to such an Argument.

Sororiant Virgin (Virgo Sororians) a young maid, whose Breasts began to be
embossed and round, or set out for show.

Sororicide (sororicida) a murderer of his own sister.

Sor^elegy (sortilegium) a divination by Lots, Sorcery.

Sortition (sortitio) a choosing or appointing by lots, a casting of lots, a
lotting.

Sorcitor (Lat.) a caster of lots.

Sospital (sospitalis) that is cause of health, medicinable, wholesome, safe,
free from danger.

Sot, See Asotus.

Soulack, an eminent Officer about the person of the Turkish Emperor.

Soul-masse-Cakes, are certain oaten cakes, which some of the wealthier sort of
persons in Lancashire use still to give the poor on All Souls day, ( Nov. 2.)
and the poor people take themselves obliged to say this old verse, in
retribution, God have your Saul.
Bones and all.


Source (Fr.) an original, or beginning, a Spring or Wellhead; a Seminary,
Race or Offspring.

Sor^ (surdus) deaf, hard of hearing; also listless, unattentive, heedless;
also dumb.

Sounder, a company of wild Bores together; as we say, A Herd of Deer.

Spa^daires, an order of white-Friers, which wear on their habits a
representatition of two Red Swords.

S^a^ (spado) that is gelded, be it man or Beast.

Spadiards, Laborers in the Tin-mines of Cornwall; so called from the Spade
they use.

Spa^c^ous (spadecus) of a light red or bright bay color.

Spagy^al (spagiricus) of or belonging to Alchimy, or an Alchimist.

Spagy^i^k (spagyrus) an Alchimist, an extracter of quintessences.

Spa^ies or Spachies, (the right word is Espawhee, which in the Persian tongue
signifies a Horseman) are the Great Turks Horsemen or Cavalry, armed for the
most part at once, with Bow, Mace, Lance, Harquebuse, and Scimitar. ^ands.

Sparo, a red Male deer of three years old.

Sparsion (sparsio) a sprinkling, especially of water, colored with Saffron,
out of some Pipe.

Sparsedly (from sparsim) here and there, one with another, scatteringly. Bac.

Spartan (spartanus) belonging to the Lacedaemonians, or to their chief City
Sparta.

Spasmatical (spasmaticus) pertaining to the disease called the Spasm or Cramp,
which is a ^onvulsion, or piucking up of the Sinews, arising either of to much
fullness, or overmuch emptiness.

S^t, Spat^er or Spatule (Spalla) a little slice or Splat^r, wherewith Surgeons
a^ Apotheca^ies use to spread their plasters and salves also a little two
handed or bstard sword.

Sp^ate (spatior) to walk abroad to travel, to wander, to go jeing up and down.

Specs (Lat.) a figure, image, f^n, or shap, likeness, semblan^ outward face or
show, etc. ^e different kind of any thing With Grammarians, Spec^ is the
accident of a word, a Primitive or Derivative. ^th Logicians it is the secon of
the five Predicables; see enus.

Specific^ specificus special, particu, belonging to Species.

Specious ^peciosus) goodly or fair to to, beautiful, or graceful appearance,
honorable inew.

Spectable (spectabilis) worthy to been, or that may be seen, ^le; of great
renown, notab goodly.

Spectative (spectativus) that belongs to ^eculation; speculative, complative.

Spectre (spum) is an apparition or inination of a substance with a body, which
presents it self sensibly to men against the order and course of Nature; a
Ghost, a spirit, a fantasy, a vision.

Specular (specularis) any thing whereby a man may see the better, belonging to
seeing or spying, to Spectacles or glass windows.

Speculation (speculatio) a spying, a watching in an open place, a discovery, a
considering, or observing.

Speculate (speculor) to watch in an high Tower, or other like place, to see
far, to espy, search out, to consider diligently; to behold and gaze upon.

Speculatory (speculatorius) belonging to espial or scouting.

Spel (Sax.) a word: see Gospel.

Spelt (spelta) a kind of wheat growing in Italy, France and Flanders, called
also Zena.

Sperable (sperabilis) that may be hoped for, or trusted unto.

Sperma Ceti; see Parmaceti.

Sperm (sperma) the natural seed of man, or any other natural seed whereof
things are engendered; spawn of fishes.

Spermatical, belonging to such seed, or to the veins which contain the seed.

Spermatize, to shed, eject or inject natural seed or sperm.

Speustick (speusticus) made in haste or quickly, made and baked on the sudden.

Sphaselism (sphaselismus) an ulcer eating in the brain.

Sher^ (sphaera) a figure in all parts equally round, a Circle, a Globe, a
Bowl, or any thing that is round. The Sphere of the world consists of Ten
Circles, the Aequinoctial, the Zodiac, the Two Colures, the Horizon, the
Meridian, the Two Tropicks, and the Two Polar Circles.

Sperable (sperabilis) that may be made round like a Sphere.

Sperical (spericus) round like a Sphere, Orbicular, Globe like.

Spericity (from spaera) the being round like a Spear, roundness, Br.

Spheromachy (sphaeromachia) playing at Tennis, or Bowling.

Spher (Lat.) an Indian, and Ethiopian Beast, rough bodied like an Ape (of the
kind whereof he is) yet hairless between his Neck and Breast, round, but
out-faced, and Brested like a woman, his unarticulate voice like that of a
hasty speaker, more gentle and tameable then an ordinary Ape, yet fierce by
nature, and revengefull, when he is hurt; having eaten meat enough, he reserves
his Chaps full to feed on when he feels himself hungry again.

Spicated (spicatus) eared, or in an ear, as corn is.

Spiciferous (spicifer) that bears ears of corn.

Spicilegy (spicilegium) gathering ears of corn, gleaning or leising corn. Lo.
B^c.

Spiculator (Lat.) a^ Archer, or Spearman of a Guard; Some take it for a
Tormenter or Hangma.

Spine (spina) a thoa, the sting of a Be, a prickl; Also the backbone.

Spinal (spinalis) penining to the Chine, or back-bne.

Spiniferous (spinir) that bears prickles, or horns, thorney.

Spinosity (spinosis) thornishness, fullness of rickles, difficulty.

Spins^er, a ternor addition in our Law-Diact, given in Evidences and ^tings,
to a feme sole, as it we, calling her Spinner; And ^is is the only addition
for ^ unmarried women, fr^ the Viscounts Daughter ^wnward.

Spin^ian (fin spintriae) pertaining to the that seek out, or invent n^ and
monstrous actions ^ust.

Spiracle (^paculum) a breathing hole* hole out of which breath, ^, smoke, or
wind issues, a mp-hole.

Spiral (^n spira) circular, turning and, winding about. Sir H* ^otton.

Spiration spiratio) a breath or ^thing. In Divinity it is a eathing or impulse
of the ^ll, by which it expresses affection. The Holy Gho proceeds from the
Father ^d the Son, as from one only source, and not as made or created, nor as
begotten, but produced through the will by an ineffable way, and this Divines
term Spiration. Tour. Cat.

Spira^k (spirarchus) a Captain in a fore-ward.

Spiritualities of a Bishop (spiritualia Episcopi) were those profits which he
received as a Bishop, and not as a a Baron of the Parliament. Stwanf. pl. Cor.
fol. 132. Such were the duties of his Visitation, his Benefit growing from
ordering and instituting Priests, Pretestation money, that Subsidium
charitativum, which upon reasonable cause he might require of his Clergy. Jo.
Greg de Benefic. ca. 6. number. 9. And the benefit of his Jurisdiction.

Spiss (spissus) thick, slow, and long, gross, massive, firm, hard and sound,
standing thick and closs together, full of.

Spisity Spissitude spicitas spicitudo thickness, grossness. Bac.

Spitter, a red Male Deer of a year old, whose horns begin to grow up sharp
Spitwise, called also a Brocket.

Spittle or Spittle-house, from the Ital. Spedale, Teut. Spital, or it may be
contracted from Hospital; for it has the same signification; an Hospital-house.

Spleget; see Pleget.

Splendent Splendit splendens splendidus bright, clear, shining, famous,
notable excellent,

Spleen (splen) the Milt of Man or Beast, which is like a long narrow Tongue,
lying under the short ribs on the left side, and has this office of nature, to
purge the Liver of superfluous melancholic blood: Sometime it signifies anger
or choler.

Splendo^ (Lat.) clearness, brightness, light, beauty, elegancy, glory.

Splenetick (spleneticus) sick in the Spleen, or troubled with the Spleen, that
has a great Spleen; also choleric or angry.

Spoliation (spoliatio) a robbing, spoiling or taking away. If any difference
had been between two Parsons, or Incumbents, claiming under one Patron, and the
right of Patronage not in question; this was to be decided in the Spiritual
Court, and was called Spoliation. Not. Br. 36, 37.

Spondalion (Gr.) a Himn consisting most of Spondes; sung to procure and settle
the favor of the gods, whilst the incense was a burning.

Sponde (spondaeus) a foot, consisting of two long syllables.

Spondyles (spondili) the Knuckles or turning joints of the Backbone or Chine;
also small Bones of Beasts or Fishes. Dr. Br.

Sponge (spongia) is well known, and is between the nature of an Animal, and a
Plant; it grows under the sea-rocks of the Isle Samos, and not elsewhere in the
world.

Spongious (spongeosus) hollow like a Sponge, full of small holes, or eyes like
a Sponge, light or puffed.

Sponsal (sponsalis) belonging to betrothing or marriage.

Sponsalitious, the same.

Sponsion (sponsio) a promise, a bargain, a wager, an agreement, a covenant;
every promise made by demanding and asking of another, etc.

Spontal Spontare Spontaneous (spontalis, spontaneus) that does, or is done
willingly, naturally, without help or constraint, voluntary.

Spontane^ty, the freeness or natural unconstrainedness of an action, done
without either constraint or choice; as an Herb grows, or an Animal eats when
he is hungry.

Sport (sporta) a Hand-basket, Maund or Pannier. Act of Parl. 1656 ca. 20.

Spon^, sponsa a woman spoused or affianced, a Bride or new married woman; also
from sponsus, a new married man.

Spansage (sponsalia) the contract or betrothing before full marriage.

Spraints, dung of an Otter.

Spretor (Verbal, a sperno) a contemner, a despiser, a scorner, a setter light
by.

Spright^, a sort of short Arrows (formerly used for sea fight) without any
other heads, save wood sharpened, which were discharged out of Muskets, and
would pierce through the sides of ships, where a bullet would not.

Spring-tides. As there are every day two Tides; so every month two courses of
great Tides and small Tides; for seven days about the change of the Moon, are
the great or Spring-tides, and the next ensuing seven days are the small or
Neap-tides; then at Full Moon are the Spring-tides again, and all the last
quarter Neap-tides; which course of the Sea is thus monthly renewed for ever;
save that some extraordinary Spring-tides sometimes happen in the Spring and
Autumn, and sometimes after plenty of Rain, or rage of Weather, etc, And in
Neap tides the water is never so high, nor so low, as in Spring-tides.

Springal (from the Belg Springac^) a young man, or stripling.

Sp^me (spuma) foam froth, scum.

Spumid (spumidus) frothy or foamy.

Spumiferous (spumifer) that bears foam, froth or scum.

Spunges; see Sponges.

Spurcidical (spurcidicus) that speaks dishonestly or uncleanly, bawdy in talk.

Spurious (spurius) born of a common woman, that knows not his Father,
base-born, counterfeit.

Sputative (from sputo) that spits often or much.

Squadron (from the Ital. Squadra, or Fr Esquadron) a certain number of
Soldiers ranged into a square Body or Battalion. This word is most commonly
appropriated to Horsemen ( Battalion to Footmen) and sometimes both to Horse and
Foot; see Brigade.

Squalid (squalidus) filthy, sluttish, foul, ill-favored, causing one to abhor
the sight of it.

Squalor (Lat.) filthiness, sluttishness, uncleanness, deformity of any thing
for want of trimming, etc.

Squ^migerous (squamiger) that has or bears scales, scaly.

Square-number; see Quadrate.

Squinant ( squinanthum the sweet rush, which is very medicinable: Camels meat.

Squinancy (squinantia) a swelling disease in the throat, which causes a
difficulty in breathing; the Squincy.

S.S. stand usually for Sacro-Sanctus, or for Sacra Sciptura, or for Sancti; as
S.S. Patres, Sancti Patres.

Stability (stabilitas) firmness, stableness, soundness, constancy.

Stabulate (stabulo) to stand or be as Cattle in a Stable or Stall, to be
housed as Beasts are, to keep or stall up ones self.

Stade (stadium) a race for men or horses to run in; also a proportion or
measure of ground, called also a Furlong; whereof there are three sorts, viz.
The Italian, containing one hundred twenty and five paces; the Olympic of one
hundred and twenty paces; and the Py^hick of two hundred paces, all after five
feet to the pace. Of these Stades, eight make an Italian mile, containing one
thousand paces; see Furlong.

Stagga^d, a red Male Deer four years old.

Stagir^te, Aristotle so called, from Stagira a Town in Macedonia, where he was
born.

Stallage (Fr. Estallage) signifies in our Common Law, money paid for pitching
stalls in Fair or Market; see Scavage. This in Scotland is called Stallange.
Skene, verbo Stallongiatores. And among the Romans it was termed (Siliquaticum)
from siliqua, their first and least of all weights.

Stallion (from the Fr. Estallon, or Ital. Stallone) a horse kept for covering
Mares.

Stamineous (stamineus) pertaining to hemp or flax, or that has shreds in it.

Standard or Estandard, (from the Fr. Estandart) an Ensign for Horsemen in War,
and is commonly taken for that of the King, or chief General. It is also used
for the principal or standing measure of the King, to the scantling whereof,
all the measures throughout the Land are, or ought to be framed, etc. Magna
Charta, and confirmed 14 Edw 3. cap. 12. Of these Standards and Measures, read
Britton cap. 30.

Stannaries (Stannaria) the Mines and Works, touching the getting and purifying
of Tin in Cornwall, and other places; of which works, there are two sorts,
(viz.) Lode-work and ^tream-work. See Came. Brit. page 119.

Stanza (Ital.) a Staff of Verses. As Spencers Books are divided into Canto's,
and those again into Stanza's.

Staple (Fr. Estape) a Mart or general Market, a public Storehouse in a Sea
Town, or Town of Traffic, whither the Merchants of England, by common Order or
commandment, did carry Wools, Woolfels, Clothes, Lead, Tin, etc. (which are the
Staple Commodies of this Land) for the utterance of them by the great.

Staple Inn, near Holburn Bars, now one of the Inns of Chancery, was formerly
an Inn or Hostel of the Merchants of the Staple, and from thence took name.

Star Chamber a late Court at Westminster, voted down by Act.

Starrulet (a dim. of Star) a little Star.

Stasiarch (Gr.) an Arch-rebel, the head of a Sedition.

Stater (Lat.) an ancient coin of several sorts.

The Corinthian Stater was worth 21 d. want a farthing. The Macedonian Stater
was worth about two shillings nine pence half penny. The Golden Attick Stater
weighed two drams, and therefore worth seventeen shillings six pence. But in
Scripture it valued two Didrams; for the tribute money to be paid for each
person was Didrachmum. Mat. 17.24. and a Stater was paid for two, namely, for
Christ and St. Peter, the value of it therefore was 2 s. 6 d.

Staticks (Gr.) the science of weights and measures; a species of Mechanics.
Br.

Station (statio) a standing place, a Bay or Rode for ships to rest in; also a
place of resort, abode or stay.

Station-staff, is a strait Pole divided into feet, and inches used by
Surveyors in measuring Land.

Stationary (stationarius) appointed to keep ward in any place, that is in a
Garrison, settled, standing.

Stationer (so called of his station or standing shop to sell in) is often
confounded with Bookseller, and sometimes with Book-binder; whereas they are
three several Trades; the Stationer sells Paper and Paper-Books, Ink, Wax, etc.
The Bookseller deals only in printed Books, ready bound; and the Book-binder
binds them, but sells not. Yet all three are of the Company of ^tationers.

Stative (stativus) pitched or set, as a Fortress or pitched Camp; also
standing.

Statuary (statuarius) a Stone-cutter, a Carver of Statues and Images.

Statuminate (statumino) to prop up, to under-set, to make sure.

Statute (statutum) signifies a Decree or Act of Parliament, etc. 2. It is a
kind of Bond; as Statute Merchant, and Statute Staple, An. 5. H. 4. cap. 12.
The reason of which name is, because those Bonds are made according to the form
of certain Statutes, which direct both before what persons and in what manner
they ought to be made, West. par. 1. Symb. lib. 2. sect. 151.27. Ed. 3. ca. 9.
and 23 Hen. 8.6.

Statutes is also used in our vulgar talk, for the petit Sessions, which are
yearly kept for the disposing of Servants in service, by the Statutes of 1, and
5 Eliz. cap 4.

Steccado (Span Estacada) a place railed in for a Combat or Lists.

Steel-yard; see Stil-yard.

Stegan^graphy (Gr.) a description of the way or manner of covering Edifices.

Stellar (stellaris) starry, pertaining to a star. Bac.

Stellation (stellatio) a making star-like, or adorning with stars; also a
blasting.

Stelled (stellatus) full of, or garnished with stars.

Stelletto or Stiletto (Ital.) a little Poniard, or the small and sharp pointed
Dagger.

Stelliferous (stellifer) that bears or has stars in it, starry.

Stellion (stellio) the spotted or starry Lizard, so called; also an envious
fellow, or one that cannot endure another should be the better by him; from the
Stellion, which, having (as he does half yearly) cast his skin (a soverein
remedy for the Falling Sickness) presently devours it, to deprive mankind of it.

Stellionate (stellionatus) a deceit, in dissembling a thing, to take profit by
another unjustly, a counterfeiting of merchandise, a cousening or selling the
same thing to several persons. Lo Bac.

Stem (stemma) a Garland of flowers; a Race of Kindred, the blood of a Gentile
house.

Stenegraphy (stenegraphia) the Art of Short-writing; or a description of
reducing any thing in a narrower compass.

Stentor, a Grecian that had a voice louder then fifty men together. Hence we
use Stentorian voice, for a great, loud, roaring voice.

Stephen (Gr.) a Crown.

Stepmother, so called, because she steps in instead of a Mother, by marrying
the sons or daughters Father; a Mother in Law.

Stercorean or Stercorarious (stercorarius) belonging to dung or muck.

Stercoration (stercoratio) a dunging or defiling with dung

Sterile (sterilis) barren, fruitless, that cannot engender, without
generation, yielding nothing.

Sterility (sterilitas) barrenness* unfruitfulness.

Sterling, is the old term or Epitheton for money current in this Nation; which
thus took denomination; In the time of Richard the First, money coined in the
East part of Germany, began to be of special request in England for its purity,
and was called Easterling money, as the Inhabitants of those parts were called
Easterlings; shortly after some of that Country, skilful in Mint-matters and
Allayes, were sent for hither to bring our coin to perfection, which since that
time was called from them, sterling, for Easterling; Not from Sterling or
Striveling in Scotland, nor from a star, or the bird Starling, which some
dreamt to be stamped on it; For in old Deeds, they are always called Nummi
Esterlingi; which implied as much as good and lawful money of England, or Proba
Moneta, among the Civilians, and Monois de Roy in France. Came. Rem. fol. 184.

A Pound sterling is Twenty shillings in our Engli^ money, an English penny was
of old called a Sterling; and in the composition of Measures made in Edward the
Firsts time, we find, that Denarius Angliae, qui nominatur Sterlingus,
rotundus, sine tonsura ponderabit 32 grana in medio spicae. Antiq Hibern. p.
133.

Stern^mancy (sternomantia) divination by a man's breast.

Sternutation (sternutatio) a sneezing.

Sternu^atory (sternutatorium medicamentum) a medicine or powder that will
cause sneezing, sneezing powder.

St^rquilinious (from ste^quilinium) pertaining to a Dunghill, or Mixen.

Stews, are those places, where women of professed incontinency, proffer their
bodies to all comers; from the Fr. Estuve, i. a Bathe or Hot-house; because
wantons are wont to prepare or rather to purge themselves for those venereous
acts by often bathing and Hot-houses. And that this is not new, Homer shows in
the eighth Book of his Odiss. where he reckons hot Bathes among the effeminate
sort of pleasures. Of these Stews see the Statute, An. 11. H. 6. ca. 1.

Sticonoma^tic (Gr.) divination by words written on the bark of trees.

Stigian; see Stygian.

Stigmatick Stigmatical (stigmaticus) that is marked with an hot iron, notably
defamed for a naughty fellow.

Stigmatize (stigmatizo) to mark with an hot iron, as we use to do Rogues, and
notorious offenders at Goal deliveries.

Stilletto; see Stelletto.

St^llatory (stillatorius) stilling, distilling, dropping; Also substantively,
a Still or Limbeck.

S^illicide (stillicidium) the dropping of the Eaves of an house.

Stillatitious (stillatitius) that drops or distills.

Stillicidiou^, the same.

Stil-yard or Steel-yard ( Guilda Teutonicorum, An. 32. H 8. c. 8. and An. 32.
ejus. ca. 14.) is a place near the Thames in London, where the Fraternity of
the Easterling Merchants, or the Merchants of Hanse and Almain (Ann. 1. Edw. 6.
cap. 13.) were wont to have their abode. It is so called of a broad Yard or
Court, wherein Steel was much sold, upon which that house is founded; see
Hanse. The place is now only famous for Rhenish wine, Neats-Tongues, etc. L.
Herb. in Hen. 8. calls it the Stilly-art, but gives no reason for it.

Stimulate (stimulo) to prick, move, incense, stir forward provoke.

Stipation (stipatio) a bolstring or holding up on every side, a guarding about
or en^ironing.

Stipendial (stipendialis) belonging to wages or hire.

Stipendary (stipendarius) that pays tribute, or takes wages.

Stipendious (stipendiosus) that has often been retained in wars, and served
for wages.

Stipone, a kind of sweet compound liquor, drunk in some places of London in
the summertime.

Stiptical (stipticus) that stops, or binds; restrictive.

Stipticity (stipticitas) astringency, the quality or power of binding.

Stipulate (stipulor) to require and demand a thing to be given him, or done
for him with ordinary words of the Law, to require by, or make a^ covenant, to
promise effectually what he is required to do.

Stipulation (stipulatio) a demanding the performance of covenants, a bargain
or solemn promise.

Stiricide (stiricidium) the dropping of a house with ice-sickles.

Stirious (from stiria) pertaining to a drop of ice, or an Icesickle. Br.

Stir^s (Lat.) the root, stem or stalk of a Tree, Plant or Herb; a stock or
kindred; a race, issue, or nobleness of birth. Lo Bac.

Stocada (Span. estocada) a stab, foin or thurst with a weapon.

Stoics (Stoici) a Sect of Philosophers at Athens, whereof of Zeno was the
chief; they held a wise man ought to be free from all passions, never to be
moved either with Joy or Grief, and esteeming all things to be ordered by an
inevitable necessity of Fate. They were called Stoics, of the Gr. ((...)) i. a
Porch; because Zeno taught his followers in a common Porch of the City.

Stoical, pertaining to such Philosphers; severe.

Stoicism, the Doctrine or Discipline of the Stoics.

Stole (stola) any Garment wherewith the body is covered, a Robe of honor.
Among the ancient Romans it was had in great reverence, and held as a Vest or
Badge of chastity, hence that of Martial, lib. 1. Quis floralia vestit and
Stolatum permittit meretricibus pudorem! With the modern Romanists it is that
part of the Priestly Ornaments, which being put over the neck, is afterward
set crosswise over the breast with the ends hanging down on each side, and used
in memory of the cord, by which our blessed Savior was tied to the Pillar when
he was whipped and scourged; and signifies the light and sweet yoke of Christ,
whereunto we are patiently and obediently to submit. The ancient Spartan
Soldiers did also wear a crimson Stole or Tippet about their necks, and a
shield of brass. 1. ^art. Tr.

Stolid (stolidus) fooling, fond, lewd of condition, unadvised, dull, doltish.

Stolidity (stoliditas) solly, unadvisedness, fondness.

Stomachick (stomachicus) that is sick in the stomach, that cannot keep the
meat it has taken.

Stomach^sity (stomachesitas) anger, indignation, disdain.

Stomatick (stomaticus) that has a sore or swelling in the mouth.

Stone of Wool, ought to weigh fourteen pounds, yet in some places by custom it
is more or less as in Herefordshire it is 12. in Glocestershire 15. and two
Stone made a Tod of Wool; see Crompt. J of P. f. 83. b. See Sarplar. A stone
of Beef is but eight pound in London, 12 in Herefordshire.

Stonef^ulcon (Lithofalcus) from the Gr. (...), i. lapis) so called from the
stones and rocks where she eyres or builds her nest.

Stook of Cor^; see Thrave.

Stooming of Wine, There is (says Mr. Howel in his Letters) a hard green wine
that grows about Rochel, and the Islands thereabouts, which the cunning
Hollander sometime uses to fetch, and he has a trick to put a bag of herbs
or some other infusions into it ( as he does brimstone in Rhenish) to give it a
whiter tincture, and more sweetness; then they reimbark it for England, where
it passes for good Bachrag, and this is called Stooming of wine

Stork (Belg.) a Bird famous for natural love toward his Parents, whom he
feeds being old and impotent, as they fed him being young. The Egyptians so
esteemed this Bird, that there was a great penalty laid upon him that should
kill him.

Stowing, is the laying any goods or victuals in order in the Hold of a Ship;
and at Land it is the laying Coals or other goods in a Warehouse, Cellar or
other place; And Stowage is the place it self, or the money that is paid for
such place to lay goods in.

Strabism (strabismus) the squintness in the eyes.

Strage (strages) a slaughter, a discomfiture, a multitude of men slain; also a
beating, selling, or cutting down to the ground, properly of trees; a great
ruin and fall.

Straight. See Straight.

Struck of a Wheel, is the iron wherewith the wheel is bound, or the wood or
hoop wherein the Spoaks are set; because it makes a struck in the ground, as it
goes. Min.

Strand. See Strond.

Strangury or Strangullion (stranguria) a disease, wherein one makes water by
drops, very hardly, and with great pain.

Strappado (Ital.) a punishment inflicted on Soldiers for some offense; which
is hanging them by the arms drawn backward, and being so bound they are drawn
up on high, and let down again with a violent swing, which (if used with rigor)
unjoynts their back and arms.

Stratagem (stratagema) a policy, or witty shift in War.

Stratagemical, done by stratagem, full of stratagems.

Stratiotick (stratioticus) warlike, pertaining to War.

Stratocracy (Gr.) military Government; where a Commonwealth is governed by an
Army or by Soldiers.

Stratuminate (stratumino) to pave.

Straight or Straight, is a narrow passage at Sea, between two lands; As the
Straight of Magellan, Gebraltar, etc.

Stremeworks, is a kind of work in the Stanneries; Of these Mines and
Tin-works (says Came.) there are two kinds, the one called Lodeworks, the other
Stremeworks: This lies in lower grounds, when by trenching they follow the
veins of Tin; that other is in higher places when they dig deep pits on the
hills, which they call Shafts, etc. mentioned A. 27. H. 8. ca. 23.

Strenuity (strenuitus) activity, valiantness, nimbleness, manhood, stoutness.

Strenuous (strenuus) valiant, strong, stout, hardy, active.

Streperous (streperus) hoarse or jarring.

Strepitate (strepito) to make a noise often, to make a great noise, to rusle.

Strictive (strictivus) gathered or cropped with the hand.

Stricture (strictura) a spark that flies from a piece of iron red hot, when it
is beaten; also a gathering of fruit; and sometimes a brief collection or
slight st^oak. Dr: Ham.

Striden^ (stridens) crashing or making a noise, creaking.

S^rider (Lat.) a noise, a crashing, a shril noise, the creaking of a door.

Stridulous (stridulus) that makes a crashing, or creaking noise. Dr. Br.

Strigilate (strigilo) to curry a horse.

Strigment (strigmentum) filth rubbed from ones body; it may be used for a
trussing point; also a paring of Cucumbers, or like fruit.

Strikle, Strikler or Stritchel, that wherewith the measurer of Corn or Grain
strikes the filled measure, to make it even.

Strematick (from stroma) belonging to strowings, or any thing spread on the
ground, or under a thing. The Strematicks of Clemens Alexandrinus were a
Miscellanie, or Books of several scattered subjects.

Strand Strond or (Sax.) a Shore or Bank; Hence the Strand a street in the
Suburbs of London, so called because it lies by the River side.

Strophes (strophae) wily deceits, subtilties in arguing; conversions or
turnings.

Strumatick)strumaticus) that has the Impostume Struma, which is a Wen or
swelling in the Neck and Armholes, wherein are as it were hard kernels closed
in the skin, some take it to be the King's Evil.

Stultiloquy (stultiloquium) foolish speech, talk or babbling.

Stupefaction (stupefactio) an astonishment, an abashing, a making dull or
senceless.

Stupid (stupidus) dismayed, abashed, astonished, amazed, senceless.

Stupor (Lat.) sudden privation, or lack of sense or feeling, benumming,
unsensibleness, stupidity.

Stupration (stupratio) a committing Adultery or Rape, a deflouring a Virgin.

Stuprous (stuprosus) corrupt, naught, given to Adultery or Whordom, whorish.

Stygia^ (stygius) belonging to the River Styx, or Hell; hellish, infernal,
devilish.

Sty^onovo and veteti. See Julian Account.

Styptica^, See Stiptical.

Styx, a Well in Arcadia, the water whereof is strong poison; Poets call it the
River of Hell; the Gods were wont to swear by it, and what god soever swore by
Styx falsely was banished Heaven, and prohibited Nectar for 1000 years.

Suada, the goddess of Eloquence, or delectable speech, among the Romans.

Suasible (suasibilis) that may be persuaded.

Suasory (suasorius) belonging to exhorting or persuading.

Suavation (suavatio) an amorous kissing, a sweet bussing.

Suaviloquent (suaviloquens) that speaks sweetly, that has a sweet sound or
manner of speech.

Suavity (suavitas) sweetness, pleasantness.

Sub and Subter, two Prepositions signifying under or after, and often used in
composition; of which a few only for example, referring the Reader for the
rest to the simple words.

Subaction (subactio) a driving or bringing under, a constraint or subduing.

Subalbid (subalbus) somewhat white.

Subalpine (subalpinus) under the Alps.

Subaltern (subalternus) placed under another, or that which succeeds another
by course.

Subaquaneous (subaquaneus) that is or lies under the water.

Subcineritious (subcineritius) baked under the ashes.

Subclav^an (from sub and clavis) pertaining to that which is under lock and
key.

Subcutaneous (subcutaneus) between the skin and the flesh.

Subdial (subdialis) abroad in the Air, without the house, all open, wholly
discovered.

Sub-dio (Lat.) abroad in the Air, without cover.

Subdititious (subdititius) that is not properly ones whose it is feigned to
be, that is put or laid in the place or room of another.

Subdolous (subdolus) that deceives craftily, full of deceits or wiles,
deceitful.

Subduct (subduco) to take, pluck or draw away, to remove, to pluck or draw
back.

Subduction (subductio) a reckoning or account, a deduction, or allowance; a
withdrawing, or bringing under.

Subhastation (subhastatio) an outcry, or portsale, or the selling things by
out-rope, etc. so called because the old Romans used (especially in time of
war) to hold their outcries of confiscated goods, sub hastam, under a Spear or
Javelin.

Subhumera^e (from sub and humerus) to undergo a burden.

Subject (subjectus) one that is under another, a bringing or putting under; a
matter treated of. Also in Logic, that which supports qualities belonging to
it; as the body is the subject, in which is health or sickness, and the mind
the subject that receives virtues or vices.

Subitan^cus or Subitary (subitancus) hasty, sudden, without premeditation.

Subjugate (subjugo) to bring under yoke, to make subject, to subdue.

Sub-jugum, i. under the yoke. The Armenians and other Nations in ancient time,
were wont to force such enemies, as they had vanquished, to go in despite,
under certain Spears pitched a cross, like a Gallows, and this they termed Sub
jugum, and was held a great disgrace. Tacitus Annal. lib. 15.

Subjunctive (subjunctivus) that under-sets or joins underneath.

Sublation (sublatio) a lifting up, a taking away

Sublevate (sublevo) to lift or hold up; also to help, aid, ease, lighten or
lessen.

Subligate (subligo) to under-bind, to under-tye, to tie or hang at.

Sublimation (sublimatio) a lifting or raising up; also a distillation or
extraction; a term in Chemistry.

Sublimatum (Lat.) a strong corrosive powder, called white Mercury, used by
Chyrurgeons to eat and consume corrupted flesh. It is made of Chalcantum,
Quicksilver, Vinegre, and Sal ammoniac.

Sublimatory, an Instrument or Vessel of sublimation.

Sublimity (sublimitus) height, highness.

Sublition (sublitio) an anointing or dawbing underneath; in Painting it is
the ground color, whereon the perfect color is laid; and is called Grasing.

Submarine (submarinus) under the Sea. Bac.

Submersion (submersio) a plunging or sinking in the water, a drowning.

Subordinate (subordinatus) appointed or placed in order under another.

Subor^ (suborno) to make, prepare, instruct, foist, or bring in a false
witness; also to deprave, corrupt, or allure unto lewdness, to bribe.

Subpedaneous (subpedaneus) belonging to a footstool, or any thing under foot.

Subpaena, is a Writ that lies to call a man into the Chancery, to have equity
upon such case only as the Common Law has not provided for; There is also a
Subpaena ad testificandum, which lies for calling in witnesses to testify in a
Cause, as well in Chancery, as in other Courts; And the name proceeds from
words in the Writ, which charge the party called to appear at the day and place
assigned, sub paena centum librarum, etc. But in case the party to appear, be a
Lord of Parliament, or the Widow of such Lord, then is he or she called by the
Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellors Letter, giving them notice of the suit intended
against them, and desiring them to appear. Cromp. Juris. fol. 33.

Subriguous (subriguus) moist, wet, and waterish underneath.

Subsannate (subsanno) to scorn or mock with bending the Brows, or snuffing up
the Nose.

Subsecive (subsecivus) cut under or off, pared from the principal, borrowed or
sepated from other affairs, done at times.

Subservient (subserviens) serving, agreeing, helping forward.

Subsidence (subsidentia) a resting or settling in the bottom, a sitting under;
a staying or hiding ones self.

Subsidiary (subsidiarius) that is sent or given to the aid of another,
succoring, assistant.

Subsidy (subsidium) aid or assistance; a tax or tribute assessed by
Parliament, and granted by the Commons to be levied of every Subject, according
to the value of his Land or Goods, most commonly after the rate of 4 s. in the
pound for land; and 2 s. 8 d. for goods, etc.

Subsortition (subsortitio) a choosing by lots, after others have chosen, to
fill up the number of those that before were refused. ^uet.

Substitute (substituo) to ordain or appoint in place of another, to depute.

Substitutive (substitutivus) that is appointed or ordained in place of
another. Also a term in Logic, as Propositio substitutiva, a conditional
Proposition.

Substraction (substractio) a drawing out, of, or from, as a lesser number out
of a greater.

Substruction (substructio) an underpinning or ground-selling of a house; a
building or groundwork, the making, a foundation; an under-filling; A term in
Architecture.

Subsult (subsulto) to leap or hop under or about.

Subsultation (subsultatio) a leaping or hopping under or about.

Subsultory, that jumps or hops under. Bac.

Subtegulaneous (subtegulaneus) that is under the eaves or roofs of houses.

Subtense (linea subtendens) is a right line drawn from the one extreme of a
given Arch to the other, called also a Chord, and is as the string is to a Bow,
bent. A term in Geometry.

Subterduction (subterductio) a private stealing or leading away.

Subteruflous (subterfluus) which runs or flows under.

Subterfuge (subterfugium) a private escape, a shift, a crafty evasion; a
corner or hole to slip into, or slink out at.

Subterrany Subterraneous (subterraneus) that is under the ground.

Subterranity (subterranitas) the being under ground.

Subbentaneous (subventaneus) pertaining to the wind, windy; under the wind.

Suburbian (from suburbia) belonging to the Suburbs or out-streets and Parishes
of a Town or City.

Subuthicarian. See Vrbicarian.

Subbulturian (subvulturius) resembling or like a vulture; that lives by
ravine, as those birds do.

Suc (succus) juice or moisture that a healthful body receives of meat; also
generally all kind of juice, sirrop or broth; vigor or strength.

Succedaneous (succedaneus) that succeeds or comes in place of another.

A Succedaneous Medicament, is that which is substituted instead of another,
that is so rare it cannot be had, or so dear it cannot be purchased.

Succentor (Lat.) he that sings the Base. See Incentor. Our phrase, an old
Sincantor, is either a corruption from this word; or if it be written with a C,
then it is from the Fr. Cinquante, which signifies fifty, and so may be taken for
one that is fifty years of age or above. Act of Parl. 1649. ca. 24. mentions
Succenter as one of those Officers abolished with Deans and Chapters.

Succenturiate (succenturio) to fill up the number of the Band, for them that
are dead or absent; to recruit.

Succiduous (succiduus) low, ready to fall, faltering.

Succinct (succinctus) environed, fenced about; girt, compassed; also brief,
short.

Succineous (succineus) of or belonging to Amber.

Succisive (succisivus) cut off, or pared from the principal, pared or
separated from other affairs, done at times.

Succubius (Lat.) a Devil that sometimes, in the shape of a woman, lies with
men. See Incubus.

Succulent (succulentus) sappy, moist, full of juice, wel-liking, or in good
plight.

Succulency, juyciness, moisture. Bac.

Succumbents (succumbentes) those that lie or fall down under, or that are not
able to sustain; anciently it signified those penitents or excommunicate
persons that fell down on their knees and prayed in a certain place behind the
Quire or Pulpit.

Succussation (succussatio) a hard shaking or jolting, a violent jogging, the
trotting of a horse. Dr. Br.

Succussion. Idem.

Suction ( suctio or succus) a sucking. Bac.

Sudation (sudatio) a sweating; a taking pains.

Sudatory (sudatorius) that belongs to sweating.

A Sudatory (sudatorium) a Stew, a Hot-house, a place to sweat in. Sands.

Sudorous (from sudor, oris) sweaty, or full of sweat.

Sudorifick (sudorificus) that causes sweat Bac.

Suffarcinate (suffarcino) to truss or stuff up, to load or burden.

Suffarraneous (suffaraneus) that carries meal or flower to any place to sell;
also that is under a Servant.

Suffection (from sufficio) a substitution or putting in place of another.

Suffition (suffitio) a purfume, a fumigation, any thing that being laid or
cast upon hot coals, makes a sweet smell.

Sufflaminate (sufflamino) to skatch, scotch, or trig a wheel, lest it go
forward or backward too fast.

Sufflation (sufflatio) a blowing or puffing up.

Suffocate (suffoco, a faucibus) to stop the breath, to strangle, to stifle, to
choke, to kill.

Suffocation (suffocatio) a strangling, choking or stifling. See Lapidation.

Suffossion (suffossio) a digging under, or undermining.

Suffragan (suffraganeus) a Bishops Vicegerent, one that exercises the
Function of a Bishop, but has not the Title. The Statute 26. Hen. 8. cap 14.
inables every Diocesan at his pleasure to elect two sufficient men, etc.

Suffragation (suffragatio) a declaration of con^ent or favor, a giving ones
voice in election.

Suffrage (suffragium) a good word, or favorable voice in ones behalf, as at
the time of choosing Mayors, Burgesses or the like; a speaking in ones favor.

Suffrages, in ancient Rome were the voices of the people given by Centuries,
Curiae or Tribes, which went affirmatively under this form Vti rogas, i. be it
according to your Bill: And negatively thus, Antiquo, i. I deny or reject it.

Suffraginous (suffraginosus) that is diseased in the houghs or pasterns, that
has the Scratches or Spaven.

Suffricate (suffrico) to rub off, or under.

Suffumigate (suffumigo) to make a fume or smoke underneath. The smoke which is
physically received from under a stool into the body, for the diseases of the
Guts, Fundament or Matrix, is called Suffumigation. Cot.

Suffusion (suffusio) a spreading abroad, a pouring upon.

Suggestion (suggestio) a putting into ones mind, a prompting.

Sugillation (sugillatio) the being black and blew with beating, the blood-shot
of an eye; also reproach, slander

Suhit, See Gazul.

Suicide (from sui) the slaying or murdering of himself; self-murder.

Suist (from sui) one that loves himself, a selfish man.

Sulcate (sulco) to cast up in Furrows, to Till or Plow.

Sulphurous (sulphureus) belonging to, mixed with, or of the color of Sulphur
or Brimstone.

Sultan, in the Persian language, properly signifies an Earl. But Sultan or
Sultan among the Turks, Persians, and Arabians is commonly taken for a King,
Prince, or Sovereign. Also a Turkish Coin of Gold worth about our Six
shillings, six pence.

Sultanin Sultana a Turkish coin of gold worth about Seven shillings six pence,
or Seven shillings ten pence sterling; It is so called because coined at
Constantinople, where the Sultan lives.

Sumack, Sumake, or Sumaque, a kind of rank-smelling plant or shrub with
black-Berries, wherewith Curriers dress their leather.

Sumage, seems to be Toll for carriage on horseback. Crompt. juris. fol. 191.
for the book called Pupilla oculi, has these words pro uno equo portante
Summagium per dimidium anni, obulum. It is otherwise called a Seam; and a Seam,
in the Western parts is a horse load, which word Seam and Sumage may well come
of the Fr. Sum, i. Sarcina, and Sommier, equus sarcinarius, a Sumpter-horse.

Summary (summarium) a brief gathering together, an abridgement containing the
whole effect of a matter ^n few words, an Epitome.

Summit or Summity (summitas) height or hig^ness, the top; the either erd of a
thing beneath or above.

Summist or Summulst one that writes sums or brie^s upon any subject; an
abridger. Peripat. Instit.

Sumpter-horse (from sumptus) a horse that carries the necessaries and expenses
for a journey.

Sund or Sond (Sax.) a narrow passage at Sea, between two lands, a Straight.

Sumptifie (sumptifacio) to make great expenses or cost.

Sunamite (Heb.) dormiens, one sleeping. A worthy good woman of Suna that often
entertained Eliseus the Prophet, by whose prayers she had a Son, when by course
of nature she was past hopes of any, and afterward had the same Son raised
from death to life by the same Eliseus, 4 Kings.

Sunday was dedicated to the Idol of the Sun, by the old Pagan Saxons, and
therefore called the Sun's day, or day of the Sun; now dies Dominicus, or our
Lords day.

Superable (superabilis) that may be passed or overcome.

Superannate Superannuate (from the Ital. superannato) to out wear with, to
exceed in years, to grow old, or out of date, to live longer, to outlive. Bac.

Superate (supero) to overcome, to exceed or excel.

Superbifical (superbificus) that does a thing proudly, that makes proud.

Superbiloquence (superbiloquentia) arrogant speaking, proud, and haughty words.

Supercilious (superciliosus) pertaining to the eyebrows, sour in countenance;
also proud, squeamish.

Superchety (Fr.) foul-play, an injury, wrong, affront, assault on a sudden, or
upon great advantage. Tanslation of L' Home Criminelle.

Supereminence (supereminentia) a Prerogative, authority or excellency above
others.

Supererogation (supererogatio) laying out more then one has received, or the
doing more then a man is of necessity bound to do, a giving overplus. In
Divinity, works of Supererogation are usually taken to be such, as are done
upon a pious account; and to which a man is not bound in particular by any
positive precept of Gods Law.

Supererogatory, that gives overplus, or does more then obligation, or that is
apt to do so.

Superferation (superfaetatio) the conceiving another after the first young is
conceived; a second conceiving, or the breeding of young upon young.

Superfici^ (superficiarius) he that has built an house upon another man's
ground, and therefore pays Quit rent; belonging to the outside of a thing.

Superficies (Lat.) the uttermost part of any thing: the outside, the surface.
In Geometry, it is the second kind of quantity, to which are attributed two
dimensions, length and breadth, but not thickness, and it is the term or end of
a body, as a line is the end of a Superficies.

Superficialize (from superficies) to do any thing on the outside, or not
thoroughly.

Superfluirance Superfluity (superfluitas) operplus, excess more then needs.

Superiection (superjectio) a laying or casting upon.

Superinduce (superinduco) to lay upon, to cover, to draw over. Lo. Bac.

Superior (Lat.) one that is higher, above, or over others.

Superlative (superlativus) highest in degree, preferred.

Supermeate (supermeo) to go or slip over.

Supernal (supernus) that which comes from above, high.

Supernation (supernatio) a swiming upon, over, or aloft.

Supernatural (supernaturalis) which is above Nature, or the ordinary course of
it.

Supersaliency (from super and salio) a leaping or jumping upon. Br.

Supersedeas (from supersedeo, i. to omit, leave off or cease) is a Writ which
lies in diverse cases, and signifies a command or request to stay or forbear the
doing of that, which in appearance of Law were to be done, were it not for the
cause whereupon this Writ is granted; for example, a man regularly is to have
Surety of Peace against him, of whom he will swear he is afraid, and the
Justice required hereunto cannot deny him; yet if the party be formerly bound
to the Peace, either in Chancery, or elsewhere, this Writ lies to stay the
Justice from doing that which otherwise he might not deny.

This word is also used in our common discourse to like purpose, as when one is
commanded or requested to omit the doing that which he had former order, or
ought to have done, We say the former order or command is superseded.

Supersession (supersessio) a surceasing, a leaving off, or giving over.

Superstition ( superstitio, from super and sto.) an excess of ceremonious
Worship, vain Religion or Devotion; the worship of Demons; an honoring that
which should not be honored, a vain reverence or fear toward that thing,
wherein is no efficacy or force but only by illusion; spiced conscience in
vain things.

St. Thomas Aquinas mentions four kinds of Superstition. 2 da. 2 dae. qu. 92.
Art. 1. and Art. 2. in Corp.

Supervacaneous or Supervacuous (supervacaneus vel supervacuus) needless, vain
superfluous, not necessary, unprofitable; also that which is set aside, above
ordinary use, against some future occasion.

Supervene (supervenio) to come unlooked for, to come upon or after another
thing; to leap upon, as the Male does the Female.

Supervive (supervivo) to recover from peril of death, or when a man seems to
be dead; to outlive, or live longer then another thing.

Supine (supinus) upright, upward, the belly upward; also negligent and
careless.

Supinity (supinitas) a bending backward, a lying with the belly upward,
negligence, idleness.

Suppedaneous (suppedaneus) belonging to a footstool, or any thing that is set
under the feet.

Suppeditate (suppedito) signifies properly to relieve the skirmishers with
footmen, to supply or second with foot forces. Metaphorically, to give or
minister sufficiently, to supply or furnish what is wanting; also to subdue or
overcome.

Suppellecticarious (suppellecticarius) that pertains to household stuff.

Suppilation (suppilatio) a stealing or pilfering.

Supplant (supplanto, a planta pedis) to put under the foot, to trip with the
foot; also to overthrow, to deceive.

Supplant (supplanto, a sub and planto) to plant underneath, to under-plant and
set up a thing, bending to the ground.

Supplement (supplementum) that supplies or makes up what is wanting in
quantity or number, a supply; a filling up the number and places of.

Suppliant (Fr.) he that entreats humbly, or makes supplication, an humble
suitor; also used adjectively.

Supplicate (supplico) to beseech or entreat humbly, to make humble request.

Supplice (supplcium) punishment, correction, pain, torment; it is also used
for Prayer or Supplication, and sometimes for Sacrifice.

Supplosion (Supplosio) a stamp or noise with the feet.

Supposititi^us. See Subdititious.

Suppository (suppositorium) any thing put up into the fundament, to make the
body soluble, it is commonly made of honey boiled, til it grow thick, and so
made into an apt form for that purpose, whereto sometime is added the Yolk of an
Egg, or Salt, when we would have it work the effect more speedily. It may be
used adjectively, for, put, or set under.

Supposted (suppostus) put or set under, put in place of another; suborned,
underset.

Suppuration (suppuratio) a mattaring, a gathering of a Bile or Impostume into
a Mattary-head, a resolving into Mattar. Suppurare (says Min.) is sub pelle pus
agere: Quia tunc efficiendum est, ut materies apostematis in pus convertatur.

Supputation (supputatio) a pruyning or cutting Trees; a counting or reckoning.

Supremacy, the being of highest power or authority.

Supremity (supremitas) the estate of men after death, the last or highest
action of any thing.

Surannation (Fr.) a growing old, stale or above a years date, a Commission or
Command not executed within the year and day

Surbating (Fr. Surbatture) a beating under; as when the Soles of the Feet,
after a great journey on foot, are much beaten and sore.

Surcharge (Fr.) a new charg, a charge upon a charge, or burden upon burden.
Surcharge of the Forest is the commoning with more Beasts therein, then one
has right to.

Surcle (surculus) a young Set or Slip, a young Graff, a Scion, a Shoot, a
young Branch or Twig.

Surcoat (Fr. Surcot) an upper garment worn over another; a Coat of Arms to
wear over Armor.

Surcrew (Fr. surcroist) a Surplusage, over-measure, vantage, amends; also an
overgrowing.

Surculate (surculo) to cut off shoots or sprigs from trees; to prune trees.

Surculous (surculosus) full of shoots or sprigs.

Surd (surdus) deaf; also he that speaks not; insensible.

Surdity (surditas) deafness; also muteness.

Surge (from surgo) a wave.

Surplusage (Fr. Surplus) signifies in our Common Law superfluity or addition
more then needs, which sometimes is a cause that the writ abates. Brook tit.
Nugation and Superfluity fol. 100. Plowden casu Dive and Maningham f. 93. b. It
is also sometimes applied to matter of account, and signifies a greater
disbursment then the charge of the Accomptant amounts to.

Surprizal (Fr. surprinse) a sudden taking, an assaulting or coming upon a man
before he is aware; a taking tardy, or finding in the manner.

Surrejoynder, is a second defense of the Plaintiffs action, opposite to the
Defendants Rejoinder; And therefore Hotoman calls it Triplicationem, quae est
secunda actoris defensio, contra rei duplicationem opposita; Nor does Hotaman
only call this Triplicationem, but the Emperor himself, de Replicationibus
lib. 4. Instit. Titulo 14.

Surrender (sursum i redditio) is an instrument, testifying with apt words,
that the particular Tenant of Lands or Tenements for life or years, does
sufficiently consent and agree, that he who has the next or immediate
Remainder or Reversion thereof shall also have the particular estate of the
same in possession, and that he yields up the same unto him; For every
Surrender ought forthwith to give a possession of the things surrendered, West.
part. 1 lib. 2. sect. 503. where you may read diverse Presidents. But there may
be a Surrender without writing; And therefore there is said to be a Surrender
in Deed and a Surrender in Law; Surrender in Deed is that, which is really and
sensibly performed; Surrender in Law is intendment of Law, by way of consequent
and not actual. Perkins Surrender fol. 606. and Seq. As if a man have a Lease
of a Farm, and during the term he accept a new Lease, this Act is in Law a
Surrender of the former. Coke vol. 6. fol 11. b.

Surreptitious (surreptitius) stolen, or done by stealth, falsely come by, that
no man knows of.

Surrogate (surrogo) to put in place of another, to make ^ Deputy, to appoint
or put in ones room, to substitute or subrogate.

A Surrogate is one substituted to supply the room of mother, most commonly, of
a Bishop.

Sursengle (Fr. Sursangle) a long upper girth.

Survivor (from the Fr. Survivre) one that survives, over-lives or out-lives
another. In Law it is taken for the longer liver of two Joyntenants, or of any
two joined in the right of any thing.

Susan (Hebr.) Lilly or Rose. Suzan in the Persian tongue, signifies a Needle.

Susception (susceptio) an enterprise, a taking a thing in hand, an undertaking.

Susceptor (Lat.) an undertaker. Mr Fuller uses it for a Godfather at Baptism.

Suscitation (suscitatio) an often stirring up, a taking up, a taking one out
of his sleep, a raising up; a quickening.

Suspend (suspendo) to hang up or upon; Also to delay, to defer; to stay or
pause; to keep one in suspense and doubt.

Suspension (suspensio) a hanging up; also doubt, incertainty of mind. It is
used for a temporal stop of a man's right, and differs from Extinguishment in
this, that a right of estate suspended, revives again, but extinguished, dies
for ever. Brook tit. Extinguishment, and Suspension. f. 314. Supension is also
sometimes used in our Common, as it is in the Cannon Law, pro minori
Excommunicatione. An. 24. H. 8. c. 12.

Suspensories (from suspensio, or from the Fr. suspensoires) certain cords or
strings (hanging from the Bed-stead) for a sick man to take hold of, and bear
himself up with, when he would remove or alter his lying.

Suspiral (Fr. Souspiral) a passage for air or breath to come in and go out at;
a bent or breathing hole; hence the Tunnel of a Chimney, the Window of a
Seller, the Mouth of a Cave or Den. In the Statute of 35 H. 8. cap. 10. is
seems to be taken for a Spring of water, passing under the ground, toward a
Conduit or Cestern.

Suspiration (suspiratio) a sighing, an earnest desiring, a sighing after or
for one.

Susurrate (susurro) to whisper, to mutter, to carry tales.

Suitler Sutler (from the Dutch Soeteler, i. a Kitchen Slave, a Huckster) one
that follows an Army, and sells meat or other provision in it.

Suitor (Lat.) a Shoemaker, a Sewer.

Sutorious (sutorius) belonging to a Shoemaker, or Sewer.

Suture (sutura) a seam, a fastening or joining together; the line under the
yard of a man; also a joining together of bones in the head, much like a thing
drawn together with long stitches, etc.

Swainmot or Swantmote (from the Saxon Swain, i. a Freeholder, and Mot or
Gemot, conventus) is a Court of Freeholders within the Forest, kept by the
Charter of the Forest thrice in the year. An. 3. H. 8. cap 18.

Swallows Tail, in building, signifies a fastening two pieces of Timber so
strongly together, that they cannot fall asunder; and is so called from the
resemblance it has with a Swallows Tail, being forked.

Swarthy (from the Belg. Swart or Swert, i. black) blackish, of a dark tawney;
Sunburned.

Swart or Swert-Ruyter (Belg.) a black Horseman with black Arms. Hexham.

Swepe or Swipe (telo) was an instrument of war; like that which Brewers use
with cross beams to draw water. Tho. Est genus machinae ( ut ait Festus) quo
hauritur aqua, in alteram partem praegravante pondere.

Swepe, in some part of England, is taken for the crop of hay that is got in a
meadow.

Swil-po^gh. See Dilling.

Swinuer (from the Sax. Swine. i. labor) a laborer.

Swithin (Sax.) from the old English Switheahn, that is, very high, as Celsus
or Exuporius with the Romans. This name has been taken up in honor of St
Swithin, the holy Bishop of Winchester, about the year 860, and called the
weeping St Swithin, for that about his Feast Praesepe and Aselli, rainy
Constellations, arise cosmically, and commonly cause rain. Came.

Sword-sleip^r (Sax.) a dresser or maker of Swords. So used in the North of
England; And a Cutler with them deals only in knives.

Sybarites (Sybaritae) people of the City Sybaris, in sensual delights passing
all other; hence.

Sybaritical (sybariticus) dainty, wanton, sumptuous, effiminate.

Sybil (sybilla) a name of all women that had the spirit of Prophecy; there
were ten famous, the first was called Persica, 2. Lybica, 3. Delphica, 4.
Cumaea, 5. Erythraea, 6. Samia, 7. Cumana, 8. Hellespontica, 9. Phrygia, 10.
Tiburtina. They all prophesied of Christ's Incarnation. But the certain number
of them is not agreed on among Authors, some making more, others fewer; whereof
read Vulgar Errors, page 150.

Sybillianists, Christians so called by the Pagans in the Primitive times,
because they believed and esteemed the Prophecies of the Sybils, touching
Christ.

Sybilline (Sibillinus) belonging to a Sybil or Prophe^ess.

Sy^manty (Gr.) Divination by Fig, or Sycamore Leaves.

Sycamore (Sycamorus) a Tree like a Fig Tree, having great branches, and large
leaves like a Mulberry; it bears fruit three or four times in a year, much like
a wild Fig, but without any Seeds within. The fruit grows upon the very body
of the Tree and the great main boughs, and will never be ripe, except it be
scraped with an iron tool. It is found plentifully in Caria, Egypt, and the
Isle of Rhodes, especially in such places were Wheat will not grow.

Sycophant (sycophanta) a talebearer, a false accuser, a Deceiver, Parasite,
Smell-seast. The name arose upon this occasion; There was an Act in Athens,
that none should transport Figs out of the Territory Attica; such as gave
information of those that, contrary to this Law, conveyed Figs into other
parts, were termed Sycophants, from Sycon, which in Greek is a Fig.

Sycophantize (sycophantisso) to play the Sycophant, to slander or accuse
falsely, to deal deceitfully.

Syderation (syderatio) blasting of Trees with great heat and drouth,
tree-plague; also a sudden taking or benumming of a Limb.

Syderosous (syderosus) Planet-strucken; also full of Stars.

Syllabical (syllabicus) pertaining to or consisting of syllables.

Syllabize, to divide by syllables, or to make a Table, or Index to a Book.

Syllabary (from syllaba) a Book treating of syllables, or teaching the use or
knowledge of syllables; also as Syllabus.

Syllabus (Lat.) a Table or Index in a Book, to show places or matter by
Letters or Figures; also an Argument subtly reproving.

Syllogism (syllogisirus) a most perfect kind of Argument, which gathers a
necessary conclusion out of two premises; as thus,

2. Every vice is odious.

2. Drunkenness is a vice.

3. Ergo, Drunkenness is odious.

The first part of a Syllogism is called the Proposition or Major; the second,
the Assumption or Minor; and the third, the Conclusion.

Syllogystical (syllogisticus) pertaining to a Syllogism.

Syllogize (syllogizo) to reason or argue by Syllogisms.

Sylvanus, the God of the Woods.

Sylvatical (sylvaticus) belonging to Woods, or Trees, woody.

Sylvestrick Sylv^strious (sylvestris) of Wood or Forest, full of Trees or
Wood, woody.

Sylvi^erous (sylviger) that bears wood.

Symbol (symbola) a token, badge, or sign to know one by, a secret and
mystical note; a short and intricate riddle or sentence; also an uniform
concurrence of diverse opinions; also the sum of our belief, the Creed. Many
frauds you shall read in Plautus, plotted and acted by counterfeiting, and sly
conveyance of these Symbols or tokens, wherein there was ever some image or
other. So the Symbol of Amphytrion in that Tragicomedy was Sol cum quadrigis,
the Sun in his Chariot drawn with four horses. Pyrgopolinices the bragging
Soldier, had his own lovely self with great decorum drawn in his Signet for a
Symbol.

To Symbolize (from symbola) to sympathize, to concur in opinion, ump in
Councils, agree in humors or manners with; also to join purses, or pay rateably
toward any charge, to club. Also by certain outward signs to signify some
hidden thing; thus an eye symbolizeth vigilance. Fire and Air are called
Symbolizing Elements, so are Earth and Water; because they share and
participate of each others quality.

Symbolical (symbolicus) of or pertaining to a Symbol, or token.

Symbolical Philosophy, is that kind of Learning and Wisdom, which, knowing
the causes and proprieties of things natural and supernatural, teach us how to
make or expound those mystical and artificial bodies called Symboles, of what
kind soever.

Symbolography (Gr.) a description of Symboles, a writing or expression of
things by signs and tokens; also the art or description of Instruments or
Presidents.

Symmachy (symmachia) aid in war, league among men of diverse Countries to join
in war against one

Symmetry (symmetria) due proportion of each thing to other, in respect of the
whole. The convenience that runs between the parts, and the whole.

Symmetrist or Symmetrian (from Symmetria) one that considers the due
proportion of a thing, and how well the parts agree with the whole; one skilled
in proportions.

Symmist (symmista) one of the privy Council, a Secretary; a fellow or
colleague in a (sacred) profession.

Sympathetical (sympatheticus) agreeing well together, in nature, disposition,
or passions.

Sympathy (sympathia) natural consent or combination, mutual passion, affection
or disposition, fellow-feeling, symbolizing; as water in coldness, participates
or sympathizes with the Earth; in moistness with the Air. Resemblance of
quality, concordance of natures and things.

Sympathize (sympathizo) to have a fellow-feeling of, to ^ump with in passion,
consent with in affection, agree with in disposition.

Symphony (symphonia) consent in tune or time, a tuneable singing without
jarring, harmony.

Symphoniacal (symphoniacus) of or belonging to consent or harmony.

Symphonist (symphonista) a Chorister, one that sings with true tune and time.

Symposiast (symposiastes) the Master or overseer of a Feast, a Feast-maker.

Symposiaques, Books treating of Feasts and Banquets, such are those of
Plutarch so called.

Symptom (symptoma) an effect, accident or passion, following a disease, or
sensible grief joined with it; as headache with an Ague; a pricking in the side
with a Plurisie: generally whatever happens in a living Creature against or
besides nature, as sickness and the inward causes and accidents thereof.

Symptomatical (from symptoma, atis) of or pertaining to a Symptom.

Synelaepha (Gr.) a contraction of two vowels into one.

Synagogue (from the Gr. (...), to gather together) commonly taken for a house
(among the Jews) dedicated to the worship of God, wherein it was lawful to
pray, preach, and dispute, but not to sacrifice. In Hebrew it was called Beth
Harneseth, the house of Assembly. The Temple of Jerusalem was as the Cathedral
Church; the Synagogues, as petty Parish Churches belonging thereto.

Synagogical (synagogicus) pertaining to a Synagogue.

Synaxis (Gr.) the holy Communion, the Eucharist.

Syncategorematical, a term in Logic, signifying what has no predicamental or
self-signification, but being added to another, qualifies that differently from
what it was. As on the contrary Categorematical imports what has a
predicamental or self-signification.

Syncentrick (Gr.) that has the same center with another.

Syncopize Syncopate (syncopo) to cut away, to contract; also to swoune.

Syncrism (syncrisma) a liquid Medicine, a thin and spreading ointment.

Synchronical (ejusdem temporis) contemporary. Charl.

Synchronism (from the Gr. (...), i. cum; and (...), tempus) the being or
happening of two things at one, and the same time, contemporanianism,
co-existence. Sir W. Ra.

Syncretism (Gr.) the joining or agreement of two enemies against a third
person.

Syndic (syndicus) a censor or controller of manners; an Advocate, Agent or
Attorney for a Commonwealth, or for the Commonalty of a City or Country, one
that has the charge or Commission to deal in affairs of the Commonwealth with
a foreign Prince. The Government of Geneva is by a Common Council, consisting of
Two hundred, the four chief whereof are called Sindiques. There are also
Syndicks at Naples, Dantzick, and other places.

Syndicable (from syndic) subject unto examination, censure, or controlment.

Syndicat, the Office or degree of a Syndick.

Syndrome (Gr.) running together, or a running of many to the same place; a
concourse. Dr. Br.

Synecdachical, pertaining to the figure Synecdoche; that is, when a part is
understood by the whole, or the whole by a part. B. Derry.

Synedrion; see Sanhedrim.

Synerize (from syneresis) to contract two into one; as when we contract two
Vowels into a Dipthong.

Syngraph (syngrapha) a Writing or Deed, made or signed with the hand of him
that makes a bargain; an Obligation or Bond betwixt two or more; a Specialty of
ones own hand. Tho.

Synod (synodus) a meeting or Assembly of Ecclesiastical persons, for the cause
of Religion. Of this there are four kinds: As first, a General Ecumenical or
Universal Synod or Council, and that is, where Bishops, etc. of all Nations
meet. Secondly, National Synod, where those of one only Nation meet. Thirdly,
Provincial Synod, where Ecclesiastical persons of one only Province meet.
Fourthly, Diocesan Synod, where those of but one Diocese meet. See Convocation.

Synodal Synodical (Synodicus) pertaining to a Synod, or Assembly of Divines.

Synonima's (synonima) words of one and the same signification, which is to be
understood both of Appellatives and proper names; as Ensis mucro, gladius, all
Latin for a Sword; and Publius, Cornelius, Scipio, Africanus, all one man's
name. So, stout, hardy, valiant, doubty, courageous, adventurous, all
comprehended under the Latin word (fortis).

Synonimize, to vary the word, but keep the same signification, to use
Synonima's, to make two words bear one sense.

Synonimous Synonimal pertaining to words of the same signification, or whose
name and definition are common.

Synoper (synopsis) Red Lead. See Cinnaber.

Synopic (Gr.) Green in Blazon.

Synopsy (synopsis) an Inventory, a short view, or brief recital of any thing.

Syntagm (syntagma) a Treatise, Ordinance, or Constitution; a placing things
together.

Syntax (syntaxis) the construction and coherence of words and parts of Speech
by concord and agreement; a volume gathered of diverse works; also a Tribute, or
sum of money to be distributed to many.

Syntectical (syntecticus) that sounds often, that is weak or brought low.

Synteresy (synteresis) the pure part of conscience; or a natural quality
engraffed in the soul; which inwardly informs a man, whether he do well or ill.

Syntheme (synthema) a token given to Soldiers, when they are ready to fight, a
watch word; also a riddle or intricate sentence.

Synthetical, pertaining to the figure Synthesis, which is when a noun
collective singular is joined with a verb plural.

Syntomy (syntomia) a cutting away, brevity, conciseness

Siren; see Siren.

Syrtes (omnibus linguis) a sandy place in the utmost parts of Africa, where
the sands so move with the waves, that that which was now deep sea is
streight-way full of Quicksands; and is usually taken for any Quick-sand or
shelf in the water.

Sysigte (sysigia) a conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, the new Moon.

Systatique (Gr. (...)) that has the force or power of compacting, building,
or putting together. Bac.

Systeme (systema) the compass of a song, or (by a metaphor) of any other
thing; the body of any Art or Science, comprehended in one Treatise

Systole (Gr.) the motion or lifting up of the heart or Arteries; also the
shortning of a long vowel.

T.
TAbaco; see Tobacco.

Tabefy (tabefacio) to corrupt, consume or melt.

Tabellary (tabellarius) a carrier of letters; an Auditor, a Scrivener.

Tabellarions (tabellarius, a, um) belonging to Carriers or Auditors.

Tabellion (tabellio) a Notary public, or Scrivener, allowed by authority to
ingross and register private contracts and obligations; His Office in some
countries did formerly differ from that of Notarie, but now they are grown or
made one; see Notary.

Taberd or Tabard (Sax.) a Jacket, Jerkin, Mandilion, or sleeveless Coat; a
chymere Verstegan says, it was antient^y a short Gown that reached no further
then the midleg; Stow in his Survey, p. 456. says, 'twas a Jacket or sleeveless
Coat, whole before, open on both sides, with a square Collar winged at the
shoulders. It is now the name only of an Heralds Coat, and is called their
Coat of Arms in Service. It is also the sign of an ancient Inn in Southwark.

Tabernacle (tabernaculum) a Pavillion or Tent for War; a little Shop, Shed, or
Booth, made of bords or boughs. The Tabernacle of God you may read described,
Exodus 26. It was made like a Tent to remove to and fro as occasion required, it
had in it one room called Sanctum Sanctorum, wherein the high Priest entered
but once a year, and another room called the Holy place, etc. Heb 9.2, 3, 4.

There was of old among the Israelites, a feast commanded by God, called the
feast of Tabernacles, which began on the 15. day of the Seventh month, and
continued seven days, during which time the Israelties lived abroad in
Tabernacles, in remembrance that their Fathers a long time so lived, after God
had delivered them out of the Land of Egypt. Now the feast of Tabernacles drew
near, Lev. 23.34.

Tabernarious (tabernarius) belonging to Shops or Taverns.

Tabid (tabidus) corrupted, consuming, pining away.

Tabifical (tabificus) that brings into consumption, pyning or rotting away;
contagious, corrupt, poisonous.

Tabuha (Heb.) Roe-Buck; a woman's name.

Laws of the 12 Tables ( leges 12 tabularum) were certain Grecian Laws brought
for the most part from Athens by the decemviri unto Rome, and there written in
12. Tables of brass, and set up in the Market place; by which Laws Justice was
ever after administered to the Roman people. Excellency of the Civil Law. p.
134. See Decemvirate.

Table of Apelles, was a picture drawn by Apelles, that famous Painter, the
moral whereof was on the one side to represent the excellency of abstinence,
and sobriety in the life of man; and on the other, the deformity of drunkenness
and gluttony, etc. you may read the story at length in part 1. Tr. of times,
fol. 609.

Tabouret (Fr.) a Pincase; also a little low stool for a child to sit on. In
France the privilege of the Tabouret, is of a stool for some particular great
Ladies to sit in the Queens presence.

Tabular (tabularis) whereof boards, plancks, or tables may be made, long and
large.

Tabulary (tabularium) a chest or place wherein Registers, or Evidences are
kept in a City; the Chancery or Exchequer Office.

Tabularious (tabularius) pertaining to writings or accounts; also belonging to
tables, or good for them.

Tabulate (tabulo) to board a floor or other place, to make a thing of boards.

Taces, armor for the thighs; so called because they are tached or tacked on
with straps of leather to the corslet.

Tachygraphy (Gr.) the art or description of swift writing.

Taciturnity (taciturnitas) silence, secrecy of tongue, keeping of counsel.

Taci^e (tacitus) that holds his peace, and is still; quiet, saying nothing,
without noise.

Tacticks (tactici) they whose office is to set an Army in array; also books
treating of that subject.

Taction (tactio) a touching.

Tagliacotian Nose (an inhabitant of Bruxiels had his Nose cut off in a
combat, and a new one of another man's flesh set on in its sted, by
Tagliacotius, a famous Chyrurgeon of Bononia) a Nose of wax. Dr. Charl.

Tagus a River in Spain, parting Castile from Portugal, where has been found
gravel like gold.

T^le (from the Fr. Taille, i. a cut or cutting) signifies in our Common Law, a
kind of inheritance in Fee, as when a man holds lands to him, and the Heirs of
his body lawfully begotten. This Tail is different, and as it were cut from
Fee-simple or free inheritance, because it is not in the Tenants free power to
dispose of those lands, being as it were Taille, cut from him, or divided by
the first giver, and entailed or tied on his issue, etc. Tail is either general
or special, whereof you may read at large in Littleton

Tails. Kentish men are said to have tails, which thus took its origin; St.
Thomas of Canterbury being in disfavor with Hen. 2. rode from the Court toward
Canterbury upon a poor Jade, and some common people, the more to vilify him,
cut off his horse tail, for which crime the successors of those people are said
to have had tails, as a judgment from heaven for some generations, now long
since ceased; And from hence the French do in derision call us in general
Caudate.

Tailage or Taliage (from the Fr. taille) a tax, tribute, or imposition. Hence
also Tailagiers in Chaucer, for tax or toll-gatherers.

Tainct, a kind of red-coloured Spider, found in the summertime; It is so
little of body that ten of the largest will hardly outweigh a grain; this by
Country people is accounted a deadly poison to Cows and Horses: But see Vul.
Err. p. 177.

Talaries (talaria) shoes with wings, which Mercury wore, as Poets feign.

Talassion (talassio) a song used to be sung at marriages; see Thalassio.

Talent (talentum) a value of money, of diverse sorts; Among the Greeks there
were two Talents, the greater and the less; the greater valued about 233 l.
sterling. the less about 175 l. Among the Hebrews the Talent of silver contained
of ours 375 l. The Talent of Gold was 4500 l. It also signifies a faculty or
aability; as we say a man of good talents, i. of good parts or abilities.

Tales de Circumstantibus; see Circumstantibus.

Taley or tally, from the Fr. taille* i. cut or slit; because a taley is a
score made of a stick of wood slit in two pieces, to keep account between two
parties; one part of it remaining in the custody of the one, and the other of
the other, so that one cannot score up any thing without the other.

Talion, or lex talionis, a Law where each suffered what they had done to
others, eye for eye, one bad turn for another, Deuteronomy. 19.21. and Aul. Gell. lib.
11. ca. 1.

Talismans (Arab.) images, or figures made under certain constellations;
Magical Characters; see Gaffarels curiosities, p. 147. for their antiquity and
use; see Gamahes.

Talismanical belonging to such Images.

Tallage; see Taliage.

Talmud or Thalmud (from the Hebr. (...) talmid,.i disciplina) a superstitious
and blasphemous Book containing the body of the Jewish Law, composed by their
Rabbis, and of great authority among them.

Talmudical, pertaining to the Talmud, superstitious.

Talmudist, a Student or Professor of the superstitions contained in the Talmud.

Talpicide (talpicida) the taking or killing Moles or Woants.

Talwood, Ann. 33. and 35. H. 8. ca. 3. and A. 7 Ed. 6. ca. 7. and 42 Eliz. ca.
14. Talshide, ibid. It is a long kind of shide of wood, riven out of the tree,
which shortened, is made into Billets.

Tamarinds (tamarindi) a fruit brought hither out of India like green
Damascens, the tree whereof is like a Date tree, they are cold of operation,
and therefore good against burning Fevers, and all inward diseases proceeding
of heat and choler.

Tamarisk (tamarice) a shrub, whereof there are two kinds, the greater, which
bears fruit like the lesser oak apples, or galls, the less bearing gayish
leaves without fruit; The decoction of which lesser Tamarisk, in wine and a
little vinegar being drunk, i^ of great virtue against the lardness or stopping
of the spleen or Milt.

Tamburine, an old kind of instrument, which by some is supposed to be the
Clarion-Spencer.

Tampeon or Tampkin (Fr. Tampon) a bung or stopple. It is a small piece of
wood, turned fit for the mouth of any piece of Ordnance, to keep out rain or
seawater.

Tampoy, a curious sort of drink in the Moluccoes and Philippines made of a
kind of Gilliflowers. Mr. How.

Tanacles (from the Ital. Tanaglie) Tongues or Pincers for tortures.

A Tangent, Is a right line perpendicular to the Diameter, drawn by the one
extreme of a given Ark, and terminated by the Secant, drawn from the Center
through the other extreme of the said Ark.

Tangible (tangibilis) which may be touched, touchable.

Tanistry (a thanis, viris a^ud Saxones honoratis) a cer^ain Law or custom in
Ireland, which did not observe the he^editary right of succession a^ong Princes
and great persons, but he that had most power, was eldest of the house and was
most worthy of blood and name, did inherit. Antiq. Hib. p. 38.

Tantalize, Poets feign Tantalus, King of Phrygia, to have been the son of
Jupiter, and the Nymph Plota, and that he received the gods to a banquet, and
sod his own son Pelops, and gave them him to eat; Ceres only did eat of the
shoulder, the rest forbearing that meat, yet Pelops was restored to life and
received an ivory shoulder for his own; and for that Tantalus discovered the
secrets of the gods to men; therefore is he said to be tormented in hell thus;
He stands up to the chin in a pleasant River, and a tree of fair fruit hanging
over him, and yet is he always plagued with hunger and thirst, for when he
either stoops down to drink, or reaches out his hand to take an apple, they
both so retire that he cannot touch the one or taste the other, therefore he
may be called Tantalus, quasi (...), i. infelicissimus. Hence to be tantalized,
is to be in the condition of Tantalus, to be near unto, or in sight of some
happiness or wished thing, and yet not to be permitted to enjoy it.

Tapinage (Fr.) secrecy, a lurking or lying close.

Tapissant (Fr.) lurking, lying, squatting, a term of hunting, called shortly,
Tapis.

Tara-tantara, or Tarantara (from the British Tara^, i. thunder, or from taro
and taraw, i. to strike, and so may signify as much as percutiens, percute) it
is a word of encouragement to battle which Trumpets do (as near as they can)
imitate.

Tarantarize (tarantarizo) to sound a Trumpet, to sing or sound tara-tantara.

Tarantula (Lat.) a most venomous Spider, so called, of Tarentum, a Neapolitan
City, where they most abound; some take it to be a fly, whose sting is deadly;
yet curable by diverse sounds of Music. See more of this in Sands Travels, fol.
249.

Tardigrade (tardigradus) that goes slow, or has a slow pace.

Tardiloquent (tardiloquus) that speaks slowly, or draws his speech out at
length.

Tardity (tarditas) slowness, slackness, hindering or delaying.

Tar-pawling or Tarpauli^, a piece of canvass tar'd all over, to lay upon the
Deck of a ship, to keep the rain from soaking through; also one of the meaner
sort of Sailers, because commonly clothed in Canvas.

Tarshish the Ocean or main Sea, Psa. 48.9. Break the ships of Tarshish.
Tarshish was the name of the Son of Javan, the son of Japeth, the son of Noah,
Genesis 10.4. of whom Tarsus a City of Cicilia in Syria, had the name, Acts 21.34.
from thence they went by shipping into far Countries Africa, Judea, Ophir, etc.
1 Kings 22.48. and 10.21. Hereupon that sea was called Tarshish, and the name
is generally applied to every Ocean. Wilson.

Tarrasse (Fr. terrasse) bank or heap of earth; bu^ most usually an open
Gallery or place to walk in, commonly above ground.

Tarter (Fr. tartre) the Lees or dregs that stick to the sides of wine vessels,
hard and dry like a crust; sound, and so close compacted that you may beat it
into powder; called also Argal.

Tartarine Tartarean (tartareus) of hell, hellish terrible.

Tases; see Taces.

Tassel or Tiersel (Fr. tiercelet) the male of any kind of Hawk; so termed,
because in bigness or strength of body, he is commonly a third part less then
the female.

Taurean (taureus) Taurine (taurinus) of ^ belonging to a Bull.

Tauricornous (tauricorni) horned like a Bull. Br.

Tauriferous (taurifer) which bears or nourishe^ Bulls or Neat.

Taurus the greatest h^l in all Asia, which in hoy Writ is called Mount Ara^t.
Also one of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

Tautologie (tautologia) a repeating of one and the same thing in other words.

Tautological (tautologicus) that does so repeat.

Taxers, two Officers yearly chosen in Cambridge, to see the true gage of all
weights and measures; the name took beginning from taxing or rating the rents
of houses, which was anciently the duty of their Office.

Technical (technicus) artificial, cunning, done like a workman.

Technology (Gr.) a treating or description of Crafts, Arts or Workmanship.

Tectonick (tectonicus) of or belonging to a builder.

Tectorian (tectorius) pertaining to covering, pargetting washing or
white-lyming.

Tedder (from the Dutch Toddere^, i. to tie) to tie a a horse or beast with a
rope, that he may grase within such a compass, and no further* and sometimes the
Rope it self.

Tediferous (tedifer) that bears a torch or taper.

Tegment (tegmentum) a covering, a garment or clothing. Br.

Teirse; see Tierse.

Telarie (from tela) pertaining to a web or weaving, Dr. Brown speaks of Telary
Spiders, that is such as weave cobwebs. Vul. Err.

Telescope (Gr.) an instrument enabling one to see afar off; a Prospective
glass.

Telesme; see Talisman.

Te^feron (telifer) which bears darts, arrows or weapons.

Tellus, the goddess of the earth.

Temerarious (temerarius) more hardy then needs, and wisdom requires,
foolhardy, rash, indiscreet, unadvised.

Tem^i^ (temeritas) rashness, fool-hardiness, unadvisedness.

Temp^, a pleasant and most delightful place in Thessaly, held to be the Muses
garden; whence all pleasant woods and fields receive that name.

Temperament (temperamentum) a moderation, mean or measure, a due proportion of
the four humors of the body.

Temperamental, pertaining to temperament.

Temperance (temperantia) moderation, refraining of sensuality and unruly
affections, soberness.

Temperance is a virtue, which rules the appetite, bridles our sensual
delights, and makes a man content to moderate himself in them according to
reason. Tour. Cat.

Temperature (temperatura) moderation in mingling things together; good
disposition, temperateness.

Tempestivity (tempestivitas) season or time convenient, opportunity, fitness
of time, seasonableness.

Templaries, or Knights of the Temple (Templarii) certain religious
Christian-souldiers dwelling about the Temple at Jerusalem, and therefore so
called, whose office and vow was to defend that Temple and the holy Sepulcher,
and to entertain Christian strangers that came thither for devotion, to guard
them in safety, when they went to visit the places of the holy land: Their
habit was a white cloak or upper garment with a red cross and a sword gir^
about them, as you may see in Mr. Dugdales Antiquities of Warwickshire. This
order was instituted by Pope Gelasius about the year of our Lord 1117. or 1120.
and had flourished about two hundred years, when it was suppressed by Clement
the fifth.

These Templars first founded and built the Temples or Templars Inn in
Fleetstreet, which without controversy is the most ancient of all the Inns of
Court, and though they were divided into three several Houses, that is the
Inner, the Middle, and the Outward Temple (which last is now converted into
Essex house) yet were they at first all but one House; in which these Knights
lived in great honor and opulency about one hundred years; For they had many
Castles, Lordships, and Seignories belonging to them and their Order in many
parts of England; and the Master of this Order was a Baron of this Nation;
their Church, yet standing, was dedicated to the service of God by Heraclius,
Patriarck of Jerusalem, An. Dom. 1185.

After the suppression of these Templars, their lands were (by a general
Council held at Vienna) conferred on the other more ancient and religous
Knights of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, called also Joannites, and after
Knights of Rhodes, and lastly of Malta, where they live at this day. And this
Cannon of the Council was confirmed to the Knights of Saint John residing here
in England by Act of Parliament made 17. Ed. 2. In the reign of Edw. 3, (after
several noble persons had in this interval been tenants and occupants of the
Temple Inns) certain of the reverend ancient Professors of the Laws obtained a
very large or perpetual Lease of this Temple, or of two parts thereof,
distinguished by the names of the Middle and Inner Temple, from the said
Joannites (then residing in their goodly house called the Priory of St. John of
Jerusalem, near Smithfield) to pay yearly ten pounds.

These Knights Templars bore for their Arms, a Shield Argent, charged with a
Cross Gules, and upon the Nombril of it, a holy Lamb. And Mat. Paris says, on
their common Seal was engraven a horse with two men riding on him. But the
Society of the Inner Temple have taken for their Ensign or Devise, a Pegasus,
or flying Horse, sable or gules upon a Shield Or. Over the door of the Temple
Church was this inscription in ancient characters, remaining legible till April
1656. since which time the latter part of it is defaced. Anno ab incarnatione
domini MCLXXXV. dedicata haec Ecclesia in honorem beatae Mariae a Domino
Eraclio Dei gratiae Sanctae resurrectionis Ecclesiae Patriarcha, quarto Idus
Februarii, qui eam annatim petentibus, de injuncta sibi penitentia, LX. dies
indulsit.

Temporaneous (temporaneus) done suddenly, at a certain time, pertaining to
time; variable for the time.

Temporary (temporarius) in time, at the hour appointed, temporal, temporeous.

Temporaities of Bishops, were such revenues as had been given to their Sees by
the Kings and other great Personages, as they were Lords of the Parliament. See
Spiritualities of Bishops.

Temporize (from tempus, oris) to observe, agree with, or apply himself to the
time; to seek to please the times, to live as the times go; also to linger or
protract the time.

Temporizer, he that does so, a time-server.

Temulency (temulentia) drunkenness.

Temulent Temulentine (temulentus) drunken, cupshot.

Tenacies (tenacia) the stalks of apples. Lustra Lud.

Tenacious (tenax, acis) that holds fast, long and steadfast, good and sure,
clammy, glewish; also hard to be moved, stiff-necked.

Tenacity (tenacitas) fastkeeping, sure holding, niggardliness, misery; also
constancy, stedfastness.

Tend (tendo) to extend, to stretch out, to bend, to incline, to make toward,
to draw on.

Tendency (tendentia) an extending, a stretching out; a going forward, a making
toward.

Tenderlings, the soft tops of a Deers horns when they are in blood, any living
things that are nesh and tender.

Tendons or Tendines (Lat. tendones) certain instruments of moving in the top
of muscles, made of sinews and ligatures, and knitting them to the bones, they
are harder then sinews, and not so hard as ligatures. Thom.

Tendrels (from the Fr. tendron, or Lat. tenendo) little sprigs of vines or
other plants wherewith they take hold to grow or stay themselves up; also a
kind of gristle.

Tenebres (Fr. a tenebrae) darkness, obscurity; also the Service or Mattins
used in the Roman Church on Wednesday Thursday and Friday before Easter, are
called tenebrae, (and thence tenebrae-Wednesday, Thursday, etc.) as being begun
with many lights, and ending in darkness, representing the nightime of our
blessed Saviors apprehension in the Garden Gethsemani; in which Office are
lighted at the first on a triangular candlestick fifteen candles, viz. as many
as there are Psalms and Canticles in the Office, and at the end of every Psalm
one of the fifteen lights is extinguished till they are all put out; so to show
the forsaken desolate state of our blessed Savior in his passion, all the
light or comfort of his friends leaving him, or being forced from him for a
time, and he left alone suh potestate tenebrarum, under the power of darkness.

Tenebrosity (tenebrositas) great darkness or obscurity.

Tenebrous (tenebrosus) very close, dark or obscure.

Tenerity (teneritas) softness, tenderness.

Tenn^, a term used by Heralds signifying an orange or tawny color.

Teno^, that part of a Post or Rafter which is put into a mortise hole, to make
it stand upright, or bear it up.

Tenor (Lat.) a continual order, form, fashion, trade, state or race; Also the
content or substance of a matter.

The tenor part in music is that which is next above the base. The order in
consort-vocal music is thus; 1. Base. 2. Tenor. 3. Counter-tenor; 4. Mean or
Contra-alto. 5. Treble or Alto.

Tensile (tensus) stretched out, bent, strouting out.

Tent^ has diverse significations. As first (from tentorium) it signifies a
Pavillion or Tent for War, commonly made of Sackcloth or such like.

2. Tent which Chyrurgions put into a wound, comes from ( tento, to try)
because it tries how wide or deep the wound is.

3. Jewellers call that Tent which they put under Table Diamonds when they set
them in work, and is made of Mastick and Turpentine.

4. Tent or Tint wine, is a kind of Alicant, though not so good as pure
Alicant, and is a general name for all wines in Spain, except white, from the
Span. (vino tinto) i. a deep red wine.

5. Tent (from tentum) a man's privy member.

Tentative (from tento) the posing (for the passing) of Graduates; a probation
or examination of such as are to to take degree, or that tries or examines.

Tenths (decimae) is that yearly portion of tribute, which all Ecclesiastical
Livings yield to the King, An. 26. H. 8. cap. 3. The Levites paid them to their
high Priests, Numb. 8. Hieron. in Ezekiel. It signifies also a tax levied of
the temporalty. Holinsh. H. 2. fol. 111.

Tentorian (tentorianus) belonging to a Tent or Pavillion.

Tenuate (tenuo) to make small, thin or slender; to make lean, or feeble.

Tenuifolious, thin or narrow leafed. Br.

Tenuious or Tenuous (tenuis) slender, thin, low, lean, poor, sparing, small,
of no estimation. L. Bac.

Tenuity (tenuitas) smalness, poverty, leanness, thinness, fineness.

Tenure (from tenere to hold) is the manner whereby Lands and Tenements are
holden of their Lords. What may make a Tenure, and what not. See Perkins
Reservations 70. By Act of Parl. 1656. ca. 4. all Tenures are now turned into
free and common Soccage.

Tepefie (tepefacio) to make warm.

Tephragmantie (Gr.) divination by ashes, blown or cast up in the air.

Tepid (tepidus) mean between cold and hot, lukewarm; also cold and nothing
earnest in a matter.

Tepidity (tepiditas) lukewarmness. Tepor idem.

Teraphim (the Heb. word Taraph signifies in general the complete image of a
man) in particular an Idol or Image made for men's private use in their own
houses, Genesis 31.30. Judges 17.5.

Teribinthine (terebinthinus) belonging to Turpentine, or the tree out of which
it issues.

Terebrate (terebro) to bore or make a hole with a wimble or awger, to pierce,
to thirle.

Terebration (terebratio) a boring or piercing. Bac.

Tergeminous (tergeminus) three fold, triple; one of, or the three born at the
same time.

Tergiductor (Lat.) the hinder man, or bringer up of a file of Soldiers.

Tergiment (tergimentum) that which is put into the scales to makes weight.

Tergiversation (tergiversatio) a flinching, withdrawing, shifting, slinking,
shrinking back or dodging, a nonsuit in Law, a hasting, a running away, yet
fighting still. See Calumniate.

Termagant (from ter and (...), i. magnus) thrice great, or great in the
superlative degree. Sir W.D.

Terminals (terminalia) feasts instituted to the honor of Terminus, the god of
Bounds, and kept in February, at the eighth Calends of March, because between
terminalia and refugium, the odd days of the Leap year were put in.

Terminate (termino) to end, to finish, to bound, to appoint or assign bounds
or marches, to limit.

Terminus, the God of Bounds, who was wont to end the strifes and controversies
of Country people in dividing their lands. See Lactantius l. 1. c. 20.

Ternary Ternarious (ternarius) belonging to the number three.

Ternion (ternio) the number three.

Terra-sigillata (Lat.) an earth brought from the Isle Lemnos, it was used to
be sent from thence sealed, therefore called sigillata, and said to be good for
curing wounds, stopping fluxes, expelling poisons, etc.

Tertae-filius ( i. son of the earth) the name of the Fool in the Acts at
Oxford.

Terrene (terrenus) earthly, that lives on the earth, or is done on the earth.

Terrestrial. Idem.

Terrestrify, to make earthly or like earth. Br.

Terrar or Terrer (from terra) a particular or survey of a Manor, or of ones
whole estate of lands, containing the quantity of acres and boundaries thereof.
In the Exchequer there is a Terrar of all the Glebelands in England, made about
the II. of Edw. 3. Sometimes used for a suit-roll, or catalogue of all the
tenants and Residents names within a Manor, and what Lands they hold.

Terre-tenant (i. tenens terram) is he, who has the natural actual possession
of the land, which we otherwise call the occupation, A. 39 Eliz. cap. 7. For
example, a Lord of a Manor has a Freeholder, who lets out his free land to
another, this third person is called the Terre-tenant. West. part. 2. Simb.
tit. Fines sect. 137.

Terricrepant (terricrepus) that rebukes terribly or bitterly.

Terrisonant (terrisonus) that sounds terribly.

Territory (territorium) the Country or Continent of land lying within the
bounds of a City, Town or Lordship.

Terrulent (terrulentus) earthy or earthly, made of earth.

Terse (tersus) clean, pure, neat; as a terse Oration, i. neat or well-pen'd.

Tertiate (tertio) to Till ground, or do any thing the third time; to
tri-fallow, as they say in Herefordshire.

Tertiary (tertiarius) of or belonging to the third, or the third sort, tertian.

Tessera (Lat.) a thing in every part square, as a Dye; Also a watchword, or
signal, a note, mark or token, etc.

Tesserarious (tesserarius) belonging to Tessera, or a Dye.

Test, is a broad instrument, made of Maribone ashes hooped about with iron, on
which Refiners do fine, refine and part gold and silver from other Metals, or
(as we use to say) put them to the Test.

Testaceous (testaceus) made of tile, brick, or baked earth; that has a shell.
Testaceous animals, are such as have shells* as all shel-fish, snails, etc.

Testament, testamentum, i. testatio mentis, the witness of of the mind, as
the last Will and Testament is, of which there are two sorts, viz. nuncupatory,
and in writing; The first is when a man being sick, and for fear least death,
want of memory or speech should come so suddenly upon him, that he should be
prevented, if he staid the writing his Will, desires his neighbors and friends
to bear witness of his last Will, and then declares the same by words before
them; which after his decease, being proved by the witnesses, and put in
writing by the Ordinary, stands in as good force (except for lands) as if it
had in his life time been put in writing, etc. Some distinguish Testaments from
Wills, as if the first concerned lands only, and the other personal estate. Of
this read the Duty of Executors.

Testamentatious (testamentarius) belonging to a Testament or last Will.

Testation (testatio) a witness bearing.

Testator (Lat.) he that makes a Will or Testament.

Testatrix (Lat.) she that does so.

Testicular (testicularis) belonging to the stones of man or beast.

Teston (Fr.) a piece of silver coin, worth about 18 d. sterling.

Testification (testificatio) a proving by witness, a witness-bearing.

Testudineous (testudineus) belonging to, or bowing like the shell of a
Tortoise, vaulted. Also pertaining to that ancient War-engine called Testudo,
or to the Target-fence; of both which see Godw. Anthol. p. 180.

Tetanical (tetanicus) that has the crick in the neck, or a kind of cramp,
which holds the neck so stiff, that it cannot bow.

Tetra (Gr.) four; hence

Tetracord (tetrachordium) an ancient instrument with four strings; but now it
is taken for every fourth in the Scale of Music. or Gamut.

Tetrade (Fr.) a quaternity or mess, the proportion or number of four.

Tetraglottical (Gr.) that has, or consists of four Tongues or Languages.

Tetragonal (tetragonus) that is four square, as a tetragon or quadrangle.

Tetragrammaton (Gr.) that has four letters. The Hebrews so called the great
Name of God, Jehovah; because in their language it was written with four
letters, and was held in such reverence among them, that it was unlawful to
pronounce it.

Tetralogie (Gr.) a speaking or writing in four parts. Among the Ancients it
was a kind of Tragedy, consisting of four Dramma's, as the manner was, when
they contested, to be presented at four several Festivals.

Tetrameter (Gr.) a kind of verse having but four feet or measures.

Tetraptote (tetraptotum) declined in four cases.

Tetrach (Gr.) a Governor of the fourth part of a Country.

Tetrarchy (tetrachia) the government of the fourth part of a Country, or a
government of the whole by four persons.

Tetrastick (tetrastichon) a sentence or Epigram comprised in four verses.

Tetrasyllabical (tetrasyllabicus) that has or contains four syllables.

Tetrical (tetricus) rude, rough, unpleasant, sower, crabbish, hard to relish.

Tetricity (tetricitas) sourness or sadness of countenance.

Tetritude, Idem.

Tetronimal (tetronimus) that has four names.

Teutenicks (teutonici) people of Germany, called Almains; Also an order of
Knights.

Textile (textilis) that is weaved or wounden, embroidered. Bac.

Textorian (textorius) of or belonging to a weaver; or weaving.

Texture (textura) a weaving.

Thalassiarck (thalassiarcha) an Admiral or chief Officer at Sea.

Thalassical (thalassicus) of a blew color like the sea-waves, seagreen or
blew.

Thalassion (thalassio) a nuptial Song, or a song at a Bridal. Thalassio was
used at Bridals or Weddings in Rome, as an auspicate or lucky word; like this
among the Greeks, Hymen O Hyminaee, Hymen, etc.

Thalia, one of the Muses.

Thalmud; see Talmud.

Thane (Sax.) a dignity among our ancient Saxons, of two sorts; Meset Thanes
were Priests qualified to say Mass; Worrould Thanes were a kind of secular or
temporal Lords.

Thavies Inn in Holborn, is one of the eight Inns of Chancery, it was anciently
the house of one John Thavie, an Armorer, of whom it was rented in Edward the
Thirds time, by some Professors of the Law; but about Henry the Seventh's time
it was purchased by the Benchers of Lincolns Inn, for the Students and other
professors of the Law of Chancery, and still retains the name of the old owner,
Mr. Thavie. The Arms of this house are Azure, two garbs in saltor Or, with a T.
argent in a chief Sables.

Theater (theatrum) a place made half round, where people assembled to behold
Plays and solemn Games; a Stage or scaffold; see Amphitheater.

Theatral Theatrical (theatricus) belonging to a Theater.

Theatins or Thietins, an order of religious persons, which began about the
time of Pope Clement the seventh. So called, because they were first instituted
by John Peter-Caraff, who was first Bishop of Thiette or Theate in the Kingdom
of Naples, and afterward Pope Paul the third. Spir. Conflict.

Theft-bo^e (from theft and boot, i compensatio) signifies the receiving of
goods from a thief, to the end to favor and maintain him; the punishment
whereof is ransom and imprisonment, and not loss of life and member. Stawnf.
pl. Cor. lib. 1. cap. 43. And the Mirror of Justices lib. 2. cap. des peches
criminels al suite del roy: And yet he there makes mention of a Record alleged
which testified a Judgment of life and member given in this case.

Thelemite (Gr.) a libertine, one that does what he list.

Themis, the Goddess of Justice, that gave out Oracles in Boeotia.

Theos in Greek, is Deus. God, with which we have many words compounded. As,

Theobald (commonly Tibold and Thibald) Gods power.

Theode^ic (Germ.) contractedly Deric and Terry, with the French, powerable, or
rich in people, according to Lipsius. Came.

Theodore (Gr.) Gods gift, a man's name, now corruptly by Welch-Brittans called
Tydder. Came. But the modern Britains say Tudur, which may come from Tawdwr,
signifying grosness or fat, and so signifies a fat or gross man.

Theocracy (Gr.) Gods government.

Theogonie (theogonia) the beginning or generation of the gods.

Theologaster, a small or simple Divine, a smatterer in Divinity.

Theology (theologia) divinity, reasoning; or science of God and holy things.

Theologue or Theologer (Theologus) a Divine, a Professor of Divinity.

Theological (theologicus) pertaining to Divinity.

Faith, Hope and Charity are called the Theological virtues, because they have
their object and end in God: For the object of Faith is Gods veracity or
infallibility in speaking truth; the object of Hope is Gods infinite
inclination to do good to all; the object of Charity is Gods infinite
perfection, whereby he is worthy of all love.

Theologize, to preach or play the Divine.

Theomachy (Gr.) a warring or fighting against the gods, as the old Giants are
feigned to have done.

Theomagical (Gr.) pertaining to the wisdom of God, or that works wonders by
his help.

Theomancy (theomancia) a kind of divination or Enchanting by abusive calling
upon the secret, and mysterious names of God.

Theominy (theominia) the anger or wrath of God.

Theophilus (Gr.) loving God.

Theorba (from the Ital. Tiorba) a certain musical instrument somewhat
different from the ordinary Lute, in that the head of this, or part of it bends
back, and the head of that is commonly strait.

Theoreme (theorema) a speculation; any principle or undoubted rule in any
science or Art. But particularly (as it is opposed to problema) that which
respects contemplation more then practice.

Theorem^tick Theoretick (theorematicus) belonging to a theoreme, or to
contemplation.

The Theoretick part of Science consists in Geometry, Harmonic, Astronomy,
which neither act nor produce any thing.

Theoremist, a professor of Theoremes or Axioms of undoubted truth.

Theory (theoria) speculation, contemplation and knowledge of an art without
practice, or deep study.

Theosophical (Gr.) wise in things belonging to God.

Therapeutick (therapeuticus) curing, healing. Br.

Theraphim; see Teraphim.

Theriacal (theriacus) of a viper or other cruel beasts; of, or belonging to
triacle.

Thermety (thermefacio) to chase or make one hot with outrageous eating and
drinking hot things.

Thermometer (Gr.) an Instrument, whereby to measure the degrees of heat and
cold, a weather-glass.

Thermopolist (thermopola) a Cook that sells hot meat.

Thesaurer (thesaurus) a Treasurer. Spotsw.

Thesaurize (thesaurizo) to gather or heap up treasure, to hoard up riches.

Thesiphone, one of the Furies.

Thesis (Gr.) a general and indefinite question, argument or position.

Theta () a Greek letter, answering to (th) with us, used as a mark for persons
condemned to death (being the first letter of (...), i. mors) or for faults in
writings or Books; as the letter L. for lauds or laudibilia, select words and
sentences.

Et potis es nigrum vitio praefigere,

Theta. Thetic, pertaining to Theta.

Thetis, sometimes used for the Sea.

Theurgy; see Turgie.

Thiller or Thil-horse, is that horse which is put under the Thills of the Cart
to bear them up.

Thud-borow; see Head-borow.

Thole (tholus) a knot in the midst of a timber vault, where the ends of the
posts meet, called a Scutchin: a Pinnacle, a Tabernacle; Also that place in
Temples, where donaries and such gifts as were presented there, are hung up.

Thomas (Hebr.) signifies twin, or, as some will have it, bottomless deep.

Thomists (Thomistae) are those Divines that follow the Doctrine of St. Tho. of
Aquine, who, for his excellency in Theology, is generally styled the Angelical
Doctor; whose School-opinions are impugned by Johannes Scotus a Minorite and
his followers.

Thorachique (from thorax acis) belonging to the breast or stomach. Thorachique
Vein or Artery; see in Vein and Artery.

Thor was an Idol of great esteem among the old Saxons and Teutonicks, and the
day now called Thursday was dedicated to his peculiar service, and thence took
denomination, which the Danes and Swedes yet call Chors^ay; He was also called
the God of thunder, whence in the Neatherlands the day is called Dundersdagh,
or Chun^ersday. Versteg. 60, 61.

Thorp (Sax.) a Village or Country Town, we have many in Leicester and
Nottinghamshires, that still retain this ancient name; and in Holland they call
it Dorp.

Thrask^es, are the followers of John Thraske, who broached his Judaical
opinions in England about the year 1618. for which he was censured in the
Star Chamber, but afterward recanted. Mr. Full. Church hist. lib: 10. p. 76.
There was also one Theophilus Braborn, a Disciple of his, who wrote a Book in
defense of his heretical opinions, in the year 1632.

Thrasonical (thrasonicus) vainglorious, boasting, cracking, Thraso-like.

Thrave of corn, was too Shocks of six or rather twelve sheaves a piece. Stati
2. H 6 ca. 2. The word comes from the British Dreva, i. twenty four. In most
Counties of England twenty four sheaves do now go to a Thrave. Twelve sheaves
makes a Stook, and two Stooks a Thrave.

Threne (threnum) lamentation; also a lamentable verse or song; a funeral song.

Threnody (threnodia) the singing of a funeral song.

Threnetick (threneticus) mournful, lamentable.

Threpe (Sax.) to affirm positively, or to face one down with confidence; Also
to rebuke or chide. Still used in the North.

Third-borow is used for a Constable, An. 28. H 8. ca. 10. which also is noted
by Mr. Lambert in his Duty of Constables, p. 6. and seems to be corruptly used
for the Sax. Fre^^or^, i. ingenuus fide jussor. See Headborow.

Throb (^ax.) to pant or rise often, as the heart does.

Thrones (throni) have the third rank in the celestial Hierarchy, whom
together with Dominations, Principalities and Powers, St. Paul mentions; They
signify Majesty, on whom God is said to sit. Thou sit, etc.

Thurman (Hebr.) persection. See Vrim.

Thuriferous (thurifer) that bears or brings forth frankincense.

Thursday. See Thor and Day.

Thymelical (thymelicus) belonging to players in interludes and open dance.

Thymous (thymosus) full of Thime, an herb so called.

Thyrse (thyrsus) a stalk or stem of any herb; also a Javelin wrapped with Ivy,
which the flock of drunken Harlots bare in Bacchus his Sacrifice.

Tiar^ (Lat.) a round Ornament for the head, which Princes, Priests, and women
of old time wore. Hence we still call it a tire for a woman's head, and a
tiring-woman. It is sometimes used for the Popes triple Crown.

Tibial (tibialis) of, or belonging to pipes; meet to make pipes of.

Tibicinate (tibicino) to sing or pipe.

Ticktack (Fr. trictrac) a game at Tables, so called, not from the sudden
removing the men, and the snapping noise they make, as Min. would have it; but
ticktack, quasi touch and take, that being the law of the Game, if you touch a
man, you must play him.

Tide (Belg.) time. See Springtide.

Tiercel. See Tassel.

Tie^c^t Fr.) a song of triple Stanzoes, or Stanzo of three verses.

Tierc^ (Fr. tiers) a certain measure of liquid things, as Wine, Oil, etc.
containing the sixth part of a Tun. Ann. 32. H. 8 c. 14. or the third part of a
pipe, and from this last it takes denomination, because tiers in French
signifies a third, or third part.

Tigrine (tigrinus) of, or like the swift beast, Tigre.

Tilting. See Turneaments.

Timariots, wheresoever any land is conquered by the Great Turk, it is divided
into diverse parts, and given to those they call Timariots, for term of life,
with obligation to serve on horseback wheresoever they shall be summoned; This
is not much unlike our old Tenures of Knights service or Escuage, but not
hereditary; According to the value of the timar or feud, the Timariot is to
come in with one, two, three or more horses, etc. See Sir Hen. Blounts Voyage,
fol. 65.

Timber of skins, is a term among Furriers, and signifies Forty skins. Acts
1656. ca. 20. And Timbers of Ermine is a term in Blazon, signifying the rows or
rancks of Ermine, in the Capes of Noblemens Robes.

Timbrel (from the Belg. Trommel) a Taber.

Timidity (timiditus) fearfulness, bashfulness, timerousness.

Timocr^cy (Gr.) dominatus in quo a sensu magistratus creantur. Scap. a
government wherein the Magistrates were created by their riches.

Timothy (Timotheus) a man's name; in Greek, it signifies honoring God.

Timpane. See Tympane.

Ti^cei (from the Fr. Estincelle, i. a spark, or sparkle of fire) signifies
with us a stuff or cloth made of silk, and copper; so called because it
glisters like sparks of fire.

Ti^ture (tinctura) a dying or staining, a color or dye.

Tingible (tingibilis) that may be stained, dipped or died.

Tin^y (a word used in Worcestershire and thereabouts, as a little tiney) comes
from the Ital. (Tini) which is a diminutive termination.

Tinniment (tinnimentum) a ringing or tinckling, as metals do.

Tinsel. See Tincell.

Tint-wine. See Tent-wine

Tintamar (Fr. tintamare) a clashing or crashing, a rustling or gingling noise,
made in the fall of wooden stuff, or vessels of metal.

Tintinate (tintino) to ring like a bell, to ring.

Tipoc^smy or Typ^c^sm (typocosmia) a type or figure of the world.

Tiromantie (tiromantia) a kind of divination by chee^e.

Tissu (Fr. woven or plaited) with us cloth of tissu is cloth of silk and
silver, or silk and gold woven together.

Ti^an, used of Poets for the Sun.

Tit^nick (titanicus) of or belonging to the Sun.

Tith^ (decimae) seems to be an abreviate of tithing, being the Saxon (^ot^u^g)
a little altered, which signifies decuriam, a tithing. It signifies the tenth
part of all fruits predial or personal, etc. See Sir Henry Spelman, de non
temerandis Ecclesiis, and Mr. Seldens History of Tithes.

Tithing (Sax. Teothung) signifies (says Lambert) the number or company of ten
men, with their families cast and knit together in a society, all of them being
bound to the King, for the peaceable and good behavior of each of their
society; of these companies there was one principal person, who of his office
was called (Teothung-man) at this day in the West parts (Tithing-man) but now
he is nothing but a Constable; for that old discipline of tithings is left long
since. It also signifies a Court. An. 23. Ed 3. ca 4.

Titillation (titillatio) a tickling, a stirring, a pleasant moving.

Titubate (titubo) to stagger in going, to stumble; and by metaphor, to stutter
or stammer in speaking.

Titular (from titulus) that bears a title only

Tobaco or Tobacco (sic vocatur in omnibus linguis) a Drug too well known in
England since the year 1585 when the Mariners of Sir Fra. Drake first brought
it hither from the Indies, where some affirm there is an Island called Tobacco,
and abounding with it, whence the Drug took denomination, if nor, the Island so
called from the Drug.

Tobi^^ (Heb.) the Lord is good.

Tod of Wool is twenty eight pounds in weight, or two Stone; see Stone.

Tol^^yth, the name of the chief Prison at Edinburgh.

Tolsey or Toldsey, is a place in the City of Bristol, answerable to the Old
Exchange in London, where the Merchants meet; and may perhaps be so called,
because oft-times there is money told upon the heads of round posts or pillars
made for that purpose; or from, Tol, i. vectigal and sey, i. seeds, the seat or
place of paying Custom.

Tolutation (tolutatio) an ambling pace, a going easy.

Tolutiloquence (tolutiloquentia) a smooth or nimble kind of speaking.

Toman, a kind of coin among the Persians valuing 3 l. 6. s. sterling.

Tome (tomus) properly a severing or dividing. When an Author has wrote a book,
which being all together, would be too great and unweildy, he commonly divides
it into several Tomes or parts.

Tomboy (a girl or wench that leaps up and down like a boy) comes from the
Saxon tumu^, to dance, and tum^od, danced; hence also the word tumbling still
in use.

Tomentitious (tomentitius) made of flocks of wool.

Tomin (Fr.) six penny weight, or the weight of a Spanish Real. Among Jewellers
it is taken for three Carrats.

Tonical (from tonus) pertaining to tone, note, tune or accent. Dr. Br.

Tonitruate (tonitruo) to thunder.

Tonange is a Custom or Impost due for Merchandise brought or carried in Tuns
and such like vessels, from or to other Nations, after a certain rate in every
Tun, 1. Jac. cap. 33. I have heard it also called a duty, due to the Mariners
for the unloading their ship arrived in any Haven after a rate for every Tun.

Tonsils (tonsillae) certain kernels at the root of the tongue subject to
inflammations and swellings, occasioned by the falling down of humors from the
head. Cot.

Tonsorious (tonsorius) of, or belonging to a Tonsor or Barber.

Toparchie (toparchia) the rule of a Country or place.

Topaze (topazius) a precious stone, whereof there are two kinds; one of the
color of gold, and the other of saffron color, not so good as the first. It
is written that this stone being put into seething water, so cools it, that one
may presently put his hand into it.

Tophet (Heb. Toph) a large and wide place near Jerusalem where Jewish
Idolaters (after the manner of the Amonites) burnt their children, and offered
them to the Idol Moloch, set up in this Tophet, being in the valley of Hinnom,
as we may read, 2 King. 23.10, Jer. 7.31, etc.

Topos (Gr.) locus, a place Hence,

Topics (topica) books that speak or entreat of places of invention; or that
part of Logic, which treats of the invention of arguments.

Topical (topicus) pertaining to places of inventing arguments.

Topography (topographia) the description of a particular place or places, be
they Towns, Cities, Shires or Counties; see Tyberiade.

Torcular^ous (torcularius) belonging to a Press that squieseth grapes.

Torico; see Banditi.

Torminous (torminosus) that frets the guts, or that has torments and
frettings in the guts.

Tornado (Spa. tronada, i. a return, or turning about) is a sudden, violent and
forcible storm of rain and ill weather at sea, so termed by the Mariners; and
does most usually happen about the Ae^uator.

Tornatil (tornatilis) that is turned, or made with a wheel.

Torosity (torositas) fleshiness, fatness, brawniness.

Torpedo, a cramp-fish, that, being alive, stupifies the hands of him that
touches it, though he do it with a long pole, but after death produces no such
effect.

Torp^d (torpidus) slow, dull, drouzy, astonished.

Torpor (Lat.) a feebleness of the mind, and unaptness to do any thing; a
slothful heaviness.

Torquated (torquatus) that wears a collar or chain.

Torrefy (torrefacio) to broil or roast by fire, or by heat of the Sun; to
parch, to scorch.

Torrent (torrens) substantively, signifies a violent stream coming down hill,
caused by rain or snow; a land or rain flood in Summer time; any strong running
stream. Adjectively, burning or rosting; as in Solinus it is used for the
scorching time of Summer, Aestivo torrente.

Torrentine (from torrens) belonging to, or abiding in torrents, or swift
streams.

Torrid (torridus) dry, parching, burning, scorching.

Torsion (torsio) a writhing, wresting or wringing.

Torteaures (Fr. torteaux) a term in Heraldry, for those things that seem like
cakes of bread; they must be round, whole, and of some color, not of metal,
therein to make them differ from Pesants; old Blazonners call them Wastels.

Tortile (tortilis) that is bent, bowed or wrested, winding or writhen.

Tortiloquy (tortiloquium) crooked talk.

Tortive (tortivus) that is wrung or pressed out.

Tortuosity (tortuositas) crookedness, a bending or winding in and out

Tortuous (tortuosus) crooked.

Torvid (torvidus) cruel, spightful in looks, stern, grim, sour, unpleasant.

Torvity (torvitas) sowerness, lowering, crabbed looking, frowning. Felth.

Tossed (tostum) is a place wherein a message has stood. West. tit. Fines. Sect
26.

Totage (Fr.) the whole sum, substance, matter of; all.

Totality (totalitas) the utmost penny, the total or whole sum. Bac.

Tournement. See Turneament.

Tournois (Fr.) a French penny, the tenth part of a penny sterling, which rate
it holds in all other words (as the Sol or Livre) whereunto it is joined. In
France they say so much money Tournois, as we say sterling.

Towage (Fr. touaige) the towing a Ship by Boats, or at the Stern of another.

Toylet (Fr. toylette) a bag or cloth to put night clothes in.

Trabal (trabalis) belonging to a beam; great or big like a beam.

Tracas or Tracasserie (Fr.) restless trotting, ranging, roaming, hurrying up
and down, a busy or needless travel or toyling ones self. Cot.

Traces (Fr.) the foot-print of ravenous beasts, as wild Boars, Bears, etc.

Tract (tracta) a line or thread, a discourse drawn out in length. In the Mass
it is two or three versicles betwixt the Epistle and the Gospel; and so called,
because it is sung with a slow, long, protracted tone.

Tractable (tractabilis) that may easily be entreated, handled or ordered,
gentle, pliant.

Tractate (tractatus) an handling, a describing or entreating of any thing in
words; also a part of a book, wherein any thing is handled, a Treatise.

Tractitious (tractitius) that handles, touches or entreats of.

Tradition (traditio) a teaching, delivering or yiedling up. In Divinity that
is called Tradition which is delivered by hand to hand from Christ or his
Apostles to the the present age.

Traditive (traditus) pertaining to tradition; as a traditive Science, is a
Science delivered by word of mouth from father to son; continued, or left to
posterity by tradition.

Traduction (traductio) a conveying from one place to another, a translating; a
slandering, defaming or traducing, a withdrawing.

Tragelaph (tragelaphus) the great and blackish deer called a stone-buck,
deer-goat, or goat-hart; because conceived between a buck-goat and the hind.
Cot.

Tragematopolist (tragematopola) he that sels confits, carawaies and such other
ware, made of sugar; a Confectioner.

Tragecomedy (tragecomoedia) a play that is half Tragedy and half Comedy; such
is Amphitruo in Plauius.

Tragedy (tragoedia) is a lofty kind of Poetry so called from (...), a goat,
and (...), an Ode or Song; because the Actors thereof had a goat given them as a
reward. The differences between a Tragedy and a Comedy are these; First, in
respect of the matter; because a Tragedy treats of exilements, murders, matters
of grief, etc. a Comedy of love-toyes, merry fictions, and petty matters; In a
Tragedy the greatest part of the Actors are Kings and Noble Persons; In a
Comedy, private persons of meaner state and condition. The subject of a Comedy
is often feigned, but of a Tragedy it is commonly true and once really
performed; The beginning of a Tragedy is calm and quiet, the end fearful and
turbulent; but in a Comedy contrarily, the beginning is turbulent, and the end
calm. Both Comedies and Tragedies ought to have five Acts and no more,
according to that of Horace.

Neve minor quinto, neu sit productior actu
Fabula --
These Acts are divided into several Scenes, which sometimes fall out more,
sometimes fewer in every Act; The definition of a Scene being Mutatio
Personarum.

Tra^idian (tragicus) a maker or writer of Tragedies, a Tragediographer, also
the Actor of them

Tragica^ (tragicus) pertaining to Tragedies, cruel, outrageous. See Comical.

Trajection (trajectio) a passing over, a conveying or carrying over; also an
interlacing or setting things out of order.

Trajectitio^s (trajectitius) belonging to passage; As trajectitious money, is
that which is carried over the Sea at the peril of the Creditor, whether it
were money indeed, or money turned into wares.

Tralatitious [tralatitius] transferred or transposed: of the common sort,
ordinary, vulgar.

Tralucency, a shining through, translucency. Br.

Tramontan^ (transmontanus) that dwells beyond the mountains or in the north,
from Italy; a word generally used by the Italians, to express the Nations
beyond the Alps.

Tranquillize (tranquillo) to make quiet, still or calm, to cause tranquillity.

Trans (a Praeposition) signifies, over, from one place to another, beyond, on
the other side.

Transaction (transactio) a a finishing, a making over, a dispatching an
agreement.

Transalpine (transalpinus) over or beyond the Alps, foreign, Italians, on
the further side the mountains.

Transcendent (transcendens) that which surpasses or exceeds other; In Logic
it signifies a word of such a nature, that it cannot be included in any of the
ten Predicaments.

Transcript (transcriptum) that which is transcribed, written or copied out of
any original.

Transcarrenc^ (from transcurro) a running over, a passing over quickly.

Transduction (tranductio) a leading over, a removing from one place to another.

Transection (from trans and sexus) a turning or passing from one sex to
another.

Transfeminate (from trans and foemina) to turn from woman to man, or from one
sex to another. Dr. Br.

Tranfiguration (transfiguratio) a turning out of one shape into another, a
transforming. The tranfiguration of our Savior Christ does not signify the
turning or change of one figure or one shape into another, but as it were a
putting on an exceeding splendour and brightness that made his blessed face
shine as the Sun, and his clothes white as snow.

Transfixed (transfixus) sticked or thurst through.

Transfretation (transfretatio) a passing over-sea.

Transfume (transfumo) to smoke through.

Transfusion (tranfusio) a pouring out of one vessel into another.

Transjection^ (transjectio) a casting over, or through, an overthrowing.

Transition (transitio) a passing over, a going forth, or from one place to
another, a yielding, a running away.

Transmarine (transmarinus) that comes from, or is of the parts beyond the Seas.

Transmeable (transmeabilis) that may be passed over.

Transmeate (transmeo) to to pass or go beyond.

Transmigra^e (transmigro) to remove from one place to another, to go further
or beyond, to flit.

Transmission (transmissio) a passing or sending over or from one place to
another, a transmitting.

Transmute (transmuto) to to change from one place to another.

Transnomination (transnominatio) a changing name.

Transom^, a brow-post, or beam in building, that goes overthwart. And in a
ship it is that timber which lies athwart the stern.

Transpare (transpareo) to appear through, to be evident, or clear.

Transpeciate (from trans and species) to change form or shape.

Transpiration (transpiratio) an evaporation or breathing forth. Est totius
corporis veluti respiratio quaedam per cutem.

Transpose (transpono) to remove from one place to another, to alter the order
of a thing; a word used by Printers when their pages, lines or words are
misplaced.

Transvasation (transvasatio) a turning, pouring or removing out of one place
into another.

Transubstantiation (transubstantiatio) a passage or conversion of one
substance into another; as of bread into the body of Christ, by the words of
consecration, according to the doctrine of the Roman Catholics.

Transvection (transvectio) a conveying or carrying over.

Transversion (tranversio) a turning away or cross, a traversing, or going
athwart.

Transult (transulto) to leap or jump over, to over-leap.

Transumption (transumptio) a taking from one to another, a changing.

Transvolation (transvolatio) a flying over or beyond.

Trappan. See Trepan.

Traskites. See Thraskites.

Trave (from the Fr. Travee, i. a bay of buildings) a trevise or little room
made purposely to shoo unbroken horses in.

Traverse (Fr. Traverser) to thwart or go overthwart, to cross or pass over, to
go to and again. In Law it signifies sometimes to contradict or deny any point
of the matter werewith one is charged, or to put the proof of it on the
Plaintiffs part; sometime to overthrow or undo a thing done. The formal words
of this Traverse in the first signification are, (absque hoc) without that that
any other matter or thing, etc. As is commonly used in the later end of Answers
in Chancery, etc.

Travers-board; is a board which they keep in the steeridge of a Ship having
the thirty two points of the Compass marked in it.

Travested (from the Fr. Travester) disguised or shifted in apparel, And
Metaphorically, translated out of one language into another.

Traumatick (Greek) belonging to wounds or to the cure of them, vulnerary. Scap.

Treated (from the Fr. traicte) handled or entreated of, contracted or agreed
on; entertained. In which last sense it is now much used, as to say, I was
nobly or kindly treated at such a man's house.

Trecentene (trecentenus) pertaining to three hundred.

Trellized (from the Fr. treillisse) cross-barred, latticed, grated with wood.

Tremendous (tremendus) greatly to be feared.

Tremor (Lat.) quaking, trembling, shaking, great fear; also an earthquake.

Tren (Fr.) an instrument (somewhat like an Eelespear) wherewith Mariners
strike and kill fish at Sea.

Trental (from the Fr. trente) the number thirty, commonly spoken of Masses for
the dead.

Trepan or Trevanditon (Fr. trepan) an instrument, having a round and indented
edge wherewith Chyrurgions open a fractured scull, and by the help of a
Lavatory (within it) raise up the crushed and depressed parts thereof, and take
out pieces of bones and clotted blood. Cot.

To Trepan, or Trappan, (from the Ital. Trappare or trappolare, i. to entrap,
or catch in a gin) in the modern acceptance, signifies to cheat, or entrap in
this manner; a whore admits a man to be naught with her, and in the very
instant, rings a Bell or gives a watchword, and in comes a Pander who pretends
to be her husband, and with vapouring and threats, upon the act of Adultery or
otherwise, forces money or bond from the deluded third person. Some take this
word to be derived from a Pander, that does entrap, or a trapping Pander.

Trepidate (trepido) to fear, to tremble, or quake for fear, to be astonished.

Trepidation (trepidatio) fear, trembling.

Tressis-agaso (Lat.) a halfpenny Herdsman or horskeeper; a fellow of no worth.

Trestie (tripus) a three footed stool; It differs from a Trevet, this being
made of iron, the other of wood; but both should properly have three seet
apiece.

Triacle (theriaca) remedy or antidote against poison.

Triangle (triangulum) a figure that has three angles or corners, of which
there are six sorts.

1. Equilateral, which is when the three sides are of an equal length, and the
Angles all equal among themselves.

2. An Isoceles triangle, is that which has two equal sides and two equal
Angles opposite to those sides.

3. All irregular triangles* having three unequal sides and angles, are known
in Geometry under the term Scalenum.

4. An Oxugoneum, is a triangle having three acute angles.

5. An Amblogonoum, is a triangle, having two acute angles and one obtuse.

6. And lastly, an Orthogoneum, is a triangle which has one right angle.
Enchir. of Fortif.

Triangular (triangularis) that has three corners, or is three cornered.

Triarchie (triarchia) a government, where three are in like authority.

Triark (triarchus) a Master of a ship with three tops, or of a Galley that
has three orders of oars.

Triarians (triarii) Soldiers that were always set in the Rereward, and were
the strongest men; they ever fought standing, and bowing somewhat their knees,
as if they would rather die, then remove their place.

Tribe (tribus) a kindred or company, that dwell together in one Ward or
Liberty; as the people of Rome were divided into thirty five Tribes, Bands,
Wards, or Hundreds; It seems in old time the same people were divided into
three parts only, and that this name Tribus did thence first arise. Tribes in
Scripture signify the posterity of the twelve Sons of Israel. Psalm. 78.55.
Numb. 13.3, 5, 16.

Tribunal (Lat.) a judgment seat; a place erected on high in form of our
Pulpits, but many degrees larger, and in the midst stood the Stella Curulis, i.
the Ivory chair, from whence the chief Magistrate administered Justice.

Tribune (tribunus) the name of two chief officers in Rome; the first was
Tribune of the people who was to defend their liberties against the power of
the Nobles, and for that cause had the gates of his house always open both day
and night, and was called tribunus plebis; the other was called tribune of the
soldiers, who had charge to see them well armed and ordered, etc. And of these
there was tribunus major and minor, etc.

Tribunitial (tribunitius) belonging to the Tribune.

Tributary (tributarius) that pays Tribute, which is money arising out of the
goods of the people, after their ability.

Tricenarious (tricenarius) of or belonging to thirty.

Tricennial (tricennalis) of thirty or thrice ten years.

Tricliniarh (tricliniarches) the master of the dining chamber or room, the
Usher.

Tricliniar^ (tricliniarius) pertaining to the Dining room or Parler to dine
and sup in, called Triclinium; where the guests did fit or lie along on beds
about the table, as you may read at large in Goodwins Anthol. chapter de mensis and
conviviis Romanorum.

Tricornous (tricornis) which has three horns or is three horned.

Trichotomy (from the Gr. (...), tripliciter and (...), sectio) a cutting or
dividing into three parts.

Trident (tridens) Neptunes three forked mace; and thence any weapon, tool or
instrument, made of that fashion or having three teeth.

Tridentiterous (tridentifer) that bears or carries such an instrument; the
usual Epithete of Neptune.

Tridentine (tridentinus) pertaining to the City Trent.

Triduan (triduanus) of three days continuance.

Triennial (triennis) of three years continuance.

Triental (Lat.) a vessel containing the third part of Sextarius, half our Pint.

Triental (trientalis) of or being four inches broad, or four ounces in weight.

Trierarck (trierarchus) the Master of a Ship or Galley.

Trieterick (trietericus) that is every third year.

Trifallow, to plow land the third time, for the same crop.

Trifarious (trifarius) of three manner of ways.

Triferous (trifer) that brings forth fruit thrice a year.

Trifistulary (trifistularis) pertaining to three pipes.

Trifole or Trifolic (trifolium) an herb or three-leafed grass so called. Also
a trifole in Heraldry, is painted like the three-leafed grass.

Trifurcous (trifurcus) three-forked, that has three forkes.

Trigamist (trigamus) he that has had three wives.

Trigeminous (trigeminus) threefold, three at a birth.

Trigliphes (trygliphi) hollow gravings or borders, like three furrows, or
short gutters, Masonry. A term of Architecture.

Trigonal (trigonalis) three-cornered, that has three corners.

Tri^o (Ital.) an excellent grace in singing; being an uniform trembling or
shaking of the same Note, either soft and smoothly in the throat, as naturally
the French do, or more strongly and artificially from the stomach, as the
Italians.

Trilogie (Gr.) a speaking or writing in three parts.

Trimenstruous (trimenstruus) of three months age.

Trimodial (from trimodia) pertaining to a measure of three bushels.

Trinacrian (trinacrius) pertaining to the Island Sic^ly.

Trine (trinus) of three years old, or pertaining to the number three.

Trine Aspect. See Aspect.

Trinitarians, a religious order. See Mathurins.

Trinitarian heretics, otherwise new Arians, are those that deny the blessed
Trinity, and all distinction of the Divine persons, inveighing against the word
Trinity, and blasphemously terming the most sacred Mystery of the Trinity,
Infernalem cerberum is Lindanus testifies, in dubi^antis sui Dialogo secundo.

Trinity trinitas) the number three, or three in one. The distinction of the
persons ^ the unity of the Godhead; one and the self-same God in Essence,
being for subsistence three, to wit, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7. And these three are one. How three remaining three, may yet be one;
and one, abiding one be three, and all this at once, is a Mystery rather to be
religiously adored, then curiously sought into, requiring rather faith to
believe, then reason to comprehend and judge it.

Trinity-house, is a certain house at Depford near London, which belongs to a
company or Corporation of Seafaring men, that have power by the Kings Charter,
to punish those that destroy Sea-marks, to correct the faults of Sailers, etc.
And to take care of diverse other things belonging to Navigation and the seas.
Anno 8. Eliz. Cap. 13. and 35. ejusdem cap. 6.

Trinobants (trinobantes) a people in the East part of England, by the Thames.

Trinoccial (trinoctialis) belonging to three nights space.

Trinodal (trinodis) that has three knots, three knotted.

Trinqu^t (Fr.) is properly the top or top-gallant on any mast, the highest
sail of a ship; also taken for a petty, gay thing.

Triobolar (triobolaris) vile, of small estimation, little worth.

Trinominal (trinominalis) that has three names.

Tripartite (tripartitus) divided into three parts.

Tripedanious, Tripedal, (Tripedaneus, Tripedalis) that is three foot long,

Tripery (Fr.) a market, shop, or street, wherein tripes are usually sold.

Triplicate (triplico) to triple, to do or fold a thing three times. See
Duplicate.

Triplicity (triplicitas) threefold being, threefoldness.

Astrologians divide the twelve signs into four Trigons or Triplicities, so
called, because they are distant the third part of a circle one from the other.

Tripode (tripodium) a three footed stool, any thing that has three feet.
Hence,

Tripodical, that has three feet, three footed.

Tripoly (tripolium) a stone, with the powder whereof Lapidaries and
Stonecutters smooth or polish their Jewels, also a kind of herb.

Triptot^ (triptoton) a Noun having but three cases.

Tripudiate (tripudio) to dance, to go tripping on the toe, dancer-like.

Tripudiary divination was by bread rebounding on the ground, when it was cast
unto birds, or chickens. Br.

Triquet or Triquetrous (triquetrus) having three corners, triangular.

Trirem^ (triremis) a Galley wherein every oar has three men to it, or a
Galley that has three oars on every side. See Quinquereme.

Trisagien (Gr.) thrice holy; the Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, mentioned in the
Church Service, or Te Deum.

Trismegistus (i. ter maximus) so called, because he was the greatest
Philosopher, Priest and King, he is called also Hermes Trismegistus, and
Mercurius.

Tristifical (tristificus) that makes sad or heavy.

Tristitiate (from tristitia) to make sad or pensive. Felth. Resol.

Trisulk (trisulcus) having three edges, or three furrows.

Trisyllabical (trisyllabicus) that has three syllables.

Trite (tritus) worn, overworn, old, threadbare, much used, common.

Tritheites (thritheitae) a sort of Heretics, that held there were three
distinct God-heads in the Trinity of the persons.

Triticean (triticeus) wheaten, of wheat.

Triton, a god of the sea, also a weathercock.

Triturable (from trituro) that may be threshed, threshable. Dr. Br.

Trituration (trituratio) a threshing, as they do corn.

Trivial (trivialis) common, used or taught in high ways, of small estimation,
homely.

Triumph (triumphus) a solemn pomp or show at the return of a Captain from a
victory. Among the Romans there was Triumphus major and Minor, the lesser kind
of Triumph, was called Ovation, above, from a sheep which was in this kind of
Triumph led before him, and after sacrificed by him; In the greater triumph
(properly so called) the Lord General sacrificed a Bull, etc. Of the
magnificence of this Triumph, see Plutarch in the Triumph of Paulus Aemilius;
And of the ceremonies of both, see Dr. Heylyn in his description of Italy.

Triumphant Arches, were among the Romans erected for them only, who, having
subdued whole Provinces or conquered foreign Nations, and obtained noble
Victories, seemed worthy of triumph; and thereupon they were called Triumphant
Arches. Upon these Arches, for the perpetual memorial of acts achieved, were
engraven the portraiture of the very places, where the war was performed, the
resemblances of Fabrics and ranged Battles, if the service was on land; and of
Ships, if it were at sea; In Pliny's days they began first to be built, before,
only Statues and Trophies were set up, etc. Livie.

Triumvirate (triumviratus) the office of the triumvir, or of three in the like
authority; of which there were several sorts in ancient Rome, as you may read
in Livie.

Trochisk or Trosque (trochischus) a little wheel; also a little Rundlet or
Cake whereinto diverse medicinable things are reduced, the better to be kept,
and the readier to be used.

Troglodites (trogloditae) people in the furthest part of Africa beyond
Aethiope, that dwell under ground, go naked and eat Serpents; of whom you may
read in Herberts Travels.

Tronage is a kind of Toll, Westminster. 2. cap. 25. ann. 13 Ed. 1. taken (as it
seems) for weighing: For I find in Fleta lib. 2. cap 12. Sect. Item Vlnas, that
Trona is a beam to weigh with.

Tromperie (Fr.) fraud, cozenage, deceit, circumvention, legerdemain.

Trope (Gr. Tropos, i. verborum immutatio) is when a word is drawn from its
proper and genuine signification to another. The difference between a Trope and
a Figure is this; the first relates to particular words only, the other
concerns many words or the whole frame of a sentence. The last most commonly
uses words elegantly in their native signification, the other contrariwise.

Tropical or Tropological (tropicus) that speaks or is spoken figuratively, or
by tropes.

Trophie (trophoeum) a token or monument set up in a place where enemies were
vanquished, with their ensigns or other spoils hanged on it; a sign or token of
Victory, a brave, a victory of joy; Also a frame of wood made to hang somewhat
upon in manner of a funeral Hearse.

Tropicks (tropici) two imagined circles in the Heavens of equal distance on
either side from the Equator; The one called the Tropic of Cancer, the other
of Capricorn, to the first the Sun comes about 12 June, to the other about 12
December. They are called Tropicks of the Greek (...), to turn; because when
the Sun comes to either of them, he turns his course either higher, having been
at the lowest; or lower, having been at the highest. Min.

Tropology (tropologia) a figurative kind of speaking, or a speaking by Tropes.

Trosque. See Trochisk.

Trover (from the Fr. trouver; i. to find) is an Action at Law, which lies
against a man, that having found another goods, refuses to deliver them upon
demand, etc. See the New Book of Entries, verbo Trover.

Troy Weight contains twelve ounces in the pound; by which Gold, Silver,
Precious stones and Bread are weighed. See Weights.

Trowel (from the Fr. Truelle) an instrument that Masons and Bricklayers use to
dawb Mortar.

Truand (Fr.) a common Beggar, a lazy Rascal, a Vagabond; a Scholar that
loyters from School or neglects his Book.

Truch-man or Teriuman (Fr. Trucheman, Span. Truchaman, or Truiaman, Ital.
Torcimanno) an Interpreter, a Drogoman.

Trucidation (trucidatio) a cruel killing or murdering.

Truculent (truculentus) cruel in countenance and menacing, rough, terrible.

Truel. See Trowel.

Trullissation (trullissatio) a pargetting or plaistering with mortar or loam.

Truncation (truncatio) a cutting a thing shorter; a maiming, a mangling.

Trunck (truncus) a stump, a stem, stock, or body of a tree without the boughs;
a body without a head; a block-head or Dunce.

Trutinate (trutino) to weigh or examine, to consider thoroughly of a thing.

Tube (tuba) the Pipe, through which the marrow of the Backbone runs; also a
Trumpet or any long Pipe.

Tuberous (tuberus) full of bunches, swellings, wens or knots.

Tubicinate (tubicino) to sound the Trumpet.

Tubulatio^ (tubulatio) a making hollow like pipes, swelling or puffing out.

Tudiculate (tudiculo) to pound or bruise; to work as Smiths do with a hammer;
to engrave.

Tuel, the fundament of a Beast. A term in hunting.

Tuition (tuitio) defending, safe keeping, protection.

Tulipant, a roll or wreath commonly of linen, which the Indians wear on their
heads instead of hats, a shash. Herb. Tr.

Tullianum (Lat.) a dark and stinking dungeon or common prison in old Rome
built or enlarged by King Tullius, from whom it took name.

Tumbrel, is an Engine of punishment, which ought to be in every Liberty, that
has view of Frank Pledge, for the brideling of Scoulds and unquiet women.
Kitch. fol. 13. a. called also a Cucking-stool.

Tumefie (tumefacio) to make to swell or puff up.

Tumid (tumidus) risen, swollen, puffed up; also proud, haughty.

Tumor (Lat.) a swelling, rising, or puffing up of the flesh, by reason of some
malicious matter or ill humor; loftiness, pride.

Tumulate (tumulo) to make the ground hollow, to bury, to intomb.

Tumultuary (tumultuarius) done in haste without advisement, suddenly, and
without fear, hasty, disorderly.

Tumultuous (tumultuosus) full of business and trouble, seditious, mutinous,
full of broil.

Tun, a measure of Oil, Wine, etc. containing Two hundred fifty two Gallons, 1
R. 3.12. In weight it is commonly Twenty hundred.

Tunick or Tunicat (tunica) a Jerkin, Jacket or sleeveless coat, formerly worn
by Princes; Also a skin or coat that covers the eye, whereof there are four
sorts. 1. Cornea, which is white and resembles an horn. 2. Wea, which is like
a grape kernel. 3. Vitrea, which resembles glass. 4. Christallina, which
resembles crystal in clearness. Tho.

Tunicle (tunicula) a little jacket or coat; Also a Membrane or thin skin
covering any part of the body, as Tunicat.

Turbant, A Turkish hat, or Ornament for the head, of white and fine linen,
wreathed into a rundle, broad at the bottom to enclose the head, and lessening
for ornament toward the top; The custom of wearing it, had this origin; The
barbarous people having the Grecian Army once at a great advantage at or near
the Hill Thermopylae, there was no other remedy, but some few must make good a
narrow passage, while the main of the Army might escape; which some brave
Spirits undertook, and knowing they went to an inevitable death, had care of
nothing but sepulture, of old much regarded; wherefore each of them carried his
winding sheet wrapped about his head, and then with loss of their own lives,
saved their fellows; whereupon for an honorable memorial of their exploit, the
Levantines used to wrap white linen about their heads, and the fashion so
derived upon the Turk. Sir Hen. Blounts voyage fol. 18. See Shash.

Turbar^e, is an interest to dig tu^ff upon a Common. Kitch. fol. 94. Old Not.
brev. fol. 70.

Turbination (turbinatio) the fashioning a thing like a top, broad above, and
small beneath.

Turbineous (turbineus) belonging to a storm or blustering wind, whirling
round.

Turb^h mineral, a certain red powder (made according to the Paracelsian
practice) which is used against the French disease.

Turbulent (turbulentus) troubleous, angry, full of contention, busy,
seditious.

Turgent (turgens) swelling, rising, strouting out.

Turgescence (from turgesco) a swelling up or growing or waxing big; a swelling
for anger.

Turgid (turgidus) swollen, or puffed up, rising in state; big, strouting out.

Turgie (theurgia) white magic; a pretended conference with good spirits or
Angels. Sir Wall. Ral. lib. 1. fol. 178.

Turn, is the Sheriffs Court kept twice a year, viz. within a month after
Easter, and again after Michaelmas. Magna Charta, ca. 35. And 3 Ed. 3. cap. 15.

Turneament or Tourneament, is a martial exercise of Knights or Soldiers
combating one with another in disport on horseback, and is thus defined.
Torneamenta dicuntur Nundinae vel feriae, in quibus milites ex condicto
convenire and ad ostentationem virium suarum and audaciae, timere congredi
solent. The word is used in the Statute of 24 H. 8. cap. 13. And the reason of
the name may proceed from the French (Tourner, i. vertere) because it consists
much in agility both of horse and man. It was much in request with us in Queen
Elizabetbs reign, being otherwise called Justing or Tilting.

Turpentine (Br. Twrpenti, Lat. Terebinthyna) a fair, clear and moist kind of
Rosin, which issues out of the Larx and Turpentine tree; It is good to be put
into ointments, and Emplaisters, for it cleanses and heals wounds; It may be
also licked in with honey, and then it cleanses the Breast, and gently loses
the belly, provoking urine, and driving out the stone and gravel.

Turpify (turpifico) to make unclean or dishonest.

Turpitude (turpitudo) dishonesty, villainy, deformity.

Turriferous (turrifer) that bears a Tower.

Tuscan-work; In Architecture there are five orders of Pillars, The Tuscan
Dorique, Jonique, Corinthian, Composite or Italian. See Sir Hen. Wottons
Elements of Architecture, page 206, and 209. The Tuscan is a plain, massy,
rural Pillar, resembling some sturdy, wel-limb'd laborer, homely clad; the
length of it ought to be six Diameters of the grossest of the Pillars below.

Tutelar Tutelarie (tutelaris) belonging to a Guardian, or to the custody of a
Ward, or to protection and defense.

Tutele (tutela) wardship, guardianship, custody of a child in nonage; also
safe keeping, defending, protection.

Tutelina, the Goddess having the protection of Corn.

Tutie (tutia) a medicinable stone or dust, said to be the heavier foil of
Brass, cleaving to the upper sides and tops of brasse-melting houses; and such
ordinary Apothecaries pass away for Tutie; whereas the true Tutie is not heavy,
but light, and white like flocks of wool, falling into dust, so soon as it is
touched; this is bred of the sparkles of brazen furnaces, whereinto store of
the mineral Calamine has been cast. Cot.

Tut-mouther, he that has the Chin and nether Jaw sticking out further then
the upper.

Twait (an old Law word) signifies a wood grubbed up and turned to arrable.
Cokes Instit. 4. b.

Tuysco was the most ancient and peculiar Idol-god of all the old Germans, from
whence they called themselves Tuy^hen, that is, Duytshes or Duytsh-people; and
the day which yet among us retains the name of (Tu^sday) was especially
dedicated to this Idol. See its posture in Verstegan, page 57.

Twelf-day ( dies duedecimus or Epiphania) the feast of the Epiphany of our
blessed Savior; so called, because it is the twelfth day after the Nativity
exclusively. See Epiphany.

Twibil (Belg. Tweebill) an instrument used by Carpenters to make mortiseholes.

Twilight (Belg. Tweelight) cockshoot time either in the morning or evening,
when it is betwixt day and night, or betwixt two lights, that is of the Sun and
the Moon.

Tyber^ade, a Topograph, the model or draught of a place; called so of a book
of that name, composed by Bartholus the Lawyer, who was the first that graced
his works with such figures.

Tydder. See Theodore.

Tymariots. See Timariots

Tympany (tympanites) a disease, wherein the body waxing lean, the belly swells
up, having great store of wind and windy humors, gathered together between its
inner skin and the guts, which being smitten with the hand, make a noise like a
Taber.

Tympane (tympanum) a Tymbrel, Tabor, Drum or Drumstale; Also an instrument of
a Printers Press whereon he lays the sheet that is to be printed; so called,
because it is made of parchment, and being stricken on, will sound like a Taber.

Tympanism (tympanismus) a kind of torturing, used by the Jews, by beating one
to death with Cudgels or Drumsticks, Heb. 11.25. 2 Mac. 6.19.

Tympanist (tympanista) a Drumster or Taberer; also one sick of a Tympany, or
one that is well skilled in curing that disease.

Tympa^itical (tympaniticus) that has a Tympany or Dropsy.

Tympanize (tympanizo) to play on a Drum, Taber or Tymbrel.

Typographer (typographus) a Printer.

Typography (typographia) the art of Printing.

Type (typus) a figure, under which is signified some other thing; an example,
a likeness, the shadow of a thing.

Typical (typicus) mystical, or that which serves as a shadow or figure of
another thing.

Typocosmy (Gr.) a figure or type of the world.

Tyrannicide (tyrannicidium) the murdering a Tyrant, cruel Lord or Ruler.

Tyrianthine (tyrianthinus) belonging to purple.

Tyromancy (Gr.) divination by a cheese. Cot.

Tyrone (tyro) a fresh water Soldier; a young beginner in any art or science, a
Novice.

Tyrociny (tyrocinium) the first exercise in any thing, an Apprentiship, a
first beginning.

Tytan. See Titan.

V
VAcant (vacans) empty, void, having nothing to do.

Vacancy Vacation (vacatio) a time of ceasing from labor or common business,
leisure, exemption; Vacation has a special signification in this Nation, being
used for all that time respectively, which passes between Term and Term at
London, which every Almanac will tell you. And when such times begun and ended
in our Ancestors days, See Roger Hovedens annals, part posteriori. fol. 343 a.
where you shall find this intermission was called Pax Dei and Ecclesiae.

Vaccarie alias Vacharie (vaccaria) is a house or ground to keep Cows in, a
Cow-pasture. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 41. a word of common use in Lancashire.

Vacillation (vacillatio) a wagging or wavering; looseness, inconstancy.

Vacive (vacivus) empty, void; as aedes vacivae, houses that stand void without
a Tenant, or having all voided out of them.

Vacuity (vacuitas) emptiness, voidness, clearness, freedom from.

Vacuum (Lat.) an empty or void place. Bac.

Vacuna, The Goddess of rest.

Vadelet or Vadelect (from the Fr. Vallet) signifies a servant, and is used in
the accounts of the Inner Temple, for a Benchers Clerk or Servant. The Butlers
of the house corruptly call them Varlets.

Vadimony (vadimonium) a promise or bond to appear before a Judge at a day
appointed; also the day of appearance, a suretiship.

Vafrous (vafer) subtle, crafty, sly, guileful.

Vagabond (vagabundus) one that wanders about, an idle fellow.

Vagation (vagatio) a wandering, straying or ranging up and down.

Vagenate (vagino) to sheath.

Vaginipennous (from vaginnipennes) pertaining to such Flies which have their
wings closed, as it were in sheaths and cases, as the Beetle has. Dr. Br.

Vaile-bonnet, to put off the Hat, to strike sail, to give sign of submission.

Vaived. See Vayvod.

Vald'ombre or Val^mbreux, a sort of Religious, begun by John Gualbert, a
Florentine, about the year 1040. who betaking himself to the study of Religion,
retired to a place in the Appennine, called Val ombreux or the shady vale; his
followers wear a smoaky colored habir, and follow the rule of Saint Bennet.
Heyl.

Vale (from valeo) farewell, God be with you, God keep you in health.

Valenti^ (valentia) puissance, might, power, strength.

Valentines, are either Saints chosen for special Patrons for a year, according
to the use of the Romanists; or men or women chosen for special loving friends
by an ancient custom upon Saint Valentines Day, the Fourteenth of February;
about which day birds choose their mates.

Valentinians, certain Heretics so called from Valentinianus their first
Master, who held, our Savior received not flesh of the blessed Virgin Mary;
And therefore was wont to say, Jesus, born by the Virgin, not of, etc.

Valerian Law (Lex Valeria) made it lawful to kill him that took upon him the
Magistracy without the command of the people.

Valet (Fr.) a Groom, Yeoman or Houshold-servant of the meaner sort. In old
time it was a Title for all young Gentlemen in France, till they came to
eighteen years of age.

Valetudinary (valetudinarium) a place where sick men lie, a sick man's lodging,
an Hospital for sick persons; or the place where they get health.

Valetudinary (valetudinarius) subject to sickness, sickly, often sick, crasie;
also one recovering out of sickness.

Valid (validus) strong, valiant, mighty, puissant.

Validation (validatio) a strengthening, inforcement, confirming; an
establishing or ratifying.

Validity (validitas) might, strength, force, power.

Valves (valvae) folding doors or windows.

Van or Vanquard (Fr. Avantguard) the fore-ward in a battle.

Vancurriers (Fr. Avantcoureurs) forerunners.

Vaniloquence (vaniloquentia) idle talk, vain babbling.

Vapid (vapidus) that gives an ill smack, that casts a vapor or ill savor,
stinking.

Vapor (Lat.) a hot breath, reaking or moisture issuing out of a thing.

A Vapor is defined to be a certain watery thing, and yet is not water; it is
as it were a fume or smoke which will easily be resolved into water.

Vaporation (vaporatio) a casting of vapors or hot breath; also a sweating or
reaking.

Vaporiferous (vaporifer) that makes or stirs up vapors.

Vapulation (vapulatio) a beating or scourging.

Variegation (variegatio) a garnishing with diverse colors.

Varry or Verry (Fr. vaire) a term in Heraldry and signifies that which is
diversified with argent and azure; as the fur of Ermines powdered thick with
blew hairs.

Varvels (Fr. Vervelles) are like little rings of silver about Hawks legs,
whereon the owners name is inscribed.

Vasiferous (vasifer) that carries a vessel.

Vasselage (Fr.) subjection, the duty or estate of a vassal or slave. Among the
ancient Romans 'twas used for valor and a worthy deed.

Vastation (vastatio) a wasting, spoiling or destroying.

Vastity (vastitas) excessive greatness, destruction, destroying.

Vatican (vaticanus) the chief Library in Rome, called also the Palatine,
founded by Pope Sixtus the fourth, who not only stored it with the choicest
books he could pick out of Europe, but allowed also a large revenue for its
perpetual augmentation. It is so called from the Hill Vatican, where the
Library stands; And that Hill was so called from ^aticinium, i. a foretelling;
because it was famous for many divinations and prophesies uttered upon it.

Vaticinate (vaticinor) to Prophecy or Divine; to conjecture or foretell.

Vaticiny (Vaticinium) a prophecy; a foretelling.

Vaticinian (vaticinius) pertaining to prophesying or divining, or to those
that practice it, prophetical.

Vavasour or Valvasour, is one that in dignity is next a Baron. Came. Brit. page
109. It is also the name of an ancient family in the North of England.
Sometimes it is abusively taken in ill part, for a jolly fellow, or a great man.

V^udevil (Fr.) a Country ballad or song, a Roundelay or Virelay; so termed of
Vaudevire, a Norman Town wherein Oliver Bassel, the first inventer of them,
lived; also a vulgar Proverb, a Country or common saying.

Vauntcouters. See vancurriers.

Vauntlay (from the Fr. Avaunt, i. before, and lay) a term of hunting, when
hounds are set in readiness where they think a chase will pass, and cast off
before the rest of the kennel come in.

Vaward the foremost part of an army in battle. See Vanguard.

Va^vode, a title of dignity in Transylvania, Walachia, etc.

Vberate (ubero) to make plenteous and fruitful; to fatten or give suck with
the breast.

Vberou^ (uber) fertile, fruitful, plentiful, abundant, copious, ample, great.

Vberty (ubertas) plentifulness, fertility, store, abundance.

Vbication (from ubi) the being in a place, the locality of a thing. Tr. of
Schism.

Vbiquitary (from ubique) that is every where, or in all places.

Vbiquitarians or Vbiquitarii, a late Sect, (ranked by some among those, called
Semilutherans) holding that Christ's body is every where as well as his
Divinity; in which kind of Doctrine one Johannes Boedeker was eminent.

Vbiquity (ubiquitas) a being every where and in all places.

Vecordy (vecordia) madness, trouble of mind, folly, doting.

Vectarious (vectarius) belonging to a coach, wagon or any carriage.

Vectible (vectibilis) that is or may be carried.

Vectigal (vectigalis) that pays or pertains to paying tribute, subsidy,
pension or rent. Also used substantively for toll, impost-money or tribute it
self.

Vection (vectio) a carrying or portage.

Vectitation (vectitatio) an often carriage.

Vectorian (vectorius) apt to carry, serving for carriage.

Vegetals Vegetables (vegetabilia) is a general name for all things that live
and grow.

Vegetable (vegetabilis) able to live and increase in growth, as plants or
other living things.

Vegetation (vegetatio) a making strong, lively and quick, a refreshing or
comforting.

Vegetive (vegetus) that lives and grows; whole, strong, quick, lively.

Vehicle (vehiculum) a Cart, Wain, Wagon, or Chariot; a general name for all
things serving to carry.

Vehicular (vehicularis) pertaining to any instrument or engine of carriage.

Vein (vena) a vein in the body, an artery, a pulse; yet every vein is not a
pulse, though every pulse be a vein; the several kinds whereof follow.

Adipal or Adiposous veins (venae adiposae) are two veins, a right (sometimes a
branch of the right kidney-vein) and a left one (ever a branch of the
descendant trunk of the hollow vein) which particularly nourish the fat and
skin that is about the kidney, and generally breed fat in those parts by which
they run.

Arterial vein (vena arterialis) is one of the four principal veins of man's
body, issuing from the right ventricle of the heart, the blood whereof it
carries to the lungs for their nourishment.

Auricular vein (vena auricularis) the ear vein, which runs up along by the
kernels which are under the ear, and is there divided into two branches, the
one whereof mounts up before the ear, and the other behind it; Chirurgions
open it against deafness, pain, and ulcerations of the ears.

Axilary vein (vena axillaris) a great and large vein, which, being a branch of
vena cava, is conveyed under the canel bone, and through the Arm-hole into the
inner seat of the arm, where it is dispersed.

Basilick vein (vena basilica) the liver vein, which issues from the second
main ascendant branch of vena cava, and is divided into two branches, a deep
and a superficial one; the later whereof being near the inward process of the
Arm, and very near the skin, is divided into other two; (viz.) a less which
runs into the head vein, and together with it makes the Median or middle vein,
whilst the greater passes along by the elbow, to the hand, and there makes the
Salvatella.

Bena cava (Lat.) the hollow vein which is a great one, issuing from the
thickest part of the liver, and then divided into two main branches; and they
into many others.

Cephalic vein (vena cephalica) the head vein which springs out of the Axillar
vein, and passes between the first and second muscle of the shoulder,
stretches to the outmost parts, and there lies evident aloft. Thom.

Cervical vein vena cervicalis) the vein of the brains which passes by the
cross processes of the neck-joynt, up to the film or thin skin, which is next
the brain, and there ends.

Celiacal vein (vena coeliaca) the blind vein, a second branch of the
Mesenteri^ue vein, runs unto the blind gut, and there ends in many branches.

Common vein. See Median vein.

Coronal vein (vena coronalis) the Crown-vein; a branch of the spleen-vein, so
termed because it environs the heart in manner of a Crown.

Crural vein (vena cruralis) the thigh-vein, a great vein which issues from the
trunk descendant of the hollow vein.

Cystique vein (vena cystica) a small, and sometimes double, sometimes single
branch of the Port vein, whence it mounts to the neck of the gall, and there
divides if self into two branches.

Diaphragmatick vein (venae diaphragmaticae) the midriff veins; two several
branches of the hollow vein, from which they run into the midriff, and there
end.

Emulgent vein. See Emulgent.

Epigastrick veins (venae Epigastricae) an outward and an inward branch of the
slanck-veins, both which, after diverse passages at length join themselves unto
those that belong to the dugs.

Dexter Epiploick vein (vena Epiploica) the second branch of the spleen vein,
goes to the Epiploon and the gut colon; Also a fourth branch of the spleen
vein, which, ending toward the upper part of the Epiploon, is called
Epiploick, but with the addition of Posterior.

Frontal vein (vena frontalis) the forehead vein, a third branch of the outward
throat vein, whence, mounting by the bottom of the nether jaw, it comes into
the lips and nose, and thence ascends by the inside of the eye to the middle of
the forehead.

Garter or gartering vein is a fourth branch of the thigh vein, from which it
descends, among the back muscles of the thigh, unto the bought of the ham,
where it gets this name.

Gastrepioloick vein (vena gastrepiploica) the third branch of the trunck of
the Port vein, issuing side-wayes out of the right side thereof, and spreading
abroad in the bottom of the ventricle.

Gastrick vein (vena gastrica) the belly vein; a branch of the Port vein, from
which it descends to the hollow part and backside of the ventricle; There is
also another called the Petty-Gastrick, which is the first branch of the Spleen
vein, and goes to the right side of the ventricle.

Hederiform vein (vena hederiformis) a certain vein which passes down along by
the sides of the womb.

Hemorrhoidal vein (vena hemorrhois) the first branch of the Mesenterick, which
runs to and ends at the Colon and strait gut, sometimes it issues from the
Spleen vein.

Hepatick or liver vein (vena hepatica) the great carrying vein, which proceeds
out of the hollow part of the liver.

Humeral vein (vena humeralis) the shoulder vein. See Cephalic vein.

Hipogastrick vein (vena hypogostrica) the third branch of the flanck veins,
and is it self divided into diverse branches, the first whereof runs to the
yard, bladder and strait gut, and thence to the bottom of the fundament, others
to the Matrix, and others, after a long course, go down almost to the ham.

Iliack veins (venae Ilicae) the slanck veins; two main descendant branches of
the hollow vein, a right and a left one, from either of which, five others
issue, the right one is opened against the dropsy and other diseases of the
liver; the left for the passion of the Spleen.

Intercostal vein (vena intercostalis) the fourth branch of the trunck
ascendant of the hollow vein; It feeds three distances between the upper ribs.

Intestinal vein (vena intestinalis) a fourth branch of the Port vein, from the
posterior and right part whereof it issues and communicates it self sometime to
the hungry gut.

Iujular veins (vena jugulares) the two throat or neck veins, (viz.) an outward
one, which is sometimes double, and mounts along the sides of the neck to the
bottom of the head, where it is divided into five branches; And an inward one,
which ascends along by the windpipe to the bottom of the brain, and is there
divided into two branches.

Labial veins (venae labiosae) the lip veins, whereof there are two on each
inner side, both of the upper and under lip.

Lumbar vein (vena lumbosa) the vein of the loins, the fourth branch of the
descendant trunk of Vena cava, divided, near its source, into diverse parts, all
which bestow themselves among the joints of the loins.

Mammal vein (vena mammalis) is double, an inward and an outward one,
distributed among the parts of the breast.

Matricious vein (vena matricis) the matrix vein, or a vein that runs along the
flanck near the Reins.

Median vein (vena mediana) the middle, common or black vein; compounded of the
two less branches of the liver and head-veins, and running along the middle of
the arm, almost to the wrist, where it passes in the form of a Y into the
hand; There is likewise another of this name under the instep.

Meseraik veins. See Mesenterique.

Mesenterique veins (venae mesentericae) two veins, one a branch of the Port
vein, ends at the Mesentery, but is formerly divided into three branches,
whereof the other is the third, and called so, because it likewise ends at the
Mesentery in some fourteen or fifteen branches.

Musculous vein (vena musculosa) the first branch of the flanck veins, termed
thus because it communicates it self with diverse muscles above the belly and
loins.

Nasal vein (vena nasalis) the nose vein, seated between the nostrils.

Ocular vein (vena ocularia) the eye vein, that part of the frontal vein, which
runs along by the inside of the eye.

Organick veins, as Iliack veins.

Pericardick vein (vena pepericardica) the second branch of one of the two main
ascendant branches of the hollow vein; whence it runs to the Pericardium, and
there ends.

Popletick vein (vena poplitis) the ham-vein. See Garter vein.

Port vein (vena porta) the carrying vein, seated in the liver by diverse roots,
which at length join in one stock or trunk, and so pass forth into the
Ventricle, Spleen, Gall, Mesentery, and other parts of the body.

Ranular veins (vena runularis) the first branch of the outward throat vein,
ascends to the tongue, and parts in two, under each side thereof.

Renal veins (vena renum) the kidney veins; two thick and short branches of the
descendent trunk of the hollow vein, a right and a left one, divided into seven
or eight others (when they come near the kidney, into the substance whereof
they enter) there is likewise anothe of this name seated under the instep.

Sacred vein (vena sacra) the second branch of the flanck vein running to the
Os sacrum, and thence getting this name.

Salvatel vein (salvatella) is made of the two bigger branches of the liver and
head veins, from which it runs through the wrist into the hand, and unto the
root or division of the third and little fingers.

Saphen vein (saphena) the mother Vein; the first branch of the thigh vein,
consisting of two divisions, the one inward, which ends among the inner kernels
of the thigh, the other more outward, has three branches, the first ends in
the skin of the thigh, the second goes but to the knees, the third to the
muscles of the leg, whence running along, above the inner ankle (where it is
most opened and known by this name) it comes to the sole of the foot, and there
ends.

Sciatique vein (vena sciatica) is a branch of the thigh vein, which descends
down the leg to the outward ankle, where it is commonly opened for the
Sciatica, and thereupon gets this name.

Spermatick vein (vena spermatica) the third branch of the trunk descendant of
the hollow vein.

Splenitick vein (vena splenitica) the Spleen vein, one of the two main
branches of the Port vein, from which it runs to the spleen, and there ends,
divided into four parts.

Stomachick vein (vena stomachica) the stomach vein runs to the hollow part of
the ventricle, and there ends in two branches.

Subclavicular vein (vena Subclavicularis) one of the two main ascendant
branches of the hollow vein, divided into six parts.

Sural vein (vena suralis) one of the two main branches of the thigh vein, most
eminent in the bought of the knee, from whence it bestows and loses it self
among the muscles of the calf of the leg.

Temporal vein (vena temporalis) the vein of the Temples, opened for the
Megrim, pain of the ears, and extraordinary watering of the eyes.

Thorachique vein (vena thoracis) the breast vein, which is divided into two
branches, both which bestow themselves among the muscles of of the Thorax or
breast.

Thymick vein (vena thymica) the first branch of the subclavicular) goes to the
fag piece or kernel, which is under the kannel bone.

Torcular vein (vena torcularia) the second branch of the outward throat vein,
from which it ascends by the inside of the scull to the brain, which it
moistens and feeds.

Vmbilical vein (vena umbilica) is that whereby an infant in the womb receives
nourishment, and which (it being born) closes it self, and serves as a ligament
to settle the liver to the navel.

Veliferous (velifer) that bears sail, or is under sail, as a ship.

Velification (velificatio) a sailing forwards, or hoysting sail; a course or
voyage.

Velifical (velificus) that is done with sails displayed or full spread.

Velitation (velitatio) skermishing by leaping from place to place, brawling,
bickering in words.

Velivolant (velivolans) running and (as it were) flying with with full sail.

Velleity (from velle the infinitive mood of volo, to will) an inclination of
the will; a kind of willing or desiring, or (as the vulgar say) a wishing and
woulding.

Vellication (vellicatio) a plucking, pulling, lugging; also a carping at,
depraving or detracting.

Velocity (velocitas) swiftness, quickness, nimbleness.

Venal (venalis) set to sale, that does or speaks what one will for money,
that will be bribed and sell his faith for money. Lo. Herb.

Venality (venalitas) vendibleness, a being saleable; a letting or setting to
sale.

Vena porta. See Port Vein in Vein.

Venalitious (venalitius) belonging to the sale of men or children, or of
slaves; that is to be bought or sold.

Venarie (from venor) the sport of hunting or chasing wild beasts.

Venatick (venaticus) belonging to hunting or chasing.

Venation (venatio) a hunting or chasing.

Venator (Lat.) a hunter or huntsman.

Venatorious (venatorius) belonging to hunting and chasing, serving for that
game.

Vendible (vendibilis) saleable, easy, ready or fit to be sold.

Vendicate (vendico) to claim or challenge to himself.

Venditation (venditatio) a vain ostentation, a glorious bragging, show or
setting forth.

Vendition (venditio) a sale or selling.

Venefice (veneficium) the art or craft of poisoning; poisoning, sorcery.

Venefick Veneficial Veneficious (veneficus) that poysoneth; venomous,
poysonfull.

Veneniferous (venenifer) that bears poison, venomous.

Venenous (venenosus) full of poison or venom.

Venerate (veneror) to reverence, worship or honor.

Venereal Venereous (venereus) disposed to lechery; lecherous, lustful,
fleshly, lascivious. Venereal disease, See Morbus Gallicus.

Venerie (venus, eris) carnal lust, lechery, fleshly wantonness, carnality.

Venew. See Venue.

Veniable (from venia) pardonable. Dr. Br.

Venial (venialis) that may be forgiven without much difficulty, pardonable.

Sin is either original or actual; the first is a privation of original
justice, which we inherit from our first parent Adam, being all by course of
nature conceived and born in that privation or original sin; The latter is a
thought, word or deed contrary to the Law of God and this Actual sin is, by
many Divines, divided into mortal and venial; Mortal sin they account any great
offense against the charity of God or our neighbor, and to be so called,
because it kills the soul; and robs it of the spiritual life of grace; Venial
sin, is any small and pardonable offense against God or our neighbor, as the
stealing an apple or a pin; an idle word or such like.

Vent (ventus) wind, a blast, air, breath; also a bruit or report; a place for
air to come in and out at.

Ventilet (a diminitive of vent a little wine, a small puff, gentle gale, cool
blast of wind.

Ventiduct (from ventus and duco) a conduit or conveyance of wind, as an
Aqueduct is of water.

Ventilate (ventilo) to gather wind, to give a vent, to fan or winnow corn;
Also to turn out of one hand into another.

Ventoy (from the Fr. ventau) a fan.

Ventosity (ventositas) windiness.

Ventricle (ventriculus) the place wherein the meat sent from the stomach is
digested; some use it for Epigastrium, others take it for the stomach it self;
a little belly.

Ventricles of the heart, are two large holes, one on the right, the other on
the left side thereof, that, the greater and closed within a slender flesh,
contains the natural blood; this, of a harder substance, contains the blood
wherewith our Arteries are nourished; and thereupon that is called the bloody,
this, the spiritual Ventricle.

Ventriloquist (ventriloquus) one that has an evil spirit speaking in his
belly, or one that by use and practice can speak as it were out of his belly,
not moving his lips.

Ventripoten^ (ventripotens) big-paunch'd, belly-able, huge-gutted.

Venue or Visu^ (from vicinus) a Law term, of frequent use, and signifies the
next or neighboring place to that, where any thing that comes to be tried, is
supposed to be done. 35 H. 8.6.

Venundate (venundo) to buy and sell.

Venus, the goddess of lust; also lust it self, venerie, unchastness, lechery;
also (among Alchimists) the metal copper; also one of the seven Planets See
Saturn, the day or mornin Star.

Venus Escuage, is used for Knights (or nights) service to Ladies.

Quid facies, facies Veneris cum veneris ante:
Ne sedeas, sed eas, ne pereas per eas.
Venustate (venusto) to make beautiful, fair or sightly.

Vepricosous (vepricosus) full of briars or brambles.

Veracity (veracitas) a speaking truth, or the quality or virtue of saying
truth.

Verbal (verbalis) that is of, or that descends of a word; In Grammar those
words are called Verbals which come from some verb, as amabilis from amo.
Lector, from Lego, etc.

Verbality (verbalitas) a belongingness to a word or verb; a fullness of words.

Verbatim (Lat.) word by word, that which is precisely spoken, according as it
was delivered before.

Verberable (verberabilis) that may be, or is worthy to be beaten.

Verberate (verbero) to beat, punish, or strike.

Verbigerate (verbigero) to speak, to talk, to noise abroad.

Verbosity (verbositas) much talking or speaking, talkativeness.

Verdan (from the Fr. verd) green, fresh, lively, new, in prime.

Verd-grease or vert-gr^ce^, a green substance made of the rust of Brass or
Copper, which has been hanged certain days over strong vinegar; It is of a
fretting nature, and therefore to be used with great discretion.

Verderer or Verdor (Fr Verdier) a Judicial Officer of the Kings Forest; a
great part of whose office is touching the vert, i. the wood and grass in the
Forest.

Verde or Verdea, a kind of white Muscadine wine, made in Toscany, which is
sometimes brought into England in bottles.

Verdict (veredictum) is the answer of a Jury or Inquest, made upon any cause
civil or criminal, committed by the Court to their consideration or trial: And
this Verdict is twofold, either general or special: Stawnf. pl. Cor. lib. 3.
cap. 9.

Verditure, is one of the names of green Color among Painters, whereof they
have four most u^ual; Green Bice, Verditure, Vert Greece, Sap-green.

Verdure (Fr. Verdeur) greenness or green things, as herbs, etc. a raw or
natural sowrness in wine, fruits, etc.

Verecund Verecundous (verecundus) modest, shamefaced, demure, bashful.

Verdo^, a term in Heraldry, when a bordure is charged with leaves, fruits,
flowers and the like.

Verge (Fr.) a rod, yard, or wand; also a Sergeants Verge or Mace: It is also
used for the compass about the Kings Court that bounds the jurisdiction of the
Lord Steward and Coroner of his House, and seems to have been twelve miles
compass. Anno 13. R. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 3. Fitzh. Not. Br. fol. 241. B. Britton.
fol. 68. b. 69. a. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 2. and Cokes Reports lib. 4. fol. 47. a.
For this see the Statute of 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12. But Fleta says, this compass
about the Court is called Virgata, a virga, quam Marishallus portat ut signum
suae potestatis. lib. 2. cap. 4. Sect. 1. Verge has also another
signification, being used for a stick or rod, whereby one is admitted Tenant,
who, holding it in his hand, swears fealty to the Lord of a Manor, and for
that cause is called Tenant by the the Verge. Old. Not. Br. fol. 77.

Verger (Fr. or Virger from Virga) one that bears a Verge or white wand before
a Magistrate, etc.

Vergobert (Fr.) a Mayor or Burgomaster; Among the ancient Heduanes it was an
yearly elected chief Officer or Magistrate that had power of life and death.

Veridical (veridicus) that says or speaks truth.

Veriloquy (veriloquium) the true exposition of a word, the Etymology or right
meaning of a word; Also a Speech, or Report.

Veriloquent, as Veridical.

Verisimility (verisimilitas) great likelihood, or true likeness of a thing. Dr
Br.

Vermiculated (vermiculatus) eaten with worms; also embroidered, wrought with
checquer work, or with small pieces of diverse colors, representing sundry
pictures, as we see in Tables and Counters.

Vermillion (Fr. Vermillon) a ruddy color, made of Brimstone and Quicksilver;
Also Gules in Armory. See Cinnaber.

Vermination (verminatio) a disease with worms, properly in cattle, a vehement
ache by the wringing of the Guts, as if they were gnawn with worms.

Vermiparous (vermiparus) that brings forth, or breeds worms. Dr Br.

Vernaccia (Ital.) a kind of wine like Malmsey, drunk much in Rome.

Vernaculous (vernaculus) that is born and brought up in our own house, that
takes beginning in our own Country; Proper, natural.

Vernal (vernalis) belonging to the Spring of the year.

Vernant (vernans) springing or waxing green, as herbs do, burgeoning.

Vernility (vernilitas) flattery, servile or slavish behavior.

Verrey. See Varry.

Verrucous (verrucosus) full of warts, hillocks or knaps.

Versable Versatile (versatilis) that turns, or may be turned, turned or
wounden one about another. Bac.

Versation (versatio) a turning or winding.

Versicle (versiculus) a little verse or line; a short song or sentence.

Versify (versifico) to make verses.

Version (versio) a turning or translating.

Versutiloquent (versutiloquus) a crafty talker, one using words craftily.

Vert (Fr. verd, i. green) green color in Heraldry. In the Forest Laws it
signifies every thing that grows and bears a green leaf within the Forest that
may cover and hide a Deer. See Manwoods, 2. part. fol. 6. a. and fol. 33. b.

Vert Greece. See Verdi-greece.

Vertible (vertibilis) that may be turned.

Vertical (from vertex, icis) wavering, inconstant, apt to change or turn; also
standing right over the head. Vertical Circle. See Azimuth.

Vertical point, is the Zenith, or point of the Firmament, directly over ones
head.

Verticallit^, the being of a thing directly over ones head.

Vetricity, the top of a thing, or an aptness to turn.

Vertigious Vertig^ous (vertiginosus) a giddy, dizzle, turning round, or that
has the disease Vertigo.

Vertig^ (Lat.) a dizziness, giddiness or swimming in the head; a disease in
the head, caused by wind, wherein the Patient thinks all things turn round; a
whirling or turning about.

Vertumra^s, Feasts dedicated to, or Books treated of the god Vertumnus.
Broughron.

Vertumnus, a god among the Romans, that would turn himself into all shapes,
and was supposed to have the government of men's minds.

Vertuoso. See Virtuoso.

Vervecean Vervecine verveceus vervecinus belonging to, or like a Weather or
Sheep.

Vervels. See Varvels.

Vesaneus (vesanus) mad, wood, furious, out of his wit, cruel, outrageous.

Vesculent (vesculentus) apt to eat or feed.

Vesicatory (vesicatorium) a cupping glass, or any sharp Ointment, Cataplasm,
or Plaster, which has power to draw humors outward exulcerating the skin, and
raising little blisters on it. It is also used Adjectively.

Vesicle (vesicula) a little bladder.

Vesperal (vesperalis) pertaining to the evening, or West part.

Vespers or Vesperals, Evening-song, or Evening-prayers; so called among Roman
Catholics. See Prime.

Sicilian Vesperas, is taken proverbially for mischiefs done, or death
inslicted in a place and time of imagined security; from a general massacre of
the French made on a sudden throughout Sicily (whereof they were over insolent
masters) by the incensed Islanders ( Anno 1582) and about five of the clock in
the afternoon at the toll of a bell.

Vesperies (Fr.) Evening-Exercises or Disputations (among the Sorbonists.)

Vespertine (vespertinus) of the evening, done in the evening; also the hour of
Vesperas.

Vespilone (vespilo, onis) he that carries sorth dead bodies in the night to be
buried, as they use in time of plague and great sickness.

Vest (vestio) to cloth, array, attire, adorn, etc. See Vestment.

Vestals (Vestales Virgins) certain Virgins among the ancient Romans,
consecrated to the Goddess Vesta, and therefore so named; they were always
chosen between six and seven years of age and continued thirty years in their
Office; whereof the first ten years they bestowed in learning the cremonies of
their Order; the second in execution thereof, and the last ten in teaching
others; After it was lawful for them to marry: Their chief Office was to keep
fire continually burning in a round Temple at Rome, in honor of Vesta; and if
it chanced to go out, they were to renew it again with no u^ual fire, but such
as they could get by art from the Sunbeams.

Nec tu aliud Vestam, quam puram intellige flammam.

Ovid. They were greatly honored in the City, and had diverse privileges; for
they were carried in Chariots, and the chiefest Magistrates would do reverence
to them; they had Officers going before them, as the Consuls had, and if they
met any one, who was led to be put to death, they had authority to deliver him,
taking an oath that they came not that way of purpose; they might also make a
Will, and dispose of their Goods as they pleased; but if any of them were found
to live unchaste, she was openly carried with sad silence to the Gate called
Collina, where, being put into a deep pit, she was presently buried alive.
These Vestals were first instituted by Numa Pompilius, or (as some write) by
Romulus.

Vestiary (vestiarium) a Wardrobe, Press, or Chest, where apparel is laid; also
a Vestry in a Church.

Vestible (vestibulum) a void place without the door, a Porch, an Entry.

Vestigate (vestigo) to seek out, to seek by the print of the foot, to trace,
to search, diligently, to hunt after.

Vestige (vestigium) the print of a man's foot, a footstep, a trace, or track,
or mark of any thing; the sole of the foot. Spotswoods Hist.

Vestitor (Lat.) he that clotheth, a Tailor.

Vestment (vestimentum) a Garment, Vesture, Apparel, Clothing, Attire. It is
particularly used by the Romanists for the upmost Garment, which the Priest
has on, when he says Mass; and they say he is vested, when he is so attired.
This Vestment the French call Chasuble.

Vetation (vetatio) a forbidding to do something.

Veteran (veteranus) ancient, old, one that has served long in a place or
office; it is used both substantively and adjectively.

Veteratorian (veteratorius) crafty, subtle, gotten by long use.

Veterinarian (veterinarius) he that lets Horses or Mules to hire, a Muletor, a
Horse-courser, a Hackney-man, also a Horse-Leech or Farrier; it is also used
adjectively. Dr Br.

Veterine (veterinus) that bears burdens, used in carriage.

Vetust (vetustus) old, ancient.

Vexillation (vexillatio) a company of men of arms under one Standard.

Vexillary (vexillarius) a Standard Bearer; also pertaining to a Standard or
Ensign.

Vial (phiala) a plain pot, with a wide mouth; also the general name to all
plate, serving for Wine or Water; a Glass or Glass-bottle. Vials of wrath,
mentioned in the Apocalipse, signify Gods readiness to be fully revenged on
sinners.

Viande (Fr.) meat, food, sustenance, victuals, especially of flesh. Holy Court.

Viary (viarius) belonging to the way. Feltham.

Viatick (viaticus) pertaining to a journey, or traveling by the way.

Viaticum (Lat.) all things necessary for a Traveller, be it in victual or
other things: The Blessed Sacrament, as given to dying people, is also so
called by the Fathers.

Viator (Lat.) a Traveller or wayfaring man; but among Divines it signifies
any living person, who is in the state of meriting or demeriting, though by
Mystics frequently taken as contra-distinguished to comprehensor, which is one
that has attained the sight of God.

Viatorian (viatorius) belonging to the way, traveling or journeying, or
serving to way-faring-men.

Vibration (vibratio) a brandishing, shaking, or wagging, as men do drawn
swords, when they threaten others.

Vibrissation (vibrissatio) a quavering or warbling in singing, a shaking a
thing.

Vicarious (vicarius) that is in stead or place of another, that supplies
another man's room, and takes pains for him; as an under-servant, or Vicar.

Vice versa (Lat.) contrary to what was before, the former course being changed
into the opposite or contrary.

Vicenarious (vicenarius) belonging to the twentieth.

Vicennals (vicenalia) solemn games and vows for twenty and thirty years.

Vicesimal Vicessme the same with Vicenarious.

Vicinage. See Voisinage.

Vicinal (vicinalis) of or belonging to Neighbors or Neighborhood.

Vicinity (vicinitas) the company of Neighbors, dwelling nigh one;
Neighborhood, nighness, likeness.

Vicissity or Vicissitude vicissitas, vicissitudo, changing or succeeding by
course, the turn or course in altering, now one, now another, an
interchangeable course.

Vicount alias Viscount, (vicecomes) signifies with us as much as Sheriff;
Between which two words I find no other difference, but that the one comes
from our Conquerors, the Normans; and the other from our Ancestors, the Saxons.
Viscount also signifies a degree of Nobility next an Earl, which (as Camden
says) is an old name of Office, but a new one of Dignity, never heard of among
us till Henry the Sixth's days. But this degree of honor is far more ancient
in other Countries. See Cassan. de gloria Mundi. part. 5. Consid. 55.

Victime (victima) the Beast killed in Sacrifice for Victory, an Oblation, a
Sacrifice.

Victimate (victimo) to Sacrifice, to make an Oblation.

Victor (Lat.) a Conqueror, he that overcomes.

Vidame (Vicedominus) an honor in France, of which there are but four; viz.
That of Chartres. 2. Amiens. 3. Chalons. And 4. of Gerbery in Beauvois.

A Vidame was originally the Judge of a Bishops Temporal Jurisdiction, or such
an Officer to him, as the Vicount was to the Count or Earl, but in process of
time, of an Officer, he became a Lord, by altering his Office into a Fief, held
of the Bishopric he belonged to; so that even to this day the Estate of all
Vidames depends of some Bishopric, or is annexed to the Temporalities thereof,
and therefore they are no better then Seignieurs Mediocres (as the French say)
though the first of that rank; and in all other Privileges and Rights equal to
Vicounts, with some advantage of credit, in respect of high Jurisdiction, which
those have usurped by degrees upon their Earls; and these had at the first, by
the gift of their Bishops.

Videlicet (Lat.) that is to say, to wit: It is usually written thus (viz.) And
in the same sense we use (i.e.) for id est, and sometime i. alone.

Viduation (viduatio) a dividing, a leaving alone, a depriving, a making widow.

Viduity (viduitas) widowhood, or the estate of a widow: also lack of things.

Vieter (Lat.) a Cooper, that with hoops binds Vessels, or he that makes
baskets, or vessels of Osier, to be covered with Leather.

View, is a term of Hunting, and signifies the print of a Fallow-Deers foot in
the ground.

Vigesimal (vigessimus) pertaining to the twentieth in number.

Vigil (vigilia) a watching, abstaining from sleep; a watch by night, which
they used to divide into four parts. The first Vigil began at six of the clock
in the Evening, and continued till nine. The second began at nine and continued
till twelve: The third was from twelve till three: And the fourth from three
till six in the Morning. This word is mentioned Luke 12.38. Exodus 14.24. Also
the Eve or day next before any solemn Feast, because then Christians were wont
to watch, fast and pray in Churches.

Vigintivirate (vigintiviratus) the Office of the viginti viri, or of twenty
men in like authority. Tacitus.

Vigone (Fr.) a kind of Demicaster, or Hat of late so called, from the fine
Wool, which for the most part they are made of, borne by a kind of Sheep of
Spain of that name.

Vigor (Lat.) strength, force, lustiness, courage.

Vigorous (vigorosus) strong, firm, lusty, courageous.

Vilify (vilifico) to make of no reputation or value.

Vilipend (vilipendo) to disesteem, to make light of, not to value.

Vility (vilitas) cheapness, vileness, baseness.

Villication (villicatio) the rule of Husbandry under the Master or Owner of a
Manor.

Viminal (viminalis) apt to wind or bind, belonging to Of^ers or Twigs.

Vin^ Chia, the most excellent wines of all Greece, so called from the Island
Chios (now Scio) where they are made.

Vinarious (vinarius) of or belonging to Wine.

Vinatorian (vinatorius) belonging to the dresser of a Vineyard.

Vincent (from vinco) victorious, overcoming; a man's name.

Vincible (vincibilis) easy to be vanquished or overcome.

Vincture (vinctura) a binding or tying.

Vindemiatory Vindemial (vindemiatorius) pertaining to gathering Grapes, or
ripe Fruit in Harvest, serving for such a purpose.

Vindictive or Vindicative (from vindico) revengeful, apt to vindicate, or
revenge, wreakful, avengeful.

Vineatick (vineaticus) belonging to Vines, apt, or that serves for Vines.

Vinipo^e (vinipotor) a drinker of Wine, a Wine-bibber, a Drunkard.

Vinitorian (vinitorius) of or belonging to the keeping a Vineyard or Vines.

Vinolent (vinolentus) given much to drinking Wine; also made with Wine.

Vinosity (vinositas) wininess, fullness of wine. Dr. Br.

Vintage (Fr. Vendenge) Vine-harvest, Grape-harvest, Grape-gathering, Wine
making, and the season wherein it is made.

Violate (violo) to corrupt, defile, make foul, transgress, or break; as a man
does a Law; to misuse.

Viper (vipera) a venomous Serpent in some hot Countries, lying much in the
earth, having a short tail, which grates and makes a noise as he goes; they are
of a yellow color, and sometimes red. The Male has but one Tooth on every
side, but the Female more, etc.

Viperine (viperinus) belonging to Vipers or Adders.

Viragin or Virag^ (Lat.) a woman of stout and manly courage, a manly or
mankind woman.

Virason, a cool sea-gale of wind; so called in Hispaniola, or Saint Domingo's
Island.

Virelay (Fr.) a roundelay, Country-ballad, or Free-mans Song.

Virgate of Land (virgata terrae) See Yard-land.

Virger. See Verger.

Virginal (virginalis) Maidenly, Virgin-like; hence the name of that musical
Instrument, called Virginals, because Maids and Virgins do most commonly play
thereon

Virgo (Lat.) one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac; so called, because as a
Virgin is barren and unfruitful, whilst she lives without man; so whilst the
Sun continues in this Sign, it brings forth nothing, but only ripens such
Fruit as the preceding part of the year has brought forth.

Virgule (virgultum) a company of young shoots, or many young tender Sprigs and
Sprouts growing together out of the ground.

Viridate (virido) to make green and lusty

Viridity (viriditas) greenness; also lustiness, strength, manliness.

Virility (virilitas) manliness, man's estate; also the privy parts of man.

Viripotent (viripotens) ripe for marriage, able to lie with a man.

Virtuoso (Ital.) a learned or ingenious man, or one that is well qualified
with virtue and ingenuity.

Virulency (from virus) fullness of poison or venom; ranckness of savor.

Virulent (virulentus) full of poison, venomous.

Viscated (viscatus) dressed, or taken with Birdlime.

Visceration (visceratio) good cheer, a dole or distributing raw flesh at the
death of rich men, or when hogs are killed; also the garbage that Hunters give
their Dogs.

Visceral (from viscera) pertaining to the Bowels, or Entrals of Man or Beast.

Viscid or Viscous ( viscidus et viscosus clammy, fast as glue

Viscosity (viscositas) clamminess, a birdlime-like sliminess, or cleaving to.
Br.

Visibility (visibilitas) visibleness, a capacity or aptness of a thing to be
seen.

Vizier, a President, chief Counselor, or chief Statesman about the great
Turk; as much to say a Viceroy, or Deputy to a King.

Vision (visio) a seeing, an apparition or fantasy.

Visor (Lat.) a Messenger sent to view or spy a thing, a Spy.

Visual (from visus) belonging to, or carried by, the the sight; extending as
far as the eye can carry it.

Vital (vitalis) lively, pertaining to the maintenance of life, likely to live.

Vital faculty; see Faculty.

Vitality (vitalitas) life, liveliness, the Spirit of Life, whereby we live.

Vitation (vitatio) an eschewing, voiding or shunning.

Vitelline (vitellinus) of, or resembling the yolk of an Egg.

Vitiate (vitio) to corrupt, destroy, deform, infect, or deslowre.

Vitiferous (vitifer) that bears Vines.

Vitiosity (vitiositas) vice, lendness, the contrary to virtue; corruption, an
inconstant affection of mind in all manner of behavior.

Vitrean Vitrine (vitreus) belonging to Glass, glassie, glassie-green; clear
like glass, or resembling glass.

Vitrifiable, that may be turned or made into glass.

Vitrification (vitrificatio) glassiness, or the making glass

Vitrification (says Dr. Br.) is the last work of fire, and when that arrives
humidity is exhaled; for powdered glass emits no fume or exhalation, although
it be laid upon a red hot iron. Vul. Err. fol. 53.

Vitriol (vitriolum) a little glass; also Copperas so called, which is of a
middle nature between stone and metal.

Vuriolou^, of or pertaining to Vitriol or Copperas.

Vitulin^ (vitulinus) of or belonging to a Calf

Vituperable (vituperabilis) blameworthy, that may be reprehended.

Vituperate (vitupero) to blame, rebuke, discommend, or dispraise.

St. Vitus his Dance, is a kind of madness or disease so called, which
Senertus affirms to proceed from a certain malignant humor gendered in the
body, of near kin with the poison of the Tarantula.

Vivacity (vivacitas) natural strength or liveliness, long life; lustiness,
vigor.

Vivency (from vivo) a living, or enjoying life.

Vivian (from vivo) lively, or that may live long. A man's name.

Vivifie (vivifico) to quicken or give life. Felth.

Vivifical Vivificent (vivificus) which quickens or gives life.

Viviparous (viviparus) which brings forth their young alive, and do neither
spawn, nor lay Eggs. Dr. Br.

Vizier; see Vizier.

Vlcerate (ulcero) to blister, to break out into an Ulcer or running soar, to
exulcerate.

Vlcerous (ulcerosus) full of ulcers or running soars, ulcer-breeding.

Vligirous (uliginosus) soaked with long abode of water; wet, plashy, moist,
full of water.

Vlophone (ulophonum) a venomous glue or clammy substance, made of
Misseltoe-Berries; also the black or Cameleon Thistle, whose Root is also
venomous.

Vle, Yeule, Yool or Vle-Games, in our Northern parts, are taken for Christmas
games or sports; from the Fr. Nouel, i. Christmas, which the Normans corrupt to
Nuel, and from Nuel we had Nule or Vle. But Dr. Hammond thinks Yule should be
taken immediately from the Lat. Jubilum, as that signifies a time of rejoicing
or festivity, etc. See his Answer to six Quaeries, p. 464. But Mr. Sumner more
probably derives it from the Sax. Gehul, i. natalis domini, Christmas. In
Yorkshire etc our other Northern parts, they have an old custom, after Sermon
or Service on Christmas day, the people will, even in the Churches cry Vle,
Vle, as a token of rejoicing, and the common people run about the streets
singing Vle, Vle, Vle,
Three puddings in a Pule,
Crack nuts and cry Vle.


Vltime Vltimate (ultimus) last, final, extreme, the furthest or utmost.

Vltimity (ultimitas) the lastness or end of a thing.

Vltion (ultio) a revenging, a taking vengeance.

Vltramarine (ultramarinus) coming from beyond Sea.

Vltramundane (ultramundanus) supercelestial, beyond or above the Sky. Dr.
Char.

Vltroneous (ultroneus) willingly, with a free will, well-willing.

Vlulate (ululo) to howl as a dog or wolf does.

Vmber, somewhat a sad yellow color used by Painters; also a Beast engendered
between Musmon and another Sheep.

Vmbilical (umbilicalis) pertaining to the Navil. Vmbilical Vein. See in Vein.

Vmbilical Arteries, are two Arteries marching from the Navil, through
Peritonaeum to the sides of the Bladder; they are the first Arteries that in
the Infant are begotten. Tho.

Vmbilicality, the being of a thing, at or in the midst; as the Navil in the
midst of the belly.

Vmbrage (Fr. or Ombrage) a shade, a shadow; also jealousy or suspicion.

Vmbrageous (Fr. Vmbrageux) shady, shadowy, covert, full of shade, obscure,
dark.

Vmbratical (umbraticus) like, or of a shadow, making or casting a shadow; that
is done in the shade, or very privately.

Vmbratilous, idem. Bac.

Vmbrello (Ital. Ombrella) a fashion of round and broad Fans, wherewith the
Indians (and from them our great ones) preserve themselves from the heat of the
Sun or Fire; and hence any little shadow, Fan, or other thing, wherewith women
guard their faces from the Sun.

Vmbriferous (umbrifer) making or casting shadow.

Vmbrosous (umbrosus) having much shadow, casting a great shadow, full of shade.

Un, is an English Privative, which may be added at pleasure to simple words,
and deprives them of their natural sense, as un-accessible, which cannot be
come to; to un-bewitch, un-deceive, etc.

Unanimity (unanimitas) concord of mind, consent of heart.

Vnanim Unanimous (unanimus) of one mind, heart and will, of one consent and
accord.

Vncial (uncialis) belonging to an ounce or inch.

Uncouth (Sax.) unknown, strange, unbeaten: In some of our Law books it is
taken for one, for whose offense his Host is not bound to answer, till the
third night, till when he is not accounted a Guest.

Unction (unctio) anointing.

Vnctorian (unctorius) pertaining to anointing or greazing.

Unctuous (unctus) anointed; fat, oily, moist.

Vnctuosity, oyliness or fattiness.

Vndation (undatio) a flowing or rising of waves.

Vndisonant (undisonus) making a noise like waves.

Vndulated (undulatus) made like waves of water.

Vndulation (undulatio) a waving or moving up and down like waves. Per. Instit.

Vnguen^ (unguentum) any sweet oil or ointment, a liquid perfume, ointment or
salve consisting of grease, fat, and liquors mingled with oil, to the just
thickness of an oil.

Vnich (unicus) one only, single, singular.

Vnicornous (unicornis) that has but one horn, as the beast called Unicorn is
said to have. Br.

Vnifie (unifico) to join or make one; as marriage does Husband and Wife.

Uniformity (uniformitas) one and the same shape or fashion.

Union (unio) peace, concord, agreement, the number one. Union, is a combining
or consolidation of two Churches in one, which is done by the consent of the
Bishop, Patron, and Incumbent, etc.

Union Pearls (so called by Antiphrasis, because they always grow in couples;
Nulli duo reperiuntur indiscreti, says Pliny; Vnde nomen unionum, scilicet,
Romanae imposuere deliciae) are the best sort of Pearl.

Vniparous (from unus and pario) that brings forth but one at a birth.

Unison (Fr. unisson) an one; an oneliness, or loneliness, a single or
singleness; a term in Music, when two Strings or Notes agree in one tone.

Unition (unitio) a making one, a joining two things together.

Unity (unitas) an uniting or joining two things or more together; also
concord, agreement.

Unity of possession, in our Law, is a joint possession of two Rights by
several Titles. For example, I take a Lease of Land from one upon a certain
Reut; afterward I buy the Fee simple; this is an Unity of possession, whereby
the Lease is extinguished, by reason, I, who had before the occupation only for
my rent, am become Lord of the same, and am to pay my rent to none but my self.

Universality (universalitas) generality, the whole State, all in general.

Univocal (univocus) signifying but one thing; consisting o^ one voice.

Vnivocalty (univoce) of the same signification; a term in Logic; wherein as
often as the same word in the same signification, that is, meaning the same
notion, is applied to more, it is said to signify or be spoken univocally. Per.
Instit.

Vocabulary (vocabularium) a Dictionary, an Index, or Table of words; also used
adjectively (from vocabularis with relation to words.

Vocal (vocalis) that has a voice, loud, making a noise, belonging to the
voice.

Vocal Nerves (vocales nervi) are those noble sinews, which have the virtue of
forming the speech.

Vocal Prayer, is that which is uttered by words, as mental is conceived in the
mind and spirit without pronunciation of words.

Vocality (vocalitas) a tune or sound of a voice.

Vocation (vocatio) a Caling or course of life.

Vocative (vocativus) belonging to Calling.

Vociferate (vocifero) to cry out aloud, to bray, to exclaim.

Vociferation (vociferatio) an exclaiming, a crying out aloud, a braying.

Voculation (voculatio) the accent of every word, the due moderation and
measuring the voice in pronouncing a word.

Vogue (Fr.) swey, swinge, authority, power, clear passage, as of a Ship in a
broad Sea.

Voiders, great broad dishes to carry away the remains from a meat-table; also
a term in Heraldry.

Voisinage (Fr.) neighborhood, nighness, nearness. Dr. Tailor.

Volant (volans) flying, swiftly passing, fast running; also a term in
Heraldry, when a Bird is born flying

Volary (from volo, as) a place (for birds) to fly in.

Volatical Volatile Volatilous (volaticus) (volatilis) that flies, or can fly,
flitting, passing swiftly; not fixed, apt to evaporate.

Volatility (volatilitas) swift passage, inconstancy, unfixedness; aptness to
evaporate, and fly away. A term in Chemistry.

Volgivagant or Vulgivagant (volgivagus) pertaining to the common people, poor,
base, mean, uncertain, inconstant.

Volitate (volito) to fly often, to run in and out, or to and fro often.

Volition (from volo, vis) a willing or an assenting act of the will. The
disposition in the Soul upon which Operation follows, we call the Will, and the
first beginning, Volition. Per. Inst.

Volocity (volocitas) a flying or running hastily.

Volta or Lavolta (Ital.) a turn, a course about, a turning round, or coming
about again; also the turn which expert Riders teach their Horses, also a
turning dance so called. Florio.

Volubility (volubilitas) the turning of a thing, facility to turn round,
aptness to roll, roundness, inconstancy, mutability. Also sound or quick
speaking without impediment or staggering, the falling or round going of words
by measure. Tho.

Voluble (volubilis) that is or may be easily tumbled or rolled, inconstant,
always turning; having a round pronunciation or good delivery of speech.

Voluntary (voluntarius) one that serves or does any thing, without pay or
compulsion, of his own accord or will.

Voluntative (from voluntas, atis) that proceeds from the Will, wilful or full
of desire.

Voluptable (voluptabilis) which brings pleasure, pleasurable, that causes
delight.

Voluptuous (voluptuosus) wholly devoted to worldly delights, unsatiable in
sensual pleasure.

Volutation (volutatio) a rolling or tumbling, a tossing, a wallowing, a
casting or revolving in the mind.

Volutina, a certain Goddess, who was said to be the the over-seer of the husks
of corn, wherein the Grain is enclosed.

Vomitio^ (vomitio) a vomiting, casting or parbreaking.

Vomitory (vomitorius) that has the nature or strength to vomit or spew.

Voracity (voracitas) gluttony, ravening, devouring, excessive eating.

Vorage (Lat.) a Gulf, a Whirlpool, a Quagmire, or mavelous deep place, that
sucks or swallows up even Rivers, and whereout nothing can come; Also a
gluttinous waste-gut, and spend all.

Voraginous (voraginosus) full of Gulfs, and Whirlpits.

Voration (voratio) a devouring, or eating up greedily.

Votary (from voto) he that makes a vow, or binds himself to the performance of
a vow; a vowed Servant, a Devote.

Votive (votivus) that is vowed or promised by vow; also that is or has been
greatly wished or desired.

Vouch (Fr. Voucher) to cite, pray in aid, or call to aid in a suit. It is a
word much used in our Common Law; Also to avow, or affirm boldly, to avouch.

Vowel (vocalis) a letter which makes a perfect sound of it self, of which
there are five, a, e, i, o, u.

Urania, one of the Muses, to whom the invention of Astrology is attributed;
called also the heavenly Muse.

Vraros^py (Gr.) a speculation or view of the Heavens.

Vrbane or Vrbanical urbanus urbanicus belonging to a City, civil in courtesy,
gentle in speech and gesture, pleasant in behavior and talk, comely, seemly.

Vrbanity (urbanitas) courtesy, civility, civil life, good manners, etc.

Vrbicarian (urbicarius) belonging to a City. And Suburbicarian, under or
within the jurisdiction of a City, properly and specially attributed, by
ancient Writers, to a certain part of Italy near adjacent to Rome; but extended
by Ruffinus, a barbarous Author, to all those Countries of which Rome was then
the Political Head; viz. all the West.

Vrent (urens) burning, parching.

Vreter (Lat.) the Pipe or conduit by which the Urine passes from the Reins to
the Bladder.

Vrim and Thummim, a light of the knowledge of Christ, by the Word, together
with perfection of virtue and holy manners; Exodus 28.30. Thou shall put in the
Breast Plate of Judgment, the Vrim and Thummim. Who made this Vrim and Thummim,
what it was, and of what made, is very hard, if not impossible to find out:
Certainly, it was not reckoned among the things wrought by Art, but was given
to God by Moses alone, to put in the holy Pectoral, as Levit. 8.8. and written
of Christ, Colos. 2.3. Dan. 8.13. See Sir W. Ral. lib. 2. fol. 395.

Vrinary (urinarius meatus) the Pipe by which the Pi^s runs from the Bladder.

Vrinator (Lat) one that dives or swims under water, and fetches up Merchandise
from the bottom.

Vrn (urna) a measure of liquid things, containing of old two Gallons and a
Pottle; also the general name for a Pitcher or Pot; but most commonly taken for
a Vessel or Coffin, wherein the ashes of the dead were kept; for the old Romans
were wont to burn their dead bodies: Now it is often taken for a Grave or
Sepulcher; also a vessel wherein the Roman Praetor did put the names of such as
were to be elected or tried by lot. See a learned discourse of Vrns, written
lately by Dr. Brown, and entitled Hydriotaphia.

Vroscopy (Gr.) an inspection of Urines, or casting of water, as Physicians do.

Vrsine (ursinus) of or belonging to a Bear.

Vrsula (Lat.) a little she Bear; a woman's name, heretofore of great
reputation, in honor of Vrsula the British Virgin Saint, martyred under Gods
scourge, Attila, King of the Hunnes.

Vrus or Ure Ox, is a huge-bodied, hulk-backed, short-horned, and red-eyed
wild Ox. Pliny.

Vsance (Fr.) use, usage; it is a term among Merchants, as if a Merchant
receive money here, and engage by Bill of Exchange to pay the like sum in Paris
at Vsance, that is, at the months end; and double Vsance is two months.

V^bagh or Vs^abagh Irish Aqua vitae, the word in that language importing as
much.

Vstion (ustio) a burning or scaring.

Vstulate (ustulo) to burn or sear a thing: also to frizel or curle.

Vsucaption (usucaptio) prescription or long possession, or the attaining a
thing thereby.

Vsufructuary (usufructuarius) one that has the use, and reaps the profit of
that, whereof the propriety rests in another.

Usury (usura) usage; the occupation of a thing; also money or moneys worth
given above the principal sum for the lone of it; interest, use.

Usurpation (usurpatio) an usurping, an unjust or often using, a taking against
right and reason, an incroaching on another man's Right.

V^as (Octava) is the eighth day following any Term or Feast; as the Vtas of
Saint Michael, the Vtas of St. Hillary, the Vtas of St. Martin, the Vtas of St.
John Baptist, and the Vtas of the Blessed Trinity, etc. as you may read An. 51.
Hen. 3. Stat. concerning general days in the Bench. And any day between the
Feast and the Eighth day, is said to be within the Vtas; the use of it is in
the Return of Writs, as appears by the same Statute.

Vtensil (utensile) any thing necessary for our use and occupation;
Housholdstuff.

Vterine (uterinus) of or pertaining to the womb.

Fratres Vterini, brothers of the same Mother, that came both of one Womb, or
Belly.

Vtible (utibilis) that may be used, profitable.

Vtinam (Lat. Adverb) God grant, Would to God; it is sometimes used
substantively in English, for a wish.

Vtlarie. See Outlawrie.

Vtopian, belonging to the feigned or imaginary place or Country, Vtopia.

Utter Barristers. See Barristers.

Wal (from uva) pertaining to a Grape or Vine.

Wid (uvidus) wet, moist.

Vviferous (uvifer) that bears Grapes or Vines.

Vulcan (Vulcanus) the god of Fire, who is also called Jupiters Smith; it is
sometimes used for fire it self; or for any Workman or Forger continually about
the fire; or for a Hill that continually burns and casts out flame and smoke.

Vulgarity (vulgaritas) the common manner or fashion of the vulgar people.

Vulgarization, a making common or vulgar.

Vulgate (vulgatus) published abroad, commonly used, set out to the use of all
men.

Vulned (from vulnus) wounded. A term in Heraldry.

Vulnerate (vulnero) to hurt or wound.

Vulnerary (vulnerarius) he that heals wounds, a Chyrurgeon; Also used
adjectively, which relates to wounds or sores.

Vulnifical (vulnificus) which wounds, or makes wounds.

Vulpinate (vulpinor) to play the Fox; to deceive with crafty wiles or deceits.

Vulpinatiness (from vulpinor) craftiness, deceit.

Vulsion (vulsio) the twinging or pulling of the cramp, or any other thing.

Vultuosous (vultuosus) of a grave and solemn countenance, or of a heavy and
sad look.

Vulturine (vulturinus) pertaining to the ravenous Bird called a Vulture, or
Cormorant, also gray colored.

Uvula (Lat.) a little piece of flesh in the inmost roof of the mouth, which
sometimes hangs loose downward, and hinders from speaking, and swallowing meat;
the Palate of the mouth.

Vxorious (uxorius) belonging to a Wife; also that is very indulgent to, or
fond of a Wife.

W.
WAge (from the Fr. Gager) i. to put in security for performing any thing; as
to Wage Law, and Wage Deliverance.

When an Action of Debt or Detinue is brought against one (upon some secret
agreement or contract had between the parties, without Specialty showed, or
other matter of Record) for goods lent or left with the Defendant, then the
Defendant may Wage his Law, if he will, that is, Swear upon a Book, and certain
persons with him, that he detains not the Goods, nor ows any thing to the
Plaintiff in manner and form as he has declared. Terms of the Law. Note that
the offer to make the Oath is called Wager of Law, and when it is accomplished,
it is called the doing your Law.

To Wage Law (in the common acception) seems to be, to follow, urge, drive on
or prosecute the Law, or Law Suits; as to wage War is praeliari, bellare, to
drive on the War, to fight in Battails as Warriers do.

The Wain of the Moon (from the ancient Belg. Wan, i, defect or want, a lat.
vanus, quia evanescit) the decrease or declination of the Moon. Hence also To
look wan, that is pale, as being in a decaying or defective health.

To Waive or Weive, is to forsake. As to waive the company of Thieves. Stawnf.
pl. Cor. fol. 26.

Waif or Weif. The nineteenth Chapter of the Grand Customary of Normandy, is
entitled (De chooses gaives) and Latined by the interpreter, De rebus vaivis,
i. Of things waived, which are there thus defined. Vaiva sunt res, velalia,
quae nullius proprietate attributa, sine possessionis reclamatione sunt
inventa, quae usque ad Diem and annum servanda sunt. This weif or things
weived, are nothing but things forsaken. The Civilians call it Derelictum.
Bract. ( lib. 1. cap. 12. number. 10.) reckons them inter res, quae sunt nullius,
ea quae pro waivio habentur; sicut de averiis, ubi non apparet dominus; where
he also says, Quod olim fuerunt inventoris de jure naturali, and jam
efficiuntur Principis de jure gentium. This is a Regality, and belongs to the
King, except it be challenged by the owner within a year and a day, as appears
by Britton, cap. 17. Now the Kings in their times have granted this, and such
like Prerogatives to Subjects within their Liberties and Fees; so that Waifs,
Estrays, Things lost, are the Lords of the Franchise, where they are found, but
must first be cried and published in Markets and Churches near about, or else
the year and day runs not to the prejudice of him that lost them; and otherwise
the Detainer may be accused of Theft.

The Expositor of Law Terms also says, VVaif is when a Thief has feloniously
stolen Goods, and being closely pursued with Hue and Cry, or else overcharged
with the burden or trouble of them, for his ease or more speed, flies away, and
leaves the goods, or any part of them behind him; then the Kings Officers, or
the Reeve or Bailiff of the Lord of the Manor, who has such Franchise of VVaif,
may seize the Goods, so waived, to the Lords use, who may keep them as his own
proper, except the owner come with fresh Suit after the Felon, and sue an
Appeal, or give in Evidence against him at his Arraignment upon the Indictment,
and he be attainted thereof, etc. In which cases the first owner shall have
restitution of his Goods so stolen and waived. Also if a man be pursued with Hue
and Cry, as a Felon, and leaves his own Goods, etc. these shall be taken as
Goods waived and forfeited, as if they had been stolen.

VVaived also belongs to a Woman, that being sued in Law, contemptuously
refuses to appear, as the word Outlawed does to a man: For Women cannot be
outlawed, because they are not sworn in Leets to the King, nor to the Law, as
men are; so that a Man is said Outlawed, or without the Law, to which he was
sworn, and a Woman waived.

Waldenses, a Sect or Congregation that took name from one Waldo of Lions in
France, about the twelfth Century; and held, They were not bound to make
profession of their Faith, denied the real Presence, Purgatory, etc. And
condemned the eating of Flesh, Eggs, and Milk, etc. See Rosses View, p. 223.

Wakes or Country Feasts, were most usually kept on the Sunday next after that
Saints day, to whom the Parish Church was dedicated. And these Feasts took
Origin from a Letter written by Gregory the Great to Melitus Abbot, sent into
England with St Austin, in these words. It may therefore be permitted them (the
English) that in the dedication days, or other solemn days of Martyrs, they
make them Bowers about the Churches, and Feasting together, after a good
religious sort, kill their Oxen now to the refreshing of themselves, to the
praise of God, and increase of Charity, which before they were wont to offer up
in Sacrifice to the Devil, etc. Bid Eccles. Hist. c. 30. And they may be
called Wakes, because on the Vigil of those Feasts, people were wont to watch
and pray, or to awake from sleep at the several Vigils of the night; but now
that Religious custom is profanely converted into rude Sports, and Gluttonous
Feasting for the most part.

Waiter (Germ. a man's name, from Waldher, for so it is most anciently written)
a Pilgrim, according to Reneccius; others make it a Wood-Lord or Wood-man. Came.

Wapentake, is all one with that which we call a Hundred, as appears by Bract.
lib. 3. Tract. 2. cap. 1. number. 1. In some Counties they are called Hundreds, in
others Wapentakes, etc.

Wardmote, is a Court kept in every Ward in London. An. 32. Hen. 8. cap. 17.
ordinarily called among the Citizens, the VVardmote Court.

Wardwit alias Ward wit, is to be quit of giving money for keeping Watch and
Ward. Stows Survey.

Warp (from the old Saxon awarp or awurp) to throw or cast; hence we still say
a board warps or casts; and in some parts of England we call a Moul, a
Mouldwarp, which is as much as to say, a Cast-earth. Versteg.

Wards and Liveries, a certain Court erected in Hen. the Eighths time; and put
down by Act. 1656. ca. 4.

A Wash of Oysters is ten Strikes.

Wassail or Wassale on Twelf-day at night, or on New Years Eve. The Origin in
the words of Verstegan, thus. "Lady Rowena, Niece to Hengistus, having invited
King Vortiger to a supper, at his new built Castle, called Thong-Castle, caused
her after supper to come forth of her Chamber, into the Kings presence, with a
Cup of gold filled with Wine in her hand and making, in very seemly manner, a
low reverence to the King, said with a pleasing grace, in our ancient Saxon
Language, Waes heal h^aford Cyuing, which is, according to our present Speech,
Be of health Lord King; for as (was) is our Verb of the preter-imperfect tence,
signifying have been, so (Waes) being the same Verb in the Imperative Mood, and
now pronounced (was) is as much to say, as, grow, be or become, and Waeshe^l,
by corruption of pronounciation afterward became Wassaile. The King not
understanding what she said, demanded it of his Chamberlain, who was his
Interpreter, and when he knew what it was, he asked him, how he might answer
her in her own Language; whereof being informed, he said unto her Drinc heal,
i. Drink health, etc." Verst. p. 101. Some say it is Wassale, quasi, wash your
throat with Ale.

Waters of Shiloah, properly Waters, which came from a Fountain at the Root of
Mount Sion, and ran through Jerusalem with a still and quiet course. Therefore
in Nehemiah 2. it is called the Dragons or Serpents Well, because the Waters of
it crept gently as a Serpent; but Figuratively it denoted the promise of help
to the men of Jerusalem, against the Kings of Syria and Israel, from Gods power
alone (without hiring foreign forces) to repel their enemies, Isa. 8.6. The
waters of Shiloah, which run so softly. See Psalm. 46.4. Wilson.

Watling-street, is one of the four ways, which the Romans are said to have
made here in England, and called them, Consulares, Praetorias, Militares,
Publicas. This Street is otherwise called Weriam-street, and leads from Dover,
to London, Dunstable, and so to Westchester. An. 39 Eliz. cap. 2. The second
Street is called Ikenild-street, beginning Ab Iconis, who were the people
inhabiting Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire as Mr. Camden declares in his
Brittan. page 345. The third is called Fosse, the reason of the name he gives,
because he thinks it was ditched of each side. The fourth is called
Ermyn-street, etc. Of these read more in the said Author, page 43, 44. And in
the first Volume of Holinsheds Chronicle, cap. 19.

Wave-Offerings, were certain loaves, which were enjoined to be paid, as the
first fruits of every years increase, Levit. 23.17. See Moses and Aaron, p. 219.

Weald of Kent, is the woody part of the Country. Came. Britan page 247.
Verstegan says, Wald, Weald and Would, differing in Vowel, signify one thing,
to wit, a Forest or Wood; for so the (Teut.) Wald also signifies. Yet I have
observed, in Leicester and Yorkeshires, those places are now called Wolds,
which have little or no Wood on them; but it is very probable the woods thereof
have been cut down, since they received that denomination. From this word Wald,
came Waltham Forest, anciently called Waldham Forest. And Waldegrave (an
ancient name in Norfolk) took denomination from the disposing and over-seeing
the Forest for so much the name imports.

Wea-bit or Way-bit, is a word used in the North of England, where if you ask
how far it is to such a place, they answer, a mile and a VVay-bit, by which is
understood a mile and vantage, or a mile and better. I find i^ written
Wea-bit, but conceive it should be Way-bit; quasi, a bit or part of a way.

Weapon Salve, is that by which a wounded person is said to be cured, by
applying it to the sword or weapon that made the wound; and was first found out
by Paracelsus. Of this see Dr. Charltons Paradoxes, p. 1.

Wedding (nuptiae) comes from the Germ. (wed) i pignus, a pledge; and wedde in
Scotland signifies so much at this day. Skene.

Wednesday. See VVoden.

Weigh, is a certain weight of Cheese or Wool, containing 256 pounds of
Avoir-du-pois. And in some parts of this land it signifies a quantity of corn
(most commonly Barley or Malt) containing six Quarters, or forty eight Strikes.

Weights (pondera) there are two sorts of them in use with us; the one called
Troy weight, which has Twelve ounces in the pound, and by this, Pearl, precious
Stones, Electuaries, or Medicinal things, Gold, Silver and Bread are weighed;
the other Avoir-du-pois, which contains sixteen ounces in the pound; by this
all other things are weighed that pass between man and man by weight, saving
only those above named: Why the one should be called Troy weight I have not
learned; though I read it libram and unciam Trojanam, as if it came from Troy:
The other seems to be so termed by reason of the more full weight; for Avoir du
pois in French, is to have good weight, but by these words Avoir du pois are
sometimes signified such merchandise as are bought and sold by this kind of
weight. Fleta l. 2. c. 12. says, 15 ounces make the merchants pound; which
it is like, though an ounce less, should be all one in signification with the
pound Avoir-du-pois, and the other Pound, called by Fleta, Trone weight,
plainly appears to be all one with that, which we call Troy weight; and I find
not Troy weight mentioned by any other that ever I read upon this subject, but
only our own Countrymen. See Tronage. One Phidon an Argive is said to have bin
the first finder out of Weights and Measures. See Ounce and Sarplar.

Welken or Welkin (Sax.) a cloud; but now commonly taken for the Sky or Element.

Welsh, the people of Wales, which were the old Britans, and those a people of
the Gauls; from whence the Saxons (according to their manner of speech) instead
of Gallish, called them VVallish, and by abbreviation Walch or Welsh.

Were-wulf or Were-wolf ( were in the old Sax. was sometimes used for man) this
name remains still known in the Teutonick, and is as much as Man-wolf; which is
a certain Sorcerer, who having anointed his body with an Ointment made by
instinct of the Devil, and putting on a certain enchanted Girdle, does not only
to the view of others, seem as a Wolf, but to his own thinking, has both the
shape and nature of a Wolf, so long as he wears the said Girdle, and
accordingly worries and kills humane creatures. Of these sundry have been taken
in Germany, and the Neatherlands. One Peter Stump, for being a Were-wolf, and
having killed thirteen children, two women, and one man, was at Bedhur, not far
from Cullen, in the year 1589. put to a very terrible death. Verst.

Westphalia Bacon, so called from the Country Westphalia, a Province in
Germany* from whence it comes; which Province is wonderfully stored with
Acorns, that feed Swine of an exceeding pleasant taste and nourishment.

Westsaxonlage, See Merchenlage.

Wharf (from the Belg. Werf, idem) is a broad plain place near a Creek or Hithe
of the water, to lay Wares upon, that are brought to or from the water. Or it
is a working place for Shipwrights.

Wharfage, is a Fee due for any thing that is landed at the VVharf, or brought
upon the VVharf to be carried by water.

Wharfinger is the Keeper of a VVharf. An. 7. Ed. 6. cap. 7.

Whead or Wheedle, is a late word of fancy, and signifies to draw one in, by
fair words or subtle insinuation, to act any thing of disadvantage or reproof.

Whirlebat, See VVhorlebat.

White Hall in Henry the eighth's time, was called Yorkhouse, as being the
Archbishop of Yorks Palace, otherwise called Cardinal Wolsey; upon whose
conviction in a Prem^nire it fell to that King, who beautified and enlarged it,
and called it White Hall.

Whitsunday, Pentecost, Whitsontide (i. albi solis tempus) is a solemn Feast in
memory and honor of the coming of the holy Ghost upon the heads of the
Apostles, in tongues, as it were of fire. ( Act. 2.3.) Pentecost in Greek
signifies the fiftieth, it being the fiftieth day from the Resurrection. It is
also called VVhitsunday from the Catechumens, who were clothed in white, and
admitted on the Eve of this Feast to the Sacrament of Baptism.

Verstegan says it was anciently called Wied Sunday, i. sacred Sunday; for wied
or wihed signifies sacred in the old Saxon.

Whole-chase Boots, are whole hunting, or large riding Boots; and Demichase,
are, with the French, half hunting, or (as we call them) Summer riding Boots;
though some of our Shoomakers do ignorantly apply the word Demi^chase to a
certain color of the leather.

Whorlebat (caestus) is a Weapon with Plummets of lead, used in Games for
exercise by the ancient Romans.

Wicket (from the Fr. Huisset) a little door (commonly) where great gates are.

Wick^vi^s or Wick^v^tes, the followers of VVicklif, who was Curate of
Lutterworth in Leicestershire about the year, 1380 See his opinions in Mr.
Fullers hist. lib. 1. p. 131.

Wildfire (what it is, is well enough known) was invented by the Grecians about
the year of our Lord 717. when Caliph Zulciman besieged Constantinople, and
therefore the Latins call it Graecus ignis.

Will of the Wisp. See. Ignis fatuus.

Will^am (Tent.) for sweeter sound drawn from Wi^helm, which is interpreted by
Luther, much defense to many; as Wilwald, Ruling many; Wildred, much reverend
fear, or awful; Wilfred, much peace; Wi^bert, much increase. Came.

Wimple (Belg Wimpel) a Streamer or Flag; but it is most commonly taken for the
linen plaited cloth, which Nuns and Religious women wear about their necks.

Winefred, if Saxon, signifies win or get peace; but some conceive it to be a
British word, corrupted from Gwen fremi. Frewi was the Saints name at first,
but had the addition Gwen (which signifies white in the Feminine Gender) from
the white circle that remained in her neck, after she was revived by Benno, the
Priest, and Pastor of the Church (as the story goes) by joining her cut off
head, to her dead body. For it is a Tradition among the Britans, that in the
very place where her head was cut off by wicked Cradacus, there sprung the Well
that has to this day continued under the name of St Winefreds Well in
Flintshire; esteemed to be the most plentiful and miraculous Spring in the
world.

^frid, i. An Obtainer of Concord* or a win peace; for so it signifies in the
old Saxon. An Englishman of that name, was by means of Charles the Great, made
Archbishop of Magunce, by Pope Gregory the Second, and was afterward called
Boniface, he is accounted an Apostle of Germany, for his preaching and
converting much people to the Christian Faith in Saxony, and thereabouts. At
Doccum in Freezland, has been reserved unto our time, a Book of the four
Gospels, all written with his own hand. Verst.

Wisard or Wizard (perhaps from the Sax Witega, i. a Prophet or Foreteller of
things to come) a cunning man, the Hebrews describe him thus; he put in his
mouth the bone of a Beast named by them Jadua and burned Incense, and did other
things, till he fell down with shame, and spoke with his mouth, things that are
to come. We commonly take him for a kind of Witch, or one that can tell where
things are, that were lost, etc.

Wiseacre (from the Belg. Waerseygher, ex Waer, i. veritas and Sagen, dicere)
one that knows or tells truth; we commonly use it in malam partem, for a Fool.

Wis^men of Greece were seven. See Solon.

Witch, is derived from the Dutch Witchelen or Witchelen, which properly
signifies whinnying and neighing like a Horse; also to foretell or prophecy; and
Witcheler, signifies a Soothsayer; for that the Germans (from whom our
Ancestors the Saxons usually descended) did principally (as Tacitus tells us)
divine and foretell things to come by the whinnying and neighing of their
Horses; Hinitu and Fremitu, are his words. For the definition, Master Perkins (
cap. 1.) says, Witchcraft is an art serving for the working of wonders, by the
assistance of the Devils, so far as God will permit. Delrio defines it to be,
An art which by the power of a contract, entered into with the Devil, some
wonders are wrought, which pass the common understanding of men. Lib. 1. cap.
2. de Mag. Disq.

Wittal, is a Cuckold that wits all, or knows all; that is knows himself to be
so.

Woden, among the old Saxons was honored for their god of Battle; the word
signifies Fire or Furious. Hence we say, when one is in great rage, he is Wood;
and hence we call Wednesday instead of Wodnesday, on which day he was chiefly
honored. See Verst. 59.

Would. See Weald.

Seven Wonders of the World, were these. 1. The Pyramides. 2. Mausolaeum. 3.
The Temple of Ephesus. 4. The Walls of Babylon. 5. The Colossus of Rhodes. 6.
The Statue of Jupiter Olympicus. And 7. The Pharus or Watch Tower built by
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus.

Wooldrivers ( An. 2, 3. Ph. and Ma. cap. 13.) are those that buy wool abroad
in the Country of the Sheepmasters, and carry it on horseback to the
Clothiers, or Market Towns to sell again.

Woolstaple. See Staple.

Woolwinders, are such as wind up Fleeces of Wool, to be packed and sold by
weight, into a kind of bundle, after it is cleansed as it ought to be by
Statute. And to avoid such deceit, as the owners were wont to use, by
thrusting in Locks of refuse Wool, and such other dross to gain weight, they
are sworn to perform that Office truly between the owner and the Merchant. See
the Statute of 8. H. 6. c. 22.23 H. 8. c. 17. And 18 Eliz. c. 25.

Wranglands, seem to be misgrown Trees, that will never prove Timber. Kitchen,
fol. 169.6.

Wreath, a Boars-tail so called by Huntsmen; also in Heraldry it is that which
is placed between the Mantle and the Crest, being most commonly made of two
colored silks, wreathed together; called also a Torce.

Wreck (From the Fr. Varech) is where a ship perishes at Sea, and no person
escapes alive out of it; the Civilians call it Naufragium. This Wreck being
made, the goods that were in any part of the Ship (being brought to Land by the
waves) belong to the King by his Prerogative, or to him to whom he has granted
this privilege. An. 17 Edw. 2. cap. 11. But if any person in the Ship come to
land, it is on Wreck, or if either Dog or Cat escape alive, the goods are the
owners still, so he comes within a year and a day to claim them. And for this
the Statute is plain. Westminster. 1. cap. 4. An. 3 Ed. 1. The Emperors of Rome made
no advantage of this sad event, as appears Titulo de Naufragiis, 11. Cod. And
Richard the first had some remorse of poor Seamens miseries in this case; for
he quietum clamavit VVreck suis subditis. Hoved. Part. post. Annal. f. 386.

Wroth (from the Belg. Wreedt) angry, cruel, fierce, inhumane.

Wreke (from the Belg. Wreken) to avenge or revenge.

Wurt or Wort (Sax.) an Herb, and Kelewurt (now Colewurt) a^ Herb much used
for pottage in time of old. The City Wirtsberg in Germany (in Latin Herbipolis)
had that name from the abundance of Worts or Herbs, which grew about the Hill
sides by that Town. Verst.

X.
XEnodochy (Xenodochium) an Hospital.

Xeriff, the name by which some Princes of Barbary are instiled.

Xerophagy (xerophagia) the eating dry meats.

Xerophthalmy (xerophthalmia) soreness or blearedness of the eyes, when they
neither swell, nor run, but only look somewhat red, having little or no pain,
but a kind of itching.

Xilinous (xilinus) of or belonging to Cotton.

Xylobalsamum (Gr) a sweet and odoriferous wood, whereof Baulm naturally comes.

Xylopolist (Xylopola) a Woodmonger, or one that sells Wood or Timber.

Y.
YArdland (virgata terrae) so called from the Sax. (Gyrlander) is not the same
quantity in all places; for in some Countries it contains twenty acres, in some
twenty four, in some thirty, according to Mr Lambert; This Yardland Bracton
calls Virgatam Terrae ( Lib. 2. cap. 10. and 27.) but he expresses no
certainty what it contains.

Mr Noy (in his Complete Lawyer, page 57.) says, two Fardels of Land make a
Nook, and four Nooks make a Yardland, and four Yardlands make a Hide of Land;
and four (but some say eight) Hides make a Knights Fee, the relief whereof is
five pounds, and so ratably.

Year (annus) was divided by Julius Caesar into twelve months, fifty two
weeks, three hundred sixty and five days, and six hours, wanting eleven
minutes, which odd six hours, every Leap or fourth year, make the odd day in
February. The month is the twelfth part of the Solary year, the week is near
the fourth part of the month; the natural week day, a seventh part of the
week, the Quadrant the fourth part of the day, the hour the sixth part of the
Quadrant; the Point the fourth part of the hour; the Moment or Minute about the
fifteenth part of the Point, etc. The Greeks observed the Lunary year, that is
twelve revolutions of the Moon, three hundred fifty and four days. Br.

Yeoman or Yeihan seems to be one word made by contraction of two Danish words
(Young Men) which I gather out of Canutus's Charter of the Forest, Part 1. fol.
1. number. 2. in these words, Sunt sub quolibet horum quatuor ex mediocribus
hominibus, quos Angli (Legespend) nuncupant Dani vero (Young Men) vocant,
locati, qui curam and onus, tum viridis tum veneris suscipiant. These Mr Camden
( Brit. page 150.) places next in order to Gentlemen, calling them (ingenuos)
whose opinithe Statute affirms. Anno 16 Rich. 2. cap. 4.

Sir Thomas Smith in his Repub. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 23. calls him a Yoman, whom
our Laws call Legalem hominem, which (says he) is in English a Freeman born,
that may dispend of his own Free-land, in yearly revenue, to the value of forty
shillings Sterling; The former Etymology of the name he likes not, making
question, whether it comes of the Dutch (Yoncker) or not, which in the
Low Countries signifies a mean Gentleman, or a Gay-fellow; but he that has
added the Marginal Notes to that Book, seems to draw it from the Saxon (Geman)
which signifies a married man.

Verstegan ( cap. 10.) says, (Gemen) among the ancient Teutonicks, and
Gemaene, in the old Saxon signifies as much as Common, and that the first
letter G. is in this word, as in many others, turned into Y. and so written
Yemen, and that therefore Yemen or Yeomen signifies Commoners.

Yoman signifies an Officer in the Kings House, who is in the middle place,
between the Sergeant and the Groom; As Yoman of the Chaundry, and Yoman of the
Scullery, An 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12. This word (Yongmen) is used for Yomen in the
Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 10.

To Yex, is that we do, when we have the Hicket or Hick up; some take it, to
sob or sigh.

Yewl. See Vle.

Yoncker (Belg.) a lusty Lad, a gay-fellow.

Z.
ZAchary (Heb.) the memory of the Lord.

Zane (Ital.) the name of John in some parts of Lombardy, but commonly used for
a Silly John, a simple fellow, a servile drudge, or foolish Clown, in any
Comedy or Interlude. Flo.

Zanni (Ital.) men, that with foul mouths, unseemly speeches, disfigured faces,
mimique gestures and strange actions, profess to procure laughter; used also
for cross biting, cunning-catching knaves.

Zecchine (Ital.) a coin of Gold current in Venice worth about seven shillings
and six pence sterling. But the Turkish Zecchine is valued at nine shillings
Sterling.

Zelots (Zelotes) they that fear lest the thing they love should be common to
another, they that envy at one, or assay to follow another in living; but most
used, for those that are zealous or fervent in matters of Religion.

Zelotypie (Zelotypia) jealousy.

Zenith (Arab.) the point of the Firmament directly over ones head; called the
vertical point. See Nadir.

Zephirus (Gr.) the West-winde; called also Favonius.

Zereth, an Hebrew measure of nine inches.

Zero (Fr.) a Cyphre in Arithmatick, a thing that stands for nothing.

Zodiac (zodiacus) is an oblique imiginary circle in the Firmament, dividing
the Sphere athwart the Aequinoctial into two points, viz. the beginning of
Aries and Libra; in the midst whereof is the Ecliptic line; Its utmost limits
are the two Tropicks, Cancer and Capricorn; its length three hundred and sixty
degrees, and breadth Sixteen. It is divided into Twelve signs, Six Northernly
and Six Southerly; the Northern are Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Gemini, Leo, Virgo;
the Southern, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces; he
turns upon his own Poles from West to East.

Zoilus, was a backbiting Poet, who wrote against Homers Works, from whence he
was called Homeromastix, i.e. Homers scourge. Hence all envious persons, or
such as back-bite or carp at other men's works, are called Zoilists.

Zone (zona) a Girdle; In Cosmography it signifies a division made of the
Heavens into five parts, whereof one is extreme hot, two extreme cold, and two
temperate. The hot or torrid Zone, is all that part of the Heavens, which is
contained between the two Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn, in which Zone the
Sun continually keeps his course. The two cold or frigid Zones are situate
between the two Polar Circles, and the very Poles, continually wanting the
neighborhood of the Sun: The two temperate are betwixt the Tropicks of Cancer
and the Artick, and betwixt the Tropic of Capricorn, and the Antartick
Circles, enjoying an indifferency between heat and cold; So that the parts next
the torrid Zone are the hotter, and those next the frigid are the colder. These
five Zones are disposed according to the order of the five Zones in Heaven.

Vtque duae dextra Coelum, totidemque sinistra
Part secant Zona, quinta est arden^ior illis:
Sic onus inclusum numero distinxit eodem
Cura Dei, totidemque plagae tellure premuntur.
Quarum quae media est, non est habitabilis aestu;
Nix tegit alta duas; totidem inter utramque locavit
Temperiemque dedit mista cum frigore flamma.
Ovid. Zone also signifies a Soldiers Belt or Marriage Girdle; the Soldiers
Belt was lined in the inside, where, when they went to war they put their
money; whence Horace says, of a man that has lost his money, Zonam perdidit.

Young Maids when they were married, were wont to have a Marriage-Girdle, tied
about their middle, which their Husbands, the first might did untie; whence
Zonam solvere has been translated, to deflowr a Virgin.

Zonarious (zonarius) of or belonging to a Girdle, Purse, or Zone.

Zonigrism (zonigrismus) an Instrument with a long and narrow neck, to convey
potions into the stomach with little taste of bitterness.

Zoography (zoographia) the painting or picturing of beasts.

Zoographer (zoographus) a Painter or one that draws the pictures of beasts. Dr
Br.

Zoophytes (zoophyta) that are in part living creatures, in part plants; as
Oysters, Spunges, etc.

Zygostatical (Zygostaticus) belonging to the pound weight of Sixteen ounces,
or to a Clark of a Market that looks to weights.

Ipse mihi plaudo; nam stulta e fece popelli,
Hic scripsisse feret me been, and ille male.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
In AMort, read, what al a^ort. Applumbuture, read, applum^atura. Auxil.
Forces, r. Countries. For Babe^ r. Babel. Banes, r. Abannan. r. Battalogy.
Batavians, r. Ba^a^i. Bell, r. ^miramis: Belzebu^, ^. C^wley's Note: Brigantine.
^. Faleque. Bugge^ie, r. 25 Hen. 8. cap. 6. r. Cacafuego. Capuched, dele, into
the. Chronogram, r. 1638. Commaterial, r. matter o^. Concords, r. which is.
Conservator, r. conductuum. Cristal, r. crystalius Crosier, r. French, Creix.
Diatessaron, r. of four. Direption, r. them away. Dissidence, r. or
disagreeing. Edish, r. aftermath. Enclitick, r. trochive. Esquilinus, r. Hills
and the better. r. Euintegrous. Exceptor, r. Writes* Excommunication, r. of the
lawful communication of the. Eximietie, r. eximietas. r. Expatiate and
Exorcist. For Feuid, r. Feud. Flamens, r. of woollen. For Gazel r. Gazet. r.
Geld or Gelt. Germination, r. germinatio. For Gipsony r. Gipsous. Girasole, r.
Opals. r. Giromantie. Grilliade, r. broiled on. Haleyon, r. times, Haleyan.
Harold, r. use of them with. r. Harmonick. Hayward, r. Hay. Hellespont, r.
Propontis^. r. Hierosolymitan. Hypocaust, r. Ste^. Jannock, r. Avenaceum. For
Jesuats, r. Jesuati and C^ant^ius.


In Inhibition, r. a writ. r. Insulture (insultura) r. Intersation (intersatio)
Knoll. r. duni pacis. r. ^as^iviate. r. Locuplecity (locuplecitas) Lombardeer,
r. See Caursines. Longanimity, r. expelling. Loray Law, r. if it were. r.
Lushbrough. Malachite, r. dark green. Measure, r. Fadom six foot. Meridian, r.
meridies. Messile, r. Mis^eo. Moly, r. (...). Morglay, r. Mortglai^e. r.
Morose. Multivious. Mumie, r. mu^ia. Muses, r. beatu Musteline, r. VVeesel. r.
Mutilate and Mynning. Numerical, dele the last one. Pilgrim, r. differ thus.
Piepowders, r. court. Plenilunary, r. full moon. Portgreve, r. Prafectus, Dele
Prepositor in a School. Pullation, r. bringing. r. Pyrenean Mountains. Rapine,
r. (rapina) Refection, r. refreshing. r. Residentiary. Rouge Cross, r. Rouge
dragon. Sanhedrim. r. trium virorum. Sooterkin, for Bat r. Rat. r. Sphere
(sphaera) Spiritualities, r. Prestation. r. Spissity (spissita^) r.
Stenographie ( Stenogr. r. Strand or Strond. For Splendit, r. Splendid. r.
Subte^fluous. Surrender, r. in intendment, Synoper, r. Synopis. r. Tephramantie
and Tetarch. r. Tonnage and Tornada. Transalpine, r. Italian. r. Trinominal and
Tripedaneous. Turneament, r. temere. Vertumnals, r. treating. With some other
literal faults.



