The Sale of Esau's Birthright; Or, the New Buckingham Ballad,
To the Tune of the London Gentlewoman, or Little Peggey Ramsey.
A Wondrous Tale I will relate,
The like was never told you,
Of English men that England hate,
The Town of Bucks has sold you.
To serve in Parliament they chose
Two men I fear to name them;
For if I did, you would suppose
I told a Lie to shame them.
That Beef and Ale should yet prevail
You need no longer wonder;
For men of wit, must still submit
To Fools of greater number.
The D --, the Pope, and Tyranny,
Need never fear a Downfall,
For Tiege and Wakeman both would be
Elected for a Town Hall.
These Loyal men of Buckingham,
(True only to their Purses,)
Would sell the Crown t'Inrich the Town,
And laugh at all your Curses.
When they have sinned, and damned their souls,
Or to the Devil gave them;
Their friend the Pope in him they hope,
Well knowing he can save them.
If Sc -- s would take off Oats's head,
He need not fear succeeding;
But send him down unto this Town,
He soon might see him bleeding.
Of Thirteen men there are but Six
Who do not merit Hemp-well,
The other seven play their Tricks
For L -- and T --
The Father is a Reprobate,
And yet the Son's Elected:
The Gaudy Youth comes down in State,
And must not be rejected.
Our prating Knight does owe his Call
To Timber, and his Lady,
Though one goes longer with Town Hall,
Then the other with her Baby.
These men do to their choosing trudge
With all the speed that can be,
And make the Son the Father's Judge,
To save great Tom of D --
The Bailiff is so mad a Spark
(Though lives by Tanning Leather)
That for a Load of Temple's Bark,
He Would Sacrifice his Father.
His Horns do shine, his Wife kept fine,
All men would blame him had he
Not made him stand, whose helping hand
Must make him be a Daddy.
He huffs and rants, and calls to Hall,
But will not give men warning:
When drunk over night, he takes delight
To play the Rogue in the morning.
Next comes the Barber, who will do
Whatever you desire him;
He for a Groat, will cut your Throat,
A Lousy, perjured hireling.
God damn and rot his Arm, he cries,
And swears like any Lover,
For to be true, to three in two,
Poor Judas younger Brother.
Of late he huff'd and drank with Lords,
But since a sad Disaster
Has summoned him to Wash and Trim,
A Reverend Owl his Master.
Another he has kissed a hand,
Which puts him in a Rapture;
So have I known a Miss of the Town,
Adore the Fopp that Clapped her.
Since kissing hands can so prevail,
There Is no man need want Riches;
If they will be kind, and come behind,
They Are welcome to our Breeches.
Thus Buckingham has led the way
To Popery and sorrow;
Those seven Knaves who make us slaves,
Would sell their God to morrow.
A List of those who Voted for their King and Country, Protestant Religion, and
Sir P. -- T --
Mr. Rogers Draper, Mr. Brown Gent. Mr. Mason Apothecary, Mr. Eversay Draper,
Mr. Robinson Laceman, Mr. Walter Arnot Ironmonger.


Honest men and True, be not weary of Well-doing.

Mr. William Hartly was absent at the Election, nor was there any need of his
Company.

Those who Voted for the L -- d. L --. for the E. of D --, for Popery, and for
their Town Hall.
George Dincer Tanner and Bailiff, Thomas Sheen Farmer, Pellam Sandwell
Maulster, Henry Hayward Knight of the Post, and Shaver in Ordinary to her
Excellency Madgl Owlet, -- Stevens Maulster, George Carter Baker, Good Lord
deliver us from.


Those who Voted for Sir R. T. his Timber, Chimny-mony and Court, were the same
with the L. L s. not worth --

The Charter of this Town was given them by Queen Mary for their good Service
in the propagation of Popery; Therefore (to give the Devil his due) they are
but true to the old Cause.


