Signatura Rerum: OR THE SIGNATVRE of all THINGS: SHOWING The Sign, and
Signification of the several FORMS and SHAPES in the CREATION: And what the
Beginning, Ruin, and Cure of every Thing is; it proceeds out of Eternity into
Time, and again out of Time into Eternity, and comprizeth All Mysteries.

Written in High Dutch, MDCXXII. BY JACOB BEHMEN, alias Teutonicus Phylosophus.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for Gyles Calvert, at the black spread Eagle,
at the West end of Paul's Church. 1651.

The Preface of the Translator to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IT is uncertain to me whether the Author wrote a Preface to this Treatise or
not: and I could wish that the little spark of breathing desire which is in me
after true knowledge, were able to write any thing which might be worthy of an
Introduction unto this Book; which is a true Mystical Mirror of the highest
Wisdom, for albeit I have been trained up in the Schools of learning, and have
made some progress in the Tongues, and Arts, according to my mean capacity, yet
I do acknowledge my self to be but an unlearned A. B. C. Scholar in Sophia's
School, that would fain learn to read her Christ's Cross line.

Indeed the best Treasure that a man can attain unto in this World, is true
Knowledge; even the knowledge of himself: for Man is the great Mystery of God,
the Microcosm, or the complete Abridgement of the whole Universe: he is the
Mirandum dei opus, Gods Masterpiece a living Emblem, and Hierogliphick of
Eternity and Tune; and therefore to know whence he is, and what his temporal
and Eternal Being, and well being is, must needs be that ONE necessary thing,
unto which all our chief Study should aim, and in comparison of which all the
wealth of this world is but loss, and dross.

Hence Solomon the wisest of the Kings of Israel says, Happy is the Man that
finds Wisdom, and the Man that gets Understanding, for the Merchandise of
it is better then the Merchandise of Silver, and the gain thereof then fine
Gold; she is more precious then Rubies, and all things that can be desired, are
not to be compared unto her, etc.

This is that Wisdom which dwells in Nothing, and yet possesses All things,
and the humble resigned Soul is its play-fellow: this is the Divine alloquy,
the Inspiration of the Almighty, the Breath of God, the holy Unction, which
sanctifyeth the Soul to be the Temple of the holy Ghost, which instructs it
aright in all things; and searches (...), the depths of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10.

This is the precious Pearl, whose beauty is more glorious, and whose virtue
more Sovereign then the Sun: it is a never-failing comfort in all afflictions,
a balsame for all Sores, a Panacea for all diseases, a sure antidote against
all poison, and Death it self; it is that joyful and assured companion, and
guide, which never for sakes a man, but convoyes him through this valley of
misery, and death, into the blessed Paradise of perfect Bliss.

If thou ask what is the way to attain to this Wisdom: Behold! Christ who
is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, tells thee plainly in these words (Luc.
9. 23.) If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross, daily, and follow me; or as he says elsewhere, Unless ye be born again,
ye cannot see the Kingdom of heaven: or as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 3. 18. If any
man seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be
wise.

Herein lies that simple child-like way to the Highest Wisdom, which no sharp
Reason, or worldly learning can reach unto; nay it is foolishness unto Reason,
and therefore so few go the way to find it: The proud Sophisters, and
wiselings of this world, have always trampled it under foot with scorn and
contempt, and have called it Enthusiasm, madness, melancholy, whimsey, fancy,
etc. but wisdom is justified of her children.

Indeed every one is not fit for, or capable of the knowledge of the Eternal
and Temporal Nature in its Mysterious operation, neither is the proud covetous
world, worthy to receive a clear manifestation thereof, and therefore the only
wise God (who gives Wisdom to every one that asks it aright of him) has
locked up the Jewel in his blessed Treasury, which none can open but those that
have the Key, which is this: viz. Ask and it shall be given you, Seek, and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you: the Father will give the
Spirit to them that ask him for it.

This is the true Theosophick School wherein this Author learned his A. B. C.
and unto which we must go if we would understand his deep writings: for we must
know that the Sons of Hermes, who have commenced in the High school of true
Magic, and Theosophy, have always spoke their hidden Wisdom in a Mystery; and
have so coucht it under Shadows, and Figures, Parables, and Similies, that none
can understand their obscurely-clear writings, but those that have had
admittance into the same School, and have tasted of the Feast of Pentecost.

And this does not at all seem strange to the babes of Divine Mercury, for the
Mysteries of Philosophy, Divinity, and Theosophy, must not be profaned, and
laid open to the view of the outward Astral Reason, which turns all to its
selvish Pride, Coveteousness, Envy, Wrath, and cuning Hypocrisy; and therefore
a parabolical or Magical Phrase, or Dialect is the best, and plainest habit,
and dress that Mysteries can have to travel in up and down this wicked world:
and thus Parables have a double and different respect and Use, for as they do
conceal, and hide Secrets from the Rude and vulgar sort, who are not able, or
Patient to bear any thing but what suites with their common conceits and
opinions, so likewise, they do sweetly lead the mind of the true Searcher into
the depths of Wisdoms Council: They are as the cloudy Pillar of Moses: they
have a dark part, and they have a light part, they are dark to the Egyptians,
the Pharisaical Sons of Sophistry, but light unto the true Israel, the children
of the Mystery.

And therefore whosoever will be a nursling of Sophia, and learn to understand,
and speak the language of Wisdom, he must be born again, of, and in, the word
of wisdom, Christ Jesus, the Immortal Seed: the Divine Essence, which God
breathed into his Paradissical Soul must be revived, and he must become one
again with that, which he was in God before he was a creature, and then his
Eternal Spirit may enter into that which is within the Vail, and see not only
the litteral, but the Moral, Allegorical, and Anagogical meaning of the Wise
and their dark sayings: he then I say will be fit to enter, not only into
Solomon's Porch, the outer Court of natural Philosophy, Sense, and Reason; but
likewise into the inward Court of holy and spiritual exercises, in divine
understanding and knowledge; and so he may step into the most inward and
holiest place of Theosophical Mysteries, whereinto none are admitted to come,
but those that have received the high and holy Unction.

But lest I should transgress in being too large, I will endeavor briefly to
hint unto the Reader what this Book does contain, albeit the Spirit of Wisdom
herein cannot be deliniated with Pen and Ink, no more then a Sound can be
ainted, or the Wind grasped in the hollow of the hand: but pknow that herein he
does lively decipher and represent unto thee the Signature of all Things, and
gives thee the Contents of Eternity and Time, and glanceth at all Mysteries.

Herein the Author sets forth fundamentally the Birth, Sympathy, and Antipathy
of all Beings, how all Beings do originally arise out of one Eternal Mystery,
and how that same Mystery does beget it self in it self from Eternity to
Eternity; and likewise how all things, which take their Original out of this
Eternal Mystery may be changed into Evil, and again out of Evil into Good, with
a clear and manifest Demonstration how Man has turned himself out of the Good
into the Evil, and how his Transmutation is again out of the Evil into the
Good: Moreover, herein is declared the outward Cure of the Body; how the
outward Life may be freed from sickness by its likeness or Assimulate, and be
again introduced into its first Essence, where also by way of Parable or
Similitude the Philosophers Stone is lively described for the Temporal Cure;
and along with it the Holy Corner Stone, Christ alone, for the Everlasting
Cure, Regeneration, and perfect Restitution of all the true, faithful, eternal
Souls. In a word, his intent is to let thee know the inward Power and Property
by the outward Sign; for Nature has given Marks and Notes to every thing,
whereby it may be known; and this is the language of Nature, which tells for
what every thing is good and profitable: And herein lies the Mystery, or
central Science of the high Philosophical Work in the true Spagirick Art, which
consummates the Cure not only for the Body; but for the Soul.

But let the Reader know, that the sharp speculation of his own Reason will
never pry into the depth of this Book, but rather bring him into a maze of
doubtful Notions, wherein he will be wilder himself, and think the Authors
phrasetedious, irkesom, and strange; and therefore the understanding lies only
in the manifestation of that Spirit, which in the Day of Pentecost gave forth
the true sense and meaning of all Languages in one: Now if that Spirit does
rule and dwell in thee, then thou may understand this Author in the deepest
ground, according to thy creatural Constellation, both in the Eternal and
Temporal Nature; but if not, these things will be but as a Relation of Nifles,
and Chimera 's unto thee. And therefore if thou be of a Saturmne property,
dull and dark, shut up in the house of Luna, soar not too high with thy censure
and scorn, or with a critic speculation of thy outward Reason, lest thou fall
indeed into the deep Abyss of darkness; but wait patiently, till the divine Sol
shall shine again in thy dark and selfish Saturn, and give thee some beams and
glimpses of his Eternal Light, and then thy angry Mars will be changed into
pure Love-zeal, and thy prating pharisaical and hypocritical Mercury into a
meek, mild, and Christian Speaking of Gods Works and Wonders in the
dispensation of his Wisdom; and thy doubtful, unsettled Jupiter will be turned
into a Plerophory, or most full assurance of true joy, and saving comfort in
thy Religion; thy earthly Venus into heavenly Love, and thy eclipsed mutable
Luna into the pure, perfect, and cristalline streams of Light, Life and Glory.

But the proud Scorner that will take no warning is of Lucifers Regiment, who
saw the Mystery of Gods Kingdom to stand in meekness, simplicity, and deep
humility, and therefore out of his pride would aspire to be above the divine
Love and Harmony of obedience to Gods Will, and so fell into the Abyss of the
dark World, even into the outmost darkness of the first Principle, which we
call Hell, where he and his Legions are Captives, from which the Almighty God
of Love deliver us. Amen.

And so I will end with the words of the Author at the conclusion of the Book,
where he says thus: I have faithfully with all true admonition represented
unto the Reader what the Lord of all Beings has given me; he may behold
himself in this Looking-glass within and without, and so he shall find what,
and who he is: Every Reader, be he good or bad, will find his profit and
benefit therein: It is a very clear Gate of the Great Mystery of all Beings; by
Glosses, Comments, Curiosity and Self-wit, none shall be able to reach or
apprehend it in his own ground; but it may very well meet and embrace the true
Seeker, and create him much profit and joy, yea be helpful unto him in all
natural things, provided that he apply himself thereunto aright, and seek in
the fear of God, seeing it is yet a time of Seeking, for a Lilly blossometh
upon the mountains and valleys in all the ends of the Earth: He that Seeks,
Finds. And so I commend the Reader unto the Grace and Love of Jesus Christ,
in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.

Yours in the true Service of all Christian Love, J: ELLISTONE.

Signatura Rerum, J. B.
CHAP. I. How that all whatsoever is spoken of God without the knowledge of the
Signature, is dumb, and without understanding, and that in the mind of man the
Signature lies very exactly composed according to the Being of all Beings.
Essence of all Essences.
1. ALL whatsoever is spoken, written, or taught of God, without the knowledge
of the Signature, is dumb, and void of understanding; for it proceeds only
out of an Historical Conjecture, from the mouth of another, wherein the spirit
without knowledge is dumb; but if the Spirit does open unto him the Signature,
then he understands the speech of another; and further understands how the
Spirit has manifested and revealed it self (out of the Essence through the
Principle) in the Sound with the voice. For that I see one to speak, teach,
preach, and write of God, and albeit I hear and read the same, yet this is not
sufficient for me to understand him; but if his Sound, and spirit out of his
Signature and Similitude, enters into my own Similitude, and imprinteth his
Similitude into mine, then I may understand him really and fundamentally, be it
either spoken or written, if he has the Hammer that can strike my Bell.

2. Hereby we know, that all humane properties proceed from One, that they all
have but one only Root and Mother, else one man could not understand another in
the Sound, for with the Sound or Speech the Form does note and imprint it self
into the similitude of another; one like tone or sound catches and moves
another, and in the Sound the Spirit imprinteth his own similitude, which it
has conceived in the Essence, and brought to form in the Principle.

3. So that in the word may be understood, wherein the Spirit has Or, formed
it self; or originally put forth it self.
conceived, either in good or evil; and with this Signature he enters into
another man's form, and awakeneth also in the other such a form in the
Signature; so that both forms do mutually assimulate together in one form, and
then there is one Comprehension, one Will, one Spirit, and also one
Understanding.

4. And then secondly we understand that the Signature or Form is no Spirit,
but the Recoptacle, Container, or Cabinet of the Spirit, wherein it lies; for
the Signature stands in the Essence, and is as a Lute that lies still, and
is indeed a dumb thing, that is neither heard or understood; but if it be
played upon, then its Form is understood in what form and tune it stands, and
according to what note it is set. Thus likewise the Signature of Nature in its
form is a dumb Essence, it is as a prepared Instrument of Music, upon which the
Wills-spirit plays; what strings he touches, they sound according to their
property.

5. In the humane mind the Signature lies most artificially composed,
according to the Essence of all Essences, and man wants nothing but the wise
Master that can strike his Instrument, which is the true Spirit of the high
Might of Eternity; if that be quickened in man, that it stir and acts in the
center of the mind, then it plays on the Instrument of the humane Form, and
even then the form is Proceeds from the mouth.
uttered with the sound in the word; As his Instrument was set in the time of
his Or, Conception.
Incarnation, so it sounds, and so is his knowledge; the inward manifests it
self in the sound of the word, for that is the Minds natural knowledge of it
self.

6. Man has indeed all the forms of all the three Worlds lying in him; for he
is a complete Image of God, or of the Being of all Beings; only the order is
placed in him at his Incarnation; for there are three Work-masters in him which
prepare his Form [or Signature,] viz. the threefold Fiat, according to the
three Worlds; and they are in Contest about the Form, and the Form is figurized
according to the Contest; which of the Masters holds the predominant Rule, and
obtains it in the Essence, according to that his Instrument is tuned, and the
other lie hid, and come behind with their sound, as it plainly shows it self.

7. So soon as man is born into this world, his spirit plays upon his
instrument, so that his innate genuine Form [or Signature] in good or evil is
seen by his words and Conversation, for as his Instrument sounds, accordingly
the senses and thoughts proceed from the essence of the mind, and so the
external spirit of the will is carried in its behavior, as is to be seen both
in men and beasts; That there is a great difference in the Procreation, that
one Brother and Sister does not as the other.

8. Further we are to know, that albeit one Fiat does thus keep the upper hand
and figurizeth the form according to it self, that yet the other two do give
their sound, if their Instrument be but played upon; as it is seen, that many a
man, and also many a beast, albeit it is very much inclined either to good or
evil, yet it is moved either to evil or good by a Contra-tune, and does often
let its inbred Signature [or Figure] fall, when the Contra-tune is played upon
his hidden Lute, or Form; As we see that an evil man is often moved by a good
man to repent of, and cease from his iniquity, when the good man does touch and
strike his hidden Instrument with his meek and loving spirit.

9. And thus also it happens unto the good man, that when the wicked man
strikes his hidden Instrument with the spirit of his wrath, that then the form
of Anger is stirred up also in the good man, and the one is set against the
other, that so one might be the Cure and Healer of the other. For as the Vital
Signature, that is, as the form of life is figurized in the time of the Fiat at
the Conception, even so is its natural spirit, for it takes its rise out of
the Essence of all the three Principles, and such a will it does act and
manifest out of its property.

10. But now the will may be broken; for when a stronger comes, and araiseth
his inward Signature with his introduced Sound and Wills-spirit, then its upper
Dominion loses the Power, Right, and Authority; which we see in the powerful
influence of the Sun, how that by its strength it qualifieth a bitter and sour
fruit, turning it into a sweetness and pleasantness; in like manner how a good
man corrupts among evil company, and also how that a good herb cannot
sufficiently show its real genuine virtue in a bad soil; for in the good man
the hidden evil Instrument is awakened, and in the herb a contrary Essence is
received from the earth; so that oft-times the Good is changed into an Evil,
and the Evil into a Good.

11. And now look! as it stands in the power and predominancy of the Quality,
so it is signed and marked externally in its outward Form, Signature or Figure;
Man in his speech, will and behavior, also with the form of the members which
he has, and must use to that Signature, his inward form is noted in the His
look, or Physiognomy.
form of his face; and thus also is a beast, an herb, and the trees; every
thing as it is inwardly [in its innate virtue and quality] so it is outwardly
signed; and albeit it fall out, that oft-times a thing is changed from evil
into good, and from good into evil, yet it has its external Character, that
the good or evil (that is the change) may be known.

12. For man is known herein, by his daily practice, also by his course and
discourse; for the upper Instrument, which is most strongly drawn, is always
played upon: Thus also it is with a beast that is wild, but when it is
overawed and tamed, and brought to another property, it does not easily show
its first innate form, unless it be stirred up, and then it breaks forth, and
appears above all other forms.

13. Thus it is likewise with the herbs of the Earth; if an herb be
transplanted out of a bad soil into a good, then it gets soon a stronger
body, and a more pleasant smell and power, and shows the inward Essence
Essence externally, and there is nothing that is created or born in Nature, but
it also manifests its internal form externally, for the internal does
continually labor or work it self forth to manifestation; As we know it in the
power and form of this world, how the one only Essence has manifested it self
with the Extern Birth in the desire in a Similitude, how it has manifested it
self in so many forms and shapes, which we see and know in the Stars and
Elements, likewise in the living Creatures, and also in the Trees and Herbs.

14. Therefore the greatest Understanding lies in the Signature, wherein Man
(viz. the Image of the Greatest Virtue) may not only learn to know himself, but
therein also he may learn to know the Essence of all Essences; for In.
by the external form of all Creatures, by their instigation, inclination and
desire, also by their sound, voice and speech which they utter, the hidden
Spirit is known; for Nature has given unto every thing its Language, according
to its Essence and Form, for out of the Essence the Language or Sound arises,
and the Fiat of that Essence forms the quality of the Essence in the voice or
virtue which it sends forth; unto the Animals in the Sound, and unto the
Vegetables.
Essentials in smell, virtue, and form.

15. Every thing has its mouth to manifestation; and this is the language of
Nature, whence every thing speaks out of its property, and does continually
manifest, declare, and set forth it self to what it is good or profitable; for
each thing manifests its Mother, which thus gives the Essence and the Will
to the Form.

CHAP. II. Of the Opposition and Combat in the Essence of all Essences,
whereby the Ground of the Antipathy and Sympathy in Nature may be seen, and
also the Corruption and Cure of each thing.
1. Seeing then there are so many and diverse Forms, that the one does ever
produce and afford out of its property a will different in one from another, we
do herein understand the Contrariety and Combat in the Being of all Beings,
how that one does oppose, poison, and kill another, that is, overcome its
Essence, and the Spirit of the Essence, and introduce it into another form,
whence Sickness and Pains arise, when one Essence destroys another.

2. And then we understand herein the Cure, how the one heals another, and
brings it to health; and if this were not, there were no Nature, but an eternal
Stilness, and no Will; for the Contra-will makes the motion, and the original
of the Seeking, that the opposite Sound seeks the Rest, and yet in the
Seeking it does only elevate, and more enkindle it self.

3. And we are to understand how the Cure of each thing consists in the
Assimulate; for in the Assimulate arises the satisfaction of the Will, viz.
its highest Joy; for each thing desires a Will of its likeness, and by the
Contra-will it is Made sick.
discomfited; but if it obtains a Will of its likeness, it rejoices in the
Aslimulate, and therein falls into Rest, and the Enmity is turned into Joy.

4. For the Eternal Nature has produced nothing in its desire, save a likeness
out of it self; and if there were not an everlasting Mixing, there would be an
eternal Peace in Nature, but so Nature would not be revealed, and made
manifest, in the Combat it becomes maninifest; so that each thing elevates it
self, and would get out of the Combat into the Still Rest, and so it runs
to and fro, and does thereby only awaken, and stir up the Combat.

5. And we find clearly in the light of Nature, that there is no better help
and remedy for this Opposition, and that it has no higher Cure, then the
Liberty, that is, the light of Nature, which is the desire of the Spirit.

6. And then we find, that the Essence cannot be better remedied then with the
Assimulate; for the Effence is a Being, and its desire is after Being; now
every taste desires only its like, and if it obtains it, then its hunger is
satisfied, appeased and eased, and it cease to hunger, and rejoices in it
self, whereby the Sickness falls into a Rest in it self; for the hunger of
the Contrariety cease to work.

7. Seeing now that man's life consists in three Principles, viz. in a
threefold Essence, and has also a threefold Spirit out of the property of
each Essence, viz. first, according to the eternal Nature, according to the
fires property; and secondly, according to the property of the eternal Light,
and divine Essentiality; and thirdly, according to the property of the outward
world; Thereupon we are to consider the Property of this threefold Spirit, and
also of this threefold Essence and Will; how each Spirit with its Essence
introduces it self into strife and sickness, and what its Cure and Remedy is.

8. We understand, that without Nature there is an Eternal Stilness and Rest,
viz. the Nothing; and then we understand that an eternal Will arises in the
Nothing, to introduce the Nothing into Something, that the Will might find,
feel, and behold it self.

9 For in the Nothing the Will were not manifest to it self, wherefore we know
that the Will seeks it self, and finds it self in it self; and its seeking is a
desire, and its finding is the essence of the desire, wherein the Will does
find it self.

10. It finds nothing save only the property of the hunger, which is it self,
which it draws into it self; that is, it draws it self into it self, and
finds it self in it self; and its attraction into it self makes an
overshadowing or darkness in it, which is not in the Liberty, viz. in the
Nothing; for the Will of the Liberty overshadoweth it self with the essence of
the desire, for the desire makes essence, and not the will.

11. Now that the Will must be in darkness is its Contrariety, and it
conceives in it self another Will to go out from the darkness again into the
Liberty, viz. into the Nothing, and yet it cannot reach the Liberty from
without it self, for the desire goes outward, and causes source and
darkness; therefore the Will (understand the re-conceived Will) must enter
inwards, and yet there is no separation.

12. For in it self before the desire, is the Liberty, viz. the Nothing, and
the will may not be a Nothing, for it desires to manifest it self in the
Nothing; and yet no manifestation can be effected, save only through the
essence of the desire; and the more the re-conceived will desires
manifestation, the more strongly and eagerly the desire draws into it self,
and makes in it self three Forms, viz. the Desire, which is astringent, and
makes hardness, for it is an enclosing, whence coldness arises, and the
attraction causes Or, Sting
Compunction, and stirring in the hardness, an enmity against the attracted
hardness; The attraction is the second Form, and a cause of motion and life,
and stirs it self in the Astringency and Hardness, which the Hardness, viz.
the Contraction, or Constringency.
Enclosing, cannot endure, and therefore it attracteth more eagerly to hold the
Compunction, and yet the Compunction is thereby only the stronger.

13. Thus the Compunction wills upwards, and whirleth crosswise, and yet
cannot effect it; for the hardness, viz. the desire, does stay and detain it,
and therefore it stands like a Triangle, and transverted Orb, which (seeing
it cannot remove from the place) becomes wheeling, whence arises the mixture
in the desire, viz. the essence, or multiplicity of the desire; for the Turning
makes a continual Confusion and Contrition, whence the Anguish, viz. the Pain,
the third Form [or sting of Sense] arises.

14. But seeing the desire, viz. the Astringency becomes only the more strong
thereby, (for from the Stirring arises the Wrath and Nature, viz. the Motion,)
the first will to the desire is made wholly austere and a hunger, for it is in
a hard Compunctive dry Effence, and also cannot get rid and quit of it, for it
self makes the Effence, and likewise possesses it, for thus it finds it
self now out of the Nothing in the Something, and the Something is [Love and
Anger, Father and Son.]
yet its Contra-will, for it is an unquietness, and the free will is a stilness.

15. This is now the Original of Enmity, that Nature opposes the free will,
and a thing is at enmity in it self; and here we understand the Center of
Nature with three Forms; in the Original, viz. in the first Principle, it is
Spirit; in the second it is Love, and in the third Principle Essence; and these
three Forms are called in third the Principle Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal.

16. Understand it thus; Sul is in the first Principle the free will or the
Luber in the Nothing to Something, it is in the Liberty without Nature; Phur is
the desire of the free Luber, and makes in it self, in the Phur, viz. in the
desire, an Essence, and this Essence is Austere by reason of the Attraction,
and introduces it self into three Forms (as is above mentioned,) and so
forward into the fourth Form, viz. into the fire; In the Phur the Original of
the eternal and also external Nature is understood, for the hardness is a
Mother of the sharpness of all Essences, and a Preserver of all Essences; out
of the Sul, viz. out of the Lubet of the Liberty, the daik anguish becomes a
shining light; and in the third Principle, viz. in the outward Kingdom, Sul is
the Oil of Nature, wherein the Life burns, and every thing grows.

17. But now the Phur, viz. the desire, is not divided from Sul; it is One
Word, one Original also, and one Essence; but it severs it self into two
Properties, viz. into Joy and Sorrow, Light and Darkness; for it makes two
Worlds, viz. a dark fire-world in the Austereness, and a light fire-world in
the Lubet of the Liberty; for the Lubet of the Liberty is the only cause that
the fire shines, for the Original fire is dark and black, for in the
fire-shine in the Original the Deity is understood, and in the dark fire, viz.
in the Anguish-Source, the Original of Nature is understood, and herein we do
further understand the Cure.

18. The Source is the Cure of the free Lubet, viz. of the still Eternity; for
the Stilness finds it self alive therein, it brings it self through the
Anguish* source into Life, viz. into the Kingdom of Joy, namely that the
Nothing is become an eternal Life, and has found it self, which cannot be in
the Stilness.

19. Secondly, We find, that the Sul, viz. the Lubet of the Liberty, is the
Curer of the desire, viz. of the Anxious Nature; for the Luster of the Liberty
does again (from the enkindled fire out of Nature) shine in the dark Anguish,
and fills or satiateth the Anguish with the Liberty, whereby the Wrath
extinguisheth, and the Turning Orb stands still, and in stead of the Turning,
a Sound is caused in the Essence.

20. This is now the form of the Spiritual Life, and of the Essential Life; Sul
is the Original of the Joyful Life, and Phur is the Original of the Essential
Life; the Lubet is before and without Nature, which is the true Sul; and the
Spirit is made manifest in Nature, viz. through the Source, and that in a
twofold Form, viz. according to the Lubet of the Liberty in a Source of Joy,
and according to the Anxious desires Lubet; according to the Astringency,
Compunctive, bitter and envious from the Compunction, and according to the
Anguish of the Wheel, wholly murtherous and hateful; and each property dwells
in it self, and yet they are in one another; herein Gods Love and Anger is
understood, they dwell in each other, and the one apprehends not the other, and
yet the one is the Curer of the other; understand through Imagination, for the
Eternal is Magical.

21. The second Form in Nature; in Eternity is the Orb with with the
Compunctive bitter Essences; for there arises the Essence, understand with the
Perturbation; for the Nothing is still without motion, but the Perturbation
makes the Nothing Active: but in the third Principle, viz. in the Dominion in
the Essence, and Source of the outward world the Form is called Mercury, which
is opposite, odious, and poysonfull, and the cause of life and stirring, also
the cause of the senses: where one Thought Or sparkle of the will.
glance may conceive it self in the Infiniteness; and then also immerse it self
thereinto: where out of One only the Abyssall unsearchable and infinite
multiplicity may Arise.

22. This Form is the unquietness and yet the seeker of Rest; and with its
seeking, it causes unquietness; it makes it self its own Enemy, its Cure is
twofold, for its desire is also twofold, viz. according to the Lubet of the
liberty; according to the stilness and meekness: and then also in the hunger
according to the Rising of Unquietness and the finding of it self; the Root
desires only joy with the first Will, and yet it cannot obtain it, save
through the opposite Source; for no Joy can Arise in the Still Nothing, it must
arise only through motion and Elevation, that the Nothing finds it self.

23. Now that which is found desires to enter again into the will of the Still
Nothing, that it may have Peace and Rest therein; and the Nothing is its Cure,
and the wrath and poison is the Remedy of the Seeker and finder; that is their
life which they find; an example whereof we have in the poysonful gall, whence
in the life arises joy and sorrow, wherein we also understand a twofold will,
viz. one to the wrathful fire and anxious painful life to the original of
nature, and one to the light-life, viz. to the joy of nature, this takes its
original out of the eternal nothing.

24. The first wills Cure is the Lubet of the Liberty, if it obtains that, then
it makes triumphant joy in it self; and the wrath in the hungry desire is the
Curer, and helper of the other will, viz. the will of Nature: and herein Gods
Love and Anger is understood, and also how Evil and Good are in the Center In.
of each life, and how no joy could arise without sorrow, and how one is the
Curer of the other.

25. And here we understand the third will, (which takes its original out of
both these, viz. out of such an essence, viz. out of the mother) viz. the
Spirit, which has both these properties in it, and is a son of the properties
and also a lord of the same; for in him consists the power, he may awaken,
which he please; the properties lie in the essence and are as a well
constituted life, or as an Instrument with many Or, Voices.
strings, which stand still, and the Spirit, viz. the Egresse is the Real Life,
he may play upon the instrument as he pleases; in Evil, or Good; according to
Love or Anger; and as he plays, and as the Instrument sounds, so is it
received of its Contra-tenor, viz. of the Assimulate.

26. If the tune of Love be played, viz. the Liberties desire, then is the
Sound received of the same Liberty, and Love-Lubet; for it is its pleasing
relish, and agreeable to its Wills desire; one like Lubet takes another.

27. And thus likewise is it to be understood of the Enmity, and Contra-will;
if the Instrument be struck according to the desire to Nature, viz. in the
wrath, anger, and bitter falsehood, then the same Contra-sound and wrathful
desire receives it; for it is of its property, and a satiating of its hunger,
wherein we understand the Desire of the light, and also of the dark World; a
twofold Source and Property.

28. The desire of the Liberty is meek, easy, and pleasant, and it is called
Or, God.
Good; and the desire to Nature makes it self in it self dark, dry, hungry,
and wrathful, which is called Gods Anger; and the dark World, viz. the first
Principle, and the light World the second Principle.

29. And we are to understand, that it is no divided Essence, but one holds
the other hid or closed up in it, and the one is the beginning and cause of the
other, also its healing and Cure; that which is awaked and stirred up, that
gets the dominion, and manifests it self externally with its Character, and
makes a Form and Signature according to its will in the External after it
self. A similitude whereof we see in an enraged man or beast; albeit the
outward man and beast are not in the inward world, yet the outward nature has
even the same forms; for Nature.
it arises originally from the World.
inward, and stands upon the inward Root.

30. The third Form is the Anxiousness, which arises in Nature from the first
and second Form, and is the Upholder or Preserver of the first and second; it
is in it self the sharp Fiat; and the second Form has the Verbum, viz. the
property to the word, and it consists in three Properties, and makes out of
her self with the three the fourth, viz. the Fire; In the Extern Birth, viz. in
the third Principle it is called Sal, or Salt, according to its matter; but in
its Spirit it has many Forms; for it is the Fire-root, the Great Anguish, it
arises betwixt, and out of the Astringency and Bitterness in the Austere
Intraction; it is the Essentiality of that which is attracted, viz. the
Corporality, or Comprehensibility; from Sulphur it is Brimstony, and from
Mercury a blaze or slash; it is in it self painful, viz. a sharpness of dying,
and that from the sharp Attraction of the Astringency; It has a twofold Fire,
one cold, another hot; the cold arises from the Astringency, from the sharp
Attraction, and is a dark black Fire; and the hot arises from the
forth-driving Or, Sting of Instigation.
Compunction in the Anguish in the desire after the Liberty, and the Liberty is
its Enkindler, and the raging Compunction is the Colds Fires Raiser, Enkindler.
or Enflames.
Awakener.

31. These three Forms are in one another as one, and yet they are but One, but
they sever themselves through the Original into many Forms, and yet they have
but One Mother, viz. the desiring Will to manifestation, which is called the
Father of Nature, and of the Being of all Beings.

32. Now we are to consider the Hunger of the Anxiety, or the Salt spirit, and
then also its satiating or fulfilling; The Anguish has in it two Wills from
the Original of the first Will out of the Liberty to the manifestation of it
self, viz. the first Will is to Nature, and the other re-conceived Will is the
Son of the first, which goes out of the manifestation again into it self into
the Liberty; for it is become an Eternal Life in Nature, and yet possesses not
Nature essentially, but dwells in it self, and penetrateth Nature as a
transparent Shine, and the first Will goes Or, Out of it self.
outward, for it is the desire of manifestation; it seeks it self out of it
self, and yet amasseth the desire in it self; it desires to Educe the Internal
out of it self.

33. Thus it has two Properties; with the Seeking in it self it makes the
Center of Nature; For it is like a poison, a Will of dreadful Aspiring, like a
Lightening and Thunderclap; for this Desire desires only Anguish, and to be
horrible, to find it self in it self, out of the Nothing in the Something; And
the second Form proceeds forth as a Flagrat, or produced Sound out of it
self; for it is not the desire of the first Will to continue in the horrible
Death, but only thus to Educe it self out of the Nothing, and to find it self.

34. And we understand by the Center in it self, with the Aspiring
Wrathfulness, with the wrathful Will to Nature, the dark World, and with the
Egress out of it self to manifestation, the outward World; and with the second
Will out of the first, which enters again into the Liberty, we understand the
light World, or the Kingdom of Joy, or the true Deity.

35. The desire of the dark World is after the manifestation, viz. after the
outward World, to attract and draw the same Essentiality into it, and thereby
to satisfy its wrathful Hunger; and the desire of the outward World is after
the Essence or Life, which arises from the Pain and Anguish.

36. It Is Desire in it self is the Wonder of Eternity, a Mystery, or Mirror, or
the Comprehended of the first Will to Nature.

37. The outward Worlds desire is Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal; for such an
Essence it is in it self, viz. a hunger after it self, and is also its own
Satisfying; for Sul desires Phur, and Phur desires Mercury, and both these
desire Sal; for Sal is their Son, which they hatch in their desire, and
afterward becomes their habitation, and also food.

38. Each Desire desires only the Essentiality of Salt according to its
property; for Salt is diverse; one part is sharpness of cold, and one part
sharpness of heat; also one part Brimstone; and one part Salniter from Mercury.

39. These Properties are in one another as one, but they sever themselves,
each dwelling in it self; for they are of a different Essence, and when one
enters into another, then there is Enmity, and a Flagrat. A Similitude whereof
we may understand in Thunder and Lightening, which comes to pass when the
great Anguish, viz. the Mother of all Salts, understand the third Form of
Nature, does impress it self, which comes to pass from the Aspect of the Sun,
which stirs up the hot Fires form, so that it is Penetrative, as the
property of the fire is; and when it reaches the Salniter, then it enkindleth
it self, and the Salniter is in it self the Great Flagrat in Mercury, viz. the
Flash, or Compunction, which enters into the Coldness, so also into the cold
sharpness of the Salt-spirit; this Coldness is exceedingly dismayed at the
flash of the Fire, and in a trice wrappeth or foldeth up it self in it self,
whence arises the Thunderclap (or the Tempestuous Flash, which gives a
stroke in the Flagrat) and the Flagrat goes downwards, for it is heavy by
reason of the Coldness, and the Salnitrous Spirit is light by reason of the
Fire, which [Spirit] carries the Thunder or Sound side-ways, as is to be heard
in Tempests and Thunder; presently thereupon comes the Wind or Spirit out of
all the four Forms one against another, for they are all four enkindled in the
Penetrating Flagrat; whereupon follows Hail and Rain; the Hail foldeth it
self together in the Coldness, in the property of the cold Salt-spirit; for the
Wrath attracts to it self, and turns the water to Ice, and the water arises
from the meekness, viz from the desire of the Light, for it is the Essentiality
of the meekness; this the cold salt-spirit does congeal into drops, and
distills it upon the Earth, for before the Congealment it is only as a mist, or
steam, or as a vapor, or damp.

40. Thus we see this Ground very exactly and properly in Thunder and
Lightening; for the Flash, or Lightening, or Etherial Blaze, goes always
before, for it is the enkindled Salniter; thereupon follows the stroke in the
Flagrat of the coldness; as ye see, so soon as the stroke is given the
Astringent Chamber is opened, and a cool wind follows, and oftentimes
whirling and wheeling; for the Forms of Nature are awakened, and are as a
Turning Wheel, and so they carry their Spirit, the Wind.

CHAP. III. Of the Grand Mystery of all Beings.
1. COurteous Reader, Observe the meaning aright; We understand not by this
Description a beginning of the Deity, but we show you the manifestation of the
Deity through Nature; for God is without Beginning, and has an Eternal
Beginning, and an Eternal End, which he is himself, and the Nature of the
inward World is in the like Essence from Eternity.

2. We give you to understand This of the Divine Essence; without Nature God is
a Mysterium.
Mystery, understand in the Nothing, for without Nature is the Nothing, which
is an Eye of Eternity, an Abyssal Eye, that stands or sees in the Nothing,
for it is the Abyss; and this same Eye is a Will, understand a longing after
manifestation, to find the Nothing; but now there is Nothing before the Will,
where it might find Something, where it might have a place to Rest, therefore
it enters into it self, and finds it self through Nature.

3. And we understand in the Mystery without Nature in the first Will two
Forms; one to Nature, to the manifestation of the Wonder-Eye; and the second
Form is produced out of the first, which is a desire after Virtue and Power,
and is the first Wills Son, its desire of joyfulness. And understand us thus;
the Desire is Egressive, and the Egress is the Spirit of the Will and Desire,
for it is a Moving, and the Desire makes a Similitude, Likeness, or Signature.
Form in the Spirit, viz. Formings of the Infiniteness of the Mystery.

4. And this Form [or Likeness] is the Eternal Wisdom of the Deity; and we
understand herein the Trinity of the only Deity, whose Ground we must not know,
how the first Will arises in the Abyss from Eternity, which is called Father;
only we know the Eternal Birth, and distinguish the Deity, viz. what purely and
merely concerns the Deity, or the Good, from Nature, and show you the Arcanum
of the greatest Secret Mystery; namely, how the Abyss, or the Deity,
manifests it self with this Eternal Generation; for God is a Spirit, and so
subtle as a thought or will, and Nature is his Corporeal Essence, understand
the Eternal Nature; and the outward Nature of this visible Palpable.
comprehensible World is a Manifestation or extern Birth of the inward Spirit
and Essence in Evil and Good, that is a Representation, Resemblance, and
typical Similitude of the dark Fire, and light World.

5. And as we have above shown you concerning the Original of Thunder and
Lightening with the Tempestuous Stroke; so likewise the inward Nature of the
inward World is, and stands in the Generation: for the outward Birth takes
its Original from the inward; the inward Birth is unapprehensive to the
creature, but the outward is apprehensive to it; yet each property apprehends
its Mother whence it is brought forth.

6. As the Soul comprehends the inward eternal Nature, and the Spirit of the
Soul, viz. the precious Image according to God, Or, Apprehends, or Conceives.
Comprehends the Birth of the Angelical light-world, and the Sydereal and
Elemental Spirit comprehends the birth and property of the Stars and Elements;
every Eye sees into its Mother whence it was brought forth:

7. Therefore we will set you down the Generation of all Essences out of all
Mothers and Beginnings, how one generation proceeds from another, and how one
is the Cause of another, and this we will do from the eyesight of all the
three Mothers.

8. Let none account it impossible, seeing man is a likeness according to and
in God, an Image of the Being of all Beings; and yet it stands not in the
power of the creature, but in the might of God; for the Sight and Science of
all Essences consist alone in the clearest Light.

9. We have made mention before, how the Extern Birth, viz. the Essence of this
World consists in three things, viz. in Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal: Now we must
set down and declare what it is, seeing that all things arise from one
Original, and then how its inward Separation is effected, that out of one
Beginning many Beginnings are produced; this is now to be understood, as is
before mentioned, concerning the Center of all Essences.

10. For Sulphur in the eternal Beginning consists in two Forms, and so also
in the outward beginning of this world: viz. in the Internal, the first Form,
viz. the Sul, Or, Stands.
consists in the Eternal Liberty; it is the Lubet of the Eternal Abyss, viz.
a Will or an Original to the Desire; and the other Original is the Desire,
which is the first motion, viz. an hunger to the Something; and in this same
Hunger is the Eternal Beginning to the Or, To the nature of the Pregnatress.
Pregnant Nature, and it is called Sulphur, viz. a Conception of the Liberty,
viz. of the Good, and a Conception or Comprehension of the desire, viz. of the
austere Attraction Or, with.
in the desire.

11. Sul in the Internal is God, and Phur is the Nature; for it makes a
brimstony spirit: as is to be seen externally in the property of Brimstone; for
its substance is a dry constringent matter, and is of a painful anxious
forth-driving fiery property; it attracteth eagerly and hardly into it self,
and parcheth up as a dry hunger, and its painful property does eagerly and
anxiously force it self forth: the Cause and Original is this, because it
stands in two Beginnings, viz. in the property of the Desire, which is an
Attraction; and in the property of the Light or Liberty, which is
forth-driving, or pressing to the Manifestation, through the desire of Nature.

12. The Desire, viz. the Attraction makes Hardness, and is the Cause of the
Fire, and the Lubet is a Cause of the Luster or Light of the Fire: Sul is
light, and Phur makes fire, yet it cannot be reduced alone in Sulphur to fire
and light, but in Mercury, and at last in Sal, which is the real Body, but not
of the Brimstone, but of the Essence and Water: And so understand, that in the
first Desire, which arises in the Lubet of the Liberty, all things are, and
are made Substantial and Essential, whence the Creation of this World is
proceeded; and we find herein the property of the Earth, so likewise of all
Metals and Stones, and also of the Stars.
Astrum, and the Original of the Elements, all out of one only Mother, which is
the Lubet and the Desire, whence all things proceeded, and still proceed.

13. For Mercury is generated in Sulphur; it is the Severing, viz. of Light and
Darkness from one another, the breaking Wheel, and Cause of the various
Division or Multiplicity: it severeth the dark Essentiality from the
Essentiality of the Light, viz. the Metals from the gross, astringent, dark,
stony, and earthly property; for the property of the Desire gives and makes
dark Essence, and the property of the free Lubet makes light Essence, viz.
Metals, and all of the same kind and resemblance.

14. Mercury has in the beginning In.
of his Birth three Properties, viz. the Trembling in the Austereness, and
Anguish from the hard impressing of the Astringent hard Desire, and the
Expulsion of the Multiplicity, viz. the essential Life; for the Desire
attracteth very hard unto it self, and the Attraction makes the Motion, or
sting of Trembling [or horrible Compunction,] and that which is impressed is
the Anguish; but if the Liberty be therein comprehended, it refuses it, and
there arises the Original of Enmity, and the Severing, that one Form severeth
from another, and a two fold Will arises.

15. For the Lubet of the Liberty does again set its desire into the Stilness,
viz. into the Nothing, and does force again out of the darkness of the Desires
Austereness into it self, viz. into the Liberty, without the wrath of the
Enmity, and so it has only sharpened it self in the Austere Impression in
Mercury, that it is a moving feeling Life, and that its Liberty is sharpened so
that it becomes a Luster, which is, and causes a Kingdom of Joy in the
Liberty, and so understand us, that the Spirits Dominion, viz. the Spirit and
the Or, Substance.
Essence does thus Sever.

16. The Essence remains in the Impression, and becomes material; that is,
not God, but gold, or any other metal: according to the property of the first
conception in the Sulphur, or Stone, or Earth: out of the desires own peculiar
property; all according as the first Boiling.
Sude in Mercury; for no metal can be generated without Salniter: which is the
Flagrat in Mercury: which also becomes material in the Astringent Impression,
and divides it self in the Severation: one Part into brimstone, another into
Salniter, and a third into a Salt sharpness: whereas yet there cannot be any
corporeal essence in all these: but only the Spirit of the Essence; the Essence
proceeds wholly out of the Death through the Mortification, which is effected
in the great Anguish of the Impressure, where there is a dying Source, which is
the Mercurial Life, where the Salnittal Flagrat arises, as an opening,
displaying Flash; for the Liberty, viz. the property of the Eternal Lubet, does
there Or, Separates it self in it self.
Severize into it self, and yet the attracted Essence out of the Lubet of the
Liberty continues all along in the Comprehension of the Attraction in the
Astringent austere dark Anguish: Now if the Wrath enters so vehemently into it
self, as to raise up the Salnitral Flagrat, then it apprehends the
Essentiality of the free Lubet in it self, whence arises the Flagrat; for the
Wrath there apprehends the Meekness, which is even as if water were poured
into fire, which gives a Flagrat; and then the Wrath of the great Anguish
dies, and with the Flagrat the Joy ascends, and the Flagrat is out of Mercury,
or out of the Anguish of Death, and becomes also material, but by reason of the
Liberty it changes it self into white, which is Salniter: Now if the fire,
viz. the horrible anxious sharpness, does again come into it, then the Salniter
is dismayed, and gives a Report, Clash.
Repulse; for the first Property [which was] before the Death is again
enkindled with the Brimstony-spirit; a sufficient resemblance whereof you have
in Gunpowder, which is the matter of these Properties.

17. Further we are to know the Dying with the Enkindling of the Fire, all
which is done in the Flagrat; for it is a Flagrat to Death, and to Life; one
part immerseth it self into the property of Death, viz. into the Wrath of the
Austere Desire; and the other part, which is from the Lubet or
Love-essentiality, arises up in the Kingdom of Joy: but being that there
happens also a mortifying in the Free Materia (albeit it is no mortifying, but
a redeeming from the Wrath, for the Materia of the Liberty will be free from
the Wrath) thereupon this Materia Sinketh.
falls downward, which is water; and it is not of the property of the Wrath,
but the Wrath holds i^^^ptive in it self; but they are severed from one another
in the Essence and Source; the Wraths Essence gives earth and stones, and the
Essence of the Liberty is water, which arises with the enkindling of the fire
through the mortification out of the meekness of the Light.

18. But being this Water does also severize it self in the Salnitral Flagrat,
and before the Salniter all was mutually enwrapt together, thereupon it
obtains diverse Properties in the Separation, and there is a diversity of
Water; and this various diversity of Properties gives in each property also a
bodily or Corporeal Essence, all according to the first Separation of Mercury
in Sulphur; for in the Mortification in the Salnitral Flagrat two things are
effected and come forth, viz. a Life, and a body of the Life; understand, an
Essential, and a life-less, sense-less Body, whose Materia is mortified in the
Flagrat: Thus there is a diversity of Water, and a diversity of the Life, and a
diversity of the Corpus.
Body, or of the Materia, as each body is, so is also its essential Spirit.

19. Now we must consider this from the first Original; as, 1. from the Lubet
of the Liberty, and 2. from the desire to Nature, or the manifestation of the
Abyss.

20. First, In the Salnitral Flagrat there is produced through the Anxious
Mortification a Sulphrous water from the Anguish which affords a Brimstone,
as we plainly see, and all whatsoever is of the like sort and semblance.

21. Secondly, There is generated from the Astringent austere, attractive
in-drawing Property a Salt Water; its Materia is Salt: if it be again impressed
through the fire or heat, then it turns into Salt; and all whatsoever is
sharp and attractive, be it either in Herbs or Trees, proceeds thence; for
there is as much diversity of Brimstone and Salt, as there is variety of taste
and fire, to be found in all Creatures, Herbs and Trees; also all whatsoever
lives and grows, has Brimstone and Salt; for the saltish property
attracteth, and preserves the Corpus.
body; and the Brimstone has in it the Oil or Light, wherein the free Lubet to
manifestation consists, whence the growth arises.

22. Thirdly, There is brought forth through the Salnitral Flagrat out of the
property of the bitter compunctive Attraction, in the first Impression in the
Spirit, an earthly property of water; its Materia is Earth; for the same
arises from the dark Essentiality, where the Darkness does impress it self in
the first Desire, wherein the Darkness arises, as is before mentioned: Thus it
begets out of its property in the Impression a mist, smoaky steam, or
vapor, which the Flagrat in the Salniter apprehends, and its Essence is
dismayed or dies, and fall^^h downwards; this is the Materia of the Earth,
albeit the Earth is not of one only Sort, but has in it all whatsoever became
Corporeal in the Flagrat, all which springs through the Death of the Earth,
according as it was enwrapt and driven together in the Creation into a Lump, as
we plainly see.

23. Further, We are to consider of the highest Arcanum, viz. of the Heavenly
Essentialy, and then of the precious stones and metals, whence they all do take
their rise and original, seeing that all things come out of one Mother, which
is the Lubet and Desire of Eternity to its own manifestation.

24. Now as concerning the uncorruptible Essence of Corporality, the same
arises also in the first desire to Nature, yet in the Impression of the free
Lubet, and goes all-along through all the Forms even into the highest
sharpness, where it retireth again into it self, as a Life out of the Fire: the
Eternal Fire is Magical, and a Spirit, and dies not; the Liberty is its
Enkindler, but the eternal Nature is its sharpness; this same Essence loses
the Wraths property in the Light: it is in the same fire as a dying, yet there
is no dying, but an entrance into another Source, viz. out of a painful desire
into a Love-desire; it yields also Spirit and Essence from the Fire-spirit,
and the Essence of Meekness from the Light.

25. For that which dies to the Fire, or sinketh through death, that is divine
Essence; and it is effected likewise through the Salnitral Flagrat of the
divine Joyfulness, where the Property Trembles in the Joy of Meekness, and
immerseth it self through the death of the Fire, which is called Gods Anger,
and quenches it, so that God dwells in a meek Light; and the first property
to the enkindling of the Light is fire, and wrath of the eternal Nature, and
Gives, yields, or affords.
makes the dark world.

26. The Properties of the first Mother in the Lubet and Desire do also divide
themselves in the Salnitral Flagrat of Joyfulness into distinct parts, as is to
be seen in this outward world; it yields also Water, but of a very sovereign
essence, and it resembles only a spirit of a pleasant lovely desire: This is
the Water of which Christ told us that he would give us to drink, and whosoever
should drink the same, it should spring up in him to a fountain of eternal life.

27. It retains also in the Flagrat of the Disclosure the fiery Property,
which is called Heaven, in which the Wonders of the divine Kingdom of Joy are
known and manifest; and in the watery Property [it retaineth] the pleasant
Spring, or Paradise; for in the fiery [Property] the eternal Element arises,
and it is the real Essence of the divine Corporality, wherein consists all
whatsoever may be known in God, as is sufficiently and orderly cleared at large
in our other Writings of the Divine Revelation, treating of the Divine Wisdom,
and of the Divine Eternal Abyssal Birth: And now we will turn us to the Essence
of the outward World, viz. to the manifestation of the Eternal, viz. to Metals,
Herbs, and Trees; so also to Men, and Beasts.

28. We see that the Metals have another manner of body then the living
creatures, or are otherwise then the earth and stones are: Now Reason asks,
How the Original of every thing is, seeing that in the beginning all arose out
of one Mother, and yet the Eternity has no Temporal beginning: Here we must
again consider the Mother of the first Pregnatress, where, and how one Essence
severeth it self from another, viz. the Inchoative from the Eternal, Time from
Eternity, and yet they stand mutually in each other, but are severed into two
Principles, viz. into the Kingdom of God, and of this World, and yet All is
Gods: But seeing Christ calls the Devil a Prince of this World, and we also
are able to declare how far, and in what he is a Prince, and that this world is
not his Or, Propriety.
own, but he is the poorest creature in this world, and also not at all in this
world:

29. Now therefore look upon the first Ground, upon the Mother, which has thus
generated all creatures; so also the earth, stones, and all metals; her
Property consists in a spiritual Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal, and all whatsoever
has had beginning is arisen in and out of her Impression; and inchoatively
thereupon came forth with the first form of the Mother, viz. with the
Astringent Attraction, through the Fiat into a Creatural Being, and affords a
diversity of Essence and Spirit, according to the first property of the
Separation.

30. As first, The high Spirits, which were created out of the Free Lubet in
the Desire, in the Fires property, viz. out of the Center of all Essences, and
had in them the Or, the properties [out of which they were created] had in them
both the Eternal Worlds.
Properties of both the eternal Worlds; but those which after their corporizing
[or creaturizing] remained with their Desire in the Property of the Free Lubet,
and introduced their Will out of the Fire into the Light, they became Angels;
and the other, which introduced their Desire again into the Center (viz. into
the Austere Properties) they became Devils, viz. Outcasts from the free Lubet
out of the Light, as is mentioned in other Writings.

31. Therefore the Devils have neither the Kingdom of God, nor the Kingdom of
this World in Possession; for in the beginning of the Creation this world was
created out of both the inward Properties, whereupon the Devil has now only the
Wraths Part in Possession, the other profits him nothing; and thus he is in
the world, and also not in the world, for he has but one part thereof in
Possession, from the other he is cast out.

32. After the Creation of the highest Spirits, God created this visible World
with the Stars and Elements as an Extern Birth out of the Mother of all
Essences, all which proceeded out of the Eternal Beginning, and took a Temporal
Beginning: for here we are to consider, that the Eternal Pregnatress moved it
self, and enkindled its own Form [or Similitude,] where then the one became
Corporeal in the other; but afterward God created the Earth, which we are thus
to consider of, etc.

33. The first desire to Nature impresseth it self, and introduces it self
with the Impression into three Forms, viz. into Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal, and
in the Impression all become rising and moving, which is not in the Still
Nothing, and so forces it self even into the highest Anguish, even Or, until.
unto the Salnitral Flagrat, where then is the Original of the Fire: Thus the
Source whirleth in it self, as a boiling of water upon the fire; for the
Austere Desire is attractive, and the fiery is expulsive, which is a Sulphur;
and the Astringent Attraction is a wrathful Sting [or Compunction,] viz. a
Contrition; and yet it is held by the Austereness, that it cannot move away,
whereupon it is painful, and causes pain, as if it were wheeling, or seething,
which yet is only Spirit without Essence, which comes to pass in Mercury, and
is Mercury his own form.

34. And there is the Separation of two Wills, viz. one remains, and is the
very anxious Essence, being it originally arises from the Desire; the other,
which arises out of the Lubet of the Liberty, retireth back again into it self
into the Liberty, and yet there is no parting, sundering or dividing from one
another, but thus it goes one with another all along through the enkindling of
the fire through the Salnitral Flagrat, where with the enkindling of the fire
the death is effected in the wrath of the fire, where the Source dies, and yet
there is no death, but a likeness of death; and yet the real eternal and
temporal Death is in that wise, even there the Liberty apprehends it self in
it self, and the Death or Flagrat falls down into the Liberty as impotent,
and freely resigns it self, and the Spirit, viz. the Source (understand the
very sharp fiery anxious Source) becomes material, and retains only an
essential working, like to an impotent desire; and in the enkindling of the
fire in the Salnitral Flagrat each Property severeth it self in it self, and
the whole Materia is particularized, viz. to metals, stones and earth.

35. The highest Or, The highest or chiefest Metals.
Metal, as Gold, arises from the Liberty, which is comprised all along in the
Flagrat in the Astringent Impressure, and it is not free from the Materia of
the Rest, for all is comprised or enwrapt up together; but being the Liberty
with the Sul, or Lights property, is comprised or comprehended therein also,
thereupon Sul is expulsive to the manifestation of it self, as it is the
property of the Liberty so to be; Hence it comes, that metals grow, and not the
gross hard stones, which are too hard comprised in the Impression out of the
wrathful Essentiality, and have too little Sul in them.

36. But as concerning the precious Stones, with their radiant Luster and great
Virtue, the same have their Original in the flash of the Fire, where Life and
Death Separate; as when one part by reason of the dark Essentiality descends,
and the other by reason of the Liberty ascends, and yet all is brought into
Essence in the Flagrat; so that the same flash or glance becomes also material
in the Flagrat; and therefore they are hard, and of a blinking glance, like an
Eye; for so also is the original of the Eye or Sight in the Body.
Womb, when the Life enkindleth; all according to the Right of Eternity.

37. And therefore they are of so great Power, Efficacy and Virtue, in that
they are so nigh to the Deity, and bear the incorporated Names of the divine
Power in them; as also Gold is nigh unto the divine Essentiality, or heavenly
Corporality: if man could open [or disclose] the dead Body, and reduce it to a
Liquid.
flying moving Spirit, which only can be effected through the Divine Motion,
then it should be seen what it could be, which no Reason believes or
understands without divine Sight [or Vision.]

38. Further, we are also to consider of the other Metals and Minerals, which
in like manner do thus take their Original; but in the Salnitral Flagrat each
property is severed; as we see that the property of the Fire and Light is
diverse, and all from the first Impression, where before the Impression the
Lubet and Desire of the Liberty stand mutually in each other, as a Chaos, a
Complexion of great Wonders, where all Colors, Powers and Virtues are
contained in this only CHAOS, or Wonder-Eye, which CHAOS is God himself, viz.
the Being of all Beings, who thus manifests himself in Particular Beings with
the Eyes of Eternity; each Materia is an Essence according to the Spirit,
whence it was generated; and if it be enkindled in the Fire, it yields
likewise such a Light as the Spirit is in the Essence.

39. And thus also we are to consider of the Metals; what kind of Spirit each
of them has, such a Glance and Luster it yields, and also such a Corpus.
Body it has.

40. As the mind acts and moves the thoughts and senses from the highest to
the lowest, and comprehends and commands by the thoughts from the highest to
the lowest; even so the Eternal Mind has manifested it self from the highest
Majesty, even to the lowermost [meanest, or outermost thing] viz. unto the
greatest Darkness; and this World, with the Sun, Stars, and Elements, and with
every Creatural Being, is nothing else but a Manifestation of the Eternity of
the Eternal Will and Mind; and as it was in the beginning, so it still stands
in its Boiling, and growing; walming and waxing.
Sude and Vegetation, and so it still puts forward to Light and Darkness, to
Evil and Good; and all things consist in these first three Forms, viz. in
Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal, as one degree orderly after another; for so likewise
are the Quires of the Spirits; also of the Stars, Trees, Herbs, and of all
kinds whatsoever have been, and are; so also the inward Heavenly Quires with
their distinction.

CHAP. IV. Of the Birth of the Stars, and four Elements in the Metalline and
Creatural Property.
1. AS is before mentioned, All Things proceed out of One only Mother, and
sever themselves into two Essences, according to the Right of Eternity, viz.
into a Mortal and an Immortal, into Life and Death, into Spirit and Body; the
Spirit is the Life, and the Body is the Death, viz. a House of the Spirit; as
the holy Trinity stands in the Birth, so also the extern Birth: There is
likewise Essence and Spirit in Heaven; a figure whereof we see in this outward
World, where there are four Elements, and yet there is but one only Element,
which severs it self into four Properties, viz. into Fire, Air, Water, and
Earth, as is above mentioned.

2. For so we are to consider of the Creation of this World, that the whole
Essence of Eternity has moved it self in the Loco.
Place of this World, and the whole Form was Enkindled and Sirred, and that in
the desire to Manifestation, and there the Generation divided it self in the
Flagrat of the enkindled Fire into four parts, viz. into Fire, Water and Earth,
and the Air is its moving Outgoing, breathing.
Egressive Spirit; as is to be considered in Sulphur, which consists in these
four things.

3. In like manner also the Astrum is thus Generated out of the first Mother;
and All put together is only one Body, and it All takes its rise from the
inward Spirit; as a hand or foot grows forth from the inward Center, and has
already its fashion in the Center, viz. in the first operation, and so only
grows into a form as the spirit is.

4. The First Mother of all Things, viz. the Lubet with the Desire, does
especially introduce it self into Seven Forms, and yet continues steadfast in
three only, but manifests it self in Or, In a sevenfold Form.
Seven Forms.

5. As, the first Form is Astringent, viz. an Austere Attraction, which is a
Cause of Coldness and Salt, and all Corporality.

6. The second Form is the Or, sting.
Compunction, viz. the Drawing or Motion, and causes the Feeling, also
Pricking, Aching, Tormenting; the Stirring up, or moving.
Affection of bitterness, enmity and friendliness, joy and sorrow.

7. The third Form is the Great Anguish in the Impression, which causes two
Wills, viz. one to the Fire, to the highest sharpness; and the other to the
mortifying and dying in the Fire, where the Will of the free Lubet falls down
to the Wrath in the Fire, and again goes into it self, and makes a Luster in
the Fires sharpness.

8. Now the fourth Form is the Fire it self, viz. the first Principle in the
Life, with which the dark and light World do Sever; also in this Flagrat all
Material Separations are effected, and the Corporality and Multiplication
begins according to the Property of the first Eternal Mind, viz. according
to the Essentiality, a mortal [Ens,] and according to the free Source, a living
[Ens.]

9. The fifth Form is now the second Desire, which is done after the
Separation, and that according to two Properties; viz. one according to the
Lubet of the Liberty out of the Light, which is the highest Love-desire; and
the other according to the Fires Lubet, which leads its Life of its Essence
in the Love in the Light, whence the Joyfulness and every true Life arises.

10. The Love gives Essence; for it is expressive, and yielding, viz. it self;
for God gives himself to every Essence; and the Fire is receptive; for it
needs Essence in its wrathful Hunger, else it extinguisheth, and then the
Luster of the Light would go out, and the Desire of Love would cease, for the
Fire makes the Light desiring, viz. of the Joyfulness; for if the Fire dies,
the Light waxes dark, and Love turns into Anguish, as may be conceived of in
the Devils.

11. The sixth Form arises from the Turning Wheel before the Fire, where the
Multiplication of the Essence arises, out of the property of Mercurius in the
Salnitral Flagrat; with the enkindling of the Fire, one Form is introduced into
another; and if now the Love-desire penetrateth all the Forms, then all the
Forms grow very desirous, the one after the other, for the dear lovely child
Venus is in all.

12. Here begins the Taste, Smell, Hearing, Seeing, and Feeling, and
Speaking; for the Light does open another Principle of another Source, and
fills All; and here springs up the Life in Death, viz. the Love in the
Anger, and the Light shines in the Darkness; here the Bridegroom embraces his
Bride, and God himself resists his Anger, viz. the Wrath of Nature; and in
this Form all Speeches, Understanding, and Senses do arise, and the True real
Life of all Creatures; so also the Life in the Vegetables, viz. Trees and Herbs
in each thing according to its property, etc.

13. The seventh Form arises from all the other, and is the body,
mansion house, or food of the other, and its thus effected; when the other
Forms do taste each other in their mutual Penetration in the Love-desire, then
in each Form there is an hunger or desire after the Love, viz. after the Light;
now each Hunger or Desire is forth-reaching after the thing it does desire, and
eagerly attracteth the property of the thing desired; and thus out of two one
Essence is made, viz. out of the Hunger, and that which the Hunger desires;
for this Hunger does not stand in Death, it does not any more aval or enclose
up it self in Death, unless it be too great, and the Imagination in the Hunger
be too great, and the Hunger cannot obtain that same thing, then it choketh: as
many times a child is so choked or smothered in the mothers womb; if this Form
be enkindled in another Form to eat of some external thing, whereupon the
mother grows so ardent in longing, and if she cannot get it, the child also
cannot get it; now it choketh in the Hunger, or else a member is spoiled,
whence the Hunger did arise.

14. The first Hunger in the Center before the Fire is a spiritual Hunger,
which makes the dark World; and the Hunger of the free Lubet makes the light
World; both which are only Spirit, until they pass both together through the
enkindling of the Fire, where then they are mortified to the Spirit, and are a
likeness of the first Spirit, viz. a manifestation of the incomprehensible
Spirit, which is called God in Love and Anger, in a twofold Source: thus each
stands undivided in it self, viz. God in the Time, and the Time in God, and
the one is not the other, but they come from One Eternal Original: thus the
Temporal Spirits-hunger gives a Temporal Body, and the Eternal Spirits-hunger
affords an Eternal Body, and are both mutually in each other, and yet are The
one is not the other.
distinct.

15. The seven Forms do make them a Body according to their Hunger out of their
own Property; therefore all whatsoever the Spirit has in all Propertises,
lies in the Body.

16. Further we are to know, that there is a Severation made in the Creation of
this World; for this is to be seen in the Sun and Stars, so likewise in all
Creatures, also in Metals, Stones and Earths; for this same is the
manifestation of God.

17. We see in the Firmament seven Planets, and in the Earth seven Metals which
are fixed, and also seven Planets only which are fixed in their property; the
rest are Minerals, and so of the Stars; and as the Planetick Orb has its
predominant Stamp or Influence, so is also the Birth of each thing.

18. As the Deity, viz. the divine Light, is the Center of all Life; so also in
the manifestation of God, viz. in the Figure, the Sun is the Center of all
Life; in the highest Life the highest things have taken their beginning, and so
forward successively one from another to the lowermost: In every external thing
there are two Properties; one Or, Out of.
from Time, the other from Eternity; the first property of Time is manifest,
and the other is hidden; yet it sets forth a likeness after it self in each
thing.

19. Whatsoever has its beginning out of the Lubet of the Liberty, stands
with the Root in an Heavenly Property, and with the Body in an earthly; but the
Eternal stands in Time, and manifests it self with Time.

20. Sulphur is on one part in the Internal Heavenly, and as to the Body
earthly, yet puts forth an Heavenly likeness according to the Eternal out of
it self, which is fixed and steadfast; as is to be seen in Gold, and is much
more to be understood in the Or, Man's.
Humane Body, if it were not corrupted in the Desire in Mercury; for the
spiritual or heavenly Man consists in Sulphur, and in Mercury the Corporeal,
viz. the Similitude of the divine [Man,] so also the Metalline Property in
Sulphur is the noblest, most excellent, and highest, for it is the highest
Spirit.

21. Understand it thus; in the Heavenly Being there is also a property of a
Seething, boiling, or decoction.
Sude, when the Liberty is apprehended and enkindled in the highest Desire,
wherein the Joyfulness arises; this is effected in the Heavenly Sulphur, where
it is made essential in the Heavenly Mercury, viz. in the Eternal Word, which
is a spiritual Essence.

22. But if the same Spirituality longs to manifest it self in a likeness,
both according to the Property of the Spirit, and the Essentiality too,
according to the Trinity of the Deity, according to the Mortal and Immortal
Essence; then that Image is represented With.
in the Stars and Elements, and lastly it is set forth in Man, who is a lively
Image of the whole Essence according to the divine and outward World; also the
inward and outward World is represented with the Metals in a mortal Image, as a
Resemblance and Similitude of the living Heavenly Essentiality.

23. The beginning is in Sulphur; for Sul is the Lubet of the Light, or the
Liberty, which longs to manifestation, and it cannot otherwise be effected,
save through Fire: in Phur arises the Desire, viz. an Austere Attraction,
which makes the dark earthly Property, and the Austereness of the Spirit, viz.
the fiery Essence: In this Austereness arises Saturn, which is the thing
Impressed; and Mercury is the desire of the Hunger, and the Rager, Raver and
Breaker; and Mars is the wrath in the Hunger, a cause of Anger; these three are
the Property of Phur, viz. of the free Lubets-desire.

24. The free Lubets Property begets the Essence in the three forementioned
Forms, viz. in Saturn, Mercury, and Mars; for it gives it self in to each
Property, and the Property in the Hunger of Mercury makes it a Corporeal Form;
but if the free Lubet turns also to an Hunger in the Austere desiring, then
it makes also three Forms according to it self, viz. Jupiter, who is the
understanding of the Lubet; and Venus, which is the desire of the Lubet; and
Luna, which is the body of the Lubet, and according to the Property of the
Light it makes Sol: all this is Spirit; but now in every Spirits Hunger there
is also an Essence, both according to the mortal and immortal Ens, a fixed, and
unfixt; a Figure according to the Heavenly, and a Figure according to the
Earthly [Being, or Property.]

25. In the Saturnine Property the desire of the free Lubet makes (according
to Saturns own Property) Lead, and according to the watery [Property] in Saturn,
Salt; and according to the mortal and earthly [Property] in Saturn, Stones, and
Earth, and all whatsoever is of that Sort, and Semblance.

26. But according to the Liberty, or according to the Free Desires own
property (in that it yields up it self to Saturn, viz. to the Desire) it
makes in Saturn Gold, according to the desire of the Light, where the Spirit
and Body do sever; the Spirit of its Desire is Sol, and the Body is Gold,
understand, the golden Body is in Saturn according to the property of the free
Desire, and not according to Saturns property, his property in himself is Lead,
Salt, and Earth; but he keeps the golden Child shut up in Himself as a black
Raven, not in his gray form, but in a darkish glee; He is a great Lord, but his
Dominion, by reason of the golden Child which he has in his bowels, stands
not in his own Power: He is not Father of the Child, but Mercury is he which
Or, Fashioneth.
forms the Child; but he puts his morning Mantle upon it, that he can have no
joy with the golden Child; but he Corporizeth the fair Child; for he is its
Fiat or Creator, and does hide and cover it close under his Mantle; He cannot
give it the Body from his own property, for it (understand the golden Body) is
the Essence of the free Desire in the highest degree of Corporality in the
fixed Death, where yet there is no Death, but an Enclosing, and in the
Similitude a Representation of the divine Heavenly Essentiality.

27. Mercurius is the Or, Faber.
Master-workman of this Child, which Saturn hides; when he gets it into his
Hunger, he casts off his black Cloak, and rejoices in it; but he is too
malignant in his [In a strange fire, and yet not strange; when the cloak is
laid aside, it needs only its own fire.]
Fire-wrath, he devoureth the Child, and turns it wholly to his own property:
when he is most sharply hungry in the Fire, then Sol must be given him (it is
his wife) that his Hunger may be appeased; and then when he is satisfied, he
laboreth in the Materia of the Child with his own Hunger or [Here must be its
own fire only from within, and from without.]
Fire, and fills up his sufficed Desire out of Sols property, which he before
had eaten down, and nourishes the Child till it gets upon it all the four
Elements with the Constellation, and he grows exceeding pregnant with the
Child, and then it belongs [or is fit] unto a strange Fire, and yet not
strange, unto an Earnest Fire; and then the Father gives it the Soul, viz. the
Fire-spirit; and its first Mother, which Mercury did eat down in its Hunger,
which was fixed and perfect, [giveth] the Souls-spirit, viz. the Light-life,
even then the [And it is the Tincture which Tinctureth the Body.]
Death arises, and the Child is born, and becomes afterward its own, and a
Child of the Liberty, and cares no more for its Work-master; it is better then
its Father, but not better then its Mother, in whose feed it say, before the
Father wrought in it; it bruiseth the Head of its Fathers fiery Essence, viz.
of the Serpent, and passes freely through death in the Fire: do thou
understand nothing here? then thou art not born unto the highest knowledge of
the Spargirical Science.

28. Further, we are to consider of the Degrees, what the Liberty, viz. the
Eternal Lubet, gives to the Hunger of the other Forms in Sulphur, in the
property of the other Planets; the Form of the Birth is as a Turning Or,
Rotation.
Wheel, which Mercury causes in the Sulphur.

29. The Birth of the highest Degree turns round, (viz. the Desire,) for this
World is round, so also the Birth; when as the Liberty has given its highest
Lubet (as a golden Hunger) unto Saturn, and placed Mercury for Work-master,
then it betaketh it self into it self, into its Defire, according to the
property of Meekness; for the first Conception to the golden Child is effected
according to the property of Joyfulness; but this out of goodness and meekness
resigneth it self to Luna; for it is a pleasant demission by reason of the
meekness, which Mercury does apprehend, and works therein also; this Body is
Silver, and comes from the first Impression, where the yellow and white
separate in the Fire, viz. the Colors of the Virtue; then Luna arises out of
the yellow, and turns into white, by reason of the divine Meekness; and
because its Original is from Sols Color, therefore it has a perpetual Hunger
after Sol, and receives the Suns Luster into it, Draws it to itself.
puts it on, and shines therewith.

30. Now as the Superior is, so is likewise the Inferior (namely Metals,)
therefore Silver is the next degree to Gold; and as Gold is generated, so is
also Silver: Venus clothes it, which Mercury cannot endure, being he is the
Master-worker, and he gives his garment also; but the Silver has neither the
property of Venus nor Mercury, for it retains the property of its Mother,
viz. the meekness in the Liberty, and is hatched, as the Gold by reason of the
Sun: The Moon has an Heavenly Property, but in reference to its own proper
Form from the property of the Desire, it is of a very earthly property, it is a
Cabinet and Keeper of the earthly and heavenly Essence: As the outward body of
Man, which before the fall in Adam was comparable to Silver, but when he dyed
in the Lubet, then the earthly property only lived in him, and therefore he
continually hungreth after Sols glance [and glory,] he would fain take again
his splendour with Luna from the Sun, but he gets only an earthly Lunatical
Luster, wherein he acts and exercises Pride, unless he be born again out of
Sols splendour, that is, out of Gods Power in the Heavenly Mercurius, and so he
becomes again the golden filver-child in divine Essentiality, only covered and
clothed this lifetime with the Earthly Moon, that is, with Earthly Flesh.

31. Saturn also is the House of silver, he is likewise the Cause of the first
Conception, but he turns his Desire only upon the golden Child, and leaves
the silver its garment, and takes it into his stony Earthly Property, and lets
Mercury hatch it.

32. The Desire of the Free Lubet is fixed, and steadfast, as concerning the
Property of the Desire only, which brings its Will again from the Body into
the Combat in the Senses, and makes Jupiter, that is on the Wheel, or sphere.
Orb upwards under Saturn, under the Saturnine Power; its metal is Tin, and it
is the third degree; for the Lubet of the Liberty in the Desire proceeds
forth into the Desire of the Austereness, and so gives it self into the Fiat.

33. We must understand it thus; The Lubet of the Liberty goes forth out of it
self, as a Plant, and makes one degree after another in order, but Mercury
makes the Sphere, for he is the Work-master: And as the Eternal Birth is in it
self in the Heavenly Mercury, viz. in the Eternal Word in the Fathers
Generation; so likewise with the Motion of the Father it came into a Creatural
Being, and so proceeds in its Order, as may be seen in the Wheel of the
Planets; for the Order is just so placed, as Man is in his Order.

34. First there is in him the true golden divine man, which is the likeness of
God; Next there is in him the man of heavenly Essentiality, viz. the inward
holy body, generated from the Fire and Light in the Tincture, which is like to
the pure Silver if it were not corrupted. Thirdly, there is in him the
Elemental man from the pure Element resembling Jupiter. Fourthly, the
Mercurial, which is the growing or Paradisical [man.] Fifthly, the Martial,
from the fire; viz. the Soulick [man] according to the Fathers property.
Sixthly, the Venerine [man] according to the outward Desire, and the waters
property. Seventhly, the Solar, according to the Suns property, viz. according
to the outward World, as a Seer and Knower of the wonders of God: and yet it is
but the one only man; yet is both in the inward and outward World. Thus
likewise is the similitude [or form] of the Seven Metals; with one property
according to the inward World, and with another visible palpable property
according to the outward World.

35. From Jupiter the Sphere turns round, and out of the Severation Mercury
proceeds forth with a broken metal, according to his spirits property;
externally quicksilver, and internally he is a Paradisical working; he is in
his spiritual property the Distinguisher [or Articulator] of the words, voices,
and speeches. It is written, God has made all things by his Word: The heavenly
Eternal Mercurlus in his Word, which the Father expresses in the Enkindling of
his Light, and the Expressed is his Wisdom; and the Word is the Worker, Framer
and Maker of the Formings in the Expressed Wisdom. Now what the inward
Mercurius does internally in Gods Power, that likewise the outward Mercurius
effects in the outward Power in the Created Essence: He is Gods Instrument,
wherewith he works extrinsecally to death and to life; in each thing
according to its property he builds, and breaks down.

36. According to Saturns property he builds, and according to his own
property he distinguishes and Attenuates, destroys*
dissipateth the hardness in Saturn, viz. the Enclosed, and opens it to life:
He opens the Colors, and makes Forms and shapes, and carries in him an
Heavenly, and also an Earthly Property; in the Earthly he carries out of the
first Desire to Nature, viz. out of Saturn; Mars, viz. the wrathfulness of the
Impression; for he is his Soul, wherein Mercury lives; he gives him the fiery
Essence, and stands under Jupiter in the order upwards on the Sphere; for he
carries the fire-spirit in Sulphur into all Planets, and forms and gives to
each thing its Source, and true spirit of life.

37. Mars in the first Impression is the great Anguish, and causes the
Love-will of the Liberty to separate from him; and the Severed is called God;
and the Anguish, or Fire-Source, is called Gods Anger, viz. the Wrath of the
Eternal Nature: And as internally Gods Love Severs from Gods Anger, that is,
from the wrathful Property of the Eternal Nature, viz. Heaven from Hell, God
from the Devil; so also it is effected in the Birth of the outward Nature.

38. Love proceeds out of the Wrath, and is an Humility, or Submission: Thus
likewise it came in the Creation into Order; therefore Venus stands in the
Sphere on the line of Mars under the Sun, for so is the Separation in Nature;
and so one proceeds forth from another: Its Metal is Copper, the Original
whereof is this, That the Love is a Desire, and desires only Light and Joy;
for the Materia is made out of the Desires Property: But if the Love-desire
shall come to be corporeal in the Impression, then it must resign it self to
the wrathful Fiat, viz. to Mars his Desire in the fire, or in the fiery
Property; for the Saturnine Property takes all into its might, and makes it
Corporeal.

39. Therefore the Metal of Venus is so nigh allied to gold, by reason of her
own Property from the Liberty, but Mars makes it too wrathful, and too spreud;
and because it separates it self out of Mars his fire, it retains a great
part of Mars his Property in it.

40. Mars his Metal is Iron, for he is the Wrath in Sulphur, in which the fire
enkindleth, and arises; his Original with the Materia is in the Austereness of
the Desire: Copper does sever it self in the Generation out of Iron, for it
Arises from the Will of Venus, and they differ as Body and Soul; for Mars is
the Fire soul of Venus, and makes Venus Corporeal; else Venus, as to her own
Property, gives only water in the mortification in the Salnitral Flagrat; for
her fire is only a pleasant Shine, Smile, or Love-fire, as she is alone devoyd
of other mixture; and therefore she cannot produce any Corporeal Essence from
her own Power and Ability, which is hard and tough; she is only the Woman,
Wife.
Mother to her child without a creatural Soul; Mars is her Soul, and Saturn
makes her Body.

41. The spirit of Sol may Tincture Mars and Venus, and change them into the
highest Metalline Perfection, viz. into Gold, which cannot so easily be
effected in Silver, unless it be reduced into the first Maetria, where Saturn,
Mars and Mercury are together in the Sulphur, and then it can be done: Venus
receives its toughness from Saturn, and its redness from Mars (as the fire.)

42. Now the Desire of Venus is only Eager, and longing after Sol, as after
her first Mother, whence she springs forth in her Birth in the first
Original; for the Love comes forth originally from God, and so it is likewise
in the extern Birth in the Figure: The Desire of Venus goes into Sol, into the
Sun, and receives in its Desire the Property of the Sun, and shines from Sol;
she has a very Peculiar Shine and Luster, above all the Planets and Stars,
which she receives from her Mother, and in her Mothers Power consists her Joy,
viz. the Pleasant Twinkling Smiling Aspect which she has in her; she is in her
own Property (as she is purely alone without the property of the other Planets)
a real Daughter of the Sun (understand in Sulphur, where all is enwrapt
together) therefore she stands next under the Sun, as a child of the Sun;
not that the Sun did generate that Star, for he is likewise created with her,
but in the Sulphur without the Creation, merely in the Generation, it is so,
both in the Heavenly and Earthly [Being, or Principle.]

43. For God the Father Generateth the Love through his Heart; now the Sun, by
way of similitude, betokens his Heart; for it is a figure in the outward
World according to the Eternal Heart of God, which gives strength and virtue
to every Life and Essence.

44. And understand it aright; As All things proceed from the Word and Heart of
God (which is the Divine Sulphur) in the Birth of the holy Trinity, and
manifest themselves in and through the Proceeded (or Egressed) Essence, which
is Gods Wisdom; and yet again do eagerly force and press out of the Egress, in,
and toward his Heart and Power, and vehemently long after it, as Paul says,
all Creatures do groan and pant with us to be delivered from Vanity.

45. So also does the outward Essence in the outward Birth of Metals, Planets,
Stars and Creatures; Each thing longs after its Center, viz. after its first
Mother, whence it proceeded, viz. after the Sun in Sulphur, for it is the
Tincture of all Essences: Whatsoever the first Desire with the Impression in
Saturn makes Evil in the Wrath of Mars, that the Sun turns again into good. As
the Divine Sun Tinctureth the Anger or Wrath of God, so that the wrathful
Property of Gods Anger is changed into a Joyfulness; so likewise the outward
Sun Tinctureth the outward Sulphur, viz. Saturn and Mars, that there is a
pleasant Temperature, viz. a growth springing and blooming in all Metals and
Creatures; therefore the Sun is the Center, which Reason will not believe;
understand, in the Planetick Orb, and in all Vegetables and Animals.

CHAP. V. Of the Sulphurean Death, and how the dead Body is revived, and
replaced into its first Glory.
1. ALl Life and Motion, with Understanding, Reason, and Senses, both in
Animals and Vegetables, consist originally in Sulphur, viz. in Natures Desire,
and in the Lubets Desire of the Liberty.

2. In Natures Desire arises the Death and Enclosing, and in the Desire of the
Liberty arises the Opening and the Life; for the Liberties Desire Tinctureth
the Desire of the dark Nature, so that the wrathful Mother foregoeth her own
Right, and freely resigneth to the Liberties Desire, and so the Life grows in
Death, for there is no Life without Light; but if the Light goes out in the
Essence of the Sulphur, then it is an Eternal Death, which no man can revive,
except God move himself in the Lubet-desire in the same Death; for Death can
receive no Life into it, unless the first Desire, viz. the free Lubets Desire,
does manifest it self in the Desire to Nature, wherein the Enclosing and Death
is generated.

3. Therefore when Man dyed in the Sulphur, none could have made him alive
again, unless the Free Lubet, viz. the Desire to the Eternal Life did again
enter into his Phur, viz. into the Birth of the Nature of the humane Property,
and moved the enclosed Death, viz. the Center of Nature, and give it self again
into the Center, viz. into the Soulike Property, and into the Souls
Essentiality and Corporality; and this was so brought to pass.

4. We know that the right Sulphur is a generation of all Spirituality and
Corporality; so far as concerns its first Original, where it is heavenly, it
is the Generation of the Essence of all Essences: For all, whatsoever Eternity
and Time is in it self, has, and is able to effect, lies in this Birth; But
now as to the Kingdom of this World it is earthly, viz. a figure of the
Eternal; for in it the Time and Creature consist, and all whatsoever is
visible, and invisible.

5. Now Man, and every Life also, as to the Kingdom of this World, was created
and generated out of the outward Sulphur; Man out of the inward and outward
[Sulphur] and the outward Creature only out of the outward; for Man is an
Image and likeness of God, and the other Creatures are as a Similitude
according to the Figuration in the internal Generation in Gods Wisdom, viz. in
the expressed or procreated heavenly Essence, according to both Eternal
Principles.

6. But now Man was created Good, and Perfect, according to, and out of all the
three Worlds, as an Image of the Deity, in whom God dwelled; and was even that
Essence, what God is, according to Eternity and Time in all the three Worlds;
but a Creature with a beginning, as to the Creature; and dyed through Lust.
Lubet as to the Heavenly and Divine Essence: For the inward Lubet, which was
generated in the Center, viz. in the fire, wherein stood the Life in the Divine
Essentiality; that is, that, which enkindled the Essence of the divine
Meekness, wherein the Joyfulness or the Angelical Form consists; that (I say)
turned it self from the inward Lubet of the Liberty and Eternity into the Time,
viz. into the Extern Birth, into the Planetick Property, [it departed] out of
the Pure Divine Element into the four Elements: Thus the inward Divine
Essentiality, or inward Corporality, did no longer retain any Leader or Life:
and this was the death; for the Souls fire proceeding from the Fathers
Property, turned it self away from the Sons Property, in which alone the Divine
Life consists.

7. Thus the Property of the Soul remained naked only and alone with its Will
in the outward Sulphur, and the inward disappeared, and continued steadfast in
the Eternal Or, Immobility.
Unchangeableness, as in an Eternal Nothing, wherein there was no more any
Effecting [or working Efficacy to bring to pass.]

8. Thus Man with his outward Body lived, barely and merely to the Time; the
precious Gold of the Heavenly Corporality, which tinctured the outward Body,
was disappeared, and so the outward Body stood barely and alone in the Life of
Natures Desire, viz. in the Souls fiery Property; understand in the Form and
Property of Mars, viz. in the Wrath of God, who is the Wrath in Sulphur, viz.
the Property of Gods Anger and the dark World: but being the outward Body was
created out of the Time, therefore the Time, viz. the Constellation with the
four Elements, presently obtained the dominion in him; and the divine Property,
viz. the Desire of the Deity (which Ruled and Tinctured Time, so that there was
a holy Life in the Creature out of the Time) was vanished; its own peculiar
Love in the divine Desire was turned to water, and it became blind and dead in
the Will and Desire of God; and the Soul must help it self with the Suns Light.

9. But being that Time has Beginning and End, and the Will with the Desire
has given up it self to the Temporal Leader, therefore the Dominion of Time
destroys its own contrived spirit, and so the Body also dies and passes
away; and this is that which God said to Adam, That he should not eat of the
Tree, or Plant, of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, of both Properties, Or, he
should dye.
lest he dyed; as it also came to pass, he dyed in the Sulphur; The Sul in the
Kingdom of God, viz. the Lubet of the divine Liberty, out of which the Light of
God shines, and in which the divine Love, viz. the Love-fire burns, [did
disappear, and withdraw from him.]

10. Now there was no remedy for him, unless Gods Desire entered again into his
dead Sulphur, that is, into his mort Sul, viz. into the dead [or mortified]
Essentiality, and again enkindle it with the Love fire; which came to pass in
Christ: and there the Heavenly Body, wherein Gods Light shines, did again
arise. But if this must be effected, then the Love-desire must again enter into
the Desire of the Enkindled Anger, and quench and overcome the Anger with the
Love; the divine water must enter again into the Souls burning fire, and quench
the wrathful death in the Astringent Fiat, viz. in the Desire to Nature, that
the Love-desire, which desires God, might be again enkindled in the Soul.

11. For Man's Salvation.
Happiness consists in this, that he has in him a An upright, full, and
unscigned Desire.
true Desire after God, for out of the Desire springs forth the Love, that
is, when the Desire receives the Meekness of God into it self, then the Desire
immerseth it self in the Meckness, and becomes essential; and this is the
Heavenly or Divine Essentiality, or Corporality; and therein the Souls-spirit
(which lay shut up in the Anger, viz. in Death) does again arise in the Love of
God; for the Love Tinctureth the Death and Darkness, that it is again capable
of the divine Sunshine.

12. And as this is done in Man, so likewise it is in the Transmutation of
Metals: the Sulphur is shut up in Saturn, viz. in the Death, and yet there is
no Death, but a Vegetative Life; and the outward Mercury is the Life Or therein.
thereof. Now it the Metalline Body shall come to the Highest Perfection, then
it must dye unto the External Leader.
Dominator, viz. to the Elements, and come again into such a Sulphur, as it
was, when as yet it had not the four Elements on it, but lay only in the
Element in In one.
unity.

13 But now none can reduce it into such a Body, save he only which has
generated; He that has given it the four Elements, He Alone can take them
away; and He that at first made it Corporeal, He must aval it into himself, and
transchange it in himself into another Body; and this is the Sulphur, which
has Mercurius, as its chief Faber in it self. He must again take it out of
dark Saturns bowels in the Fiat, and introduce it into his own, and with his
own Fire separate the four Elements from it, and reduce it into one; as God at
the last Day will in the Enkindling of his own Fire separate the Essence of the
four Elements from the Pure Element, that the eternal Corporality in the Pure
Element may Arise Begin.
and spring forth: and as in the death of Man the four Elements do sever from
the true Man (who is the Element of God) and the Heavenly Body remains only
in it self; even so it goes in the Transmutation of Metals.

Process.

14. The Body lies shut up in a disesteemed Form in Saturn, not wholly in
Saturns Property in a dark color, marked with Mercurius its Father, and Sol
its Mother, clothed with Saturn, and manifest with the Life of Mars; but its
Mother is not outwardly manifest and known on it, unless its Faber be enraged
with its own Iniquity; which yet cannot be, except an Alienate be applied,
whereby its Propriate is enraged; and then (if his Anger be set on a fire, or
fury) he becomes so very hungry and thirsty, and yet can find no refreshment
in it self; then it seizes on its Faber who has made it, and fights against
its Creator, as the earthly wicked man against God, so long, till he devoureth
and consumes himself, as a fiery-[pestilent] Poison consumes the Body, unless
you remedy, stay, and allay its hunger; yet there is none that can still this
horrible Hunger, but God himself who has made him; and if he assists not in
due time, then the Hunger in the Wrath consumes the Body, and puts it into the
eternal Darkness.

15. This Hunger desires nothing but the Mercy of God, that he might be freed
from the Anguish of Hell; but this he cannot obtain of himself, for he is shut
up in the Anger of God; and his dear Mother, which nursed him in the beginning,
is also shut up in Death; but if God shows his Grace, and gives him again of
his Love, then the Anger is dismayed Or, In the Divine Love.
at the Love; and this is a Flagrat of great Joy: for he again tastes the
sweetness of his dear Mother, and then he knows full well, that he has been
so vile and wicked, and repents of his Iniquity; and will turn and mortify
the old Adam, and cast it away from him.

16. So the Artist takes him presently away with the old Adam from the strange
Anger, and lays him in a soft bed; for the old Adam is sick, and will dye;
and then his own Faber in the old Adam is Or, upon the Love of God.
in the Love of God, which destroyed the Anger, and will make a young child,
and rejoices in the child: and the old Adam grows sick, and weak, wholly
dark, and swart, and dies; and the four Elements Depart.
go out from him with their colors: so the Faber gives him even Leave to go,
and continually laboreth on the new Body, which shall arise from Death; and
none sees his labor, for he works in the dark.

17. But the Artist takes no care about the Labor.
work, but gives the Faber his own food, till he sees that a Vegetative Life
appears in the dark Death with a new color out of the black; and then, when
the new Man is ready, the Artist comes, and brings the Soul, and gives it the
Faber; at which the Faber is dismayed, that another Life comes into him; and
he puts the Soul into the new Body, and goes inwardly in the Anger: Thus the
new Man arises in great Power and Glory from Death, and bruiseth the Head of
the old Serpent in the Anger of God, and passes through the Anger, and the
Anger can do him no harm at all.

Whoever thou art, that hereunto art born,
Thou have a chosen work, no way for lorn.
CHAP. VI. How a Water and Oil is generated, and of the difference of the Water
and Oil, and of the Vegetable Life and Growth.
1. ALl Life, Growth, and Instigation, consist in two things, viz. in the
Lubet, and then in the Desire; the Lubet is a free Will, and as a Nothing in
comparison to Nature; but the Desire is as a Hunger: in the Desire arises the
moving Spirit, viz. the Natural, and in the Lubet the Supernatural, which yet
is Of, or belonging to Nature.
Natures, but not out of its own property, but out of [or from] the property of
the Desire.

2. The Desire is the Instigation of the Essence, viz. an Hunger, and the Lubet
is the Hungers Being, Materia, or Food.
Essence, which it takes into it self; for the Desire is only an hungry Will,
and it is the natural Spirit in its Forms; but the Lubet is out of the Liberty:
for God is desire-less as concerning his own Essence, in so much as he is
called God; for he needs nothing, All is his, and he himself is All.

3. But he has a Lubet-will, and he himself is the Will, to manifest himself
in the Lubet; yet in the free affection-less Lubet no manifestation can be
effected, for it is void of Desire; it is as if 'twere nothing in respect of
Nature, and yet it is All; but not according to the Desire, viz. according to
Nature, but according to the satisfying of Nature, it is the satisfying of the
hungry Desire, viz. of Nature; it freely and willingly gives it self into the
Hunger of Nature; for it is a Spirit without Essence and Desire, wholly free as
a Nothing: but the Desire does essentialize [or materiate it] in it self, and
that according to two Properties, viz. one according to the Eternal Liberty,
which is free from the Source; and the other according to the Desire, which
gives a vegetative Life, viz. a growing, or a giving forth it self.

4. The Free Essence is, and gives an Oil, and the Desires property gives a
Life of the Oil; the Oil is a Light, and the Desires property gives to the
Light the Essence, viz. the Fiery property, so that the Light shines, as is to
be seen in the Fire and Light, and the free Lubet remains yet a free Will in
it self, but gives its Meekness, viz. a free Resignation into the Desire, that
it comes to Essence and Luster: its Will is only good, it has no other Desire
save only to be good, meek and pleasant: there is also no other possibility
therein; for Understand the free will.
it is. as a Nothing, wherein no disturbance or Source can be, but it is the
Meekness it self.

5. But being it cannot be a Nothing, by reason that it is a Cause and
Beginning of the Desire, therefore it gives it self freely, as the Sunshine
freely gives it self into every property; and the Desire conceives [or taketh]
this free Lubet, viz. the Luster or shine of the Abyss of Eternity into it
self, and makes it in it self into Essence according to its property; so much
property as is in the Desire, so much also there is of Essence; and we are to
consider, that when the free Lubet does give in it self into the Hunger of the
Desire, that the Desire then makes out of the free Lubets property a
Similitude according to the Liberty, which is as if 'twere nothing, and yet is;
this is a Water and Oil.

6. But seeing the Desire, that is, the Hunger, is filled with the free Lubet,
it makes its own property in the Essence of the Liberty also to Essence; its
Essence is Water, and the Essence of the free Lubet is an Oil. Thus a two fold
Property arises in one only Spirit, viz. a fiery [Property] according to the
property of the Desire, and a joyful or Lucid Property according to the Liberty.

7. The fiery Affords, produces, or makes.
gives in its Essence, viz. in its Water, a sharpness from the austere Desire,
which is saltish, or a Salt; and from the fiery Anguish a Brimstone, whence in
the Impression, and Creation of the World, are made stones, earth and metals,
so also the Elements and Stars, all according to the forms in the Desire; and
the oleous property gives its Meekness, viz. a Love-Lubet, wherein the fiery
is impressed with the Desire, and makes Corporality, and the oleous gives it
self out in its Meekness, and makes the Vegetable Life, viz. a springing and
growing in the fiery Impression, whereinto the Fire must give its Essence and
Instigation, viz. the vehement Or, Raging Sting.
Compunction in the Attraction of the Desire, which is the Severator in the
Corporality, viz. the Distinguisher, Carver and Causer of the Essence and
Multiplicity [or Variety.]

8. Philosophers have called this Form Mercurius from the anxious inciting
Sphere, which is the Cause of all Life and Motion, and a Faber in the oily and
watery Property.

9. Thus we are to search and find out the Great Mystery, how there is an Oil,
Brimstone and Salt in every thing, and how it does arise; for God has made all
things out of Nothing, and that same Nothing is Himself, viz. a Love-Lubet
dwelling in it self, wherein there is no affection; but now the Love-Lubet
would not be manifest, if it remained One in the Stilness without Essence, and
there would be no joy or moving therein, but an Eternal Stilness.

10. But Or, When.
being he introduces himself into Essence through the Desire, his eternal
Stilness becomes an Essence and working Power, and that with two Properties,
viz. in an Oil, in which the working Power is a good Spirit according to the
property of the Love-Lubet, which resists the Desires Wrath in the Brimstone,
Salt, and poysonful Mercury, and appeaseth and heals his poysonful Hunger
with the pleasant Meekness; that which Mercury destroys with the Raging Or,
Furious Wheel.
Sphere of his own Property, that the Lubet of the Love. Oil does again heal:
and thus there is Good and Evil in each Life, and yet there is no Evil in any
thing, unless the Good, viz. the Love. Oil famish in its own Lubet, which
falls out in the Forms of the Impression of the Hunger of the Desire.

11. That is, if the Hunger-spirit does in its own Forms too much impress it
self [long, or imagine] after it self, and too eagerly hunger after its own
manifestation, it cannot take the free Lubet, which appeaseth its Hunger, into
it self; for Natures property must be sincerely bent and inclined to the free
Lubets property, viz. to Gods Love* Ens, and wholly direct its Hunger after
Love; and then the Hunger receives the Love into it self, and makes the same
essential in it self, and is no longer a famished dark Hunger, which rages in
it self, and raveth as a poysonful Mercury; but the Hunger becomes a
Love-desire, which is called Gods Nature, and the hungry, fiery [Desire] is
called Gods Anger; and in the outward Nature it is called a Fire, but in the
inward Worlds property, where the Desire does Energize in the property of the
free Lubet, this Desire is called the divine Desire, wherein the fiery Love
burns, and whence the Joyfulness proceeds; for the free Lubet does
therefore give it self into the austere Desire, that it may bring forth a fiery
Love, viz. a Joyfulness, which could not be in the Still Lubet; for where there
is a stilness, there is no joy, or motion.

12. Now the free Lubet, viz. Gods Property, does manifest it self through the
fiery Property, and the flery Property makes the free Lubets Essence, viz. the
Oil which arises in the Impression of the Desire to a Light or Luster; for the
Austere Desire gives the Anxious darting Flash, viz. a Sulphrous Spirit, and
the Meekness of the Oil gives its Love into it, and dispelleth the Intracted,
viz the Darkness, and manifests the Eternal Liberty, viz. the Nothing, and
this is now the Seeing.

13. For when the Fire-splendor tastes the sweetness of the Light, then the
Fires-desire reaches after the Meekness, and the Meekness of the free Lubet is
as a Nothing wholly incomprehensible: Now the Hunger of the Desire comprehends
its own Essence, and devours it, and makes it to Nothing; this is the Darkness,
which is the Hungers Essence, which the fiery Hunger devoureth through the
property of the Light, or free Lubet: as we see, that so soon as the Light
shines, it depriveth the Darkness of its Power; therefore God is a Lord over
all Beings, for he is the eternal Power and Light: A Similitude whereof we see
in the Sun, that it is Lord of the Darkness and of all Essences, and rules
whatsoever grows, lives, and moves in this World.

14. Further, we are to consider of the manifold Salts, how they take their
rise in the Original, and sever into many Properties. In the Original of the
Impression, viz. in the Verbum Fiat, a twofold Salt does arise: The first is
spiritual, and gives the sharpness in the Essence of the free Lubet; it is a
Severizing, or a sharpness of the Powers: The other Salt is the sharpness of
the Impression, according to the property of the Astringent Austereness, which
is the Anguish in the Impression, that is, Brimstone, and the essential
property is Water.

15. The Water is the senceless mortal property of the Salt; and the Sulphrous,
which is from the Anguish, is the property of the quick Salt; for it has the
Sting of Motion viz. the Mercury in it, which makes the Life's form, and yet
the Brimstone is not the Salt, but it is the Anguish in the Impression, which
also comes to be Corporeal.

16. The Salt is the sharpness in Brimstone, as to the Astringency; the Salt
causes the Anguish to be Corporeal; and so Salt dwells in the Brimstone, and
is the Brimstones sharpness, and preserves the Brimstone in the Corporeal
Essence, and also the spirit of the Brimstone, that it falls not to dust: the
Salt impresseth the Powers of the Anguish, and the impressed Life is the
Mercurial Life; the same is the Life of the Anguish, viz. of the Brimstone, and
severizeth the Materia according to the Forms to Nature, and the Materia of the
free Lubet into two Essences, viz. into a watery and oily, and then into a
Corporeal.

17. The Corporeal is twofold; both according to the Darkness, and the Light:
according to the property of the austere Desire it makes in the watery
[property] a Sand, or stony nature, whence the Stones have their Original;
understand out of the Sulphrous, viz. out of the Brimstones Water.

18. The other Property, According to, or after.
as to the mortification in the Salnitral Flagrat, is the common running Water;
the other Corporeal [Water] is the Metalline Body, from the free Lubets
property in the Impressed Form; and Or, Out of.
from the watery Property (where the Brimstone is in the Water) it produces
Trees, Herbs, and all whatsoever grows in the earthly property, viz. in the
mortified or dead Substantiality, which yet has a Dumo.
senceless Life, viz. a Vegetative.

19. The Oily Property is also twofold according to the Impression; viz. one
part forces again into the Liberty to be free from the Wrath of the
Impression, which is the Good Spirit, viz. the Light in the Oil: the other part
yields it self into the Anguish of the Brimstone, and remains in the
Corporality, and does unite and apply it self in each thing according to the
Salt-property of the thing; as in a fiery Salt, it is fiery; in a bitter Salt,
it is bitter; in an astringent [or Source Salt] astringent, etc.

20. The first property according to the Light is sweet in all things, and the
other property of the Oil is according to the form, viz. the taste of the
thing, let it be either sweet, sour, astringent, sharp, or bitter, or how it
will; as is to be found out and known in Herbs: in some it is a bitter poison,
and in some again a healing of the poison; but if the poysonful property be
broken by Mercury in the Oil of Meekness, then the Love of the Light does
incline it self also into the Oil, for the Original of both is from one Will,
but it is altered in the Impression: As the Devil, when he was an Angel,
changed himself into a poisonous devilish property, and Adam out of an heavenly
into an earthly [property.]

21. Whatsoever grows, lives, and moves in this World, consists in
Sulphur, and Mercury is the Life in Sulphur, and the Salt is the Corporeal
Being of Mercury his Hunger, albeit the Body is manifold; according as the
property of the Brimstone and Salt is, according to the same property is also
the ingrafted Oil, which springs up all along in the Power; for the Oil
makes the Power [or vertual Influence] in each thing. In the Oil of the
Impression, viz in the Impressed Oil, is the other Oil, viz. the Spiritual,
which gives us Light, but it has another Principle; it receives no other
Source into it but the Lubet of Love, it is divine Essentiality: therefore Gods
own Essence is nigh unto all things, but not essentially in all things; it has
another Principle, and yet inclines it self to all things; so far as the thing
has any thing of the divine property in it, it receives virtue from the
divine property, be it either a Vegetable or Animal; for there are Herbs and
Trees, and also Creatures to be found, in which something of the divine Power
is couched, wherewith in the Magical Cure the false Magic, viz. the corrupt
evil Oil can be resisted, and changed into a good Oil.

22. All sharpness of taste is Salt, let it be whatsoever it will in this
World, nothing excepted; and all Smell proceeds from the Brimstone, and
Mercury is the Distinguisher in all motion [or affection] both in the smell,
power, and taste; but I understand by my Mercury, the Sphere of the Birth of
all Essences, as is before mentioned; not a dead Mercury, but a living one,
viz. the Strongest, according to the property of the dry Poison, etc.

23. Now it does behove the Artist and Physician to know these things, else he
cannot Cure any sickness or disease, unless he hits on it by chance, if he
knows not wherewith the Oil is poisoned in the body and what kind of Hunger
Mercury has in the sickness, and after what he hungreth; for if he may Can but
get.
obtain the Salt according to the property of his Hunger (after which he is
desirous) with such an Oil as he fain would have, then is the sickness over
very presently; for he turns his Oil again into the property of the Love of
the Light, whereupon the Life begins again to shine bright.

24. For every disease in the body is nothing else but a corruption or
poisoning of the Oil, where-from the Lifes-light burns or shines; for when
the Light of the Life shines or burns clear in the Oil, it does expel and
drive away all poysonful influences and operations, as the day expels the
night.

25. For if the Oil, out of which the Life burns, be infected [or inflamed]
with a poysonful Mercury or Salt, let it be done either from the Constellation
or Salt of Meat, viz. from a contrary Source, whereby a loathing [or nauseous
detestation] arises in the oil, which the Oil would always spue out, whereunto
Mercury does help: then Mercury does eagerly travel and perplex it self in the
Sulphrous fire more and more, and continually labors to drive forth the
Abominate, but does only inflame it self in it self in this austere Endevor,
and more and more enkindle its inward Form, whereupon the Oil grows more dark
and poysonful, until at last the Oil becomes wholly waterish and earthly, and
then the Light, and also the Fire, extinguisheth, and Mercury with the
Sulphrous Spirit departs from it, as when a Candle is put out. Thus Mercury
passes out with the Sulphrous Spirit in Deaths baneful Sting.
Steam, until he also be famished; for a time he may help himself in the
Syderial Body, which passes along with it; but when Mercury in the Spirit of
the Great World has consumed and starved its property, then is the Temporal
Life wholly gone; for so soon as the Light of the Vital Oil extinguisheth, the
Elemental Body falls down into putrefaction, viz. into the Fiat, whence it
came to be; and then this Time ends in the Creature, which is the Death,
Dying, or Departure; and from thence there is no Deliverance or Return, unless
the heavenly divine Mercury does once more move it self in him, which yet
cannot be, except there has bin a good property of the Oil in him, viz from
the divine Essentiality; in this property, which is capable of the divine
Essentiality, the Light does only enkindle it self again.

26. For the divine Essentiality, or this heavenly Mercury, changes the dead
Oil again into his, and becomes its Life; for the outward Mercury, which has
ruled the Life, returns not again, it has only been for a time a Mirror of the
Eternal, but he is changed into another Source; for being suffocated, he
passes again into the Mystery, whence he at first proceeded in the Creation of
the World, and the body also goes into the same Mystery.

27. Thus it remains and belongs yet to another motion of the Deity, viz.
to a Separating, where the Evil, wherein the Death was, shall be separated from
the Good, and the Verbum Fiat shall restore and bring forth that which has
fallen into it in Death.

28. The Physician is to know, that in the strongest Mercury, which is most
poysonful, the highest Tincture lies, but not in Mercury his own property,
which must be Or, Taken from him.
broken; for his own property, even from the Center, is the anxious poysonful
Life: but he has another property in him, viz. an Oil from the Light, whereby
he is so strong and potent, which is his food and preservation; if this may be
severed from him, it becomes a Tincturing, and mighty Enkindling of all
obscured Lives, viz. of all Diseases and Sicknesses; for in this Oil lies the
joyful Life, and it is an Hunger after Life, viz. that it might enkindle the
weak, and lift it up on high.

29. In a Toad, Viper, or Adder, or the like poysonful Beasts, Worms, or
Insects, the highest Tincture is to be found, if they be reduced into an oily
Substance, and the Wrath of Mercury be severed from Or, It.
them; for all Life, both external and internal, consists in Poison and Light,
as we understand, that the Wrath and Anger-fire of God is a Cause of the divine
Joyfulness: The like also we are to know is externally; for all Life devoyd of
the poysonful Mercury is amort, and an Or, Lothsomness.
abominate, and accounted as Dead.

30. Now Mercury is an Enkindler of the Fire, and every moving Life consists in
the Fire; and albeit some Creatures dwell in the Water, yet Fire is their Life,
viz. the poyson-gall, wherein Mercury manageth the Life; but the Water in the
Gall is a Poison, wherein an Oil is hid, in which the Life in Mercury does burn
and shine: of which thou have a Similitude: If in a Creature there be a strong
poysonful Mercury, of a dry quality, that Creature is strong, bold, courageous,
and potent, which has also a clear Oil in it; for the fiery property of the
Mercury consumes the waterish, but if its fat be enkindled, it yields a
clear Light, much more would it be, if the watery property were severed from
the oleous.

CHAP. VII. How Adam in Paradise, and Lucifer, was a fair Angel, and how they
were corrupted and spoiled through Imagination and Pride.
Process.

1. WE will give an occasion of Consideration unto the earnest Searcher and
Seeker, and if he apprehends our meaning, he shall indeed be able to find the
Noble Philosophers Stone, but so that he be chosen thereto by God, and his Life
also stands in the Heavenly Mercury, otherwise we are a Mystery unto him, and
we will represent it unto him in Similitudes, in the most manifest, and yet
Mystical manner.

2. When Adam was created in Paradise, the Heavenly Mercury did then lead him;
his Life burned in a Pure Oil, therefore his Eyes were Heavenly; and his
Understanding did excel Nature, for his Light shone in the Oil of the Divine
Essentiality, the external waterish Property was not manifest in his Oil; he
was Iliastrish, that is, Angelical, and became in the Fall Cogastrish, that is,
the waterishness in the mortal Property was manifest in his Oil, and
penetrated, so that the Mercury in him became an Anxious Poison, which before
in his Oil was an exaltation of Joyfulness.

3. For the Salnitral Flagrat in the Impression in the Coldness, viz. according
to the Saturnine Property, was thereby elevated, and got the Dominion, as a
cold Poison, which arises in the Impression of Death, whence the Darkness was
generated in the Oil, and Adam dyed to the Divine Light; to which the Devil Or
Lead.
persuaded him Or, Through.
by the Serpent, that is, by the Essence and Property of the Serpent; for the
Kingdom of Wrath, and also the outward Kingdom, was manifest in the Serpent;
for it was more subtle then any Beast of the field, and this subtlety Eve
desired; for the Serpent persuaded her, that her eyes should be opened, and she
should be as God, and know good and evil.

4. Which also was the Will of the Devil, that he would know Evil: and in the
Enkindling to the Knowledge in Mercury he became corrupt and dark; for he
entered with the Imagination, according to his Condition, Knowledge and Desire,
into the fiery Byss; and Adam, according to his Knowledge and Desire, went into
the cold Byss into the Impression, into the procreated waterish Property in the
Salniter, where both Kingdoms stand severed: He desired to prove and taste the
watery Mercury, in which is the Mortal Poison; and Lucifer [desired] the fiery
Mercury, which gives Strength and Might; whence his Pride arose, viz. out of
the fiery Mercury: But both, viz. Lucifer, and also Adam, lost the Oil of the
Meekness of the Divine Essentiality.

5. Now we are to consider of the Serpent, which deceived Adam with its craft;
How it was, and what its subtlety was, after which Adam and Eve did Imagine;
wherefore they did eat of the forbiden Tree which was Evil and Good, and how
they did eat Death thereby; and what their Salvation and Restoration is
naturally, and properly; what Evil and Good is; what the Property of the
eternal Life, and then the Property of eternal Death, is: what the Cure is,
whereby the Sickness introduced by Adam, and its death, may be healed, and
restored both to the Temporal, and Eternal Life.

6. Let the Reader attend unto the sense and meaning; for we have not the
Ability to give this into his hands, that only belongs unto God; but the
Gates shall stand open for him, if he will enter in; if not, Or, The Riddle.
flattery avails him not.

7. The Devil was a fair Angel, and the Serpent the subtle Beast, and Man the
likeness of the Deity; now all three were Spoiled, undone.
corrupted by Imagination and Pride, and got the Curse of God for their false
Lust, [or cunning.]

8. All whatsoever is Eternal, proceeds originally from one Ground, as Angels
and Souls; but the Serpent is not out of the Eternal Ground, but out of the
Beginning, as we have before given you to understand, how Or, In.
with the Enkindling of the fire in the Salnitral Flagrat, two Kingdoms SeVer,
viz. Eternity and Time; and how the Eternity dwells in the Time, but yet
only in it self; but yet so nigh unto the Time, as Fire and Light which are in
one another, and yet make two Kingdoms; or as Darkness and Light dwell in each
other, and the one is not the other. The like we are to consider of the
inchoative poysonful Mercury in the Devil, and in Man, and in the Serpent also;
how an Oil corrupts, and yet the Essence or Being of God is not hereby at all
corrupted, but enters into it self, viz. into the Nothing; and the Creatural
Mercury, which Arises, or is begotten with the Beginning of the Creature in
the Creature, goes out Or, Outward.
of it self, that is, out of the Eternal into Time, viz. into the Beginning of
the Creature: It desires its own self, that is, the Beginning; and will be its
own, or a Selfist, and forsakes the Eternity, into which it should be wholly
confined and resigned with its Desire, and bring its Hunger thereinto; and then
its Poyson-Source would not be manifest.

9. For whatsoever does hunger after the eternal Nothing, viz. after the quiet
meek Liberty of God, that is not manifest to it self, but it is manifest in the
Still Liberty, viz. in God, for as the Hunger is, such is also the Essence in
the Hunger; each Hunger, or Desire, makes it self an Essence according to the
Property of the Hunger, or Desire.

10. Thus the Devil makes [or causeth] in himself his Darkness; for he went
with his Desire into himself, into the Property of the Center to the Desire,
and forsook the Eternity, viz. the Nothing, that is, the Lubet of Love; so that
he enkindled himself in his Poysonful Mercury, that is, in the Forms unto Life
in himself, and became an anxious Fire-source in the Darkness; as wood that is
burnt to a coal, which only gloweth, and has no more any true light in it,
also no oil or water; so it went with him. Now in his own Property, viz. in his
Lifes-Forms, there springs forth nothing but a stinging envious Property,
where one Form does hate and annoy the other, and yet do so beget each other.

11. And so was the Serpent likewise, yet not by its own Aspiring Haughtiness;
but when God said, Let all sorts of Beasts come forth, each according to his
property [or kind,] then came forth Beasts out of every Property of Nature, as
it was manifest in the Se Veration, when God moved himself to the Creation; for
the Devil would domineer over the Love and Meekness of God, and Or, Set his
Desire upon the Anger.
put his Desire also into the Anger, that is, into the Austere Might, where the
Poyson-life Arises, viz. into the Fiat of the wrathful Property, out of which
Form are proceeded Vipers, Serpents, Toads, and other venomous worms; not that
the Devil has made them, That he cannot: only as the Desire was in the
Impression of the Fiat, such also was the Creature in the Evil and Good.

12. For in the Impression of the Fiat, in the Original of the outward Mercury,
viz. of the Life, which is manifest to it self internally, was the SeVeration,
where God and the World Sever, viz. God Text. Into himself.
inwardly, the World Out of it self.
outwardly, as a Similitude of the Abyss, or a Looking-glass of Eternity; even
there the inward Wrath, whence God is called an angry zealous God, and a
consuming fire, manifested it self externally in figures, as in a Similitude of
the inward Birth in the Center; like as the Eternal Lubet, which He is himself,
stirs up [awakeneth] and causes the Desire to the Nature of the eternal
Manifestation, and gives in it self into the Desire, and turns the Wrath of
the Desire into Joyfulness.

13. Thus it is also with the Serpents Or Wit, or subtlety.
craft; in the highest Mercury is the highest sharpest proof of all things: the
more poysonful a thing is, the more sharply it proves a thing; for the
Quickest, keenest.
sharpest Taste and Smell consists in the great Poison, viz. in a Dying Source.

14. And as the Eternal Light is Or, Begets it self.
generated out of the Fathers sharpness, that it attains the Shine, and goes
forth with its own Source through the sharpness out of the Anguish-Source again
into the Liberty, viz. into the Nothing, where the Light, by reason of the
Fires-Source and Property, becomes also a Desire, which is the Desire of the
Divine Love and Joyfulness; in which Desire, Mercurius, the Eternal Word, or
the Understanding of Eternity, or Deity, is rightly Considered and Named: and
this Efflux from the Fire (understand from the Eternal Magical Spiritual Fire)
is a Procreation, viz. of the Word of the Power, Colors, and Virtue: and this
Desire of the Same Mercury, or Word, does also Or sorm, or immass.
immodelize the Power into its own Desire, and makes it essential; which is
the Meekness and the Love, which quenches the Wrath of the Eternal Father,
viz. of the Eternal Nature-Desire with Love, and changes it into Joyfulness,
where the Name of God has its Original from Eternity. This immassed
Essentiality Affords, yields, produces.
causes two Properties, viz. one Oleous, which is Heavenly Essence, a cause of
the shining of the Light; and also a Powerful [Property] from the Motion of the
Eternal Impression, or Desire of the Father after the Birth of the Son; whence
the Divine Air (as the Power through the Shine of the Light) proceeds forth
out of this Love-fire, which is the Spirit of God.

15. In like manner know this, That the Eternal Love (understand the Essence,
viz. the Heavenly Essentiality) has given it self forth into the Creation with
the Verbum Fiat, to Bring, turn, or sublimate.
set the Fathers Anger, viz. the form of the Eternal Nature, into the highest
Joyfulness, and to set forth the likeness of the Eternal Generation, and where
the Nature of the Wrath was most elevated through the Fiat, there also the
Desire did most incline it self toward the Liberty, to be free from the Wrath,
and to bring it into the Or, Joyfulness.
Kingdom of Joy, whence the great and deep Knowledge is Arisen, and also the
most precious and highest Tincture; understand the Desire of the wrathful
Hunger Or, Receives that which it hungreth after.
received that into it self after which it hungered, viz. the Liberty; for all
things were created good in the beginning, also the Devil was good while he was
an Angel, so also the Serpent [was good in its Creation before the Curse.]

16. But being the Devil went into the highest Fires-Desire, God departed from
him, as a light that is put out, or extinguisheth in a Candle, and afterward
he lived according to his own Desire.

17. But seeing he knew that there was such a Tincture in the Serpent, and the
Serpent being created out of the beginning of Time; therefore he Crept.
insinuated with his Desire into the Serpent, and took possession of the
Serpents Tincture, and wrought forth his Desire through the Serpent against
Man, to introduce him to long after the Serpents Property: For the Serpents
Tincture was from both Originals, viz. out of the deadly Mercury from the Dying
in the fire, viz from the coldness in the Impression; and then also from the
Wrathful [fiery Property in the Impression.] The cold Impression is earthly,
which Arises from the Wrath, viz. from the Dying in the Wrath, in the
Impression; and the fiery [Impression] arises from the quick Poison of
Mercury, in which Property the Spirits life consists.

18. Thus Adam and Eve were infected with the Devils Desire through the
Serpent, viz. through the earthly, deadly Property of the Serpent; and also
[through] the wrathful poysonful living Property of Gods Wrath according to the
Devils own Property; and was inflamed in his Divine Oil, that is, in the
Heavenly Essentiality.

19. Even then the Divine Light, which shone out of the Divine Body of the
Heavenly Essentiality, was extinct unto him; for the Curse seized upon the
Soul. Now Gods Or, Gods banning is a banishing.
cursing is a withdrawing; viz. the Divine Power, which was in the Body,
departed into its own Principle; and his holy Oil (wherein the Power of God
dwelt, and had made a Kingdom of Joy, viz. the Paradise) became a Poison.

20. For the Earthly Part according to the mortifying of the water, viz. the
Cogastrish Property, was manifest; and forthwith Mercury, (viz.) the coldness
in the Deaths Property, got he Dominion, whereas before he was as it were Or,
avalled.
swallowed up in he divine Power: Thus Adam dyed unto God, and lived to Death;
here it was necessary, that God should regenerate him; and therefore the
Serpent was cursed, because it had served, and willingly obeyed the Devil.

21. Thus we understand what lies hid in the greatest Anguish, viz. in the
strongest Mercury, viz. an Oil, which Cures and Tinctureth all Diseases; but
the cold Poison, viz. the Deaths-Source must be done away, and put into a fiery
[property] which is desirous of the Light; for God created all things good in
the beginning, but through his Cursing or withdrawing the Evil came in; for
when Gods Love-desire dwelt in the outward Worlds-Source, and Penetrated it, as
the Sun the Water, or the fire an Iron, then the outward World was a Paradise,
and the divine Essence sprang forth and budded through the Earthly, the Eternal
Life through the Mortal; but when God cursed it for man's sake, the mortal [
Part, or Property.
Life] was manifest in man, and also in the fruit of which man should eat,
which property before was only manifest in the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, on which Adam and his wife were Tempted, whether their Desire would enter
into the Eternity, viz. into Gods Essence, or into the Essence of Time, into
the living or mortal Oil, in which Source the Souls spirit would live, that is,
burn.

22. Thus by Gods Curse or withdrawing the Heavenly Body was shut up, and the
Anger-Source set open, and so [the Heavenly Body] lies still shut up: but
seeing Man by the Eternal Mercury, that is, by the Word of Divine Power, was in
one part formed out of Eternity into Body and Soul, none could Open, or
exclude. --
disclose the Poyson-death, and destroy the mortal Mercury, and change it again
into the Lights-Source, viz. into the Source of the divine Joyfulness, save
only the very divine Mercury, viz. the Power and the Word of Life it self; for
the Serpents poysonful earthly property was manifest and stirred up in man;
therefore when Gods Word did pity the Corruption of man, and did again Or, Took
his part.
embrace him, he said, The Seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head,
and thou (understand the Serpents poison or fire) shall sting him in the Heel.

23. Herein now lies the Philosophers Stone, [to know] how the Seed of the
Woman bruiseth the Serpents Head, which is done in the Spirit and Essence,
Temporally and Eternally; the sting of the Serpent is Gods Anger-fire, and the
Woman's Seed is Gods Love-fire, which must be again awakened, and Throughshine,
irradiate.
illustrate the Anger, and deprive the Wrath of its might, and put it into the
divine Joyfulness, and then the dead Soul, which lay avalled in Gods Curse,
does arise: when the poysonful Mercury, which resembles Gods Anger, is
Tinctured with Love, then the Deaths Anguish in Mercury is changed into the
highest Joyfulness and Desire of Love, which does again make a Love-essence in
it self, viz. an heavenly Body out of the earthly: when Mercury is changed into
an heavenly Source, it desires no longer [or more] the earthly mortal Life;
[it desireth] not the four Elements, but only the One, wherein the four are
contained, as it were avalled; as the Light holds the Darkness avalled in it
self, and yet the Darkness is in it, but not manifest in the Light; as God
dwells in Time, and the Time comprehends him not, unless it be translated and
wrapped up into Eternity, that the divine Light does again shine in its Source,
and then the Time is manifest with its Or, Works and effects.
Wonders in the Eternity.

24. On this wise also is the Process of the Wise men with the Precious Stone:
There is no nearer Consideration of the same, then to consider [and know] how
the Eternal Word, viz. the heavenly divine Mercury in the divine Power is
become man, and slain Death, and the Anger in man, viz. changed the Mercury
into the divine Joyfulness, whereby the humane Mercury, which before lay shut
up in Gods Anger, viz. in the Source of Death, does with its new enkindled
Desire, which now is called Faith in the Holy Ghost, attract divine
Essentiality, viz. Christ's Body unto it self, and sets it self in divine
Power and Light above the Anger of God, and the Poison of the Serpent, and
bruise the head of the Anger, viz. the poison of Death with the Life of divine
Joyfulness, that is, the Anger was Master, but in the Light it became a
Servant, which now must be a cause of the Joyfulness, as it is most plain,
clear, and manifestly made known and shown unto us in the Mercurial Life.

25. Now observe the Process, and meditate thereon, ye dear Children of Wisdom,
and then ye shall have Enough Here and for ever.
Temporally and Eternally; do not as Babel does, which tickleth and comfort
it self with the Philosophers Stone, and boasts of it, but keeps only a
gross Masons-Stone shut up in Poison and Death, in stead of the Or, noble Stone
of the wisemen.
precious Philosophers Stone; what is it for Babel to have the Stone, when as
it lies wholly shut up in Babel? It is as if a Lord bestowed a Country upon
me, which indeed was mine, but I could not take possession of it, and remained
still a poor man for all that, and yet I boasted of the Dominion, and so had
the Name, and not the Power: Even thus it goes with Babel about the precious
Stone of the New Birth in Christ Jesus.

26. In the Sweet Name, Jesus Christ, the whole Process is contained, what, and
how the New Birth is out of Death into Life, which is very clearly understood
in the language of Nature; for the Name Jesus is the property of the free Lubet
of Eternity, which yields it self into the Or, Pregnant Center
Center of the Pregnatress, viz. into the Fathers property, and figurizeth it
self in the Center in the Fathers property, viz. in the Fathers Fire, to a word
of Eternal Power.

27. Understand, the Father, viz. the Fathers fiery Forms, do figurate [shape]
this divine Voice essentially in it self in the Lubet of the Liberty; that is,
the Fathers fiery property makes it self in the divine Essence of the eternal
Love to a Mercury of Ioyfulness; for the Fathers property is the Fire-source,
and the Sons, viz. the eternal Lubets property, is the Love-source; and yet
also there would be no Desire of Love, if the Fathers Fire did not enkindle it,
and make it moveable, viz. denrous; from the Fire arises the Desire.

28. The Father of all Essences begets this holy Desire through his
Fire-source, which is now his heart of Love, which gives in his Fire the
shining Luster and Splendour, even there the Wrath in the Fires-property dies
from Eternity to Eternity, and is changed into a Love-desire.

29. Thus observe it; the free Lubets property is here in the Fires property
called Christ, which signifies in the language of Nature a One that breaks
through irresistably.
Potent Champion, depriving the Wrath of its Power, a Shine of the Light in the
Darkness, a Transmutation, where the Love-Lubet rules over the Fire-Lubet,
viz. over the Wrath, the Light over the Darkness: Here the Seed of the Woman
(understand of the free Lubet, in which there is no Source) bruiseth the Head
of the Wrath of the Eternal Nature, viz. of the Eternal Desire; for the Fires
property is rightly called the Head, for it is the Cause of the Eternal Life;
and the Liberty, viz. the free Lubet, or the Nothing, is rightly called the
woman; for in the Nothing, viz. in the Liberty Or, Devoyd of all Source.
of all Source, consists the Birth of the Holy Trinity of the Deity.

30. Now the Fire gives Life, and the free Lubet gives Essence into the Life,
and in the Essence is the Birth, where the Father, viz. the Eternal Ground,
begets his Essence, viz. his Heart out of the Abyss in Himself, that is, out
of the Abyss in Himself into a Byss; the Son Or, Becomes.
is the Fathers Byss: Thus the Father remains in Himself, as touching his own
property only, the Byss of the Eternal Nature; and the Son remains in the
Father, the Byss of the Power and Kingdom of Joy; a resemblance whereof you see
in the Fire and Light: And thus the Son Tinctureth the Father with the Liberty,
viz. with the Nothing, and the Father Tinctureth (the Son) the Nothing, that
there is an Eternal Life therein, and no more a Nothing, but a Sound or Voice
of the Manifestation of the Eternity.

31. Thus, dear Philosophers, observe here the Ground how you should Tincture;
seek not the Son without the Father to Tincture therewith: it must be one
Corpus.
Body; the Serpent-bruiser lies therein aforehand; for the Seed of the Woman
has not bruised the Serpents Head without the Humanity, but in the Humanity:
The Source of the divine Lubet (understand of the Love) manifested it self
through a Or, Awakening, or stirring it self up.
Resurrection in the humane Essence, and became manifest in the humane Life,
and Tinctured the Wrath of Death with the Blood of the divine Tincture, and
there the Wrath of Death was changed into a Source of divine Love and
Joyfulness: Thus the Love bruised the Head of the Anger, and the oleous Poison
in Mercury, and deprived the Wrath of its Dominion, and Set.
sublimed the Wrath into the highest Ioyfulness; even there the Anger, and the
astringent cold Death were made open Or, Victorion fly triumphed over.
show of in a fiery Love; then it was said, Death, where is thy Sting? Hell,
where is thy Victory? God be thanked who has given us Victory!

32. Now it behooves the wise Seeker to consider the whole Process with the
Humanity of Christ from his Opening in the Womb of his Mother Mary, even to his
Resurrection and Ascension, and so he may well find the Feast of Pentecost with
the joyful Spirit, wherewith he may Tincture, Cure and Heal whatsoever is
broken and destroyed: We declare it in the ground of Truth, as we have highly
known it; for a Rose in the time of the Lilly, which shall blossom in Or, The
bloomy Spring of the Paradissical New birth in Man.
May when the Winter is past, for blindness unto the wicked, and for a light
unto the Seeing.

33. God be for ever praised, who has granted us eyes to see through the
poysonful Heart of the Basilisk, and see the day of Restitution of all
whatsoever Adam lost.

34. Now we will come unto the Process of Christ, and go with him out of
Eternity into Time, and out of Time into Eternity, and bring again the Wonders
of Time into Eternity, and openly set forth the Pearl, for Honor unto Christ,
and scorn unto the Devil; He that sleeps is blind, but he that waketh, sees
what the Or, pleasant spring.
May brings.

35. Christ said, Seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto
you: Ye know that Christ signifies in a Parable concerning the wounded
Samaritane, how he fell among murderers, which beat him and wounded him, and
pulled of his clothing, and went away, and left him lie half dead, until the
Samaritane came, and took pity on him, dressed him, and poured Oil into his
wounds, and brought him into the Inn: This is a manifest and lively
Representation of the Corruption of Man in Paradise, and also of the Corruption
of the Earth in the Curse of God, when Paradise departed from it.

36. Now will thou be a Magus? then thou must become the Samaritane, else thou
can not heal the wounded and decayed; for the body, which thou must heal, is
half dead, and sorely wounded, also its right garment is torn off, so that it
is very hard for thee to know the man whom thou will heal, except thou have the
eyes and will of the Samaritane, and seek nothing else thereby but to
restore the loss of the wounded.

37. Now consider! the Eternal Word manifested it self in Adam with divine
living Essentiality, with the Heavenly Mercury, but when the Souls-fire in
Adam, by the infection of the Devil, poisoned the Wills spirit in Adam, and
introduced it through the property of the Serpent into earthly deadly lust,
then the Heavenly Mercury of the Heavenly Essence withdrew, that is, the
Souls-will departed from it with its Desire, and introduced his Hunger into the
earthly mortal Essence, viz. into the property of the cold Mercury, which had
made Stones and Earth; Adams spirit would prove this [Mercury,] and have the
knowledge in evil and good, and so this Mercury of the four Elements forthwith
drew him into its Poison, and effectually wrought in him, and robbed him of the
Divine Property, stung, and wounded him with Heat and Cold, and made him half
dead, and stripped him of his Angelical Raiment, viz. the garment in the pure
Element, where the Heavenly Source penetrateth the four Elements, and tinctured
them in Adams body; then he needed no other garment, for Heat and Cold were as
it were swallowed up in him; as the Day holds the Night swallowed up in it
self, and yet the Night dwells in the Day, but it is not manifest: Thus it
went with Man when the property and Source of the Night seized on him, then it
domineered in him; and thus it went also with the Earth when God cursed it.

38. Now will thou be a Magus? then thou must understand how to change the
Night again into the Day; for the Source of the Night, viz. of the Darkness, is
the Anguish-Source of Death; and the Source of the Day, viz. of the Light, is
the Life, and the Luster in the Life; now Christ has again enkindled this
Shine in the Humanity, and quickened man again in Himself: Now if thou will
Tincture, then thou must change that which is shut up, and closed in the Death
of the Night again into the Day, for the Day is the Tincture, and yet the Day
and Night lie in each other as one Essence.

39. Now says Reason, How may I begin Or, what shall I first do to bring it to
pass?
to do it? Look upon the Process, how God began with the Humanity, when He
would Tincture the same.

40 Christ came into this World in the shut-up humane form, and brought into
the enclosed Fortress of Death the Tincture of Life, viz. the Deity; He came
into the World as a Pilgrim in our poor form, He became ours, that he might
Tincture us in Himself: But what did he? Did he live in Joy? Did he behave and
carry himself as a Lord? No; He entered into Death and dyed, and put away the
Nights-Source in him through Us: But how did he do it? He assumed the Essence
of our Soul and Body unto the divine Essence, and quickened our Essence with
the divine, that our Essence entered again with its Will and Desire into the
divine Essence, and then the Heavenly Fiat was moved again in the Humanity; for
the Humanity inclined it self again into the Liberty, viz. into the free Lubet
of the Deity.

41. This being done, the man Christ was tempted forty days, so long as the
first Adam was alone in Paradise, and was tempted; then the outward earthly
food was taken from him, and the Humanity must eat with its Desire of Gods
Essence; there was represented unto him all whatsoever the first Adam had
Amused himself in, and whereinto he Imagined, and wherein he was captivated, as
in the Death of the Night. This the Devil, being a a Prince of this World, now
represented unto him in the property of Death, as he had represented it unto
Adam through the Serpent, whereon Adam and his wife did amuse themselves, and
entered thereinto with the Imagination,

42. Now behold! What did Christ do when he was to undergo the Combare of this
Trial, when the humane Essence was to enter again with its Desire into the
Deity, and eat of Gods Bread, that is, of the divine Essentiality? He went to
Jordan, and was baptized of John; Wherewith? With the Water in Jordon, and with
the Water in the Word of Life, viz. with divine Essence, which must Tincture
our mortal Essence in the outward Humanity of Christ, whence the divine Hunger
arose in the humane Essence, that he desired to eat of Gods Bread, therefore
the Spirit of God took him and carried him into the Wilderness, and there the
Fathers Property in the Wrath did oppose him through the Prince in the Wrath,
and there Gods Bread, and also the Bread of Gods Anger according to the Deaths
Desire, was tendered unto him; now it was tried, whether the Soul, which was
generated and created out of the Fathers Property, would after this
Tincturation of Baptism enter again into the Love-desire, viz. into the Nothing
out of all Source.

43. What is hereby intimated unto the Magus? A Mystery is hinted unto him; if
he will do Wonders with Christ, and Tincture the Corrupt Body to the New Birth,
he must first be baptized, and then he gets a Hunger after Gods Bread, and
this Hunger has in it the Verbum Fiat, viz. the Workmaster, or Faber.
Archeus to the new Generation, that is, the Mercury: but I do not speak here
of a Priests Baptism; the Artist must understand it Magically; God and man must
first come together ere thou baptizest, as it came to pass in Christ; the Deity
first entered into the Humanity, but the Humanity could not presently
comprehend it, until it was quickened through Baptism, and the Hunger, viz. the
dead Mercury in the Humane Essence, was again stirred up in the Heavenly Part.

44. And Here began again the Humane Eating; viz. the Mercury received again
Divine Property and Will; and then the inward Mercury (understand Man's
Property) did eat in the Taste of the Divine Word of Gods Essence: and the four
Elemental Properties did eat of the Nights Property, so long, till the Humane
Mercury sublimed its Life, and changed the four Elements into One: and the Life
Tinctured Death, which was done on the Cross; then the four Elements departed
from him: that is, He dyed unto Time, viz. to the Night, that is, to the four
Elements, and arose in the Pure Element, and lived to Eternity.

45. The Magus must keep and observe this Process also with his Alchimy. Do
thou ask how? I will not put it into thy mouth by reason of the wicked, who is
not worthy of it: Observe only the Baptism, that thou baptizest the dead
Mercury, which lies in the Heavenly Essentiality, enclosed and shut up in
Impotency with its own Baptism, [and mark] of what Or, Whose Essence is in
every Thing
Essence he is in a thing: but thou must have his divine Water, and also the
earthly; for the earthly Mercury cannot else Receive the Divine [Being] except
the Divine Mercury receives of its Power, whereupon it stirs and hungereth:
even then the Heavenly [Mercury] seeks, but yet finds not Divine Essence
about it for its food; Thereupon it brings its Will through the Desire of Death
into it self, viz. into the Verbum Fiat, which has made and produced it, and
sets its Hunger upon the same; whereupon the Or, Gods Being.
Divine Essence inclines it self unto it, and will become Joyfulness in him;
even then arises the beginning of the new Body out of the Divine Essentiality,
which the Desire nourishes and brings up; and when the new Life is born,
viz. the Day; then the four Elements dye: and then the new Body is shut up in
the dark Death, and on the third day it rises again from Death; for the Night
is avalled in the Grave, and the Morning rises.

46. If thou did understand this, then had thou the Pearl; But my Intent
and purpose is otherwise; I will show thee Christ along with it, and also this
Pearl; therefore none shall find it but he that Loves Christ.

47. Thou say, Tell me the Baptism? and I have already told it thee. Every
Hunger is a Desire after its Property; now if thou give again the Property of
Death unto the Hunger of Death, then Death increases; but if thou give him
Heavenly Property, then Death receives it not, for Hell is against Heaven;
therefore thou must give Death and the Anger of God to Death, and in this Anger
give him Heavenly Essence, viz. the Baptism, and so the Baptism will Aval the
Death into it self, even then the Anger dies in the Death through the Baptism,
but not presently; thou must first keep the Process of Christ, and suffer the
baptized to Preach, that is, appear in his divine Form and Colors, exceedingly
persecute and plague him, and give him no rest; for so the right Mercury
becomes working and active; and when he has shown all his Wonders through the
old Adam, even then thou must east the old and new Man into Gods great Anger,
and slay the old Man, ventilate him, and hang him Or, Openly. Text. In the air.
naked on the Cross, and again take him thence, and lay him into the
Putrefaction, viz. into the Grave.

48. And then Christ will arise from death, and appear, but only his own know
him; He walks about in Heavenly Form, and sometimes in his own [Form which he
had here] until the Feast of Pentecost, for now here is tried in him the
highest Perfection, whether he will persist in the Angels-form, and eat only of
the divine Essence; and then comes the Holy Ghost, and proceeds with his
Power out of the whole Corpus, viz. out of the Body and Soul, which then
Tinctureth the dead and broken Being, as may be seen in the day of Pentecost,
where Saint Peter Tinctured three thousand Souls at once with his Heavenly
Mercury, and delivered them out of death.

49. Dear Seekers, herein lies the Pearl, had you the Universal, then ye could
also Tincture as Saint Peter did, but your covetous Death does withhold you and
shut you up; for ye seek only Covetousness and Temporal Honor in the pleasure
of the flesh, to generate your selves in the Nights property; therefore the
Pearl does hide it self from you; yet the day shall again appear, when the
wrathful Anger of God is fulfilled, satisfied and appeased in the blood of the
Saints, and turned unto a Love-life, and the time is near.

Process.

50. Every Creature keeps in its generation and propagation unto its own Kind;
the male to the female, and the female unto the male: Now God said to Adam and
Eve after the fall, The seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head; He
said not [the seed] of the Man: Herein lies the Baptism of Nature; the Male
has the Fire-spirit, and the Female the Water-spirit to the Tincture; now the
Mercury is a Fire-life, and makes himself a Body according to his Hunger and
Desire; now the chief of the work is in the beginning to give the Fire-hunger a
Love-Virgin out of its Kind for its Consort, that so his wrathful Hunger may be
changed into a Love, and then they sleep together in their own Marriage Bed;
now the Devil is an Enemy of this Wedlock, who soon comes with a strange
Desire, and tempts these married people, but dares not lay an hand of
violence on them, but only afflicts and plagues them with a false strange
Desire; now if they yield their Desire unto his Will, and his Desire overcome
them, then they become Enemies to one another, and bring forth a false Child;
for Christ said, An evil Tree brings forth evil fruits, and a good Tree good
fruits.

51. Therefore the Artist must beware, and keep himself from such Anger, and
yet must prepare a Cross for this married couple; for he is their Foe and
Friend, that so they both in their Marriage Bed of Love might lift up their
Desire to God, and so with their Desire Gods Essence may be pregnant in their
Desire, and then in their Copulation they shall beget such a Child, which Or,
She shall, etc.
they (understand the Mother, viz. the Female) shall nourish in their Belly,
until it be ripe.

52. In the mean time let the Mother take heed she bear no Love to any other
besides her Consort, and also not Imagine after strange things, else she will
imprint a spot or mark on the Child; she must continue simply in one Love, till
the Child be perfect as to its body, which comes to pass in the fourth Month;
yet according as the Parents are of one property, even so strife and contrary
will arise in the essence in the Child, when as the Child is to receive its
Souls life.

53. But when the Essence is in its wresting Combat, the Artist must assist
the Soulish, viz. the fiery propeity, until the Souls-spirit attains its Life,
even then he appears in the Woman's Form and Luster: Now supposes the Artist
that he has the Child, that it is born, but there belongs a further time
unto it, till the Soul grows strong, and then it appears and shows it self in
its red and white Coat.

54. But there is yet a wonderful Process behind; when the Souls life is born,
then the new Soul casts away the Vegetable Life of the Parents, (which is
propagated and inherited to the body And
from the Parents Vegitta, wherein the body of the Child Curdled.
congealed and grew till the time of the Soul,) and the Life of the four
Elements dies, and the Life in the one Element arises; the Child is hidden in
the dark Death, and the Artist supposes it to be dead, but he must have
patience till the Child be born.

The Peculiar Process in the shaping of the Magical Child.

55. The Course of Christ upon the Earth is a real Type how the new Child is
nourished in the Mothers Womb after its Conception, as is before mentioned, and
attains a Vegetable Life, and grows up to the time of its right Souls and
Spirits Life; and how the Child arises from the Parents Essence; and how in
the Enkindling of its Right, viz. of its own Life, it casts away the Parents
Vegitta and Working; and how a new plant, viz. a new peculiar Operation, does
now arise according to the new enkindled Spirits property, whereby the Child is
more noble then its Parents, understand as to its outward Life.

56. But perhaps some rude clownish Sophister might meet with this Treatise,
and draw a strange Understanding from it, in that I write of a Soul in the
Vegetative Life; but let him know that we do not understand the Image of God,
which was formed into a likeness according to God [to be] in Metals, Stones and
Herbs; but we understand the Magical Soul, how the Eternity, viz. the Deity,
does imprint and pourtray it self in its likeness, according to the Model of
its Wisdom in all things, and how God fills all in all; we understand the
Summum Bonum, the Good Treasure which lies hidden in the outward Worlds
Essence as a Paradise.

57. When Christ in his childhood grew up in humane and divine Property till he
was twelve years old, he went with his mother Mary unto the Feast at Jerusalem,
and went into the Temple among the Scribes, asked them, and harkened unto them,
and gave answer unto the Questions of the Teachers; but when his Parents
returned home, supposing him to be among the Company, he remained purposely
behind among the Doctors, and followed not the intent of his Parents, but the
divine Will, until they came back again, and sought him; and then his Mother
said unto him, My Son, wherefore have thou dealt so with us? Lo! thy Father and
I have been seeking thee Sorrowing. Then he said unto them, How is it that you
have sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business? And he
went home with them, and was subject unto them.

58. In this Figure we have the Type of the Wills of the inward and outward
World how they are in one another, and against one another, and yet are but
one: Even as in Christ there were two Kingdoms manifest; one wrought unto Gods
Will, and brake the outward Worlds Will of his Parents, in that Christ tarried
behind contrary to the will of his Parents, at which they were troubled, which
the divine Will in Christ knew well enough; and the other Kingdom, viz. of his
Parents Will, brake the divine Will, that he went home with them, and was
obedient unto then: according to their will.

59. This Figure shows the Magus, that he shall find two Wills in his
Purpose, which he thinks to carry on; one will not be obedient and subject unto
him, viz. the divine Will; and yet if his own peculiar external Will shall
rightly apply it self thereunto, and only seek the dear Child Jesus with Mary,
with desire and earnest sorrow, and not earthly pleasure of the flesh, then the
divine Will will be obedient to him, and go home with him, and be used
according to his good pleasure.

60. Secondly, It shows him the twofold Working and Will in all things; and
if he will be a Magus, and according to his Will turn the Will and Essence of
the good Property out of the inward into the outward, then he must be first
capable of the inward, viz. of the divine Will, else he cannot change the
inward Will into the outward; as Christ was not obedient to the external Will
of his Mother until she sought him with grief and sorrow of Heart, and turned
her Will into Gods Will, and wrestled in his Compassion with Gods Will, as
Jacob the whole night, until the Lord blessed him, and God said unto him, Thou
have wrestled with God and man, and have overcome, or got the Victory.

61. Also let the Magus know, that he need not go about to implant the right
Will to perfection from without into his purpose; it is already in all things;
only he must introduce a divine desirous Will according to the things property
into that thing which he takes in hand, which wrestleth with the divine Will
as Jacob, and blesses the Will introduced to Gods Will, that the divine Will
yields it self freely into the Hunger, or incline it self to the Desire, and
makes the imperfect Will (which earnestly presses into his Compassion)
Perfect, and then is it rightly said, Thou have wrestled with God, and have
overcome; then thy Purpose obtains a transformed Body, which is Heavenly and
Earthly.

62. Observe it! It is the first beginning to Baptism, and so you are fit and
prepared to the Baptism, and not otherwise, else you baptize only with the
water of the outward World; but the true Magus baptizeth with the outward and
inward Water: if he has a right divine Desire in him, then Gods Will in his
Baptism is the first glimmering Tinder in Mercury, so that the Life enkindleth
Death, viz. the Mercury shut up in Death, and he gets divine Desire; even
then Mercury begins to Hunger after divine Essence, and does his first
Miracle, and turns the water into wine, as Christ did after his Baptism: This
is the first Tincturation in the dead Corpus in the Power of Baptism, that the
Vegitta, or working energetical Life, obtains another Property, viz. an
Hunger of Love, wherewith she embraces her Bridegroom, viz. the Fire-Source,
that he is enkindled in her Love, and changes his cold deadly Wrath and Will
into a fiery Lovewill; then the mortal Water turns into Wine (a sharpness of
a fire and water-taste,) out of which at last comes an Oil to another Baptism,
after the manner and disposition of the Artist, viz. according as he intends
and begins; after the Magus has joined the Virgin and young man together,
then Christ, viz. the Bridegroom, is lead with his Bride into the Desert, and
tempted of the Devil.

63. Here is the Trial whereby the Artist is proved by God what he seeks with
his Baptism; for here is the proof in Paradise to try whether the Bridegroom be
not too bad; for the Virgin casts her Love upon him, and inviteth him; if he
receives it with desire, and gives his Will thereinto, then she gives him
her heart and will wholly: This is the Heavenly Tincture, which gives it self
into the enkindled Anger of God (viz. into the Curse of the Earth when God
cursed it) that is, into the Mercury enclosed in Death, which is the
Bridegroom; for the Seed of the Woman, viz. the Heavenly Tincture, must bruise
the Head of the Serpent, viz. the poysonful Mercury, in the property of Death,
and change his Poison into Wine, and then the Virgin receives the Seed of the
Bridegroom, and not before.

64. The Desert is the earthly outward Body, where Mercury is Tempted; when the
Devil appears unto Mercury, and plagueth him, and assaulteth him in his fiery
Essence, then must the Virgin come to help him, and give him her Love: now if
the Mercury eats of the Virgin-like Love, that is, of Gods Bread, then he may
stand before the Devil; and at last the Angels come to him, and serve him; the
illuminated Magus will well understand what is meant by the Devil.

65. Hereby let the Magus in the Temptation (seeing the whole Marriage stands
in the Devils Temptation) have a careful eye upon his purpose; and if the
Angels do not appear in forty days space, then is his purpose in vain;
therefore let him look, that he suffer not too fierce a Devil to tempt, and
also not too weak, lest Mercury become Light, and desire to continue in his own
poysonful Deaths property, and devour the Baptism as a Wolf, and the old one
remain.

66. So soon as he does espy the forms of Angels, let him bring Christ out of
the Desert, and let the Bridegroom eat again his own food, and dismiss the
Devil, that he may no longer plague him, and then Christ will do many Wonders
and Signs, at which the Artist will marvel and rejoice; even then he has
nothing to do, the Bride is in the Bridegroom, they are already Or, In Wedlock.
married, he need only make their Bed ready, they will warm it well enough
themselves; the Bridegroom embraces the Bride, and the Bride the Bridegroom;
and this is their food and pastime until they beget a Child.

67. But if the Artist will needs be so diligent as to warm the married Couples
Bed, then let him have a care that he do not anger and enrage them in their
Love; what he begins he must go on with; only the Bridegroom is wonderful:
He has continually two Wills, viz. an earthly Hunger after Gods Anger, and an
Hunger after his Bride; therefore he must always have his own earthly Food
given him, but not into his Belly, but Magically, that so he may satisfy only
his Wills-Hunger; His Food is his Mother that begets him, as is before
mentioned.

68. In brief, the whole Work which men do speak so wonderful much of, consists
in two things, in an Heavenly and in an Earthly; the Heavenly must make the
Earthly in it to an Heavenly: the Eternity must make Time in it to Eternity:
the Artist seeks Paradise; if he finds it, he has the great Treasure upon
the Earth: but one dead man does not raise another; the Artist must be living,
if he will say to the Mountain, Arise, and cast thy self into the Sea.

69. When the Incarnation of the Child begins, then first of all Saturn
takes it, and then it is dark and disesteemed, and is contemned and derided,
that such a Mystery should lie hid in such a mean form; there Christ walks in
a poor simple form upon the Earth, as a Pilgrim, and has not so much room and
propriety in Saturn as to lay his Head; He goes as a stranger, as if he were
not there at home.

70. After this the Moon takes it, and then the heavenly and earthly Properties
are Blended.
mixed, and the Vegetative Life arises, and then the Artist rejoices, but he
is yet in danger.

71. After the Moon Jupiter takes it, who makes an understanding in Mercury,
viz. a pleasant Habitation, and gives him its good will; and in Jupiter his
Enclosed Life, viz. Mercury is quickened, who takes it with its Orb, and
forces it into the highest Anguish, and then Mars apprehends it, and gives
the Fire-Soul to Mercury; and in the Flagrat of Mars the highest Life does
enkindle it self, and Severs it self into two Essences, viz. out of the Love
into a Body, and out of the Fire into a Spirit, then the Life of Love in the
fiery Flagrat sinketh downwards, and appears beautiful, but it is Venus, a
Woman: then the Artist supposes that he has the Treasure, but the Hungry
Mercury devoureth Venus, and the Child turns to a black Raven; then Mars
Afflicts Mercury in himself, until he grow faint, and yields himself to Death;
then the four Elements Depart from him, and the Sun receives the Child into its
Property, and sets it forth in a Virgin-like Body in the Pure Element; for in
the property of Mars the Light is enkindled, and the right Life is born, and
stands in the Pure Element, no Anger nor Death can destroy it.

72. It seems strange in the eyes of Reason, that God has kept such a Process
with the Restoring of Man in Christ, that he appeared in such a poor
disesteemed form in the humane Property, and was reviled, mocked, scorned,
scourged, crucified and slain; and that he was buried, and rose again out of
the Grave, and walked forty days upon the Earth before he entered into his
invisible Kingdom. Reason is so blind, that it understands nothing of the
Eternal Birth, it knows nothing of Paradise, how Adam was in Paradise, and how
he fell, and what the Curse of the Earth is; if it understood this, the whole
Process were manifest to it: as the Eternal Birth is in it self, so is also the
Process with the Restoration after the Fall, and so likewise is the Process of
the Wisemen with their Philosophers Stone, there is not the least tittle of
difference betwixt them; for all things do Originally Arise out of the Eternal
Birth, and all must have one Restoration in one and the same manner.

73. Therefore if the Magus will seek Paradise in the Curse of the Earth, and
find it, then must he first walk in the Person of Christ; God must be manifest
in him, understand in the internal Man, that he may have the Magical Sight; He
must deal with his Purpose as the World did with Christ, and then he may find
Paradise, wherein is no Death.

74. But if he be not in this Birth of Restoration, and walks not himself in
the way wherein Christ walked upon the Earth, if he steps not forth into the
Will and Spirit of Christ, then let him give over and leave off his Seeking; he
finds nothing but Death, and the Curse of God; I tell him plainly and
faithfully, for the Pearl of which I write is Paradisical, which God does not
cast before Swine, but gives it to his Children for their play and delight.

75. And albeit much might be mentioned here, that even Reason might obtain
open eyes, yet it is not to be done; for the wicked would grow worse, and more
full of pride; therefore being he is not worthy of Paradise, and also cannot
enter thereinto, no Heavenly Jewel shall be given him; and therefore God does
hide it, and permits him to whom he does reveal it, to speak of it no otherwise
then Magically; therefore none attains it, unless he himself be a Magus in
Christ, unless Paradise be manifest in his internal Man, and then he may find,
if he be thereto born and chosen by God.

CHAP. VIII. Of the fiery Sulphurous Seething of the Earth, and how the Growth
is in the Earth; also of the Separation of the several Kinds of Creatures: An
open Gate for the Wise Seekers.
1. LEt the Reader but consider what before is written concerning the Center of
the Generation of all Essences, and then he may easily proceed here: All
whatsoever is Corporeal, let it be either Spirit or Body, consists in a
Sulphrous property; the Spirit in such a spiritual Property, and the Body out
of the Spirit in such a Corporeal property.

2. For all things are arisen from the Eternal Spirit, as a likeness of the
Eternal; the invisible Essence, which is God and the Eternity, has in its own
Desire introduced it self into a visible Essence, and manifested it self in a
Time, so that he is as a Life in the Time, and the Time is in him as it were
Dumb, senceless, mute.
dead; as a Master that makes his work with an Instrument, and the Instrument
is mute to the Master, and yet it is the Making* the Master only guides it;
even so are all things confined into limit, measure, and weight, according to
the Eternal Generation, and they run on in their Operation and Generation
according to the right and property of Eternity.

3. And God has appointed over this great Work only one Master and Protector,
which can alone manage the Work, which is his Governor.
Officer, viz. the Soul of the great World, wherein all things lie; [and] he
has appointed a Type of its likeness as the Reason over this Officer, which
represents unto the Officer what he is to do and make; and this is the
Understanding, viz. Gods own Dominion, wherewith he rules the Officer: Now the
Understanding shows unto the Officer what the property of each thing is, how
the Se Veration and Degrees proceed from each other; for all things are Stand
and lie.
contained in the Sulphurean Body, and Mercury is Sulphurs Life, and the Salt
is the Impression, that preserves the Corpus.
Body from falling to ashes, so that the Spirit is known in a palpable Essence.

4. The Property of Mercury is in Sulphur, as the boiling of a Water; Sulphur
is the Water wherein Mercury Seetheth, and produces continually Two Forms out
of the Water; viz. one Oleous, living, from the Liberty of the divine Powers
property; and one Mortal from the dissolution in the Fire in the Salnitral
Flagrat.

5. The Oily is in Stones and metals, herbs, trees, beasts and men; and the
Mortal [property] is in the Earth, in the Water, in the Fire, and Air; likewise
the Oleous property is in these four Forms (viz. in the Earth, Water, Fire, and
Air) as a Spirit or Life, and these four Properties are as a dead Body, in
which the Oil is a Light or Life, whence the Desire, viz. the Growth, arises,
as a Springing out of the dead Property, which is the Vegetative Life, a
Springing, budding and growing out of Death.

6. But now the Oily property could not be a Life if it were not in the Anguish
of Death; the Anguish makes it to pullulate or move, in that its Will is to
fly from, and press out of the Anguish, and forces it self eagerly forwards,
whence the growth arises: Thus must Death be a cause of the Life, that the
Life may be stirring [or active,] and therefore Mercury is the true moving Life.

7. In the Mortal property he is Evil, and is called the Life of Death, of
Hell, and the Anger of God; and in the Oily property he is Good from the
efficacy of the Meekness and Liberty of God; and he is the Officers Faber,
whereby the Officer distinguishes the Degrees in the Vegetative Life,
[severing] the living [Being] from the mortal, the heavenly Essentiality from
the dead or earthly, and orders it into two Kingdoms; viz. the Good in the
Oleous [property] into a heavenly [Being] viz. into a Light; and the Mortal
[part] into the Darkness.

8. These two Kingdoms are in continual Combat one with another, and there is
an uncessant wrestling in them; as water boiling on the fire; each boyleth in
its property, viz. the Oily in Joy and Meekness, and the Mortal in the Anguish
of Darkness, and yet one is the cause of the other; the Light is the Death, and
deadly destruction of he Darkness, viz. of the Anguish; for in the Light the
Anguish has no strength, but it changes it into the exultation of Joyfulness,
and the cause of Joy, else there would be no Joy; for the Meekness is like a
Stilness, but the Source of Anguish sublimeth it, and turns into a pleasant
laughter; also the Anguish, viz. the Darkness, is the death and destruction of
the Oily property; for if it gets the upper-hand in the oleous property, it
takes possession of the Or, Body.
Corpus, and turns the Oil into a poysonful Source, viz. into a dark Spirit, or
Body wholly earthly, as Adam was when he Imagined into the Evil.

9. And yet we do not acknowledge, that the Oleous property does take any
Poyson-Source into it self, but Mercury, viz. the Fire-Life, insinuates it self
into the Anguish, and poysoneth the Essence of Time, which the outward Mercury
it self makes in its own Desire, that is, he departs from the inward oleous
Essence, and then the Internal [Being] remains immovable in it self, and the
Essence and Spirit of Time do Se Ver from the Essence and Spirit of Eternity,
and yet there is no parting [or dividing,] but both Principles remain in One
Essence, whereas there be two Essences, but the one comprehends not the other,
as Eternity does not comprehend Time; for thus also Adam and Eve dyed; the
Souls -Mercury departed with its Imagination from the Essence of Eternity into
the Essence of Time, viz. into the Anguish source, and then the Essence of
Eternity lost its Leader, which Christ restored again With, or in.
by the divine Word, or Mercury; so that the Essence of Eternity, which in Adam
was forsaken of the Souls -Mercury, obtained the Life again.

10. And thus we know, that the Essence of Eternity lies hid in the Anxious
Mercury, as in the Fortress of Death; and our writing and teaching is to show
how a man may bring the poysonful Mercury with its Desire so far, as to enter
with its Desire again into the Essence of Eternity, viz. into the Enclosed, and
reassume the Essence of Eternity for a Body, and with the same Tincture the
Essence of Time, and reconcile them in One, that the whole Corpus of the inward
and outward World may be only One, that so there may be only one Will in the
Spirit, viz. a Love-Hunger, and this Hunger does then make unto it self only
one Essence, and then every Spirit eats of its [own] Essence or Body, so that
afterward no Evil Will can arise any more therein.

11. Thus we understand, that Joy and Sorrow, Love and Enmity, do originally
arise through Imagination and Longing; for in the Inclination [or earnest
Desire] toward God, viz. the Free Love, the Kingdom of loy does arise in the
midst of the Anguish of Death; and if the Desire departs our of the free Love
into the Anguish of Death, viz. into the Source of Darkness, then is the Desire
filled with the Source of Death, and so Mercury works effectually in the
Source of Death.

12. Thus we declare with ground, that there is nothing so bad, but there lies
a Good therein, but the Badness is not capable of the Good; also there lies in
the most poysonful Mercury the greatest Pearl and Jewel; if his poysonful Will
may be Or, If his Poyson-Will be brought into the moving Spirit of Love.
introduced into the same, then he himself manifests the Pearl; for he changes
himself; as is to be seen in the Earth, where Mercury seeks its Pearl, and
turns it in the Gross Stone, or stony grossness.
Oar to Gold, and to other Metals, according as the Sulphur is in each place.

13. For there is a continual Wrestling.
Combat in the Earth; the Eternity travels with Longing through Time to be
free from Vanity, and in its Longing it gives it self to Mercury, as to its
Life and Faber; and when Mercury obtains it in his Hunger, he becomes joyful,
and makes this free Luber Corporeal in him, and there arises Gold and Silver,
together with other Metals and good Herbs, all according to the powerful
Efficacy of each Place: As the Or, Sude.
Boiling is in each Place, so likewise is the Metal, all according to the
Property of the seven Forms of Nature; that Form which is chief in a place,
according to the same Property grows a Metal, also Herbs and Trees.

14. Here the Physicians must observe, that they learn distinctly to know what
kind of property is the strongest in each thing wherewith they would Cure; if
they do not know it, they will oftentimes give their Patients death: Also they
must know, that they are to understand, and very exactly to know the property
of the Patient, which of the properties among the seven Forms of Nature is the
Mercury in Sulphur; for such a Salt he also makes: Now if the Physician gives
him a contrary Salt, Mercury is only thereby the more vehemently enraged, and
made more venomous; but if he may obtain his own Salt according to his own
property (after which he hungereth,) then The Mercury.
he rejoices, and readily quitteth his Poyson-Source in Mars his Fire. But the
Right Physician has another Cure, he first brings his Mercury wherewith he
will Cure out of Deaths-Anguish into the Liberty; He may well Or, Such a
Physician has true skill to cure.
Cure, the other is dangerous and uncertain; if he does happen to cure, it is
by chance, and very unconstant, and cannot cure any disease fundamentally; for
the outward Mercury is shut up, it cannot reach no further then into the four
Elements, into the mortal-Essence: it is able to do nothing in the Sydereal
Body; but if it be turned and introduced into the Love, as is before mentioned,
then it Or, Seizes on.
touches the very Root and Ground, and renews it even to the Divine Power in
the Second Principle.

15. We have an excellent Resemblance of this in the blooming Earth on the
Herbs; for in the Earth Mercury is earthly and venomous, but when the Sun
tinctureth him, then he reaches after the Suns Power, after its Light, and
brings it into his Hungry fiery Mars desire, into his Salt, viz. into his
Corporeal Essence, viz. into Sulphur, which is his Mother, and wheels it about
with his Rotation in the Essence, as if he also boiled; and then the Liberty,
viz. the highest Power, reaches after its Property, viz. after the Solar
Property, and apprehends Mercury also along with it.

16. Now when Mercury tastes the Heavenly Being in it self, it grows exceeding
desirous after the Power of Love, and draws the same into its Desire,
whereupon it changes it self, and its Salt, so also its Mother, the Sulphur,
into a pleasant Source; and now if the Liberty be so introduced into a Moving
Life with Mercury, then it is very full of Joy, and springs up in its Joy, as
a light from the Fire, and puts forth through the Sulphur-spirit in the
Salt: Thus is the growing of the Root, and thence the Root geteth such a
pleasant smell and taste; for in the Original the Salts sharpness in the first
Impression from Saturn, is a sharpness of Deaths Anguish, and here it is turned
to a pleasant Power; for all taste in Herbs in Salt.

17. Thus understand us further Or, By.
about the Root in the Earth; when the inward Power of the Liberty in Mercury
his Property, which now is changed, does thus force it self forth to the
manifestation of the Deity, then the Suns Power does eagerly press toward the
divine Power, and inclines it self with great Desire unto the highest Heavenly
Tincture, and draws it with its Desire unto it, viz. out of the earthly Body
into a Solar: Thus the Sun draws the Power out of the Root in the Earth, and
the joyful Mercury ascends up along with it, and continually draws the Suns
Power from above into it self, and from beneath it draws its Mother, viz. the
Or, Sulphur.
Brimstone unto it self; and here all the seven Forms of Nature arise in
Joyfulness in the Combat, each will be uppermost; for so it is in the Taste,
viz. in the Generation of Nature; and what Form in Nature gets to be the
chiefest, according to the same Taste is the Salt in In Brimstone.
Sulphur, and such an Herb grows out of the Earth, let it be what it will;
albeit now every thing does spring from its Mother, yet all things have so
taken their Original, and do still so take it; for just so is the Right of
Eternity.

18. Now we are to consider of the Stalk, when the Herb or Sprig does look out
of the Earth, it comes up at first below with a white Form, then further more
upward with a brownish [colour] and above with a green color: This is now its
Signature, [shewing] what kind of Form is internally in the Essence, in the
Source; the white color of the Shoot, or Twig.
Branch is from the Liberty of the Love Lubet, and the brown is the earthly
[property] from Saturns Impression, and from the Wrath of Mars; and the green,
which does open it self above, is Mercuries in the form of Jupiter and Venus.

19. For Jupiter is Power, and Venus is Love-desire, which hasten toward the
Sun, as toward their likeness; and the Heaven, which is created out of the
midst of the Water, does put upon them its blue and green-coloured garment
according to the Stars might; for the Spirit of the Stars receives the new
Child also, and gives him its Spirit and Body, and rejoices therein: Now the
Forms are in Or, In their wrestling Combat.
Contest, and Mercury is the Faber and Separator, Saturn Impresseth, and
Jupiter is the pleasant Power in Sulphur, Mars is the Fire-Source, viz. the
Might in Sulphur, Venus is the Water, viz. the sweet Desire; Mercury is the
Life, Luna the Body, and Sol the Heart, viz. the Center whereunto all Forms
tend and press.

20. Thus the outward Sun presses into the Sun in the Herb, and the inward Sun
does press into the outward, and there is a mere pleasing relish and delight of
one Essence in another; Saturn makes sour, Jupiter makes a pleasant taste,
Mars makes bitter, by reason of his Anxious Nature, Venus makes Sweet,
Mercury distinguishes the Taste, Luna takes it into her Sack and hatcheth it;
for she is of an earthly and heavenly Property, and she gives it the Menstruum
wherein the Tincture lies.

21. Thus there is an Instigation in the Taste; each Form hasteneth unto the
sweet Water and the Sun; Jupiter is pleasant, and ascends up aloft with the
Love-desire in the sweet Sourcewater, wherein Mars rages, and thinks himself
to be Master in the House, seeing that he rules the Fire-spirit in Sulphur, at
which Mercury is dismayed, that Mars does so disquiet him, and Saturn makes
the Flagrat Corporeal according to his austere Impression, and these are the
knots upon the Stalk, and the Flagrat is Salnitral, according to the third Form
of Nature in the first Impression to the Spirit-life, viz. in the Anguish-form,
whence the Sulphur takes its Original, and in the Flagrat Mercury goes up in
the Salniter on the sides, and takes Venus also into it, viz. the Love-desire,
whence grow Twigs and Branches on the Stalk, Trunk, or Body, be they either of
Herbs, Trees, or Shrubs, and each Branch [or Sprig] is then like unto the whole
Or, Growth.
Plant.

22. But the Sun does continually by little and little deprive Mars of his
force, whereupon the Salniter extinguisheth, and Mars loses his bitter
Property; even then Jupiter and Venus do wholly yield themselves to the Sun in
the Moons Bag, or Sack.
Cabinet, and the outward Sun takes full possession of the inward; understand
the inward Sun is a Sulphur in Mercury, and is of the divine Powers Property,
from the Liberty of God, which imprinteth it self on all things, and gives
Life and Power unto all things. Now when this is done, that Jupiter and Venus
have given themselves to the puissance of the Sun, then Jupiter forces no more
upwards, but Mars and Mercury do continually more and more wind up the Stalk
from the Earth on high; Jupiter stays still above in the inward and outward
Sons Power, and there is the pleasant Conjunction with Time and Eternity, there
the Eternity does behold it self in an Type, or Resemblance.
Image in the Time.

23. And Paradise springs up [or opens,] for the Sulphur and the Salt in
the Sulphur are here transchanged in the Paradise, and the Paradisical Joy
puts it self forth in the Smell and Taste. This is now the Head or Knob of
the Blossoms, wherein the Corn grows; the lovely Smell is on one part
Paradisical, viz. from the divine Power, from the Liberty; and on the other
part Earthly, according to the outward Sun, and the outward World.

24. The heavenly Property sets forth its Signature with fair Colors of the
Leaves on the Blossoms, and the earthly [represents its Signature] by the green
Leaves [or Sprigs] about the Blossom; but seeing this Kingdom of the outward
World is only a time (in which the Curse is) and Adam could not stand in
Paradise, the Paradisical Property soon passes away with its Signature, and
changes it self into the Corn which grows in the Blossom; therein the
Property of the inward and outward Sun, viz. of the inward and outward Power,
is couched, each Property in its Principle; for God has cursed the Earth, and
therefore let none think that the outward is divine, only the divine Power
Penetrates and Tinctures the outward [Being,] for God said, The Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head; This is now effected after the Curse in
all things which approach near the Deity, wherein Mercury is a Poison; there
God bruiseth its Head with the inward and outward Sun, and takes away the
poysonful Might in the Anger.

25. O that you would but learn to understand, dear Sirs and Brethren,
wherewith you are to Cure; not with the Angry Mercury, which in many an Herb is
an evil Poison Source, but with the inward Mercury; if you would be called
Doctors and Masters, then you ought also to know how you may-change the outward
Mercury in the Sulphur into Love, that he may be delivered from the
Anguish-Source, and brought into a Joyfulness, viz. that the earthly [Being] be
turned into an Heavenly, the Death into Life; this is your Doctorship in the
Right Meaning, and not by the Officer of Reason only.

26. God has placed man above the Officer, and ordained him in the
Understanding unto his own Dominion; He has ability to change Nature, and to
turn the Evil into Good, provided that first he has changed himself, else he
cannot; so long as he is dead in the Understanding, so long he is the Servant
and Slave of the Officer; but when he is made alive in God, then the Officer is
his Servant.

27. Ye haughty Caps, let it be told you, Pride, and your own Honor, also the
earthly lust of the flesh, lies in your way, so that you are not Masters in
the Mysteries, but blind Children; you will not lay your hands upon the Coals,
but you take money from the poor and distressed, and give that unto many an
one, which had been far better he had never bought it, for which you must give
a severe and strict account.

28. Thus it is likewise with the Sulphurean Seething in the Earth with the
Metals, the Virtue or Efficacy.
Power is stronger in Metals then in the Herbs, the Tincture is more heavenly
then earthly if the Artist affords it his Help, then it changes it self, viz.
the Earthly into an Heavenly, which notwithstanding comes to pass in many
places without the Artists Ingeny; as we see, how Mercury in Sulphur
apprehends the Heavenly Tincture in its Boiling, whereby he changes his made
Essence (which he makes in the Sulphur) into Gold and Silver by the Power and
Efficacy of the Tincture, understand, by that part of the Heavenly Property;
for out of the Earth, or out of the mortified Property in the Salniter, no Gold
can be made, for there is no fixedness therein.

29. Now we are thus to consider of this Process of the Boiling in the Sulphur
in the Earth; where the Earth is in any place Sulphurous in the Saturnine
Property, wherein the Sun bears chief Rule, there is such a Boiling; the
outward Sun hungreth after the inward, which dwells in its own Principle in
the Center in Sulphur, and sets its desire upon Time; for the Time, viz. the
Creature, longs after Eternity, viz. after the Liberty, to be freed from
Vanity; as the Scripture says, That all Creatures do earnestly long with us to
be freed from Vanity.

30. Even here the Liberty gives it self into the Solar property into the
Time, and when Mercury tastes it, he becomes joyful, and turns his Wheel in
the Joy; then Saturn impresseth the Meekness, and Mars, which arises in the
Mercurial Wheel in the Impression, gives the Fire-Soul thereinto, so that
there is a forth-driving and growth; for the Liberty puts it self forth in
Mercury his Property, and Mercury continually severs Saturn and Mars from it,
for he will have a fair and pure Child to his Joy; he suffers Venus to remain
on the Child; for she is in property akind unto the Child: Copper is nighest
unto Gold by reason of the Materia, it wants only the Tincture, Mars holds him
too hard in Possession; if he may be got out, then it is Gold, which the Artist
does well understand.

31. After Venus Mars is akind unto Gold; for he has swallowed up Venus in his
Wrath, and uses her for his Body, else in his own peculiar Property he has no
Corporeal Essence, for he is only Wrath, which consumes; He makes him a Body
out of the water of Venus, which he devoureth, and Saturn makes it bodily [or
Corporeal] to him; therefore he does so defile his Iron with Rust, and that is
his Property, viz. to be a Devourer of his Body; but Venus is pleasant, and
makes a growing in him, he devoureth again whatsoever Venus property makes in
him; for Venus is Mars his food in the Saturnine property; therefore the Artist
is to consider what lies in Mars; if he has only the Solar Tincture, he
needs nothing else thereto, that he may but deprive Mars of his force, for
Mars has his toughness from Venus.

32. Mars in his own peculiar Property is only Spalt, and causes Hardness, as
the Fire does; but Saturn is the Impressure of all things; Venus needs only the
Tincture, and then she is perfect; but the Artist must rightly understand,
where the Possibility lies, viz. in Sulphur, where Saturn has the Sulphur in
his Belly, and Mercury shows its Color, there he is in the Or, mind.
Will, but cannot, for Saturn holds him too fast imprisoned; but if the Artist
gives him his helping hand, that he may but advance his Wheel, and give him his
Mothers food, which she has hid in the Center, then he grows strong, and
casts Saturn away, and manifests the Child; for so it is also in the Earth,
where Mercury is quick in his Mother, viz. in the Sulphur, that he is not
withheld, that he may only reach Venus in his Hunger for food, the Sun will
soon shine forth, for she beameth forth in Venus meekness; He dresseth [or
seeths] his food with his own Fire, he needs no Artist thereto, which the
Artist must well observe, for he has his Mars in Himself.

33. Now as the Boiling is in the Earth, so also it is above the Earth; when
the fruit grows out of the Earth, it is first sharp [astringent] and bitter,
also sour and unpleasant, as the Apple upon the Tree is so; for Saturn has at
first the Dominion, he attracteth it together, and Mercury forms it, and Mars
gives the Fire to Mercury, which Saturn receives into his cold Property, Venus
gives the Sap, and Luna takes all into her Body, for she is Mother, and
receives the Seed of all the Planets into her Menstruum, and hatcheth it;
Jupiter gives Power thereinto, and Sol is King therein, but at the first Sol is
weak; for the Materia is too earthly and cold. Now the whole Essence in its
Boiling lies in the Or, Womb.
Body of Sulphur, and in the Sulphur the Salnitral Flagrat makes a Salt in
Mars his Wheel according to each Property; for the Or, The Sulphur.
Brimstone turns into Salt, that is, into Taste, and in the same Taste there
is an Oil hid in the Center in the Sulphurous property, which [Oyl] arises
from the Free Love-Lubet, viz. out of Eternity, and manifests it self with an
external Essence in the Time, which is the manifestation of God.

34. Now in this same Oil is the Hunger or Love-desire after the Essence of
Time, viz. after the manifestation of the Deity; this Desire reaches in the
Essence of Time after its Property, viz. after the Sun, and the Suns property
reaches after the Oil in the Center of the Fruit, and fervently longs after
it, and gives it self freely into the Fruit, and sucketh the virtue into it
self, and gives it forth in its Joy, into the austere property of the Fruit,
and meekeneth and sweeteneth all with the Love, which it receives in the
Center in the Oil of the Liberty: Thus a Fruit, which at first is sour and
sharp, becomes very pleasant and sweet, that a man may eat it; and even thus is
the ripening of all Fruits.

35. Now by the Signature in the External you may see the inward Form, for the
Forms in the Salt, viz. in the Power, do show themselves externally.

36, There are commonly four Colors, as White, Yellow Red, and Green: Now
according to what color the fruit (as an Apple) is most signed, accordingly is
the Taste also in the Salt; as White with a clear thin skin, somewhat inclining
to dark gives sweetness, which is of Venus property; if the sweet Taste be
strong and powerful, then Jupiter is potent therein; but if it be weak and
fulsom, then the Moon is strong therein; but if it be hard, and of a brownish
color, then Mars is strong therein; but if the white color be of a grayish
Brown, then Saturn is strong therein: Venus Gives, or yields.
makes a White color, Mars Red, and bitter in the Taste; Mars makes Venus
her Color Light, Mercury gives a mixed color, and opens the green in Mars;
Jupiter inclines to blue, Saturn to black, almost gray; the Sun makes the
yellow color, and gives the right sweetness in the Salt, and casts forth
the pleasant smell, which takes its rise from Brimstone.
Sulphur: Saturn makes astringent [sharp] and sour, and each property
represents it self externally, as it is internally in the Dominion: so also by
the Form [or Signature] of the leaf, or branches.

37. Every root, as it is in the Earth, may be known by the signature, to what
it is good or profitable; even such a Form also has the Earth, and it is
discerned in the leaves and stalks, which Planet is Lord in the Property, much
more in the flower; for of what taste the Herb and Root is, even such an Hunger
is in it, and such a cure lies therein, for it has such a salt. The Physician
must know what kind of sickness is arisen in the Body, and in what Salt the
Loathing is Arisen in Mercury, that so He may not administer a further Loathing
[and Nausea] to his Patient; for if he gives him the Herb, in whose Property
Mercury has before received a Loathing, then he ministers Poison to him; so
that the poison in the Loathing of the Body does exceedingly inflame it self in
Mercury, unless that he burn that Herb to ashes, and give it him; then the
poison of the Loathing loses its Might; for these ashes are a Death to the
poison of the living Mercury.

38. This we find very effectually in the Magic; this also the Physician must
know, that all Sicknesses do arise from the Lothing in the form of Nature: As
when one Form in the Life is Superior, if then a contrary thing clean opposite
to its Property be per-force introduced into it, let it be either from the
Stars, or from the Elements, or from the seven Forms of Life, then it depriveth
this superior [or chiefest] Form (which is the Leader and Ruler of the Life) of
its strength and power in its Salt; then the Mercury of this Superior Form
begins effectually to work, that is, to hunger and loath; and if he gets not
his own peculiar Property, understand the bodily Forms, which is chief in the
Body among the seven Properties or Forms, then he enkindleth himself in his own
Poyson-Source according to his Or, Life's
vital Property, and does so forcibly strive so long, till he becomes fiery,
and then he awaketh his own Mars, and his own Saturn, which Impress him, and
consume the flesh of the Body in the Poyson-fire, and wholly consume the Oil of
Light; even then the Life's Light goes out, and it is past recovery.

39. But if the Form of Life, Or, whereby.
wherein Mercury is inflamed in the Or, Nausea.
Loathing in the Anguish and Poyson-Source, may obtain that Property into its
Hunger, of which the Spirit and Body is chief, then he obtains his own
natural food, of which he lives, and does again rejoice, and puts away the
Or, Loathing.
Nauseate, and then the Nauseate dissipateth [or dissolveth,] and is spewed
out; but the Physician must have a care, whether or no that thing which he will
minister to his Patient be in its Property strong also in the same Essence,
whence the Nauseate is arisen in the Body.

40. As for example; A jovial man receives a Nauseate for [or Loathing] from
the Lunar property; now if the Physician knew that he had so gotten his
Nauseate, and prepared him a jovial Cure according to the Hunger of his own
Spirit or Mercury, this now would be right; but if the Moons property be strong
in the Salt, which he would administer for the Nauseate, then he gives him a
Nauseate; but if the jovial Cure be free from the Moon, then the jovial Mercury
receives his own food with great Desire, and quitteth the Nauseate: And thus
it is likewise with Diseases which arise in the Salniter, viz. from fear or
frighting; thereto belongs also such a Flagrat as the first was, and then
there is a present Cure, or such an Herb, wherein the Salniter lies in such a
property as it lies in that man.

41. I know, and it is shown me, that the Sophister will cavil at me, because I
write, that the divine Power is in the Fruit, that Gods Power does Unite, or
give in.
appropriate it self into the Generation of Nature: But hear, my dear Friend,
become seeing, I ask thee, How was Paradise in this World? Was it also manifest
in Nature? Was it also in the Fruit? Was it in the World, or without the World?
Did Paradise stand in Gods Power, or in the Elements? Was the Power of God
manifest in the World, or hidden? Or what is the Curse of the Earth? and the
putting of Adam and Eve out of Paradise? Then tell me; Does not God dwell also
in Time? Is not God all in All? It is written, Am not I he who fills all
things? Also, Thine is the Kingdom, the Power and Glory, from Eternity unto
Eternity.

42. Here consider thy self, and leave me uncensured: I do not say, that the
Nature is God, much less the fruit proceeding from the Earth; but I say, God
gives Power to every life, be it good or bad, unto each thing according to its
Desire, for he Himself is All; and yet he is not called God according to every
Being, but according to the Light wherewith he dwells in Himself, and shines
with his Power through all his Beings; He gives in his Power to all his Beings
and Works, and each thing receives his Power according to its Property; one
takes Darkness, the other Light; each Hunger desires its Property, and yet
the whole Essence [or Being] is all Gods, be it Evil or Good, for from him and
through him are all things, what is not of his Love, that is of his Anger.
Paradise is yet in the World, but man is not therein, unless he be born again
of God; then as to that new Regeneration he is therein, and not with the Adam
of the four Elements. O that we would but once learn to know our selves, and
even understand it by the created Essence [or Being.]

43. Lo ^ in Saturn there lies Gold shut up in a very disesteemed and
contemptible form and manner, which indeed resembles no Metal; and though it be
cast into the fire and melted, yet a man shall have nothing, save a
contemptible matter devoyd of any form of Virtue, until the Artist takes it in
hand, and uses the right Process about it, and then it is manifest what was
therein.

44. So likewise God dwells in all things, and the thing knows nothing of
God, he likewise is not manifest to the thing, and yet it receives Power from
him, but it receives the Power according to its property from him, either from
his Love, or from his Wrath, and from which it receives, so it has its Or, so
it is signed, marked.
Signature externally, and the Good is also in it, but as it were wholly shut
up [or hidden] to the Iniquity [or Evil;] an example whereof you have on
Bushes, and other thorny and pricking Briars, out of which notwithstanding a
fair well smelling Blossom grows, and there lie two Properties therein, viz.
a pleasant and unpleasant, which overcomes, that shapeth [formeth or marketh]
the fruit.

45. Thus also it is with man, he was created a fair Blossom and Fruit of
Paradise, but the Devil raised up in him his thorny property by the Serpent,
understand the Center, the property of the wrathful Nature, which in his
Paradisical Source was not manifest in him; but when his Hunger entered into
the thorny false property of the Serpent, viz into Death, then the property of
Death, and the false Serpent in the Devils Desire, pressed into his Hunger, and
filled Soul and Body, so that the Hunger of the false Serpent began effectually
to work in him, and Death awaked in him, and then Paradise hid it self in him;
for Paradise entered into it self, and the poison of the Serpent in Deaths
property dwelt also in it self; here was now the Enmity; then said God to him,
The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpeats head, and thou shall sting the
Heel with Deaths poison.

46. Understand the Paradisical Image shut up, and captivated in the wrathful
Death, in which the Word of the Deity, viz. the divine Mercury ruled and
wrought, did disappear; as the Gold is disappeared in Saturn, so that nothing
is seen but a contemptible matter, until the right Artist sets upon it, and
again awaken the Mercury in the enclosed Gold, and then the dead enclosed Body
of the Gold does again revive in Saturn; for Mercury is its Life, who must be
introduced into it again, and then the dead Body of the Gold Or, Puts it self
forth, text. glanceth forth.
appears, and overcomes the gross Saturn, wherein it lay shut up, and
changes its mean contemptible old Body into a fair glorious golden Body.

47. Thus likewise it is with Man; He lies now shut up after his Fall in a
gross deformed, beastial dead Image; He is not like an Angel, much less like
unto Paradise; He is as the gross Oar in Saturn, wherein the Gold is coucht and
shut up; His Paradisical Image is in him, as if it were not, and it is also not
manifest, the outward Body is a stinking Carcass, while it yet lives in the
Poison: He is a bad thorny Bush, whence notwithstanding fair Rose-buds may
bloom forth, and grow out of the Thorns, and manifest that which lies hidden,
and shut up in the wrathful poysonful Mercury, so long till the Artist who has
made him take him in hand, and brings the living Mercury into his Gold or
Paradisical Image disappeared and shut up in Death; so that the Enclosed Image,
which was created out of the divine Meekness and Love-essentiality, may again
bud and spring forth in the divine Mercury, viz. in the Word of the Deity,
which entered into the Humanity shut up [and closed in the Death and Curse.]

48. And then the divine Mercury changes the wrathful Mercury into its
property, and Christ is born, who bruiseth the Head of the Serpent, viz. of the
Poison and Death in the Anger of God, understand the might of wrathful Death,
and a new Man arises in Holiness and Righteousness, which lives before God,
[and his divine Image] appears and puts forth its Luster as the hidden Gold
out of the earthly property, and hereby it is clearly signified to the Artist
chosen of God how he shall seek; no otherwise then as he has sought and found
himself in the property of the pure Gold, and so likewise is this Process, and
not a whit otherwise; for Man and the Earth with its Secrets lie shut up in the
like [or same] Curse and Death, and need one and the same Restitution.

49. But we tell the Seeker, and sincerely and faithfully warn him as he loves
his Temporal and Eternal Welfare, That he do not first set upon this way to try
the Earth, and restore that which is shut up [in Death,] unless he himself be
before born again through the Divine Mercury out of the Curse and Death, and
have the Or, Has the Newbirth in perfect knowledge.
full knowledge of the Divine Regeneration, else all what he does is to no
purpose, no learning [or studying] avails; for that which he seeks, lies
shut in the Curse, in Death, in the Anger of God; if he will make it alive, and
bring it into its First Life, then that Life must be before manifest in him, and
then he may say to the Mountain, Get thee hence, and be cast into the Sea; and
to the Fig Tree, No fruit grow on thee henceforth, and it shall come to pass;
for if the divine Mercury lives, and is manifest in the Spirit, then when the
Spirit of the Souls Will imagines into any thing, Mercury also goes along
with it in the Imagination, and enkindleth the Mercury fast apprehended in
Death, viz. the Similitude of God; or the Manifestation, wherewith the living
God has made himself manifest.

50. I know and see, that the Mocker in the Devils Vizard will yet bring my
writing into a misapprehension, and make me more dark and doubtful, because I
write of the inward and outward Mercury, and understand by the inward the Word
of God, or the Divine Voice, viz. the Manifestation of the Eternity of the
Abyss, and by the outward [Mercury] I understand the Officer in Nature, viz.
the Instrument, which the inward, living, powerful Word or divine Voice uses,
wherewith it Or, Makes.
forms and works. Now the Sophister will falsely interpret it, and say,
That I mix them both together, making no difference, and Or, Take.
hold Nature for God, as Babel has already done unto me: But I bid him view my
words well, and learn to understand them aright; for I speak sometimes from the
Heavenly Mercury, and see that only, and then presently I name the Instrument
of the Heavenly, therefore let him have regard unto the sense; I write not
Heathenishly, but Theosophically, from a higher Ground then the outward Faber
is, and then also from the same.

CHAP. IX. Of the Signature, showing how the Internal does Sign the External.
1. THe whole outward visible World with all its Being is a Signature, or
Figure of the inward spiritual World; whatsoever is Internally, and howsoever
its operation is, so likewise it has its Character externally; like as the
Spirit of each Creature does set forth and manifest the internal Form of its
Birth In* or with.
by its Body, so does the Eternal Being also.

2. The Being of all Beings is a wrestling Power; for the Kingdom of God
consists in Power, and also the outward World, and it stands especially in
seven Properties or Forms, where the one does cause and make the other, and
none of them is the first or last, but it is the Eternal Band, therefore God
has appointed six days for man to work, and the seventh Day is the Perfection
wherein the six do rest, it is the Center unto which the Desire of the fix Days
do tend, therefore God calls it the Sabbath or Resting Day, for therein the
six Forms of the working Power do rest; it is the Divine Voyco, or Harmony.
Sound in the Power, or the Kingdom of Joy, wherein all the other Forms are
manifest; for it is the formed Word, or divine Corporality, by which all things
are generated and come forth to a Or, Essence.
Being.

3. This formed Word has manifested it self with the motion of all Forms In,
or by.
with this visible World, as with a visible likeness, so that the spiritual
Being might be manifest in a Corporeal Comprehensive Essence; as the Desire of
the inward Forms has made it self external, and the internal Being is in the
external; the internal holds the external before it as Glass, wherein it
beholds it self in the property of the generation of all Forms, the external
is its Signature.

4. Thus every thing which is generated out of the internal has its Signature;
the Superior Form, which is chief in the Spirit of the working in the Power,
does most especially sign the Body, and the other Forms hang unto it; as is to
be seen in all living Creatures, in the shape and form of the Body, and in the
behavior and deportment, also in the sound, voice, and speech; and likewise in
Trees and Herbs, in Stones and Metals, all according as the wrestling is in the
power of the Spirit; so is the Figure of the Body represented, and so likewise
is its Will, so long as it so boyleth in the Life-spirit.

5. But if the Artist takes it in hand with the true Mercury, then he may Turn
the weakest Form to be uppermost, and the strongest nethermost, and then the
Spirit obtains another Will, according to the most Superior Form; that which
before must be Servant, becomes now Lord and Master in the seven Forms; as
Christ said unto the sick, Arise, thy faith has made thee whole, and they
arose: And thus likewise it is here, each Form hungereth after the Center, and
the Center is the Voice of Life, viz. the Mercury, the same is the Faber or
Former of the Power; if this Voice gives it self in to the Hunger of the
meanest Form in the strong Text, wresting Power.
Combat, then it does lift up its property (understand the property of that
Form) and thus its Desire or Faith has saved it, for in the Desire Mercury
does lift up [or sublime] it self, and thus it was in Christ's Patients.

7. Sickness had taken possession of them, and the Poison of Death had gotten
the upper-hand in Mercury; but now the Form of Life in the Center did set its
Hunger as a famished and mean property after the Liberty to be freed from the
Abomination; but being the Mercury was revived in Christ in the divine
Property, therefore the weak Hunger entered into Christ's strong Hunger after
the Salvation of Man, and so the weak Hunger received the strong in the Power,
and then the divine Voice in Christ said, Arise, lift up thy self, thy Faith,
that is, thy Desire which thou have introduced into me, has saved thee.

8. Thus the Life prevails over the Death, the Good over the Evil; and on the
contrary, the Evil over the Good, as came to pass in Lucifer and Adam, and
still daily comes to pass: and thus every thing is Signed; that Form which is
chief receives the Taste, and also the Sound in Mercury, and Or, Shapeth.
figureth the Body after its property; the other Forms do hang unto it as
cohelpers, and do also give their Signature thereto, but very weakly.

9. There are especially seven Forms in Nature, both in the eternal and
external Nature, for the External proceed from the Eternal: The ancient
Philosophers have given Names unto the seven Planets according to the seven
Forms of Nature; but they have understood thereby for another thing, not only
the seven Stars, but the sevenfold Properties in the Generation of all
Essences; there is not any thing in the Being of all Beings, but it has the
seven Properties in it; for they are the Wheel of the Center, the cause of
Sulphur, in which Mercury makes the boiling in the Anguish-Source.

10. The seven Forms are these; viz. the Desire of the Impression is called
Saturn, into which the free Lubet of Eternity gives it self; this in the
Impression is called Jupiter, by reason of its pleasant commendable Virtue; for
the Saturnine Power does enclose, and makes hard, cold, and dark, and causes
the Sulphur, viz. the vital Spirit, understand the moving vital Spirit, viz.
the natural; and the Free Lubet makes the Impression Long to be freed from the
dark astringent Hardness, and it is very rightly called Jupiter, being a desire
of the Or, Original.
Understanding, which opens the Darkness, and manifests another Will therein.

11. In these two Properties is pourtrayed and exactly deciphered Gods Kingdom,
viz. the Original, and also the Kingdom of Gods Anger, viz. the dark Abyss,
which is a cause of the motion in Saturn, viz. in the Impression; the
Impression, viz. Saturn, makes the Nothing, viz. the free Lubet moveable and
sensible, and also opposite; for it causes it to be Essence, and Jupiter is
the sensible Power proceeding from the free Lubet to manifestation out of the
Nothing into Something, in the Impression of Saturn, and they are two
Properties in the manifestation of God according to Love and Anger, viz. a
model of the Eternal Form, and are as a wrestling Combat, viz. an opposite
Desire against each other; one makes Good, the other Evil, and yet it is all
Good; only if we will speak of the Anguish-Source, and then also of the joyful
Source, then we must distinguish, that the cause of each Source may be
understood.

12. The third Form is called Mars, which is the fiery property in the
Impression of Saturn, where the Impression introduces it self into great
Anguish, viz. into a great Hunger; it is the Painfulness, or the cause of
feeling, also the cause of the fire and consuming, also of Enmity and
Malignity; but in Jupiter, viz. in the free Lubet, in the Nothing, it causes
the fiery Love desire, that the Liberty, viz. the Nothing, is desirous, and
introduces it self into Sensibility, viz. into the Kingdom of Joy; in the
Darkness it is a Devil, viz. Gods Wrath, and in the Light it is an Angel of
Joy, understand such a property; for when this Source became dark in Lucifer,
he was called a Devil, but while he was in the Light he was an Angel; and thus
also it is to be understood in Man.

13. The fourth Property or Form is called Sol, viz. the Light of Nature, which
has its Original in the Liberty, viz. in the Nothing, but without Splendour,
and gives it self in with the Lubet into the Desire of the Impression of
Saturn, even unto the wrathful or fiery property of Mars, and there the free
Lubet, which has sharpened it self in the Impression, in Mars his property, in
the consuming Anguish, and in the Hardness of Saturn, does display, or
powerfully put it self forth in Jupiter, as a sharpness of the Liberty, and an
Original of the Nothing, and also of the Perceivancy, or Sensation.
Sense, and the Or, Breaking forth.
effluence from Mars his Heat and Anguish; and from Saturns Hardness is the
shining of the Light in Nature, which gives the Understanding in Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mars, viz. a Spirit, which knows what it self is in its
properties, which hinders or prevails against the Wrath, and brings it out
of the Anguish, out of Mars his property into Jupiters, viz. out of the Anguish
into a Love-desire.

14. In these four Forms the Spirits Birth does consist, viz. the true Spirit
both in the inward and outward Being, viz. the Spirit of Power in the Essence,
and the Essence or Corporality of this Spirit is Sulphur.

15. Ye Rabbis and Masters! that you could but understand, how faithfully that
is given and revealed unto you, which your Predecestors have intended and aimed
at, wherein you have been a long time blind, the cause whereof is your Pride;
This God, the most high Understanding, does set before you by mean, and
heretofore ungrounded Instruments, which he himself has grounded, if that you
would yet once see, and escape the Tormenting Source.

16. The fist Form is Venus, the beginning of all Corporality, viz. of the
Water, which arises in the Desire of Jupiter and Mars, viz. in the Love desire
out of the Liberty, and out of Nature, viz. out of the Impressions Desire in
Saturn, in Mars, in the Great Anguish, to be freed from the Anguish, and
carries two Forms in the Desire of his Property, viz. a fiery from Mars, and a
watery [property] from Jupiter, understand an Heavenly and Earthly Desire; the
Heavenly arises from the Heavenly Impression of the Union [or free Effluence]
of the Deity in Nature to its own manifestation, and the Earthly arises from
the Impression of the Darkness in Mars, viz. in the wrathful Fires property;
therefore the Essence of this Desire consists in two things, viz. in the Water
from the Original of the Liberty, and in Sulphur from the Original of Nature
according to the Impression.

17. The outward Similitude of the Heavenly [Being] is Water and Oil;
understand, according to the Sun it is Water, and according to Jupiter it is
Oil, and according to the hard Impression of Saturn after the Heavenly Being,
according to Mars, it is Copper, and according to Sol Gold, and according to
the earthly Impression, according to the property of the Darkness, it is in
Sulphur Grit, Gravel and Sand; according to Mars his property a Cause of all
Stones; for all Stones are Sulphur from the powerful Predomination of Saturn
and Mars in the property of Venus according to the dark Impression, understand
according to the earthly part.

18. O ye dear Wisemen, if you did but know what lies in Venus, you would not
so sumptuously Adorn your Roofs: The Potentate often loses his life for the
servants sake, and he puts the Master upon his Roof, therefore he is blind;
this his false Venus-desire does cause in him, that he forms it in Saturn and
Mars, and brings it forth in Sol; if he formed his Venus-desire in Jupiter,
then he might rule over the fiery Mars which lies in Venus, and has put his
Coat upon Venus in Sulphur.

19. Thus Mars does clothe all his Servants which love him, and Saturn with his
Garment, that they only find the Copper of Venus, and not its Gold in the
Copper; the spirit of the Seeker enters into Sol, viz. into Pride, and
supposes that he has Venus, but he has Saturn, viz. Covetousness; if he went
forth in the Water, viz. in the Resigned Humility of Venus, the Stone of the
Wisemen would be revealed unto him.

20. The sixth Form is Mercury, viz. the Life and Separation, or the Form in the
Love, and in the Anguish; In Saturn and Mars, on the one part he is earthly
according to the hard Impression, where his Motion and Hunger is a pricking,
adverse, and (according to the fire) a bitter pain and woe; and according to
the Water in the earthly Suphur, viz. in the Mortification, a Poyson-Source.

21. And according to the other part, according to the Lubet of the Liberty, he
is the pleasant property of Joy in Jupiter and Venus, also of springing and
growing, and according to the Impression of the Heavenly Saturn, and according
to Mars in the Love-desire, he is the Sound in the Spirit, understand, the
Separator of the Sound, viz. of the Tone; also of all pronunciations of
Speeches, and all several Cries and Notes; all whatsoever sounds is
distinguished by his Might, Venus and Saturn carry his Lute, and he is the
Lutanist, he Or, Plays.
strikes upon Venus and Saturn, and Mars gives him the Sound from the Fire,
and thus Jupiter rejoyeeth in Sol.

22. Here lies the Pearl, dear Brethren; Mercury makes the Understanding in
Jupiter, for he Or, Distinguishes the senses.
severizeth the thoughts, and makes them act and move; He takes the
infiniteness of the thoughts into his Desire, and makes them essential; this
he does in Sulphur, and his Essence is the manifold Power of the Smell and
Taste, and Saturn gives his sharpness thereinto, so that it is Salt.

23. But I understand here the vertual Salt in the Vegetable Life: Saturn
makes the Common Salt in the Water; Viz. the mercury.
He is an Heavenly and an earthly Labourer, and labors in each Form
according to the property of the Form; as it is written, with the holy thou art
holy, and with the perverse thou art perverse. In the holy Angels the Heavenly
Mercury is holy and divine, and in the Devils he is the Poison and Wrath of the
Eternal Nature according to the dark Impressions property, and so forth through
all things, as the property of each thing is, so is its Mercury, viz, its Life;
in the Angels he is the Hymn of Gods Praise, and in the Devils he is the
Cursing and Awakening of the opposite Will of the bitter poysonful Enmity.

24. Thus likewise it is to be understood in men and all Creatures, in all
whatsoever does live and move; for the outward Mercury is the outward Word in
the outward World: Viz. mercury.
He is the outward Verbum, and Saturn with the Impression is his Fiat, which
makes his Word Corporeal; and in the inward Kingdom of the divine Power he is
the Eternal Word of the Father, whereby he has made all things in the outward
[Principle,] understand, with the Instrument of the outward Mercury.

25. The outward Mercury is the Temporal Word, the Expressed Word; and the
inward [Mercury] is the Eternal Word, the Speaking Word; the inward Word
dwells in the outward, and makes through the outward all outward things; and
with the inward, inward things: The inward Mercury is the Life of the Deity,
and all divine Creatures; and the outward Mercury is the Life of the outward
World, and all external Corporality in men and beasts, in Vegetables and
Animals, and makes a peculiar Principle, viz. a likeness of the divine World,
and this is the manifestation of the divine Wisdom.

26. The seventh Form is called Luna, the Amassed Essence; what Mercury has
comprised in Sulphur, that is a Corporeal or Substantial Hunger of all Forms;
the Property of all the six Forms does lie therein, and it is as a Corporeal
Being of all the rest; this Property is as a Wife of all the other Forms; for
the other Forms do all cast their Desire through Sol into Luna; for in Sol they
are spiritual, and in Luna Corporeal; therefore the Moon assumeth to it the
Sunshine, and shines from the Sun; whatsoever the Sun is, and makes in the
Spirit-life in it self, the same Luna is and makes Corporeal in it self.

27. It is Heavenly and Earthly, and rules the Vegetative Life; it has the
Menstruum, viz. the Matrix of Venus in it; all whatsoever is Corporeal does
Thicken, cu^ale.
congeal in its property; Saturn is its Fiat, and Mercury is its Husband, which
does Impregnate it, and Mars is its Vegetable Soul, and the Sun is its Center
in the Hunger, and yet not wholly in the Property; for it receives only the
white color from the Sun, not the yellow, or the red, viz. the majestatical;
therefore in its property lies Silver in Metals, and in Sol his property Gold;
but being Sol is a Spirit without Essence, thereupon Saturn holds the Suns
Corporeal Essence in himself to lodge in; for he is the Fiat of the Sun; he
keeps it shut up in his dark Cabinet, and does only preserve and keep it; for
it is not his own Essence, until the Sun sends him his Faber Mercury, to whom
he gives it, and to none else.

28. Observe this, ye Wisemen! It is no fiction or fallacy; let the Artist but
understand us aright; he must bring the Jewel shut up in Saturn into the Mother
of Generation, viz. into Sulphur, and take the Faber, and divide all Forms, and
separate the variety of Hungers, which the Faber himself does, when the Artist
brings the work into the first Mother, viz. into Sulphur; but he must first
baptize the froward Child with the Philosophical Baptism, lest he makes a
Bastard of Sol; and then let him lead him into the Desert, and try whether
mercury will eat Manna in the Desert after the Baptism; or whether he will make
Bread of Stones; or whether he will aspire aloft as an haughty Spirit, and
precipitate himself from the Temple; or whether he will worship Saturn, in whom
the Devil sits hidden: This the Artist must observe; whether mercury the wicked
poysonful Child receives the Baptism; whether he can feed of Gods Bread or no.

29. If he now does eat, and stand out in the Temptation, then will the Angels
appear unto him after forty days, and then let him go out of the Desert, and
eat his own food, and so the Artist is ready and fit for his work; if not, then
let him by all means leave it, and as yet account himself unworthy thereunto.

30. He must have the understanding of the Generation of Nature, else all his
labor and pains is to no purpose, except the Grace of the most High has
bestowed upon him some Particular, that so he is able to Tincture Venus and
Mars, which is the shortest [and most ready way] if God shows him such an Herb,
wherein the Tincture lies.

31. The Lunar Body of metals lies in the Sude of the Earth, in Sulphur and
Mercury, covered internally with the Coat of Venus, and clothed externally
with the Cloak of Saturn, as we see plainly, and is a degree more external then
the Solar Body: Next after Luna, Jupiters Body is also a degree more external;
next Jupiter, the Body of Venus is a degree also more external; but Venus is a
fly Bird, she has also the inward Solar Body, she takes Mars his Coat upon
her, and hides her self in Saturns Cabinet, but she is manifest, and not hidden.

32. Next Venus, Mars is likewise a degree more external, and nearer to
earthliness; and next Mars, Mercury's Body is a particula of all the rest; on
one part most nigh to the earthly Corporality, and on the other part nearest
the Heavenly; and next Mercury, Luna is on the earthly part wholly earthly, and
on the heavenly part wholly heavenly; it It gives a cursing or a blessing
Aspect.
carries an earthly and heavenly face toward all things; to the Evil it is
Evil, and to the Good it is Good; to a pleasant Creature it gives its best in
the Taste, and to a bad creature it gives the Curse of the corrupted Earth.

33. Now in all this, as the Property of each thing is internally, so it has
externally its Signature, both in Animals and Vegetables, and this you shall
see in an Herb, so likewise in Trees and Beasts, and in men also.

34. If the Saturnine property be predominant, and chief in a thing, then it is
of a black, grayish color, hard and spare, sharp, sour, or salt in taste; it
gets a long lean Stalk, or Blossom.
body, gray Or, Of whitish buds in vegetables.
in the eyes, of a dark blue, of a very slender body, but of a hard touch,
albeit the property of Saturn is very seldom alone master in a thing; for he
soon awakeneth Mars with his hard Impression, who makes his property benty and
crooked, full of knots, and hinders the body from growing high, but is full
of branches, and rugged, as is to be seen in Oak-shrubs, and the like Trees.

35. But if Venus be next In Conjunction with Saturn.
Saturn in any place in the Sude of the Earth, then the Sude in the Sulphur of
Saturn causes a tall, strong body; for it gives its sweetness into Saturns
Impression, whereby Saturn becomes strong and lusty, and if Venus be not
hindered by Mars, it grows a great, tall, slender Tree, Herb, Beast, or Man, or
what ever it be.

36. But if Jupiter be next him in the property of Venus, so that Jupiter is
stronger in Saturn then Venus, and Mars beneath Venus, then it falls out to be
a very excellent fair Body, full of virtue and power, also of a good taste; its
eyes are blue, and somewhat whitish, of a meek property, but very potent; if it
fall out, that Mercury is between Venus and Jupiter, and Mars undermost, then
is this property in Saturn graduated in the Highest degree with all power and
virtue, in words and works, with great understanding.

37. If it be in Herbs, then they are long of a middle sized stature or stalk,
of a very curious form, fair blossoms, white, or blue; but if the Sun also
casts the influence of his property into it, then does its color by reason
of the Sun incline to yellow; and if Mars hinders not, then is the Universal
very Sovereign in the Thing, be it either a man, or other creature, or an Herb
of the Earth: This let the Magus well observe, it withstandeth all malignity,
and false influences and assaults from the Spirits, what ever they be, so far
as a man himself be not false and wicked, and inclines his desire unto the
Devil, as Adam did, in whom also the Universal was wholly complete.

38. With these Herbs a man may cure, and heal without any art of the Artist;
but they are rarely and seldom found, yea not one amongst many sees them, for
they are nigh unto Paradise: The Curse of God hides the eyesight of the
wicked, that it does not see, although they should stand before his eyes; yet
in such a Conjunction of the Planets they are manifest and may not be hid;
therefore there lies a great Secret in many an Herb and Beast, if the Artist
knew it, and had the true skill to use it; the whole Magia lies therein; but I
am bidden to be silent by reason of the wicked, who is not worthy of it, and is
justly plagued with the Plague wherewith he plagueth other honest people, and
tumbleth himself in the mire.

39. But if Mars in his property be next Saturn, and Mercury casts an
opposite Aspect, and the Power of Venus be under Mars, and Jupiter under the
property of Venus, then out of this Property all is corrupted and poisoned; a
poysonful Herb, Tree, Beast, or whatsoever it be, if it falls into the
corrupt humane Property, then it is fitted and prone to Evil, but if the Moon
brings its powerful Influence thereinto, then is the false Magia ready in the
Lunar Menstruum, and Witchcraft is manifest, of which I must here also be
silent, and will only show the Signature.

40. In an Herb, if the blossom be somewhat reddish, and writhen, or streekt,
and inclined to white by the red, then is the power of Venus there, which
makes resistance therein; but if it be only reddish, and of dark wriths or
streeks, with a rough peel or skin on the stalk, branch and leaf, then does the
Basilisk lodge there.

41. For Mars makes it rugged, and Mercury is poysonful therein, which gives
a streekt color, and Mars the red, and Saturn the dark, which is a Pestilence
in the Lunar Menstruum, but unto the Artist it is an Herb against the
Pestilence; if he takes the Poison from Mercury, and gives him Venus and
Jupiter for food, then Mars brings forth the Vegetable Soul in Sol, and
turns his wrathful fire into a Love-fire, which the Artist must know, if he
will be called a Doctor.

42. This Property likewise signeth the living Creatures both in their voice
and visage; it gives a gross dull sound, somewhat inclining to a shrill voice
by reason of Mars, soothing, flattering, and very false, lying, commonly red
pimples [or streams] in the eyes, or blinking, and rouling unsteady eyes: In
Herbs this Property likewise yields a taste very loathsome, whence in man's
life, viz. in Mercury, if it takes it down, a stirring boiling poison does
arise, which does darken and obscure the life.

43. The Physician must have a care of the Herbs of this Property; they are not
to be taken into the body, but they are poysonful, of what Name soever they be;
for there often happens such a Conjunction of the Planets, which does sometimes
so prepare an Herb, which is good if it be subject to Saturn and Mars: So
likewise it falls out sometimes, that an Evil Herb by reason of a good
Conjunction, if in its beginning stands in the Menstruum, may be freed from the
malignity, which is to be known by the Signature; therefore the Physician, who
understands the Signature, may best of all gather the Herbs himself.

44. But if Mars be next Saturn, and Mercury very weak, and Jupiter also under
Mars in the Property, and Venus casts an opposite Aspect or Dissent with its
Desire, then it is good; for Jupiter and Venus do change the Wrath of Mars into
Joy, which produces hot wholesome severain Herbs, which are to be used in all
hot Diseases and Hurts; the Herb is rough, and somewhat pricky, the leaves on
the branches; so likewise the stalk is fine thin, according to the nature of
Venus, but the virtue and power is of Mars and Jupiter, well mixed and
Tempered, commonly with brownish blossoms, forcing forth in the Property, and
that because Mars is strong therein with his Wrath; but being his Wrath is
changed by Jupiter and Venus into a pleasant Property, the Wrath becomes a
Desire of Joy.

45. The Physician must not give Saturn without Mars in hot Diseases, not Cold
without Heat, else he enkindleth Mars in the Wrath, Text, that he stireth, etc.
and stirs up Mercury in the hard Impression in the property of Death; Mars
belongs to the cure of every Mars-like Sickness, which is of Heat, and
pricking pangs: But let the Physician know, that he must first correct and
qualify Mars, which he intends to minister with Jupiter and Venus, that Mars
his Wrath may be changed into Joy, and then he will also change the Sickness in
the body into Joy, Cold is quite contrary to it.

46. If the Physician administreth Saturn only and alone to a martial Disease
or Hurt, then Mars is dismayed with Death, and falls down with his force and
strength into Deaths property; and now being he is the fire in the body, the
Life's fire becomes thereupon deadly in the Elemental property; for he soon
awakeneth Mercury in the property of Cold; but yet the Physician must have a
care that he administreth not in an hot Disease the raw undigested hot Mars, in
which Mercury is wholly inflamed and burning; for he enkindleth the fire more
vehemently in the body; he must first mollify Mars and Mercury, and put
Sublime them.
them into Joy, and then it is right and good.

47. The hotter an Herb is, the better it is hereunto; yet its wrathful Fire
must be changed into Love, and then he can also change the Wrath in the Body
into Joy; all according as the property of the disease is, that the disease be
able to bear it; for unto a weak fire in the body, which is tired and
languished by reason of the Heat, and rather inclines to Cold, viz. to the
poison of Mercury, where the life is in danger, there belongs a Cure with a
fine subtle Heat, wherein Venus is strong, and Mars very tender and mild by
reason of Venus her Power; Jupiter need not be strong there, lest he make Mars
and Mercury too strong, so that the weak life, before it is quickened and
refreshed, is overwhelmed, and brought into the Mercurial Poison.

48. An Herb in this aforesaid Property grows not high, it is somewhat rough
in the touch; the rougher it is, the stronger is Mars therein; it is better to
be used outwardly to wounds and sores, then inwardly: The fine and subtle part
is to be taken into the body, and is expulsive; the more subtle it is, the
nigher it is to the life in the body, which the Physician may very well know by
its Salt, for no sough wild property is to be taken into the body, unless the
body be inflamed with a sudden Poison, where the life also is fresh and strong,
then a vehement resistance must be used; yet Mercury and Mars must not be
administered in the Wrath, but in their most potent Power; Mars in the greatest
Heat, but before changed into Joy, and then he also changes Mercury according
to himself: Jupiter belongs to the transmutation of wrathful Mars, but he
must be first introduced into Sol's property, and then he is rightly fit
thereunto.

49. Every living Creature, according to its kind in the foregoing property, is
friendly and pleasant, if you deal friendly and gently with it; but if it be
dealt roughly with, then Mercury is stirred up in the Poyson-property; for Mars
soon boyleth up, and gets aloft in the bitter property, and then the Anger
springs forth; for the ground of all Malignity lies therein; but if it be
not stirred up, then it is not manifest; as a great sickness which lies in the
body; but while the same is hid, and not enkindled, it is not manifest and
apparent.

50. But if Mercury be next Saturn in the Property, and next him the Moon, and
Venus and Jupiter beneath, and also weak, then let Mars stand where he will,
yet all is earthly; for Mercury is held in the austere Impression in the Cold
property, viz. in Deaths Form, and his Sulphur is earthly; if Mars comes near
unto it, then it is poysonful also, but if Venus makes an opposition therein,
then the Poison is resisted, yet it is but earthly; it gives a greenish color
from the Power of Venus.

51. But if Venus be next Saturn in the Property, and the Moon not opposed by
Mars, and Jupiter likewise goes in his own Power, then all is pleasant [and
lovely under that Property or Constellation,] the Herbs are slender, single,
and soft in touch, of white blossoms, unless Mercury brings in a mixed color
from the Power of the Sun, viz. from Mars half red, and from Jupiter bluish,
and it is weak in the Property, and of little use in Physic, yet not hurtful;
in the Creature it gives a pleasant courteous humble life, with no deep reason
[reach or capacity,] but if Mars comes thereunto, the Creature is small, or
thin, of a white, weak, and effeminate nature.

52 There are three especial Salts which may be used for to cure, which belong
unto the Vegetable Life, viz. Jupiter, Mars, and Mercury, these are the Working
Life, in which the Sun is the right Spirit, which makes these Salts Working,
powerful, or vertual.
Operative.

53. The Salt or Power of Jupiter is of a pleasant good smell and taste from
the inward Original [of the Property] of the Liberty of the divine Essence, and
from the external [Principle or Original] of the Property of the Sun and Venus,
but yet it is not alone of it self of sufficient Power in Nature; for the
outward Nature consists in Fire and Anguish, viz. in Poison, and The jovial
Virtue.
Jupiters Power is opposed to the fiery Poison life, which makes a Temperature
in the poysonful Nature, viz. a Desire of Meekness out of the Enmity.

54. The Salt of Mars is fiery, bitter and austere, and the Mercuriall Salt is
anxious and raging, like a Poison, inclined both to Heat and Cold; for it is
the Life in Sulphur, and unites [or assimulates] it self according to each
things Property; for if it comes into Jupiters Salt, it causes Joy and great
Power; but if it comes into Mars his Salt, it makes bitter Pangs, Stitches,
Akings, and Woe; but if it comes into Saturns earthly Salt, it makes
Swellings, Anguish, and Death, if it be not hindered by Jupiter and Venus:
Venus and Jupiter are opposite to Mars and Mercury, that so they might
Temperize them both, and without the Power of Mars and Mercury there would be
no Life in Jupiter, Venus, and Sol, but only a stilness; therefore the worst is
as profitable as the Best, and the one is the cause of the other.

55. But the Physician is to heed and mind what he takes in hand, lest he
inflame the Mercurial Poison more and more in his Patient, or introduce it into
another adverse Source: He ought indeed to use the Martial and Mercurial Salt
for his Cure, but he must first reconcile Mars and Mercury with Venus and
Jupiter, that so both these angry Adversaries may resign their Will into
Jupiters Will, so that Jupiter, Mars and Mercury may all three obtain one Will
in the Power, and then the Cure is right, and the Sun of Life will again
enkindle it self in this Union and Agreement, and also temperize the Nauseate
of the Disease in the Contrariety in the Salt of the Disease, and turn
Mercury's Poison, and Mars his bitter Fire into a pleasant Jupiter.

56. This is now to be understood only concerning the Vegetable Soul, viz.
concerning the outward Man, which lives in the four Elements, and concerning
the sensible and feeling Property.

57. Ratio.
Reason likewise is to be cured with its likeness; for as Reason may be brought
by words into a sensible Sickness and Disease, so that Reason may vex, fret,
and torment it self, and at last fall into an heavy sad Sickness and Death; so
also it may be cured with the Opposition.
application of the same thing [with its own Assimilate.]

58. As for example; An honest man falls into great debts, care, trouble and
distress, which does even afflict him nigh to death; but if a good friend comes
and pays his debt for him, then is the Cure soon effected with its likeness:
Even thus it is in all things, whence the disease is arisen, even such a like
Cure is requisite for the restoring its health; and thus it is likewise in the
Otherwise Metalline.
mental Soul.

59. The Soul of the poor Sinner is poisoned in the Anger of God, and the
Mercury (understand the eternal Mercury in the eternal Nature) is inflamed in
the Souls property in the fiery Mars of Gods Anger, which does now burn in the
Eternal Saturn, viz. in the horrible Impression of Darkness, and feels the
sting of the poysonful angry Mars; His Venus is imprisoned in the house of
misery, his Water is dried up, his Jupiter of Understanding is brought into the
greatest folly, his Sun is quenched, and his Moon turned to dark night.

60. Now he cannot be cured and remedied any other way, save with the likeness;
he must again appease the mental Mercury; he must take Venus, understand the
Love of God, and introduce it into his poysonful Mercury and Mars, and Tincture
the Mercury in the Soul again with Love, and then his Sun will again shine in
the Soul, and his Jupiter will rejoice.

61. Now if thou say, That thou can not, and that thou art too strongly
captivated, I say also, that I cannot; for it lies not in my willing, running
and toiling, but it lies in the Compassion of God; for I cannot by my own
strength and ability overcome the wrathful Anger of God which is enkindled in
me; but seeing his dear Heart has freely given it self again out of Love, and
in Love, into the Humanity, viz. into the poysonful enkindled Mercury in the
Soul, and Tinctured the Soul, viz. the Poyson-Source of the Eternal Nature in
the Eternal Fathers Natures property; therefore I will cast my will into his
Tincture, and I will go with my will out of the Enkindled Poyson-Source, out of
the evil Mercury in Gods Anger into his Death, and with my corrupted will I
will dye with him in his Death, and become a Nothing in him, and then he must
be my Life.

62. For if my will is a Nothing, then he is in me what he pleases, and then I
know not my self any more, but him; and if he will that I shall be Something,
then let him effect it; but if he wills it not, then I am dead in him, and he
lives in me as he pleases, and so then if I be a Nothing, then I am Or, In.
at the End, in the Essence out of which my Father Adam was created, for out of
Nothing God has created all things.

63. The Nothing is the highest Good, for there is no Turba therein, and so
nothing can touch [or annoy] my Soul; for I am a Nothing to my self, but I am
Gods, who knows what I am, I know it not, neither shall [or ought] I to know
it.

64. And thus is the Cure of my Souls sickness; he that will adventure it with
me, shall find by experience, what God will make of him: As for example; I here
write, and I also do not do it; for I, as I, know nothing, have also not
learned or studied it; so then I do it not, but God does it in me as he
pleases.

65. I am not known to my self, but I know unto him what and how he pleases:
Thus I live not to my self, but unto him; and Thus we are in Christ only One,
as a Tree in many boughs and branches, and he begets and brings forth the
fruit in every branch as he pleases, and thus I have brought his Life into
mine, so that I am Atoned with him in his Love; for his Will in Christ is
entered into the Humanity in me, and now my Will in me enters into his
Humanity; and thus his living Mercury, that is, his Word, viz. the Speaking
Mercury, Tinctureth my wrathful Evil Mercury, and transformeth it into his; and
thus my Mars is become a Love-fire of God, and his Mercury speaks through
mine, as through his Instrument, what he pleases; and thus my Jupiter lives
in the Divine Joy, and I know it not; the True Sun shines unto me, and I see
it not; for I live not to my self, I see not to my self, and I know not to my
self: I am a thing, and I know not what; for God knows what I am; and so now
I run and tend to and fro as a thing, in which the Spirit drives [or acteth]
me as he pleases; and Thus I live according to my inward Will, which yet is
not mine.

66. But yet I find in me another Life, which I am, not according to the
Resignation [or Self-denial,] but according to the Creature of this World, viz.
according to the Similitude of Eternity; this Life does yet stand in poison and
strife, and shall yet be turned to Nothing, and then I am wholly perfect: Now
in this same Life, wherein yet I find my self-hood, is Sin and Death, and these
likewise shall be brought to Nothing; and in that Life, which God is in me, I
Or, I am an enemy.
hate Sin and Death; and according to that Life which yet is in my self hood, I
hate the Nothing, viz. the Deity: Thus one Life fights against the other, and
there is a continual Contest in me; but being Christ is born again in me, and
lives in my Nothingness, therefore Christ will, according to his Promise made
in Paradise, bruise the head of the Serpent, viz. of my Self-hood, and mortify
the evil man in my Self, so that he himself may truly live [in me.]

67. But what shall Christ do with the evil man? shall he cast him away? No!
for he is in Heaven, and does thereby accomplish and effect his Wonders in this
World, which stands in the Curse: Now each labors in its own [Vineyard,] the
outward Man labors in the Cursed World, which is Evil and Good, in the
Wonders of God, viz. in the Mirror of Glory, which yet shall be revealed in
him; and the inward Man is not its own, but Gods Instrument, with whom God
makes what he pleases, till the outward with its Wonders in the Mirror shall
also be manifest in God, and even then is God All in All, and he alone in his
Wisdom and Deeds of Wonder, and Nothing else besides; and this is the Beginning
and the End, Eternity and Time.

68. Now understand it aright; unto the outward Man there appertains a Cure
from the outward, viz. from the outward Will of God, who has made himself
external In, or by.
with this visible World; and for the inward Man there is a Cure from the
inward World, which God is All in All; only One, not many, one in all, and all
in one; but if the inward Penetrates the outward, and illustrate it with its
Sunshine, and the outward receives the Sunshine of the inward, then is it
tinctured, cured, and healed by the inward, and the inward does illustrate it,
as the Sun through-shines the water, or as the fire do set the Iron quite
through of a light glee; here now needs no other Cure.

69. But seeing the Devil in the Wrath of the eternal Nature does oppose the
Soul, as an enemy of the Soul, and continually casts his poysonful
Imagination at the Soul to tempt and try it, and the Anger or Wrath of the
Eternal Nature is manifest in the outward Man, which Adam awakened and stirred
up; thereupon this Wrath is oftentimes stirred up by the Devil and his
servants, that it does effectually work and burn in the outward body, and even
then the inward Love-fire goes out in the outward Man, as a red-hot Iron is
quenched in the water; yet not so soon in the internal, but in the external
[Man,] unless the outward Man continue lying in the Or, Water.
mire of sin; so that the Soul which had given it self into the Nothing, viz.
into the Liberty, into the Life of God, does enter again with its Desire into
the outward sinful Man, then it loses the inward Sun; for it goes again out
of the Nothing into the Something, viz. into the Source.

70. Thus the outward body must then have an outward Cure; and albeit the
inward Man yet lives in God, yet whereas the Soul has Imagined into the
outward Wrath, so that the divine Tincturation is no longer in the outward Man;
the outward Mercury, viz. the Outspoken.
Expressed Word, must have a Tincturation from the outward expressed Love and
Light, unless the Willspirit of the Soul does wholly re-enter into the inward
hidden Man, and be again Transformed.
transmuted; and then the Cure may be again introduced into the outward Man
(being the The transforming Light of God in the dark Soul, such as shined in
Enock, Elias, Paul, etc.
throughshining Love of God in the Light,) which is exceeding precious.

71. But now this Herb is rarely to be found upon the Earth; for men do eat
only of the forbidden Tree; therefore the Poison of the Serpent does so spring
up in them in the Wrath of the eternal and external Nature, so that they must
also have an external Cure for their Serpents Poison in the outward Mercury.

72. It is indeed Possible for a man to live without sickness, but he must
bring the divine Tincturation from the inward Man through the outward, which is
very difficult [to do] in the World; for the outward Man lives amongst the
thorns of Gods Wrath, which gall and sting him on every side, and blow up the
Wrath of God, so that it burns in the outward Man, and then the Tincturation
of Gods Love may not continue there; it is indeed there, but not in the outward
enkindled Abominations, but it dwells in it self, like as the Light dwells
in the Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not, also knows nothing
thereof; but when the Light is manifest in the Darkness, then is the Night
changed into Day.

73. Thus it is likewise with Man; of what Light Man lives, of that also
comes his Cure; if he lives in the outward World, then the outward Goodness
and Love, viz. the outward Jupiter and Venus with the Sun must be his Cure, or
he remains in the Angry Mars, and in the poysonful Mercury, in the earthly
Moon, captived in the Impression of Saturn, viz. in the earthly Sulphur, which
however is made manifest, and awakened in the outward Man by Adam, for whose
sake the outward Man must dye, putrify, and so enter again into the Nothing,
viz. into the End; or as I might better say, and signify it, into the
beginning of the Creation, into the Essence, out of which it went, and departed
with Adam.

CHAP. X. Of the inward and outward Cure of Man.
1. LEt the Lover of God understand us aright; We do not go upon an Historical
Heathenish Conjecture, but only and alone upon the Light of the outward Nature;
both Suns shine unto us. Understand us aright, and see! how God has Cured Man
when the Poison of the Serpent and Devil held him imprisoned in Death, and how
he yet still cures the poor Soul captivated in Gods Anger; the like Process
also must the Physician keep in curing the outward body.

2. The divine Light and Love was extinguished in Adam, because he Imagined
into the Serpents property, viz. into Evil and Good, so that the Poison of
Death began effectually to work in Mercury, and the Source of Anger was
inflamed in the eternal Mars, and the dark Impression of the eternal Natures
property took possession of him; his body became Earth in the dark Impression
in the Poison of the enkindled Mercury, and was an enmity against God; he was
utterly undone, and there was no remedy for him by any Creature, neither in
Heaven, nor in this World, the wrathful Death captivated him in Soul and Body.

3. Now how did God do to Cure him, and Tincture him again? did he take a
strange thing thereunto? No! He took the Likeness, and cured him with that,
what was corrupted in him, viz. with the divine Mercury, and with the divine
Venus, and with the divine Jupiter; understand, in Man was the Expressed Word,
which I call the Eternal Mercury in Man; for it the true ruling acting Life; it
was inspired or in-spoken into Man's Image (which God created out of his Essence
into an Image according to God) as into a Creatural Image, which was the Soul
with the Property of all the Three Worlds, viz. with the World of Light and
Understanding, which is God, and with the Fire World, which is the Eternal
Nature of the Father of all Beings; and with the Light, Love-World, which is
Heavenly Corporality; for in the Love-desire is the Essence, viz. the
Corporality.

4. The Desire of Love is Spirit, and is the Heart of God, viz. the right
divine Understanding: In the Love-Essence Mercury is Gods Word, and in the
fiery Nature he is the Wrath of God, the Original of all Mobility and Enmity,
also of Strength and Omnipotence; the fiery Property makes the Light, viz. the
Liberty desirous, so that the Nothing is a Desire, and this Desire is the Love
of God, which Adam did extinguish in him; for he Imagined after Evil and God,
that is, after Earthliness; the Earthliness came forth into a Being both out of
the Wrath, and out of the Love-Being, and that through Gods Motion, that the
Wonders of the Abyss and Byss might be made manifest, that Good and Evil might
be made known and manifest; and this Adam being the Image of God should not do,
for God had created him unto his Image; He should have Tinctured the Fire-World
and outward World with the Word of Love, that so none of them should be
manifest in him, like as the day holds the night avalled in it self.

5. But by false Imagination he has awakened and manifested the dark and
poysonful Mercurial Fire-World in him, so that his bodily Essence of the dark
Impression is fallen unto the evil Part in the poysonful Mercurial Property,
and the Soul is become manifest in the Eternal Nature in the Fathers
Fire-property, viz. in the poysonful hateful Mercury, according to which God
calls himself an angry zealous God, and a consuming fire.

6. Now to help and restore this again, viz. the Image of God, God must take
the right Cure, and even the same which Man was in his innocence: But how did
he effect it? Behold O Man, behold and see, open thy Understanding, thou art
called.

7. He introduced the holy Mercury in the Love-flame, viz. in the fiery Love
with the Desire of the divine Essentiality, or after the divine Essentiality
(which Desire makes divine Corporality in it self) again into the Expressed
Word, viz. into the Mercurial Fire-Soul, (understand, into the Souls Essence in
the Womb of Mary,) and became again that same Image of God; He Tinctured the
Poison, viz. the Wrath of the Father of all Essences, with the Love-fire; He
took only even that same Mercury which he had breathed into Adam for an Image,
and formed into a Creature; He took only that same property, yet not in the
Fires property, but in the burning Love; He did with the Love introduce again
the Light of the Eternal Sun into the humane property, that he might Tincture
the Wrath of the enkindled Mercury in the humane property, and inflame it with
Love, that the humane Jupiter, viz. the divine Understanding, might again
appear and be manifest.

8. Ye Physicians, if ye here understand nothing, then ye are captivated in the
Poison of the Devil: Behold, I pray the right Cure, wherewith the enkindled
Mercury in Man's life is to be remedied; it must be a Mercury again, but first
enkindled in Venus and Jupiter; it must have the Suns property, which it
attains unto by Jupiter and Venus: As God deals with us poor men, so must the
outward poysonful sick Mercury be Tinctured with such an external Cure; not
with the dark Impression of Saturn, with Cold, (unless it be first sweetly
appeased and qualified with Jupiter and Venus, that the Sun does again shine in
Saturn,) but with meek Love; this is his right Physic, whereby the Death is
changed into Life; yet this is only a common manual Cure, which the Vulgar may
learn.

9. But it behooves the Doctor, if he will be called a Doctor, to study the
whole Process; how God has restored the universal in Man, which is fully clear
and manifest in the Person of Christ, from his Entrance into the Humanity, even
to his Ascension, and Sending of the Holy Ghost.

10. Let him follow this entire Process, and then he may find the Universal,
provided he born again of God; but the selfish pleasure, worldly glory,
covetousness and pride does lie in the way. Dear Doctors, I must tell you, the
Coals are too black, ye defile your white hands therewith; the true unfeighned
selfdenying Humility before God and man does not relish with you; Therefore ye
are blind: I do not tell you this, but the Spirit of Wonders in its
manifestation.

11. But we will give Direction unto the desirous Seeker, who would fain see,
if he knew the way fitly to attain his intent; for the time is at hand, where
Moses is called from the Sheep to be a Shepherd of the Lord, which shall
shortly be manifest, maugre all the raging and raving of the Devil: Let not the
dear and worthy Christendom think, being now it does seem as if she should go
to wrack and ruin, that it is utterly undone; No: The Spirit of the Lord of
Hoasts has out of his Love planted a new branch in the humane Property, which
shall root out the thorns of the Devil, and make known his Child Jesus to all
Nations, Tongues and Speeches, and that in the Morning of the Eternal Day.

12. Dear Brethren, behold, I pray the right Cure; what did God with us when we
lay sick in Death? did he quite cast away the created Image, understand the
outward Part, viz. the outward Corrupt Man, and make wholly another new Man?
No, he did it not; although he introduced Divine Property into Out Humanity,
yet he did not therefore cast away our Humanity, but brought it into the way or
Process to the New Birth.

13. What did he? He suffered the outward Humanity, viz. the outward Water,
understand the Essentiality of Venus, which was shut up in the Wrath of Death,
to be baptized with the Water of the Eternal Essence, and with the Holy Ghost,
that the Incentive of the outward Essentiality shut up in Death, might again
glow, as a fire that falls into Tinder: Afterward he withdrew his outward
food from the outward Body, and brought it into the Desert, and let it hunger,
and then the Spark enkindled from the Fire of God must Put its desire, hunger
and Imagination into the Nothing, the highest Good or Omnipotence, and eat of
Gods Bread.
Imagine into God, and eat Manna of divine Essentiality forty days, of which
Israel was a Type in the Wilderness Sinai with their Manna: The Essence of
Eternity must overcome the Essence of Time; therefore it is called a Temptation
of the Devil; for the Devil as a Prince in the Wrath of God did there tempt the
outward Humanity, and did represent all that unto it wherein Adam fell, and
became disobedient unto God.

14. There now it was tried whether the Image of God would stand, being
internally there was Gods Love-fire, and externally the Baptism of the Water of
Eternal Life: Here the Soul was tempted, whether it would be a King, and an
Angelical Throne in the stead of the fallen Angel, and possess the Elected
Throne of God in the Royal Office, from which Lucifer was taken, and thrust
into the Darkness, viz. into the Throne of Poison and Death; but seeing he did
stand (in that the Soul did resign and submit its Will alone into Gods
Love-fire, and desired no earthly food, nor the earthly Kingdom, Good and Evil,
for outward Dominion,) the Process to the Universal, viz. to the Restoration of
all that which Adam had lost, did further proceed and go on; He turned Water
into Wine.

15. Ye Physicians, observe this, it concerns you in your Process, you must
also go the same way to work; He healed the sick; so you must likewise make the
Form in your poysonful Mercury whole and sound by the Power of the
Philosophical Baptism; He made the dead alive again, the dumb to speak, the
deaf to hear, the blind to see, and cleansed the Lepers; all this must go
before, that all the Forms in Mercury may be pure, sound, and living, which
Mercury himself does make after the Baptism and Temptation; as the living
speaking Mercury did this in the Person of Christ, the Artist cannot do it,
only there must be Faith; for Christ also Testifies, that he could not do many
Wonders at Capernaum, save heal a few diseased; for the Faith of the
Capernaitans would not enter into the Divine Mercury of Christ.

16. So that we see there, that the Person of Christ, viz. the Creature, could
not work the Wonders in its own Power, but the Mercury, viz. the living
speaking Word in him; for the Person did cry and call into God, viz. into the
speaking Word, and set its Desire thereinto; as we may see in the Mount of
Olives, where he prayed, that he did sweat drops of blood; and by Lazarus, when
he would raise him up, he said, Father, hear me; but I know that thou always
bear me; yet because of those that stand by, I say it, that they may believe
that thou workest by me.

17. Thus the Artist must not arrogate any thing unto himself, the Mercury does
it self after the Philosophical Baptism work these Wonders, before it does
manifest the Universal; for all the seven Forms of Nature must be Crystalized
and purified, if the Universal shall be revealed, and each Form carries a
peculiar Process when it is to be brought out of the property of the Wrath, and
entered into the pure and clear Life, and transmute it self into the
Crystalline Sea which stands before the Throne of the Ancient in the
Revelation, and change it self into Paradise; for the Universal is Paradisical,
and Christ also came therefore into our Humanity, that he might again open or
make manifest the Universal, viz the Paradise again in Man; the Speaking Word
in Christ wrought Wonders through all the seven Properties or Forms, through
the Expressed Word in the Humanity, before the whole Universal was manifest in
the Corpse of the humane Property, and the Body glorified.

18. Even thus it is in the Philosophical Work, when the Mercury shut up in
Death receives into it the Baptism of its refreshment in Love, then all the
seven Forms do manifest themselves in this Property, as came to pass in the
Process of Christ in his Miracles, but as yet they are not perfect in the
operation of their Properties manifestation.

19. The Universal is not yet there, until all seven do give their Will into
One, and forsake their property in the Wrath, and depart from it with their
Will, and take into them the Loves-property; they must take in the Will of the
Nothing, that their will be a Nothing, and then it can subsist in the Wrath of
the Fire, and there is no further Turba therein; for so long as the Desire of
the Wrath is in the Form, it is adverse and opposite unto the Or, other Forms.
second Form, and enflameth the second Form with its wrathful property, that
is, it strikes the Signature of the second, and awakeneth it in the Wrath, and
then the voice or sound of the second enkindleth the first Forms property in
Mercury, and so no Form can attain unto any perfection, that it might enter
into Love.

20. Therefore the Artist can effect nothing, unless he gives a Meat unto the
Forms, which they all do desire and love to eat, wherein there is no Turba: now
the Properties cannot eat, being their mouth is frozen up in the Impression of
Saturn; the Artist must first open their mouth, and make them alive in their
Zeal, that all the Forms may be hungry, and then if there be Manna, they do all
eat together thereof, and so the precious grain of mustard seed is sown.

21. Now when Mercury does thus awake from the Death of the Impression of
Saturn, and gets Manna into the mouth of his property, of the poysonful
Deaths-Source, then arises the Flagrat of the Kingdom of Joy, for it is as a
Light which is enkindled in the Darkness, for the Joy or Love springs up in
the midst of the Anger: Now if Mercury apprehends the glimpse or aspect of the
Love in Mars, then the Love dismayeth the Wrath, and it is as a Transmutation,
but it is not fixed and steadfast, and as soon as this comes to pass, the
Angelical Properties do appear in view and ken.

The Process in the Temptation.

22. Jesus was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness, and the Devil came unto
him, and tempted him. When the Soul of Christ did hunger, the Devil said unto
Jesus, Open the Center in the Stones, that is, the Impressed Mercury, and make
thee Bread, eat the Substance of the Souls property; what, will thou eat of
nothing, viz. of the speaking Word? Eat of the expressed Word, viz. of the
property of Good and Evil, and then thou art Lord in both; this also was Adams
bit, wherein he did eat Death: Then said Christ Jesus, Man lives not by bread
alone, but by every word which proceeds from the mouth of God.

23. Mark! Whence had the Person of Christ the Will, that he would not eat with
the Souls Hunger of the Bread which could have been made of stones, which he
could well have performed? Or how had it been, if the Hunger of the humane
Property had after the Unction of Baptism here eaten in the Temptation of the
Mercury in the Impression of Death, viz. of the Sulphur of the expressed Word,
in which was the Anger, and from whence the Love was fled, as it is so in the
earthly Property?

24. Observe! The Will and Desire to eat of the Speaking Word, came into the
Souls property from the Motion of the Deity; when as the same had moved it self
in the Soulick Essence, shut up in Death in Mary his Mother in her Essence or
Seed, and introduced the Aspect of the Eye of God in the Love into the dead
Souls Essence, and had manifested the Love in Death, then one Divine Property
desired the other, and the Desire of the bodily Hunger to eat of Gods Bread or
Essence came from the Baptism: When the Water of the Body, which in the
Impression of the Substance was enclosed in Death, did taste the Water of
eternal Life in the holy Spirit, viz. the holy Spirits Corporality or
Essentiality in the Baptism, then the Incentive of the divine Hunger of the
Ardent Desire after Gods Essence did arise in the flesh, as a divine Hunger, a
glimmering or shining Incentive of Divine Property.

25. Now the Man Christ must hereupon be tempted in Body and Soul, of which he
would eat; on one part the Expressed Word of Love and Anger was represented
before Body and Soul, in which the Devil would be Lord and Master, and rule
therein omnipotently; and on the other part the Speaking Word in the Love.
property was only represented to the Soul and Body.

26. Here now began the Combat which. Adam should have undergone in Paradise;
for on one side Gods Love-desire, which had manifested it self in the Soul, did
eagerly attempt the Soulick and bodily property, and introduced its Desire into
the Souls property, that the Soul should eat thereof, and give the Body Manna
thereof; and on the other side the Devil in Gods wrathful property did assault
in the Souls property, and brought his Imagination into the property of the
first Principle, viz. into the Center of the dark World, which is the Souls
Fire-life.

27. Here was the Contest about the Image of God, whether it would live in Gods
Love or Anger, in the Fire or Light; for the property of the Soul, as to its
Fire-life, was the Fathers, according to the Fire-world; and being the Soul in
Adam had quenched the Light-world, the Light-world was again incorporated with
the Name Jesus, which came to pass in the Conception of Mary.

28. Now it was here tried in the Temptation Or, Unto.
of which property man would live; whether of the Fathers in the Fire, or of
the Sons in the Light of Love: Here the whole property of Christ's Person was
Tempted; The Devil said, as he had also said unto Adam, Eat of the Evil and
Good; Have thou not Bread? then make Bread of Stones; why do thou Hunger so
long in thy own Property? Then said the Divine Desire, Man lives not of Bread
alone, but of Every Word of God.

29. Thus the property of the fiery Soul resigned it self with its Desire into
the Love, viz. into the Speaking Words property, and the fiery Desire did eat
Manna in the Love-desire. O ye Philosophers! observe it well; when this was
done, the Love transmuted the fiery property into its Love-property; here the
Father gave the Fire-Soul unto the Son, understand the fiery property of the
Expressed Mercury to the Speaking Mercury in the Light; for Christ also said so
afterward, Father, the men were thine, and thou have given them me, and I give
unto them Eternal Life.

30. Here Gods Love gave the Eternal Love-Life to the Corrupted Humanity; the
Love did wholly give it self in unto the Fire-wrath, and transmuted the Wrath
of the Soul into a Triumphant joyful Love; but if the Souls and Bodies property
had obeyed the Devil in Gods Wrath, and made Bread of the Enclosed Mercury, and
eaten thereof, then had the Will entered again into its self-hood, and could
not have been transmuted.

31. But being it entered into Resignation, into the Speaking Word of God, and
was willing to be and do what ever that pleased, then the Will went from its
self-hood, though the wrathful Death of Gods Anger, viz. from the Expressed
Word, which the Devil had poisoned with his Imagination quite through the
property of the Wrath, and sprang forth afresh with a new Love-desire in God;
here the Will was Paradise, viz. a divine Lovebudding in Death.

32. Thus now the Love-will being set in opposition to the poysonful Mercury of
the Souls property in the Anger of God, then came the Devil, and said, Thou art
the King, who have overcome, come and show thy self in thy Miracles and Deeds
of Wonder; and he brought him upon the Pinnacle of the Temple, and said, Fall
down, that men may see it; for it is written, He bath given his Angels charge
over thee, that they should bear thee up in their hands, left thou dosh thy
foot against a stone. Here the Devil would fain that he should use again the
Fires might, viz. the Souls self-hood in its own fiery property, and depart out
of the Resignation into an Arrogation of Self in its own Fire-will (as he had
done, and also Adam) when he went with the Desire in his own Might into Evil
and Good, and would have his eyes open in Evil and Good, as Moses writes
thereof, that the Serpent did persuade them thereunto.

33. Here came the fine Adorned Beast again, and tempted the second Adam also;
for God gave him leave, seeing he said the Fires Matrix had drawn him, he could
not stand; here now that should be tried; for he was an Angel also, as well as
the humane Soul, which he had Seduced; but the humane property in Body and Soul
in the Person of Christ had once cast it self into the Resignation out of its
Self-hood into Gods Mercy, and stood still in the Resignation, viz. in the
divine Will, and would not cast himself down, or do any thing, save what God
alone did by it, and said unto the Devil, It is written, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God; which is as much as if he had said, A Creature of God shall
will not do nothing but what God wills and does by it; there must be no other
God besides the only One to Rule and Will, the Creature must go and do as the
Will-spirit of God does lead it; it must be Gods Instrument, wherewith he
works, and does only what he pleases.

34. In this proof Adam did not stand; for he went from the Resignation into an
Arrogation of Self, into an own self-will, and would try Evil and Good, Love
and Anger, and prove how Evil and Good tasted. Here, dear man, was the trying
state before the Tree of Temptation in Paradise, and that was fulfilled which
the first Adam could not, and would not do in divine Obedience in Resignation.

35. When the Devil saw that in this also he had no success, that the Humanity
would not give way to depart out of the Resignation, out of Gods Will, he
carried the Humanity upon an high Mountain, and showed it all the Riches of the
World, all whatsoever does live and move in the Expressed word, all the
Dominions and Might in the outward Nature, over which he calls himself a
Prince, but has only the one part in the Wrath of Death in possession, and
said unto it, (understand to the humane property,) If thou fallest down and
worshipest me, I will give thee all this.

36. The Humanity should again depart out of Resignation into a Desire of
Propriety, and desire to Possess something of its own in arrogation of Self in
the Cursed Property, Evil and Good; this had been a dainty dish and delight
unto the Devil; then had he remained King, and his lies had been Truth, in this
Adam also was Corrupted, and entered into selfish Propriety, and desired worldly
Dominion and Covetousness (which may be seen in Cain,) which is the Heart of
the poysonful Mercury, viz. its Hungers-desire, which makes it self Essence
according to the property of its Hunger, not Manna, but Earth; as we may see in
the wild Earth, what he has made in the Enkindling, or Motion of the Father
in his Fires property, in which Inflammation (viz. in the poysonful Wrath of
the Expressed Mercury) the Devil thought to be a Prince, and is so in the same
property in the wicked, and also in the Government of the World in the Wrath;
but God holds him captive with the Water and Light of the third Principle, so
that he is not Prince in the Dominion of the expressed Word, but the Judges
Executioner; He must look where Turba Magna is enkindled in the Wrath, and
there he is busy so far as Turba Magna goes in the Wrath, further his Courage
is cooled.

37. He would give the Humanity of Christ this whole Dominion to rule in, and
above all in the Essence of all things, as a mighty God, which notwithstanding
he only possesses in the part of the Turba in the Wrath of God, and has it
not in his full Domination: He should but set his Desire thereinto, and
introduce his Will into him, and he would bring his Mercury of the Creature
into the Greatest Omnipotence, that he should be a Lord over Good and Evil, and
have all things at Command, to do therewith as he pleased, for so Adam had
fooled it.

38. His Mercury went with the Desire into the Impression, whence Cold and Heat
arises, and Imagined thereinto, and so the property of the cold and hot Fire
did presently boil up in the Mercury of the Creature; and so also the outward
Heat and Cold did soon pierce into the enkindled Mercury of the humane
property, so that the body now suffers pain from the Heat and Cold, which
property before (when as it stood in the free Will of God in the Resignation)
was not manifest; and thus Evil and Good did Rule and domineer in Adam.

39. For the Center of Wrath, viz. the dark Worlds property, was manifest in
him, in a poysonful Deaths property, as the Mercury in Man is yet to this day
so poysonful, and of a venomous Source; whereas indeed he is changed in the Or,
Life's light.
vital Light into a Solar property, but yet the poison and property of Death
does hang unto it, and it is his Root; as we plainly see, that so soon as the
ready Instrument of his martial fiery Properties Signature or Form is a little
struck or played upon, that his evil poysonful fiery Property does come forth,
and show it self, and inflameth the body, that it does even tremble and shake
for the very poison of Wrath, and will ever enter into the Enkindled Poison.
Source Or, of.
in him, who has awakened and enkindled the same, and assimulate in his malice
with the malignant Fomenters malice, and wrestle in the poysonful Properties
Right, and then must the Body set to its strength as a Servant, and accomplish
the Poysonswill, and wrangle and contest with his Adversary, and beat him, or
be beaten of him; let it be either by hand-blows, or words; it is all in this
Property, and Desire of this poysonful Mercury.

40. Hence arises all War and Contention, namely, from the Dominion of Gods
Anger in the Corrupt and Enkindled Mercury of the Expressed Word, which does so
act its delight and sport in the poysonful Wraths and dark Worlds property in
Man.

41. Therefore the Warrior is a Servant of Gods Anger: He is the Ax wherewith
the Angry Husbandman cuts up his Thorns and Briars from off his ground; He is
the chief Worker and Accomplisher of the wrathful Anger of God; Gods Anger
according to his Fires property will have it so, and not his Love; and he that
suffers himself to be made use of thereunto, he serves the Anger of God
according to the dark and Fire-worlds-desire and property, which in the heavy
Fall of Adam has manifested it self in the humane property, and brought Man,
viz. the Angelical Image, into an half devilish Vizard and Likeness; in which
property and Image of his Will in the Expressed Creatural Mercury or vital Word
he cannot inherit Gods Kingdom, but must be born a new in his Mercury and Will,
with and in Christ, in Gods Love, viz. in the holy Speaking Mercury and Word of
Life, that a new obedient Will wholly resigned into Gods Love may proceed from
his Creatural Mercury, which neither wills or acts any thing but what the Will
of the Speaking Divine Mercury wills, who in his Self-hood, and selfish
Arrogation in his own Will, is as Dead, that he may be the Instrument of the
Great God, whereby he should act, work, and do how and what he pleases; and
then is God All in All in him, his Will and Deed, and he is a Branch in the
Great Tree which draws Sap, Power and Life from the Tree of God, and grows
and lives in him, and brings forth his fruit; then is the Mercury of the
humane Life a procreated or expressed fruit, which grows upon the
Paradise-Tree of God, and gives forth its Note and Sound, and strikes the
Signature in the Speaking Word of God, viz. Gods Harp and Lute in his Praise,
to which end man is created, not that he should needs play upon the Instrument
of Anger and Death according to the Devils will.

42. The Devil has given himself to be such a Lutanist who contriveth and
helps to act and drive on the Play in the Wrath, viz. in the Darkness; He is
the Instrument and Actor in the Wrath of the Eternal Nature, which has its
effects and achievements with And all his begions of evil spirits.
him and in him, as its Instrument: The like also must the wicked man do, as
Saint Paul speaks thereof; The holy man is unto God a sweet Savor unto Life,
and the wicked a sweet Savor unto Death. All whatsoever does live and move
must enter Agree, or make sor.
into the Glory of God; one works in his Love, the other in his Anger: All is
generated and created in the Infinite Being to the manifestation of the
Infinite great God; out of all the Properties of Evil and Good, Creatures were
brought forth by the Will of the Speaking Word; for the property of the
Darkness and the Fire was as well in the Speaking, as the property of the
Light; and therefore there are evil and good Creatures.

43. But the Angels and Men were spoken forth Or, unto.
in the Image of Gods Love; they ought not to speak and incline their Will into
the Fire and dark Word, and introduce their Desire thereinto; also not at all
will to be their own, but continue steadfast in the Resignation in the Speaking
Will of God, as a form of the Speaking Will, and bear no inclination to any
thing, save only unto the Speaking, in which Figure they stand as an Image or
Platform of the Expressing, as a spoken Word, wherewith the Speaking Word does
behold it self in its own likeness, whereby it does there manifest the Eternal
Knowledge of the Eternal Mind, and sets the Spirits Will into a Image, or
likeness.
Form, and plays therewith.

44. As a Limmer that pourtrayeth his own Image, and does thereby behold what
he is, and how his form and feature is; or as a Musician does compose a curious
Lesson or Song, and so plays and melodizeth with his Life, and Will of Life,
viz. with the Sound of his own Life's Mercury, in the Tune of the Song, or upon
some Musical Instrument, as it is agreeable to his Life's Mercury, wherewith his
vital Mercury does joy and delight it self.

45. Thus likewise God created us to his Melody, harmony, delight, or play.
Love-Consort unto his Joy and Glory, whereby he exalts his Speaking Eternal
Word, or plays in the same with us, as with his Instrument.

46. Therefore, when this melodious Instrument was broken in its Sound by the
wrathful Might of his Anger, that is, when Man's Image would play in its own
Might both in Evil and Good, in Love and Anger, viz. in its own self-will, and
would not yield it self to be used whereunto the Speaking Word had created it,
and departed out of Resignation into an Arrogation of Self, and would play as
it self pleased, now good, then bad; Then this Instrument was against the Love
of God, in which no voice, breath or inkling of Anger is manifest or can be, as
in the light of the Fire no pain of the Fire is manifest.

47. For the Will of the humane Mercury went out from the Will of the divine
Speaking Word into its own self-will: Thus it fell into the Center of the
Pregnatress of all Essences, viz. into the Anguish, Poison and Death, where
Gods Anger, viz. the Speaking in the Wrath took possession of it.

Here now was our distress, we were forlorn,
Oppressed in wrathful Death, and woeful Scorn;
If God had not restored us again,
We should have still been tumbling in Deaths pain.
48. Thus, dear Reader, it is clearly set before you, wherein Christ was
tempted; namely, whether the Soul, and the whole Man* viz. the Image of the
Speaking Word (after that God had introduced the Spark of his Love again into
the humane Property, and freely given in it self again with the Love into it)
would now again enter into its first place, and be Gods melodious Instrument in
his Love, or not; or whether it would be a selfish Arrogator in its own Will,
and do what its own Speaking would bring forth in the Enkindled Mercury of its
Life; whether it would suffer Gods Will to strike the Signature upon its
Instrument, or the Anger of God to strike it, as before came to pass [viz. in
the First Adam.]

49. Here it was tried; Therefore said the Devil, viz. the Organist in Gods
Anger, unto Christ, That he should fall down and worship him, and then he would
give him all Dominion, Power and Glory; he should and might do what he please,
he should live and delight in his own self-will; he should only give the Devil
his Will, and forego Resignation, and depart out of Gods Mercy and Love-will;
and if this had come to pass, then had the fair Instrument been once again
broken, and the humane Melody in Gods Love and Deeds of Wonder had ended; but
Christ said, Get thee hence, Satan; it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and serve him only. Then the Devil left him, and the Angels came and
ministered unto him.

The Magical Process.

50. Herein (as it is already mentioned at large) the Magus must well consider
his purpose and intent; not desiring with the Covetousness of the Devil to
possess the earthly Kingdom, also not to fly [or cast himself down] from the
Temple, much less to work out his intent from the stones; he must think that he
is Gods Minister and Servant, not a selfish Lord, of whom becomes a fool* If he
will help the poor Captive shut up in the Anger of God out of the bands of
Darkness, wherein he is swallowed up in the Curse of the Earth, and deliver him
from the Anger of God, then he must think and well observe, how God with his
Entrance [viz. into the Humanity] has redeemed him; he must very exactly and
intimately consider the Temptation of Christ, not blindly grope after it with
outward manual Art, and think with himself, I have a dead Stone before me, it
neither knows or feels any thing, I must per-force set upon it, that I may
compel it, and take its lewel, which it has hidden in it.

51. He that does so is a Fool, and goes on in his own self-will, and is
altogether unfit for the work, let him not meddle with it; we desire faithfully
to admonish him, that if he will seek aright, then let him consider the Process
of Christ, how God has again regenerated the universal shut up in Death in the
humane Property.

52. For God did not take Man as he lay closed up in Death, and cast him into a
furnace, and melted him in the Wrath, as the false Magus does; but he gave his
Love first into his humane Essence* and baptized the Humanity; afterward he
brought him into the Wilderness, and set the Devil opposite to him, not into
him; he let him first fast and hunger forty days, and gave no outward food to
the Humanity; he must eat of his Life's Mercury, that God might see whether the
Humanity would bring its Desire into God; and when the Humanity introduced its
Desire into the Deity, and received the Manna, then he let the Devil set upon
the Humanity, who introduced all his Subtlety, and desires into the Humanity,
and tempted him: Do thou not understand any thing here? What shall I say more
unto thee? If thou be a beast, then I give thee not my Pearl, it belongs
to Gods Children.

53. God must become Man, Man must become God; Heaven must become One thing
with the Earth, the Earth must be turned to Heaven; if you will make Heaven out
of the Earth, then give the Earth the Heavens food, that the Earth may obtain
the Will of Heaven, that the Will of the wrathful Mercury may give it self in
unto the Will of the Heavenly Mercury.

54. But what will thou do? will thou introduce the poysonful Mercury (which
has only a Deaths Will in it self) into the Temptation, as the false Magus
does? Will you send one Devil to another, and make an Angel of him? In deed and
in truth I must needs laugh at such folly: If thou will keep a corrupt black
Devil, how do thou think to turn the Earth by the Devil to Heaven? Is not God
the Creator of all Beings? Thou must eat of Gods Bread, if thou will Or, Change.
transmute thy body out of the earthly Property into the heavenly.

55. Christ said, He that eats not the flesh of the Son of man, has no part
in him: And says further, He that shall drink of the water that I shall give,
it shall spring up in him to a fountain of eternal life. Here lies the Pearl
of the New Birth: It is not enough to play the Sophister; the grain of Wheat
brings forth no fruit, unless it falls into the Earth; all whatsoever will
bring forth fruit, must enter into its Mother whence it came first to be.

56 The Mother of all Beings is Sulphur, Mercury is her Life, Mars her Sense,
Venus her Love, Jupiter her Understanding, Luna her Corporal Essence, Saturn
her Husband: You must reconcile or lovingly betroth the Man with the Woman; for
the Man is Angry, yet give him his dear Spouse into his Arms; but see that the
Spouse be a Virgin, wholly chaste and pure; for the woman's Seed shall break the
Serpents Head, viz. the Man's Anger: The Virgin must be in real Love, without
any falsehood or unfaithfulness, a Virgin which never touched any man in Anger
according to his manhood; for the pure Deity does so espouse it self in clear
Love with the Humanity, even as Mary said, Be it unto me as thou have spoken,
for I am the Lords handmaid; and so the Humanity assumed the Diety* and also
the Deity the Humanity.

57. The chaste Virgin signifies in the Philosophic work the clear Deity; the
Humanity is Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, both heavenly and earthly; the Heavenly
property is disappeared, and as a nothing; the deadly property in the wrath is
stirred up, and lives to the Anger, and in the properties of the Anger, the
Humanity, both in Adam and in Christ was tempted. Do thou ask, wherewith?
Resp. with the like opposite in the wrath, even with such a Devil as had all
these properties in him, as a Potent Prince [in all the properties of the
Anger.]

58. The properties in Sulphur were tempted with the likeness of the Sulphur;
in the Sulphur, or from the Sulphrous property the Temptation did come and
arise, and its forms Or, were.
are three, as one in the Impression, which the Philosophers call Saturn, which
the Humane Spirit or Will should open in Venus property, and therewith satiate
or feed its hunger, viz. the Fire; the other property was, that he should live
in his own awakened and opened Venus out of Saturns property, and aspire in
Selfwill.

59. The third property was, he should introduce his will through the Awakened
Love-desire again into the Center, viz. into the Sulphurean Mother, which
arises in the Impression in the Anguish: and this he would not do, but the
first Adam did it; and therefore God when he would help him Tempted him in the
Sulphur, viz. in the first Mother to the Humanity, and suffered a wrathful
Devil, which was enkindled in the Sulphur, to tempt him with his enkindled
malignity and malice in the Sulphur: Do thou not understand this? what then
shall I say more unto thee?

60. Sulphur is the womb whereinto we must enter, if we would be new born.
Nicodemus said well; how can one being old enter into his mothers womb, and be
born again? But Christ said, Except you be converted, and become as Children,
you cannot see the Kingdom of Heaven. The Self-wil must enter again into the
First Mother which brought it forth* viz. into the Sulphur, by the Will
understand Mercury.

61. But now who will persuade it to do so? for it is become a Self-thing, and
must enter again into the Mother, and become Nothing; this seemed a strange and
wonderful thing to Nicodemus, but the Lord said unto him, The wind blows
where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but thou know not from
whence it comes, or whither it goes; even so is every one that is born of
God. Behold, who persuaded the Will of Christ in his Humanity, for to enter
again with the Will into the Filiation or Adoption, as it were into the Mothers
Womb, and eat Nothing forty days, and would also [eat] nothing, but remained in
full steadfast Resignation in the Mother? Did not the Deity do it, which was
entered into the Humanity?

62. Thus likewise it goes in the Philosophic Work, therefore let the Artist
well observe, and rightly understand us: he must seek the evil stubborn Child
(which is fled from the Mother, and entered into the Center, and would be a
Self-thing [or its own only]) in Saturn, for the wrath of God has shut him up
with its Impression in the chamber of Death.

63. Not that he has made him to Saturn, but he holds him shut up in the
Saturnine death; the same he must again take and bring into the Mothers Womb,
and then send the Angel with a Message unto Mary, and tell her, she shall bring
forth a son, whose name shall be called Jesus: and if the Mother shall yield
her consent thereunto, and receive the Name Jesus, then the new Humanity shall
begin in the Mother, with the new Child in the old Apostate captivated in the
Anger of God, and the Name Jesus will first give in it self unto the Dead
Child, which lay captivated in Saturn, and eagerly draw the Will of the Evil
dead child unto it self; this is the fair Bride, which shows her Crown of
Pearl unto her Apostate Bridegroom; he should but again receive her, and she
would again give him her love. Now if the Apostate youth shut up in death does
again receive her, then is the Artist well prepared, and counted worthy by God
to finish his purpose: Now will the Bride love the Bridegroom, and a Virgin
bring forth a Son, at which all the World will wonder; the Virgin shall embrace
the Man; but he is a Man, and not a Woman, and has the Virgins heart.

64. Now he must be tempted, whether or no he will live in Virgin-like
Chastity, and in full Resignation of his Will to God, for he must be a Valiant
Champion, and destroy the Devils Royal Fort. Fort rampant.
Fortress of Prey (which he has in his Mother) in seven Kingdoms; then let the
Devil set his Mothers House on fire with his wrath, and tempt him, he will now
well enough defend himself with Christ against the Devil.

65. This being done, the young man with his Virgin-like heart, will wholly
give himself up unto the Mother, when as the Tempter comes and assaults him,
and the Mother will wholly swallow him up into her self through the Devils
wrath; He gives himself forth wholly out of his own Will into the Nothing. Now
thinks the Artist with himself, I have lost all, that he has lost Heaven;
for he sees nothing, and does not consider that a Virgin has now brought
forth: but let him have Patience; that which is impossible to the Artist, that
is possible to Nature, after the night it is day; when the Tempter has
finished all his Temptations, then comes the Sign [or Appearance] of the
Angels, then the Devil which has tempted him must depart.

66. Let the Artist well observe this, and pack away the Devil, and suffer the
young man with his Virgin-like Heart to lie in his Bed, and eat his former
food, for he is now become a Physician of his Or, Kindred.
Sisters in his Mothers house; he will do great Wonders in all the seven
Kingdoms of his Mother (which are the seven Forms of Life) as Christ has done.

67. As, in Saturn he will raise the dead, understand, he will awaken the dead
Essence which held him captive in his former Prison; for the shall turn [or
make] the Earth to Heaven: Even as the Virgin has raised up his Will out of
the Anger in the Love, and made him a Wonder-worker; so must he also awaken
with his Will, which is united unto the Virgins Heart, the Form or Signature in
his Mothers womb, whence she has brought forth him and all her Children, and
enkindle it with the Virgins and his Love-desire: This is effected and done in
the Sulphur of Saturn in the young man's own Text, Bodily.
personal Property, and in his mother; for before the espousing of the Virgin
the heavenly Essence of the young man lies shut up in Death; for when God
cursed the Earth, then the heavenly Paradisical Body disappeared, and the
Impression of Saturn took it in possession, until the Restitution, where God
shall restore that which is hidden, that Paradise does again spring forth
afresh in the Expressed Word, or that the Artist does open the same in a By
Degrees.
Part by Gods permission.

68. In the second Kingdom of the Mother, viz. in Luna, he shall also do
Wonders; for Jesus fed with five Barley loaves five thousand people; this is
the working in the Essentiality or Corporality. He turned water to wine: These
and the like do all belong unto the Lunar property, where the Champion with his
Virgin does open Paradise, and feeds the Body, where nothing is, where the
outward Mercury has not labored and wrought: Thus the Or, Signatures.
Forms in the Lunar property do open themselves as if they are Paradisical,
even then the Artist thinks I am nigh unto it, but he is yet far off from the
End.

69 In the third Kingdom of the Mother, viz. in Jupiter, Christ did make the
Babes and Ignorant, of a very weak and mean capacity, Knowing and
Understanding, viz. of poor Fishermen, Carpenters, and the like Mechanics, he
made Apostles, and the most understanding men of all; and also of poor,
disrespected, vilified people, as of women, and simple ones, he made faithful
devout, dear, godly children, who apprehended in themselves the Universal
without any Art.

70. Thus likewise it goes in the Philosophic work; the essentiality which
lies disappeared in death, where the Mercury is wholly earthly, cold, and
impotent, does now arise in power, as if the whole Being and Essence were
become a new life, at which the Artist does wonder, and marvelleth what it is,
or how it happens! and yet does also exceedingly rejoice that he sees the
Divine Power to spring forth before his eyes in a half dead Essence, and that
in the Curse of God: he sees all the four Elements, each apart, and sees how
the Wisdom of God does Speculate, or behold.
represent it self therein, as an harmony of joy, and sees all colors, and
the Rainbow upon which Christ sits in judgment in the expressed Mercury.

71. The nature of this splendour arises out of the impression of Saturn; the
good Jupiter does give himself forth to be seen in such a manner, as God will
change the World, and transform it again into Paradise; for this is the
Understanding in the Expressed Word, even as Christ has made the foolish,
rude, ignorant people truly wise and knowing in divine, real, heavenly joviall
understanding and knowledge.

72. In the fourth Kingdom of the Mother of all Beings, which is the Mercurial
in the Orb, Rotation, or Course.
wheel of the nature of life, Christ made the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak,
and cleansed the lepers from the poison of Mercury: All apoplexies, the French
or poisonful pox and sores do arise from the Saturnine water in Mercury, which
[water] is called Phlegma, all which Christ healed in the Form or Signature of
the young man, and Virgin; for the Eternal Virginity had espoused it self with
the young man, viz. with the humanity.

73. This comes to pass also in the Philosophic work: the Artist will see how
the Heaven severs it self from the Earth, and how the Heaven does again sink
into the Earth, and changes the earth into a heavenly color; he will see how
Mercury purifieth the matter, and how the purified colors will appear in
Antimony in their property, and how the Wonder proceeds on.

74. In the fifth Kingdom of the Mother of all Beings, Christ expels the
Devils out of the Possessed, and healed the deaf in this form and property.

75. This likewise the Artist will see in the Philosophic work, how Jupiter in
Mercury will drive up a black twinkling fiery vapor out of the matter, which
sticks on like foot; for it is a hunger of the poison in Mercury, and is very
rightly compared to the Devil, for it is of his property.

76. In the sixth Kingdom of the Mother of all Beings, viz. in the wheel of
Life, called Venus, Christ loved his Brethren and Sisters according to the
Humanity, and washed his Disciples feet, and loved them even to the deepest
exinanition, and gave his life into the wraths property even unto death for
them, and manifested himself among them that he was Christ: and when they
perceived, that the King was come that should deprive self-will of its might
and Dominion, and destroy the Devils Kingdom; then they cried out, and said, We
have no King but Caesar; they took him in the dark night into their power,
bound him, and brought him before their Or, judgment seat.
Council, mocked him, whipped him, and beat him, stripped him of clothes, and
hung him on the Cross.

77. This Also the Artist will see very powerfully in the Philosophic Work;
for so soon as the dark fiery steam, viz. the material Devil goes from the
matter, then Virgin Venus appears in her virginity very glorious and
beautiful; for it betokens Christ's Love, who did so humble himself, and
manifested his Love in our Humanity; then the Artist thinks that he has the
philosophic Child, that he has now the fine Morsel: but he danceth with the
Jews, who thought, when as they had taken Christ, Now we have him, we will keep
him well enough. Thus thinks he also, it is finished, and receives the
Child, and when he beholds it in the Trial, then he has Venus, a Woman, and
not the Virgin with the Tincture of the Fire and light, and is Or, Lets the
Woman deceive him.
deceived by the woman.

78. Now observe aright, what do the properties, viz. Saturn, Mars, and
Mercury, when as they see the Child, viz. the Champion in Royal Color, and
find that he manageth no external Dominion and Royalty with Power and
Authority as they do, but will only rule with Love in their poysonful
Fire-might? They will not suffer him.

79. For Saturn signifies the worldly Dominion, and Mercury the Spiritual
dominion, viz. the Or priests which call themselves the Ministers of Christ,
but are not.
Pharisees, and Mars signifies the Devil; these three would not endure Christ
among them; for he said that he was a King of Love, and the Son of God, and was
come to deliver his people from Sin: then thought the Devil, sure this rhimes
not well, thou will lose thy Kingdom: and the worldly Magistrate thought, Is
this a King, and Gods Son? then he will take away our might; this does not at
all like us: and the Mercurial Priests thought, this man is too mean for us, we
will have a Messiah who may bring us unto worldly Dominion, and make us to be
High and rich in the world, that we may alone possels the honor of the world;
we will not receive him, he is too poor for us, we might so lose the favor and
respect of the worldly Magistrate, and should be much damaged; we will rather
abide in our Power, Respect, and Authority, and abandon this beggarly King with
his Love-kingdom; in like manner as yet to this day they are so minded, and
serve his Messengers so, whom he sends.

80. Thus likewise it goes in the Philosophic work, when Venus manifests
her self with Love, viz. in her own property in the three wrathful forms, viz.
in Saturn, Mars, and Mercury; they can by no means endure it, for it is wholly
against their austere, dark, fiery might, but especially against the poison of
Mercury, they flash and lighten against Venus, and shoot their rays, viz. the
Mercurial poysonful rays upon her, as the Pharisees did upon Christ. In the
mean while, Jupiter and Luna hold with Venus, and give their power to Venus;
for Venus does here stand forth in the power of Jupiter; at this the Pharisees
laugh, and think with themselves, we are wise enough already, what need we
knowledge and understanding? we will have might and honor; and Luna signifies
the multitude of Laymen who stuck to Christ, while it went well with him; so
does Luna in the Philosophic Work to Venus in her Luster, so long as Saturn,
Mercury, and Mars do not meddle with and assault her; but when the Power of
wrath comes, then Luna changes her Will, viz. the color, and looks,
arises, and cries also with the rest the Crucifige; this the Artist will see,
if he be chosen and accounted worthy of God for the work.

CHAP. XI. Of the process of Christ in his suffering death, and Resurrection:
Of the wonder of the sixth Kingdom in the Mother of all Beings: How the
Consummatum est was finished, and how likewise it is symbolically accomplished
in the Philosophic work.
1. THis now is thus to be considered; we are to know, that the Essence of this
world, together with man, does consist in two properties, viz in Fire and
Light, that is, in Love and Anger: Now the Fire is twofold, and the Light is
also twofold, viz. a cold Fire from the Impression, and an hot Fire from the
Speer of Mercury in Sulphur; and so likewise there is a cold Light from the
cold Fire, and a warming Light from the hot Fire; the cold Light is false, and
the hot Light is good; not that it is false in its property, only in the
Impression, in the cold Sulphur, in the sharpness of the Wrath it turns to a
false desire, viz. to a false Love, which is contrary to the meeknes; for its
desire is Saturn and Mars.

2. It puts forth its Sun (understand its luster of life) in Mars, and the
warming Light (which also receives its fiery sharpness in the Impression in
Sulphur from Mars) brings its desire again into the liberty, viz. through the
dying in the Fire, through the anguish: It does wholly and freely give it It
freely loses it self in the Nothing.
self forth in the dying of the Fire, and forsakes the property of the wrath.

3. And so it becomes a General joy, and not its own only, even like the Sun
that gives forth its shining Luster Universally: the Sunshine is neither hot
nor cold; only Mercury in the Spirit of the great World does make in Mars and
Saturns property a heat therein; for the Sun does enkindle their desire,
whereupon they grow so very hungry, eager, desirous, and operative; that even a
Fire is found to be in the Light, which heat is not of the Lights own property,
but of the Soul of the great Word, which does so sharpen the pleasant Light in
its Splendour, that it is unsufferable to the eye.

4. And we are highly to consider and know, that if another Fire-desire, which
is not like unto the outward life in Mercury, would rule in the Austere wrath
of the outward Nature; that then it would be an Enmity contrary to the Austere,
cold, bitter, and fiery Dominion and Life, and that they would exalt [or
exasperate] their wrath, eagerly desiring to be rid of it: Even as it so came
to pass when the Divine Love desire did manifest it self with its great
meekness to the false, cold, proud, and austere Fire desire of the
Saturnalites, Martialists, and especially of the false Mercurialites: It was a
great Opposition and Enmity to them, that Love should rule in the Death of
Poison, and dwell therein, this they could not, not would not endure; for
Heaven was come into Hell, and would overcome the Hell with Love, and take away
its might; as it is to be seen in the person of Christ, he loved them, and did
them all manner of good, and healed their plagues [or diseases] but in that he
was not arisen from their wrathful might, and that he said he was descended
from above, and was Gods Son: this was unsavory to the cold, hot Fires might,
even that he should rule with Love over them.

5. Even thus it goes in the Philosophic Work; when the wrathful Forms of the
Earthliness, viz. the outward Saturn, Mars, and Mercury do see the Heavenly
Champion with the Virgins property among them, and perceive that he has far
another desire then they, then they are angry in themselves; for the
Love-desire, when it glimpseth on the Fire-flagrat, does awaken their
Fire-flagrat, and then the wrath proceeds forth from the Anxiety into Love,
where-from arises a Deaths-flagrat in the Love; but being there can be no
death therein, the Love condescendeth in the Fire-flagrat, and gives forth [or
distuseth] it self into their desire, and leaves its Essence: so that in their
desire they reach after its Property in the Deaths-flagrat; this is a poison to
Death, and a pestilence unto Hell; and in this Manner or condition.
Property Death was deprived of its power in the Humanity; For Christ, when as
he shed his Heavenly blood in the Flagrat of Death, and left it in Death, the
wrath of God was driven to retain the Heavenly Love-essence in it self: Even
there the Fire-desire in the enkindled Humanity was changed into a Love-desire,
and out of the Anguish of Death Was born, or begotten.
proceeded a Joy and strength of Divine Power.

6. But I will hereby give the Wel-wisher fundamentally to understand how it
went with Christ, and how in like manner it goes with his Philosophic Work,
both have wholly one process. Christ overcame the wrath of Death in the Humane
property, and changed the Anger of the Father into Love in the humane property;
the Philosopher likewise has even such a Will, he wills to turn the wrathful
Earth to Heaven, and change the poysonful Mercury into Love; therefore observe
us here aright, we will not here write parabolically, but wholly clear as the
Sunshine.

7. God would change the Humanity (after that it was become Earthly, and had
awakened the poysonful Mercury in the Love-property which [poysonful Mercury]
had devoured the Love, and changed it into it self) again in to the Divine
Heavenly property, and make Heaven of the humane earth, of the four Elements
only one in One desire, and change the wrath of God in the humane property into
Love.

8. Now his Anger was a might of the Fire and Wrath, and was inflamed in man,
and therefore there must be right Earnestness to withstand the same, and
change it again into Love: the Love must enter into the Anger, and wholly give
it self in unto the Wrath: it would not be enough that God should remain in
Heaven, and only aspect the Humanity with Love; it could not be, that the Anger
and Wrath should thereby yield up its might and strength, and freely give it
self unto the Love: as the Fire is not made better by the light, it still holds
its wrath for all that in it self; but when a meek Essence (as water) does come
into the Fire, then the Fire goes out.

9. Even so Heavenly Divine Essentiality (understand Heavenly water, which the
Tincture of the Fire and Light does change into Blood) must enter into the
wrathful Fire of God, and become the Fires food, so that the Fire of God might
burn from another Essence; for water could not have done it; the Fire does not
burn in the Water, but the meek oleous property of the Fire and Light in the
Essence of Divine meekness in the Lovedesire, that did effect it.

10. The humane Fire-life does consist in the Blood, and therein rules the
wrath of God; now another Blood, which was born out of Gods Love-essence, must
enter into the Angry humane Blood: they must go both together into the death of
the wrath, and the wrath of God must be drowned in the Divine Blood, and
therefore the outward Humanity in Christ must dye, that it might not any more
live in the Wraths property, but that the Heavenly bloods Mercury, viz. the
Speaking Word, might alone live in the outward Humanity, and solely rule in
peculiar Divine Power in the outward and inward Humanity; that the Self might
cease in the Humanity, and Gods Spirit might be All in All, and the Self only
his Instrument, whereby he makes what he pleases; that (I say) the Self hood
might be solely Gods instrument, and wholly in Resignation; for God has not
created man to be his own Lord, but his servant: He will have Angels under
obedience, and not Devils in their own Fire-might.

11. Now when as His Love would give it self into Death, and deprive Death of
its might, then the two Worlds, viz. the Fathers Fire-world, with the outward
visible World, and also the Divine Love-world with the Divine Heavenly
essentiality, that is, with Heavenly Flesh and Blood, and also with corrupted
flesh and blood, were formed into one Person. God became man, and made man to
God; the Seed of the Woman, viz. of the Heavenly Virginity, which disappeared
in Adam, and also corrupted man's Seed in the Anger, viz. Mary's Seed, were
formed into one Person, which was Christ; and the Seed of the Woman, viz. of
the Virgin of God, understand the Heavenly Essentiality, should bruise the head
of the Serpent, understand, the wrath of God in the Corrupted man; the head is
the might of Gods Anger: the Divine man, understand the Divine property, should
change the earthly into it self, and turn the earth to heaven.

12. Now when the Person was born, Heaven stood in the earth of man. Now the
Incarnation could not have done it alone, there must be yet after this another
Earnestness; for so long as Christ walked on the Earth, the Humanity which was
from Mary's property was not almighty, but the Humanity from God [was
omnipotent] they were set opposite one against the other in two principles, yet
not shut up, but both manifest in each other, the Love against the Anger, and
the Anger against the Love.

13. Here now was the Trial of the Combat one with another, whence also
proceeded the Temptation of Christ; and when the Divine World overcame, then
the great Wonders brake forth through the outward Humane World; but all this
could not accomplish it, there must yet be a greater earnestness, the Humane
Property, viz. the expressed Word, was yet stirring in the inflamable Anger;
the Humane Sulphur must be changed into the Heavenly, viz. into the Heavenly
part, and thereupon the Humane Self, viz. the expressed Mercury was astonished,
when upon the Mount of Olives the Heavenly world in the Love did wrestle with
the Anger in the Humane world, viz. with the Selfhood, so that the person of
Christ did sweat bloody sweat: even there the one was dismayed at the other;
the Love at the horrible death, whereinto it should and must wholly yield and
give in it self with the Divine Essentiality, and be swallowed up by the Anger,
and the Anger [was dismayed] at its death, in that it must lose its might in
the Love.

14. Hence the whole Person of Christ said, Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me; yet not as I will, but thy will be done. The Love-world in
Christ said, Can it not be but that I must drink down the cup of thy Anger?
then thy will be done. And the Anger said, If it be possible, let this Cup of
Love pass from me, that I may revenge my self, and rage in the wrath of man for
his disobedience sake; as God said to Moses, who stood in the Spirit of Christ
as a Type of Christ before God, Let me alone that I may devour this disobedient
people: But the Name Jesus, which had incorporated it self in Paradise with the
promise of the Woman's Seed in the Aim of the Humane and Divine Covenant, would
not suffer him; for the humility of the Name Jesus has always inter posed
against the wrath of the Father, against his Fires property, that his Fire
might not enkindle the half poysonful Mercury in man, save only at sometimes
when Israel walked wholly in the wrath and disobedience, as is to be seen by
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and by Elias.

15. So it was here on the Mount of Olives, the Anger would live in the Fires
might in man, and the Name Jesus put it Self into the Anger; and here there was
no other remedy, but that the Name Jesus in Divine Love, and Heavenly
essentiality must wholly resign up it self to be devoured by the Anger: the Son
must be, and was obedient to the Angry Father, even to the death of the Cross,
says the Scripture.

16. The dear Love-humility and meekness did suffer it self to be scorned,
mocked, spit upon, and Judged by the Anger, that is, the Jews must execute the
justice of God; for by man's self-action sin was committed, and by man's
self-action, Death and Sin must be blotted out. Adam had introduced his Will
into the poison of the outward Mercury: even so must Christ, viz. the Love,
freely give up its Will also into the same poysonful Mercury. Adam did eat of
the evil Tree, Christ must eat of Gods Anger; and as it went inwardly in the
Spirit, so likewise outwardly in the Flesh, and even so also it goes in the
Philosophic work.

17. Mercury in the Philosophic work betokens the Pharisees, he will not
endure the Love-child: when he sees it, he gives it trembling and anguish, and
Venus also stands dismayed at the poison of the angry Mercury; they are in one
another as if sweat did drop from them, as the Artist shall see.

18. Mars says, I am the Lord of Fire in the body, Saturn is my strength, and
Mercury is my life, I will none of this Love, I will devour it in my wrath;
this betokens the Devil in the anger of God; and being he cannot do it, he
raises up Saturn, viz. the Impression, which signifies the worldly
Magistracy, and reaches therewith after Venus, and yet cannot get her into
him, for she is to him a poison unto Death: This Mercury also can much less
endure, for the Love took away his Dominion; as the High Priests thought that
Christ would take away their Government, because he said that he was Gods Son.

19. Thus Mercury is vexed at the child Venus, for Venus has wholly discovered
her self, and freely given up her self; they may do now what they please, she
will go even into the Dragons mouth, he shall only but open his jaws; and this
Mars in Mercury does not understand, but they take the fair child, and shoot
their venomous Darts against it, and bind it with Saturns Might in their wicked
bands, as the Artist will see how they surround Venus her color.

20. Mars brings it first unto Mercury, being he is the life; as before the
High Priest, who must examine and prove the fair child; but he does hate it, he
cannot reach into the heart after its Love-will, he does only judge it
externally, because it is not of his property, that it stands forth with such
a form as the Mercury himself, and yet has another Power, Virtue, and Will.

21. But being there is another Mercury which lives in its Love in the Child
Venus, therefore he cannot kill it, but brings it unto Saturn, as the Jews
brought Christ from Caiaphas to Pilate, who signifies Saturn, who also takes
the Child: But seeing that he is a Lord of the Impression, viz. of the
darkness, therefore he cares not at all for the property of the Child, but for
the Dominion only; he seizes on the Child with the dark Impression, and strips
it of its fair Venus garment; and when Luna with the white splendour of the Sun
sees this, then she hides her self; as the Disciples of Christ fled, and the
enraged [rude] multitude also, who did highly presume to stand by him in the
Cross and Persecution, but in In the heat of his trial:
earnest they fly; for Luna is unconstant, she has not Sols heart in the
Love-flame; and Saturn with his thorny impression puts the Sulphur upon the
child, viz. the Mother of all Beings with the purple-coloured raiment of her
own peculiar property, in which the wrath of Mars is couched and harbored.

22. When Mars, viz. the Devils crew, and Mercury also, viz the self pride of
life does see, that Venus has her royal Garment on, understand the
Purple-robe of Saturn and Mercury in Sols color, mingled with fiery Mars, and
adorned in Mercury's sulphur-colour in the open blaze as a shining Luster; for
so is the Or, stuff.
Materia according to the color of the venereal property which the Artist must
well observe; he then will clearly see as it is mentioned.

23. When Mars, Mercury, and Luna also sees this, then they cry Crucistge,
away with Him, he is a false King in our Garment; he is a man as we are, and
will be God, that is, they cast their poysonful desire through the purple.
garment upon the child, and so the Artist will see that the Child will appear
in his own form, as if it were full of streaks from the poysonful rays of
Mercury and Mars, which they lay upon the Child, through the impression of
Saturn; as Pilate whipped Jesus; the Artist will see the prickly Crown of
Thorns standing very sharp with its point upon the property of the Child; also
he will see how that Venus does not at all move her self, but stands still,
and suffers it self to be so done unto.

24. Further we are to understand, how that Adam had taken on him a cold false
Love, and therewith so showed himself before God as if he were in peculiar
Dominion and Will, and moreover Gods Child, whereas he did but mock God
therewith, for so the Love desire does appear when it is captivated in the
impression of death.

25. Thus must the second Adam Christ take all this upon him, and enter into
the same ignominy and scorn, and be clothed with a purple garment as a King of
this World, and be mocked therein; for Adam had put on the purple garment of
the outward Worlds Self-might in the splendour of self-hood, and here it was
made open show of before the Anger of God: and the white garment which Herad
put upon Christ for to mock him in, signifies and is the cold false Love as a
cloak of falsehood, wherein man pranketh as if he were an Angel, and so puts
upon himself Christ's purple mantle with his white robe, and covers himself
with Christ's pure snow-white garment, viz. with his Suffering and Death, and
yet holds and harbors the man of falsehood, viz. the false Love under a
vail.

26. Now Christ must set forth this Figure, and it was represented on his body;
for he should overcome and slay the man of fashood which lay in the Humane
property, and so it was fully represented before God. Christ must be termed and
reviled for such an one as Adam was, the innocent must take the blame upon him.

27. And thus it goes in the Philosophic work, when the curse of Gods anger
which is in the Earth is to be changed into Love; for seeing Mercury sets the
Child of Love before Saturn, and Saturn cannot, nor may not try it, therefore
he puts upon it the purple-coloured Garment with stripes underneath, and sends
it before Sols splendour, which glimmereth in Mars, and the Sun puts upon it its
white color, viz. the Lunar, and then the purple color vanishes, and the
Child stands in the Lunar white simple color, very despicable without
Luster; the Sun would fain see this Child to show forth its golden color, for
it perceives there is a Solar virtue in the Child, therefore it gives it the
white color from the property of the Eternal liberty; the Child should but
give the power of the Fires Center thereunto, viz. the Divine might, and then
it would be like the Sun, and would be a Lord over the Sulphur of Mars and
Mercury, yet only a Lord over the outward worlds Essence, a Governor in the
wrath, as Sol is the like.

28. But Christ said to Pilate, my Kingdom is not of this world, and would not
answer Herod any thing in this white raiment when he put it on him, nor in the
Purple robe; for the Purple robe and the white raiment also were both false,
and were put upon him for to disgrace and mock him, because Adam had put them
on, and proudly pranked therein with falsehood. Christ might not do any sign
therein before Herod, although he desired it. Hereby the shame of man, who was
an Image of God, and yet had made himself a false King, was represented before
Gods Face, as the poor Sinner confesses, and sets forth his abominations
before God, when he sets upon abstinence and repentance.

29. Thus Christ represented unto his Father the Abominations [or sins] of man
in this false Garment, and stood before him as an Ignominy, and confessed the
Sins of man unto his Father in the stead and place of all men: and when his
Father beheld him through his Imagination in this Garment, he would none of
this robe; therefore Pilate must pull it often from Him again, and set Him before
the Jews in His own form; but they cry, away, away with him, be must be put to
death; For so his Father would, that he should give himself up to Death in his
wrath, and drown the same.

30. And Pilate condemned him to death, for he would not acknowledge him for a
King: so it also goes in the Philosophic Work; Saturn will not receive the
Child, for it is not of his property: and Mars and Mercury likewise will not
have it in its property; but what do they do? the Child is among them, they
would fain be rid of it, but yet cannot: They grow angry and enraged, as the
Jews against Jesus, and take the Child into their Text, Hold.
Arms, viz. into their false poysonful angry desire, and will murder it, and
quite sting, and pierce through the Materia of the Child with their sharp,
fiery, and poysonful rays, viz. with three sharp nails.

31. One whereof is Saturn, viz. the Impression of the dark World, betokening
the wrath of the dark World. The other is Mars, which signifies the Devil,
viz. the Serpents property in the Anger of God. The third is Mercury, which
signifies the false life, viz. how the wrath of God is enkindled in the
expressed Word in the Humane property.

32. These three nails they pierce through the property of the Child. Thus
Venus, viz. the Essence of Love does wholly yield it self into the three
Murderers, and wholly forgoeth its jovial life as if it did dye; and the
Mercurial life of the Humane property, understand the Child's power, falls
also unto the three Murderers in its Mothers house, viz. into the Corporal
Essence, wherein the young man received his Virgin, wherein God became man.

33. Now when the Heavenly body, and also the Earthly, do thus yield unto these
three Murderers, then appears the Image of John and Mary by the Cross as a
Type, for the young man's life, and also the Virgins in the young man has
freely surrendered, and given forth it self: and now the two properties, viz.
the Divine and Humane do divide themselves in the form of each power, which the
Artist may see if he has the eyes and understanding thereunto.

34. And here, when Saturn with his Impression and dark sharpness, and Mars
with his wrath, and Mercury with his poyson-life do powerfully enter into the
property of Venus, then the Wrath does force it self into the Love, and the
Love into the Wrath essentially mixed, as assimulating one into each other:
here the wrathful Death is dismayed at the Love, so that he in dying falls
into Impotence [or a Swoon] for it loses the might of the Wrath; and the Love
is, and stands also in the Source of the wrath in Deaths flagrat as impotent
[or in a swoon] and gives it self forth wholly into the flagrat [or stroke] of
Death, and even then the Heavenly Essence viz. the Heavenly Blood flows forth
from it into the property of the third Principle, viz. of the young man. Here
the Virgin gives her Pearl to the Young man for a propriety, and God and Man
become one.

35. For the Virgins blood out of the Divine Essentiality does here now drown
with its Love-essence the Young-mans blood, viz. the Self hood, and the three
Murderers do surrender their life in the blood of the Virgin, and then the red
glee from the Fire, and also the white from the life of the Champion do arise
up together, viz. from the Wrath the Life, and from the Love the Meekness; and
both, viz. the life of the Anger, and the life of the Love, do ascend together
as one only life; for in death they become one: The Death dies away in the
Love, and becomes in the Love the life of the Divine Kingdom of joy; for it is
not a dying, but a free surrendering of its Power, Might, and Will, a
Transmutation; the Virgins blood changes the Humane, dead as to God, into an
Heavenly [blood] the life of the Young man dies, and the life of the Deity
remains sixth and steadfast, for it stands in its property in the Nothing.

36. And here thou dear Seeker, when thou see the crimsoncoloured blood of
the Young man to arise out of Death with the Virgins white blood, then know
that thou have the Areanum of the whole World, and a treasure in this valley of
misery, which surpasses the value of gold; take it and esteem it more
excellent and sovereign then that which shall again arise from Death; if thou
be born of God, then thou will understand what I mean.

37. For this is the Type of Christ [shewing] how Christ has drowned sin, and
the enkindled Anger of God in the Humane property; it is not only an Offering,
for then Moses had accomplished it; it is not a bare verbal* forgiveness, as
Babel teaches; no, no, the Humane Will must from all its Powers enter into
this death, into this blood, viz into the Highest Tincture.

38. The Purple-robe which Christ wore could not do it; the white hypocritical
Pharisaical Priests coat could also not effect it, no flattery or demure
hypocrisy avails here; no comfortings, soothings, or giving God good words
are effectual here, the crafty malignant man must be mortified in Christ's
blood, he must be drowned in the Virgins blood; The seed of the Woman must
bruise the head of the Serpent; the Will must wholly disclaim and depart from
its selfness, and become as an ignorant Child, and wholly enter into Gods
Mercy, into the Virgin-like blood of Christ, that sin and the poisoned Mercury
may be drowned in its Mars, that the white Lion may arise; for the Lion which
now appears in the white color, in Crimson red, is the Mercury of life, viz.
the expressed Word, viz. the Soul, which before was a wrathful Devil in its
self-hood, ruling and domineering in the Anger of God in the three forms of the
poyson-source, viz. in Saturn, Mars, and Mercury; now it is the white
scarlet-colored Lion from the House of David and Israel, fulfilled in the
Covenant of promise.

NE.

39. But that we may give satisfaction unto the Wel-wisher, we will further
show him the whole ground even unto the Resurrection of Christ; when the Jews
had hung Jesus upon the Cross, and He had shed His Humane and Heavenly Divine
blood, and drowned the Turba in the Humane [blood] then Jesus said, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do.

40. When Jesus had broken Death in the Humanity, and took away Self, he did
not then wholly cast away the Humane property, wherein Death and the Anger of
God was, but then he did first truly assume it; Understand, he even then did
truly take the outward Kingdom into the inward; for the outward Kingdom was
begotten as a Wonder out of the Eternal Wisdom in the Speaking Word, and spoken
forth into a form, as a manifestation of the Deity in Love and Anger, in Good
and Evil: so that Jesus would not that the outward Type of the wonders in the
likeness of God should perish [or quite vanish] but the Wrath which had over
powered the love in man should be forgiven, that is, it should be given into
the Nothing, viz into the Liberty, that it might not be manifest in its own
Self-property; it must be Servant, and only a Cause of the fiery Love and
Divine joyfulness; nothing should perish [or be lost] in man, for God had
created him unto his Image.

41. Thus let the Philosopher observe, that when the three Murderers, viz.
Saturn, Mars, and Mercury do Are drowned.
sink in the Crimson-coloured blood of the Lion, they do not perish; but they
are pardoned, that is, their wrath is changed into a Love-desire, viz. out of
Venus into Sol; for when the fiery desire enters into the watery desire, then
a shine, viz. a glorious splendour, does arise from and in the Fire; for Venus
is white, and the Fire-desire is red.

42. Here now it is changed into one color which is yellow, that is, white and
red both in one color, which is the Majestical [Lustre;] for when Mercury is
changed into the power of joy, then arises the Multiplication; he changes his
Mother, wherein he lay shut up in death, into Sol; he makes the Earthly
Heavenly in one property, as the Virgin was; for here the Virgin loses her
Name, for she has given her Love and Pearl unto the Champion, who is now
called here the white Lion, as the Scripture speaks of the Lion of the House
of ISrael and David, who should demolish the Devils Kingdom, and destroy Hell,
that is, break the Anger of God, and change it into Love.

43. This Champion or Lion is no Man or Woman, but he is both; the Tincture of
the Fire and Light must come into One, viz. of the Essence, which is Venus, and
of the Spirit which is Mars in Mercury; the Fathers Love and Anger must become
one thing, and then this one thing is called the Kingdom of joy; so long as it
is separated, there is in the thing only anguish and torment, and mere desire;
but when it burns in one Will, it is a joyful proceeding forth from it self:
and this Egressive outgoing property is called the Holy Ghost, viz. the life of
the Deiry.

44. Therefore know that the Virgins and Young man's blood must be both shed
together, that the Fire-Lyon might dye, which was manifest in the Humane
property, that the Love of the Virgin might change his wrath in her dear
Love-blood into her property, and obtain the Soul from the Young man; for in
Adam the Virgin did disappear, for the Soul departed out of its Love-will out
of the Resignation into its own, and became disobedient unto God.

45. Here the Virgin does again take the Soul into her Self, and gives it her
Crown of Pearl, as unto a Noble Champion, and calls him in his own Name the
white Lion or Champion. O ye children of men, observe it I beseech you; open
the Gates of the World in your heart; Open them wide that the King of glory may
come in, even the great Champion in Battle, who has deprived Death of its
might, and destroyed the Hell in Gods Anger, and made of the World Paradise.

46. O ye wise Seekers, how does the Lord open his windows! wherefore do ye
sleep in the desire of Plenty.
muchness [in your covetousness] which is multiplied in the Wrath? Do but enter
only into the Divine Resignation; you may partake of that which the Powers of
Heaven are able to afford: If you do but forsake your Selfness, then the Earth
shall become Heaven to you, says the Spirit of Wonders; but you shall not
obtain it in your wicked ways and coverous doings.

47. And when Jesus through the shedding of his Blood had given the Wrath of
God in Man unto the Love, that the Father had received the Love in the Humane
property into the Wrath; then the Kingdom of the Devil in the Wrath, and the
Kingdom of Love did forthwith part asunder; they were divided: and this Figure
did hang with Christ on the Cross, viz. the wicked mocker at the left hand, who
reviled Jesus, and was not capable of his bloodshedding; and the other at the
right hand, who was converted from his sins unto Jesus, and said, Lord remember
me when thou come into thy Kingdom; to whom Jesus answered, Verily to day
thou shall be with me in Paradise.

48. Thus we are rightly to consider, that when the wrath of God is drowned in
the blood of Christ, so that it changes its might into Love, that even then
Paradise is again open; for when JESUS had tinctured the Humane Blood which was
corrupted in Sin with the Virgins blood in the Love; then the Virgin received
the Manhood, viz. the Self-hood, into her Virgins Love. This was the Paradise,
and an Habitation of God, with, and in Man, where God dwells in the Humanity,
and is All in All in it.

49. Thus it falls out also in the Philosophic Work, when Mars and Mercury
do dye according to the property of the dark Impression of Saturn, then Venus
takes them into her Love-blood, and Venus gives her Love into the poysonful
Fire-desire; She wholly gives her self in unto the Fire of MARS in MERCURY,
yea, she yields her self fully to be their own; but seeing Mars and Mercury
become impotent (as to the might of the Fire and poison) in the Love, the Love
and Anger do thereupon change themselves into one Essence, into one desire; and
here, when the Fire, viz. the Fire desire, does give in its desire unto the
Love; then says the Love, To day thou shall be with me out of thy Fire-anguish
in Paradise, viz. in joy, that is, thou shall be changed in me, and here Venus
gets the Soul in the Philosophic work, so that Mars and Mercury become her
Soul, and the strife cease; for the Enmity is appeased and quelled, and thus
the Child subsists in the Fire immovably without any change; for Mars does not
at all annoy it, and so likewise Mercury and Saturn burrs it not, for they are
in the Child at the end of Nature, where there is no Turba any more.

50. Mercury is very pure in Saturn, he has no more poison, whereby to make
soil [or rust] in the Water, viz. in the Salt of Saturn: and let the
Philosopher and Divine also well observe this, that in Paradise there is a
perfect life without any shadow of change, also without any false evil desire,
and a continual day, where the Paradisical man is clear as a transparent glass,
in whom the Divine Sun shines through and through, as Gold that is thoroughly
bright and pure, without any spot or foulness.

51. And when Jesus knew that all was finished, he sees his Mother and John
his Disciple standing by under the Cross, and says unto his Mother, woman, lo!
this is thy Son; and to the Disciple, Behold thy Mother, and forthwith the
Disciple took her unto his own home.

52. This is an excellent Type, how Christ has forsaken this World, viz. the
Humane Self-hood,, and is again gone unto the Father; for he saw his Mother
according to this World, and his Disciple, viz. his Uncle, according to the
outward Humanity from his Mothers side, and yet said unto his Mother, Woman,
hehold, there is thy Son, I am no more thy Son according to my outward
Humanity; it is changed into Gods Son, and is no longer of the World, but it
lives to God; but seeing thou art to be yet in the World, take John, who is
not yet changed, to be thy Guardian, and thou John take thy Mother, and he
presently took her unto himself.

53. This is the Type of the Christian Church upon Earth; for we the poor
Children of Eve, are not presently wholly changed according to the outward man;
but we must also pass into death, and putrify, that the wrath also in the
flesh may rot and putrify, and the Spirit might rest in the death of Christ
until the General Resurrection and Transmutation of the outward man, in which
the Earth of man shall be transformed into Heaven, and the Mirror [or Type] of
the Wonders shall appear therein.

54. Thus he commanded his Disciple to take care of his Mother: His Mother is
the Christian Church upon Earth, wherein the Children of God are begotten
according to the Spirit, whom he should take care for, and guide and lead them,
until the number of the Humanity out of the Flesh shall be accomplished, and
then the Spiritual body shall arise, and shall be proved in Christ's death, in
his Entrance into the Anger, where he changed the Anger into Love: and the
Kingdom with the Source of darkness shall be Separated from it.

55. But in this lifetime, albeit the Spirit be Transformed.
changed in the Divine power, and the Spirit be baptized with the Virgins
baptism, and puts on the Image of Christ internally, viz. Venus's body in
the Love; yet Adam is not capable of it until he also enters into the
Transmutation of Christ, which comes to pass in death [or in the dying unto
this mortal life.]

56. But in the mean while, Jubn, as the Teacher of Christ in Christ's stead,
must provide for the outward Mother according to the outward man, and feed and
teach the Lambs of Christ with Christ's Spirit: and it does exactly show us how
the outward Man is not Gods Mother; for Christ does separate himself from his
outward Mother, and gives her unto John; he has Taken or received.
put on the Eternal Mother, viz. the Father of the Eternal Birth, and therefore
they do very ill that honor and worship the outward Mother of Christ for Gods
Mother.

57. The whole true Christendom is Christ's Mother, which bears Christ in her:
And John, viz. the Servants [and Ministers] of Christ are her Nurses, which
take care for the Mother of Christ as John did; he presently received the
Mother of Christ and provided for her, as her Son, and not as her Lord; for
Christ said also unto him, Behold, she is thy Mother; even so should all the
Disciples and Teachers of Christ do, and take care of the poor Christendom, as
Sons, with great Humility toward the Mother provide for, and cherish her with
diligence and circumspection, and serve her with all discreet modesty,
courtesy, and humility; feed and comfort her with the Spirit of Christ, not as
the Priests in Babel do, who ride over her as wealthy rich domineering Masters,
and will be Lords over the Mother, and only seek Honors, and to fatten their
Bellies in pleasure, and live in Strife and Contention; these, one with the
other, of what Name or Title soever they be, are not all Johannites, but they
are the poysonful Mercurial Pharisees, in whom there is nothing but mere
anguish, vexation, pain and torment, where one property does continually
torment, envy, and hate the other, and holds it out for false; and yet they are
all only out of one root, and have all only one will, save that one color does
not glister as the other.

58. For Saturn is not as Jupiter, Jupiter is not as Mars, Mars viz. the Fire
spirit is not as the light of the Sun, and the Sun is not as Venus with her
meek water-Source, and Venus is not as Mercury with his Sound; for she is meek
and still, and Mercury sounds and sets up his note; and Mercury also is
not as Luna, which as a simple body does give body to all the rest for
manifestation, the one is far otherwise then another, and have not one property
and will, and yet they are in the Center of the Essence, viz. in Luna and
Saturn, in the property of the Soul and Body, all of them one and the same
batch. Thus the partial Sectarian Mercurialites, and Baals Servants, are
divided in these properties; they are the Pharisees which judge and condemn
Jesus in his Members.

59. They wrangle and contend only about the Church, and yet none will take
care of the poor forsaken Mother of Christ: they are mad in their Martial and
In War for their proud unrighttous Mammon, and in bitter strife about their
outward worship of christ.
Mercurial Contest, and are not Johannites, they enter not in Christ's Spirit at
the door of Christ into the Sheep fold; They are Wolves, Lions, and Bears, yea
Foxes and fearful Hares, who fly from and forsake the Mother; their Rise and
Original is out of Babel, where they continually contend, wrangle, grin, and
bite one another for the Letter. Every one will be Lord and Master over the
Letter, and transpose and place it as he pleases, only for the Honor,
Applause and Pleasure of this World: They consider not that the Mother is a
Widow, and that Christ has left and ordained them that they should be such
Curates for her as John.

60. O thou dear Mother of Christendom, let these Wolves, Bears and Lions go,
and shelter themselves where they please, regard no longer these evil Beasts;
take the John, the Disciple of Christ, who teaches the Love and Humility.

61. O thou dear and worthy Mother, art thou not only One? Wherefore do thou
suffer the Lions to rent and teer thee in pieces? Christ is thy Husband, all
these are Strangers and Hirelings, unless they walk in thy filial Love, and
humble themselves toward the Mother, and provide for her as Ministers, else
they be all Wolves, Bears, and teering Lions; although there were many thousand
of them, yet one is not at all better then another, unless he comes forth in
the line of John, and take care of Christ's Mother, and provide for the Mother
with earnestness in Christ's Spirit; which if he has not, he is not then called
of Christ to be a Guardian or Curate to the Mother: but he is a Mercurialite, a
Pharisee, such as Christ called the Seed of Serpents, and Generation of Vipers,
who crucify Jesus in his Members.

62. And thus the Philosopher must consider of and well observe Christ's Mother,
whom he recommended unto John to take care for: he must likewise be a John, and
know that his business is about the Mother, and that his work in this world is
not Altogether.
wholly Heavenly; he will not so manifest Paradise, that God will appear, and
be manifest face to face in his Work: no, he remains in the Mother, yet he
obtains the Universal in the Mother; for the Mother of Christ obtained it
also, for it was said unto her, Thou art the blessed among all women.

63. So likewise the Philosopher reaches unto the Blessing in this valley of
misery, that he is able to bless his corrupt body, that is, Tincture it and
free it from sickness, even to the limit of his highest Constellation according
to Saturn, and therefore let him take heed of Covetousness, for so he
introduces the Turba.

64. By the Type of John, and the Mother of Christ, he is to know that the
Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of this World are two in his Work, and that
Gods Kingdom lies shut up in the Mother, viz. in his work, of which he must
take care, and be a Minister thereunto, and not a Lord of the Mother; but an
Almsgiver, and not a gatherer of Treasure and Wealth, not a covetous Muck-worm;
also none shall attain unto it, or understand our meaning, that will not be a
Guardian of the Mother: the most High has laid a bar before the foolish
Understanding of folly.
understanding, that it is blind, until it be weary with secking; I speak in
the ground of truth.

65. And when Jesus had commended his Mother unto John. he again turned his
desire into the Mother of the Humane property, and said, I thirst; he thirsted
after the Members of Humane property, and desired the Salvation of Mankind,
viz. the health of his Members, understand of his Children, which should be
begotten in Him; and the Jews gave his Humanity Gall and Vinegar to drink, and
when he tasted it he would not drink it.

66. Here is again the outward Type, showing how it went inwardly: The name
Jesus, viz. the Love of God which was entered into the Humanity, and had
espoused it self thereunto, did thirst in the Love-desire after the corrupt
Humanity, and would fain taste the pure water of the Humanity in it self; but
the wrathful Anger of God which was enkindled in the Humane property, did give
it self in with the Humane property unto the thirst of the Love desire: and
when the Love-desire tasted of it, it would not drink it, but sank down into it
as wholly resigned, or freely yielded, and did unite and very essentially
incline it self into the Anger of God as a full and perfect obedience, and
fully and freely given over as a peculiar propriety thereinto.

67. This was now the Flagrat of the wrath, that the Love should so come into
it; whereupon the Earth trembled, and the Rocks clove asunder; for so the Death
was dismayed at the Life: and here the Awakened Wraths property did SeVer it
self into the Center, viz. into the First Principle, into the Fire^root; and
now from the Center there proceeded forth the hunger to the New Birth in the
Humane property, of the hunger unto Death was made an hunger unto Life; for the
Love tinctured the Anger, that the Fire^desire to the dark Impression became a
desire of Life.

68. Understand it here aright; God the Father, who gave his dear Heart into
the Humanity to help mankind, did now thirst after the Humanity* viz. after his
heart or word of Power: and the Deity in the Humanity, viz. the heart of the
Father, did thirst after the Father, and the Love or the Essence of the Light
did thirst after the Fires Essence; for the Fires, or Souls Essence in Adam was
departed out of the Love-essentiality (wherein the Paradise did consist) into a
Selfness, and was become disobedient unto God, and thereupon the Essence, life,
and being of the Light and Love did dye in its Growing, that is, it did wither
as to the Vegetative life, or Heavenly growth, blooming, and Sense of the
Paradissal Source, and did awake and arise to the Earthly World.

69. Here the Father brought the Soul, which was entered into his Wrath, and
had manifested its self in his Anger, again into the Love, viz. into the
disappeared Paradisical Image: and here the dark World was dismayed in Deaths
Flagrat at the Fire-Flagrat, which arose up in Love in the Death as a joyful
Flagrat, which Joy-Flagrat entered into the dead Bodies of the Hopers of Israel
(who did hope upon the Messiah) as a sound of the power of God, and did awaken
them from death.

70. This Flagrat rent in twain the Vail in the Temple, viz. the Vail of Moses,
which hung before the clear face of God, so that man could not see God, and
therefore he must serve him with an Offering, and Type of this Final Discovery,
in which God did manifest himself again in the Humanity: This Flagrat broke the
Type in the Offerings and Sacrifices, and manifested the clear face of God, and
united the Humane Time with Eternity.

71. All whatsoever the Jews did outwardly unto Christ, the same was a Type of
the inward, viz. how it went between God and the Humanity, viz. between the
Eternity and Time; the Jews gave Jesus Gall and Vinegar in his Thirst, both
these properties are a Mercury in the Sulphur of Saturn, viz. in the
Impression; this is even the Type and full resemblance of the Souls property,
as it is in it self alone devoid of the other Love-properties.

72. God gave this property of the Soul again into his Love, the Death into the
Life, the disappeared Love-essence (which the Word of God had assumed to it
self in the Essence and Seed of Mary, and quickened to life) [he gave] into the
Angers property, into the Souls essence, viz. into the Center of the Fire and
dark World, whereupon the Soul-like Fire and dark world became an exceeding
Triumphant joyful Paradisical life; and here the Champion upbraided Death and
Hell, viz. the dark World in the Soul, and said, Death! where is thy Sting now
in man? Hell! where is now thy victory in the Wrath of the poyson-Source in the
expressed Word or Mercury? all is now dead: O Death, I am to thee a Death;
Hell! I am to thee a Conqueror; thou must serve me for the Kingdom of joy:
Thou shall be my Servant and Minister to the Kingdom of joy; thou shall
enkindle the flames of Love with thy Wrath, and be a Cause of the Spring in
Paradise.

73. Thus we give the Philosopher to understand our sense and deep ground in
Nature, who desires to seek and open the disappeared Essence of the Earth,
which lies shut up in Death, viz. in the Curse of God: the Vail of Moses
hangs also before him, and a very right earnestness is requisite for to rend
the Vail in twain, that he may be able to see the face of Nature, otherwise he
is not fitted thereunto.

74. And as it went in the Humanity of Christ, betwixt Gods Love and Anger, and
both were transformed into One: so likewise it is in his Work of Nature, the
poysonful Mercury in the Sulphur of Mars and Saturn gives its Lunar Menstruum,
viz. the greatest poison of the dark Source into Venus's property; when Venus
thirsts after the Fire of Love, then Mercury gives his poison into the
thirst of Venus, and Venus's thirst gives it self wholly unto the poison, as
if it dyed; it wholly yields up its desiring life, whereupon arises the
great darkness in the Philosophic Work; for the Materia becomes as black as a
Raven, for Venus has resigned its life, whence the glance [or splendor] does
arise, as it is to be seen by Christ, that the Sun lost its light, and there
was a great darkness contrary to the common Course of Nature.

75. For when the inward Sun gave in it self unto the Anger, viz. into the
darkness of God; then the outward Sun, which receives its power and luster
from the inward, as a glass or resemblance of the inward, could not shine; for
its root from whence it shines was entered into the darkness in the place of
this World, and would turn the darkness in the Curse of God into light, viz. it
would make the place of this world again Paradise.

76. Thus likewise the Sun of the outward World, which is a Figure of the
inward all essential Sun, must stand still with its Splendour in the darkness,
from the sixth hour unto the ninth, which is even the time of Adams sleep when
he entered with the desire into the Center of the Eternal Nature, viz. into the
Birth, where the Love and Anger do part themselves into two Centres, and would
prove the cold and hot Fire, which took him, and did powerfully work in him.
Here are three hours according to the Or number three.
Ternary, and in the Grave three days according to the time, viz. according to
the Humanity.

77. When Adam was in the Image of God, and was neither Man nor Woman, but
both; He stood forty days in Paradise without wavering, and when he fell he
stood even until the third day, viz. forty hours in the Sleep, even till God
did make or build the Woman out of him. Thus Israel must be tempted forty days
on Mount -Sinai, whether it would live in the obedience of God under the
Wonders and mighty Acts; and when as it could not be, God gave them the Law of
His Covenant as a Looking-glass of that which was promised in the Covenant,
therefore the temptation of the body was upon them forty years, that the body
must eat Manna to try whether Man could be remedied; and when as the body [or
outward person] could not stand, then Joshuah brought them through the water
with the Covenant of the Mirror, Resemblance, Glass.
Type, where Israel must serve with Sacrifices in the Covenant in the Type of
the Final accomplishment until the time of Restitution came in, and then the
Valiant Champion in Battle stood 40. days in the Wilderness Or, In.
of the temptation, and stood out the first Trial of Adam in Paradise; and the
three hours of darkness on the Cross are the three hours of the Temptation of
Christ, when the Devil tempted him: And again the forty hours of Christ in the
Grave are the forty days of Adam in Paradise, and the forty days of Moses upon
the Mount, and the forty years in the Wilderness, and the forty days after the
Resurrection before the Ascension, are even one and the same: and now when the
Champion had stood out Adams Trial, the Soul was tempted forty days in the
Humane property, whether it would eat of Gods Word, and live in full Resigned
obedience in the Will of God, and be a true Image, Likeness, and Similitude of
the Divine Power in the Unsearchable Eternity, according to the Trinity of the
Deity.

78. In the like manner let the Philosopher observe us, that the essence of
time does also stand in such a property, for man was created out of the Essence
of time into an Image, as an extract of all essences, a complete Image and
likeness according to Time and Eternity, ruling and standing in the Time and in
the Eternity, as an Instrument of the great infinite God, with whom, by, and
with his Spirit he would make and do what he pleased.

79. Now man is the Instrument of God, with [or by] whom he does manifest his
hiddenness both in his own Humane property, viz. in the Essence and Image of
God; and then also through man; as with the Instrument in the Mother of all
Beings, as in the Grand Mystery, viz. in the Soul of the great world.

80. Man has power so far as he goes as an instrument of God in Divine
obedience, as his Spirit does guide and lead him, that he can introduce the
Earth which stands in the Curse of God into the Benediction, and make of
Deaths-anguish the highest triumphant joy in the outward Pregnant Mother; but
he himself does it not, only his will does labor with the understanding
therein, and does conjoyn the Compacta, which belong together, as Life and
Death which stand opposite to one another; these he must join together, and
bring them into one by such an art as Time and Eternity are united by and in
the man Christ, and by him all those which give their will thereinto.

81. He will see in his work all whatsoever God did with.
in the Humanity; when he brought it again into the Universal, viz. into
Paradise, He will see how the Wrath devours and swallows up the fair Venus into
his pricking thorny essence, and how Venus does fully yield in her self, and
how the Wrath also dies away in Venus, and becomes wholly dark and black as a
Coal; for death and life do lie together both in the Death, viz. in the
obedience of God: they both hold still unto him, and suffer the Spirit of God
to make of and with them what it pleases, who introduces them again into the
Eternal will of God whereto he at first created them; and thus the Essence
stands again in the beginning in the Order as God created it: It must only
stand in its Impression, in the Verbum Fiat, viz. in the Divine making, until
the day of Gods Separation, when God will change the Time again into the
Eternity.

82. And when Jesus had drunk the cup and tasted the Vinegar mixed with Gall in
the outward [man] and inwardly in the Love-property, viz. in the Virgin, the
wrathful Anger of God; then said the whole man Christ, My God, my God,
wherefore have thou forsaken me? For Gods Speaking Word stood still now in the
Humane property, and the newborn essentiality which was dead in Adam, and was
again quickened in Christ did cry with the same, My God, my God, wherefore have
thou forsaken me? For the Anger of God was by the Souls property entered into
the Image of the Divine Essentiality, and had devoured the Image of God.

83. Here now the Image in the Creature of the Soul cried, My God, my God,
wherefore have thou for saken me? for the Humane Image which disappeared in
Adam, and was again revived in Christ's Incarnation, should bruise the head of
Gods Anger in the Fire-soul, and change its Fire-might into Text, The Sun.
Sol: and now the Speaking Word of God did here forsake it, and it fell into
its souls wrath, where it felt Gods Anger; for the Speaking Word did so bring
it through the Anger into Death, and out of the Death again into the Solar
life, understand into the Eternal Sun.

84. Like as the Candle dies in the Fire, and out of that death the light and
power proceeds, viz. the great painless life; so out of Christ's dying and
death the eternal Divine Sun should and must arise in the Humane property; but
the Selfness of the Humane property, viz. the Souls own Self will to live in
the Fires might must here dye and be drowned in the Image of Love, and the
Image of Love must also resign and give it self in unto the Wrath of Death,
that so all might fall down into death, and arise in Gods will and mercy
through death in the Paradissal Source in the Resignation, that Gods Spirit
might be all in all. Hells eye must see through the Love, as the light shines
out of the Fire, and the Fire from the Darkness, and the Darkness takes its
Original from the Eternal desire.

85. And as Adam changed the likeness of God into the dark Deaths form, so God
did again change the likeness through his Fire-wrath out of Death into the
Light; he drew forth the likeness again out of death, as a blossom grows
from the Or wild.
harsh Earth.

86. Thus it goes likewise in the Philosophic work; Venus is forsaken when
she receives the three wrathful properties into her self in wrath; their wrath,
viz. the death does devour her life, whereupon she loses the color, and yet
becomes a Death to the three forms in the Wrath, for she drowneth Death with
Love. Thus the Life is made a death to death, viz. to the Wrath, and now they
both do lie in the will of the Eternal Nature, viz. in the Verbum Fiat, which
Goes out.
proceeds with them the Divine way, in manner as it proceeded forth into
Essence in the beginning of the Creation; for in the beginning Paradise, viz.
the Universal was manifest, and the Love shone through the Death or Anger. Even
so it must be again, Venus must become the Eye or Sight in the Wrath, and then
of Saturn, Mars, and Mercury there will be a Jupiter: Mars becomes Sun, and
Saturn Moon, and so Mars shines with the Sun out of Saturn in Luna from
Venus's eye, and all Seven are only one; Thus the strife has an end, and all
is accomplished until the Resurrection of the body.

87. And when Jesus had drunk the Cup, and said, My God why have thou forsaken
me? then he said, All is finished, understand the work of man's Redemption; and
said further, Father into thy hands I commit my Spirit, and towed his head, and
gave up the Ghost. Here the whole life of Christ resigned it self into the
Fathers desire, viz. into the Will of the Eternal Nature, and fully gavein the
Will of his Self-hood, viz. his creatural will again into the Center, viz. into
the first Mother whence the Soul-like Creature was produced, that is, into the
grand Mystery of Eternity: the Self-will must again enter into Natures End, so
that the selfness may wholly dye, that Gods Eternal Will and Spirit may be and
do only All in All in the Humanity, and that the Creature might afterward be
alone his Instrument, wherein he might do and work according to his good
pleasure; and thus God the Father has in Christ's death and entrance into our
Humanity again received our self-hood into his Will; and that this might be, he
first tinctured the Humanity with the Deity, that the Humanity might be a
pleasant sweet savor and offering to him in his power, for before death lay
before it.

88. Here the Love destroyed Death, and opened the fast Seal, that the Will
might again enter into that which it was before [it was] the creature, and even
so we all must follow him upon the path which he has made open for us; none
can see God, unless God become first man in him, which is brought to pass in
Faiths desire, and even then the Corrupt Will (which is apprehended in the
Death and Anger of God, and which bloometh in the earthly essence, and brings
forth fruit unto death) be wholly mortified, and fall into the free
Resignation, into the Will and mercy of God, and then the own will is with and
in Christ at Natures end in the Grand Mystery of God, viz. in Gods hands. Gods
hands are the Eternal desire, or the Eternal will, which is Unchangeable; thus
the Creatural Self-will dies, it enters wholly into the Nothing, that it
might no more live to it self, but unto God.

89. Thus it falls out also in the Philosophic work; when the Artist has
first seen great wonders, which the Creatural and Natural will has wrought in
the power [of] Venus, insomuch that he supposes that he is nigh thereunto;
Even then Nature does first dye in his work, and becomes a dark night unto him;
the property and power of all the forms must Must go out of their center.
give forth themselves from their Center, and fall unto Natures End; all do
freely yield over themselves as one dead Essence, and there is no longer any
effectual working therein, all is divided in the Crown into the Thousand
number, and then it is again in the mystery at Natures End as it was before it
came into the Creatural Being, understand the Essential desire, viz. the
expressed Mercuty, must again come unto the End of its selfness, and resign it
self into the Speaking Word.

90. The Corporal Essence remains in the Center of the four Elements until
the judgment of God, which now at Death stands in the Center of Sol, viz. in
the Compaction of Venus and Mercury, which Compaction at Death falls wholly
into one [thing] viz. into Into the sole power and virtue of Jupiter.
one power of Jupiter, that is, into the Center of the Liberty; for here the
desire to cold and heat goes out, all Earthly will and desire of the
properties dies, and there is no more any hunger after the Earthly, or Deaths
property.

CHAP. XII. Of the Seventh form in the Kingdom of the Mother, how the Seventh
Kingdom, viz. the Kingdom of the Sun is again opened and made alive, set forth
in Parable or by way of Similitude of Christ's Resurrection.
1. WE are not to think that when Christ dyed the natural Death in the Humane
property, that he dyed as to his Soulish Creature.
creatural Soul, much less as to the Deity; also he did not disappear or dye in
the Heavenly Essentiality and in the Heavenly Tincture; this cannot be; only
the Will and Dominion of Self, viz. of the outward World, which domineered in
man, unto the own Will and own powers of the Selfish creature (wherein man was
disobedient to God) [I say] he gave that wholly into the Fathers hands, viz.
into the End of Nature, into the Fathers great Mystery; not that it should be
dead, but that Gods Spirit might alone be the life thereof, that the Divine
Dominion might be in Christ's Person, that the Eternal Father might Rule and
Reign with his Eternal Spirit in his Image, and therefore God has determined
to keep the last judgment by this Jesus.

2. Now the Creature of Christ does not it alone, but God in his Image through
the Creature in the Dominion of his Eternal Spirit of all the three Principles,
which is the life and Dominion of every Being, in each thing according to its
property.

3. And understand us aright, when Christ dyed on the Cross, the Name Jesus did
not also dye, which destroyed Death, and Tinctured the expressed Word, viz. the
Form of the Deity (or the Formed Word) viz. the Soul with Love: No, it cannot
be, the Eternity does not die, only the Spoken Word, which stands again in the
desire of the Speaking, viz. in the Fiat, which changes it self in its own
Speaking, viz. in the Self-desire, and brings its own Sound into another form
and Source, then the Speaking Word had spoken it, and set it forth with the
Verbum Fiat into a Form, Signature, and Will, as Lucifer with his Royal throne,
and Adam also did, when they both departed out of Resignation into Self hood,
the Instrument would be Master.

4. The outward working Sensitive life wherein the Anger of God was set on fire
did wholly dye away, not that it should be a Nothing, but it fell into the
Nothing, viz. into Gods Will, into Gods working and feeling, quite from the
Will of the outward World, which is evil and good, so that it might no longer
live to the World, viz. to the Astrum in the walm of the four Elements, but to
the Eternal Fathers Nature in the walm of the pure Divine Element, the life of
the outward world dyed.

5. Thus the true Humane Life fell forthwith again into that place whence Adam
had brought it, viz. into Paradise, whereupon Christ said to the Thief, To day
thou shall be with me in Paradise; it fell into Adams death, whereby he dyed
unto Paradise, and sprang up in Adams Death as a new creature out of the old,
like as the branch springs from the Corn: and this it did from the might and
power of the Speaking Word, which of grace was entered with living essentiality
into the disappeared Heavenly Essentiality of man, and had freely given it self
into the Center of the Soul-like nature, and also into the wrath of the Anger
and Death in the Flesh, and changed the Anger into Love, and tinctured the
corrupt blood in the Anger with the Love.

6. The Divine Tincture Tinctured the Humane: the Divine Sun entered into the
Humane; the Divine Sun entered into Adams night, viz. into Adams sleep; Gods Sun
with the Name Jesus entered with Adams Soul and Humanity in Christ's person into
death, understand into Adams sleep.

7. When Christ dyed, then Adam dyed also to his Self-hood in Christ's death,
the Name Jesus was in Christ the Serpent-stroyer in Adams Humanity; Christ
entered into the Image of the first Adam, so that the first Adam in the
Humanity of Christ did become the same Christ and Serpent-stroyer, indeed not
in the same Creature, but in the same Souls and Bodies property.

8. The first Adam fell into Sleep, viz. into the impotence of the Divine
World, and dyed in the death of Death; the second Adam entered into the death
of Death, and took the death of Death captive in Himself, viz. in the Humanity
of Adam; He was a death to Death, and brought forth the Life out of Death into
the Eternal Liberty: He arose in the Divine Omnipotence in the Essence of the
first Adam: Gods Spirit in the Speaking Eternal Word brought forth Adam out of
death in Christ's Humanity. Adam did arise in Christ's Humanity, and all the
Children of Adam, which are partakers of Christ's Kingdom, do arise in Christ:
all in Christ's Flesh and Blood, Soul and Spirit, but every one in his Creature
which he has had here, and mortified in Christ's death.

9. Every one is a particular twig; but there is only one Tree, which is Christ
in Adam, and Adam in Christ, only One, not two; only one Christ in all
Christians; so that I may say, If I be dead in Christ unto the World, I am the
same Christ, viz. a branch on the same Tree.

10. But seeing that I in the outward man do yet live in my Self-hood,
therefore I must also dye with the outward man in Christ's death, and arise and
live in him. Now therefore I live with the Will of Faith in the mind in Christ,
and am a Christian in the Will of the Mind in the desire of Faith, and receive
Christ with his Humanity into my Will, and cast my Will into his death, and
thus my inward man is also dead in Christ's death, and lives no longer to
Self-hood; but I am resigned in him, and lie buried in his death, but being He
is arisen in Gods Will, I also live in His Resurrection in Him; but my
Earthliness in its Selfness lives to the Earthly World, until it also dies
quite to Self-hood, and enters into the Resignation and Putrefaction, and
then Christ will awaken it through my inward man, which now lives in Him.

11. Like as he is arisen from the Dead, even so shall I, who shall dye to the
Earthliness in Him, viz. in my first Father Adam, in the Name Jesus as a
Christian in Christ; my twig withered in Sin on the Tree shall obtain strength
and sap in the Name Jesus to life, I shall and must spring forth afresh with my
Humanity in Him as in my Stem, who is become a Heart and Power in my Father
Adam, and bring forth fruit to the praise of God.

12. My Will-spirit, which now is in Christ's Humanity, and lives in Christ's
Spirit, that shall in Christ's power give Sap to the dry tree, that it shall
again arise at the last day in the sound of the Trumpet of the Divine Breath in
Christ's voice, which also is my voice in his Breath, and spring afresh in the
Tree Christ, viz. in Paradise: the Paradise shall be in me; all whatsoever God
has and is, shall appear in me as a Form and Image of the Divine Worlds being:
all colors, powers, and virtues of his Eternal Wisdom shall be manifest in me,
and on me, as on his likeness, I shall be the manifestation of the Spiritual
Divine World, and an instrument of Gods Spirit, wherein he makes melody with
Himself, with this Voice, which I my self am, as with his Signature; I shall be
his Instrument and Organ of his expressed Word and voice; and not only I, but
all my fellowmembers in the glorious Tuned Instrument of God: we are all
strings in his Joyful Consort, the spirit of his mouth does strike the tune and
note on our strings.

13. And therefore God became Man, that he might again repair his glorious
Instrument which he has made for his praise, which perished as to him, and
would not sound according to the desire of his joy and Love, and did introduce
again the true Lovesound into the strings; yea he has introduced the voice
which sounds in his presence again into us, viz. into his Instrument, he is
become that I am, and has made me that which he is, so that I may say, that I
am in my Resignation in him his Trumpet, and the sound of his Instrument and
Divine Breath, air, tune.
voice, at which now I do rejoice in all my fellow-strings and voices, which
with me are tuned and set as an Eternal work unto the praise and glory of God.

14. Thus know ye now my Fellow-voyces in the praise of God, that I sound with
my string played upon in the Spirit upon and in your Note, and thus sing I unto
you: that whatsoever Jesus has done through the Christ, viz. through his and
my Humanity, the same he does yet to day in me and in all my fellow members: he
dyed to my Self-hood in his death, and I also dye to my self-hood in his death;
He is given up to his Resignation in God his Father, and God his Father has
araised him up with the spirit of his mouth in him, and set him forth for the
Royal Image according to the holy Trinity, through and with whom God will judge
all things in the place of this World.

15. Thus God also has awakened in him my Spirit and Soul through his Spirit
in the great Name Jesus in Christ, so that I in my Resignation in him need not
to dye, for he dyed in me and for me; his death, in that he is arisen from
death, is become my Eternal life, so that now I live in his death; as one
dying; and yet there is no more any death in him, but thus I dye to my Self,
and Sin in him, seeing that my desire and will presses forth from my Self hood
into it, so that I dye daily to my self, until once I shall obtain the limit of
my Self-hood, and my Self-hood with the earthly Will and Desire does wholly dye
unto its Selfness; even then shall my Self-hood, and all whatsoever is in me
which seeks and loves it self, fall into the Death of Christ, viz. into the
first Mother, whence God created me, and my Self-hood shall become a Nothing;
and even then my Self-hood lies in Christ's Death in the Resignation as an
Instrument of God, who then will make it his Instrument as he pleases.

16 But seeing now my Soul and Spirit does live in his Resurrection, and his
Voice [Ayr or Breath] is in me, according to the Resignation in him, as S. Paul
says, Our Conversation is in Heaven, whence we do wait for the Savior Jesus
Christ; Therefore also his Voice, which is in me (in that I am [or live] no
longer to my Self-hood, but he alone [is and lives in me]) shall raise up my
dead body, which I resign to him, and bring it into his first Image, whereto he
created it.

17. Thus now I live in God, and my Self-hood does not know it, for it lives
not in God, but in it self (God is indeed in it, but it does not apprehend him)
and hides the Pearl which I am in Christ; not I, but he in his Humanity in my
Creature in Himself: and thus I speak and write of the great Mystery of all
Beings, not that I have apprehended it in my self-hood, but he strikes my
Signature in my Desire, which presleth into him, as he pleases.

18. I am known to my self, but not in my self-hood, but in his Glass.
Mirror which of Grace he has put into me, thereby to allure my self-hood unto
him, viz. into the Resignation; and so likewise, dear Brethren, it shall again
be represented unto you out of his Glass, which he has set forth through my
Capacity in him, as his Instrument.

19. Thus it goes also in the Philosophic Work; Sulphur, Mercury and Sal are
entered by the Curse of God into their Self-hood, viz. into a Self working and
living; all does now work in the Curse and Anger of God according to the
property of the first Principle; if God had not placed the Sun as a Nature god
of the outward visible World therein* which tinctureth every working life, even
every thing which grows and moves, all would be in the dark Deaths
Impression, viz. in the Abyss of Hell.

20. Now if any thing shall be freed from this Self-hood, viz. from the
wrathful Death, and be again brought into the Universal, viz. into the highest
Perfection, then it must dye wholly to its Self-hood, and enter into the
Stilness, viz. into the Death of the Resignation at Natures End: Mars must
wholly lose the might of the Fire and Wrath, and Mercury also his Poyson-life;
Saturn must be a Death to himself, in so much that the Artist sees nothing but
the great Darkness, and even then the Light appears in the Resignation; for
Saint John says, The Light shines in the Darkness, and the Darkness
apprehended it not; that is, in its Self-hood, viz. in its own Will and Working
it cannot apprehend it; but in the Resignation, the Nothing, viz. the Liberty
of God does shine in it.

21. For the Nothing does manifest it self in its Lubet out of the Liberty in
the Darkness of Death; for the Nothing will not be a Nothing, and also cannot
be a Nothing, and likewise it cannot otherwise manifest it self, save according
to the property of the free Lubet, which is now fixed [or steadfast,] and in it
also as a Nothing, for there is no Turba therein; the Self-will and Hunger is
dead, and in the Nothing, and the Lubet of the Eternal Liberty is its Life: Now
seeing that the Highest Being has once moved it self, and come into a visible
comprehensible Essence, it does again Figurize [or form] that same Essence,
which departs from its Self-hood, and enters into the Nothing, into such a
Being [or Essence] as it was before the times of the World; but seeing that the
Verbum Fiat stands yet to this day a Creating of the Corporal Essence, it
does again make a sixth perfect Essence; as the like is brought to pass in the
Philosophic Work, where a new Life arises out of Death, as God does raise us
up in Himself in Christ, if we dye to Self-hood, and wholly resign up our
selves into him.

22. And thus when the expressed Mercury in the Sulphur of Saturn resigneth its
Self-hood into Venus, then the Verbum Fiat changes it again into such an
Essence according to the Lubet of the Liberty; the Death arises in a new Body
out of the Darkness of Death, in a white fair Color, but as an hidden Luster,
wherein the Color is not rightly and distinctly known, until it does dissolve
it self, and the Materia becomes desiring; then the Sun arises in the Center,
Saturn in the Property of Jupiter and Venus in all the Seven Forms (that is in
the Verbum Fiat) as a New Creation, and the Desire of all the Seven Forms do
tend unto Sols Luster, viz. unto the white and red Color from the Fire and
Light, which is the Majestatical [Colour, Luster, or Glory.]

23. And as CHRIST after His Resurrection Or, Conversed.
walked forty Days in the Mystery of all the Three Principles at once in the
property of the first Adam after his Creation before his sleep, and before his
Eve, and appeared to his Disciples in his property, which he had here from the
outward world, and did eat with them, and showed them his assumed Humanity, and
that he had in no wise wholly put off the same:

24 Even so let the Artist understand us, that in the Philosophic Work the
first matter does not wholly pass away or vanish, but it enters into the death
of the life of its wrathful property, and dies in the Curse of God, but
arises again in its former being, which it Or, was.
had before the Curse of God: the Curse only is destroyed therein, and the
first life does again rise up therein, and therefore it is fixed, and subsists
in the Fire, for it is dead to the dominion of the four Elements, and lives in
the fifth essence, not that it has that same life, but it stands still
therein, yet the spirit of the newborn Essence is a vegetative life with its
growing therein, its Luster does stand therein, it shows the first Adam in
innocence, who stood likewise in such perfection.

25. And as Christ tinctured our corrupt Humanity, in which Mercury was turned
to poison, with the Heavenly blood of the Eternal Divine Virginity and
Essentiality, whereby the Humane Self-hood dyed in the poison, and the Resigned
life did again arise: Even so the poysonful Mereurial, Martial, and Saturnine
Will and desire do dye in the blood of Venus in the Philosophic work, and do
both enter together into Death, and arise both together in one Love, in one
Will.

26. Therefore let the Artist observe the Tincture, it is more noble and
precious for man's use in this valley of misery, then the body which arises in
the Tincture; for the Spirit is the life, the body is only a Figure of the
Life, and the blood is a mansion of the Spirit.

27. The Artist must well observe this; in the blood of the young man, when his
Or, Virgin.
Pearl gives it self to the three Murderers, that it also sheddeth its blood
in and with the young man's, then the Champion stands in Hell, and disclaimeth
the Humane Self-hood: then the white Lion appears upon his Crimson-coloured
Beast, even there lies the Cure of sickness, and the death of death.

28. The body is dissolved in the blood of Love in the Death, out of the
Earthly into an Heavenly [property]. The Tincture gives it self into the new
body; and afterward, when the body arises in Sols splendour, it does also
forsake its will, it resigneth it self wholly into the bodies essence, and
becomes its beauty, splendour, and color, which the Artist can never separate;
for they are together in the fifth Essence, viz. in the mystery of the Verbum
Fiat, and do belong to Gods motion of the final day of Separation (in this time
unto his own manifestation unto his honor, and deeds of wonder) but after this
time to the crystalline world in the glassie Sea before the ancient in the
Apocalypse.

A brief Summary of the Philosophic WORK.
29. Our meaning might seem very difficult unto the Reader, in that we go so
far about, and show Christ all along therein; at which let no man wonder, we do
not seek gold, or any Temporal goods thereby, and drive man into vain
curiosities, we speak only with the Children whom God has chosen thereunto;
for the Time is born, where that which is lost shall be again found; yea not
only the Universal for the body of this World, but also for the Soul.

30. The Process is very short in both, and it is only of one property, which
is thus: the Tree, understand the Life, is divided into seven Forms; now the
curse of God is come into the seven Forms, so that they are in strife and
enmity, and one Form does annoy the other, and can never agree unless they all
seven enter into Death, and dye unto the Self-will. Now this cannot be, except
a Death comes into them, which breaks all their will, and be a death unto them;
as the Deity in Christ was a death to the Humane Self-hood, and the seven Forms
in the Humane Life; thus is it here also; the Humane Will was changed in Christ
into the Eternal Sun, viz. into the Resignation in God; even so must all the
Forms in the Philosophic Work be changed into one, viz. into Sol: Seven must
become one, and yet remain in Seven, but in one desire, where each Form
desires the other in love, and then there is no more any strife and contest.

31. Therefore let the Artist but consider how he may give death to the death
with the pure life, and how he may awaken the dead, and disappeared life, which
is Heavenly, and lies hidden and captivated in the Curse, so that it may again
receive the Fire-soul; and if he does but bring it so far, it It makes it self,
or it has its own faber in it self.
works of it self.

32. When the Virgin does again receive her Bridegroom, who has been
faithless, then he is prepared and fitted to the work, otherwise he is no way
at all fitted; but all is in vain and to no purpose [which he attempteth] there
is not any possibility for the Heavenly Image according to Gods likeness in man
to be otherwise helped and restored; after that the Fire-soul had entered into
its self-hood, unless the Spirit of God did introduce it self into the
disappeared Image, viz. into the Heavenly Essentiality, and give it self in
with the same Image awakened in it into the Souls Fire, viz. into the wrath of
Death, and be a death to Death, viz. to the wrathful anger of God, that it
might be drowned in the Love, in the blood of the Heavenly Essentiality; and
although there could be no parting nor dying, yet there was a dying of the
Wrath, so that the Wrath was changed into a joy and Love.

33. Even thus the Artists Work is exactly and throughout no otherwise, For Man
was created out of all Beings, out of the Heaven and Earth: but when he became
wholly earthly, and the Curse seized on him, the Curse also came over the
earthly Being, whence Man was made: Thus the Heaven was shut up from man, and
the Heaven also was shut up in the Earth, in Metals, Trees, and Herbs, in the
food of Man, and whatsoever belonged to his Ornament and Delight.

34. The soul of the Earth viz. the property Erom.
of the Fire of the first Principle is entered into its self-hood, viz. into
Gods anger; now the Heaven is hidden in it; therefore the Artist must in his
Work reduce the Soul in the Curse, and the Heaven again into One: He must
introduce the Soul again into Heaven, or else there is no possibility; now he
cannot bring the Soul in its iniquity into Heaven, for it will not, and
therefore he must bring the Heaven into the Soul, and wholly give in the Heaven
to the Soul, that the Soul may eat of Heaven, will she, or nill she; the Heaven
must be as Or, As dead.
Death in the Soul, so that the Soul cannot get rid of it, how angry soever she
be, and vehemently rage against it, until she be overcome in her wrath, and
enters with the Desire into Heaven, viz. into the disappeared Essence, and
wills to murder it, as the Jews Christ; and if she so enters into the
Heavenly Essence, then the Image of the Heavenly Essence falls into the jaws
of the Murderer.

35. Thus when the Heavenly Essence gives its desire unto the Murderer, the
Murder is dismayed at the Dear Love-life, and arises in the Flagrat [in the
dismayment] in the Heavenly Essentiality; thus the disappeared Essence does
again receive the Fire Flagrat into it self, and wholly uniteth it self with
the Fire-life, and so the Fire must burn in the Love and Meekness, and Or,
Leave.
forego its right in the Center, as the Light which shines from the Fire, thus
and no otherwise the Heavenly Essence obtains its life; and as a Fire does
through-heat an iron that it appears as if it were mere Fire, and it is so,
but the iron does still retain its substance; even so the disappeared Essence,
viz. the Heaven is manifest in the poysonful Mercurial and Martial Fire-soul,
and makes of Seven Wills only one, and yet Seven remain, but the Enmity
cease.

36. This is a Universal which also changes the Contra-will.
Enmity or Malignity of all Diseases in the Humane body into one Will [into
unity;] So that the raging and raving, viz. the seven forms of Life in their
Enmity do become unanimous; and then the hunger of the Disease cease, and the
process to the Universal is as has been already mentioned. It is not my intent
to mention a clear Declaration thereof; it is clear enough, he that will not
seek thereby a new man born in God, and apply himself diligently thereto, let
him not meddle with my Writings.

37. I have not written any thing for such a Seeker, and also he shall not be
able to apprehend our meaning fundamentally, albeit he strive never so much
about it, unless he enters into the Resignation in Christ, even there he may
apprehend the Spirit of the Universal, otherwise all is to no purpose; and we
do faithfully warn the Curious Critic not to amuse himself, for he will not
effect any thing in this way, unless he himself does enter thereinto, and then
it will be shown him without much seeking; for the way is child-like [plain and
easy.]

CHAP. XIII. Of the Contrary will, contrariety.
Enmity of the Spirit, and of the Body, and of their C U R E, and R E M E D Y.
1. EVery Body is in it self a senceless, and as a dead thing, or being; it is
only a manifestation of the Spirit, which is in the body: the Spirit is signed
Or, Signeth and marketh it self in the body.
with the Body; whatsoever the Spirit is in it self in an incomprehensible
[unperceivable] operation, the same is the body in the Comprehensible and
Visible working. There is one form of the Seven forms of Nature Superior and
Chief; the other do hang unto it, and give their Signs also, according as each
of them is strong in the Essence; and as the Forms do stand in their order in
each thing, even so they do sign the Body of every Thing and Creature in its
Generation [or kind:] this is the manifestation of the Divine Wisdom in the
Expressed Word of Love and Anger:

2. There is not any thing but it has its Soul in it according to its
property, and the Soul is a kernel to another body: whatsoever lives and
grows has its Seed in it; God has comprehended all things in his Word, and
spoken them forth into a Form, as the Will had Or, comprehended, or conceived.
formed it self in the Desire, the expressed [or Spoken] is a Platform of the
Speaking, and has again the Speaking in it; this same Speaking is a Seed to
another Image according to the first; for both work, viz. the Speaking, and the
Spoken [Word]

3. The Speaking works in it self, viz. in the Eternity, and the spoken also
in it self, viz. in the Time; the Speaking is the Master, and the Spoken is the
Instrument; the Speaking makes the Nature of Eternity, and the Spoken makes
the Nature of Time; each makes in its Comprehension two properties, viz. Light
and Darkness, wherein the Element of all Beings does consist, which in the
Expressed [Word] does sever it self into four Elements, but in the Speaking
Word there is but One; the Element in it self is neither hot nor cold, also
neither dry, nor moist; but it is a Lubet, viz. a desiring Will, wherein the
Divine Wisdom makes the Colors of distinction.
different and various Colors; all according to the Desires property, in
Element.
which there is neither number nor end; but in the four Elements there is
number and End; For with the Expressing (in that they are become Self-full)
they have taken a beginning, and have formed themselves into a Model or
Platform of a time, which runs as a Or, Horologue.
Watch-work; it forms, frames, and destroys.

4. This Watch-work consists of Seven forms, or properties (as is before
mentioned) which make in themselves a threefold Spirit, viz. a Vegetative,
Sensitive, and Rational; the Vegetative consists in the four Elements; the
Sensitive in the Seven forms of Nature, and the Rationative in the
Constellation; but the Understanding proceeds only from God, for it arises out
of the Eternal Nature; all life whatsoever, which has its limit in the
Expressed Word, does consist in Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, for therein consist
the Seven properties of Every life of this World, and also the spirit of
Vegetation, Sensation, and Reason.

5. Sulphur is the Mother of all Spirituality and Corporality, Mercury manageth
the Dominion therein, and Sal is the house of its habitation, which Mercury it
self makes in Sulphur: Reason arises in the Oil of the Sulphur, whereinto the
Constellation gives its desire, viz. the essence of its property, whence
forthwith the senses and thoughts do arise; but the Understanding proceeds
forth from the Oil of the Element, viz. in the free Lubet in the Speaking
Mercury.

6. Now then seeing it is very necessary for us poor children of Eve to know
whence the Disease and Enmity of our life does arise, and what that is in us
which makes us our own Enemies, and does vex, perplex, and plague us in our
selves; Much more necessary then it is to know the Cure, whereby we may cure
our selves in our Self-hood, and bring ourselves into the Into the desired end,
or Perfection of rest.
limit of Rest.

7. This we will delineate and declare, if there be any one that has a mind to
enter upon it, and truly prove and try it; and we will set forth, whence Evil
and Good do arise originally, and how they arise, and give occasion to the
understanding Searcher to seek; and we will show how the will to Evil and Good
does arise, and how the Evil is the death of the Good, and contrariwise the
Good the death of the Evil.

8. When we consider what the Mercurial life is, then we find that it consists
in Sulphur, for Sulphur is a dry hunger after Matter, which makes an austere
Impression, and in its austere Impression it has the Fire, and also in its
Impression the Oil, whence the life burns. Now the Impression makes
coldness, and its Compunction or Intraction makes heat, This is now, etc.
so that now there is a cold Fire, and an hot Fire in one thing; the cold
makes in it self Hardness and Darkness, and the Heat makes in it self the
Light, and yet there could be no Light, if the Oil in the Sulphur did not dye
in [servent] hot anguish, as the Candle in the Fire.

9. Now there is a twofold dying in Sulphur, whence also a twofold Life is
Generated; as first, the Impression or Desire does intract, contract, enclose,
makes hard, cold, thick; and the hardness, viz. the Enclosed, causes a death
in the Enclosed Being, and yet in that spirit there is no death, but a
pricking, raging, and anxious cold Firelife, which is generated with the
Impression, and is the life of the darkness.

10. Secondly, in the same Anguish, in the austere desire, the hot Fire is
generated which consumes the Substance, which the coldness, viz. the
Impression of the desire to Nature does make: Thus there remains in the Fire
the contention betwixt the Cold and Heat; the cold will have its life according
to its property, and in that it does strive for life, it does enkindle the Heat
in its Impression, and forthwith the Heat depriveth the Cold of its Might, and
consumes the Colds substance, and then also the Fire-spirit cannot subsist,
for unless it has substance it goes out, therefore it must continually, and
without intermission, dye in it self in the fiery anxious desire: so long as it
has the colds substance to live upon, its life arises, and yet it is nothing
but a constant dying and consuming, and in its Devoration is the greatest
hunger after substance; this same [hunger] passes forth through and with the
Devoration out of the dying of the Fire, and dwells in the Nothing; yet it
may not be a Nothing, and also it cannot be a Nothing, therefore it draws the
Fire again into it self; for its own desire is bent toward its Mother; but
being it is once dead to the Fire-Source, it cannot dye any more in the Fire of
the Heat or Cold, but it continually proceeds forth from the Fire, and the
Fire draws it again continually into it self, and so it is the life of the
Fire; and this is the Air, which in the Fire is rightly called Wind, by reason
of the Strength and Force; and in that In the outward Principle in the
expressed formed Word.
which is proceeded forth, it is properly called Air by reason of its life of
meekness.

11. And in the dying of the Fire we are to understand the Oil, whence the Fire
receives its shining Light, in which the true Life is understood; for that
which proceeds forth in the Fire-death with the Desire to be delivered and
freed from the Fire-Source, that is a desire of meekness, and takes its
Original in the first Will to Nature, in which the Eternal Nothing brings it
self with its Lubet into a Desire.

12. This Lubet does bring forth it self through the cold and hot Death
(through both the dyings) again into the liberty, viz. into the NOTHING, and so
it is manifested in the Austere Impression through the Fire, and brought into a
Principle, and yet it is not either of the Fire, or of the cold, but so is its
manifestation.

13. But being the Eternal Lubet to Nature does introduce it self with Nature
into a desire; thereupon this desire cannot dye either in the cold or heat, for
it takes its Original neither in the Heat or Cold, but in the Nothing; and so
it is, after that it proceeds forth from the dying in the Fire, again
desiring, namely of its own property, and does impress it self, for in the Fire
it has taken the Impression.

14. Now it cannot conceive any thing in its Impression, save an Essence
according to its desire, which is now water; understand according to the dark
impressions property it is water, and according to the Fire it is Oil, and that
which in the cold Impression is wholly enclosed in the hardness, as a
Conception according to the Wraths property, is Earth.

15. Thus the wrathful fiery desire draws continually the same Air, Water,
and Oil into it self, and devoureth it, and so the Fire-wrath is changed in the
Air and Oil, and Water into a shining Light; for the Nothing does desire
nothing else but Power and Luster, and so it makes it self manifest, and
brings it self into Essence, and the Spirit which proceeds forth out of the
Fire-burning in the Oil, viz. in the Light from the Fire and Light, gives
Reason and Understanding; for it has originally taken its Rise in the Nothing,
and was the desire to Nature, and has extroduced it self through all the
properties of Nature, through Heat and Cold, through the dying in the Fire
through the Light, and dwells again in the Nothing.

16. It is a prover and knower of all the Properties, for it is generated
through all, and proceeded forth from all; it is as a NOTHING, and yet has all
Things, and passes through Heat and Cold, and yet none of both apprehends it:
as we see, that the life of the Creature dwells in Heat and Cold, and yet the
right life is neither Hot nor Cold.

17. Now therefore understand us aright; this Birth in the Eternity is
Spiritual, but in the Time it is Material; For I cannot say of God that he is
Darkness and Fire, much less Air, Water, or Earth; but in his Eternal desire he
has so formed Himself with the Time in the place of this World into such an
Essence, which he formed in the Speaking MERcuRY according to the properties of
the Will, and brought with the expressed Word into such a formation according
to the properties of the Desire in the Eternal Nature, viz. in the Verbum Fiat.

18. Now the expressed Word, viz. the Eternal Natures property is understood in
Sulphur, for therein is the Sevenfold wheel of the Birth, which in the Spirit,
viz. in the first Conception to Nature is a Constellation, and divides it self
out of the Constellation in its own peculiar Birth into Seven properties, and
out of the Seven properties into four Elements.

19. This Constellation is a Chaos, wherein all things lie, but hidden, and it
is the first Body, but Spiritual; and the Sevenfold Wheel is the first
Explication [or working forth] of the Chaos, and makes the Second Body, viz.
the Reason: the second manifests the first, and it is also a spiritual Body;
the third Body is Elementary, a Cabinet of both the first, and is a visible
tangible Body.

20. The first Body, viz. the Chaos, or the first Constellation, being it is
Spiritual, is the Word expressed out of the Eternal Conception; the same has
again its Speaking in it self, which is the Mercurial Wheel in the Sulphur with
the seven Forms, which speaks forth again from it self the four Elements.

21. Thus the one proceeds forth from the other; the first before the Chaos
is the Lubet of Eternity in the Abyss, which takes in it self a Will to its
own manifestation; this is all God; and the Will conceives in it self a Desire
in the Lubet; this is the Chaos, or first Constellation.
Astrum, wherein consists the Eternal Nature, which with the Desire to Nature
introduces it self into seven Forms, as is before mentioned, and so does
manifest the Chaos, viz. the eternal hidden Wisdom of God, and with the Desire
in the Mercurial Wheel the Element is formed, being a Spiritual Body of the
Mercurial Life.

22. Now all this is twofold, viz. the Desire makes in it self in its
Impression the Darkness, wherein is the strong Might of the Enkindling of
Nature, and it is painful; and the free Lubet, to the Desire makes in it self
through the Enkindling of the Desire, light and pleasing motion; the Light is
the Power and Luster, and the Element is its Body, or Essence, whereas yet it
is only Spiritual: Thus the Fire-desire is a Joyfulness in the free Lubet, and
in the Darkness it is an aching painful Source.

23. Out of this whole Essence Man was created unto the Image of God, and
understand us aright, He stood after and in the Creation in the Dominion of the
Element, the Mercurial Sphere.
Wheel in Sulphur stood in the Light, and in the free Lubet of Eternity, but he
departed forth further with his Desire into the four Elements, viz. into the
Center of Darkness in the Creation, whence Heat and Cold arises.

24. His Desire in the beginning was bent [inclined] into the Liberty of God,
viz. into the Element, where he was Resigned in God, and then Gods Love-will
ruled him with the free Lubets property, but he departed out of the free Lubet
of God, out of the Resignation into a Self-ful Will, which he forged in the
Center to Nature, whence the Pain and Torture does arise, viz. Heat and Cold,
so also astringency, sour bitterness, and all the Properties of the dark
Impression.

25. Even there he fell into the Eternal Death, viz. into the dying Source, in
which the Mercurial Life in the Sulphur rules in the Poison, where one Form in
the Mercurial Sphere does envy, hate, annoy, and destroy the other, where there
is mere Anguish, Aching, Tormenting, and Enmity; for the free Lubet was quenched
in him, wherein the holy Element, viz. the divine Body does consist, and there
arose in the same pure Element the four Elements of the outward Source; even
Or, then.
there the Image of God was cursed, which is nothing else but that Gods
Love-will, which ruled in the Image of his likeness, did withdraw from man, and
so man fell into the Dominion of Nature; and being the four Elements have a
temporal beginning and end, and must again enter into the End, therefore also
the humane Body, which is now become wholly earthly in the four Elements, must
fall again into the four Elements, and be destroyed therein; and therefore now
we are to consider of his Cure and Restoration, how he may again be delivered
from Death, and he again introduced with the Body into the Pure Element, and
with the Spirit into the Dominion of Gods Will.

26. Now there is no other remedy save that he with the Spirit which arises in
the Chaos, and was inspired by Gods Will-spirit into the created Image, does
again depart out of his self-hood, viz. out of his natural Will, and resign
himself up fully and freely into the first Will, which in the beginning formed
him into an Image; He must wholly dye to his self-hood in himself in the Death
of the dark Impression (so far as he lives therein to his own will in the
self-desire of the outward life of the four Elements) and cast himself with
total Resignation into Gods Will, viz, into Gods Mercy, that he may no longer
live and will to himself, but unto God, viz. to the first Will of God, which
created him in its Image, whereby God did manifest himself in an Image; and so
he is with the first Astrum, viz with the Chaos of the Soul, again in the same
comprehension wherein God created him unto his Image.

27 But seeing the Self-hood, viz. the self-ful Will, does strive against this,
and will in no wise dye to its Self-hood, (understand [by Self-hood] the Will
of the outward World, which is from the outward Stars and four Elements,)
therefore Gods food must be given to the inward Will of the Spirit to eat of,
that it may live without need and Hunger as to the outward Being, that it may
continually mortify and break the Will of the earthly Self-hood, until the
Earthliness, viz. the earthly Body, does freely unloose or dissolve it self in
Death, and also enter again into the Mother, whence it was created, and forsake
its self-hood, that the pure Body of the Element, (in which Or, In which the
Soul in the Resigned will does again enkindle [by its desire] the true Life in
Gods will-spirit, viz. in the eternal Light or Liberty.
the true Life in Gods Will-spirit does again enkindle the Soul in the Resigned
Will,) and the disappeared Body from the Pure Element may become a mansion of
the Soul, viz. a Paradisical Budding [or bloomy Renovation in the Eternal
Springtime of Paradise.]

28. And that the own Will of the Soul might be able to do this, viz. that it
might break it self off from its self-hood, and willingly enter into the Death
of its self-hood, and become a Nothing in its self-hood, the free Will of God,
viz. the Eternal Lubet to the Chaos of the Soul, which is the Eternal Mercury
in the Power of the Majesty, is again entered into the disappeared Image of God
proceeded from the Pure Element, viz. into the Virgin-like life, and draws
the Will of the Soul to it self, and gives it again cut of Love and Grace the
Heavenly Corporality of the pure Element for Food, and the Water in that
Element in the Tincture of the Fire and Light, viz. of the Eternal Life, for
Drink; and has encorporated it self in the Humanity, and freely tendereth it
self to all Souls with full desire; that Soul which dies to its self hood, and
brings its Hunger again into Gods Mercy, may enjoy this food, whereby it does
again become the Such a Creature as it was at first, before it fell.
first Creature in Gods Love.

29. Now we are to Consider how the poor Soul captivated in Gods Anger, being
devoyd of the heavenly food, does live in mere anguish, and distress, and
restless pain; as the outward earthly body in its properties does live in its
Hunger in mere anguish, distress, and oppressing pain, unless that the Soul
with the Pure Element does so overpower and keep it under, that it does not
fully domineer in its own Dominion of the outward Astrum and four Elements in
the poysonful Mercurial Wheel according to the dark Impression, by reason of
the Influence of the Element; if that the Universal does withstand it, then it
may stand in quiet rest, but yet no longer then the inward does Penetrate the
outward [body] and Tincture it: There is in the four Elements no perfection,
till the body is changed again into the Pure Element, therefore it must enter
again into that whence the four Elements do arise.

30. Now in this time of the four Elements there is mere pain and Source.
Vexation; the Soul amuseth it self on the outward Astrum, which does force
into it, whence its false Imagination does arise, and the body does stir up the
poysonful Mercurial Wheel, whence sickness and pains befall it; therefore the
Soul must be cured with the Inward Perfection, viz. by the Speaking Word,
wherein it stands in Gods Hand, which alone is able to Tincture the Soul, and
bring it into rest; the outward Body must be tinctured and healed with the
expressed Mercury; and of the outward Mercury does also stand in the Curse as a
Poyson-wheel, then he must be tinctured with his own light in his Mother in the
Body [or Womb] of Sulphur: Mercury his own Will and Hunger must be broken, that
the envious odious Hunger may become a Love-desire.

31. And now to kn^w how this may be brought to pass, we must consider the
generation in Sulphur, whence Joy and Sorrow does arise; for the poysonfu^
Mercury may not otherwise be resisted, and also nothing can resist it, save its
own Mother which brings it forth, in whose Womb it is couched: as nothing can
resist the cold but the heat only, and yet the heat is the colds Son; even so
also the poysonful Mercury must be resisted with its own child, which he
himself does generate in his Mothers womb out of heat and cold out of himself.

32. As the Love proceeding from the heart of the Father, which is his Son,
does withstand the Anger of the Father, whereby the Father is merciful; Even so
likewise it is in the expressed Word o^ Mercury.

33. Now understand it thus: I do not-mean that the cold poison of Mercury
should be, or could be resisted with the enkindled heat; no, but if the cold
poison be enkindled, then the Remedy must be from the same likenss; but it must
be first freed from the coldness, viz. From the enflamed cold wrath, and
brought into meekness, and then it does also still and appease the hunger of
the colds desire in the disease of the Body, For if enkindled heat be
administered to the enkindled cold, then the cold is dismayed [or Flagratized]
at the Heat, and falls into a Swound, viz. into Deaths property; and so the
Heat becomes in this Deaths property a poison life, viz. an anxious Sting; and
the Mercurial wheel runs into Sadness, viz. into Sickness, or a crasie
dotage, wherein all j^y is forgotten.

34. For if the life shall subsist in its own Right, then the Heat and Cold
must stand in Equal essence.
Equality, that so they may accord one with another, and no enmity or Or,
Departure.
disaffection be at all in any of them; the one must not exceed or over top the
other, but they must stand in one Will; for the enkindled Cold desires no
Heat, but only likeness; Every hunger desires only likeness for its food, but
if the hunger be too strongly enkindled in the cold, such a Cure is not to be
given it which is so enkindled, indeed it must be in as high a degree in the
cold; but the violent force must be first taken away from it; so that it may be
only as the Mother which generates it, not according to the enkindled
poyson-source, but according to the Mothers Joy; and so the sickness, viz. the
Poison in the Anguish, will be likewise changed into such a Joy, and so the
Life does receive again its first property.

35. The raw opposite Body does not belong unto the Cure, but its Oil, which
must be mollified with its own Love, understand with a meek Essence, which also
belongs unto the same property; for the seven Forms of Nature are only one in
the Center; therefore that Oil must be brought so far in the Wheel, till it
enters into its highest Love-desire, and then it is rightly fit for Cure; for
there is nothing so evil but it has a good in it, and that very good does
resist its evilness [or poysonful malignity.]

36. Thus also in the same sickness it may withstand the enkindled Wrath in the
body; for if the cold Poison be enkindled in the body, then its good falls
into Into a Swound, or Impotency.
faintness; and if it cannot obtain the likeness of its Essence for its help,
it remains in faintness, and then the enkindled Wrath also does forthwith
consume it self, and falls also into faintness, and so the natural death is
in both, and the moving life in the body cease; but if it does attain the Or,
Assimulate.
likeness, then it gathers strength again, and the enkindled Hunger of the
Disease must cease.

37. In like manner also we are to consider of the Heat, which needs no cold
property, but the Likeness, yet it must be first freed from the Wrath of the
same Likeness, and brought into its own highest Joy and Good, so that this
Likeness does not Or, Vehemently, per-force.
effectually operate either in Heat or Cold, but in its own Love desire, viz.
in its Best Relish, and so it will bring the Heat in the body into such a
Desire: All corruptions in the body proceed from the Cold; if the Brimstone be
too vehemently enkindled by the Heat, then the Right and Property of the Cold
dies, and enters into Sorrow.

38. Mercury is the Stirring, active, vital.
moving Life in all, and his Mother is Sulphur; now the Life and Death lie in
Sulphur, viz. in the wrestling Mercurial Wheel. In the Sulphur there is Fire,
Light, and Darkness; the Impression causes Darkness, Coldness, and Hardness,
and also great Anguishment; and from the Impression of the Attraction Mercury
does take his rise, and he is the Sting of the Attraction, viz. the motion or
disquietness, and arises in the great Anguish of the Impression, where
Coldness, viz. a dark cold fire, by reason of the Hardness, does arise in the
Impression; and in the Sting of Anguish, viz. in the Disquietness, an hot fire
does arise.

39. Now Mercury is the Wheel of Motion, and a stirring up of the Cold and
Heat; and in this place it is only a painful aching Source in Heat and Cold,
viz. a cold and hot fiery Poyson-anguishment, and forces forward as a Wheel,
and yet it is a cause of Joy, and all life and motion; but if it shall be freed
from the Anguish, and introduced into the Joy, then it must be brought forth
through Death.

40. Now every sickness and malady is a Deaths property; for Mercury has too
much enkindled and enflamed himself either in Heat or Cold, whereby the Essence
or Flesh, which he has attracted to himself in his Desire, viz. in his Mother
in the Sulphur, is burnt, whereby the Earthliness arises both in the Water and
Flesh: Even as the matter of the Earth and Stones, viz. the Grossness of the
same, is nothing else but a burnt Sulphur, and Water in Mercury his property,
where the Salniter in the Flagrat of the Mercurial Wheel, whence the manifold
Salts do arise, is burnt [or too vehemently enflamed,] whence comes the Stink,
and evil Taste.

41. Otherwise if the Mercury did so effectually operate therein in the Oil of
Sulphur, that he might be brought through the Death of the Impression from the
Heat and Cold, then the Earth would be again in Paradise, and the Joy-desire
would again spring [or bloom afresh] through the Anguish of the Colds
Impression; and this is the Cause that God laid the Curse upon the Earth; for
the Mercurial Wheel was deprived of its Good (viz. the Love-desire, which
arises in the Eternal Liberty, and manifests it self with this Mercurial
Wheel through Cold and Heat, and proceeds forth through the fire, and makes
a Shine of the light,) and the Curse was brought thereinto, which is a
withdrawing of the Love-desire.

42. Now this Mercury being a Life in the Sulphur of its Mother does stand in
the Curse, viz. in the Anguish of the Heat and Cold, and makes in his Flagrat,
or Salnitral Walm, continually Salts, according to such property as he is in
each place, and as he is enkindled in each Body; these Salts are only the Taste
in the seven Properties.

43. Now if the Mercury be too vehemently enkindled in the Cold, then he makes
in the Salnitral Flagrat in his Mother in the Sulphur a cold hard Impressive
Salt, whence Melancholy, Darkness and Sadness do arise in the Life of Sulphur;
for look what Salt is in each thing, even such a luster of the fire, and such a
vital shine from the fire is also therein; but if Mercury be enkindled in
immoderate Heat, then he burns up the Cold Essence, and makes raging pains
and akings according to the Impression, and according to the Stings property,
whence arises in the Sulphur great Heat and Inflammation; he dries up and
consumes the Water, so that the Desires Hunger or Sting has then no food to
satisfy its wrathful Hunger, whereupon he rages and teereth in the Salt, as
it is the Poisons property [so to do,] whence the painful distemper in the
flesh arises.

45. But if he obtains the Likeness again in the property as he stands in the
Center of his Mother, viz. in the Sulphur, understand as she has generated him
in the beginning, viz. as he at first came forth to the natural life in both
Tinctures of Man and Woman, understand in the Child where his life did
Enkindle; then he is freed from all Anguish, and enters again into the
likeness of the Heat and Cold; and albeit that the Strife arises in many even
from the very Womb, yet the Combat is first raised up after the beginning of
the Life: In the Life's beginning the Life enters into its highest Joy; for
the Gates of the Three Principles are opened in equal Accord; but the Strife
soon begins about the Conquest between the Darkness and Light.

46. But now we are to consider, what is to be done unto Mercury, if he be
Enraged.
Enkindled either in Heat or Cold, whereby he raises up sickness and pains:
now it were very good that men had the Right Cure; but alas! it will remain
hidden and covered by reason of the Curse of the Earth, and the abominations
and sins of men, because they do awaken this Poison in Mercury with their
immoderate With their bestial lustful excess or disorder.
bestiality.

47. Yet the poor Captive has need of deliverance; and though men have not the
high Universal, which reaches the Center, and brings the Wheel of Life into
its first Property, yet men must take from the Mercurial Walm of the Earth its
fruits thereunto, seeing the body is also become earthly: A man must accord (or
Assimulate) one Likeness with another, one Salt with another, according as the
Inflammation is in the Salt of the Body: For look in what Property the Brimstone
is Enkindled, either in Heat or Cold, in Melancholy or falling sickness
(whether the Brimstone be burnt too in the Body and Putrified, or whether it be
yet fresh and burning in the cold or hot fire,) even such an Herb, such a
Brimstone belongs to the Cure, lest the Heat or Cold be terrified in the
Salniter, where the Salt arises, by a strange Might which comes into it, and
generate a Mort Salt, and set open more and more the House of Sadness: but it
is not sufficient and powerful enough in its wild Nature and Property as it
grows out of the Walm of the Earth; it is not able to Master the Root of the
Enkindled Mercury in the Brimstone, but it does more vehemently Enkindle it in
such a Source and Property.

48. That which thou desire should happen to the Body, the same must first
happen to that which shall cure the Body: Unto the Cure of a foul Sickness
there belongs a foul Brimstone, and so to a cold or hot sickness the like is
to be understood; for look in what degree of the fire-or cold Mercury is
Enkindled, and in what Form among the seven Properties of Nature, that is, what
Salt soever among the seven Salts is Enkindled, even such a Salt belongs to
the Cure: for sickness is nothing else but an Hunger; now the Hunger desires
nothing else but its likeness; but now the property of that Life, which in its
beginning of its rise did stand in Joy, is the Root; and the sickness is its
immoderate Enkindling, whereby the order [or Temperature] is broken and
divided: Thus the Root desires in its Hunger the likeness, but the Inflammation
has taken it away; now the Inflammation is stronger then the Root, therefore
the Hunger of the Inflammation must be appeased, and that which it self is, must
be administered unto it.

49 But even as God cured us with his Love, and restored us to the Salvation of
the Soul, when as we had enkindled the same in the poysonful Mercury of his
Anger; in like manner also this Likeness must be first cured and circulated in
the Mercurial Wheel, and freed from the Heat and Cold, indeed not taken away
from them, (this cannot be, and it were also unprofitable.) but it must be
brought into its Highest Joy, and even then it will make such a Property in the
Body in the Mercury of the Brimstone and Salt; for the Root of Life does again
quicken it self therein, and lifts up the first Desire, so that now the
Hunger does vanish in the fall of the Inflammation.

50. Now it does behove the Physician to know, how he may deal with the
Medicaments in the Likeness, so that he do not enrage them, and bring them into
another Property, for in their Property they are even as a man's Life is: He
must have a care that they remain in their Degree, as they are originally
brought forth in their Mother; for no thing can come higher then it is in the
Center of its Original according to the Hiddenness; but if it shall come
higher, then it must assume another Property on it self; and so it is not in
its own degree, and has not its proper Virtue, but an improper one, which
indeed may very well be, but it has lost its Nature-Right, wherein it stands
in Joy, and is not able to effect any proper Operation in the Assimulate of its
own Nature.

51. Therefore there is nothing better then to let every thing remain in its
innate Genuine Virtue, only its Wrath must be changed into its own Joy, that so
its own Virtue according to the good part may be advanced into its Dominion,
and then in the likeness it is powerful enough in all Sicknesses without any
other mixture; For the Original in the Life desires no other multiplicity, but
only its likeness, that it may stand, live, and burn in its own Power and
Property.

52. The Power of the most High has given to all things (even to every one
according to its property) a fixed perfection, for all was very good, as Moses
says, but with the Curse the Turba is introduced, so that the properties do
stand in the strife of Mercury; yet in each property, in every Herb, or
whatsoever is [I say] In whatsoever does grow or arise out of the Walm of the
four Elements, there is a fixity hidden; for all things, which are in the four
Elements, are originally Sprung forth out of the Eternal Element, in which
there is no strife, neither heat nor cold, but all things were in equal weight
of all the properties in a Love-play, as it is even so now in Paradise; and the
same [Paradise] sprung forth in the beginning of this World before the Curse
through the Earth: thus it is also yet hidden in all things, and may be opened
by understanding and Art, so that the first Virtue may overcome the enflamed
malignity.

53. Albeit we Men have not full power to do it in Self-might, yet it may be
done in Gods permission, who has again Or, Put his mercy into us.
turned his mercy toward us, and again opened Paradise and its comprehension
in Man: Has God given us power to become his Children, and to rule over the
World? wherefore then not over the Curse of the Earth? Let none hold it for
impossible, there is required only a Divine understanding and knowledge
thereunto, which shall blossom in the time of the Lilly, and not in Babel, for
whom we also have not written.

CHAP. XIV. Of the wheel of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt; of the Generation of
Good and Evil; showing how the one is changed into the other, and how one does
manifest its property in the other, and yet both remain in the first Creation
in the Wonder of GOD, to his own manifestation and Glory.
1. THIS is an open gate of the foregoing Description: Every one says, Show
me the way to the manifestation of the Good. Hear and observe well, dear
Reason; thou must thy Self be the way, the understanding must be born in thee,
otherwise I cannot show it thee; thou must enter thereinto, so that the
understanding of the Work in its practique Art wherein I deal not, may be
opened unto thee; I write only in the Spirit of Contemplation, how the
generation of Good and Evil is, and open the Fountain, He shall draw the water
whom God has appointed thereunto; I will here only describe the wheel of Life
Or, what it is.
as it is in its self.

2. When I speak of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, I speak of one only Thing, be
it either Spiritual or Corporeal; all created things are that one thing, but
the properties in the generation of this only Thing do make difference [or do
give various gradual distinctions] for when I name a Man, or Lion, Bear, Wolf,
Hare, or any other Beast; yea also a Root, Herb, Tree, or whatsoever may be
named, it is the same only thing.

3. All whatsoever is corporeal, is the same being; the Herbs and Trees, and
also the Animals, but each thing in its difference of the first beginning;
according as the property in the Verbum Fiat has imprinted it self in each
thing, so is that Kind in its propagation, and all things stand in the Seed and
Procreation; and there is not any thing but it has a fixity in it, be it
either hidden or manifest, for all shall stand to the glory of God.

4. Whatsoever is arisen from the Eternal Fixity, as Angels and the Souls of
Men, does remain undestroyable in its fixed being; but whatsoever is arisen in
the Unfixt being, viz. with the motion of Time, that does again enter into the
first motion whence it has taken its Original, and is a Map of its form which
it had here like a picture, or as an Image in a Glass without life; for so it
was from Eternity before the times of this world, which the most High has
introduced into an Image, into the Comprehensible Natural life in time, to
behold the great Wonders of his Wisdom in a creatural Being, as we plainly see.

5. Now we are to consider the only Mother* how the same is in her property,
whence the innumerable multiplicity does arise, and has continually arisen,
and how she generateth Life and Death, Evil and Good, and how all things may be
brought into their First [Ens] viz. into the place where they do originally
arise, to which the Death, or the Dying, is the greatest Mystery.

6. For no thing, which is departed out of its first Order as the Mother
brought it forth, can go back again, and enter with its assumed Order into its
Root, unless it dye again with its assumed Order in its Mother, and even then
it is again in the End, and in the place whence it was created, and so it
stands again in the Verbum Fiat, viz. in the Bound of its Order in the
Expressed Word, and may enter again into that which it was in the beginning
before it was Corporeal; and there it is Good, for it stands again in that
whence it proceeded.

7. Now therefore we are to consider the beginnings of all things, for we
cannot say that this World was made out of Something, it was only and barely a
Desire out of the Free Lubet, that the Abyss, viz. the highest Good or Being,
viz. the Eternal Will, would behold it Self in the Lubet as in a Glass,
therefore the Eternal Will has conceived the Lubet, and brought it into a
Desire, which has Impressed it self, and figurized, and corporized it self
both to a Body and Spirit, according to the same Impressions property,
according as the Impression has introduced it self into forms, whereby the
Possibilities [or powers] are arisen in the Impression as a Nature.

8. This Impression is the only Mother of the manifestation of the Mystery, and
it is called Nature and Essence, for it manifests what has been from Eternity
in the Eternal Will; yet we are to conceive that there was in Eternity a Nature
in the Eternal Will, as an Eternal Mind in the Will; but it was only a Spirit
in the Will, and the Essence of its Ability was not made manifest, save only in
the Looking glass of the Will, which is the Eternal Wisdom, wherein all things
which are in this World were known in two Centres, viz. according to the Fire
and Light, and then according to the Darkness and Essence, all which came with
the motion of the Eternal will through the desire in the will into a manifest
mystery, and so introduced it self into a manifest possibility:

9. This is now the Essence expressed or made manifest out of Eternity into a
Time, and consists in the forementioned Forms in Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt,
where the one is not divided or parted asunder from the other; it is one
Eternal Essence, and Or, Figurizeth.
shapes it self into the properties of the Desire according to the possibility
of the Manifestation; and we are to understand that one property is not, nor
cannot be without the other; they are altogether the same only Possibility: and
now we will speak of their differences, viz. how this only Possibility does
introduce it self into Good and Evil, viz. into still Peace and Constant
unquietness.

10. We find Seven especial properties in Nature, whereby this only Mother
works all things, which are these, viz. First, the Desire, which is
astringent, cold, hard, and dark. Secondly, bitter, which is the Sting of the
Astringent hard Or, Intraction.
enclosure; this is the cause of all Motion and Life. Thirdly, the Anguish, by
reason of the raging in the Impression, where the impressed hardness falls
into a Teering [or contriting] Anguish and Pain by reason of the Sting.

11. Fourthly, The Fire, where the Eternal Will in this Anxious desire does
introduce it self into an anxious darting Flash [or twinkling Lightning] viz.
into Strength and Devoration of the Darkness, with which the hardness is again
consumed, and introduced into a corporeal moving Spirit.

12. Fifthly, The The flowing, or proceeding forth.
Egress of the free Will out of the Darkness and out of the Fire, and dwelling
in it self, where the free will has received the Luster, so that it does
enlighten, and shine as a light out of the Fire, and the potent desire of the
free will, which it has sharpened in the Fire (in that it is dead in the Fire
to the essence of the darkness of the first Form, and consumed) does now in the
Lights desire draw into it self the essence from the Fire-dying according to
its Hunger, the which is now Water; and in the Luster it is a Tincture from the
Fire and Light, viz. a Love-desire, or a Or, Fair complexion.
beauty of colors, and here all colors do arise; as we have fully set it down
in our other Books, but especially in the Threefold Life of Man.

13 Sixthly, The voice or Sound, which in the first form is only a noise from
the hardness, and is dead or mortified as to that [hardnes] in the Fire, and
yet in the fifth form, in the Love-desire, viz. in the pleasant property, it is
again received as a clear Sound out of the dying of the Fire in the Luster of
the Light in the Tincture, wherein also the five Senses, viz. Hearing, Seeing,
Feeling, Smelling. and Tasting, do arise in the Tincture of the Light from the
Fire.

14. Seventhly, The Menstruam, or the Seed of all these forms which the desire
does Impress into a comprehensive Body or Essence wherein all lies; whatsoever
the Six forms are Spiritually, that the Seventh is essentially [or in real
substance.]

15. Thus these are the Seven forms of the Mother of all Beings, whence all
whatsoever is in this World is generated; and moreover the most High has,
according to this Mother, introduced and created such properties as this Mother
is in her wrestling forms (understand as she brings her self with the
wrestling into properties) into a Orb, or Rotation.
Wheel, which is as a mind of the Mother whence she continually creates and
works: and this are the Stars with the Planetique Orb according to the
Platform of the Eternal Astrum, which is only a Spirit, and the Eternal Mind
in the Wisdom of God, viz. the Eternal Nature, whence the Eternal Spirits are
proceeded and entered into a Creatural Being.

16. And moreover the most High has introduced the property of this Wheel in
the motion, as a life into the four Officers, which manage the Dominion in the
Pregnant Mother; and these are the four Elements to which the Wheel of the
Mind, viz. the Astrum affords will and desire; so that this whole Being is
but one Only thing, and yet is so proportioned [or composed] as, a mind of a
man; Even as he is in Soul and Body, so also is this only Essence; for Or, He.
it was created out of this whole Essence into an Image according to Eternity
and Time; out of Eternity according to the Soul, and out of Time according to
the outward Essence; as a Similitude and Image of Eternity and Time, both
according to the Eternal Will and Mind, and its Essence, and also according to
the mind of Time and its Essence; and therefore now we are rightly to consider
of this Sulphurean wheel of all Essences, how the properties do introduce
themselves into Good and Evil, and again extroduce themselves out of Good and
Evil.

17. The Impression or Desire, viz. the first form to Nature, which is called,
and is also the Fiat, does receive the Desires property according to the
property of all the Seven Forms into it Self, and does Impress them, so that
out of the Nothing proceeds forth an Essence according to the properties of the
Will; Now its own property, being it is only a desire, and impresseth it self,
is Dark, and causes Hardness, viz. a strong Or, noise.
pulsation, which is a cause of the Tone or Sound, which becomes yet more hard
in the Fire, viz. in the fourth Form, where then the grossness dies away, and
it is received again in the fifth Form, viz. in the Love-desire; and again
proceeds forth in its own property in the Love-desire, and makes the sixth
Form, viz. the Sound, Voice, or Tone out of the Fire and Water.

18. Now this Tone or Sound, which is called Mercury, does arise in the first
Form, viz. in the Impression, by reason of the will and attractive desire; for
the attraction makes the motion, and the Compunction in the hardness, which we
distinguish, and call the second Form, but it is a Son of the first, and in the
first.

19. This second Form or Property is the raging, stinging, and bitter pain; for
the first is astringent, and the second is drawing, viz. the desire into an
Essence; this same Essence is the Or, The first property.
property of the first, and the attraction makes therein the second property,
viz. a bitter stinging which the hardness cannot endure; for it would be still,
and thereupon it does more vehemently Impress it self to withold the sting,
and yet the sting does thereby only grow the greater: Now the hardness, viz.
the Astringency wills inwards, and the sting Or, The sting in the hardness, viz.
the hardness it self.
from the hardness upwards: Hence arises the first Enmity and Opposition; for
the two Forms, which yet are but one, do make themselves their own Enemies; and
yet if this were not, there would not be any Essence, neither Body nor Spirit,
also no manifestation of the Eternity of the Abyss.

20. But now seeing the bitter sting cannot ascend, and the hardness also
cannot hold or enclose it, they fall into a Turning or through-breaking, like a
Wheel, which runs into it self as an horrible Essence, where both properties
are known only as one, and yet each remains in it self unaltered, and produce
the third property between both, viz. the Great Anguish, out of which the will,
understand the fixed will to Nature, desires to go forth again into the
liberty, viz. into the Nothing, into the Eternal Rest; for here it has thus
found it self, and manifested it self, and yet there is no Sundering or
departing: and this anxious Form is the Mother of Sulphur, for the Sting makes
Understand the mother of Sulphur.
it painful, and the hardness impresseth it, that it is as a dying Source, and
yet it is the true Original to life.

21. It has two properties in it self. viz. according to the Impression or
Desire it is dark and hard; and according to the desire of the will, which
wills to be free from the anguish, and enters again into the Liberty, it is
Spiritual and light, and the Sting breaks in pieces its conceived Essence
which the Astringent desire conceives in its self, so that its Essence is hard
and Spalt, and wholly darting as a flash of Lightning, and that from the
Darkness, and from the desire of the Light, understand to the liberty.

22. Now these three Forms are in one Essence as a raging Spirit, and the
desire impresseth these properties, so that an Essence is made according to
their property, viz. according to the astringent dark desire, viz. according to
the first Original, there is an earthy Essence, out of which in the beginning
of the great motion the Earth was made, and according to the bitter raging
Spirit there is the Instigation in the Essence, viz. a poison, and it does also
imprint [or impress] it self in the Essence, whence the Earthliness is so
wholly loathsome and bitter; and the third form, viz. the anguish gives a fiery
property thereinto; and yet here there cannot be as yet any essence, but it is
only a Spiritual Essence, and the Mother to the Essence.

23. The fourth Form in this Essence is the Fire, which as Prima materia.
to one part does take its Original out of the dark hard Impression, viz. from
the hardness, and from the raging Sting in the Anguish, which is the cold black
Fire, and the pain of the great Anguish; and as to the other part it takes its
Original in the Wills spirit to Nature, which goes again out of this hard dark
coldness into it self, viz. into the liberty without the Nature of the Austere
motion, and enkindleth the Liberty, viz. the Eternal Lubet to the desire of
Nature, with its sharpness, which it has conceived in the Impression, whereby
it is a moving and stirring Luster, for the Liberty is neither dark nor light;
but by reason of the motion it is light, for its Lubet brings it self into
the desire to light, that it may be manifest in the Light and Luster: and yet
it cannot be otherwise brought to pass but through darkness, so that the Light
might be made known and manifest, and the eternal Mind might find, and manifest
it self, for a Will is only one thing and Essence, but through the multiplicity
its Form is made manifest, that it is infinite, and a mere Wonder, of which we
speak with a Babes-tongue, being only as a little spark out of these great
infinite Wonders.

24. Now understand us thus: the Liberty is, and stands in the Darkness (and
Or, Opposite to to the dark desire, or dark Impression, which is after the
Lights desire.
inclining to the dark Desire after the Desire of the Light) it attaineth with
the Eternal Will the Darkness; and the Darkness reaches after the Light of the
Liberty, and cannot attain it; for it encloseth it self with the Desire in it
self, and makes it self darkness in it self; and out of both these, viz. out
of the dark Impression, and out of the Desire of the Light or Liberty toward
the Impression, there is a twinkling [or darting] Flash in the Impression, viz.
the Original of the Fire; for the Liberty shines in the Impression, but the
Impression in the Anguish comprehends it into it self, and so it is now as a
Flash; but being the Liberty is incomprehensible, and as a Nothing, and
moreover without and before the Impression, and Or, without any ground.
Abyssal, therefore the Impression cannot conceive or hold it, but it gives it
self into the Liberty, and the Liberty devoureth its dark Property and Essence,
and ^uleth with the Assumed Mobility in the Darkness, unapprehensive to the
Darkness.

25. Thus understand us aright: There is in the Fire a Devoration, the
Sharpness of the Fire is from the austere Impression of the Coldness and
Bitterness, from the Anguish; and the Devoration is from the Liberty, which
makes out of the Something again a Nothing according to its property.

26. And understand us very exactly and well: The Liberty will not be a
Nothing, for therefore the Lubet of the Liberty does introduce it self into
Nature and Essence, that it might be manifest in Power, Wonder and Being; it
likewise aslumeth unto it self through the Sharpness in the cold and dark
Impression the Properties, that it might manifest the Power of the Liberty; for
it Consumes the dark Essence in the Fire, and proceeds forth out of the
Fire, out of the Anguish of the Impression, with the spiritual Properties in
the Light; as ye see, that the outward Light does so shine forth out of the
Fire, and has not the Source and pain of the Fire in it, but only the
Property; the Light does manifest the Properties of the Darkness, and that only
in it self; the Darkness remains in it self dark, and the Light continues in
it self light.

27. The Liberty (which is called God) is the Cause of the Light, and the
Impression of the Desire is the Cause of the Darkness and painful Source: Now
Herein understand two Eternal Beginnings, viz. two Principles, one in the
Liberty in the Light, the other in the Impression in the Pain and Source of the
Darkness, each dwelling in it self.

28. And understand us further concerning their opening Essence and Will, how
Nature is introduced into seven Properties; for we speak not of a Beginning,
for there is none in Eternity; but thus the Eternal Generation is from Eternity
unto Eternity in it self, and this same Eternal Generation has according to
the Property of Eternity through its own Desire and Motion introduced it self
with this visible World (as with a likeness of the Eternal Spirit into such a
Creatural Being which is a Type or Platform of the Eternal Being) into a Time,
of which we will afterward speak, and show what the Creature is, as namely a
Similitude of the Operation of Eternity, and how it has also this same working
Temporally in it self.

29. Now concerning the Fire understand us thus: The fire is the principle of
every Life; to the Darkness it gives Essence and Source, else there would be
no Sensibility in the Darkness, also no Spirit, but mere Hardness, a hard,
sharp, bitter, galling Sting, as it is really so in the Eternal Darkness; but so
far as the hot fire may be Or, reached.
obtained, the dark Compunctive Property stands in the Aspiring covetous
Greediness, like to an horrible Madness, that it may be known what wisdom and
folly is.

30. Now the Fire gives also Desire, Source and Properties to the Light, viz.
to the Liberty; yet know this, the Liberty, viz. the Nothing, has no Essence
in it self, but the Impression of the austere Desire makes the first Essence,
which the Will-spirit of the Liberty (which has manifested it self through the
Nature of the Desire) receives into it self, and brings it forth through the
Fire, where the Grossness, viz. the Rawness, does then dye in the Fire.

31. Understand it thus: when the flash of Fire reaches the dark Essentiality,
then it becomes a great Flagrat, whereby the cold Fire is dismayed, and does as
it were dye, falls into a Becomes impotent.
Swound, and sinketh down; and this Flagrat is effected in the Enkindling of
the Fire in the Essence of the Anguish, which has two Properties in it; viz.
the one goes downwards into the Deaths property, being a mortification of the
cold Fire, whence the Water arises, and according to the The Caput mortuum.
Grossness the Earth is arisen; and the other part ascends in the Will of the
Liberty, in the Lubet, as a Flagrat of Joyfulness, and this same Essence is
also mortified in the Flagrat in the Fire, understand the cold Ei^es property,
and gives also a Water-Source, understand such a property.

32. Now the Flash, when it is enkindled by the Liberty, and by the cold Fire,
does make in its Rising a Cross with the Comprehension of all Properties; for
here arises the Spirit in the Essence, and it stands thus: *

If thou have here Understanding thou need ask no more; it is Eternity and
Time, God in Love and Anger, moreover Heaven and Hell.

33. The lower part, which is thus marked *, is the first Principle, and is the
Eternal Nature in the Anger, viz. the Kingdom of Darkness dwelling in it self;
and the upper part (with this figure *) is the Salniter; the upper Cross above
the Circle is the Kingdom of Glory, which proceeds forth in the Flagrat of
Joy in the Will of the free Lubet in it self out of the Fire in the Luster of
the Light into the Power of the Liberty; and this spiritual Water, which also
arises in the Flagrat of Joy, is the Corporality, or Essentiality, in which
the Luster from the Fire and Light makes a Tincture, viz. a budding and
growing, and a manifestation of Colors from the Fire and Light.

34. And this form of Separation, between the living and the dead Essentiality,
is the fifth Form, and is called the Love-desire, its Original is from the
Liberty, which in the Fire has introduced it self into a Desire, viz. out of
the Lubet of the Liberty into the fair and fiery Elevation of Joy, being a
flame of Love, which also does imprint in its Love-desire the Property of that
which it has conceived in the Will of the Eternal Mind, which brings itself
through the Fires-sharpness again into it self, viz. into the first Properties,
which arise in the first Impression, viz. from the motion and stirring, and the
Joyfulness arises out of the Anguish; for this is Joy, that the Will to Nature
is delivered and freed from the dark Anguish, for else there would be no
knowledge, what Joy were, if there were not a painful Source; and in its
Love-desire it conceives the first Properties in the first Impression, which
divide themselves in this Desire into five Forms; viz. from the Fire-flash into
Seeing, for the Water of Love reaches the Luster of the Tincture, wherein the
Sight consists; and from the Hardness, viz. from the Penetration of the Sting
in the Hardness, into Hearing, so that in this same Nothing, viz. in the
Liberty, there is a Sound, which the Tincture catches, and brings it forth in
the Water of the Desire; and from the Raging Sting into Feeling, so that one
Property does feel another; for if all Properties were only one, there would be
no Seeing, Hearing, or Feeling, also no Understanding: and from the
Assimulation, that one property does arise in the other, but with another
property comes the Taste; and from the out-going Spirit of the properties (in
that the Egress of each property enters into the other) arises the Smell.

35. Now these five Forms do all of them together make in the Love desire, viz
in the fifth Form, the sixth, that is, the Sound or Voice, as a manifestation
of all the Forms in the Spirits property, which the fiery Lights-desire does
enclose with the spiritual Water as one only Essence, which is now the fiery
Wills own Essence, which has brought it self forth in the Light, wherein it
works and makes the seventh Form, as an Habitation of the sixth, whence the
Essence and Dominion of this World was Generated, and introduced into a Form
according to the Law, or Appointment.
Right of the Eternal Birth.

36. Now understand us aright; we do not hereby understand a beginning of the
Deity, but the manifestation of the Deity; the Deity is herein known and
manifested in Trinity, the Deity is the eternal Liberty without all Nature,
viz. the eternal Abyss; but thus it brings it self into Byss for its own
Manifestation, eternal Wisdom, and Deeds of Wonder.

37. The eternal Father is manifested in the Fire, and the Son in the light of
the Fire, and the Holy Spirit in the Power of the Life and Motion proceeding
from the Fire in the Light of the Kingdom of Joy, being the Egressive Power in
the Love-flame; we speak only by parts of the Universal Or, In a Creatural
manner.
as a Creature.

38. The Deity is wholly every where All in All, but he is only called God
according to the Light of Love, and according to the proceeding Spirit of Joy;
but according to the dark Impression he is called Gods Anger and the dark
World, and according to the eternal Fire-spirit he is called a Consuming Fire.

39. We give you only to understand the Being of all Beings, whose Original in
it self is only one eternal Essence, but with its own manifestation it comes
into many Beings, unto its own Honor and Glory; and now we will show you, what
the Creatures Life and Dominion is in this All essential Being.

40. Now therefore understand us aright, what we mean by these three words,
Sulphur Mercury and Sal: In the Eternity all is Spirit; but when God moved
himself with the eternal Nature, wherein his own manifestation does consist, he
did produce out of the spiritual Essence a palpable and manifest Essence, and
introduced it into a Creatural Being according to the eternal Properties, which
also consists of Spirit and Essence, according to the Or, Genuine property.
Right [or Law] of Eternity.

41. And now I will speak of the outward Kingdom, viz. of the third Principle
or Beginning; for in this World there is also Light and Darkness in each other
as in the Eternity: God has given this World a Sun, as a Nature-god of the
outward Powers, but he rules therein as Lord; the outward [Kingdom] is only
his prepared Work, which he rules and makes with the Assimulate, as a Master
makes his work with an Instrument.

42. Sulphur is in the outward World, viz. in the Mystery of the Great Gods
Manifestation, the first Mother of the Creatures; for it does arise out of
Darkness, Fire, and Light; it is on one part, according to the dark Impression,
astringent, bitter, and anxious; and on the other part, toward the Deity, as a
Similitude of the Deity, it is fire, light, and water, which in the Fire does
Sever it self into two Forms, viz. according to the Mortification into Water,
and according to the Life into Oil, in which the true Life of all the Creatures
of the outward World does consist.

43. Mercury is the Wheel of Motion in the Sulphur; He is on one part according
to the dark Impression the stinging Rager, and the great Unquietness, and
severs it self also in the Fire in its Mother, viz. in the Sulphur, into two
Properties, viz. into a twofold Water; for in the Mortification of the Fire all
is turned to Water, understand into a living pleasant Water according to the
Light, which produces Silver in the Brimstone, viz. in the seventh Property of
Nature, which is the powerful Body, and in the Fire its Water is Quicksilver,
and in the Astringency, viz. in the Anguish of the Darkness, it is a Rust or
Smoke; therefore if its outward Water-body be cast into the fire, understand
[that Body] which it receives in Sulphur from the watery property, then it
does Or, Fly from thence as a smoke.
evaporate, for in the fire every property does sever it self again into the
first Essence, whence it came Originally, where all things were only a Spirit.

44. And then secondly it severs it self according to the Water of the dark
Impression into a Poison source, which yet cannot be understood to be a Water,
but only a Corporeal Essence of the Spirit; for as the Spirits property is, so
is also its Water, and even so it is in the Fire-flagrat.

45. Further understand us in the fiery Flagrat concerning the Salniter, whence
the manifold Salts and Powers do arise; for all the Properties of the Spirit
are become Corporeal in the great Motion of the Essence of all Essences, and
entered into a visible and comprehensible Being: This Flagrat is effected in
the enkindling of the Fire; and in the mortification of the Fire it does
impress into it self from the Waters Original a Water, according to the
property of the Flagrat, which yet is rather Fire then Water, but yet its
mortal Essence is a Water according to the property of the Flagrat, it is the
Comprizal of all Properties, it brings forth in its Comprehension, viz. in
the fiery Flagrat all Properties in it self, and apprehends the property of
the Light in its Powers, and also the property of the dark Impression in its
Powers, and makes all fiery; one part according to the Coldness, and one part
according to the Heat, but the most part according to the endless Mercury,
which is the Life of all Essences in Evil and Good, in Light and Darkness.

46. This Salniter is the Mother of all Salts in Vegetables and Animals, viz.
in Herbs and Trees and every thing; he is in all things, which give a taste and
smell, the first root according to each things property; In the Good (which
grow in the Love-desire in the oil of Brimstone) he is good, powerful, and
pleasant; and in the Evil he is evil in the Anguish of Brimstone, and in the
Darkness he is the Eternal Horror, and Despair, continually desiring in the
Flagrat to aspire above the Gates in the Fire, from whence arises the Will of
all Devils, and of all Pride, to ascend above the Humility of the Love-desire;
and in the Fire is the Trial of his Essence, as we see how he clasheth and
consumes himself in the Flash as a sudden thought.

47. For its Essence arises not in the Essence of Eternity, also it cannot
inherit it, but in the enkindling of the Temporal fire, yet it is perceived in
the Eternal Spirit by reason of the Elevation of the joy; but according to the
Essence of mortification, viz. according to the Salt of the Fire it subsists in
the Fire; for this property arises out of the first Desire, viz. in the
essence of the first Impression, which property the Philosophers call Saturn,
therefore the Salt is manifold; all sharpness in the taste is Salt, the good
taste arises out of the oleous Salt, and so also the Smell, which is the
Egressive Spirit in which the Tincture appears as a luster [or fair
Complexion] of colors.

48. Thus understand us aright; the Salniter in the Fire-Flagrat is the
Severation of the properties, where Death and Life do Se Ver themselves, viz.
the life which enters with the Love-desire into an Essence and Dominion, and
then the Life which in the Flagrat of Death, according to the property of the
cold, sinketh down in the mortification of the Flagrat as an impotency, and
gives weight; and according to the Subtilness water, and according to the
Grossness of the Austereness, Earth; and according to Sulphur and Mercury, Sand
and Stones; and according to the Subtilness in Sulphur and Mercury, understand
according to the Water of the same it makes Flesh, and according to the
Anxious darkness a smoke or rust; but according to the oleous property, viz.
according to the Love-desire a sweet Spiritual Essence, and according to the
Spirit a pleasant Smell, and according to the moving of the Fire and Light [it
giveth] the [One] Element, and from the Luster in the Fire-Flagrat with aspect
of the Light [it affordeth] the precious Tincture, which tinctureth all oily
Salts, whence the pleasant taste and smell arises.

49. The Salnitral Flagrat is the Sude in the Essence, whence the growth and
pullulation does arise, that there is a growing in the Essence its Impression,
viz. the Salt is the preservation, or upholding of the Essence, so that a thing
subsists in a body or comprehension, it holds the Sulphur and Mercury, else
they would part from each other in the Fire-Flagrat.

50. All things consist of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt: In the Salnitral Flagrat
the Element SeVers it self into four properties, viz. into Fire, Air, Water,
and Earth, which in it self is none of these, but only a moving and gentle
walming, not as the Air, but as a moving of the Will in the Body, a cause of
Life in the Essence; For as the Eternal Spirit of God proceeds from the
Father, who is a Spirit from the Fire and Light, and is the motion and life of
the Eternity; so likewise the Air proceeds forth continually out of all the
properties in the Salnitral Flagrat in the Fire from the Anguish in Sulphur in
the forcing Mercurial Wheel, as an impetuous aspiring motion; it is a Son of
all the properties, and also the life of the same; the Fire of all the Forms
does afford it, and also receives it again for its life; the water is its body,
wherein it makes the seething in the Salniter, and the Earth is its power,
wherein it enkindleth its Strength, and Fire-Soul.

51. There is but one only Element, and that does unfold it self in the
Salnitral Flagrat into four parts, viz. with the enkindling it gives a
consuming Fire of the Darkness, and its Essence; and in the Flagrat of the
dying of the Cold and the Darkness, it parts it self into Essences, viz.
according to the Subtilness into Water, and according to the Grossness into
earth; and then according to the motion in the Flagrats walming into Air, which
does most resemble the Element, but not wholly essentially, for the [one]
Element is neither hot nor cold; also not forcing or compulsive, but gently
moving.

Of the Desire of the Properties.

52. Every Property keeps its own Desire; for a property is nothing else but
an hunger, and the hunger does form it self into such an Essence as it self is,
and in the Salnitral Sude it gives such a spirit into the four Elements; for
the Original of the Sude is in the Element, whence four Elements proceed forth
in the Flagrat.

53. Each body stands Or, As to its inward motion.
in the inward motion in the Element, and in the growth and life in the four
Elements; but every creature has not the true life of the Element, but only
the high Spirits, as Angels and Souls of men, which stand in the first
Principle, in them the Element is incitable; In the life of the third Principle
it stands still, and is as a hand of God, where he holds and governs the
four Elements as an Exit, or Instrument wherewith he works, and builds.

54. Now every property of nature does in its hunger take its food out of the
four Elements; as the hunger is, so it takes a property out of the Elements;
for the four Elements are the body of the properties, and each Spirit eats of
its own body.

55. First, There are the Sulphurean properties according to the first and
second Impression, viz. according to the dark, astringent, and anxious
Impression, and then according to the Love-Impression in the Light, viz.
according to evil and good.

56. The dark hunger desires essence according to its property, viz. Earthly
things, all whatsoever resembles the Earth; and the bitter hunger desires
bitter Raging, stinging and pain; it receives into it self such an Essence (as
the poyson-source) out of the Elements: and the hunger of Anguish desires
anxious hunger, viz. the Anguish in the Brimstone; also the melancholy [taketh]
the desire to dye, and continual sadness; and the Fire-flash receives into it
Anger, Aspiring, ambition, pride, a desiringness to destroy all, and make it
subject to it, a desire to domineer in and above all, to consume all, and to be
Peculiar; and it takes the bitterness from whence the Flash arises to Envy
and Hatred, and the astringency to Covetousness, and the Fire to Anger and
Indignation.

57. Here is the true desire of Gods anger, and all Devils, and of all
whatsoever is against God, and Love; and this hunger draws such an Essence
into Self, as it is to be known and searched out in the Creatures, and in the
Herbs also.

58. Now the Fire flash is the End of the first desire, viz. of the dark
nature, and in the Fire the dying of the first hunger and Will begins; for
the Fire consumes all grossness of the first Forms, and casts them into death;
and here is the Se Veration of both Wills, viz. the one which enters back
again into the property of Death, and is a Will in the life of the dark Desire;
as the Devils have done, who would domineer in the Fire flash in the Salnitral
Sude over Time and Eternity; but they were driven back by the Spirit of God,
and spewed forth out of the Love desire as an abomination; and thus also it
happens here to the wicked soul of man, whereupon the Election follows: here
is the [Aym] or scope of the Electrion of grace, of which the Scripture
speaks, that God knows his; and here the Eternal Lubet of Gods liberty
apprehends the Will-spirit, which is arisen in the dark Center, and brings it
through the dying in the Fire into the Element.

59. In the Salnitral Flagrat lies the Possibility backwards and forwards; If
the will of the Desire goes back, then it is as to the Kingdom of this World
[earthly] and as to the Kingdom of the Eternal World, it is in Gods Anger, and
cannot see God unless it be converted, and enters into the Dying in the Fire,
and wholly dye to its Selfness, and enter into the Resignation of the Eternal
Will in the Salnitral Flagrat into the Element, viz. into the Heavenly
Essentiality and Corporality, so that the Hunger may eat of the pure Element,
and then it has further no other desire; for it is in the Fire dead unto the
austere dark hunger which is evil: thus from the dying in the Fire arises the
light, for here the Liberty is enkindled, that it becomes also an hunger, and a
desire; this is now a Love-desire, a Love-hunger.

60. In the outward World it is the light of the Sun in the four Elements; and
it is the bestial Love-desire, viz. after the Sulphurean body and Essence,
whence the copulation and multiplication does arise, viz. the Vegetative life;
and from the Mercury in the Salniter (wherein the sensible life is) therein the
Astrum gives the Reason in the Animals from the properties of the Salniter.

61. For the whole Astrum is nothing else but a Salniter in the Verbum Fiat in
the motion of the Being of all Beings in the fiery Flagrat, comprehended in the
properties of the Salts, wherein all the powers of the Element do stand as an
extern birth, which do continually Or, Seethe.
boil in the four Elements as a Salnitral Salt, and do introduce their property
in their desire fn the four Elements into the essence of Bodies, as is to be
seen in Trees, Herbs, Grass, and all growing things.

62. Thus understand us further concerning the second Center, which is manifest
in the dying of the Fire in the Light, whereby the Abyss of Gods liberty does
introduce it self into the Byss of Nature, both with the inward world in the
Kingdom of Heaven in the eternity; and then also with the outward Kingdom in
the Time.

63. Now all this has also the properties of the Desire, and takes its
Original from the first Principle, viz. from the first Center, and there is yet
no right dying in the Fire; the dark Essence only dies, and the Will-spirit
goes forth with the eternal Will to Nature again out of the fiery Death in the
light; it is only a transmutation of the Spirit, so that an hunger arises out
of the Liberty, and this Hunger is a Love-desire; as to the soul of Man it
draws Essence from the Element of God, viz. in the Divine Salniter it
[taketh] the divine Salts or Powers into it self; and as to the outward Worlds
Desire it draws the Oil out of the Sulphur into it self, in which [O^^] the
outward Life burns; and so it is likewise in the Vegetables and Metals, and
whatsoever else.

64. The Sun makes the outward Transmutation, and the divine Light in the
Souls property makes the inward; according as each thing stands in its
degree, so does its Hunger reach a property: Those which are in the Time
[receive a property] from the Time, and those in Eternity likewise out of
Eternity: The Hunger which proceeds from Eternity eats of the Eternity, and
that which is of the Time eats of the Time. The true Life of all Creatures
eats of the Spiritual Mercury, viz. of the sixth Form, where all Salts are
essentially; the Spirit eats of the five Senses, for they are the Spirits
Corporality; and the Body, viz. the Vegetable Life, eats of the Essence of
the Sulphur and Salt, for Christ says so also, Man lives not by bread only,
but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God.

65. Now the sixth Form of Nature is the expressed Spiritual Word, and the
Speaking Word therein is the Eternal Word: In the first Impression in the
Darkness it is the Word of Gods Anger, and in the outward World it is the
poysonful Mercury, viz. a Cause of all Life and Stirring, of all Tones and
Sounds: Now every Property eats of its likeness in its degree; viz the Hunger
of Time [eateth] of Time, and the Hunger of Eternity [doth eat] of Eternity,
both the Spirit of Mercury and the Spirit of Sulphur; whereas yet there are not
two [Spirits,] but only two Properties; all whatsoever does only take its
Original in one Principle, as the Creatures of the outward World, they have
only one Region, but a twofold Inclination from the good and evil; but
whatsoever takes its Original out of two Principles, as Man, he has also a
twofold Food and Dominion, viz. from the dark Center, and from the outward
Center; but if he dies to his Self hood, and brings his Hunger into Gods
Kingdom, then he may eat of the divine Mercury, viz. of the five divine Senses
with the Soul, and of the Element in the divine Essence; and yet the outward
Man apprehends not in this lifetime the divine Essence Corporally; but only
through Imagination, where the inward Body does Penetrate the outward; as the
Sun shines through the Water, and yet the Water continues still Water, for
here lies our fall in Adam.

65. The Element did wholly Penetrate the four Elements, and it was wholly One
in Man, but in the Curse the Element did sever from the Soul, so that the poor
Soul does now live only in the Vessel of the four Elements, unless that it does
again enter in the Death of its earthly Will into the divine Desire, and spring
forth in the Element.

67. Thus also the outward Body is in the Curse, and eats of the Cursed
Earths property, viz. only of the earthly Salniter, where one Hunger of the
earthly Properties does continually oppose another; for the Curse is a loathsome
Abominate in all Salts, and thence it comes that a constant Contrariety does
arise in the outward Body; for one Hunger of the Properties receives [or
catcheth] from the other the Nauseate abomination.
Abominate: now for to help the Body that it may be freed from the Abominate,
it must take the Assimulate of the Lothing Abominate, which is arisen in the
Body as a Sude, and introduce it into the Dying of the Fire, and extroduce it
in the Love-desire from the Curse of the Vanity; now this is no otherwise
effected, but as the true Life dies unto the dark Vanity.

68. The Abominate of the outward Life arises from a property of the Salt
which is contrary to the Oil of the Life: Thus the Abominate does forthwith
enkindle it self in the four Elements, and begins to Seethe in the Salniter
as a strange Life; This strange Life does at last darken and destroy the first
true Life, if it be not resisted; and it can have no better help, then with the
Assimulate of the introduced Abominate, which the Life has taken into it self;
therefore that must be done to the Cure which is to be done to the Life, that
it might be freed from the Abominate.

69. The Cure must be freed from the same Abominate, which it has received in
the four Elements from the like false Insinuation [In fluence or Impress,] it
must be brought into the Death of the four Elements, and its Spirit must also
be Tinctured in the fifth Form with the Venus desire, viz. with a pleasant
Essence, that the spiritual Mercury may arise in Jupiters property; understand,
the Cure must first dye to its sickness in all the four Elements; it must be
introduced into the Putrefaction of all the four Elements; in the Fire it dies
to its earthliness, and in the Putrefaction to the Waters earthliness, and in
the Ayrs Putrefaction to the Abominate and earthliness of the Air, and then it
must be brought into Venus, and from Venus into Jupiter, and then the Sun will
arise in the Love-desire, and with this the Abominate in the Body may be
resisted.

70. All other Cures, which are administered raw and Unregerated.
undigested (as when one takes Cold, and will resist Heat, and so likewise Heat
to resist Cold) are only an opposite fiery Flagrat, whereby indeed the
enkindled Fire does cease from its powerful working, but the Flagrat enters
into Deaths Anguish, and the Root of the Abominate becomes a poysonful Mercury,
unless that the Heat and Cold be before Temperized with Venus and Jupiter, and
then indeed it is an Appeasing of the Abominate in the Salnitral Sude; but the
Root of the Abominate remains still, unless that the Life be strong, and
mightily brings forth its Desire out of the Abominate. This the Physicians
must well observe, that the raw Herbs do not reach the Root, where the
Abominate is arisen in the Center in the property of the Life's Form, they reach
only the four Elements, and give some easement, but the Abominate remains
still in the Root as an hidden sickness.

71. The like is also to be understood concerning the Astrum, which has its
Sude in the outward Body as a peculiar Body in the four Elements; if the Cure
may be freed from the Abominate of the four Elements, then the Astrum falls
also into the Good part, and introduces its Desire thereinto, and so the Body
is also freed from the Abominate of the Astrum; for the Scripture says, That
the whole Or, All the Creatures.
Creature longs together with us to be freed from the Vanity: Now the Curse
of the Earth, wherein the Astrum does inject its Desire, is the Vanity; and if
it tastes a pure Life in it self, then it does also rejoice therein, and
casts forth the Abominate.

72. Every Nauseate or Loathsomness.
Abominate of the oily Life arises from the inward Mercury in the inward
Sulphur; for Sin also does hence take its Original, that the poysonful Mercury
(which is a cause of the Life) does in the Fire-flash in the Original of the
Salniter, in Retiring backwards, introduce it self again in to Self-hood, for
even there is the Original of the Poyson-life.

73. Every Life which will be without Entire.
spot, must dye in the Will-spirit to Nature in the Fire of the Abominate to
the first Impression of the Wrath, and must give it self forth in the
Will-spirit to Nature, as a Resigned Will through the Mortification in the
Light of Love: Let it be either heavenly or earthly it must hold that Process,
or else it comes not to the highest Perfection in its degree; for man could
not be helped unless the Love-Centre of the Love-desire did enter again into
the Humanity, and bring forth the Own Life viz* the humane Self, through the
Mortification into it self; This is an exact Type, that whatsoever will be
freed from the Abominate, viz. from the Curse, the same must dye to the four
Elements in the Abominate, and bring forth its degree through the Mortification
of the Fire in the Light.

74. Thus likewise is the Salnitral Sude in the Earth, whence Metals, good
Herbs and Trees do grow, each property is desirous of the Assimulate; and if it
can reach the Assimulate in Sulphur, and Mercury in the Love, then it brings
forth it self higher then it is in its degree; as the Eternal Liberty with its
Lubet does introduce the Eternal Nature through the Mortification into Desire,
and thereby does bring it self forth higher, viz. Or, then.
in Power and Majesty; the like is to be considered in all things; for all
things arise out of one only Being, the same is a Mystery of all Beings, and a
manifestation of the Abyss in Byss.

75. All things are generated out of the Grand Mystery, and proceed out of one
degree into another: now whatsoever goes forwards in its degree, the same
receives no Abominate, let it be either in Vegetables or Animals; but
whatsoever enters in it Self into its Self-hood, viz. into its own Lubet, the
same receives in passing through the Degrees the Abominate; for each Form of
Nature out Or, proceeding from.
of the Mystery receives of its property in its Hunger, and therein it is not
annoyed or molested, for it is of their property.

76. But if the Will enters back again into the Birth of the other
Properties, then it receives the Lust, and the Lust makes an Hunger, and the
Hunger receives strange Essence into it self: Here now is the Abominate and
Turba born; for this Will is entered contrary to the course of Nature into a
strange Essence, which is not of its property; this strange Essence domineereth
now in the Strange Will, and overcomes the Will; now the Will must either
Text, spue out.
cast it out, or else it will it self be cast out by the Strange Essence; and
seeing this also cannot be, thereupon arises Anger and Enmity.

77. For the Properties run to their Center of their first Impression, and Seek
the Strength and Might of the Fire, whence arises the Heat and Cold in the
Body, and they are in one another as Enemies, whereby the first Mother is
stirred up in her most wrathful Malice and Malignity according to the austere
Impression, and then begins the Contest, for the Conquest, and that Property
which maintains and keeps its Power and Prevalency, casts the other into
Deaths property, viz. into the Devoration, into the House of Misery.

CHAP. XV. Concerning the Will of the Great Mystery in Good and Evil, showing
whence a good and an evil Will arises, and how one does introduce it self into
the other.
1. EVery Property takes its Original from the first, viz. from the first
Impression or Desire to Nature, viz. out of the Grand Mystery, and brings
forth it self out of it self, as the Air proceeds out of the Fire, and all
whatsoever proceeds forward in one Will is uncontrollable, for it gives it
self to no Property; it dwells even from the first Original only in it self,
and goes forth in one Will; and this is the true way of Eternity, wherein
there is no Corruptibility if a thing remains in its own peculiar property,
for the Great Mystery is from Eternity: Now if the Form of the same proceeds
forth, and manifests it self out of it self, then this Form stands with the
Root in the Mystery of Eternity; but if the Form brings it self forth into
another Lust, so that two Properties must dwell in one, then from thence
arises the Enmity and Abominate; for there has been from Eternity only the
one Element in Weeving or working property.
Motion, and the free Lubet of Eternity, which proceeded forth with its Motion
from the Great Mystery of Eternity as a Spirit, which Spirit is Gods.

2. But when the Great Mystery did once move it self, and introduce the free
Lubet into the Desire of the Essence, then in the Desire the Strife began; for
there arose in the Desire out of the Element, which bears only one Will, four
Elements, viz. manifold Desires and Wills, which rule in one only Body, where
now there is Contrariety and Strife; as Heat against Cold, Fire against Water,
Air against Earth, each is the Death and Destruction of the other: so that the
Creature which stands in this Dominion is nothing else but a continual Dying
and a Strife; it is an Enmity and contrary Will in it self, and cannot be
remedied unless it enters again into one Will, which also cannot be brought
to pass, unless the multiplicity of the Wills be destroyed, and wholly dye to
the Desire, whence the four Elements Arise; so that the Will does again become
that which it was from Eternity: Herein we men do know, what we are in the
Dominion of the four Elements, nothing else but a Strife and a contrary Will, a
Our own enemies.
self-envying, a Desire of the Abominate, a Lust of Death.

3. For the Lust which arises out of the Desire must dye; if the Will (which
proceeded out of the great Mystery of Eternity, which the Spirit of God
breathed into the Image of Man, viz. into the Likeness) will be freed from the
Abominate and Contrary Will, then the Desire of the four Elements must dye, and
the Will must enter again into the one only Element; it must again receive the
Right of Eternity, and act and go forth in one Element, in manner also as God
created him, whom he himself has opposed, and brought himself into the
Dominion of the four Elements, in which he has inherited Death, and also the
Strife in the Forms of Life, whence arises his Sickness, Loathing, and Enmity;
for all whatsoever lives in Gods Will, that is not arisen in the Self-will, or
if it be arisen therein, it is again dead to the own [or self-ful] Desire.

4. Every Will which enters into its Self-hood, and seeks the ground of its
Life's Form, the same breaks it self off from the Great Mystery, and enters
into a Self-fulness, it will be its own [or of its own self-ful Jurisdiction,]
and so it is Contrary to the first Mystery, for the Same is alone All; and this
Child is accounted evil, for it striveth in disobedience against its own Mother
which has brought it forth; but if the Child does again introduce its Will and
Desire into that, whence it is generated and arisen originally, then it is
wholly one with the same, and cannot be annoyed by any thing, for it enters
into the Nothing, viz. into the Essence, whence it proceeded.

5. Thus, O Man! understand what thou art to do; behold thy self in thy Self,
what thou art, whether or no thou stand in the Resignation of thy Mother
(whereout thou were generated and created in the beginning,) whether thou art
inclined with the same Will; if not, then know that thou art a rebellious,
stubborn, disobedient Child, and have made thy self thine own enemy, in that
thou art entered into Self-desire and Will, and have made thy self thy own self
full possession, so that thou can not dwell in the first Mother, but in thy
Self; for thy Will is entered into Self-hood, and all that does vex, plague,
and annoy thee, is only thy Self-hood; thou make thy self thy own Enemy, and
bring thy self into Self-destruction or Death.

6. Now if thou will get again out of Death, then thou must wholly forsake thy
own Self-desire, which has introduced it self into Strange Essence, and become
in Self-hood, and the selfful Desire, as a Nothing, so that thou do no longer
will or desire to thy Self, but wholly and fully introduce thy Desire again
with the Resignation into the Eternal, viz. into Gods Will, that the same Will
may be thy Will and Desire.

7. Without this, there is nothing but misery and death, a continual dying, and
perishing; for hence arises the Election of Grace. If the Humane will (which
is departed out of the Unity of Eternity, and entered into a self-fulness, viz.
into a selfish Lust and desire) does again break it self off from Self hood,
and enter into the mortification of Self-will, and introduce its desire again
only into the first Mother, then the first Mother does again choose it to be
its Child, and makes it again one with the only Will of Eternity; but that
[Will or Person] which continues in Self-hood; he continues in the Eternal
Dying, viz. in an Eternal selfish enmity; and this also is only called Sin,
because that it is an Enmity against God, in that the Creature will be at its
self-ful command and Government.

8. Thus in its Self-hood, viz. in a Contentious strife-ful Dominion, it cannot
either will or do any thing that is good; and as it does impose, awaken, and
powerfully stir up to its Self nothing else but the Dying and Death: so
likewise it can do nothing else unto its fellow members; for hence also arises
the falsehood [or lyes] that the Creature denies the Union with [or in] the
Will of God, and sets his Self-hood in the place, so that it goes forth
from the Unity into Desires, and self-Lusts; If it did but truly know that all
Beings were its Mothers, which has brought it forth, and did not hold the
Mothers Substance for its own, but for Common; then the Covetousness, Envy,
Strife, and contrary Will and Enmity would not arise; from which the Anger,
viz. the Fire of Destruction does arise.

9. All Sins arise from Self; for the Self-hood does force it self with the
Desire into its Self-fulness; it makes its Self Covetousness and Envy, it
draws in its own Desire strange Effence into it self, and makes the
Possessor of the strange Essence also an enemy against it self, so that Sin is
wrought with Sin, Vileness with Vileness, and all run confusedly in and among
one another as a mere Abomination before the Eternal Mother.

10. In like manner also we are to consider of the regenerate Will, which goes
out of its selfishness or Self-hood again into the Resignation; the same
becomes also an Enemy, and an Abominate to self-hood; as Sickness is an enemy
to health, and on the contrary, Health an enemy to sickness: Thus the Resigned
Will, and also the Self-Will are a continual enmity, and an uncessant lasting
War and Combat.

11. Self-will seeks only what serves to its self-hood; and the resigned
Will is not at all careful, but brings its Desire only and alone into its
Eternal Mother, that it might be One with her; It will be a Nothing, that the
Mother might be alone all in it. Self-will says to the Resigned Will, thou art
foolish, in that thou give thy self to death, and yet might well live
gloriously in me; but the Resigned Will faith, thou art my Abominate, Pain, and
Enmity, and bring me out of Eternity into a Time only into perplexity and
misery; thou plaguest me a while, and then thou give my Body to the Earth,
and the Soul to Hell.

12. True real Resignation is the mortification of the Abominate against God;
He that wholly forsakes his Self-hood, and gives himself up with Mind and
Desire, Senses and Will, into Gods mercy, into the Dying of Jesus Christ; he is
dead to the Earthly World with the Will, and is a twofold man; where the
Abominate works only in it self to Death, but the resigned Will lives in
Christ's death, and arises up continually in Christ's Resurrection in God; and
albeit the Self-desire sins, which indeed can do nothing else but sin, yet
the Resigned Will lives not in sin; for it is mortified to the desire of sin,
and lives through Christ in God in the Land of the Living; but Self-hood
lives in the Land of Death, viz. in the continual Dying, in the continual
Enmity against God.

13. The earthly man is in the Curse of God, and is an Abominate before Gods
holiness; he can do nothing else but seek his Self-hood, for he is in the Wrath
of God; and albeit he does something that is good, yet he does it not from his
own self-will, but the Will resigned in God compels him, that he must do
what his Self would not willingly do; and now if he does it, he does it as an
Instrument of the Resigned Will; not from his own Desire, but from Gods Will,
which guides the Resigned Will in its Desire as an Instrument.

14. Therefore now whosoever will see the Kingdom of God, and attain thereunto,
he must Educe [or bring forth] his Soul out of self-hood, out of the Earthly
Desire, as the Physician brings forth the Cure of the Desease from the painful
[Tormenting] desire, and introduces it into a Love-desire; and then the Cure
also brings forth the Sickness in the Body out of the painful Desire, and
sets it into a Love-desire: Sickness becomes the Physics servant; and so
likewise the evil Earthly will when the Souls will is cured, is the Resigned
wills servant.

15. The Elemental and Sydereal man must only be the instrument wherewith man's
Soul labors in the Resigned Will; for thereto God has also created it; but
the Soul has made and set up it self in Adam for Lord and Master, and is
entered into his Prison, and given its Will thereinto; but if it will be
acknowledged for Gods child, then it must again dye to the same, and be wholly
mortified to the earthly Self-hood and Desire in Gods Will in Christ's death,
and be wholly regenerated a new in Gods Will, and deprive the earthly Will in
Self-hood of its power, and rule over it, and guide it in subjection and
command, as a Master his Instrument, and then Self-hood loses the power and
prevalency, and the lust of Self-hood arises as a continual longing; Self-hood
does then continually long after the forms of its own life, viz. after
Self-glory, and after earthly Abundance, also after Envy and Anger, whether it
may be able to attain that Abundance; and also after the cunning lies of
falsehood; these are the vital forms of the Earthly Self-hood.

16. But the Resigned Will does as a potent Champion continually bruise the
head of this Serpent, and says; Thou art arisen from the Devil, and Gods
anger, I will none of thee, thou art an Abominate before God. And although the
Resigned Will is sometimes captivated with false lust, when it does overwhelm
and overpower it with the Devils desire and insinuation of its Imagination,
yet the Resigned Will does forthwith cry unto the Voice, or breath.
Word of God, That Gods Will does again bring it out of the Abominate of Death.

17. The Resigned Will has no rest here in this Cottage, but must always be in
Combat, for it is lodged in a false house: It is indeed in it self in Gods
hand; but without it self it is in the Jaws and Throat of the Abyss of Gods
Anger in the Kingdom of Devils, which continually pass up and down with it, and
desire to try and tempt the Soul, viz. the Center.

18. In like manner also the good Angels do stand by him in the Resigned Will,
viz. in the Divine Desire, and defend him from the poysonful Imagination of the
Devil, they keep off the fiery Darts of the wicked one, as Saint Peter says.

19. For all does work and desire in man Gods Love and Anger: He stands while
he is in this Tabernacle in the Gare either to go out or in: both Eternal
Principles are stirring in him; unto which the Souls Will does give it self, of
that it is received, and thereto it is chosen; he is drawn of both, and if the
Will of the Soul remains in Self-hood, then he is in the band of Gods Anger.

20. But if he departs out of his Self-hood, and forsakes his own
Domination, and continually cas^^ himself only into Gods mercy, viz. into the
Suffering and Death of Christ, and into his Resurrection and Restoration, and
wills nothing of himself, but what God wills in him, and by him; then the Will
is dead to the Life, and desire of Gods anger; for it has no Own life, but
lies in the death of Self-hood, and the desire of the Devil, and the Anger of
God cannot reach him; for he is as a Nothing, and yet is in God, and lives in
the Divine Essence wholly, but not to himself; but to his first Mother of
Eternity, he is again in the limit or place where he was before he was a
creature; and in the Will wherein God created him, and is an Instrument in the
Voice of God, upon which only the Will-spirit of God does strike, to its honor
and deeds of Wonder.

21. All self-ful seeking and searching in Self hood is a vain thing; Self-will
apprehends nothing of God, for it is not in God, but without God in its
Self-hood; but the Resigned Will apprehends it; for it does not do it, but the
Spirit in whom it stands still, whose instrument it is; he manifests
himself in the Divine Voice in it so much as he pleases: and albeit it may
apprehend much in Self-hood by Searching and Learning (which is not wholly to
no purpose) yet its apprehension is only without in the Expressed Word, viz. in
a form of the letter; and it understands nothing of the form of the Expressed
Word, how the same is in its ground; for it is only born in the form from
without, and not in the power of the Universal Pregnatress, whose ground has
neither Beginning, Comprehension, or End.

22. Now he that is born from within out of the speaking voice of God in Gods
Will-spirit, he goes in the Byss and Abyss every where free, and is bound to
no Form; for he goes not in Self-hood, but the Eternal Will guides him as its
Instrument, according as it pleases God; but he that is born only in the
Letter, he is born in the form of the Expressed Word, and goes on in
Self-hood, and is a self-ful voice, for he seeks what he pleases, and
contendeth about the form, and leaves the Spirit which has made the form.

23. Such a Doctor Babel is; it contendeth, wrangleth, and rages about the
form of the Word, and continually introduces the self-ful Spirit and
understanding in the form, and cries out, here is the Church of Christ; and it
is only a self-ful voice, understanding nothing of the Spirit of the form which
is incomprehensible, and strikes upon its prepared Instrument without limit
and measure as it pleases. For Conjecture, Opinion, or the self-ful own
Imagination, which arises in the Expressed voice [or literal outward Word] is
not Gods Word; but that which arises in Gods Spirit in the wholly resigned
Will in Divine Power in the Eternal Speaking Word, that takes its Original out
of Gods voice, and makes the form in the heart, viz. a Divine Desire, whereby
the Souls Will is drawn into God.

24. He is a Shepherd, and Teacher of Christ, who enters in through the door
of Christ, that is, who speaks and teaches by Christ's Spirit; without this
there is only the form, viz. the That Christ once dyed and suffered for us, etc.
History that was once brought to pass, and that a man need only accept of it,
and comfort himself therewith: but this Will remains without, for it will be
a child of an assumed [applyed] grace, and not wholly dye to its Self-hood in
the grace, and become a child of grace in the Resigned Will.

25. All whatsoever teaches of Christ's satisfaction, and comfortung ones self
with Christ's Suffering; if it teaches not also the true ground how a man must
wholly dye to Self-hood in the death, and give himself up in the Resigned Will
wholly into the obedience of God, as a new child of a new Will; the same is
without, and not in the Speaking voice of God, viz. in Christ's door.

26. No flattering or comforting avails any thing; but to dye to the false
Will and Desire in Christ's death, and to arise in the wholly Resigned Will in
Christ's Resurrection in him, and continually mortify the earthly self-hood,
and quench the Evil which Earthly Will introduces into the Imagination, as an
evil fire which would fain continually burn.

27. Comforting and setting the Suffering of Christ in the fore front is not
the true Faith; no, no, it is only without, and not within; but a Converted
Will, which enters into Sorrow for its Earthly iniquity, and will none of it
any more; and yet finds, that it is kept back by the self-ful earthly Lust,
and with his converted Will departs sincerely out of this Abomination and false
Desire into Gods mercy, and casts himself with great anxious [earnest] Desire
into Christ's Obedience, Suffering, and Death, and in the Converted Will wholly
dye unto the earthly Lust in Christ's Death, which will not depart out of
Christ's death, and continually cries, Abba, Loving Father! take thee thy dear
Sons obedience for me; let me only in his death live in his obedience in thee:
Let me dye in him, that I may be Nothing in my Self, but live and be in his
Will, in his Humanity in thee; receive me, but wholly in his Resurrection, and
not me in my unworthiness; but [Receive] me in him: Let me be dead in him, and
give me his Life, that I may be thy obedient Son in him, that his Suffering and
Death may be mine, that I may be before the same Christ in him who has
deprived Death of its Might, viz. a Branch or Twig of his Life.

28. Thus, and no otherwise, is the true Christian Faith; it is not only a
Comforting, but an uncessant Desire; the Desire obtains the suffering of
Christ, which [Desire would continually fain to be obedient, if it knew but how
it should behave it self before him, which continually does fall down before
him, and diveth it self into the Or, highest.
deepest Humility before him; it suffers and does all things readily, only
that it might but receive grace; it is willing to take the Cross of Christ upon
it self, and regards not at all the scorn of all the World in its Self-hood,
but continually presses forward into Christ's Love-desire; this Desire does
only grow out of Christ's Death, and out of his Resurrection in God, and
brings forth fruit in Patience which are hidden in God, of which the earthly
man knows nothing, for it finds it self in its Self-hood.

29. A true Christian is a continual Champion, and walks wholly in the Will
and Desire in Christ's Person, as he has walked up and down upon the Earth.
Christ when he was upon the Earth desired to overcome Death, and bring the
humane Self-hood in true Resignation into Divine Obedience: and this likewise a
Right Christian desires to do; he desires continually to dye to the Iniquity
of Death and Wrath, and give himself up to Obedience, and to arise and live in
Christ's Obedience in God.

30. Therefore, dear Brethren, take heed of putting on Christ's Purple mantle
without a Resigned Will; the poor Sinner without Sorrow for his Sins, and
Conversion of his Will, does only take it in scorn to Christ: Keep you from
that Doctrine which teaches of self-ful Abilities, and of the works of
Justification.

31. A true Christian is himself the great, and anxious Work, which continually
Or, works desire.
desires to work in Gods Will, and forces against the self-ful Lusts of
Self-hood, and wills continually so to do, and yet is many times hindered by
Self-hood; He breaks Self-hood, as a Vessel, wherein he lies captive, and
buddeth forth continually in Gods Will-spirit, with his Desire Resigned in God
(as a fair blossom springs out of the Earth,) and works in and with God,
what God pleases.

32. Therefore let the true Christendom know, and deeply lay to heart, what is
now told and spoken to her, viz. that she depart from the false Conjecture [or
Opinion] of comforting, without conversion of the Will; it is only an outward
[expressed] form of the New birth; a Christian must be one spirit with Christ,
and Bear, or carry.
have Christ's Will and Life in him; the form does not renew him, neither
comforting, or giving good words does at all help or avail, but a mortifying of
the evil imbred Will, which is Gods child, and born out of Christ's death, no
other Will attaineth Christ's Inheritance, my much knowing does not also do it;
the Heardsmen in the Field is as near to me as the Doctor; no wit or subtle art
in Disputation about the way of God does help or avail any thing thereto, it is
only a let and hinderance; the true Will enters into the Love of God and his
Children; it seeks no form, but falls down before its Creator, and desires
the death of its false Self-hood; it seeks the work of Love toward all men;
it will not flourish in the Worlds scorn, but in its God; its whole life is a
mere repentance, and a continual sorrow for the evil which cleaves unto it: It
seeks no glory or applause to show it self, but lives in humility: it
acknowledges it self always as unworthy and simple; its true, Christianity is
always hidden to it in its self-hood. He says, I am in myself-hood an
unprofitable Servant, and have not as yet begun to do, or work repentance
aright. He is always in the beginning to work repentance, and would always fain
reach the gates of the sweet grace; he labourech thereto as a Woman in Travel
labors to bring forth, and knows not how it fares with him; the Lord hides
his face from him, that his working may be great toward him: He sows in
anguish and tears, and knows not his fruit, for it is hidden in God; as a
painful Traveller goes a long way, aiming at his wished for journeys end, so
also he runs after the far mark of his rest, and finds it not; unless his
Pearl does appear unto him in its beauty, and embraces him in its Love; If it
again departs from his Self-hood, then arises sighing and sorrowing again
with continual Desire; and one day calls another, the day the night, and the
night the morning; and yet there is no place of Rest in the Earthly Self-hood,
save only in the fair Solar luster of his precious Pearl; when the Sun arises
to him in the Darkness, then the Night departs, and all Sorrow and Anguish
fly away.

33. Therefore dear Brethren learn to take heed and beware of Contention, where
men contend about the literal Form: A true Christian has nothing to contend
for, for he dies to his Reasons desire; he desires only Gods knowledge in his
Love and Grace, and lets all go which contendeth and striveth about the
Form, for Christ's Spirit must make the Form in Himself; the outward Form is
only a guide: God must become Man, or else Man becomes not God.

34. Therefore a Christian is the most Simple [or plainest] man upon the Earth,
as Esaias says, who is so simple as my Servant? All Heathens desire Self-hood,
and do teer and devour one another for the Authority and Honors; but a true
Christian desires to dye to them; he seeks not his own, but Christ's honor.
All whatsoever contends about Self-hood, viz. about the self full honor and
pleasure of this Life, the same is Heathenish, and far worse then Heathenish;
yea like the Devil, who departed from God into a Self-fulness; Let it cover it
self with Christ's mantle as much as ever it will, yet the man of false
Self-hood is lodged under it; if he will be a Christian, then he must quite dye
to Self-hood, that the same may only hang unto him from without as a Garment of
this World, wherein he is a Stranger and Pilgrim, and always consider and think
that he is but a servant in his high Office, and serves God therein as a
Servant, and not be his own Lord and Master.

35. All whatsoever does Lord it self without Gods call and appointment; the
same is from the Devil, and serves the Devil in his own Power and Form;
defend, and flatter thy self as much as thou will, it does not avail before
God; thy own heart accuses thee that thou art a false branch; thy Nobility and
Highness does not at all avail or help thee in the Sight of God; If thou do
not thereby drive Gods Order, thy Office is not thine, but Gods, If thou
walk falsely therein, then thy own judgment is upon thee, and condemns thee
to death; thou art a Servant; and although thou be a King, yet thou servest,
and must enter with the poorest into the new birth, or else thou shall not see
God.

36. All self-ful assumed [or arrogated] Laws and Authority, wherewith the poor
are vexed and oppressed, do all come from Self-hood, whose Original is in the
expressed form, which has with the Form introduced it self into a Self-hood,
and extroduced it self quite from God; Whatsoever does not serve in a Servants
Office before God, the same is all false, let it be either high or low, learned
or unlearned: We are altogether Servants of the great God; nothing brings it
self into a Self-fulness, unless that it be born in Gods Anger in the
Impression of Nature: and though a Christian do possess an Own-hood, which is
not false, yet he is only but a Servant therein, viz. a Distributer for his
Master, a Steward and Overseer of his Masters Work: he deals for his Master
therein, and not for his Self-hood only; all whatsoever he plotteth and
devises to bring into Self-hood, and brings it, that he brings into the
anxious Cabinet of Covetousness, Envy, and Self-ful pleasure of the Flesh, viz.
into a Vessel that is separated from God, viz. into the Impression of Nature,
and steals from his Lord and Master who has set him up for a Steward: he is
a Text, A pilferer from God and his substance.
sacrilegious person, let him excuse himself, and pretend what he please.

37. A true Christian acknowledges himself for a servant of God, to whom it is
given in charge to deal aright with Gods Works: He is not his own, for he is
also not at home in this Earthly Work of this Tabernacle; Let him seek, search,
plant and build, traffic and Trade; and whatsoever else he does, he must
always know that he does it to God, and shall give an account thereof; and that
he is a stranger and servant in this Work, and serves his Master, and not at
all look upon the Course of his Forefathers who have walked therein in the
pleasure of the Earthly life; whosoever does so, is far from the Kingdom of
God, and can with no conscience and ground call himself [or think himself to
be] a Christian, for he stands only in the Form of Christianity, and not in
the Spirit of Christ; the Form shall be destroyed, and cease with time, but the
Spirit remains steadfast for ever.

38. A true Christian is in the Spirit a Christian, and in continual exercise
to bring forth its own Form, not only with words in sound and show, but in the
power of the Work, as a visible palpable Form, not weening, conjecturing, and
giving good words out of the self-ful self-hood, and yet remaining in
self-hood; but a dying to self-hood, and a growing forth in the Will of God in
the Love self-hood as a Servant of God in Gods deeds of Wonder: A helping to
strike his instrument in Gods Will, and be a true sounding string in Gods
harmonious Consort; A continual making Word in Gods voice, viz. in the Verbum
Fiat, which makes and works in and with God, what God makes, forms and
works, as an Instrument of God.

39. Therefore O thou dear Christendom behold thy self, whether thou workest in
the working Word of God in his Will, or whether thou stand only in the Form
of Christendom, and workest thy own Self-fulness in falsehood: Thou will find,
how thou art become an Abomination before the most High, and thy Spewing out.
casting forth from the most High out of this Form (which thou in thy Self-hood
have introduced into his expressed Form) shall presently follow; and that
because thou coverest thy Self with the true Form, and art a false Child
therein: therefore thou art sought, and found with a false vail [or covering]
in thy own Form.

40. And as thou have brought thy Self into a false self-ful Form under the
true Form, Even so thou shall also destroy thy Self, whereto the Heaven helps
thee, which thou have a long time served in obedience, and from this there is
no withholding; thy Work is found to be in the Turba, which shall well
satisfy and satiate it self in destroying, as thou have built up thy Self in
thy Apostate falsehood in thy own Form under the Name of the true Form, and have
played the Hypocrite before God with the show and ostentation of Holiness, and
only served the Earthly man; But the Servant of the Lord shall be sought and
found; the Lord feeds his Lambs in his own Form, and brings them into his
Pasture; all the haughty and wealthy of the World shall find by experience what
Judgment the Lord will bring upon the face of all the Earth, and all wicked
Hope shall be destroyed; for the day of the Harvest draws near; A Terror from
the Lord shakes the Earth, and his voice sounds in all the ends of the
Earth; and the Star of his Wonders arises, none hinders it, for it is
concluded of in the Counsel of the Watchmen in the Gates of the deep.

41. Therefore let every one seek and find himself; for the time of Visitation
is at hand, that he may be found in his Love; for the Turba has found all
false Lust in it, and the most High worker of all Essences manifests the
Turba; and then all false Lust or Imagination becomes manifest, and each thing
enters into its Eternal Keeper, for all things are generated out of
Imagination* so also it shall receive its property in the Imagination, and
every Lubet, or longing desire.
Imagination reapeth its own work which it has wrought; for to that end all
things have appeared, that the Eternity might be manifest in a time; with deeds
of Wonder it brought it self into the Form of Time, and with deeds of Wonder it
carries it self forth again out of the Time into its first place.

42. All things enter again into that whence they proceeded; but they keep
their own Form and Model, as they have introduced themselves in the Expressed
Word, and every thing shall also be received of its likeness, and Or, This is
always the end.
the End is always; and as all things do generate themselves in the Expressed
Word, so also they are signed in their inward form which also signs the outward.

43. The Self-ful Will makes a Form according to its innate Nature; but a Form
is made in the Resigned Will according to the Platform or Model of Eternity,
as it was known in the Glass of Gods Eternal Wisdom before the times of this
World; so the Eternal Will figureth and forms it into a Model of its likeness
to the Honor and wonderful Acts of God; for all whatsoever goes on in its
self-hood, the same forms it self; but what resigneth it self freely, that is
formed of the free Will: Now no self-ful Form with its own self-ful Will can
inherit the only Eternal Being; for where there are two Wills in one, there is
Enmity.

44. Seeing then God is one only God, then all whatsoever will live in him must
be like his Will and Word: As a Consort of music must be turned into one
Harmony, although there be manifold strings, and manifold voices and sounds
therein; even so must the true Humane Harmony be tuned with all Voices into a
Love-melody, and that Will-spirit which is not tuned unto the only Consort in
the divine Voice, the same is cast forth out of this Tune, and brought into its
self-ful Tune, viz. into its true fellow-voyces of its own likeness; for every
likeness shall receive in its own.

45. Has any been here an evil Spirit? then he shall be introduced into the
Root of his Likeness, for every Hunger receives its like into it self; now the
whole manifestation of Eternity with this Time is nothing else but an Hunger
and Generation; as the Hunger is, so is also the Essence of its Satiating; for
with the Hunger the Creature took its beginning, and with the Hunger it
enters into its eternal [Being.]

46. In the Hunger the Spirit with the Body is generated, and in the same
Hunger it goes into its eternal Being, unless that it breaks its first Hunger,
and brings it self into another by Mortification, else all is at its end so
soon as it is born; but Death is the only means, whereby the Spirit may enter
into another Source and Form; if it dies to its Self-hood, and breaks its
Will in Death, then a new Twig springs forth out of the same, but not
according to the first Will, but according to the Eternal Will; for if a thing
enters into its Nothing, then it falls again to the Creator, who makes
that thing as it was known in the eternal Will, before it was created to a
Creature; there it is in the right Aim or Limit of Eternity, and has no Turba,
for it is in Natures End.

47. Whatsoever runs on in Nature tormenteth it self, but that which attains
Natures End, the same is in Rest without Source, and yet works, yet only in
one Desire: All whatsoever makes Anguish and strife in Nature, that makes
mere Joy in God; for the whole Host of Heaven is Set and Tuned into one
Harmony; each Angelical Kingdom into a peculiar Instrument, but all mutually
composed together into one Music, viz. into the only Love-voyce of God: Every
string of this Melody exalts and rejoices the other, and it is only a mere
ravishing Lovely and delightful Hearing, Tasting, Feeling, Smelling and Seeing:
Whatsoever God is in himself, that the Creature is also in its Desire in him; a
God-Angel, and a God-man, God All in All, and without him nothing else. As it
was before the Times of this World in his Eternal Harmony [or Voice,] so also
it continues in the Creatural Voice in him in his Eternity, and this is the
Beginning and the End of all Things.

CHAP. XVI. Concerning the Eternal Signature, and Heavenly Joy, wherefore all
things were brought into Evil and Good.
1. THe Creation of the whole Creation is nothing else but a Manifestation of
the All-essential, unsearchable God; all whatsoever he is in his eternal
un-inchoative Generation and Dominion, of that is also the Creation, but not in
the Omnipotence and Power, but like an Apple which grows upon the Tree, which
is not the Tree it self, but grows from the Power of the Tree: Even so all
things are sprung forth out of the divine Desire, and created into an Essence,
where in the beginning there was no such Essence present, but only that same
Mystery of the Eternal Generation, in which there has been an Eternal
Perfection.

2. For God has not brought forth the Creation, that he should be thereby
Perfect, but for his own Manifestation, viz. for the Great Joy and Glory; not
that this Joy first began with the Creation, no, for it was from Eternity in
the Great Mystery, yet only as a spiritual Melody and Sport in it self.

3. The Creation is the same Sport out of himself, viz. a Platform or
Instrument of the Eternal Spirit, with which he melodizeth, and it is even as a
Great Harmony of manifold Instruments, which are all tuned into one Harmony;
for the Eternal Word, or divine Sound, or Voice, which is a Spirit, has
introduced it self with the Generation of the Great Mystery into Formings, viz.
into an Expressed Word or Sound: And as the joyful Melody is in it self in the
Spirit of the Eternal Generation; so likewise is the Instrument, viz. the
Expressed Form in it self, which the living eternal Voice guides, and strikes
with his own eternal Will-spirit, that it sounds and melodizeth; as an Organ
of diverse and various Sounds or Notes is moved with one only Air, so that each
Note, yea every Pipe has its peculiar Tune, and yet there is but one manner of
Air or Breath in all Notes, which sounds in each Note or Pipe according as
the Instrument or Organ is made.

4. Thus in the Eternity there is only one Spirit in the whole Work of the
divine Manifestation, which is the Manifestator in the Expressed Voice and also
in the Speaking Voice of God, which is the Life of the Grand Mystery, and of
all which is generated from thence; He is the Manifestator of all the Works of
God.

5. All the Angelical Kingdoms are as a prepared Work, viz. a Manifestation of
the Eternal Sound of the Voice of God, and are as a Particularity out of the
Great Mystery, and yet are only one in the divine eternal speaking Word, Sound,
or Voice of God; for one only Spirit rules them; each Angelical Prince is a
Property out of the Voice of God, and bears the great Name of God; as we have
a Type and Figure of it in the Stars of the Firmament, and in the Kingdoms and
Dominions upon the Earth among all Generations, where every Lord bears his
High Title, respective Name and Office: So likewise do the Stars in the
Firmament, which are altogether one only Dominion, and have their Princely
Dominion in Power under them, where the Great Stars bear the Name and the
Office of the Forms in the Mystery of the seven Properties, and the other after
them, as a Particularity of Houses or Divisions, where every one is a peculiar
Harmony, or Operation, like a Kingdom, and yet all proceeds in one Harmony;
like a Clock-work, which is entirely composed in it self, and all the pieces
work mutually together in one; and yet the great fixed Stars do keep their
peculiar property in the Essence of Operation, especially the seven Planets
according to the seven Properties of Nature, as an under-Pregnatress of the
Eternal Mystery, or as an Instrument of the Spirit out of the Eternal Mystery.

6. This Birth of the Astrum does beget in the four Elements, viz. in its Body
or Essence, Joy and Sorrow, and all is very good in it self; only the
Alteration of the Creature proceeds from the lustful Imagination, whereby the
Creature elevates the Wrath of the Fire in the Properties, and brings them
forth out of the likeness of their Accord: Nothing is Evil which remains in
the Equal Accord; for that which the Worst does cause and make with its coming
forth out of the Accord, that likewise the Best makes in the Equal Accord;
that which there makes Sorrow, that makes also in the Likeness Joy; therefore
no Creature can blame its Creator, as if he made it evil; all was very
exceeding good; but with its own elevation and departure out of the Likeness it
becomes Evil, and brings it self out of the Form [or Property] of the Love and
Joy, into a painful tormenting Form and Property.

7. King Lucifer stood in the beginning of his Creation in Highest joyfulness,
but he departed from the Likeness, and put himself forth out of the Accord [or
Heavenly Consort] into the cold dark fiery Generation, out of which the hot
fiery Generation arises; He forsook his Order, and went out of the Harmony,
wherein God created (...); He would be Lord over all, and so he entered into
the Austere (...) Domination, and is now an Instrument in the austere Fires
Might, upon which also the all essential Spirit strikes, and sounds upon his
Instrument, but it sounds only according to the wrathful Fires property: As
the Harmony, viz. the Lifes-form is in each thing, even is also the Sound or
Tone of the eternal Voice therein; in the holy [it is] holy, in the perverse,
perverse: All things must praise the Creator of all Beings; the Devils praise
him in the might of Wrath, and the Angels and Men praise him in the might of
Love.

8. The Being of all Beings is but one only Being, but in its Generation it
Severs it self into two Principles, viz. into Light and Darkness, into Joy and
Sorrow, into Evil and Good, into Love and Anger, into Fire and Light, and out
of these two eternal Beginnings [or Principles] into the third Beginning, viz.
into the Creation, to its own (...)-play and Melody, according to the Property
of both eternal Desires.

9. Thus each thing goes in its Harmony, and is guided [or driven] by one only
Spirit, which is in each thing according to the property of the thing; and
this* the Clock [or Watch-work] of the Great Mystery of Eternity in each
Principle according to the property of the Principle, and then according to the
innate Form of the Composed Instrument of the same Creatures, even in all these
Beginnings [or Principles.]

10. Death is the Bound-mark of all whatsoever is Temporal, whereby the Evil
may be destroyed; but that which arises out of the Eternal Beginnings, and in
its Harmony and Lifes-form enters into another Figure, that departs out of
Gods Harmony, out of the True Order, wherein God created it, and is cast out of
the same Harmony into its Likeness, as a dissonant discording Melody or Sound
in the great Excellent welltuned Harmony; for it is an opposite contrary thing,
and bears another Tone, Sound, and Will, and so it is introduced into its
Likeness; and therefore Hell is given to the Devil for his House and
Habitation, because he introduced his Life's form into the Anger of God, and
into the fiery wrath of the Eternal Nature, so that now he is the Instrument in
the Eternal Fire of God; and the Angerspirit does strike his Instrument, and
yet it must stand to the Honor and Admiration of God, and be the Sport and
Play in the Desire and Property of the wrathful Anger.

11. The Anger and Wrath of God is now his joy, not as if he feared, sorrowed,
and lived in impotency; no, but in great Strength and fiery Might, as a potent
King and Lord, yet only in the same property which he himself is, viz. in the
first Principle in the dark World.

12. The like also we are to know concerning the Angelical World, viz. the
second Principle, where Gods Light and glorious Beauty shines in every Being
[or thing] and the Divine voice or sound arises up in all Creatures in great
joyfulness; where the Spirit proceeding from the Divine Voice makes a
joyfulness, and an uncessant continual Love-desire in those creatures, and in
all the Divine Angelical Beings; as there is an Anguish-source and Trembling in
the painful Fire, so in like manner there is a Trembling joyfulness in the
Light and Love-fire, viz. a great Elevation of the Voice of God, which does
make in the Angels and in the like Creatures, as the Souls of men, a great
manifestation of the Divine joyfulness.

13. The Voice [or breath] of God does continually and Eternally bring forth
its joy through the Creature, as through an Instrument: the Creature is the
manifestation of the voice of God; What God is in the Eternal Generation of his
Eternal Word out of the great Mystery of the Fathers property; that the
Creature is in an Image as a joyful Harmony, wherewith the Eternal Spirit
plays, or melodizeth.

14. All properties of the great Eternal Mystery of the Pregnatress of all
Beings are manifest in the holy, Angelical, and Humane creatures; and we are
not to think thereof, as if the creatures only stood still and rejoiced at the
glory of God, and admired only in Joy; no, but as the Eternal Spirit of God
works from Eternity to Eternity in the great Mystery of the Divine
generation, and continually manifests the infinite and numberless Wisdom of
God; even as the Earth brings forth always fair blossoms, Herbs, and Trees,
so also Metals and all manner of Beings, and puts them forth sometimes more
sovereign, powerful, and fair, then at other times; and as one arises in the
Essence, another falls down, and there is an uncessant lasting Enjoyment and
Labor.

15. Thus likewise is the Eternal Generation of the holy Mystery in great power
and reprocreation [or Paradissical pullulation] where one Divine fruit of the
great Love-desire stands with another in the Divine Essence; and all is as a
continual Love-combate or wrestling delight; a blooming of fair colors, and a
pleasant ravishing smell out of the Divine Mercury, according to the Divine
Natures property, a continual good Taste of Love from the Divine Desire.

16. Of all whatsoever this World is an earthly Type and Resemblance, that is
in the Divine Kingdom in great Perfection in the Spiritual Essence; not only
Spirit, as a will, or thought, but Essence, corporeal Essence, sap and power;
but as incomprehensible in reference to the outward World; for this visible
World was generated and created out of this same spiritual Essence, in which
the pure Element is; and also out of the dark Essence in the Mystery of the
Wrath (being the Original of the Eternal manifest Essence, whence the
properties do arise) as an out-spoken breath out of the Being of all Beings;
not that it was made of the eternal Essence, but out of the forth-breathing [or
Expression] of the eternal Essence; out of Love and Anger, out of Evil and
Good, as a peculiar Generation of a peculiar Principle in the hand of the
Eternal Spirit.

17. Therefore all whatsoever is in this World, is a Type and Figure of the
Angelical World; not that the Evil, which is alike manifest with the Good in
this World, is also manifest in Heaven; no, they are SeVered into two
principles; in Heaven all is good, which is evil in Hell; whatsoever is Anguish
and Torment in Hell; that is good, and a joy in Heaven; for there all stands in
the Lights Source; and in Hell all stands in the Wrath in the dark Source.

18. Hell, viz. the dark World has also its generation of fruits; and there is
even such an Essence and Dominion in them as in Heaven, but in nature and
manner of the Wrathful property; for the Fiery property makes all evil in the
Darkness, and in the Light it makes all things good; and in Sum all is wholly
one in both Eternal Worlds; but Light and Darkness SeVers them, so that they
stand as an Eternal Enmity opposite one to another, to the end that it may be
known what is Evil or Good, Joy or Sorrow, Love or Anger: there is only a
distinction between the Love-desire of the Light, and the Anger desire of the
Darkness.

19. In the Original of the Eternal Nature, in the Fathers property in the
great Mystery of all Beings, it is wholly One; for the same only Fire is even
in the Angelical World, but in another Source, viz. a Love-fire, which is a
poison, and a Fire of Anger to the Devils, and to Hell; for the Love-fire is a
Death, mortification, and an Enmity of the Anger-fire; it depriveth the Wrath
of its Might, and this the Wrath wills not, and it also cannot be; for if there
were no Wrath, there would be no Fire, and also no Light: If the Eternal Wrath
were not, the Eternal Joy also would not be; in the Light the Wrath is changed
into Joy: the wrathful Fires Essence is mortified as to the Darkness in the
wrathful Fire, and out of the same Dying the Light and Love-fire arise; as the
Light burns forth from the Candle, and yet in the Candle the Fire and Light
are but one thing.

20. Thus also the Great Mystery of all Beings is in the Eternity in it self
only one Thing, but in its Explication and Manifestation it goes from Eternity
to Eternity into two Essences, viz. into Evil and Good; what is evil unto one
thing, that is good unto another. Hell is evil unto the Angels, for they were
not created thereunto; but it is good to the other Hellish creatures: so also
Heaven is evil to the Hellish creatures, for it is their poison and death, an
Eternal Dying, and an Eternal Captivity.

21. Therefore there is an Eternal enmity, and God is only called a God
according to the light of his Love; He is indeed himself All, but according to
the Darkness he says, I am an angry Jealous God, and a consuming Fire.

22. Every Creature must remain in its place wherein it was apprehended in its
Creation, and formed into an Image, and not depart out of that same Harmony, or
else it becomes an Enemy of the Being of all Beings.

23. And thus Hell is even an Enemy of the Devil, for he is a strange Guest
therein, viz. a perjured Fiend cast out of Heaven; He will be Lord in that
wherein he was not created; the whole Creation accuses him for a false
perjured Apostate Spirit, which is departed from his Order, yea even the Nature
in the Wrath is his Enemy; albe it he be of the same property, yet he is a
Stranger, and will be Lord; though he has lost his Kingdom, and is only an
inmate in the Wrath of God; he that was too rich, is now become too poor; he
had all when as he stood in Humility, and now he has nothing, and is moreover
captivated in the Gulf; This is his shame that he is a King, and yet has
fooled away his Kingdom in Pride: the Royal creature remains, but the
Dominion is taken away; of a King he is become an Executioner; what Gods anger
apprehends, there he is a Judge, viz. an Officer of Gods Anger, yet he must do
what his Lord and Master will.

24. This Reason most ignorantly gain-sayeth, and says, God is omnipotent, and
Omniscient, he has made it; Even he has done with his work as he has
pleased, who will contend with the most High? Yea dear Reason, now thou
think thou hitst it right; but first prithee Learn the A. B. C. in the great
Mystery: All whatsoever is arisen out of the Eternal Will, viz. out of the
Great Eternal Mystery of all Beings (as Angels and the Souls of men are) that
stands in Counterpoised.
equal weight in Evil and Good in the Free Will as God himself; that Desire
which powerfully and predominantly works in the Creature, and quite overtoppeth
the other, of that property the Creature is. (As a Candle purteth forth out of
it self a Fire, and out of the Fire the Wind, which Wind the Fire draws again
into it self, and yet gives it forth again; and when this Spirit is gone forth
from the Fire and Light, then it is free from the Fire and Light; what property
it again receives, of that it is: the first Mystery wherein the Creature
consists is the All-essential Mystery, and the other in the forth-going Spirit
is its propriety, and a self-ful Will.) Has not every Angel its own peculiar
Spirit, which is progenerated out of its own Mystery, which has its Original
out of Eternity? Wherefore will this Spirit be a Tempter of God, and tempts
the Mystery, which forth with captivates it in the Wrath, as happened to Lucifer?
It has the drawing to Gods Wrath, and to Gods Love in in it; wherefore does
not the Spirit (which is generated out of both) which is the similitude of the
Spirit of God, continue in its place in Obedience, as a Child before the Mother
in Humility?

25. Thou say it cannot, Or, This is spoken without any ground or foundation.
it is not so; Every Spirit stands in the place where it was created in equal
weight, and has its Free Will; it is a Spirit with the All-essential Eternal
Spirit, and may take unto it self a Lubet in the All-essential Eternal Spirit
as it wills, either in Gods Love or Anger, whereinto it introduces its
Longing Imagination, the Essence and property of that it receives in the Great
Mystery of all Beings.

26. In God the Birth is manifest in Love and Anger, wherefore not also in the
Creature which is created out of Gods Essence and Will, out of his Voice and
Breath into an Image, what property [or note] of the Voice the Creature
awakeneth in it self, the same sounds in, and rules the Creature: Gods Will
to the Creature was only One, viz. a general Manifestation of the Spirit; as
each [Creature] was apprehended in the property of the Eternal Mystery; yet
Lucifer was apprehended in the good Angelical property, which plainly
testifies, that he was an Angel in Heaven; but his own incorporized
Will-spirit forced it self into the wrathful Mother, for to awaken the same in
it, and thereby to be a Lord over every created Being: now the Will-spirit is
free, it is the Eternal Original, let it do what it will.

27. Therefore we are to know this, and it is no otherwise; that the
Will-spirit which takes its Original out of Love and Anger, out of both
Eternal Principles, has given it self in to the Wrath, whereby the Wrath has
powerfully got the upper hand and Dominion, and put it self out of the Equal
Harmony into a dissonancy or discord, and so he must be driven into his
Likeness; this is his fall, and so it is also the fall of all evil men.

28. Now Self-Reason alleges the Scripture, where it is written. Many are
called, but few are chosen: also, I have loved Jacob and hated Esau; also, Has
not a Potter power to make of one lump [of earth] what he pleases? I say the
same also, That many are called, but few are chosen; for they will not, they
give their free Will into Gods Anger, where they are even apprehended, and so
are chosen to be children of Wrath; whereas they were all called in Adam into
Paradise, and in Christ into the Regeneration; but they would not, the Free
Will would not, it exalted it self into the Wrath of God which apprehended it,
and so they were not chosen children; for Gods love chooses only its Likeness,
and so likewise Gods Anger; yet the Gate of the Regeneration stands open to
the wicked, whom the Anger of God has apprehended. Man has the Death in him,
whereby he may dye unto the Evil; but the Devil has not, for he was created
unto the Highest Perfection.

29. Thus it is also with Jacob and Esau; in Jacob the line of Christ got the
upper hand in the Wrestling wheel; and in Esau the fall of Adam; now Christ was
therefore promised into the Humanity, that he might heal the fall of Adam, and
redeem Esau, which was captivated in the Wrath, from the Wrath: Jacob
betokens Christ; and Esau, Adam; now Christ is to redeem Adam from Death and
Wrath, wherein he was captivated: But did Esau Or, Dye.
continue in Sin? that I know not, the Scripture also does not declare it; the
Blessing belonged to Esau, that is, to Adam, but he fooled it away in the Fall,
and so the Blessing fell upon Jacob, that is, upon Christ, who should bless
Adam and Esau, so that the Kingdom and Blessing might be given of free Grace
again to Adam and Esau; although he was apprehended in the Curse, yet the door
of Grace stood open in Jacob, that is, in Christ; therefore Jacob said
afterward, that is, Christ, when he was entered into Adams Soul and flesh, Come
unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden with your Sins, and I will
refresh you: Also, I am come to call the Sinner to Repentance; not Jacob, who
needs it not, but Esau, who needs it; and when he (viz. Esau) is come, then
says Christ, There is more Joy in Heaven for him, then for ninety nine
Righteous ones, which need no Repentance; [viz. for one Esau that repenteth]
there is more joy then for ninety nine Jacobs, who in the Center of the Life's
Original are apprehended in the line of Christ: There is more joy for one poor
Sinner, whom the Anger has apprehended in the Center of Gods Wrath in the
Life's Original, and chosen to Condemnation, if he brings the Sins of Death
again into the Mortification or Death of Sin, then for ninety nine righteous
ones that need no Repentance.

30. But who are the Righteous? for we are all become Sinners in Adam. Resp.
They are those whom the line of Christ in the Humanity apprehends in the
Life's Rise [or at the first point or opening of Life in them,] not that they
cannot fall as Adam, but therefore that they are apprehended in Christ's
Will-spirit in the wrestling Wheel, where Love and Anger are counterpoysed, and
chosen to Life; as happened to Jacob, so also to Isaac and Abel: but this Line
should be the Preacher and Teacher of Cain, Ishmael, and Esau, and exhort them
to Repentance, and to turn out of the Anger; and this Line did give in it self
into the Anger which was enkindled in Adam, Cain, Ishmael, and Esau, and
destroyed the Devils Sting with Love, that Cain, Ishmael, and Esau had an open
gate to Grace; if they would but turn and dye in Jacob, that is, if they would
enter into Christ's Death, and dye to sin in Abel, Isaac, and Jacob, and Christ,
then they should be received into the Election of Grace.

31. Jacob took Esau's Place in the Blessing: wherefore did that come to pass?
In Jacob was the promised Seed of Abraham and Adam; from this Line the Blessing
should come upon the sinful Adam and Esau: Jacob must be filled with Gods
Blessing, that he might bless the first born of angry Adam and Esau; for the
Blessing, that is, Christ must be born in our flesh and Soul, that the Seed of
the Woman might bruise the Head of the Serpent.

32. The Anger must be drowned and appeased in the Humanity; an offering did
not do it, but this Resigning into the Wrath, that the Love might drown the
Wrath. Jacob in Christ must drown Esau in the Love-power in his blood, that
Esau might also become a Jacob in Christ: but Esau was not willing to receive
his Brother Jacob, and contended about the Or, Birthright.
first birth; that is, Adam in sin will not nor cannot receive [or accept of]
Christ, he shall and Must dye to the sinful flesh and Will.

33. Therefore Esau has ever fought against Jacob, for Jacob should drown him
in Christ in his Blood; this the evil Adam in Esau would not have, he would
live in his Self-hood, therefore he strove with the earthly Adam against Jacob;
but when Jacob met him with his Gifts, that is, when Christ came with his free
Love-gift into the Humanity, then Esau fell upon his brother Jacobs neck and
wept; for when Christ entered into the Humanity, Adam wept in Esau, and
repented him of his Sins and evil intent, that he would kill Jacob; for when
Gods Love in the Humanity entered into Gods Anger, the Angry Father bewailed
our sins and misery, and Jacob with his Humility drove forth mournful tears out
of his brother Esau; that is, the Love in the Humanity brought forth the Great
Compassion out of and through the angry Father; so that the angry Father in the
midst of his enkindled Wrath in the Humanity did set open an open Gate of Mercy
for Adam and all his Children; for his Love brake the Anger, which [Love] did
put it self into Death, and made an open Gate for poor Sinners in the Death to
his Grace.

34 Now it is commanded the poor Sinner, whom the Anger has chosen to the
Condemnation of eternal Death, that he enter into this same Death, and dye in
Christ's Death to Sin, and then Christ drowneth it in his Blood, and chooses him
again to be Gods Child.

35. Here is the Calling; Christ calls us into his Death, into his Dying,
this the Sinner will none of: Here is now Strife in the Sinner, between the
Seed of the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent; which now overcomes, that
conceives the Child: Now the free Will may reach to which it please; both
Gates stand open to him. Many who are in Christ's line are also brought through
Imagination and Lust as Adam was into Iniquity; they are indeed called, but
they persevere not in the Election, for the Election is set upon him who
departs from sin; he is Elected that dies to sin in Christ's Death, and
rises in Christ's Resurrection, who receives God in Christ, not only in the
Mouth, but in divine Desire in the Will and New Birth, as a new fiery
Generation: Knowledge apprehends it not, only the earnest Desire, and breaking
of the sinful Will, that apprehends it.

36. Thus there is no sufficient ground in the Election of Grace as Reason
holds it forth: Adam is chosen in Christ, but that many a Twig withers on the
Tree, is not the Trees fault, for it withdraws its sap from no Twig, only the
Twig gives forth it self too eagerly with the Desire; it runs on in
self-will, viz. it is taken by the Inflammation of the Sun and the Fire, before
it can draw sap again in its Mother, and refresh it self.

37. Thus also man perishes amongst the evil Company in evil vain ways: God
offers him his Grace that he should repent; but evil Company and the Devil
leads him in wicked ways, until he be even too hard captivated in the Anger,
and then it goes very hardly with him; he indeed was called, but he is Evil;
God chooses only Children: being he is evil, the choice paffeth over him; but
if he again reforms and amends, the eternal Choice [or Election] does again
receive him.

38. Thus says the Scripture, Many are called; but when the Choice in Christ's
Suffering and Death comes upon them, then they are not capable of the same, by
reason of the self-ful forestalled evil Will, and so they are not the Elected,
but evil Children; and here it is then rightly said, we have piped unto you,
but you have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not Text,
comforted us.
lamented unto us: O Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy Children
together, as a clock-hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and thou
would not: It is not said, thou could not* but thou would not; and while
they remain in the Iniquity of Sin, they also cannot; God will not cast his
Pearl before Swine; but to the Children which draw near to him, he gives the
Pearl and his Bread.

39. Therefore whosoever blames God, despises his Mercy, which he has
introduced into the Humanity, and brings the Judgment headlong upon his Body
and Soul.

40. Thus I have truly warned the Reader, and set before his eyes what the Lord
of all Beings has given me; He may behold himself in this Looking-Glass both
within and without, and find what and who he is: Every Reader shall find his
profit therein, be he either good or evil: It is a very clear Gate of the
Mystery of all Beings; with glosses and self-wit none shall apprehend it in its
own ground; but it may well embrace the Real Seeker, and create him much profit
and joy, yea be helpful to him in all natural things, provided that he apply
himself thereunto aright, and Seek in the fear of God, being it is now a time
of Seeking; for a Lilly blossometh upon the Mountains and Valleys in all the
ends of the Earth: He that Seeks Finds.

Amen.
HALLELUIAH.
The brief Heads of what the several Chapters do treat.
Chap. I. HOw that all whatsoever is spoken of God without the knowledge of the
Signature is dumb, and without understanding, and that in the mind of man the
Signature lies very exactly composed according to the Being of all Beings.

Chap. II. Of the Opposition and Combat in the Essence of all Essences,
whereby the ground of the Sympathy and antipathy in Nature may be seen, and
also the Corruption and Cure of each thing.

Chap. III. Of the great mystery of all Beings.

Chap. IV. Of the Birth of the four Elements and Stars, in the Metaline and
creatural Property.

Chap. V. Of the Sulphurean Death, and how the dead body is revived and
replaced into its first glory or holiness.

Chap. VI. How a Water and Oylis generated, and of the difference of the Water
and Oil, and of the vegitable Life and Growth.

Chap. VII. How Adam (while he was in Paradise) and also Lucifer were glorious
Angels, and how they were corrupted and spoiled through Imagination and Pride.

Chap. VIII. Of the Sulphurean Sude of the Earth, how the Vegetation proceeds
from the Earth: and also the difference of Sex, and various kinds of creatures;
an open gate for the Searching Philosopher.

Chap. IX. Of the Signature, showing how the inward [Ens] signeth the outward.

Chap. X. Of the inward and outward Cure of Man.

Chap. XI. Of the process of Christ in his Suffering, Dying, and Rising again:
Of the wonder of the sixth Kingdom in the Mother of all Beings: how the
Consummatum Est was finished, and how likewise by way of Simility it is
accomplished and effected in the Grand Philosophic Work, or Universal Tincture.

Chap. XII. Of the Seventh Form in the Kingdom of the Mother; showing how the
Seventh Kingdom, viz. the Solar Kingdom is again opened and revived, set forth
in the similitude of Christ's Resurrection.

Chap. XIII. Of the Enmity [contrary Will or annoying distemper] of the Spirit
and Body, and of their Cure and Restoration.

Chap. XIV. Of the Wheel of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt; of the generation of
Good and Evil: how the one is changed into the other, and how the one does
manifest its property in the other, and yet remain in the first Creation in the
Wonder of God to his own manifestation and glory.

Chap. XV. Of the will of the Great mystery in Good and Evil; how a good and
evil Will does originally arise, and how the one does introduce it self into
the other.

Chap. XVI. Of the Eternal Signature and Heavenly joy wherefore all things were
brought into Evil and Good: wherein the real ground of Election and Reprobation
may be rightly understood.

The Postscript.
Reader,
IT would be too tedious, and even neeedless for to give thee a brief Summary
of the particular Heads of the Book; for it self is but a short hidden
Signature or Character of natural and Divine Knowledge, and therefore an
observant and an understanding through-reading of the same will be thy best
Index; For this Author is not to be read here and there by Peece-meals; for he
makes not a controversial bookish Rapsode of diverse Authors: but there is one
continued Breath and Sound of his own experimental Science running an
harmonious division through all the Three Principles of Divine manifestation,
and with sweet Accord playing interchangeably upon all the three clifts of
Philosophy, Divinity, and Theosophy, even from the deepest Base to the
smallest, or Highest Note that can be sounded or reached by the Spirit of Man:
and therefore none will understand him but the Nurslings of Sophia, in whose
Souls the air of the One Pure Element of Paradise breaths, which does ATONE the
strife of the four Elements, and revives the Souls true magic Fire, whereby it
is able to prove all things, and hold fast that which is good. In a word, it
brings the Souls true Faith working in Love into the Nothing, where it loses
its own Selfish Something, and finds all things.

I know this Book will seem strange and simple to the proud Self-conceited
Sophisters, the Wiselings of Pedantick Reason, who will cavil and carp at any
thing but what danceth as they pipe; but I value not their Censures, but pity
their Letterlearned mock-sciences, being but the courted shadows of their own
amused fancy; such as these being captivated in the Mystery of Babel, do Wonder
only after their Beast Mammon, upon which they ride in Pride, and scorn any
thing but what does please and flatter them in their admired works of Covetous
iniquity gilded over with seeming holiness; but the Babylonish Structure of
their Turba Magna-miracles will fall when it has attained the highest limit of
its Constellation, and no wit of man shall be able to prop it up: In the mean
time the Antichrist in Babel will rage, and domineer, and execute the Sentence
of Wrath, or his own dismal doom upon himself.

But I will not transgress by too large a digression, but come to my intent,
which is to explain thee some words which I have used in this Translation, as
Flagrat, Lubet, Source, Sude.

The Translators Exposition of the word
Flagrat.
The word in the Germane is Scbra'ck, which signifies properly a Fright, sudden
Astonishment, or Dismayment; in the other Books it is translated Terror, and
Crack; but I have put it Flagrat, from the Latin word Flagro, although by it I
mean not a burning, but even the powerful opening of the Life or Death in the
enkindling of the Fire in Nature; for the Fire is the dividing bound mark,
wherein the life of both Principles is Opened, and Se Vered; the life of the
first is the dying death in the darkness, and the life of the Second is the
living life in the Light; you may perceive a Resemblance of this Flagrat in
Thunder and Lightning, so also in Gun powder, or the like; as take diverse
Sulphrous Salnitral minerals exactly mixed, now their Powers are, as I may say,
contracted, or shut up in the Astringent dark Desire or Death; but touch them
Rightly with the true Fire, and you will see how they will soon open, disclose,
and flash forth, and even display and stream forth themselves into diverse
properties, colors, and virtues. It is even the bursting forth of the Ardent
Desire in Nature. It is, as I may term it, the Magical Fire-breath, whereby the
powers either of Light or Darkness are dismayed. In brief, it is the pregnant
Echo of the sound of Eternity every where speaking, working, and opening it
self in Love or Anger, in each thing according to its Will and Desire; In some
it is the horrible Flagrat to Death, and in others it is the pleasant
Triumphant Flagrat to Life.

Lubet.
The word in the Dutch is Lust, which signifies a longing, desire, or list to a
thing; also a delight, delectation, or contentful joy. Sometimes Imagination
and Lust* but because our word Lust is commonly used in the worst sense (viz.
for a longing after Evil and Vanity) and would not properly to agree, or fully
express the Germane word Lust in all places, I have generally translated it
Lubet, from the Latin word Lubitum, whereby is meant the Divine beneplacitum,
or good pleasure; by it is understood the Original to a Desire in the Eternal
Nothing, or Pregnant Magic; Gods free wel-liking to the Desire of the
manifestation of Nature and Creature, without which all had been an Eternal
Stilness in the Nothing. This Lubet in man is the moving will to Good or Evil,
Light or Darkness, Love or Anger.

Source.
By this is meant the first Original Qualities or Properties of both the inward
Principles, as they do break forth in the Sude of the Fire in the Flagrat of
Love or Anger in Nature or Creature; for in the Darkness the Love-Ens, or
Paradissical Light, is shut up in Death, and causes an austere dark Source,
Pain, Horror, Torment, or Disquietness; and so it is the radical Property of
the contentious Elements and Stars in the Curse of God; and in the Light the
Life of Love breaks forth, and swallow up this wrathful Source of Darkness and
Death, and turns it into Joy or a divine Source: So that by Source understand
the Original Quality, Property, or Qualification of Evil, Darkness, Anger,
Sorrow, Cursing, Damnation, Death, Hell, or the contrary to these in their
divine Source, or essential working Property, both according to Time and
Eternity.

Sude.
The word Sude is Germane, and signifies a Boiling or Seething: It is the
Stirring of the Seven Properties in Nature, arising from the Assimulation or
essential co-influence of the outward and inward Sol in Sulphur, whence the
bloomy Vegetation of the Earth proceeds; also the Generation of Metals and
Mynerals does lie therein.

These are some unusual Words, which I have used in the rendering this Book
into English; not that I would make it a Strange-Lation, or be a Coyner of new
words to amuse the mind only, but to express as well, and as fitly as I could,
the Authors Intent and scope, although I cannot say I have every where attained
to the full and lively expression of the Authors meaning; for as Nature did
open its knowledge in him, so likewise its language; so that in some words there
may be a proper and peculiar Idea, which our English words in some places
perhaps do not so fully express; yet I hope none shall find the Authors Sense
falsified or perverted, but truly translated according to the Original Copy
which I have. Words they are, but Vehicula rerum, they are formed to express
things, and not bare Sounds or empty Ayrs. Now He that rightly understands the
ground of the Cabala and Magia, and knows how the Language of Nature speaks in
every Tongue, may well translate this Author: but the bare letter of his
Writings, though never so exactly translated, will not give a man the
understanding of them, but the Spirit of Regeneration in Christ, in whom the
fullness of the Deity dwells bodily.

I should be glad that any one would take the Pains to amend what I have done
Amiss, and render them more easy to a vulgar capacity: It shall be enough for
me, that I have made him but stammer in English with a Babes tongue: God in due
time may raise up those that will do them better; for all things in this World
come by child-like steps, or gradually to their Perfection. In the mean time I
shall adventure to put one Book more (God willing) into English, which is the
chiefest of all his Writings if any may have the pre-eminence, and that is the
Mysterium Magnum, or A deep and Theosophical Exposition upon the whole first
Book of Moses called Genesis.

The Several Names, and Titles of the Authors Books collected out of his
Writings, and put into Seven Parts.
THe first Book called Aurora [or, The dawning of the Eternal Day] was written
in the year 1612. It was taken from him before it was finished, and kept by the
Magistracy of Gerlits, with strict command to him that he should not meddle
with writing Books which belonged not to his Vocation; whereupon he did forbear
for Seven years: but afterward, being stirred up by the instigation of the
Divine Light, he proceeded to write, and supplied the Defect of the First, in
the Second, Third, and fourth Books. The Aurora climbs up out of its Infancy,
and shows you the Creation of all Beings, yet very mysteriously, and not
sufficiently explained; it is of a deep, and parabolical meaning, therein are
couched many mysteries which shall yet come to pass.

The Second Book is called the Three Principles: It is a Key, and an Alphabet
for those that would understand his Writings; Therein the Great Mystery has
somewhat opened it self; It treats of the Eternal Birth, and Generation of
the Deity; also, of the Creation, of the Paradissical life of Man, and also of
the Fall; likewise of Repentance, Justification, and Regenerations of the two
Testaments of Christ; of the Total Salvation of Man. It is an Eye to look into
the Wonders of the Divine Mystery.

The Third Book is called the Threefold Life; It is a Key for above and below
to All Mysteries, it shows the whole ground of the Three Principles; it
serves every one according to his property; A man may therein sound the Depth
and Resolve of all Questions whatsoever Reason is able to devise and propound;
It is an open gate of the Great Mystery, and it is even a Wonder that does
surpass the capacity of Reason; therein are revealed and laid forth the deep
Mysteries and Secrets, about which the World has Contended since the heavy
Fall of Adam, and yet there has not been such a ground brought to light, which
notwithstanding will not be understood of the World, but of the Children of God.

The Fourth Book is called The Forty Questions; they were sent to him by a
learned man, who entreated him to answer them according to his gifts: The
Questions contain in them the great Depths of the Original of the Soul, and all
the Secrets of the Mystery; and there is such an Answer given to them, at which
the World might rejoice, if the Envy of the Devil hindered it not; but Gods
Counsel shall stand: I his Book treats fundamentally of all things which are
necessary for a man to know: Each Book from the first is grounded ten-times
deeper, so that the fourth is a clear Mirror, wherein the Mystery is
sufficiently understood; if it were Possible to have comprehended and written
all, it would have been three times more and deeper grounded; but it could not
be, and therefore there is more then one Book made, so that what could not be
explained in the one might be found in the other; and 'twere well that all were
brought into one, and the rest laid aside; for the Multiplicity causes strife
and wrong confused apprehensions, by reason of the catching Conceits and
Conjectures of Reason, which is not yet able to discern or look into the Center
and Depth of the Mystery, so that Reason supposes many times that it is
Contradictory, whereas it is not at all contradictory, but fully Agrees in One
in the Depth; yet know there is but a glimpse of the Mysteries in these
Writings, for a man cannot write them; if any shall be counted worthy of God to
have the Light enkindled in his own Soul, he shall see, taste, smell and hear
unspeakable things concerning this Knowledge; for there is the Theosophical
School of Pentecost, wherein the Soul is taught of God, and the way hereinto is
faithfully described. Is it not written, They shall all be taught of God, and
know the Lord? Also, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, etc. Why then
should any deride and contemn it, when God gives a mean Layman to know him and
his Mystery; so that he must write higher then the reach of any natural outward
Reason, yea deeper then the foundation of this World? therefore let a man open
his eyes wide, and see the ground of the School contentions, which for the most
part in all ages have gendred nothing but Pride, covetousness, Envy, and Wrath,
and so have blotted out the A. B. C. of Love and a divine Life which ought to
have been written and read in their own Book, which indeed has more in it then
can be expressed in the letter of any Book, and he that can read that aright
needs no other; for therein lies the Uaction from the holy One, which teaches
him aright of all things.

Whosoever applies himself aright to understand the Center of all Beings, and
comes once to see the Three Principles of Gods mafestation, will not need his
or any man's Writings; for he will know the Lord in himself; This is the true
Vade mecum, which surpasses the treasure of the World; yea it gives such a
plerophory of joy in the hidden man, that is not to be compared with any thing,
but with the bloomy Spring of Harmonious delights in the Eternal Paradise of
God. For herein lies the true noble Philosophers Stone, which gives a man the
Certainty of all things, and freeth him from all troubles and perplexities in
controversies of Religion, and opens to him the highest Mystery, and brings
that work whereto he is chosen of Nature to the highest Perfection, and gives
him power to look into the heart of every thing.

These four Books, viz. the Aurora, the I.
Three Principles, the Threefold Life, and the Forty Questions, with the
Authors Clavis, would make one part; and if there should be another Edition
'twere well the Aurora were translated, and the rest exactly Corrected and
Printed together; they would make about 147* sheets.

The Second Part might contain these pieces, viz. the Six great II.
Points, the Six small Points, the Signatura Rerum, a Tractate of the Heavenly
and Earthly Mystery: the Table or Scheam of the Three Principles of Divine
Manifestation.

The Six great Points do treat of the greatest Depths and Secrets, viz. how the
Three Principles do mutually beget and bear each other, so that in the Eternity
there is no strife, and yet each Principle is in it self (as it is in its own
property) as if it were only one and alone; also they show whence strife and
disunity does arise, and whence Good and Evil take their Original, wholly
brought forth out of the ground (that is out of the Nothing into the Something,
viz.) into the ground of Nature. This Book is such a Mystery, however set forth
in plain Simplicity, that no Acute Reason of Man shall fathom or understand
without Divine Light, it is a Key to all.

The Six small Points are a short Exposition, 1. Of the Water and Blood of the
Soul. 2. Of the Election of Grace, of the Good and Evil. 3. Of Sin, what it is,
and how it comes to be Sin. 4. How Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to his
Father. 5. Of Magic, what it is, and what the Magical ground is, 6. Of the
Mystery, what the same is.

The Signatura Rerum ciphers out the Creation in its Characters and Forms, and
shows what the Beginning, Ruin, and Cure of every thing is; it enters
wholly into the Eternal, and also into the External Nature and its Form.

The Treatise of the Heavenly and Earthly Mystery, is a short and deep Summary,
showing how the Heavenly and Earthly Mystery do stand in each other, and how
the Heavenly is manifest in the Earthly; it sets forth the great City Babel,
over-spreading the face of the whole Earth in its Forms and Wonders, from its
very rise to its downfall. The Table of the Three Principles is a Map or Scheam
of the threefold World, or an Explication of the Tetragramnaton, Macrocosmos,
and Microcosmos. These five Treatises together would contain about 60 sheets.

The Third Part might be of these Books, viz. The Incarnation III.
of Christ; The way to Christ; The Book of Election, and the Four Complexions.

The Book of the Incarnation consists of three parts; the First shows the
Mystery of Christ's Conception and Birth; the Second handles of the Passion,
Suffering, and Death of Christ, and shows how a man must enter into Christ's
Death, and both dye and arise again in and with him; also why Christ must dye;
the Third part treats of the Tree of Christian Faith.

The Way to Christ is a general Title, and contains these Treatises, viz. 1. Of
Repentance. 2. Of Regeneration. 3. Of Resignation. 4. Of the Supersensual
(...). 5. A Dialogue between the illuminated and un illuminated Soul. The Book
of the Election of Grace is one of the Authors clearest Books, it shows the
depth and mystery of Election and Reprobation; it reconciles the S^eming
Contradictory places of Scripture, and that from the true ground; it gives a
full and fundamental satisfaction to the true Christian mind, and frees it from
all those wild* strange, Calvinistical conceits which do indeed captivate it
in the Mystery of Babel.

The Book of the four Complexions is a short Treatise; it is an Epistle of
Consolation against Temptation; it shows whence sadness and melancholy
dejectedness of Soul comes, and how it is to be resisted and remedied: these
Treatises would be about 80 Sheets.

The Fourth Part might be the Mysterium Magnum, which is a Commentary upon the
First Book of Moses called Genesis, therein IV.
the Kingdom of Nature and the Kingdom of Grace are let forth in their
Monarchies and Hierarchies; it runs through all the Motions of Time, and
Centreth in Eternity; this will be about 100 Sheets.

The Fifth Part might consist of His Apologies, viz. one to V.
Balthazar T^lken, contained in two Parts: the First concerning some Passages
in his Book Aurora; and the Second touching some Points in his Book of the
Incarnation, viz. concerning the Eternal Purpose, Decree, and Election of God;
of the Person of Christ, and the the Virgin Mary. Also an Apology against
Gregory Richer Lord Primate of Gerlits, about his Book, entitled, The way to
Christ. Also a Consideration upon the Book of Isaias Steefel; and likewise an
Apology against Isaias Steefel, and Ezekiel Mets touching Perfection. This part
would contain about fifty sheets.

The Sixth Part would be of his Book of the two Testaments* VI.
viz of Baptism and the Lords Supper. The Book of the Divine Contemplation; the
Holy Weeks, or Prayer Book: the Book of the 177 Theosophick Questions. These
Books the Author finished not, they would be about forty sheets.

The Seventh Part would have all his Epistles, with an exact VII.
and full Explication of all the hard unusual words, and also a general Index
unto all his Books; the Sum of all would amount to about 500 sheets more or
less according to the size of the Letter.

If the Author had lived to have finished his Book of the 177 Theosophick
Questions, I believe he would have therein comprised the Sum of all his
Writings. The Questions are these.

The 177 Theosophick Questions of J. B. T.
1. WHat is God without Nature and Creature in Himself?

2. What is the Abyss of all things, where there is no Creature, being the
Abyssal [or unsearchable] Nothing?

3. What is Gods Love and Anger? how is he an angry God, seeing he is the
unchangeable Love?

4. What was there before the Angels and Creation were?

5. What is the Ground, and the Essence whence the Angels were created? What
was the same Power in the Word of which proceeded forth and became creatural?

6. What do the Angels officiate and do? and wherefore did the Power of God
bring it self into formings?

7. What moved Lucifer, that he lusted against God, and turned himself away
from the Good?

8. How could an Angel become a Devil? or what is a Devil? in what Essence and
Being does he now stand after the Fall?

9. Wherefore did not God, being he is Almighty, with-stand Lucifer, and hinder
him from becoming a Devil?

10. What did the Devil desire, that he departed from Gods Love?

11. What was the Fight betwixt Michael and the Dragon? what is Michael and the
Dragon? or how was the Conquest and casting forth effected?

12. How is the Eternal Counsel of God to be considered in the Divine
Contemplation, seeing the Spirit searches all things, yea, the depths of the
Deity (as St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 14.) and yet it stands not in the
Ability of the Creature, and however it is well possible?

13. How was the casting out of Lucifer and the Dragon brought to pass? whither
is he thrust, so that he can be without God, Thus far the Author has given his
answer.
being God fills all things? Or what is the foundation of Hell where he
dwells.

14. What is Lucifers Office in Hell with his Legions?

15. Has the foundation of Hell a Temporal beginning, or was it from Eternity?
or how may the same subsist Eternally or not?

16. Wherefore has God poured forth such wrath, in which an Eternal
Destruction is to be?

17. Seeing God is undivided, and remains Eternal, what is his working in the
place of Hell? is there also a Certain [local] place of Hell or no.

18. Where is the Place of Heaven where the Angels dwell? How is the same
SeVered and parted from Hell? is the same also a certain [circumscribed] place?
How is it to be understood?

19. What are the Dominions, or Thrones and Principalities of Angels, Evil and
Good in the invisible World? how is the Spiritual world of Eternity to be
understood in the visible world? are they also Severed by place and Abode? or
what is the inward foundation?

20. Whence is the visible World created, seeing the Scripture says, God has
made all things by his word; how is the same to be understood?

21. Seeing God and his Word is only Good, whence proceeded the Evil in the
Essence of this World; for there are poysonful Worms, Beasts, Herbs and Trees;
also Venom in the Earth, and other things?

22. Wherefore must there be strife and contrariety in Nature?

23. What is the Ground of the four Elements? how was the Separation that one
Element became four?

24. Wherefore, and to what profit are the Stars created?

25. What is the Ground of the Temporal Nature-light, and of the darkness; from
whence does the same arise?

26. What is the Heaven created out of the midst of the Water? and what is the
Separation of the Water above the Firmament, from the Water underneath the
Firmament?

27. What is the Ground of the Male and Female Kind in the Essence of this
World? whence is the Conjunction and Desire arisen? could not the same be
effected in one only Ground without distinction of Sex?

28. What are the Principles in the Spirit of this World, from the uppermost to
the lowermost Being?

29. What is the Sperm of the Generation of all things?

30. What is the difference of the Sperm betwixt Metals, Stones and Vegetables,
viz. Herbs, Trees, and earthly things?

31. How is the same Copulation and Conjunction of the Female and Male nature
effected, whence their Seed and Growth arises?

32. What is the Tincture in the Spermatick Nature, whence the Growth and
Luster arises?

33. Out of what are all the Creatures of the mortal Life sprung forth and
created?

34 What was the Archeus and Separator of their Nature and Property which
formed them, and still to this day forms them.'

35. What are the six work-days of the Creation, and the Sabbath?

36 What is the difference of the mortal Creatures? and what is their Chaos
wherein each Kind lives, and wherein they are distinct, and Severed one from
another?

37. To what End, or wherefore were the mortal Creatures created?

38. Whence was man Created as to the Body?

39 What was the Inspiration, whereby man became a living Soul'

40. What is the Immortal Life in Man, and what is the outward Life of this
World in him?

41. What is the IDEA, or exact Image of God in Man, wherein God works and
dwells?

42. What was Parad^se wherein God created Man? Is the same changeable and a
Creature, or does it stand in the Eternal Ground?

43. Wherefore did God create at first but one man, and not forthwith a man and
woman together, as he did the other kinds of Creatures?

44. Was the first man in such Habit created to eternal Life or to Alteration?

45. In what Image or Likeness was Adam before his Eve? In what form and
fashion was he when he was neither Man nor Woman.
Husband nor wife, but both?

46. Had Adam before his Eve Manlike members, and such bones, stomach, guts,
teeth, and all that we now have?

47. If that Adam was such a one as we are now, how should he in such manner
and condition have been able to Stand without Suffering and Corruption?

48. What should have been Adam's Eating and Drinking in a Paradissical manner
without care, distress, and sorrow, if he had stood out the Trial?

49. Should Adam in Paradise have eaten such fruit as the Heavenly Eating shall
be after this time? or of what should he have been Able to eat? Where should
the same have continued, seeing all the Beings of this World are earthly and
transitory, and he only was an eternal heavenly Image, and needed not the
Vanity?

50. Did four Elements also rule in Adam in his Innocence, or but one only in
the likeness of the four Elements? did he also before he fell feel Heat and
Cold?

51. Should any thing have been able to have killed or destroyed Adam?

52. What should have been Adams condition and estate upon the Earth? what
should he have eaten if he had continued in Paradise'

53. What was the Earth with its fruits before the Curse, when it was called a
Paradise?

54. Should the Propagation have been effected without Husband and wife, male
and female distinct Sex.
Man and Woman, seeing in the Resurrection of the dead they shall not be man
nor woman, but like to the Angels of God in Heaven? Mat. 22. 30.

55. How could it have bin possible that a man and woman should have continued
Eternally? will God change these Creatures of men, seeing in the Life eternal
they shall be like to the Angels? was Adam also in the beginning created in the
same Angelical Form, or in another [Form or Image] then he shall arise in, and
live for ever?

56. What were the Trees in Paradise which were pleasant to behold, and good to
eat?

57. What was the Tree of Life, and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil,
each in its Power, Essence and Property?

58. Wherefore did God create this Tree, seeing He knew well that man would
offend thereby?

59. Wherefore did God forbid man that Tree, what was the cause?

60. Wherefore should man upon the Earth Rule over all the Beasts? how, and to
what End could that have been?

61. Wherefore did God say, It is not good that man should be alone! whereas in
the beginning he looked upon all his works, and said, They are very good; yet of
man he says, It Is not good that this man should be alone; wherefore was it not
good?

62. Wherefore caused God a deep sleep to fall upon Adam when he built a woman
out of his Rib? what does it mean?

63. How was the woman made out of Adam? what does the Rib [taken] out of his
side signify, of which God made his wife, as Moses writes.

64. Did Eve also receive a Soul and Spirit from Adams Soul and Spirit, or a
new strange one peculiarly given of God?

65. How was the parting of Adam into the woman effected?

66. Why did Adam presently take his Eve to him, and said, that she was his
flesh? how could he know her?

67. What was the Serpent on the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil which
deceived Eve?

68. Why did the Serpent persuade Eve, and not Adam, to the Lust [to eat] of
the fruit? what was the fruit whereby they did both eat Death?

69. What was the Sin, and how came it to be a Sin, that the same is an Enmity
of God?

70. Why did not God hinder it from being effected, being he did forbid it them?

71. How were the eyes of Adam and Eve opened, that they saw they were naked,
which before they knew not?

72. What was Adams and Eves shame, that they hid themselves behind the Trees
of Paradise? whence came their fear and terror?

73. How did Adam and Eve really dye in the Fall to the Kingdom of Heaven and
Paradise, and yet live naturally to this world?

74. What was the Voice of God in the Word when the day grew cool? How did God
recall Adam? how is this to be understood?

75. What is the Seed of the Woman, and the bruising of the Serpent? what did
God speak again into them? was the same nothing else but an outward Promise, or
an Living Inoculation, or Ingrafture.
Incorporation of the effectual working Grace?

76. What is the Curse of the Earth, what is thereby brought to pass?

77. How was Adam and Eve cast out of Paradise into this world? what was the
Cherub with the Naked Sword before Paradise?

78. Wherefore was the first man born of a woman a Murderer?

79. What was Cains and Abels offering? wherefore did they offer? what did they
Do thereby?

80. Wherefore was Cains Murder for the offering sake? what is the ground of
it? what Type are these two Brothers?

81. In what Grace was the first World saved without the Law? what was their
Justification?

82. Was Cain condemned for his sins? what was his doubt or despair of Grace?

83. Why did God make a mark on Cain, and said, He that slays Cain, His blood
shall be avenged sevenfold?

84. Wherefore said Lamech (Cains Successor) to his Wives, Zilla, and Ada,
Lamech shall be avenged seventy and sevenfold, what does this mean and
signify?

85. What was the greatest Sin of the first world?

86. What is the Henochian life? what is become of Henoch, so also of Moses
and Elias?

87. What does Noah's Flood Typyfie, and point out?

88. What does Noah's Drunkenness signify, by reason whereof he cursed his
Son Ham?

89. What is the Tower of Babel; and wherefore were the Speeches there altered?

90. What was the Covenant with Abraham concerning the Blessing, and also the
Circumcision?

91. What Figure is the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha; how was it effected?

92. Wherefore was Lot's wife turned to a pillar of Salt; how is it to be
understood?

93. Wherefore did the Daughters of Lot lie with their Father, and first made
him drunk, that they might be with child by their Father, whence arose two
potent Nations; what does this Figure signify?

94. What does the Figure of Moses signify, that he must be drawn out of the
River, and be preserved to such a Great Office?

95. Why did the Lord appear to Moses in a fire-flaming bush when he chose him?

96. From what power did Moses do his wonders before Pharaoh?

97. What Figure is the departure of the children of Israel out of Egypt?

98. Wherefore must Moses remain forty days upon the Mount Sinai, when God
gave him the Law?

99. What is the Law in one Sum?

100. What were the offerings of Moses? How was Sin blotted out, and appeased
through these offerings?

101. What is the Ground of the Prophetical prophecyings? By what knowledge and
Spirit did the Prophets in the Old Testament prophecy?

102. What is Christ, of whom the Prophets prophesied in the Old Testament;

103. What was John Baptist Christ's forerunner?

104. What kind of Virgin was Mary (in whom God became Man) before she
conceived?

105. Why must Mary be first espoused to Joseph, before she conceived of the
Holy Ghost?

106. How was God, (viz. the word) made Flesh; what did he assume from man?

107. Why would God become Man? could not he forgive man his sins without being
incarnate?

108. How was the Union of the Deity and Humanity brought to pass in this
Incarnation?

109. How was Christ born of Mary unto this World, without the breach of her
Virginity? how could Mary after the Birth be a Virgin?

110. Wherefore did Christ Or, Converse.
walk forty years upon the Earth before he took his Office? wherefore did he
increase in Age, and favor with God and Man, when as he was himself God, and
needed no Growing or Increasing?

111. Wherefore did Christ suffer himself to be baptized of John with water,
when as he himself was the baptism and the Baptizer who should baptize with
the Holy Ghost?

112. Wherefore must Christ be tempted forty days after his baptism in the
Wilderness? what does it mean that a God-man should be tempted? and wherefore
must the Devil tempt him before he began his Miracles.
works of Wonder?

113. How was Christ in Heaven and upon the Earth at once?

114. Why did Christ Teach Unto*
before the People of the Kingdom of Heaven in Parables?

115. Wherefore did not Christ himself set down his Gospel in writing, but only
Taught it, and left it to his Apostles afterward to write down?

116. Wherefore must even the High Priests and Scribes, who taught the People,
gainsay and oppose Christ, being always bent to reproach and slay him? why must
not the worldly Magistrate do it, or the common Crew?

117. Why was there such a process of Revilings, Mockings, and Scourging kept
with Christ before his Suffering? wherefore did God so suffer it to be done?

118. Wherefore must even the Teachers of the Law bring Christ to be condemned;
and yet he must be killed by the Heathenish Magistracy?

119. Wherefore must Christ suffer, and dye? Did God require such an Avengement
for to be reconciled; and could not he otherwise forgive Sin?

120. What is the Figure of the two Murderers which were hanged with Christ
upon the Cross; and wherefore must Christ dye upon a wooden Cross, and no
otherwise?

121. How did Christ with his dying flay Death upon the Cross, how was that
brought to pass?

122. Wherefore must Christ be nailed to the Cross? and wherefore was Christ's
side opened with the Spear, from whence ran forth water and blood? what does
this signify in the Figure?

123. Wherefore must Christ be reviled upon the Cross?

124. Was the Divine Power also in that Blood which he shed forth upon the
Earth?

125. Wherefore did the Earth tremble when Christ hung upon the Cross?

126. What does the Darkness signify which at that time came above [the
ordinary course of] Nature?

127. Wherefore did Christ in his death commend his Soul into his Fathers
hands? what is that hand of the Father?

128. Wherefore did some convert themselves, and Return, when they saw those
things which were done at the death of Christ, and not the High Priests?
wherefore must they remain blind, and hardened as to As to such a great work.
that work?

129. What is the Descending of Christ into Hell, where he overcame Death and
the Devil?

130. How did Christ preach to the Spirits which believed not in the days of
Noah?

131. What does Christ's Rest in the Grave signify, that he must lie forty
hours in the Grave?

132. Wherefore must Christ's Grave be guarded with Watchmen? what does it
Typifie, that the High Priests would withstand and oppose Gods Might, and keep
Christ in the Grave?

133. Wherefore does the Evangelist say, That the Angel rouled away the Great
stone from the door of the Sepulcher; could not Christ otherwise have risen out
of the Grave?

134. What is the Power of Christ's Resurrection through death? How has he
triumphed over Death in his body? what has he thereby done?

135. What Gate has Christ opened through Death in our Humanity Against, or
through.
into the Anger and Righteousness of God, through which we may enter into God;
How is this effected?

136. What does the journey [or Pilgrimage] of the two Disciples from Jerusalem
to Emaus signify, where they did bemoan themselves, and lament in Great
Anguish for their Master, and yet Christ walked with them, asked them
questions, and taught them, and yet they knew him not?

137. Wherefore did Christ first appear after his Resurrection to a Woman, and
not to the Disciples?

138. Wherefore did Christ after his Resurrection eat with his Disciples of the
broyled Fish, and went in unto them through a shut door, and taught them?

139. Wherefore did not Christ after his Resurrection show himself to Every
one, but only to some?

140. Wherefore did Christ after his Resurrection walk forty days upon the
Earth ere he went to Heaven?

141. What is Christ's Ascension, that he went up visibly? whither is he gone,
and where is he now?

142. What do the two men in white Apparel signify, who said; Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up
from you into Heaven, shall come again in like manner as you have seen him go
into Heaven?

143. Wherefore must the Disciples of Christ yet wait forty days for the
sending of the Holy Ghost? why was it not done presently?

144. Why must the Disciples wait, and remain together in one accord till the
Holy Ghost came?

145. What is the Feast of Pentecost? How was the pouring forth of the Holy
Spirit effected? and how was the band of tongues loosed in the Disciples of the
Lord?

146. How is the Diversity of tongues to be understood in them that they at one
and the same time spoke all Speeches together in one only Sense, that all
Nations could understand them?

147. What profit is this pouring forth of the Holy Ghost unto us: and what
benefit is Christ's Death, Resurrection, and Ascension unto us; how may the
same also be wrought and brought to pass in us?

148. What is both the literal word and the living word (Christ) in this
Diffusion or Effluence; how are they distinguished, seeing they did not all
hear the Holy Ghost teach out of the mouth of the Apostles? For some said, They
are full of wine! These indeed did hear the words of men, but not Christ
Teaching in his Resurrection?

149. How does Christ himself teach present in the In the Ministry of the Word.
Office of Preaching, and yet sits at the Right hand of the Power of God? or
by whom does Christ teach? what is a Shepherd in the Spirit of Christ, and a
Letter-teacher without the Spirit of Christ each in his Office?

150. What is the office of the Keys, Mat. 20. How can the same be rightly
used? or who is worthy and capable of this office of the Keys? How is this to
be understood? Does Christ himself hold them in the Office or Function? and is
he himself the Function? or has he given man liberty that he may forgive Sins
without the Spirit of Christ, or how is the same effected?

151. What is the Testament of Christ with the last Supper with Bread and
Wine? How is Christ really enjoyed? what Flesh and Blood is it, and what is
the mouth to it?

152. Where is the place in Man, wherein Christ's Flesh and Blood remains, as
he himself says, John 6. whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, he
remains in me, and I in him? Also, If ye shall not eat the flesh of the Son
of man, and drink his blood, then ye have no life in you?

153. How is, and becomes man to be a branch on the Vine of Christ? How does
Christ dwell in him, and yet sit at the right hand of God in Heaven? How can he
also sit in Man at the right hand of God, and yet the outward man is not the
same?

154. What kind of Christian is a Titular Christian without Christ, who only
comfort himself, and applies the merits of Christ to himself, but is not
regenerated of Christ's Spirit, and lives Carnally in his fleshly mind.
bestially? Does Christ also belong to him in such working or Doing? Or what
does he receive in the Or, Sacrament.
Supper of Christ?

155. Can the Flesh and Blood of Christ be enjoyed of the faithful without the
Without the right Apostolical institution of the Ordinance.
Testamental Order and Use? or how may it be effected?

156. Wherefore did Christ ordain and institute this Testament, and said; That
so often as we do it, we should do it to his Remembrance? To what profit and
use is it administered with Bread and Wine, and not without the same? or can it
also be enjoyed without Bread and Wine?

157. Is the true real Testamental Enjoyment strictly bound to the first
Apostolical use? or have men power to alter that Ordinance, or Institution.
order, as it is come to pass?

158. Is the Testament also powerful and effectual in the changed Order or no?

159. What do the Learned, when they revile and reproach one another for the
exceeding precious Testament of Christ, and for the Covenant of Grace, and give
one another over unto the Devil for the same? Do they officiate the Function of
Christ? Is it right or wrong? Do they this as the Ministers of Christ, or whom
do they serve by doing thus?

160. What is the true mark of a right Christian upon the Earth, whereby is he
distinguished from a titular Christian?

161. What is properly and exactly a Christian within and without? How is he a
Temple of the Holy Ghost, ^n whom the Kingdom of God is manifest inwardly? How
does he walk also both in Heaven, and upon the Earth?

162. What is the Antichrist upon the Earth in Christendom?

163. What is Babel, the Beast, and the whore in the Revelation?

164. What is the destruction of the Beast; and how shall the same
Seven-headed Beast be cast into the bottomless pit [or Abyss?]

165. How does Christ then take possession of the Kingdom, when this Beast is
slain?

166. What is the true Regeneration in the Spirit of Christ? is the same
wrought in this lifetime or after this lifetime?

167. What is the dying of a true Christian, what dies in him?

168. What is the Dying [or death] of a wicked man, being the same is called an
Eternal dying?

169. Whither goes the Soul when it separates from the Body, be it saved or
not?

170. What do the Souls Do, and what is their life until the last day?

171. What is the last Judgment; or how shall the same be effected?

172. How is the Resurrection of the Dead? what is that which arises?

173. How shall this World perish [or pass away] and what remains of it?

174. What shall be after this World when God shall be All in All, Where all
Dominion and Authority shall be put down, 2 Cor. 15. 24.

175. What shall the Saints and Damned Do, and not do?

176. Where shall Hell be; and also the Eternal Habitation of the Saints?

177. What shall be the Eternal joy of the Saints, and also the Eternal pain of
the wicked? or may there be an alteration?

The Authors Preface unto these Questions.
Reader,
IT is written, The natural man understands nothing of the Spirit of God, it is
a foolishness unto him, he cannot apprehend it; and it is also written, The
Spirit of God searches all things, yea the depths of the Deity.

Now if Mr. Sophister.
Wiseling without Divine Light should undertake to clear, and expound these
Questions, he shall not be able to do it; nay perhaps he may esteem it a sin to
ask such deep questions, being he himself cannot understand them.

Therefore we bid him to let them alone, and leave them for those to whom Gods
Spirit (which search all things through the spirit of man) shall give the
understanding; being it is an Impossibility unto him, and also seems Impossible
to him.

But unto those that Love Jesus, we say [and declare] that they may very well
be searched out, and understood, and that it is no impossible thing; for in a
true Christian dwells Christ, in whom all the treasures of the hidden wisdom
are manifest; the same [Christian] knows them only in the Spirit of Christ,
but not in his own self full Nature and Ability. As we also have clearly
expounded, and described these questions in a What Book the Author means I do
not know, unless he speaks it of this Book of the 177 Questions, and so speaks
intentionally: but if he did finish his Answer unto all these Questions, the
rest are either lost or kept back; for we have but 14 fully answered, and the
beginning of the 15. Yet in his other Writings he has truly and fundamentally
answered these Questions, yea more then Reason can ask.
peculiar Book, indeed briefly, and yet in our other Writings largely, and
sufficiently enough: and so I commend the Reader into the Revelation of Jesus
Christ.

He that this Authors Books does read,
A Divine Light in's heart does need;
Or else his Reason will but stray,
And groap for Light in the midday.
But none will him censure or scorn,
That is truly of Soph-jah born;
For he that is meaning understands,
Is freed from Antichrist his bands,
And truly learns how for to see
Into the Divine Mystery.
Eternal one! the Nothing and the All
Give Adam faint and sick a Cordial;
In his distempered Age, and last distress,
Open the Treasury of thy Goodness.
O make his dissonant Spirits Accord,
And give's the Harmony of thy true Word.
Amen.
HALLELUJAH.
FINIS.

