Mercurius Teutonicus; OR A CHRISTIAN INFORMATION concerning the last Times.

BEING Diverse Prophetical Passages of the Fall of Babel, and the New Building
in Zion.

Gathered out of the Mystical Writings of that famous Germane Author, JACOB
BEHMEN, alias, Teutonicus Phylosophus.



Despise not Prophecyings.

Prove all things; hold fast that which is good,

1 These. 5.20, 21. LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons, for H. Blunden, at the Castle
in Cornhill. 1649.

To the Lover of Peace and Truth.
COURTEOUS READER;
THou have here diverse Predictions, or Prophetical Passages, taken out of the
Letters and Writings of J. B. of high and worthy Consideration in these
distractive and destructive times; wherein Satan is let loose, and rages both
in his children of hypocrisy and iniquity: by these thou may truly find out
the Fundamental rise, the effectual Progress, and event of these Modern
Cain-like Contentions, and unnatural Wars: and rightly inform thy self of
those eminent and imminent Calamities and Tribulations which are in the
Christian world. I cannot but suppose that the news of an happy period to them
would be acceptable, and joyful: but what further effect they are still like
to have (without a Cordial, and speedy amendment, and turning from our
Cain-like hypocrisy and fury) I leave for them to find, and feel by woeful
experience, that will not believe it.

What this Author was (called by the Learned, Teutonicus Phylosophus) and what
ground he had to write as well Prophetically, as Philosophically, and
Theosophically, his Writings do testify; and Time it self, the infallible
Teller of Truth will demonstrate. The Antichrist, the Whore of Babylon, the
Beast, the False Prophet, in their Mystery of iniquity, and perverse practices
are abundantly described in his Writings; which the Sectarian Babel, that sets
up the Abomination of Desolation to her own ruin, will not regard; and he has
not only discovered in a great measure the tricks and feats of Babel (for he
is none of Gods workmen that will pull down, unless he knows how to set up
the Building in a better form, and frame) but also has shown the way to come
out of her; and the true practice of Christianity: and faithfully set down
the assured way to divine wisdom, and knowledge; whereby a man shall come to
know himself; which is the most precious, and necessary thing of all; and so
free his mind from those mental Idols of hypocrisy and opinion, which do
perplex, amaze, and amuse the world in a giddy Labyrinth, and Abyss of
darkness; He does not in his Writings make an heap of Complaints against this
Sect, and that Opinion; accusing one party, or excusing another; to foment
discord, and dis-affection, as many girding tart Pamphlets, and Preachers have
done, and do; by attaching, taunting, and reviling others, only as firebrands
of schism, heresy, and division, not considering that their own Cain-like
fuming, and raging, blind and unchristian imprecating have fomented,
enkindled, and increased the wrath of God, both upon their selves and others;
but Christianly advises all to abandon all such filthy Contention; and to
seek the good one of another in love, forbearance, and self-denial; without
which it will be yet worse and worse in the world.

I need not write of the Authentic Realitie of what this Author has foretold;
for it does, and will more and more show it self. Albeit, many are, and will
be sottishly, and pharisaically blind; choosing rather to go quick into the
bottomless pit, then to forsake the Whore.

Let the Reader seriously, and diligently Consider what he says; and follow
the practice of that, which is the only way to amend, and reform all
privately, and publicly; viz. Self-denial, in unfeigned love to all, not as
Babel, the Whore of perdition, and hypocrisy teaches; that Sophistically
distinguishes, and thereby destroys the true love, and simplicity of the
Gospel, and practice of Christianity, and is become the well-falled Sodom,
fitted to destroy it self; which no Secular Arm, or wise Reason, merely
humane and politic can hinder.

Let not some unusual terms or phrases, cause thee to distaste, taunt, or
quip at them; but what thou do not understand, leave uncensured, for every
man is best interpreter of his own words, and meaning; albeit, when they are
sent into this selvish opinion'd world, they often meet with such Critics, as
put a false and strange gloss upon them; perverting them; turning that which
belongs properly to themselves, upon others; do not count them whimsicall,
fantastical, enthusiasticall fopperies; but seriously consider, and mark
whether his Predictions prove true or false, and so judge; and what thou have
here by peecemeals, thou may more at large and fully find in his Writings:
some whereof are printed already in English, viz. The 40 Questions of the
soul, wherein is a Catalogue of his Books: the way to Christ, and the Three
Principles. Also the Threefold Life (which is now preparing for the Press;)
and his Mysterium Magnum (a Commentary upon the first Book of Moses called
Genesis) are desired, expected, and intended next to be published.

Mercurius Teutonicus, OR A Christian Information concerning the last Times.
In his Letter to Mr. Paul Keym, concerning the last times he writes thus of
Babel, and Zion, as follows.
21. WHat concerns Babel, how it has grown, and how it shall again be
destroyed; is sufficiently manifest: the Destroyer is already on foot; he has
begun a good while since; however men will not see it.

22. Men cry Murder; Confusion to their enemies.
Mordio; and yet there is no strange Enemy, but it is the Turba only, which
has grown up in the midst of Babel in her wickednesses, and unrighteousnesses;
that has found the limit: and destroys only that which for a long Time has
been Selfish; useless.
naught; which men at all times ought to have cast away: whereas men should
have honored, and loved God, and their Neighbor as themselves; there they
have set up in Gods stead the Abominable Covetousness, Deceit, and wicked
craft, under an hypocritical show, and loved falsehood in the place of God; and
have made of the Mystery an abominable reproachful Blasphemous reviling.
Wherein men in a blind Cain-like envy, have cried down one another for
heretics, and Gods sworn enemies; because they adore not their mental and
verbal Idol.
Babel: where men with sweet speeches, and blind folded eyes have led us
captive, even in very Deceit, to the glory of the great Whore: so that she has
fatted her Adulterous Brat; and domineered over our body, and soul, goods, and
Estate.

23. This Bastard is now at odds with himself about the great Prey, and
Plunder.
spoil; and does it self discover its own wickedness, and great shame, so
that we may plainly see what kind of good ever was in her, for the great
wickedness which she has committed does plague her; and no strange No
foreign, or outward enemy, but her own wickedness and hypocrisy, which has
enkindled the wrath of God in her, and given her over to a perverted, mad,
unchristian fury, and bloodthirsty mind; whereby she destroys not her
opposites only, but her own self, and even that which she thinks to better
and maintain.
Thing: whereby men may now see, how her whoredom has been manifold: and how
the Devil had beset us with manifold Nets: and how one whoredom runs in the
opposition to another: and are malicious; bite, and slay one another.

24. For the Great Pain is come upon her; and she shall now bring forth the
Great Iniquity, wherewith she is fully pregnant: and therefore she cries
out, because of her woeful smart; and she speaks of the child, which she
shall bring forth: viz. of Murder, Covetousness, and Tyranny: she uncovereth
her fair feature as she is in the Heart: Now he that will not know her; for
him there is no remedy.

25. The Revelation says; Go out from her my people, that you may not be
partakers of her plagues; for she has filled her cup full with the
Abominations of her whoredom, in the Anger of God; them she shall drink out;
and thereby be forced to burst her self.

26. And this is that which I say of Babel, that she is a whore, and shall
suddenly break in pieces: and no stranger shall do it: the spirit of her own
mouth does strangle her: her own Turba destroys her: she cries for
vengeance and murder upon heresy; and yet she does it not for God, but for
her Adulterous Bratt; otherwise (if she did it for God) she would enter into
his Command, and Will of Love: where Christ says; Love one another; for
thereby men shall know that you are my Disciples.

27. The Kingdom of God stands not in any war, or revilings; or in an
outward show, in delicious days: herein the children of God are not to be
found: but in love, in patience, and hope, in faith under the Cross of Christ;
there grows the Church of God to the holy Ternary; i. e. a new angelical man
hidden in the old: and this is my certain knowledge briefly comprised
concerning this Article: in my writings you may see further of it.

28. Secondly, concerning Zion, I say according to my knowledge, as the Spirit
shows it to me, that there shall surely come an Ending of the Deceit: and
Zion shall be found; yet only of the children of faith: not in general, as if
no wicked man should remain.

29. For the Oppressor shall be a Cause that Zion is borne; when men shall see
how Babel is an whore: then shall many children be found in Zion, and seek the
Lord: but the Oppressor shall dog them at the heels, and cry them down for
Heretics: also persecute and put to death; and exercise their faith! and where
one is killed: there shall ten, yea an hundred rise up in his Room.

30. But the general Zion appears first in greatest misery; when Babel
breaks, it shall stand desolate and miserable: and then the children of Zion
shall say; How has the Lord forsaken us! come (we beseech you) let us seek
his face; ah! let us depart from strife [war and contention] have we not, alas!
made our Country desolate! is not all provision spent! are we not brethren!
wherefore do we fight? we will enter into one Love; and seek the Lord: and no
more fight, and destroy our selves: we will be content! are we not here
altogether Strangers and Pilgrims, and seek our native Country?

31. In this Time verily a Zion shall be found: and the Heaven shall give its
dew, and the earth its fatness; but not in that manner as if wickedness
should be wholly done away: for it shall continue unto the end; of which Christ
says; Think thou that when the Son of Man shall come, that there will be
faith upon the earth? And although the children of Zion shall have a fiery
deliverance, that they shall remain maugre the will of the Devil; insomuch,
that God will work great things, as at the times of the Apostles, yet it
endures not unto the end; For as it was in the days of Noah, when he entered
into the Arc, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be, as it is written.

32. But that the Holy Ghost shall be in the hearts of the faithful in Zion; I
acknowledge, and know it: for Zion shall not be from without; but in the new
man: it is already borne; he that would seek it; let him seek himself; and
depart from the old Adam, into a new life, and he shall find whether Jesus be
borne in him.

33. If he finds it not; let him enter into himself, and so he shall find
Babel, and her workings in him: those he must destroy, and enter into Gods
Covenant, and then Zion will be manifest in him; and he shall be borne with
Christ in Bethleem Jehuda Under the Cross; in disrespect and disesteeme of the
world.
, in the dark Stable; not in Not in the outward pleasures of the flesh.
Jerusalem; as Reason feign would have, that Christ should be borne in the old
Ass: the old Ass must be a servant, and serve the New Man in Zion, etc.

This wonderful Prophecy following, was written in a Postscript to a Letter,
dated the 20th of February, 1623.
23. THe Tribulation, and Destruction of Babel approaches with exceeding
vehement haste; The Storm arises upon all Coasts: There shall be an exceeding
Tempest: vain hope deceives; for the Destruction of the Tree draws near,
which is known in the Wonders.

24. The Domestic intestine.
homebred Fire hurts its own native Country: Righteousness, and Truth are
beaten down; Great Sorrow, and perplexing Sadness do Scrue up themselves.
force themselves up.

25. Men shall mourn for an empty ruinous old Cottage, which is of no
importance to Salvation: and they shall be enraged for that Nest wherein Satan
has hatched his Pride, coveteousnesse, envy, wrath; and all f^lshood, under an
holy show of Religion.
young.

26. The Tower of Babel is found to be without foundation; men suppose to hold
it up with props; but a wind from the Lord overthrows it.

27. The hearts and thoughts of men shall be discovered; for there comes a
Trial from the Lord, whereby the T^tular, verbal hypocrite, the Cain-like
Christian, who persuades himself from a blind faith, that none is accepted
with God but himself, and such as he is; the demure, and devout Pharisee: but
his false bottom will come to light, maugre his many words, and swords.
mouth-Christian shall be laid open in his false heart, and soul; as a reed
that is shaken by the wind; seeing his heart is wavering now here now there;
because his false ground is revealed.

28. Many shall betray themselves; and through hypocrisy, ruin both body and
goods. Hypocrites, and mouth-Christians shall quail for fear, when their
false foundation shall be discovered.

29. The Oriental The Turk shall turn a true Christian.
Beast gets an humane heart and face; and ere this comes to pass, it
helps to tear down the Tower of Babel with its claws.

30. In the darkness of the North arises a Sun, which takes its light from
the sensuallish properties of the Nature of all Beeings, from the Formed
expressed, re-expressing Word; and this is a Wonder; at which all Nations
rejoice.

31. An The Emperor of Germany.
Eagle has hatched young Lions in his nest, and brought them prey, till they
have grown great, hoping that they would again bring their prey to him; but
they have forgotten that, and take the Eagles nest, and pluck off his feathers;
and in unfaithfulness bite off his claws, so that he can fetch no more prey,
though he should starve for hunger.

32. But they fall out about the Eagles nest, and tear one another in anger;
until their anger become a fire; which burns up the nest: and This from the
Lord of all Beeings.

33. If the rich and potent did know upon what his foundation stood; he would
enter into himself, and look to his End.

34. The Sun gives to many a thing life, and also to many a thing death.

35. Thus they that lie still in self-will; as a child in the Mothers womb;
and lets its internal ground (whence man has its rise) to lead and guide it;
the same is the noblest and richest upon the earth.

36. The Postilion, arising out of the ground of Nature, comes, and carries a
sword over the earth; and has six winds for his assistants, which for a long
time have ruled upon the earth; these destroy the Postilions sword by the
manifestation of the seventh Wind, which they at all times have held hidden in
them, but by reason of the Postilions power, they must now call and manifest to
him.

37. Which seventh Wind, a new fire reveals, whence a great light shines
forth; and at this time shall the fountain of Grace flow forth, and the
distressed shall be refreshed.

12. The second Epist. to Carel van Endern, verse. 12. etc.
HOwever, at present all is in Babel, and there shall a great Rent be made; yet
let no man despair; For as God helped the Children of Israel with Consolation
in the Babylonicall Captivity, and sent them Prophets: even so shall now also
Lillies grow in the midst of thorns; and this is wonderful.

13. Also no man need think, that even now the whole destruction of the City
Babel shall come to pass; there shall verily be an exceeding great Rent; such
a one as men now do not believe; for the Antichrist is not wholly revealed;
though verily in part.

14. Men shall suppose that they have wholly rooted him out; and after some
sorrow, great joy shall follow; and they shall make Laws, and Covenants,
together with severe sharp Articles of Religion; yet for the most part, for
the advancement of their honor, and might; and men shall suppose that the holy
Spirit of heaven speaks; and now there is a golden world, yet it sticks
full of Gods anger, and is still in Babel; and the true Essence of the right
life in Christ, is not yet therein.

15. Also the rider on the pale Horse shall come after, and cut off many with
his Sickle; yet in the mean time, the Lilly springs in the Wonders, against
which the last Antichrist shall raise persecution; even then comes his end;
for the Appearance of the Lord terrifieth him.

16. And then Babel burns up in the zeal, and anger of God; and the same is
wonderful! of which I have no might to write more plainly; yet at at that time
my writings shall be very serviceable; for there comes a time from the Lord,
which is not from the starry heaven.

17. Blessed is he that seeks the Lord with full earnestness; for he shall not
be found in the history, but in true affiance, and in the right internal
resignation into the life, and into the doctrine of Christ; therein the Holy
Ghost shall appear with wonders, and powers, which Babel at present in her
Cunning (...) vises; forge^ hypocrisies.
inventions does not believe; yet however, it certainly comes, and is already
on foot, yet hidden from the world.

31. I Have now found a precious jewel, which might do you service, Out of an
Epist. verse. 3^
not only for the soul, but also for the body, and be profitable to your
Patients.

32. If men would labor in Christ's Vineyard, then might God verily, even now
at present; give us such a Sunshine, that should warm the Apothecaries shop,
of which many honest people have been a long time desirous; which Sunshine
would drive away the smoke in Babel, and be a refreshment to the children of
Christ in their oppression and misery.

33. But in truth, men will be so ungodly, therefore it shall first horribly
rain, and hail; insomuch, that the earth shall quake, and drown many
thousand souls in the water.

34. I would here very gladly mention somewhat unto you, but at this time it
may not be; be pleased to consider the Storm toward the East, that toward
the North is not far from it; in the South there is a great smoke, so that it
Pricketh, or makes them smart.
biteth the eyes of those toward the West.

35. No man need say, when the Storm passes by, that this man, or that man is
righteous before God, it shall go well with him, because of his Religion; the
anger of God is inkindled in all, and they are all alike before him in respect
of their Religion and knowledge, while the one lives like the other.

36. The most High sweepeth out one besom with another, yet there springs a
Lilly to all Nations; happy are they that apprehend the same.

37. The thirsty soul shall in no wise say, The Lord has forgotten me! as
little as a Mother can forget her child, and albeit she should forget, yet
the Lord has not forgotten his poor exceeding distressed Christendom; he
has noted her in his wounds pierced through with nails; his light shall shine
from the East unto the West for a Testimony unto all Nations.

38. From the South stands a Lilly toward the North, whosoever obtains the
same for a propriety, he shall sing the Song of Gods mercy; and in the same
time the word of the Lord springs as grass upon the earth; and the Nations
sing this Song of Babel in one harmony, for the beginning has found the end.

39. Think upon my dark sayings; for I might not do it better at this time,
seeing that men have only sought after pride, and coveteousnesse, and despised
the mirror of Anger; and have not at all repented; therefore they work
iniquity with iniquity, until iniquity devours it self, and the wrath of God
well satiates it self.

40. Humane Reason shall be here able to hinder little with its consultations,
but blow up the fire, and give further occasion.

41. God was good before distress; but seeing men forsake God, thereupon
follows distress and scorn.

42. Let every one consider, and have a care of himself; yet he that shall not
seek and defend himself, shall be sought and defended.

38. Out of an Epis. verse. 38.
COncerning their desire about the affairs at (Prague,) where I was present at
the coming in of the new Palsgrave Frederick.
King (the same into Sagan, you have understood, that it is already done!) he
came in at the Fort upon Re^shin of Shlan, and was received of all the three
Orders with great Solemnity; as the Custom has been formerly among all Kings.

39. I exhort you to heed well what the Prophet Ezekiel has written in the 38.
and 39. Chap Whether the time of the gathering together upon the seven
Mountains in Confused Christendom.
Babel, be not at hand, especially in respect of the Seven Bethlem Gabor.
Berger, who should get help from the Turk, and very easily come to the
Ryne-strome.

40. Where then the great overthrow of the children of Babel may come to pass;
where two great Rods of God shall appear; the one by war, the other by
mortality; in which Babel shall be ruined, shows the Spirit of the Lord in
all those who have prophesied before us.

41. Although I account the Election of a right Germane Emperor must be yet a
little while deferred, and in the mean time, great This is come to pass in
Germany.
war and contention; also desolation of many Cities, strong Holds, and potent
Countries shall follow, so far as even now is the right time, of which the
Spirit prophecieth; which we do not so punctually understand.

42. For a thousand years before God, is as one day; the Spirit sees all
things nigh at hand; then supposes the The Astrall spirit, or apprehension of
Reason.
Sidereall man, that it shall be instantly, yet it stands in Gods Counsel.

43. However, we know for certain, the ruin of the City Babel to be very
nigh, and it appears to us as if the time were even instantly at hand,
whereas yet we cannot fully apprehend the Counsel of God; but as a Pilgrim,
that is a day in a Country cannot learn all, even so it is with us; For God
keeps the time and hour to himself, and yet shows by his Spirit the
wonders that are to come.

29. Out of an Epist. verse. 29.
BUt seeing God has promised by the Prophets (especially in Joel) that he will
power forth his Spirit in the last days upon all flesh; therefore the time is
to be considered.

30. I say as I have known it, that whosoever at present will dye to himself,
him shall the Spirit of the Lord, according to Joels prophecy apprehend, and
manifest his wonders by him; therefore if any be in Earnest, he shall find it
by experience.

31. Yet let every one be faithfully warned, that if the light of God do arise
in him, that he continue steadfast in great humility, in resignation, namely, in
the death of Christ, etc. --.

36. I give you out of good affection to know, that this present time is
seriously to be taken into consideration; for the Seventh Angel in the
Revelation has prepared his Trumpet; the Powers of Heaven be in Peculiar
Motion: Moreover, both gates stand open, and light, and darkness are in great
desire; as every thing is taken, so shall it go in.

37. At what the one shall exceedingly rejoice, the other shall mock at it;
whereupon follows the sore and severe judgment upon Babel.

7. Out of an Epist. verse. 7.
HAppy are those who are comprehended under the sound of the Trumpet, which
has already sounded; for there comes such an earnestness after, that Babel
and [her] convention, together with all pride, ambition, falsehood, and
unrighteousness, shall drink an earnest Draught; and even that which she
has filled, etc. --.

3. Out of an Epist. to Carel van Endern, verse. 3.
IT is known [to me] that the time is nigh, and at hand, that the contentions
about Religion shall enter into the Temperature; but with great ruination of
the false Kingdom in Babel, that has set up it self in Christ's stead,
together with other great alterations; concerning which, although men perhaps
will hardly believe me, yet in a short time shall appear, etc. --

40 Quest. the 39. Quest.
EVery Age has had its Seekers, who have sought the Mystery; but it has been
a long time very dark in Babel.

5. Now for these two hundred years, it has begun again to be manifest, in
that the fall of Antichrist has been foreseen; and men have begun to Storm
Babel on one side; but her strong Tower stands still fast; indeed the Whore
has been somewhat discovered, yet her Beast has but grown the more lusty.

6. Therefore there is yet a wonderful time near at hand, wherein all things
shall be altered; Many great Mountains and hills shall be made a plain; and a
Fountain shall flow out of Zion, wherein the afflicted and distressed shall
drink, and be refreshed.

7. And they shall be guided to the fresh Pasture by one only Crook; and the
Shepherd shall rejoice with the Sheep, that God is so gracious.

8. At that time Silver and Gold shall be as common, as in Solomon's time; and
his wisdom shall govern the whole Earth; this is a Wonder.

23. Out of an Epist. verse. 23.
IF the world were not so blind, it might know the wonderful Being of God in
all creatures; but now that it does so rage, and rave; it does it wholly
against it self, and against the holy Spirit of God; at whose light they shall
once be astonished; they shall not hinder the Son, which the traveling
Mother brings forth in her old age; for this the Heaven declares.

24. God shall Or, make him glorious.
enlighten him against all the raging, and raving of the Devil; and his
Splendor and glory.
light shall reach from the East unto the West: I write not of my self; for I
only foreshew that this is at hand, and shall come.

The sixth Text of his Book, entitled; The Abridgement of the heavenly and
earthly Mystery.
49. WHen we consider, and ponder thus with our self, we find the strife of
all Essences; that the one is a continual loathing of the other, and is an
Enemy to the other.

50. For every will desires a purity, without Turba in the other Essence, and
yet it has the Turba in it self, and is also the loathing of the other.

51. And then the greatest gets power over the smallest, and keeps it in
subjection, and except it get rid of it, the strong rules over the weak.

52. Thus the weak does also run, and seeks the limit of the Oppressor; and
it will be freed from constraint: and thus the limit is sought by all
creatures, which is hid in the Mystery.

53. And even hence arises all the power of this world, so that the one
continually rules over the other; and this was not commanded, nor appointed by
the highest Good in the beginning, but it grew from the Turba.

54. Whereupon Nature afterward acknowledged it for her own Essence, which was
borne out of her, and she has given Laws to it, so to propagate it self
further in the received Government.

55. Where then this birth is ascended to the Kingly degree, and has so
further sought the Abyss (that is the one) till it is become a Monarchy: that
is, Empire; and there it is climing still, and would be only one alone, and
not many, and though it self be in many, yet the first Source, whence all is
generated, will rule over all, and will be one only Lord over all Governments.

56. And being the same Seeking was one only Government in the beginning, and
yet in process of time has severed it self into many, according to the
Effences; therefore the Multiplicity seeks again the unity; and it is
certainly borne in the sixth number of the Crown; that is, in the fixed thousandt
year; in the figure; not at the end.

57. But in the hour of the day, in which the Creation of the Wonders were
finished; that is, when the Wonders of the Turba are at the End; A Lord is
borne, who shall Govern the whole World, yet by many Offices.

58. And there the Magistracy that is grown up of it self, and the Oppressor
shall be sought after, for the smallest which has lien under, is also run to
the limit; and even then all things sever themselves, for they be at the limit;
and there can be no stay, or calling back.

59. Also the Turba (being the wrath) is sought by every creature; for the same
is also, with the loathing of the Creature, run to the limit; and is now
manifest, namely, at the limit, in the midst of the number of the Crown, in
the sixth thousandt year; a little above, and not under: in the day, and hour,
when the Creation was finished in the Mystery; and in the Mystery was set (as a
looking-glass of Eternity) in the Wonders.

60. That is on the sixth day past noon; even there the Mystery with the Wonders
stand open; and it is seen, and known; where then the Purity shall drive out
the Turba; a Time; till the beginning pass into the end: and then the Mystery
is a Wonder in Figures, etc. --

In his consideration upon the Book of Isaias Steefel, he Prophecieth
concerning Babel and Zion (Page 47.) thus.
104. THat the Author mentions, that this carnal Babel shall fall, and a
Fountain arise in Zion out of the true Jerusalem, is truly so; and the time is
already come about, that that break in pieces that is grown up of [and to] it
self without divine Order; for it has attained its age, and limit; the
beginning has found the end: the middle shall be manifest; against which no
fighting, or defending avails; but seeing the child of sin and perdition
does so rage against it, it must therefore ruin its own self in its rage.

105. But if it would enter into the beginning, it should then remain; and its
Wonder would only appear; but being it is grown up in pride, covetousness,
envy, and in all manner of iniquity, and cunning mischief; for what use shall
this evil Beast be? it is not fit for the Sacrifice of God: also it will not
be converted, that it might get an humane heart.

106. Therefore the Lord does proclaim, that his children must go out from
it; for the Lord will terribly shake the earth, and overthrow Babel; and a
Fountain shall flow out of Zion, to refresh the thirsty soul; for the
miserable shall be refreshed, and eat in his own Pasture.

107. The Oppressor shall be destroyed; yet thou shall rejoice a little while;
for thou art naught from thy youth; and only seek the Limit in the Wonder;
as thy beginning was, so shall also thy end be; he that is blind will not see
this, but sleep till the day dawne.

108. Christ said; Do thou think that when the Son of Man shall come, that
he shall find faith upon the Earth? Therefore the time of the end is an evil
dreggy Settling: and it will not be meet Zion, save only in the sanctified
children of Christ; for the beginning, and the end be just like one another.

109. The wonders were in the beginning manifest with the high Tongue: and the
Signature was Or, highly.
perfectly known; This comes again at the end: but we understand also
thereby a good, and an evil time, when the gates of all the Three Principles
shall stand open; as we likewise see this in the beginning by Cain, and Abel;
therefore let every one have a care what he speak, teach, and write; for all
things shall be proved by the Highest Tongue.

110. But when we speak of the Temple of Christ, and of the fountain flowing
out of Zion; we do not mean a place in one Country only; for the Temple of
Christ is every where; we understand, among all tongues, and languages: Albeit
in one place the tongues shall be brought to an higher degree then in another;
all according to the property of the people; according as the Spirit is in man.

111. For the Temple of Christ is within us, we must hear Christ teach in us;
if Christ teach not in us, then is all outward The fine hypocrisy of the mouth.
lip-labor to no purpose, and spoken into the air.

112. Therefore let no man think, that it will so come to pass, that men
shall come, and perforce teach and drive in the Holy Spirit into men; No; it is
said, To day when you hear the voice of the Lord, harden not your hearts, and
ears: wait for no other time, for this is the time of your visitation.

113. Incline your ears and hearts to the Temple of Christ in you; cast away
your abominations, and false will from you, and bring your will with
earnestness through Christ unto the Father, and purpose never to enter any
more into the iniquity, viz. into pride, covetous^esse, envy, anger, and
falsehood; regard not the highness of this world, and humble your selves under
the hand of the Lord, and in love toward the needy, etc. --

129. Loving brethren; do not jest at it, and hold it for a fiction, it is
known in the Sacred Ternary, in the pure fountain out of Zion: Let no man
wait for a golden time; when the holy Spirit shall press [or breath it self
perforce] into the beastiall will of the hardened and obstinate, that will
only live in the lust of the flesh: O no; this comes not to pass.

130. He that will hear the Holy Spirit teach from the mouth of another, he
must before bring his will into the Holy Spirit; even then the Holy Spirit
teaches to him inwardly from the mouth of another. This we see on the day of
Pentecost, in those that heard St. Peter; those whose will was bent inward, and
desired the Kingdom of God; in them the Spirit of Christ preached from Peter's
mouth; but those whose spirit was bent into this world, the spirit passed over;
who said, the men are drunk that they so speak.

131. The time is already, that Enoch teaches, and Noah proclaims the
Deluge; there is no other mark or sign, save the sign of Elias; what does
the world gape at so much, and suffers its ears in vain to be filled with the
Stars; all is to no purpose.

132. Whosoever will enter in with Zion, and praise God in Jerusalem, he has
now an acceptable time: the Seventh Trumpet has already sounded; the
Wellspring of Israel is open: only let no man think, that the sound of the
Trumpet shall come from this, or that place; for as the lightning arises, and
shines to the East, even so from the beginning to the end is the coming of the
Son of man.

133. Let no man expect only the outward Prophet, he appears inwardly in the
Spirit; the outward man will not know him; for he stands in the number of the
Crown, and preaches in the Mystery: He is already known, and found; he that
desires to see him, let him seek him in himself, and let Babel go; he shall
find him, etc. --

Aurora. Page 204.
LO! I tell thee a Mystery: It is already the time, that the Bridegroom
crowns his Bride; guess! where lies the Crown? toward the North; for
amidst in the Sharpe-astringent quality, the light becomes clear and shining:
but whence comes the bridegroom? out of the midst, where the heat produces the
light, and goes toward the North in the Astringent quality, where the light
becomes clear and shining: what do they toward the South; they are fallen
asleep in the heat; but a Tempest shall rouse them up: between th^^ many shall
have a terrible death [or end.]

What do they of the West? their bitter quality will blend it self with the
other: but when they taste the sweet water, their spirit becomes meek. What
do they of the East? Thou have ever been an haughty bride, borne in the
beginning: thou thoughtest thy self to be formerly too fair; thou live with
[or like] the rest.

Aurora. Page 567.
THe precious man Moses writes, That God made man of the dust Ger. erdenklos:
of a lump of earth; massa terrea.
of the earth (as the learned have rendered it;) but he was not by, when it was
done; but this I must say, that Moses has written very right, but the true
understanding, what the Earth was made of, remained hidden in the Letter to
Moses, and his successors; even to this time; also it was hidden to Adam while
he was yet in Paradise: But now Viz. What ever has been hidden under the veil
of Moses, and the Parables of Christ.
it will be wholly manifest; for the heart of God has beset the chamber of
death, and will soon break through; therefore some dawnings of the day will
now more and more break through in some men's hearts, and make known the day;
but when this Aurora shall shine from the East to the West, then there will be
no more time left, but the Sun of Gods heart arises, and will Ra, Ra, Ra, P.
in this cold place, and with him, in R. P. These are hidden words, and are to
be understood only in the language of Nature.

The Authors exposition of these places taken out of a Letter, etc.
6. COncerning the interpretation of some words (and also of that which you
desire of me) which are specified in my Book called Aurora; (which have very
hidden meanings, the knowledge whereof was given me of the most High) I give
you to understand, that at present it is not convenient to write at large, and
expressly thereof in letters; seeing the time is dangerous; and the Enemy of
Christ does horribly rage, and rave; till a little time be past: yet I will
give you a short hint, further to consider of it.

7. As first, there is a twofold meaning of the Northern Crown. The first
points at the Crown of life; viz. the Spirit of Christ, which shall be
manifest in the midst of the great darkness; viz. in the Contrition [or
distresse] of the sensible nature of the Conscience; where a Peculiar Motion is
present; even then comes the bridegroom; viz. the power of Christ, in the
midst of such a Motion.

8. The other overture is a Figure of the outward Kingdom; where the great
confusions, entanglements, and contentions shall be; when as the Nations shall
stand in Controversy: There also is the Figure, viz. the victory signified; as
it stands in the spiritual Figure; how it shall go, and what People shall at
last conquer, and how in the mean while, in such lamentable time of
Tribulation Christ shall be made manifest, and known; and that after and in
such lamentable time of Tribulation, the great Mysteries shall be revealed,
that men shall be able to know even in Nature, the hidden God in Trinity; in
which knowledge the strange Nations shall be converted, and turn Christians:
also therein is signified, how the Sectarian Contentions in Religion shall be
destroyed in such manifestation; for all gates will be set open, and even then
shall all unprofitable Praters, which at present lie as so many bolts before
the truth be done away; and all shall acknowledge, and know Christ: which
manifestation shall be the last: then the Sun of life shall shine upon all
Nations: and even then the Beast of iniquity, with the Whore, end their days,
which is signified under the Characters Ra, Ra, Ra, P. in R. P. as is to be
seen in the Revelation.

9. We dare not at present make this large interpretation more clear: all
will show it self; and then men shall see what it was; for there is yet clean
another time.

13. A Letter at the end of the way to Christ.
KNow; That a Lilly blossometh unto you, ye Northern Countries: if you destroy
it not with the Sectarian Contention of the Learned; then it will become a
great Tree among you: but if you shall rather choose to contend, then to know
the true God: then the ray passes by, and hitteth only some; and then
afterward you shall be forced to draw water for the thirst of your souls among
strange Nations.

14. If you will take it rightly into consideration, then my writings shall
give you great furtherance and direction thereto; and the Signate-Star above
your Pole shall help you; for its time is come about [or borne.]

15. I will freely give you what the Lord has given me; only have a care, and
employ it aright: it will be a witness for you against the mocker: Let no man
look upon my person; it is a mere gift of God; bestowed not only for my sake,
but also for your sake, and all those that shall get to read them.

16. Let no man gape any longer after the time, it is already come about: whom
it hitteth; him it hitteth: whosoever waketh, he sees it; and he that
sleeps, sees it not: the time is appeared, and will soon appear: he that
waketh, sees it; many have already felt it; but there must first a great
Tribulation pass over, before it be wholly manifest: the cause is, the
Contention of the Learned, who tread the Cup of Christ under-foot, and contend
about a child, that never was worse since men were: this shall be manifest;
therefore let no honest man defile himself with such contention; there is a
fire from the Lord therein; who will consume it, and himself reveal the Truth.

95. 3. Prin. Chap. 25.
Therefore let this be told you, ye Jews, Turks, and other Nations; ye need
not look for any other, there is no other time at hand, but the time of the
Lilly; and its Sign is the Sign of Elias: therefore take heed in what Spirit
you live, least the fire of anger devour, and consume you: it is high time to
cast Jezabel, with her whoredoms out of the house, least you receive the wages
of the whore; and as you revile one another, so you devour one another: Truly,
if these contentions [and selvish courses of oppression, and hypocrisie] be not
suddenly stayed; the fire will burn out extremely upon Babel; and then there
will be no remedy; till the anger of God eat up, and consume, all whatsoever is
in it.

96. Therefore let every one enter into himself, and not speak concerning
others [laying the blame upon them onely] and account them false; but look
that he turn himself, and see, that he be not found in the anger of the
Devourer; else if he should say, ha! ha! look how Babel burns, then must he
also be burnt; for he is fuel for that fire: and whosoever feels a thought
in himself, that does but wish for the Anger [or the heavy judgment of God to
destroy others] that [thought, or wish] proceeds from Babel.

97. Therefore it is very hard to know Babel; every one supposes, that he is
not in it, and yet the Spirit shows me that Babel encompasseth the whole
Earth; therefore let every one look to his own ways; and not hunt after
covetousness; for the Oppressor destroys it; and the Stormer consumes it:
No man's wise Counsel helps any more: all the wisdom of this world is folly;
for the fire is from the anger of God; your wisdom will turn to your hurt and
scorn. --

82. The Spirit declares, that if you do not leave off this About your
opinions, Ceremonies; your Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing; and your god Mammon.
Contention, you shall have no other Sign given you, save the Sign of Elias
in fire; in zeal; for the zeal shall devour you; and your contention must
devour your own selves; you must be forced even quite to consume your selves;
(therefore are you not mad?) are you not Brethren, and all in Christ? If you
did converse in Love; what should you need to strive about your Native Country
in which you dwell: O! leave off, your Cause is evil in the sight of God; and
ye are all found to be in Babel; be advised: the day breaks; how long will
you keep company with that Adulterous Whore? Arise; your Noble Virgin is
adorned in her Orient Garment of Pearl: She wears a Lilly, which is most
delightsome: become Brethren; and she will adorn you indeed: we have really
seen her, and in her name we write, etc. --

25. HEarken all ye, who call your selves the Apostles of Christ: M. M. Chapter 62.
has Christ sent you to war; and stir up Contention; that you should fight
for Temporal goods, and outward Might, and Glory? Is that your Authority (
John 20.) when he gave you the sword of the Spirit, did he command you to do
so? has he not sent you to declare, and proclaim his Peace, which he has
brought unto us? What will he say, when he shall see that your Apostolical
Heart has put on Armor? and that you have stirred up, and provoked your
worldly Kings and Princes to the sword; and war; and have given them free
leave out of Christian Liberty: shall he find you thus acting in his Service;
do you as the Disciples of Christ?

26. Are you not become the Apostles of Gods Anger? Whither will you betake
your selves with your shame? Do you not see that you are turned perjured,
treacherous, and adulterous to Christ, who taught you Peace? where is your
Christian Virginity? [Where are your Evangelicall fruits? Where is your love,
and righteousness? your patience, and meekness; your exhorting to the ways
of Peace, and piety, love, and holiness, with all long suffering, and
forbearance: is not the true, and sincere way to the new birth made only a
dark historical lip-labor; an outward application of a promise: how has the
world traced themselves in a Maze of their own phancies, and enslaved their
noble minds to your hypocrisy? Where is your self denial? your powerful
prayer, and faith? your rendering blessing for cursing, praying for persecuting:
your overcoming evil with good: think upon your account at the last day, and
now amend.]

79. 40. Quest. Qu. 30.
HOw will you be able to stand here, ye high Schools and Doctors! even all of
you, who have set up your selves in Christ's stead, and have so proudly wrangled
about Christ's Cup; also about Christ's Doctrine and Way of worship.
honor, that you have provoked, and put on the Princes of your Land, (who are
the Ordinance of God) to war and bloodshed; for a few words sake, which you
your selves have forged?

80. Where is Christ's teaching, and Spirit of love, who said, Love one another,
for thereby men shall know, that you are my Disciples? Where is your Love:
Look upon your bloody instigations, wherewith you have enticed men to Battle,
and have led the world astray from love, and unanimity.

81. Ye have made rents and divisions; so that Kings have been at variance,
and enmity, for your pride sake; in that you have wrested the words of Christ,
and have not regarded, whether you have had Christ's Spirit, and will or no: and
therefore you above all others shall give an heavy account; for you have known
the will of the Lord, and have not done it, you have run, and thrust your
selves into Christ's office, merely to get profit, favor, and honor: you have
not regarded the Spirit of God: therefore the Spirit calls you Babel; a
Confusion of all those that live.

82. You have set the whole world at odds; and whereas you should have taught
them love, you have taught them contention, and strife; so that one brother
has hated and persecuted another for your fables sake: O! how is the Name of
Christ dishonored for your Contentions sake: Whether will you betake your
selves, and where will you abide? when this shall be set before your eyes, and
the whole world cry, woe, woe, to you.

39. The latter end of the 13. Chap. of his book, called The Threefold life.
YE great scholastique Rabbis, and Masters, who have the pre-eminence; let it
be told you; there comes one hereafter, that will baptize you with the fire of
Anger, because you do deny his power; ye have a very heavy account for
Christ's Testaments: will you not depart from your Consultations, and enter into
the Temple of Christ: then you must be wholly cast away.

40. There were very many of you in former times; (for you increase, and
provide for your selves; and not for Christ's office) but ye are grown very
thin in Germany; where there were a thousand, there are scarce now an hundred;
will you not yet desist from your humane wit, and inventions: then God will
cast you out; so that where there are now an hundred, there shall not be ten,
yea not so many: Arise, awake from your sleep; least you be hurled down in
perdition into the Abyss.

41. Ye say, that we mock you; but it is serious; there is one that mocketh
you; him we know; he shows us this; he shall soon awake; be not so secure:
think upon it advisedly; for no man takes any thing to himself; except it be
given him: This is not spoken in vain.

42. Oh thou lovely, and worthy Christendom: mark, I pray; do not say; if
our Teacher will not lead us aright, let him look to that; ah! no, it
concerns you; it hazardeth body, and soul: The worthy Christendom is
brought out of all Apostolical Orders, and virtues, into humane institutions,
and injunctions: And in Christ's Kingdom, there is a stately Kingdom set up in
hypocrisy, both in Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

43. They have added Ceremonies; oh! but had they held the right faith, and
understanding, and shown men the way of God in the Regeneration, [or new-birth]
had they but shown them the clear The love of God.
countenance of God, they would have departed from their sins, and entered
into a divine life.

44. But thy wit, oh! thou whore, has blind-folded all: if God had not opened
my eyes, how should I know thee; I should yet also adore thee; but the world
shall seek thee, and at last find thee. Even then Europe shall be a Crown,
and Asia the Husband, and Africa the Country; and a plain Shepherd shall
govern us; if thou understoodst this, thou would enter into thy self; but
thou shall be blind, till thou art paid: as thou have filled grievance, so
shall thou drink out pain; for thou have made it too great, and art a wild
Tree, and shall be broken down; there is no remedy; thy own Anger does hurl
thee down: for thou art weighed, and art found to be too light; says the
Spirit of the great Wonders.

The Magia of Teutonicus concerning the Great Wonders, being a deep and
prophetical Discourse, concerning these present, and last Times; Showing the
rise of all blind hypocritical Crntentions, and the issue of them.
45. A Thing that grows from a beginning, has beginning, and end; and
grows no higher then to the Number of that thing, whence it grew: but
whatsoever is [or remaineth] in one Number, that is incorruptible; for it is
only one, and no more: There is nothing in it, that can break, or destroy it;
for nothing that is only one [or consists of unity) has enmity in it self;
but when two things are in one; then forthwith arises contrariety, and
contention; for unity fights not against it self; but is drawn into it
self, and out of it self; and remains one: and albeit it seeks more in it
self, yet it finds nothing; and this can never be at odds with it self; for
it is one thing, and whithersoever it goes, it walks in one Will. But when
there are two wills, then there is division; for the one will is often drawn to
it self, the other from it self: and if this thing has only one body, then
the government in that body is divided, and at variance; and if it sets upon
the other with enmity, then it becomes the contrary will, which forces against
the other; and therein dwells the third Number; and this same third Number is
an Essence commixt of both the first, and does oppose both, and will be a
singular thing of its own; and yet it has also two wills in it from the first
two; whereupon one will to the right, and the other to the left.

46. Thus this thing arises from two unto many; and each has a self-will;
and if it be now in one body, then it is at odds with it self; for it has
many wills, and needs a Judge to determine, and keep the wills in awe: but
if the wills grow obstinate, and strong, and will not submit to the Judge, but
make a proud insurrection; then of one Government two are made; for that which
is broken out by its own violence, judges it self according to its will, and
is an enemy to the other, because it is [or remains] not in its will: and thus
there is a Contention, whereby the one does desire to suppress the other, and
to exalt it self in its own Being; and if this cannot suppress, and quell
the other, though it sets it self might, and maine against it; then each grows
in it self, till it attains its highest Number, and are in continual strife,
one against the other; and when it is so come about, that it is grown unto the
highest Number, that it can go no further, then it returns into it self, and
beholds it self, wherefore it can grow no more; then it spieth the end of
the Number, and directs its will to the end of the Number, and will destroy the
limit; and in this same will (which it sets upon the end of the Number,
endeavoring to destroy the same) the Prophet is borne, and comes forth, and he
is its own Prophet, and he prophecieth of the errors in the will, whence it
is, and why it can proceed no further; and of Destruction; for he is borne in
the Highest Number in the Crown at the end of the limit; and he speaks of
the Turba in his Kingdom, and how it shall end; and shows what the Causes
are, that it cannot exceed its own Number; and then he prophecieth of a new
(Kingdom) that shall be brought forth out of the Destruction; for he is the
Mouth of that same Kingdom; and shows the contrary Will, how that the
Kingdom grew up in one will; and from its own selfish desire it is gone out of
it self into many Wills; and he discovers the Kingdoms pride, its
covetousness, and envy, in that the Kingdom had only one Root, whence it
grew; then he manifests the evil twiggs, which are grown out of the Root;
which are the Error [Confusion, Seduction] and Turba of the Kingdom, which
suppress the old Tree, and withdraw its own sap, virtue, [and strength] from
it; so that it is forced to wither.

47. And then he shows the falsehood of the twiggs, which have taken the
strength from the Tree; and do now press it down: they say, that they are a
new Tree, and a good Kingdom; and they vaunt, and glory, as if they were new
guests, endued with great wisdom, and honesty; and yet they are grown from
the old Tree, and are its children: and thus they devour their own Father: Now
the Prophet says, that they are Wolves, and not Children; and they come only
to murder, and to devour; and to set up themselves in the place of the old
Tree: and thus they exercise their pride, even to the highest limit; and then
they are devoured of their children.

48. This is their own Prophet, which is grown upon their own Crown; for he
shows the malice of the root; whence the first Tree took its rise; he
shows the poison, wherewith the root was infected; so that out of one will,
many wills are grown; from which contention, and malicious mischief are risen.

49. Now then if the Turba (which divides one into many) is grown up along in
one thing, where the multiplicity is at odds; then the Turba does also destroy
the Multiplicity; for the first will to a thing, desires only that one thing;
that is its body, and delight; but the Multiplicity in a thing makes enmity;
for the one will ever exalt it self above the other, which the other will not
suffer; hence comes, envy and falsehood; from which, Anger, and Contention do
arise, in that the one desires to break down, and overthrow the other: and
albeit the first will is its Judge, yet the Turba is sprung up along in all the
Twiggs, which does destroy obedience; so that each will go its own way; and
will not be judged, but brings up, and provides for it self, and despises the
Father, and all the children; which notwithstanding are its brethren, and
sisters; and says, that it is only the Tree, with the power, and virtue;
whereas it is indeed a rebellious, selfe-willed, haughty, false Murderer,
which sets it self against the first will, viz. against the root.

50. Now when it so comes about, that the Father sees his wicked disobedient
children, then he seeks the recovery, how he might heal the breaches, and
powers oil into the wounds; but it is found, that the oil is a poison to
them; for they have quite turned away their will from the first Will; viz. from
the Root, whence the oil springs; and the Turba has begotten another oil
in their will, so that there is no counsel, and remedy for to heal, and save
this Kingdom; it must only consume, and devour it self, in it self, and
with it self; as an evil Malignant Kingdom; yet it grows unto its highest
Number, viz. to a thousand; even to the end; for the Crown has the Number
thousand; and then there is no further remedy, except it does wholly reunite,
and become one again with it self; and enter into the first will, and submit
to obedience; and become again one thing; and then it begins again to
number; yet at first the Matter goes on well, while it is in a small number;
for that which has space, does not easily bruise, and hurt it self, but what
is in restraint pent up, and straightened, that labors to extend it self
beyond its limit, and to persuade it self, that his neighbors dwelling is
also his; and will always break the bound, and limit: and although it be,
that from one thing another does grow; yet if it be not conformable to the
first will, whence it is originally sprung, it is no true offspring, but a
wild twigg, which opposes the Mother, and loves her not; for he grows up in
his iniquity; therefore the Mother receives him not into her first will, that
he might remain for ever; but gives him leave to run on, even to the Limit.

51. But when the Mother does see, that all her children do thus miserably
revolt from her, and forsake her, and become as strangers to her, she
grieveth, and hops amendment; but there is none: even then she seeks the
Turba; for she directs her will again into her self; and seeks the
Begettresse! and there she finds a new child in the Lilly-Twig; and gives
the stubborn revolting children to the Turba; so that they do devour, slay,
and kill themselves: Moreover, she powers their own Turba, and poison upon
them, to take them away, that she might bring up her young Son, who should
remain in her house, that she might have joy in him.

52. Thus let this be told to thee, thou great Large-spread Tree, which in the
beginning were only a Twig, thou were created only in one will; all thy
Twiggs should have thy will; but the Devil did mis^beteeme it thee, and did
infect thy will with his poison, whence the Turba grew: Thus thou have
corrupted all thy children, and branches thereby; so that the Turba is sprung
up also in every Twigg: thou did mount in pride, and went forth from the
first will, which God gave thee, into the Wonders of the great Turba; wherein
thy children have amused themselves, and forsaken thee.

53. Therefore says the traveling Mother; pain takes hold on me; I had
planted me a little Tree, and would feign have eat its good fruit; but it has
brought forth much wild fruit, which I cannot eat; I will bring forth, and
educate me a young Son in my old age, that he may remain in my house, and
do my will, that I may yet have joy; Seeing that all my children have forsaken
me, I will have comfort in my young Son; he shall continue in my house while
I live; Satan shall not sift him; I will put him on a child's Garment, he shall
dwell with me, wholly, simply, and plainly as a child: Lo! I will produce him
from the first root, and destroy the Turba, for its Number in the Crown is
finished.

54. Ye wild branches [the unprofitable suckers, and dreiners] what do you
seek so much after? Ye say; we are above the Mother; we have wit,
understanding, and art; what cares the Mother for your wit, and art, she
requires obedience; she desires not your art, and wit, for she is very
plain; and numbreth only one: will you please the Mother; you must then
return from the multiplicity again into the unity; not by wit, and art, but
you must go out from your proud Turba, from your own selves, into
single-hearted humility; you must forsake the glory, and fame of selfe-wit,
sprung from the Turba, and become as children, else you are not acceptable to
the first Mother; but to the Turba; which receives you; then, even then see
where your Mansion shall be, when God shall judge the secret, and hidden things
of mankind; when all things shall pass through the fire of his Anger, says
the Spirit of the great Wonders.

55. Mother Eve said, when she brought forth her first child; I have received
a man of the Lord; he shall do it; he shall break the bead of the Serpent,
and possess the Kingdom; but Cain was a Murderer.

56. So thou at present also say; We have found the Lord: Now we will
possess the Kingdom; for we have found the true Doctrine: Thus we will teach;
and so be the children of God; but hearken; Thou have indeed found the
Doctrine; but thou art Cain; thou intendest, and seek only the Kingdom,
and not the power of Abels Sacrifice; thou will only continue in the lust of
the flesh, and keep only the husk of the Word of God, which is without
power; thou keep the histories, and for them thou stirrest up strife; thou
desolatest thy Country, and People, and deniest the power: thou say; we are
nigh unto the Kingdom of God; and yet were never farther off: this thy end
will testify, and declare to be true.

57. What does thy knowledge avail thee? the Devil knows likewise that which
thou know; but he does it not; and so do thou; and therefore the Kingdom
of God remains hidden to both of you: Thy knowledge is thy snare, which
captivates thee; were thou plain, and single-hearted, thou would not be so
proud; what does the simple know of false suttlety, and deceit; if he learnt it
not from the wit of the Turba? Thou say; We bear forth Gods will, and teach
it; art thou not Cain, who daily kills Abel? Behold thy self aright; thou
art even he; Abel lies at thy feet, and lamenteth, but thou art that wicked
Beast that trampleth upon Upon the sincere Love, and humility of Christ, and
all those that would practice it.
Abel, and oppressest the low, and miserable, and thou esteemest the simple as
dust; and yet thou devourest his sweat, and fillest thy self with deceit,
without ground: how can thou then say? Here is the Church of Christ! O thou
art Babel, a City of whoredom and falsehood.

58. Thou know Gods will, and yet do only thine omn will; and also
say; We are gone out from Babel; we have the true Doctrine among us; yea, but
had thou the Spirit of righteousness, and truth, and would live contented
with a little, thy Mother would always give thee enough, that thou should
have no lack; but thy pomp, pride, and arrogance, have no trust in God;
therefore thou reliest only upon covetousness; and thou do only devour
the fat of the Earth; thou take it away by force, and not with right: The
Law, and justice which thou do arrogate to thy self, thy false covetous
heart has invented; Thou live only in deceit; thou flatterest, and
deceivest thy self, to thine own hurt; were thou truly wise, thou would have
an eye to thy End, and to that which follows thereafter. But thou blindest
thy self with pride, and yet say, here is a golden time! Many would feign
have seen that we see; and hear, that which we hear; but have neither seen,
nor heard it: yea, but hearken; it shall be a witness against thee, and make
thy judgment so much the more heavy; for thou art not grown better thereby,
but worse: Therefore know what is declared thee, the same was thy own Prophet,
which has called thee back from thy pride unto the Mother of humility; but
thou art made only worse; thou have quasht the sword of the Spirit, that thou
might live as thou listest; but he has forsaken thee, and given thee over
to the Turba, which shall devour thee; as it happened in times past to Israel;
No Consultation avails; thy Covenants are to no purpose, seeing thou
dependest upon the arm of flesh: hence God also is quite departed from thee,
and suffer thee to do that, which makes for thy own destruction.

59. Or why do thou take the Covenant of God into thy mouth, seeing thou
hate to be reformed; and only seek Covetousness: supposest thou, that
God is such a false hypocrite, and liar as thou art; leave off from thy
lip-labor [mouth hypocrisie] thou art not accepted of God, unless thou do
return, and go out from falsehood.

60. It is with thee now, as the Turba desires, whose sport, and recreation it
is, to fulfill the Anger of God, that it may devour whatsoever is grown up in
his Kingdom: and thou art blind therein, and see nothing: To what end art
thou so having, and covetous? depart from it: do thou not see how the Noble
Tincture does arise? it will very shortly put forth its blossom, and then thou
shall have Silver and Gold enough.

61. But what shall we need say more? thou have whored thy self asleep: thou
choosest rather to go quick into the Abyss, then to forsake the Whore:
Therefore that shall be executed upon thee, which thy own Prophet shows thee;
who has long enough called thee with his Trumpet: thou expectest [Deliverance]
only from the fiery, devouring sword; that shall also cut thee through.

62. Or do thou think that we are madd, that we speak thus? yea rather, we
are borne of thee: we see, and understand the complaints of our Mother, that
rebukes her children; for she declares the wrath in the Turba, which is
grown even to the wrathful Anger of God.

63. We speak what is given us; what we know in the zeal of the Lord: what
have we to do with Babel? we speak among our selves, with the members of our
body; and with those who dwell in the Courts of God; with those who now mourn
with us; whose sorrow shall be turned into joy.

Diverse remarkable Places, taken out of the Commentary of Teutonicus upon
Gene^^s. Chap. 30. Or, Verse.
Paragraph the 34.
34. THere are Seven Times appointed, to proceed from the Tree of Life, in the
Word of Power: The first proceeds from the Pure Life of Adam, for before the
Creature the Life was in the Word, whence it was brought pure into the Image:
This continues till the Fall: from this Pure Life springs forth a twigg in the
inward [Kingdome], this was Abel: but being the Fall hung on him in the outward
[world] this same pure life was carried through death into the holy World: It
points at the Kingdom of Christ, who should bring us again through death
into the Pure Life.

35. The Second Time begins with Seth; for Moses says, that Adam was an
hundred and thirty years old, and begat a son in his own likeness; and
called him Seth: Understand, he was such an Image as Adam was after the Fall;
and was set in the spiritual Line of the Wonders; and Cain also with him in a
worldly Natural Line of the Wonders: for both Secular, and Ecclesiastical,
Natural, and Spiritual.
Kingdoms go together: Seths time continues till the Deluge; and bears the
Supremacy, even to the Deluge.

36. The third time begins with E^os under Seths time, and is carried along as
a spiritual Ministry, or knowledge of God under Seths time; being as an hidden
Kingdom; and continues till Abraham, to whom the Covenant of Christ was
established in the flesh.

37. The Fourth Time begins with Kenan, which is the spiritual Form in
prayers, and spiritual offerings, wherein the Word forms it self in the
Wisdom; and did bring it self along under Seths, and Enos his Time; and
manifested it self with Moses; like as Enos Time was first truly manifested
with Abraham, with the Promise in the Covenant; This time of Kenan continues in
its Manifestation, and Dominion under Moses till Christ in the flesh.

38. The Fifth Time begins with Mahalaleel; and it is the Reception of the
Angelical form; viz. of the new regeneration, out of the Covenant; and goes
secretly all along under the Ministry of Enos; under Seth, and Kenan, in the
word of the Promise; through all the three Times; and was manifested with the
fullfilling of the Covenant in the humanity of Christ, where the true
Mahalaleel, and angelical Image, which did disappeare in Adam, was again
manifest in the humanity of Christ.

39. The Sixth Time begins with Jared; that is the spiritual Priesthood under
the outward; when as Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel were in their Times, in
their outward Orders; viz. the Ministry of Enos concerning God, and his Being,
and Will; so likewise the Preaching of Abraham concerning the Covenant, and
Circumcision; also Moses, with the Book of the Law: under all these the inward
Priest Jared went along hiddenly: Inwardly this spiritual Priesthood is Christ
in the New Man; and outwardly, in the selfe-elected Priests, it is Babel.

40. This Sixth Time began in the Kingdom of Christ after the death of the
Apostles, when as men chose themselves Teachers out of Favor, and outward
respects, that is, it did even then first open it self out of the hiddennesse
of the shadow; and put it self forth in the Churches of stone; where the
Church stood in stead of the holy Temple of Christ: then indeed internally the
holy Jared; viz. Christ's voice, ruled in the children of Christ; but outwardly
the Cherubim with the sword; for the outward authority which these Elected
Priests manage, is the sword of the Cherubim; which in the Name Jared, forces
it self along in the Word in the Nature-speech.

41. This Sixth Time in its figure is hidden, and manifest, it is known, and
also not known; for Christ said, My Kingdom is not of this world; Thus this
time must pass away secretly under Antichrist; where inwardly in the children
of God, Christ's Kingdom has been manifest; but in the Rest (who have lived
under this Time, and also have been termed Christians) only Babel, and the
Antichrist has been manifest, both in the Priests, and their hearers; for
they, which were borne of God, they heard the true Jared in them; viz. the
voice of Christ: but the other heard only the outward voice in Babel; viz. to
dispute, and contend about Christ's Kingdom.

42. For all war which the Christians manage, is the sword of the Cherubim
from Babel: Right Christians wage no war; for they have broken the sword of
the Cherubim in the death of Christ; and are dead with Christ, and risen again
in him, and they live no longer to the external Might, and Dominion; for their
Kingdom is manifest in Christ, and is not of this world.

43. This Sixth Kingdom begins after the death of the Apostles, and
continues with its Outward Government, even to Mount Z^on, till translated
Enoch does again appear in spirit, and power; for Enoch is the Prophetical
Root, and holds in his Dominion Noah, Moses, and the sword of Elias. at the
end of the first Or, sixth Seal; about which time we l^ve.
time the outward The outward Pri^sthood in Babel.
Jared falls, and with him that same outward Building; viz. the City Babel.

44. The Sign of the End stands in such a figure, and denotes the time, when
the threefold Cross does open, and declare it self in the voice of Enoch;
being a Manifestation of the holy Trinity; To make known the same in the
Figure, and Similitude in all visible things; Moreover, it denotes the Conquest
of the sword of the Cherubim in Babel; when the force, and authority of the
City Babel, turns its sword with the point downward: Thirdly, it denotes the
great Rod, and punishment upon Babel; which Rod does mightily elevate its Power
on high: Fourthly, it denotes the wrathful enkindled fire of Gods Anger, which
shall devour the Sword, and Rod: This will be the End of the Sixth time: The
Threefold [or Triple] Cross does betoken the Time when this shall come to
pass; when the Kingdom of Christ shall attain such a Number; then is the
Sixth Time wholly past.

45. The Seventh time begins with Read the 35 Quest. of the 40 Quest.
Concerning the Enochian life.
Enoch, viz. with the Prophetical Mouth; who declares, and lays open under
all the six times, the secret Wonders of God; what should be done; and goes
along under Noah's, Abraham's, and Moses his veil, even into the Kingdom of
Christ, where this same prophetical Spirit is translated in the Spirit of
Christ, till the end of the Sixth time; then he manifests himself in the Number
of the Triple Cross: when the threefold Cross manifests it self, then stands
the right Triple Crown upon the Cross; even then the Enochia^^ Prophets mouth
does express the great Wonders of the Triple Cross; that is, he speaks no
more Magically [in types, and parables,] but shows the holy Trinity in the
Figure, viz. the Formed Word of God in all visible things; and reveals all
Mysteries within, and without.

46. And even then is the Time, when Enoch, and the children under his voice
lead a divine life; of which the first life of Enoch was a Type; and even then
there is a blessed, and golden year; till Enochs last translation comes; and
then the Turba is borne, which, (when as it shall enkindle its fire) shall
purge the Floare, for it is the End of all time.

47. Enoch begat Methusalah, who was the man of the longest age, and was
translated three hundred years after; this shows that the Spirit, (which in
Enoch did put forth a twigg; viz. Methusalah, who attained the highest Age)
shall rule in the last, and highest Age [of the world] and in the mean while
hide it self before that time, and remain as it were translated; as Enoch was
translated, and was no more seen.

48. His translation was not a dying, or a putting off of Nature, and creature;
but he went into the Mystery betwixt the spiritual, and outward Word, viz.
into Paradise, and is the Prophetical Root, springing from the Stem of Adam
in the line of the Covenant; from which Spirit afterward the Prophetical mouth
spoke.

49. This Spirit was translated in the Living voice of Christ, when it spoke in
the flesh; and must be silent, till the voice of Jared is finished; then he
proceeds forth again from his first root through all voices; viz. through
the voice of Noah, which denounces the Deluge of Anger to come upon Babel, and
through the Stem of Noah, and the whole propagation of his Tree through all the
Lines; viz. through the heathenish, Japheticall, and Sems Line; and through
Abraham's, and Nimrods children in Babel; through Moses, and the Prophets; and
lastly, through the voice of the manifested Word in the Spirit of Christ; and
reveals the whole Mystery of the Tree of knowledge, of good and evil.

50. For through his Voice all the forementioned voices of the lines of the
Wonders (whence the Kingdoms of this world have had their rise) shall be
changed into one voice, and knowledge, and transplanted into one Kingdom; viz.
into the first Tree of Adam, which is no longer called Adam, but Christ in
Adam. All N^tions, Tongues, and Languages hear this voice; for it is the first
word, whence the life of Man proceeded; for all the Wonders do again in the
Word come together into one Body; and this same Body is the formed divine Word,
which at first with Adam did introduce it self into one only Stem; and
through him into one Tree of manifold boughs, branches, and fruits, to the
Contemplation of the divine Wisdom in the Wonders of the Powers, Colors, and
^ertues; according to good and evil.

51. This high Tree does disclose, and clearly open it self what it has been
in time, and what it shall be eternally, and in its disclosure Moses puts away
his veil, and Christ his Parables in his Doctrine: and then the Prophetical
Mouth of this Tree of Wonders, does express in Divine Power, all the voices of
the powers of the Tree, whereby Babel takes her End; and this is a Wonder; and
in this same Wonder all Numbers, and Names are manifest; and this no man can
hinder.

52. For that which is lost in the Spirit of the Letters, shall be again
found; and the Spirits of the Letters [shall be again found, and knowne] in
the formed Word of the Creation: and in the Creation shall be sound, and known
the Being of all Beeings, and in the Being of all Beeings the Eternal
understanding of the holy Trinity; even then the contentions about the
knowledge of God, and his Being, and Will do cease: when the branches shall
know that they are [or stand] in the Tree; they will never say, that they are
peculiar and singular Trees; but they will rejoice in their Stem; and they will
see that that they are altogether boughs, and branches of One Tree; and that
they do all receive power and life from one only Stem.

53. And there Moses shall keep Sheep, and each sheep eats his own Pasture;
therefore mark it; when this happens to be fullfilled, Noah denounces the
Deluge, and Elias brings the Flaming Sword upon the false Israel, and the Turba
in the fire of the Wrath devoures the wild Tree with its fruits, and branches;
Let this be told thee Babel.

54. For as concerning Enochs divine time, our speech is taken from us, seeing
Babel is not worthy of it; also shall not see it; so also to disclose the Times
of the Ancient; whose Number shall be manifest in the Rose of the Lilly. --

Mysterium Magnum. Chap. 31.
19. ANd God said it repented him, etc. This is to be understood according to
the Creation of the Formed Word, not according to the Eternal Speaking Word,
which is unchangeable, but according to the good Property in the Creation, that
it must be laden with Evil against its will, etc. --

26. The Spirit does especially in Noah complain here against man, for the
Sodomiticall, beastiall concupiscence, and lust of the flesh; viz. against
unchastity, and unclean lascivious wantonness; and also against the High
Oppressors, and Tyrants, who put forth themselves in their own lust, and
domineered, and would not suffer the Spirit of God to rule in them; that they
had intruded themselves without Command; all this was an abomination before
God, and it grieved the Spirit in the Formed Word, that he had produced such
evil Beasts, and would endure them no longer.

27. Even this same Prophetical Spirit, whose root opened it self in Enoch;
which also by Enoch d^d propagate its line in its branches; which by Noah did
grieve at the wickedness of man, and drowned them with the Deluge: even this is
he that now also does grieve at the great sins, and vanity of men; for his
mouth is at present opened; he has been translated in the Spirit of Christ.
Now this Word that became man, does repent at the vanity, and wickedness of
men; that his children of the new Covenant will not suffer the Spirit of Christ
to draw them; therefore this prophetical mouth does now come forth, for it is
the time of its Manifestation; and proclaims the great Deluge of Gods Anger,
and the Flaming Sword of Elias, who also was translated [or taken] into the
mystery; for he shall bring his Sword in the Turba.

28. Let this be told thee Babel; he complains mightily against thy Beastiall
Wantonness, and Tyranny, against thy own usurped force, and violence;
wherewith thou art proud, and wanton, and thereby has set up thy self in Gods
government: he will drown thee with thy tyranny, and beastiall unchastity,
with the fire of anger; seeing that thou will not repent of thy vanity;
therefore he repents through thee with the Turba; and will drown thy Turba;
so that his repentance may be manifest in his children; and also his Comfort of
Refreshment may be manifest by his Repentance, etc. --

40. By Adam the Word Repented, and gave it self with a Covenant into the
life; to help and comfort the life: and by Noah the Word repented, and moved
all the fountains of the deep in Nature, and drowned the Wrath, and opened the
Covenant of grace.

41. And when the Time of Enos was at the End, in the days of the children of
Nimrod, the Word grieved at the vanity of man; that they would not know God,
and drowned the understanding of the one only tongue, and divided it, and gave
by its repentance the certain understanding in the Covenant with Abraham.

42. And when the Time of Cainan was at the end, that the children of Abraham's
Covenant were compelled into the vanity of Servitude: the Word grieved at the
vanity, and destroyed Pharaoh; and afterward all the men of the children of
Israel in the Wilderness, save Josua, and Caleb, and gave by repentance the
Law of his Covenant, a true type of Christ, who should drown the Abomination
in his blood.

43. Thus also when Mahalaleels time came to the end, the Word grieved in the
deepest Repentance, and brought the life of God in Christ Jesus into the formed
creaturely Word in the humane Ens; and drowned the Turba in the humane Ens with
Gods love, and mercy; and gave them the Spirit of Comfort, and the Gospel.

44. Note.
Thus even now; when the time of Jared is at the end, which has been covered
with Babel; Even now the Word does repent, and grieve at our great vanity, and
will destroy the Abomination with the devouring jaws of Wrath; with Sword,
Hunger, Fire, and Death: And gives by its sorrow, and repentance, a Lilly out
of Enochs mouth in Gods sweetness.

45. And when Enochs time shall be at the end, that the vanity does again grow
in the Turba; then comes the greatest grief and sorrow of all upon the Nature
of the Wonders; that it is at the end, and there is no more any remedy; even
then comes the last Motion with the Turba in the first Principle of the
Eternal Nature; and devoureth [or swalloweth up] the outward Nature in the
fire; and then shall the Formed Word be wholly freed from vanity; and gives by
its last Repentance the Holy Spiritual World. Amen.

Mysterium Magnum. Chap. 32.
10. THere is a very great Mystery in the Ark of Noah, which the Lord commanded
him to build after that manner; and showed him how high, how long, and how
broad it should be; and directed also that it should have three several
Stories; also concerning the creatures that he should bring into it: which is
such a Mystery, that the malicious wicked man is not worthy to know: and we
also shall not mention it in the ground [or depth of its meaning] for it has
its time wherein it shall be opened, that is, in the Lilly time, when Babel
has its End: but yet to set down somewhat for a furtherance to our fellow
branches, who shall break forth, and grow out of our Ens of this Lilly in its
time (which also shall be a Rose in the Lilly-time) we will set it down in an
hidden exposition.

11. The Mystery of the Holy Trinity: also the Three Principles: also the Three
Sons of Noah: also the Three Men that appeared to Abraham in the Plain of
Mamre: also the Vision of the great Temple in Ezekiel: and the whole Revelation
of John, belong unto this figure: also the Temple of Jerusalem.

12. Set before thee the figure of the Ark with its three Stories; with its
height, length and breadth: and place it in the three Principles: and in the
three Principles open the Mysteries of the Hierarchies of Christ, according to
the three differences of Heaven, which yet are but one, yet in three
properties, as fire, light, and air are three; and yet but one: Place in these
differences the three Sons of Noah; and proceed out of their properties into
the world in their Monarchy, which continue to the end of days: also set
before thee the formed Word, according to all the three Principles: and so you
will find the ground of all: Especially set before thee, Moses, E^^as, and
Christ, in their Appearance, and Transfiguration in the Mount. The Ark of Noah
was the first type of all these, and the Hierarchy of Christ is the fulfilling
[of that figure of the Ark] at the End of days: Enough to Ours, etc. --

33. And Moses says; When the waters were abated, the Arc rested upon the
Mountain Ararath: this Name [Arararat] does plainly hint unto us in the
language of Nature, a Mount, or the Compacting of an Essence out of the Center
of Nature; out of the Wrathfulnesse; when as the Anger of God had allayed it
self; then the Ark stood upon the allayed anger; but the last syllable in this
word Arararat, does signify that the Wrath of the Eternal Nature proceeding
from the Center, betook it self into an acting government, and would from
thenceforth ride through Nature as a Warrior; and mightily exercise its Power
in the humane property; whereby they would begin wars; and advance themselves
in pride, pomp, and power; and slay one another: and contend about this
Mountain of the wrathful might [or austere authority.]

34. This Mountain Ararat, denotes the houses of the Potentates upon the
Earth; viz. the great Castles, Bulwarks, and Mountains of the Power, and
Strength of the rich; and also the Nobility sprung up from the Mystery of the
great world: upon which Kingdom the Ark of Noah has set it self: and above
this Mountain of warlike Power [or force of Armes] arisen from the Anger of
God, the Covenant with Noah has set it self to be an Eternal Lord: I mean
the Kingdom of Christ; which shall take away this Mountains Kingdom, and
quite suppress it: and it shows us truly, fundamentally, and properly, that
this Power upon the Earth would take upon it (in its own power) the Ark of
Noah; viz. the divine Covenant, and carry it: yea put it on as a garment, and
proudly perk up it self therein, as if it had the Kingdom of Christ in its
own power.

35. And also it shows, how this Mountain of the wrathful Anger of God in the
humane property, would beautify, trim up, and adorn it self with the Ark of
Noah; and would proclaim it to be the holy Ark of Christ; and yet its
foundation would be only upon the wrathful Anger of God; and continue only
an Antichristian Kingdom; that indeed should carry the Ark; viz. the Name of
divine holiness in the mouth; but the heart would be this Mountain: only a
vessel, and a confused mass of Gods wrath; and yet would make devout shows,
and proudly perk up it self with the Arc; but the heart would only mind
[and hunt after] the Strong Holds, the preferment, power, and riches of the
World.

36. Furthermore, it denotes, that the potent, and mighty of the World, would
build the Ark; viz. the Service, and Worship of God upon their Heart, and
Reason, with great Stone-Houses, and Churches; and these Houses thus built up
of Stone, should be their God, whom they would serve in the Ark; and they would
wage war for the Houses of Stone of their own contriving, and framing; and
would contend about the figure of the true Ark; and not confider that the Ark
stands upon their Mountain; and that God has placed it above them; and that
they ought to walk under Gods Dominion in humility; and suffer the Ark to
stand upon them, and [not to usurp to themselves] or take away the power, and
authority of the holy Ghost, and bind him unto their feigned power, in their
hypocritical form; and bid him be silent; as they do, in that they cry with
full mouth; here is an assembly of Divines; here is the Church of Christ: this
you must believe and do; this is the Law, and Ordinance of the Church; No; the
Ark stands upon them; they are under, as the Mount Ararat under the Ark; Christ
is the Ark; and not the contrived Heaps of Stone: the Concilium is under the
Ark Christ, and not above; for the Arc of Noah placed it self above the
Mountain, to signify that the Mountain must bear the Ark: we must bear the
Ark of Christ upon us; and have the Temple of this Ark in us.

37. Furthermore, it denotes how the figure of this Ark; viz. the Or,
Ecclesiastical, Clergicall.
spiritual Kingdom upon the earth, would place it self upon the Mountain of
Power, and Lordlinesse; and would rule with the Mountain in the Ark; and take
upon it self the worldly Kingdom [and authority] and bring the Mountain;
viz. the power [or Secular Arme] above the Ark; whereas the Ark ought to stand
upon the Mountain: and Noah with the Covenant to remain in the Ark; till the
Lord bid him come forth; that is, till Christ deliver the Ark to the Father.

38. And Moses says further; After fourteen days when the Arc rested, Noah
sent forth a Raven to see whether the water was abated; but the Raven flew too,
and fro, till the waters were dried up from off the earth: The Raven denotes
the earthly man, and shows how he would first put forth himself upon the Mount
Ararat; that is, in selfenesse, and fleshly lust, and build up his Kingdom in
the Second Monarchy [or world.]

39. And albeit he truly came forth out of the Ark, yet he would only fly too
and again in the Kingdom of his self, and not enter again into the Ark,
whence he had his rise in Adam; and would only be a covetous Muckworme, and a
greedy devourer of fleshly temporal pleasure in his own will, and remain as
the Raven, and not return to the Arc, desiring to enter into it, but mind
only to possess the Kingdom of this world in glory; also it betokens that
the generation of this Raven would have the chief place, pre-eminence, and
Government in the Second Monarchy, (like the Devil in the Wrath of God) as
Histories witness that it so came to pass.

40. Afterward Noah sent forth a Dove from him, to see whether the waters were
abated from off the face of the earth; but when the Dove found no rest for the
sole of her foot; she returned again unto him unto the Ark: And he put forth
his hand, and took her to him into the Arc. This denotes the figure of Gods
children, who soon after come also under the government of the Ravens
Property; and are brought into the government of this world; for they are also
with Adam gone forth out of the Ark, to behold, and prove this evil corrupt
world, and live therein: but when their spirit can find no rest in the earthly
Dominion; then they come again before the Ark of Noah, which is set open in
Christ, and Noah receives them again in Christ into the first Ark, whence
Adam departed.

41. Moreover, the Raven betokens the sharp Law of Moses in the fiery Might
under Gods Anger; which binds, and slays Man, and brings him not into the Ark:
but the Dove betokens the Gospel of Christ, which brings again into the Ark,
and saves the life; for the Mount Ararat, signifies also the Kingdom of Moses
(as the Figure) and the Ark, wherein the life is preserved, signifies the
humanity of Christ.

42. And he stayed yet other 7 days, and again he sent forth a Dove out of
the Ark, and it came to him about evening; and lo! she had plucked off an Olive
leaf, and brought it in her mouth: And he stayed yet other seven days, and
sent forth a Dove, which returned not to him any more. The Spirit in Moses
shows by these three Doves, and the Raven which went forth out of the Ark, a
great Mystery; which albeit he does not clearly unfold, yet for certain is
couched therein: The Raven does also denote the Law of Moses in Nature, which
will remain in its self, and not return in true resignation [or
selfe-deniall] under the obedience of God, but will enter in to God by its own
power, and ways.

43. The first Dove betokens the Prophetical Spirit, which arose under Moses;
viz. under the outward Law and Offerings, and directed again through the
Offerings into the Ark of Noah, and Christ. This Prophetical Spirit went along
through the Office of Moses: it indeed flew under Moses; but with its Prophecy,
it went again into the Ark: as the first Dove by Noah flew indeed into the
world, but came again into the Ark of Christ.

44. The second Dove, with the Olive Branch, which also came again to Noah
into the Ark; denotes the Word in the Covenant of Noah; which came forth out of
the holy Ark of God into this world; viz. into our humanity; and plucked off an
Olive-leaf in the world, and brought it Noah; that is, it plucked off a branch
out of our humanity, and took it into the holy Word; viz. the mouth of God;
(as the Dove the Olive-leaf) and brought the branch to holy Noah; that is, to
God the Father; but that it was an Olive-leaf, denotes the unction of the holy
Spirit; that the same should anoint the humanity, and bring it again with this
Dove into the holy Ark.

45. The third Dove which Noah let fly which came not again to the Ark,
betokens the Kingdom of Antichrist upon the earth; which is flowne forth out
of the Ark, with its Doctrine: but its spirit [and minde] remains upon the
earth in the fat grass, in self: it indeed makes devout shows to God, and
gives good words; but the man (with sense, and reason) will not forsake the
world, and return again to the Ark: they build themselves Palaces without
the Ark for the pleasure of the flesh; and are devout in hypocrisy without the
Ark: and will be children by an outward adoption; but they will not enter into
the Ark; but they say, Christ is in the Ark, he has purchased, and paid all;
we need only to comfort our selves therewith; he will bring us in well enough.

46. The other party says; They have Christ in their works of hypocrisy; they
take the Ark with them, when they fly out in their pleasure of the flesh; all
these remain without the Ark in this world, and come not again [to the Ark of
Christ] this the third Dove denotes, for the Antichristian Kingdom walks
demurely in the shape of a Dove, and Sheep, but is only a figure of Christ's
Kingdom, which consists in spirit, in power, and is in the Ark.

Mysterium Magnum. Chap. 40. Page 313.
68. BY the Tribes [or stems] of the Saints (in whom the divine Covenant has
opened it self; viz. by the Patriarchs, as, Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob) there are always two Figures represented; viz. Christ, and Adam; a
good, and an evil man.

69. Cain, Ham, Ishmael, and Esau, were types of the corrupt man; and Abel,
Sem, Isaac, and Jacob, were types of Christ, who manifested himself in this
line, and was set before the corrupt children of Adam, as a light, and Preacher
to convert them.

70. For God has not sent his Son to condemn the world; viz. the poor,
corrupt [and lost] man; but he has therefore sent him into the world among the
ungodly crew of wicked men to teach, and call them; and those he will save, who
have a willing desire to hear; even those, who have but a little spark of
divine Ens, that is capable of hearing in them; in the little spark that is in
all these, the quickening, and reviving voice of Christ does cry, and call; that
is, it blows up that spark, that it may become a divine fire.

71. And that we may open awide the eyes of the blind,
selfe-titular-Christendome; and also of the Jews in their boasting (that they
may not so brag, and stand upon their knowledge, as if they were only
therefore Gods children, because they know the Name of God; and comfort
themselves with the knowing it, and condemn other people, who are deprived of
knowing, as they know; and have introduced another knowledge; as they alas! do
most blindely; insomuch, that one Nation, and People, does exercise [urge, and
evilly entreat] another.) Know, that Cain, Ham, Ishmael, and Esau, are the type
[or figure] of the Turks, and Heathen, whom God blessed in Ishmael; and gave
them the Princely Dominions in his Kingdom of this world for to possess; and
cast them out in their own contrived knowledge; from the knowledge of Christ's
adopted; as he cast out Ishmael; but recalls them in the womb by the Angel of
the great Counsel to the Tree; viz. to Gods goods; that they should return to
him.

72. For they lie shut up under the veil of Christ; as Christ did under the
Leviticall Priesthood under Moses; and as the Children of Israel under the Law
were not justified through the Law, but through him who was hid under the Law;
and thus are they now hidden under the true knowledge; and lie as it were shut
up in the Mothers womb.

73. But the Angel of the great Counsel calls them by their Mother Hagar; viz.
by the Kingdom of Nature, that she (the Mother with the child) must again
return home to Sarai; viz. to the Tree; that is, to the one only God; who
has borne his Son of the free. Thus they come as it were under the veil, in
the Mothers womb to the free; viz. to the one only God; who has borne unto
them of the free (Woman) the Lord; unto whose goods they are received in grace,
as strangers.

74. For as Ishmael did not go to Isaac for the inheritance, which properly
belonged to Isaac, (because the Lord was in him, who freely bestowed it upon
him, and set him as a Steward) but would have it of the Father; even so the
Turks have turned themselves from Isaac; viz. from the Son to the Father,
and will have the inheritance of God from the Father.

75. Now the Father is manifest to us in the Son; and when they now do call
upon the Father, he hears them only in his Son; viz. in his voice manifest
in the humane property: and they yet serve the Son in the Father.

76. For we men have no other God at all without Christ the Son; for the
Father has manifested himself toward us with his voice in the Son: and
hears us only through his voice manifested in the Son.

77. Now when the Turks worship the Father, he hears them in the Son; and
receives them to adoption in the Son, in whom God has only manifested
himself in humane property, and in no other property besides.

78. Now says Reason; How can they attain to the adoption of Christ, when as
they will not have the Son to be the Son of God; but say, that God has no
Son: hear O man! Christ said, Whosoever speaks a word against the Son of
man, to him it shall be forgiven; but he that blasphemeth the Holy Ghost, to
him it shall never be forgiven: that is, as much as if he should say;

79. He that reproacheth the humanity of Christ [in confidering it] as his own
flesh, to him it may be forgiven, for he knows not what the humanity of
Christ is; but he that blasphemeth the Holy Ghost, the only God, who has
manifested himself in the humanity; wherein Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
one only God; he has no forgiveness for evermore; that is, he that rejects
the only God, he has quite broken himself off from him, and is become his
own.

80. Now the Turks do not blaspheme the holy Spirit, who manifested himself
in the humanity; but they reproach the humanity, and say a creature cannot be
God.

81. But that God has wrought, and done wonders in Christ, that they confess,
and blaspheme not the holy Spirit, that has wrought in Christ; viz. in the
humanity: blindness is happened unto them, so that they walk under a veil.

82. Now says Reason; God has taken away the Candlestick from them, and
rejected them: Hear O man! What was the cause, that God (as he threatened by
St. Paul) did take away the Candlestick from them, and shut them up under the
veil: think thou, that it was done without his foreknowledge; without his
will; no, it was done with his will.

83. He permitted the Kingdom of Nature to give them a doctrine of Reason; The
cause and ground that the Turks deny Christ's deity.
seeing Christendom became blind in respect of Christ's person; and did
wrangle, and jangle about Christ's humanity; and put all manner of scorn,
disgrace, and reproach upon it: as it fell out among the Arians, when they
denied his Deity: and the Bishops in their covetousness did apply his merits
in his humanity for the belly-sake to their belly-orders, and did practice all
manner of lewdness, and profaneness (even with swearing, cursing, and
witchery) by his suffering, and holy wounds; so that there the holy Name of
God, which had manifested it self in the humanity, was abused; thereupon God
did hide himself from them in their understanding: so that they first became
blind with the Arians in respect of the Deity of Christ.

84. But afterward when as they would be only blind beasts; he hid himself
also from them in respect of the humanity by the The Doctrine of Mahomet.
Turkish Religion; so that they were wholly bereaved of the Candlestick of the
world: and it went with them as the Prophet said to Israel under their King;
Ah! I must give them Judges as in former times.

85. Thus the King of light in the humanity was withdrawn from them; and the
Judicature of Nature was given them again for a guide, and Governor; so that
they turned again into the Mothers womb; viz. into the root whence man was
created; that is, to the only God: so that the Name, and knowledge of the holy
humanity of Christ, is yet put out with them.

86. And that they might not use the same so vainly, and uneffectually for
swearing, and false defense: they must again enter into Hagar, (as into the
Mothers womb) and have now verily been a long time a people run away in their
mother Hagar, from Abraham's house; viz. from the humanity of Christ.

87. But know and declare this, as a word of the most High, A Prophecy
concerning the Turks conversion.
known in the sound of his Trumpet, which he has prepared to awaken all
Nations, and to visit the face of the whole earth; that the Angel of the Great
Counsel; viz. the holy voice of Christ, is not departed from them, eternally
to forget them; so little as a Mother can forget her child, that she should
not again have pity upon the Son of her womb, albeit he were disobedient
to her.

88. For as the Angel came to Ishmael, (being yet in the womb) when his Mother
fled from Sarai; and did enrich him with a blessing, and worldly Dominions, and
bad the Mother with the child return to Sarah. Thus likewise when the Eastern
Countries entered again into the Mothers womb, with their knowledge of
Religion; God gave unto them in the Kingdom of Nature, power and authority
over the Princely Dominions of the world, for to possess and rule them under
the light of Nature till its time; and then they shall come in again with
great joy, and with great humility to Abraham, viz. to Christ.

89. And not in the form of the Babylonicall, formal, literal Christendom,
in their invented, and contrived Orders; which are only Letter-[verball
outside] Christians (so that a Testimony [and some outward footsteps] of
Christ, and his Kingdom, have still continued upon the earth) but they shall
be borne in Spirit, and in power; for they are the lost Son, which is wandered
away from the Father, and is become the Swineheard.

90. But when the Angel shall bid them Return; they come in the humility of
the lost Son returning to the Father; where then the great joy shall be kept
by Christ, and his Angels; that the dead is made alive; and the lost is again
sound; and the true golden juball-yeare of the marriage of the Lamb arises up
among them.

91. And albeit the Elder brother (who has continued in the letter) does
grumble at it in respect of the different form, which he has made to himself
(for the most part for his belly, and honor) yet they are not moved at it,
they are merry with the Father.

92. If now then we truly compare painted Christendom, and the Turks
together; and look upon them aright; then we see that they (since the Turks
departed from them) have been but one People (before God in holiness, and
righteousness) with different names.

93. And they are the two Sons; to one whereof the Father said, Go, and do
this; and he said, yea; but did it not; and to the other also do this; and he
said, no; but did it; which does so highly advance [and magnifie] the Turks in
the Kingdom of Nature; which the blind Christian world does not understand.

94. Not that we justify the Turks, and say; that they should remain in
their blindness; no; but to the painted Christians we declare, that they are
alike (with them) before God; in that they are as blind in [respect of]
Christ's Kingdom as the Turks: as it plainly shows it self, in that
Christendom is full of strife, and contention, wrangling, and jangling about
Christ's Deity, and humanity; and abominably prophaneth [and hideously
unhalloweth] the holy Name in his humanity; and use it only for a form, and
custom to swear, [Covenant, and protest:] also to Idolatry, [superstition,
and hypocrisie] and are gone from the sword of the holy Spirit, unto a
bloodthirsty [confounding] Sword; wherein is nothing, but contending, and
contemning one another; and the whole titular Christendom is turned into mere
sects, and orders; where one sect does despise, and brand another for
unrighteous: and thus they have made of Christendom a mere murdering Den,
full of blasphemies about Christ's person: and [have bound the Spirit of Christ
to the forms, and orders of disputation, and have set foolish Reason over
Christ's Kingdom to be a Master [or Judge] of the understanding [or meaning of
Gods Spirit in the holy Scriptures, and mysteries.]

95. But ought we to speak so of Christendom, and the Turks; as if they were
alike? Thus we say; the Turk is openly an Ishmalite, and mocker of Christ's
humanity, and holds him not for the Son of Man, and God too; for he
understands not the heavenly Ens in the person [of Christ.]

96. But the Sects of Christendom do indeed cover themselves with Christ's
Mantle; but do attach him in his humanity, and Deity, and revile him in his
whole person; tear, and rend one another [with words and swords] about his
person: the one will have it this way; another that way; every one will be
Master over his words and spirit; and so deride Christ in his members [and
thereby destroy all brotherly love] and are as revolting, rebellious, and
fugitive Ishmaelites, as the Turks; and live in their selfish will; and serve
the Kingdom of Nature in their selfe-hood [selfe-interests] and pleasure.

97. A Christian must be dead with Christ to self; and be risen again in
Christ; and be borne anew of Christ; and to have put on Christ; that he be a
Christian in Christ, in the Spirit and heavenly flesh of Christ, according to
the internal spiritual man.

98. But instead hereof men have put on Babel, and the Antichrist; and do
boast themselves of their Ordinances [of the divine orders; in the performances
of devout duties in lip labor, and much prating] and in the Stone-houses of
Churches; and in the Cathedralls, and Cloisters of Christendom: where indeed
they do counterfeit somewhat of Christ: seeing that they there read the
writings, which the Apostles left behind them: but afterward with their
Preaching, for the most part they foist in the Kingdom [and Government] of
Nature, with brawling, and disputing; and spend the time with disputing,
confuting, and contending about Sects [and the different mental Idols, or
opinions] insomuch, that one party is brought wholly to condemn another: and
the ears [and hearts] of the hearers are so infected with gall, and
bitterness, that one Sect wilfully opposes another, and cries it down for
devilish; whence nothing but wars, and disdainful provocations do arise, to
the desolating of Countries and Cities.

99. Thus they are all alike before God, and lie as it were shut up in Hagar,
in the dead Reason; except the true children of God, which verily are here, and
there to be found among all Nations, and Sects, but wholly simple, and
despised: also covered under Christ's Cross to the Reason-wise-world.

100. For like as the four Elements receive the power [or influence] of the
Sun into them, and in the substance the body, yet not the Sun is seen;
albeit it works therein: so also the Spirit of Christ is hid in the children
of God: but as an herb springing from the earth, does by the virtue of the
Sun put forth a fair blossom, and fruit: so likewise Gods children out of
their plain homeliness [or deformity to the lewd world's, or prating
hypocrites eye.]

In the 27 Chapter of the Three Principles, what the Lilly is, may be discerned.
32. THe Lilly will not be found in strife, or wars, but in a friendly,
humble, loving Spirit, together with good, sound Wall-grounded, convincing,
satisfactory Reason. This will grow to the throwing down Babel, and the
building up of Zion.
Reason: this will dispell and drive away the smoke of the Devil, and
flourish in its time. Therefore let none think, that when strife goes on, and
he gets the upper-hand; now it is well and right: and he that is under, and
subdued, let him not think, sure I am found to be in the wrong, I should now
go to the other opinion or side, and help that party to prosecute the other:
no; that is not the way, such a one is merely in Babel.

33. But let every one enter into himself, and labor to be a righteous man,
and fear God, and do right, and consider that this his work shall appear in
Heaven before God, and that he stands every moment before the face of God,
and that all his works shall follow after him; and then the Lilly of God
springs and grows, and the world stands in its Seculum. AMEN.

Mysterium Magnum. Chap. 41. Page 326.
43. LOving Brethren, be instructed aright; the God of Love, he will not the
death of a poor corrupt, [and lost] man; but has powered forth his best
Treasure, (which he had in himself, and is himself) in Grace over all men:
like as the Sun does shine unto the good, and evil; but the wicked does
corrupt, and spoil the His precious Image.
Treasure in himself; and will not receive it, but sucketh, and takes in the
Ens of the Serpent, full of vanity; and is baptized with the fire of Gods Anger
in the will of self.

44. But if he went with his own-selfe-will into the death of Christ, and
desired from the bottom of his heart, to die from his self, and own will in
Gods mercy; and cast his whole dependence [and trust] upon God; and thought,
that he had nothing of his Own in this earthly Cottage; but that he was only a
servant of God, and his Neighbor, in all that he possesses; and forsook in
his mind the propriety, [and selfe-interest] he should soon be baptized with
the holy Spirit, and put on Christ in his will.

45. But these mischievous, earthly, temporal goods; temporal honor, and
pleasure of the flesh, captivate him in the Ens of the Serpent, so that he is
not capable of the Baptism of the Holy Ghost.

46. Also the selfe-elected, unfitted, corrupt Teachers, are wholly blind
herein, and teach only the husk; viz. the casket, [or sheath] of regeneration;
they will be outwardly adopted children, albeit, they live only in the will of
self; and will teach the holy Spirit into the Beast of self-will; which yet
is no ways capable of the holy Spirit; understanding nothing, either of
Baptism, or the Lords Supper: the New birth is strange unto them; they deny
the divine essential in-dwelling [of Christ's Spirit] in Gods children; viz.
the Temple of God [in man] and stand before the Jews (when as they should
declare unto them what Christ is in us; what Baptism and the Lords Supper is)
just like pictured Christians, or as Idols.

47. For the Jews know that God has spoken with their Fathers, and given them
the Circumcision, and the Covenant; there they stick; but could the Christians
fundamentally demonstrate to them what the Covenant, and Circumcision is
essentially, and effectually, together with their Offerings; they would forsake
the Sign, and enter into the Substance.

48. But that it has so fallen out, that both the Jews, and also the
Christians have walked in blindness, even till this last time; and so also the
Turks, who by reason of the blindness, wrangling, and ungodliness of the
Christians; have turned themselves unto Reason, and Nature; God has therefore
permitted, because the Christians, and Jews, both in the Old and New
Testament, received [or appropriated to themselves] the Covenant, and the Seal
of the Covenant, in the outward shell only; viz. in the vessel [or literal
apprehension] and lived only to the outward earthly mortal man; they always
minded, and provided for the earthly Kingdom, and life, more then for the
Eternal.

49. They would understand in the husk; viz. in the outward letter, what God
has spoken; and chose to themselves Reason-wise people, which were well
gifted, and learned in the outward formal, logical, and Notionall
understanding of the letter, who had not the Spirit, and power of Gods Word,
and life in the new birth in them; but only the spirit of self, pride, and
the earthly Belly-god; contriving how they might be rich in Christ's poverty
upon the Earth; these have blinded them, so that both among the Jews, and
Christians, men have minded, and loved only the earthly Ens.

50. Therefore God has permitted that the Wonders of Nature in the power of
his Anger should be opened, and brought forth in them, and that they should
thus stick in blindness, yet in controversy; (so that the name, and memory of
his Covenant, might not quite be extinguished) and one Nation evilly to
entreat, and exercise another in contention, and contrariety; whereby often
times a green twig has sprung from the right understanding; which has been
strange unto them, by reason of their received opinion; and they have
contemned, and persecuted it; for the earthly man in self is not worthy of the
holy Covenant, and Seal.

51. And seeing God knew very well, that they would run of themselves, without
[being sent of] him; and would abuse the holy Ens in the Covenant; thereupon
the Veil of Moses has beset the Jews; and the Tower Babel, with the
Antichrist; ( viz. the outward Christ instead of the holy Ens in the Covenant;
viz. Gods presence) the Christians; so that they have been evermore seeking in
this same Antichrist, what God might be in his Covenant, Will, and Being.

52. Thus they have been exercised in contention, and persecution, in that they
have persecuted one another; yet so as that Gods children have sprung forth in
the Cross; and [Christ] has been inwardly manifest to them; but outwardly
Babel has stood still, both among the Jews, Christians, and Turks; the
antixt is only the same among all; for he is the Letter-God; wherein the
self-will seeks and worshippeth God in the husk.

53. Hear now therefore, ye Christians, Jews, Turks, and Heathen; even all
Nations of the earth; What now (yet this once more for a farewell in this
worlds being) is freely tendered unto you in the visitation of the merciful
God in the voice of his Trumpet; by his Love-Will, and Spirit; the Sound of the
Trumpet concerns you all; let it enter into your ears, and do but open [your
ears, and hearts] a little from self; and then you shall hear the Sound in
you; It sounds through all, even to the ends of the Earth; but no self-will
hears it.

54. The simple Childrens way to divine Wisdom. The first and chiefest step to
a safe, and well-grounded-Reformation in Church, and Commonwealth.
The only divine way, wherein man may see God in his Word, Being, and Will,
is this; that man become wholly One in himself; and in his own will, forsake
all, whatsoever he himself is, or has; let it be authority, might, power,
honor, beauty, riches, money, goods, father, mother, brother, sister, wife,
and child, body, and life, and become wholly a Nothing to his Self; He must
freely resign up all; and be poorer then a bird in the air; which yet has a
Nest; the true man must have none; for he must travel away from this world;
that he be no more to himself in this world: He must be a Nothing to the
worlds self [and interests] for the Substance of this world, which he
possesses for a propriety; is the Tower of Babel, and the Antichrist; wherein
men will be their own God; and with this selfe-contrived God, they will ascend
upon the Tower to Heaven, and place themselves with [or for a] God. Understand
it thus:

55. It is not meant that one should run from house, and home, from wife,
children, sisters, etc. and fly out of the world; or so forsake his goods, as
not to remain in them; but the own [or selfe] will, which possesses all this
for a propriety; that he must kill, and annihilate.

56. And think, that all that of which he is a Master, is not at all his own:
let him win, or loose, be rich, or poor, wise, or simple, high, or low; let
him have something, or nothing; that he esteem all these things alike: a fair
fine Garment, as a course patcht one; the prosperity of this world, as the
adversity; life, as death; his authority, as a servants; a Kingly Crown, as
an old Hatt; and forsake it all in his mind, and not account it for his own.

57. But think, and wholly resign up his will thereinto; that he is but a
servant of all whatsoever he has, and only a Steward of that calling,
profession, office, and order; that it is Gods, and his brethren in common;
that he only serves God, and his brethren therein; and all whatsoever they
confer, and put upon him, be so received of him, as that it may conduce to
the general brotherly Order, and Profession; and that God may make such Orders
in this world, as a figure of the Angelical world; that he should serve him
therein.

58. And not at all in^inuate his mind into self [selfe-respects, and
interests] as to think (let him be either King, Counselor or Judge of the
people) that he is therefore better before God, or before men; he must
continually look upon his naked bosom, and think, that one naked man does
always resemble, and is like another; and also that his Gown of State, and
Office, over which he has charge, is the brotherly Societi's.

59. And all whatsoever is conferred, and bestowed upon him; either for honor,
power, wealth, and goods; to return [and give] it back again to God his
Creator; and say unfeignedly in his mind; Lord! it is thine; I am unworthy to
have command over it; but being thou have placed me therein; I wholly, and
fully resign up my will unto thee; Govern, and work thou by me as thou
please; that it may be done in thy will; and conduce to the profit, and
service of my Brethren, whom I serve in my calling, as thy command: do thou, O
Lord, all through me; and say only in me; how, and to what I ought to direct
the works of my hands; to whom I should give, and bestow money, goods, power,
and honor; and thus continually think, how he in his place may please, and
pleasure, not himself, but his brethren.

60. But if he be a servant, then let him think that he serves God in his
will; and men in Gods; and the general brotherly Function; and that he in that
little which God has given him in this Cottage for food, and raiment, is as
rich as a King; for if he looks upon himself naked, he sees the truth.

61. And when man brings it so far, that All is One unto him; [that he is
able to esteem all things alike, and be content with any condition, as St Paul
teacheth] then is he as the poor Christ (...)
, that had not whereon to lay his head; and rightly follows Christ, who said;
He that forsakes not house, Court, moneys, goods, brethren, sisters, wife,
child, and denies himself; he is not worthy of me.

62. And for this self, and unworthiness sake, God has turned his holy
Countenance from the Nations, so that they have known him only through a
dark word and shadow.

63. But he that enters into this total resignation; he comes in Christ to
divine Contemplation, that he sees God in him, and speaks with him; and God
with him; and understands what Gods Word, Being, and Will is. This man is
only fit to teach, and none else; he teaches Gods Word from him; for God is
made known, and manifest to him in his Covenant; of which he is a Minister
[and servant] for he wills nothing, save what God wills through him.

64. He teaches when God commands him; let it be either to friends, or foes,
in their season, or out of their season; he thinks that God must do in him as
he please; and albeit, that he must therefore suffer scorn, yet it is all one
unto him; if he be honored, and respected of men, he humbles himself before
God, and his brethren; and gives God, and his brethren the honor; and takes
it not at all unto himself; but if they curse him, and strike him on the face,
he thinks thus; I now stand in Christ's estate of persecution; it must turn
[and serve] to the best for me, and my brethren.

65. Lo! Loving Brethren, this is a Christian; and such [a Kingdome] he now
offers to you by the wonderful Sound of his Spirits Trumpet; and there Shall
and Must be such a Kingdom soon manifest, and come into Being, for a
witness unto all Nations of the Earth; of which all the Prophets have
prophesied.

66. On the contrary, he offers to all wicked, unwilling, stubborn men his
Anger, Wrath, and hardening to devour them; and to make an End with Babel; this
say not I, but the Spirit of the Wonders of all Nations.

67. Therefore trusse up thy self in Armor, and lay about thee lustily, thou
Antichristian Babylon, and devour Much Blood; for thou thy self art even he
that destroys, and quite rumes thy self; for thee there is no remedy [thou
wilt take no Counsel, thy own Cain-like fury in hypocrisy, has hardened
thee] also there is no repentance [or mercy] in thy will: But for the children
of God under thee, we have written this; as we have known, and seen it.

68. Now says Babel; Whence shall this people come [and arise] that shall know
the Lord, and live in God; Hear Babel! Among thy Brethren, in the time of thy
affliction, and Tribulation; they are brought forth in their misery; and thou
call them fools, and know them not: Let no man wait for another coming;
the time is already come about; the voice of the Caller and Hearer is already
present; the Covering is put away from this voice; thou art nor this time
called under a Veil, but with open mouth, with clear eyes.

69. This voice of the Crier opens Gods clear Countenance in his children;
and in the ungodly, the Angry Countenance: Seeing they desire fully to purse up
all in Covetousness into self; viz. into the Antichristian Bag; and to bring
the Whore of self, even to the Top of the Babylonicall Tower.

70. The Sign of this Image, and its destruction, is the covetousness, The
mystical and manifest Mark of Antichrist, and his ruin.
and envy: Its Sign stood before in Silver, and Gold; that was the Banner, and
Standard of Antichrist: But now the Banner has changed its self into Copper;
being Mars is the Soul; viz. the Husband in Copper: so that this Mars is given
to Babel for a Banner, and Ensign; which shall Rule till Babel has an End:
and no wicked Man shall know this: and though he carry the Sign in his hands,
yet he calls it only his Loving Companion.

71. But upon the Kingdom that is, and is not, and yet is, shall the Ornament
of Gold be put; for the Prince of the Powers of the Earth has given it to
them. Amen.

Mysterium Magnum. Chap. 38. Genesis 14.
7. ALL war, and contention, arise from the nature and propriety of the dark
world; viz. from the four Elements of Gods Anger; which produces in the
creature, pride, envy, covetousness, and anger: these are the four Elements
of the dark world, wherein the Devils, and all evil creatures live: and from
these four Elements arises war.

8. For although God bad the people of Israel, drive out the Heathen, and to
wage war: yet the Command was wholly from the Angry Zealous God; viz. from
the fires property; for the Heathens had awakened the wrath, and indignation,
which would devour them; but God, so far as he is called God, desires no
war; yea he cannot desire any thing that is evil, or destructive; for he is
according to the Second Principle; viz. according to the light only good, and
giving: and gives himself to all things.

9. But according to the dark worlds Nature, he is an angry zealous God, and a
consuming fire, if his wrath be stirred up: according to this same property, he
desires to consume, and devour all that moves, and enkindleth it self
therein: And from this property, God bad Israel fight, and smite the Heathens;
for his Anger was set on fire in them: and was as wood cast into the fire,
which the fire desires to consume.

10. Therefore the wrath of God bad one Nation slay another: that it might out
of his wrath be taken away: otherwise the fire of his Anger would have
enkindled it self; as happened to the five Kingdoms of Sodom, and Gomorra: Thus
the Wrath of God did satiate it self in the life of the wicked, which it
devoured into it self; in that they slew one another.

11. As it yet now adays so comes to pass, that oftentimes men cry unto God,
for to give them success, and victory against their enemies; that they might
murder them; but God gives them not victory therein, but the sword of his
Anger, which they awaken with their prayers, and will: were they true Men, and
children of God, they would need no war; for the holy Spirit wageth not
war; but he only loves, and gives peace; but according to the property of
Anger he consumes all ungodliness; and is yet thereby only blown [or
stirred] up, etc. --

14. Thus we must understand, how the children of the Saints have waged war
against the crew of wicked men; and drove them out; viz. in the Angers
Property, which managed its sword by them, to blot out the Heathen, and
Generation of Ha^: for Abraham went out with his whole house, and People,
against the Heathen, who had carried away Loath his brothers, Son captive; and
he smote the Heathen, and delivered his brother: This was done in the zeal of
God; which thus delivered his children through the might of his Anger; for what
conduces to the wicked for destruction, that conduces to holy men for life,
and deliverance.

15. But that those, who will be called Christians, (who ought in, and with
Christ to be dead to the Anger, and Wrath of God in Christ's death) do wage
war: they do it not, as Christians; but as Heathens; no Christian warreth;
for if he be a Christian, then he is dead in, and with Christ's death to the
four Elements of Gods Anger in Self; and borne a new man in Christ's Spirit of
Love; who lives in righteousness, in love, and patience; and not to himself,
but to God in Christ.

16. For a true Christian leads his conversation, and will in Heaven, in the
life, and spirit of Christ: as St Paul says; Our conversation is in Heaven:
but when the Christians do wage war, they do it from the Heathenish
property, and not from Christ's property; for a Christian is not of this world;
his Kingdom is in heaven: and he is dead in Christ to the world, according to
the new spiritual man in him: the Heathen; viz. the half devilish man, (who
has his Kingdom in this world, who never has room enough upon the Earth; who
lives in the four Elements of Gods Anger; viz. in pride, covetousness, envy,
and wrath) desires in the Christians to war, fight, and kill.

17. St. Paul says; Give your members to be weapons of Righteousness; for why
do men fight? for the Kingdom of this world: and yet Christ said, his
Kingdom was not of this world: so also his childrens Kingdom in him is not of
this world. Now then if we give our body and soul for weapons of Gods Anger,
and seek only thereby Self [interests, liberties, and privileges of Mammon]
and slay one another for the Kingdom of this world; I think we are herein
Christians indeed with the mouth; but the heart, and soul is an heathen; and
not borne out of Christ's Spirit.

18. When Abraham had smote the Heathen, he desired nothing of the goods, which
he took; but restored to the King of Sodom, what the Heathen had taken from
him, and was only zealous in the Lord; he did not fight for Country, and
Kingdom; but to deliver his brother. This was a true zeal, which the Lord
drove in him: he did not stand up, and fight for Country, or City: and albeit
he obtained it; he desired it not, but went again unto his own place. --

Mysterium Magnum. Chap. 51.
44. OUr knowledge must be filled, and abound with the Love of Christ; that we
love one another; else knowledge is not at all available: if I bring not my
knowledge with the Desire into the Love of God, wherewith he has Loved us in
Christ; and Love my Neighbor in the Love of God in Christ, with that Love,
wherewith God generally Loves us, and Loved us, when we were his Enemies; then
I have not as yet the Love of God dwelling in me.

45. But how will he Love his Brother, who contemns him for his knowledge
sake: whereas yet God Loved us, when we knew nothing of his Love? If a man has
not this Love of God in him, wherewith God Loved us when we knew him not: why
does he boast then of Gods Adoption? If he be the child of God, then he has
the free Love of God, wherewith God Loves all things; if he has it not, he is
not then yet capable of the adoption. Now then if any one contemns, and
condemns his brother, which has not as yet his knowledge; how can he boast
of the Love of God; wherewith God Loved his Enemies in Christ; wherewith Christ
prayed for his Enemies.

Mysterium Magnum. Chap. 44.
6. WHen God will punish a Land, he first sends them Messengers, and exhorts
them to repentance, and declares unto them his Grace: soon after he sends them
the Angel of Righteousness, who tries them whether they be capable of the
grace, that is tendered to them; and represents unto them judgment, with
threats of their ruin: also with denouncing of great war, and plagues, that
he will blot, and root them out, if they do not Return and Repent; and
shows them by his Messengers the light, and way of Righteousness; and
suffers them to run on in the light, that is tendered to them; till they be
weary and glutted; and hold it only for a common thing, and an history, and
again become a Sodom.

7. And then he sends them both Angels together, to wit, the Angel of
Righteousness, and the Angel of truth; and first threatens them, and exhorts
them, and sets the judgment before them; but when they are wholly a Sodom,
he leaves off from the outward Figure, and lets them fill up their measure;
and then it seems as if the Sun was risen upon their Sodom; and now it should
be good: but even then says the Angel of truth in his children, hasten, and
go out, the punishment, and ruin is at hand.

8. Thus we declare unto thee Babel; that God has already long since sent
thee Messengers, and with the declaration of the Gospel, has tendered thee his
grace; and therewith also has mightily threatened thee, with the punishment of
thy ruin; but thou have made a contentious disputing Babel of the light of the
Gospel, and art now the well-fatted Sodom.

9. And know for certain; that the Lord for a farewell has now sent thee two
Angels: one has the Truth in him, and bids Loath with his daughters to go out
from Sodom; and the other has the Severe judgment; and has now at last
sifted thee; and turned thy inward Signature outward, and set it before the
Lord: and thy Murtherous Thy Cain-like crying for ruin upon others. The
pregnant brand of hypocritical Cain, or the seeming holy Antichrist in Babel.
Cry is come up before the Most High, and it is exceeding great: He has sent
his Angel to destroy thee, and to overturne the Cities.

10. Thy Signature wherewith thou art outwardly marked, is the great
covetousness, and envy; together with thy evil ammunition-money: and thy
great Wrathfullnesse, of thy Oppression of the poor, and miserable, in that
thy covetousness has scrued it self aloft, desiring to devour all into it
self; whence thy great enhancement of all men's Whence the scarcity, and
deernesse of Commodities do arise. Also the neglect of the poor and
miserable; desperately forlorn in body, and soul; a crying sin.
Necessaries is risen.

11. But thou say; now it is good, and prosperous; the Sun is risen upon
me, and shines on my purse, so that I can fill it as I please; it is a good,
and fine time for me: it shall now be good: I shall surely enjoy it, and arise
in high authority, and be respected.

12. But hear now, what at present the sound of the Trumpet declares: it
says, Go out from Sodom; the Anger of the Lord is enkindled; the Sun is
risen in Love, and Anger; this we will not hide from you: the Angel of truth
has now already taken Loths daughters, together with the father, and his wife,
by the hand, and bids them go out; it is time: this thou shall soon see by
woeful experience.

13. For the Angel of Anger has also taken thee into judgment; and therefore
thou art so wrathful, covetous, murtherous, and wicked; do but behold thy
self, whether we speak Truth: thou gettest to thy self much to spend in thy
Signature; yet thou haste a storehouse [or provision] in the Abyss: he that
can see; let him see; in whom there is but the least inckling of the Trumpets
sound: let him go out of Sodom: there is no longer any tarrying, etc. --

Mysterium Magnum. Chap. 43.
67. BY this Figure this present world may behold it self; for as certain, and
as true, the Preaching of Loath was true, and the punishment followed thereupon;
so certainly shall the punishment also of the sixth Seales-time (which seal is
even now at hand, and has already opened it self) suddenly follow.

68. But that the warning hereof came so long ago; declares, and shows,
that the time of the sixth Seal in its Manifestation, is the most wonderful of
all the six Seals; till the Seventh Seal, which is yet more wonderful; for
it is the end of this world, and the last judgment.

69. Let this be declared unto thee Babel, A mystical Mark or Figure, whereby
he shows to Babel, the pouring forth of the sixth Seal in wrath upon her
mystery of iniquity: and also the Time, etc.
under the voice of the Open Seal of this sixth time, although thou contemnest,
and deridest it, it hitteth thee; and has already Stricken thee with the
obdurate obstinacy of Wrath, which has thoroughly sifted thee, in the
Appearance of the Message of these two Angels: and shall now be hinted only to
some few; which shall go out, and be delivered with Loths daughters.

70. The hardened Ensnared, or apprehended.
surprised crew is already judged; for the sifting sword has apprehended them;
they run as people raving; as enraged, and out of their wits, in pride,
covetousness, and envy, and contemn what the Angels Trumpet sounds.

71. This is the cry which the Angels Trumpet sounds; Go out from Babel; go
out from Babel; go out from Babel; she stands apprehended, and captivated in
the Flaming sword. Amen.

Mysterium Magnum. Chap. 45.
12. TO thee, O! Germany, it is now shown (and also to those Nations from whom
thou art borne, with the Name of Christ) that thou have for a long time walked
under the Mantle of Christ with an heathenish heart, and boasted of the
adoption, but only lived in the iniquity of the flesh; that thy judgment is
at hand.

13. For the Angel of the judgment calls aloud in the sound of the Trumpet,
to the residue of Abraham's children in Christ; go out from Sodom: Abraham in
Christ is departed from you: ye have no more of Christ than an empty breath;
and a disputing, verbal lip-labor: a mockery; whereby one brother does
contemn, scorn, and mock another for Christ's knowledge sake; and only
kills Christ in his members. The City Jerusalem, and Babylon, wherein thou
have gloried [and proudly perked up thy self in thy devout hypocrisie] shall
go to ruin. Amen.

14. Lo! a Star shines from the East, and North, which shall blindfold thee;
and break down thy walled Towers, and strong Holds in Jerusalem, and Babylon:
for thou art called no more Jerusalem, but Babel: and the children which fit in
the shadow of the night, and which lie imprisoned in Babel, shall be delivered,
and come forth, and enter into the City of God, which he has set open to all
Nations and Tongues of the Earth; that his glory may be known; a light for all
Nations [or People.]

313. The Conclusion to the second Apology to Baltasar Tilken, verse. 313.
I Entreat you all, that read, and hear this, not to shut up [or harden] your
hearts: look upon the Time; and consider it seriously: do but behold in what
Time, we and our Fathers have lived: namely, in mere brawling, contention, and
strife. What is the world ( viz. Man) bettered, and amended by contention [by
the letter-learned disputations, and controversies, about God, Christ, and the
way of Worship?] Nothing at all; it is become more profane, lewd, disdainful,
and scornful.

314. He is grown only worse and worse in his life, with the Manifestation of
the Gospel; and by reason of the contentions [and different opinions] of men,
one brother has despised, persecuted, and hated another; what fruits have you
now of the Gospel, which you should have [or manifest?] Must not the exceeding
precious Name of God, be a cloak for the cunning mischief of men.

315. Be not the Modern Titular Christians, so also Turks, Jews, and
Heathens, all alike in life [and conversation?] What does the Name of Christ
avail you, when as you live as Heathens? Think ye that it is enough, that
you know that Christ dyed for sin, that you need only flatter, and comfort
your selves with Christ's death; and hug and embrace the false Man, that is
only proud, and a contender.

316. Cannot ye learn what will suddenly follow hereupon: ( viz. this) that
being you are all alike in life, and will; you shall also be accounted alike
before God. And seeing that men do seek only contentions, wrangling
disputes, and fightings; it must come to such a confusion in the Controversy;
that one People devour another.

317. For God withdraws his hand from the Nations; seeing that they will not
suffer his Spirit to reprove them: and the Anger has taken hold of its sword,
and desire, and drives mightily in the minds of men; that one People do
destroy, ruin, and devour another: What our Fathers have brewed with
revilings, and scoffings; that shall their children drink out with swords, and
fightings.

318. This God does therefore permit, because men do use and abuse his holy
Name, for a pretext to swear [covenant, and make devout shows in hypocrisie],
and are only selfe-willed in the knowledge of his Name, and will; and uses
his Name only to slander [and forge complaints, and accusations against
others] insomuch, that one brother has only despised, and contemned another
for the knowledge of his Name: whereas in his knowledge he ought to seek his
good in Love: and go before him with an holy life.

319. What are the Titular Christians now better then Turks, and Heathens?
When as now they live as Turks, and worse then Turks, and Heathens: Where is
the Christian, and Evangelicall fruits?

320. Every one says; It will be We shall have an happy peaceful time; Our
Privileges and Liberties shall be settled, and all reformed, etc.
Good: when this Evil [or grievance] is blown over: but I declare unto you in
true knowledge, that it shall not be Good, but only worse, and worse: except
that every one does turn into himself, and incline his heart, and mind, to
Love, Concord, and Unity; else one People shall devour another: and the
Nations shall consume, desolate, and destroy themselves: and there shall be
such a lewd, and wicked world, that they shall be unworthy to be called Men.

321. This they shall do to one another; and there shall be a general mixture
[and confusion] of People in the strife ( Note.
no party better then another) till the Anger of God does fulfill, and satiate
its enkindled fury; and the Nations bring themselves into deepest destruction,
and misery. Then shall thou see, and learn to know thy self, what thou have
been in thy pride: when thou art naked; and shall seek the Lord in thy misery;
and see what evil thou have done to thy self.

322. Therefore my Loving Brethren; Seek only the The experime^tall
indwelling knowledge of Christ, attained only in the New Birth.
Pearl; all ye who have a mind to escape the Anger of God; do not look one
upon the life of another; but upon his own; for it is not said any longer
Dispute; but either turn, or perish.

323. The Time of disputing, and prating is out; ye can never come further
with disputing; but with the Regeneration in the Spirit of Christ, you shall
reach, and obtain the Pearl; so that you shall never need dispute, and
contend.

324. Let every one be in good earnest; and seek himself in himself; and see
what he is; and think with himself how he may seek the good of his brother
in Love: let him depart only from covetousness, and pride, and be contented
with food, and raiment, and set his trust upon God, who gives rain, and
blessing.

325. We take with us Nothing from this world; why do we wrangle and contend
about that which is vain, and fool away that which is everlasting: Note.
it must come to this pass, or in truth it shall yet be worse; and that People
that will not aim at this mark, must be wholly consumed, and devoured;
shows the Spirit of Wonders.

326. This Loving Sirs, and Brethren in Christ, who read, and use my Writings,
I have imparted to you, upon consideration of my D. Balthazar Tilken.
Adversary; and exhort you as a Brother, and also my Adversary: that you would
compare my Writings with the holy Scripture; but in the Scripture seek nothing
else, but the Fatherly Love-heart of Jesus Christ: then shall you well find
from what Spirit I have written.

327. But he that has not a mind to do this; let him let my Writings alone;
for I have written nothing for him: I have writ them for my self, not minding
how it should go; know not also how it comes about, that they be so spread;
and wonder as well as you at what the most High does.

328. Mark it I pray; and become seeing; for the day dawneth; if you will
learn to understand my Writings aright; then you shall be freed from all
Contention; and learn to know your selves; yet the bare Letter is not able to
do it; but the living Spirit of Christ only; the way is faithfully shown you.

329. Now do what you will, the harvest is at hand; that every one shall
enjoy, what he has gathered into his Barn: I speak from the bottom of my
heart, in all seriousness, in my knowledge given to me of God: and commend me
into your brotherly love in the Precious Name of Jesus Christ. 3 July. A. D.
1621.

330. Shout unto the Lord all Lands, and Praise him all People, for his Name
goes over all Mountains, and Hills: He springs up as a plant, and goes
forth in Wonders: Who will hinder this? Hallelu-jah.

FINIS.

