Forty Questions of the Soul concerning its Original, Essence, Substance,
Nature or Quality, and Property, what it is, from Eternity to Eternity.

Framed by a Lover of the Great Mysteries DOCTOR BALTHAZAR WALTER, and Answered
in the Year, 1620.

by Jacob Behme called Teutonicus Philosophus Englished by John Sparrow.

In the first Question is contained, an Ex^^ation, of the Philosophic Globe,
or Won^^ Eye of Eternity, or Looking-Glass of ^^sdom, being ONE half Light or
Dark Glob half Eye with a Rainbow about it, parted; ^^th the Halves reversed, A
Cross, and Heart, ^ppearing in the Center, with the Abyss every ^here, within
it, and without it, in Infinity, ^^ being the Looking-Glass.

^^ed for L. Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhil, 1663.

To the Earnest Lovers of Wisdom.
THE whole World would not contain the Books that should be written of Christ,
if all that he did, and spoke, should be Written of him, flowing from that
Fountain of Wisdom which dwelt in him; What then can be expected in a little
Preface? but some few Observations of the footsteps, and Paths of Wisdom, and
they are set down here, as they occasionally presented themselves to the
Thoughts of him, who desires to be made fit for the acquaintance with the
Lowest Scholar in her School.

Many have been her Scholars in their own way, which Nature has inclined them
to; or God, in them that have kindled the Divine Nature, and so have been made
partakers of it in their Souls: We may perceive the Excellency of every one of
them by that which has been left for a Record behind them, and their fitness
to be followed in Order till we shall attain the highest Pitch we are capable
of.

Since the true Grounds of the ancient Wisdom have been hidden in the Dark
Writings of the wise Men of former Ages, some in this latter Age have
endeavored to reform the Errors that have risen from the want of knowing those
grounds from which they wrote: The Writings of that Learned SELDOM, are eminent
in this kind, among others, by which means, the true Fame, and Glory of
Learning, has been in some good part restored again; as also by contriving
means to direct the way, to raise the several kinds of knowledge from the is
own true Basis and Foundation.

The Renowned, Sir Francia Bacon Lord Verulam Vicount St. Albans, laid his
foundation sure, and raised his building high; by his Instauratio Magna, he
taught men, first to free themselves from the Idola Mentis humanae, and then
laid down the whole process of the Mind, from a Natural and Experimental
History, to raise a Natural Philosophy: which does show the way to compose a
Divine experimental History, to the building of a Divine Philosophy, or
Mystical Divinity.

Comenius also, by his Pansophia, designeth the best way to educate all from
their Childhood so, that in the shortest time they may get the highest Learning
their Natures can attain to.

Pellius in his Platform concerning the Mathematics, does design to raise the
Principles, or whole Structure of that Art, out of every ones self, without the
help of Books or Instruments, by a Treatise he calls Mathematicus (...);
which may well be transferred to a Philosophus, Medicus, Legislator,
Jurisperitus, Politicus, Theologus, Theosophus, (...).

Also that strict inquirer into Truth, Comes Castri Insulae in his Book De
Veritate, teaches the true progress of the Mind in finding the certain
infallible truth in all things.

Des Chartes does lay the foundation of his Philosophy in such Grounds, and
Principles, as are undeniable to him that does but consider what is in his own
Thoughts.

These and some others in their kind, have gone as far, as the Natural faculty
of Man's outward reason can reach; This Author Jacob Behme, esteems not his
own outward Reason, but acknowledges to have received a higher Gift from God,
freely bestowed upon him, and left in Writing, for the good of those that
should live after him.

And in his Writings he has discovered such a Ground, and such Principles, as
do reach into the Deepest Mysteries of Nature, and lead to the attaining of the
highest Powerful Natural Wisdom, such as was amongst the Ancient Philosophers,
Hermes Trismegistus, Zoroaster, Pythagoras, Plato, and other deep Men,
conversant in the Operative Mysteries of Nature, and the Modern, Trevisanus,
Raymundus Lullius, Paracelsus, Sendivogius, and others: by which men will be
satisfied, that not only they have gotten, but that we also may get that Lapis
Philosophorum, the Philosophers Stone, indeed.

Those Principles do also lead to the attaining such wisdom as was taught in
Egypt, in all which Learning Moses had skill; to the Wisdom also which was
taught in Babylon among the Caldeans, Astrologians, and wisemen or Magi, with
whom Daniel was brought up: Also to that Wisdom of the East, from whence came
the Three Magi, Mat. 2. 1. who saw the Star that led them to Jerusalem, and to
Bethlem, where they saw the Child Jesus, and Worshipped, and so returned, with
whom God himself vouchsafed to speak and direct them what to do.

The Ground and Principles in his Writings, lead to the attaining the wisdom,
which excelled the wisdom of the East, 1 Kings 4. 30, 31. which Solomon had,
and wrote in the Proverbs, and in a Book (which has not yet been extant with
us in Europe, but is reported to be found in the East Country some few years
since,) wherein he wrote of all Plants, from the Cedar, to the Moss that
grows upon the Wall, and of all Living Creatures, 1 Kings 4. 33.

His Ground discovers the way, to attain not only the deepest Mysteries of
Nature, but Divine Wisdom also, Theosophie the Wisdom of Faith, which is the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen with the
outward Eyes: this Wisdom brings our inward Eyes to see such things, as Moses
saw in the Mount, when his Face shone like the Sun, that it could not be
beheld: such things as Gehazi saw, when his Master Elisha had prayed that his
Eyes might be opened, (his inward Eyes, for his outward were as open before, if
not more then any of Ours, being he was Servant to so great a Prophet) so they
were opened, and he saw Angels fighting for Israel: such things as Steven, who
saw Jesus sitting at the Right Hand of God; when his Face shone like the Face
of an Angel at his stoning: And Paul, who saw things inutterable in Paradise,
when his outward Eyes were struck blind: such Wisdom as this, sees and knows
all Mysteries, speaks all Tongues of Men and Angels, that Tongue which Adam
named all the Creatures by in Paradise, also it can do all Miracles: for the
enjoying whereof, men would give all their goods unto the Poor, nay give their
Bodies to be burned; so desirable a thing it is, to enjoy it in this Life, but
while corruption sticks to the Soul, it must have Charity, or else this Seed
of Faith will not bear the Fruit of Eternal Life in Paradise for ever, where
there is Nothing but an Eternal Miracle, of which all Miracles on Earth are but
in Part; but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect
shall be done away. This is the Wisdom by which Moses wrought his Wonders above
Nature; and all the Prophets from the First along to Christ, and it is that
which Our Savior Jesus Christ himself taught to his Apostles and Disciples,
and which the Comforter does continually teach the Holy Servants of God ever
since: and by what is written by this Author, it may be believed that both the
same Wisdom may be attained now, and the same Power of the Holy Ghost, by which
they speak and wrought their Miracles, and the Cause discerned why scarce any
has been wrought for so long a while: yes, men will believe that greater
things shall be done, as our Savior tells the Apostles, then they saw him do:
for it will appear, that the Power in one Man, even of one Thought in a Man, is
able to change the whole Universe in a Moment: This Power was in part in the
Prophets and Apostles, who could raise the Dead; and when the time appointed is
come, that all the Dead shall rise, that Power will do it, though it should be
but as a Grain of Mustard Seed in one Man, and restore the whole Creature to
the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God: Surely it will be worth our pains, to
find such wisdom as this.

By the study of these Writings, men may come to know (every one according to
his condition, property, and indination) how all the real differences of
Opinions, of all sorts, may be reconciled; even the nicest Differences of the
most Learned Critics in all Ages; that which seems different in the Writings
of the Profound Magical Mystical Chymick Philosophers, from that which we find
in the Experimental Physicians; Philosophers, Astronomers, may be reconciled by
Considering what this Author Teaches, that the Names which were given to the
Seven Planets, do signify the seven Properties of the Eternal Nature, and are
the cause of all those things, which are by Experimental Men accounted the
first and deepest causes of all.

Also thereby the differences in Religion, may be so reconciled, that the Minds
and Consciences of all doubting persons may be satisfied about Predestination,
Election, Creation, Corruption, Salvation, and Restoration, so clearly, that
all will love one another, and that hard Lesson, to love our Enemies, will be
readily learnt, and Men will quickly Contribute to the studying that one
necessary thing, that Treasure hid in the Field, that Gold of the Kingdom of
Heaven, that Precious Pearl, that All in All, Faith and Love, and Christ, and
God, when they shall perceive that all this lies hid in every Soul, in one
Measure or other, and may be found, and the way set down so plain, that every
Soul may find it.

Thereby the Writings of all Men will be understood, even the very darkest
Mysteries, contained in the VVritings of the Prophets, and Apostles, will be
made plain and easy to the simplest Thirsty Soul; and then when that appears
which is now hidden, that Excellent Glory, every one will not only see it, but
walk in the way that leads to it, and so attain it in the highest Degree of
every ones capacity and capability.

While this Wisdom is growing, it will so reform the Laws, the degrees in every
Nation, that at length, the whole World will be governed in Peace to the joy of
all.

Perhaps some will think this impossible, let them consider, that if they be
told of a Curious City, and of the incredible things that are done there, by
him that has been there, and seen what he relates, and he describe the way so
plain, that they may come thither themselves, will they not go? that they may
know as well as he that told them: do so by this Author; Read this Book
diligently, and seriously, till you apprehend the meaning but of some part of
the way he here describes, which may easily be done, and you will be satisfied
the things are true, and that the way he shows is true, and be able to walk
in it; and also be very thirsty to labor in that way, more and more, till you
attain your whole desire: and then you will keep it as the best Jewel, a
Memorial of all Mysteries.

But let every one read it themselves, whether it be the highest King that
sits upon a Throne, or the meanest Maid that grindeth in a Mill, or hear it
read with their own Ears, if they mean to partake of this so high a gift from
the most High, or else the Devil may easily bereave them of it.

J. S.

To the Reader.
IF we knew the pretiousness of our own Souls, we would confess and acknowledge
with an inward feelingness, the Answer to Christ's Question, when he said; What
shall it profit a Man to gain the whole World and lose his own Soul? Or, what
shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? The Soul is so precious that Nothing
can truly be valued at so high a Rate. To save it is the greatest Gain, to lose
it is the greatest loss: then who will not highly prize the study and
understanding of the way to save it? Christ says, He that will save his Soul
shall lose it, and he that will lose his Soul shall save it: but who
understands this? We know it is the earnest desire of every Soul to be saved,
and to be happy and glorious, but the way is very unknown to us poor fallen
Souls, for we can hardly suppose that losing will be the saving of our selves:
Christ also taught that the way to Glory was through many tribulations and
Death; this way he entered into Glory, and so have all the Blessed from the
beginning of the World, and can no otherwise to the end thereof: but how shall
a Soul know the way to lose and deny it self, so that it may assuredly attain
Eternal Salvation? Let it listen, in its Heart and Conscience inwardly to that
Teacher, which it shall find there, who is God himself: We have the Testimony
of Moses for this; who told the Israelites, The Word, the Commandment is nigh
thee, in thy Heart and in thy Mouth (not the outward but the inward Heart and
Mouth.) As also the Apostle Paul says to the Romans, That Christ the Eternal
Essential Word of God, the Word of Faith which they, the Apostles preached, is
nigh us, in our Hearts and in our Mouths: and in another place he says, Do you
not know that Christ is in you, except you be past reproof, (...) improbi?
Futhermore the Apostle John says, that God is love, and he that loves; God
dwells in him and he in God, which we all perceive is true, for in him we
live and move and have our Being; And this may be known, though the Apostle
Paul had not said so much, for one of the Poets of Old spoke what he knew, and
said, We are all of his Offspring, as the Apostle mentions it: Nay we all
know that be that does well is the Servant of God, but he that does Evil is the
Servant of the Devil who rules in his Heart: And though there is none that
does Good, no not one, nor can do of himself, while he is in this Mortal-Life,
yet through Christ in him, he can desire to do well, and be sorry when he has
been drawn away to do evil by the Lusts of his own Heart, by which the Devil
tempts us to do Evil; but if we will resist the Devil he will fly from us,
if we will leave off to do evil, and desire, try, and learn to do well,
without doubt we shall be able through God that dwells in us: and then he
will teach us all things, and lead us into all Truth by his Spirit. All this we
shall fully understand, and all Mysteries, when God shall manifest himself in
us, if we earnestly desire it with all Humility, selfdenyal, losing of Our
Souls, and being Nothing in our selves; for then God will be All in All, and
nothing is impossible with God: All this, and much more has the Author of this
Answer to these Questions concerning the Soul, found true, and has out of his
inward Mystery manifested many things in this, and other Writings of his, the
knowing whereof will be exceeding useful to the furtherance of the Salvation of
every Soul; which when I had read, I was very much satisfied in my own Soul,
and do desire that others may be made partakers of them, so far as lies in me:
I have therefore taken in hand to put this Treatise into English, which I chose
to do rather out of the Original then out of any Translations, because they
many times come short of the Authors own meaning, and because I found many
Errors in some of them, and he is so deep in his Writings, that we have need
to desire that our Souls may be put into such a condition as his was in, else
they cannot be fully understood: But the same God, that satisfied his desires,
will satisfy ours, if we cast our selves upon him in Our Souls, and let him do
with us what he pleases.

Concerning the Author, I have now published the Brief Translation of his Life,
written in High Dutch by Abraham Van Frankenberg, who was long his acquaintance
and continued so till his death. The Relation is as follows.

A brief Account of the Life and Conversation of Jacob Behme, afterward by
Learned Men in Germany called Teutonicus.
Written in High Dutch, by Abraham van Franckenberg, one very much acquainted
with him.
JAcob Behme was born in the year, 1575. at Old Seidenburg, distant about two
Miles from Gerlitz, a City in Upper Lusatia, highly Esteemed by Learned Men:
His Parents were Jacob his Father, and Vrsula his Mother, both Country people.
In his youth he kept Cattle, and at length by advice of Friends was sent to
School, where he learned to Read and Write, together with the Fear of God;
afterward was put to the Handicraft Trade of a Shoemaker; when he became
Master of his Trade in the year, 1594. he married a Maid, one Catharine the
Daughter of John Kunshman a Butcher of Gerlitz, with whom he lived quietly and
well for thirty years together, and had four Sons, that learned Handicraft
Trades.

Being from his youth inclined to the fear of God, and very diligent in
frequenting to hear the Preaching of Sermons, he was at length stirred up by
that saying and promise of our Saviors, Lube 11. 13. Your Heavenly Father will
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him for it, and because of the very many
Controversies in Religion, about which he could not satisfy himself, he was
moved, in simplicity of Heart or Spirit, inwardly earnestly and uncessantly to
pray or ask seek and knock, that he might know or apprehend the truth; whereby
then according to the Divine Drawing and will in the Spirit or Heart, he was
rapt into the Holy Inward Sabbath of Rest and satisfaction in his Soul.
Sabbath, wherein he continued seven whole days by his own Confession, in
highest Joy. Afterward, when he was come to himself, and having put off the
folly of Youth, he was driven by Divine Zeal, vehemently to reprove all
scandalous reproachful and blasphemous Speeches, and withdrew from all unseemly
matters and actings with earnestness for Love to Virtue: By which way and Life,
being contrary to the course of the world, he became but their scorn and
derision. During which time he mentained himself with the labor of his hands
in the sweat of his Brows, till the beginning of the sixth Seculum or Age, viz.
Anno 1600. when he was a second time touched by the Divine Light, and by a
sudden Glimps of a Pewter Vessel, he was introduced into the Inward Ground or
Center of the Hidden Nature.

He not being yet sufficiently satisfied with this, went forth into the open
fields, and there perceived the wonderful or wonder-works of the Creator in the
Signatures, Shapes, Figures and Qualities or Properties of all created things,
very clearly and plainly laid open; whereupon being filled with exceeding Joy,
kept silence, praising God, and so contentedly satisfied himself therewith for
a while.

But according to God's Holy Counsel, and Determination; who manageth his works
in secret, about Ten years after, viz. in the year, 1610. by the overshadowing
of the Holy Spirit, he was a third time stirred up and renewed by God,
whereupon being so enlightened, with such great Grace bestowed upon him, he
could not put it out of his mind, nor strive against his God, therefore did by
small means, and without the help of any Books, but only the Holy Scriptures,
write secretly for himself these Books following, viz.

(1.) Anno, 1612. the first Book called Aurora, the Morning Redness, or Rising
of the Sun; and being complained of to the Magistrates of Gerlitz, for being
the Author thereof, the Book was taken and laid up in the Council House, with
command to him, that he being an Idiot or Layick, should from thence-forth
forbear such writing of Books, which did not belong to his condition and
employment, upon which he abstained for seven years; but after that, being in
like manner stirred up again by the moving of the Holy Spirit, and being
exhorted to it by the entreaty and desire of some people that feared God, he
took Pen in hand again, and went on to write, and perfected with good leisure
and deliberation these that follow. 2. Anno. 1619. The second Book concerning
the Three Principles, with an Appendix concerning the Threefold Life-of Man.
3. Anno. 1620. A Book of the Threefold Life of Man. 4. The Answer to the Forty
Questions of the Soul, proposed by Dr. Balthazer Walter; in the first Chapter
whereof is contained a Treatise of the Reversed Eye, or Philosophic Globe;
with an Appendix concerning the Soul, the Image of the Soul, and the Turba or
destroyer of the Image. 5. Three Books. First, 1. of the becoming Man or
Incarnation of Jesus Christ. Second. 2. Of the Suffering Dying and Resurrection
of Christ. Third. 3. Of the Tree of Faith. 6. A Book of the small six Points,
and a Book of the Great Six Points. 7. A Book of the Heavenly and Earthly
Mystery. 8. A Book of the Last Times, or of the 1000. years Sabbath, being two
Epistles to Paul. Keym. 9. Anno. 1621. De Signature Rerum, of the signification
of the Signs or Marks of All Things. 10. A Consolatory Book of the four
Complexions. 11. An Apology to Balthazar Tilken concerning the Aurora, and
another to him concerning Predestination, and the Person of Christ and of Mary.
12. Considerations upon Esaias Stiefells Book. 13. Anno. 1622. A Book of True
Repentance. 14. A Book of True Resignation. 15. A Book of Regeneration, or the
New Birth. 16. Anno. 1623. A Book of the Predestination and Election of God.
17. An Appendix to the Predestination, being A Compendium of Repentance. 18.
The Mysterium Magnum, or the Great Mystery, being an Exposition upon Genesis.
19. Anno. 1624. A Table of the Three Principles, or a Key to his Writings,
written to Godfried Frewdenhammern and John Hausern. 20. A little Book of the
Supersensual Life. (21.) A little Book of Divine Vision. 22. A Book of the Two
Testaments of Christ, viz. Baptism and the Lord's Supper. 23. A Dialogue or
Conference between the Enlightened and unenlightned Soul. 24. An Apology for
the Book of True Repentance upon a Pamphlet of the Primate of Gerlitz, Gregory
Richter. (25.) A Book of 177. Theosophick Questions; 13 and part of the 15th
Answered. 26. An Extract out of the Mysterium Magnum. (27.) A Prayer Book,
called the Holy Week. 28. A Table of the Divine Manifestation, or an Exposition
of the Threefold World, to John Sigismund of Sigismund, and to Abraham van
Frankenberg, being at the End of an Epistle concerning the True and false
Light. 29. A Book of the Errors of the Sects of Ezekiel Meths to A. P. A. or
an Apology to Esaias Stiefel. 30. A Book of the Last Judgment. 31. A Book of
several Letters written at several times. 32. A Clavis or Key of his Writings,
being the Exposition of some words.
The Books which the Author finished nor, are marked thus. () In these he has
left so Noble and Precious a Talent and Treasure, for the setting forth God's
Honor and Glory, and for the promoting Man's Salvation, both for the present
and for the future times, that since the times of the Apostles higher and
deeper grounded Mysteries concerning the Deity have scarce been revealed; his
acquaintance for the most part was with Godly Learned People, and such as were
experienced in the knowledge of Nature, with whom he conversed, as also with
some of the Noble men of Lusatia and Silesia, in all fear of God; though some
of the Common Preachers, have not forborne, as their usual manner is, to cast
forth their venom against his Writings, and to stir up the Rude and foolish
People with all manner of Reproach and Scandal: yet the Truth lives still, and
has prevailed, and will at length Triumph in secret.

But he the blessed Jacob Behme the Teutonick, at Gerlitz in his House, near
the Waterside of the River Neisse, Anno. 1624. the 18. Day of the Month of
November, new-stile, about the sixth hour in the Morning, being the 24. Sundy
after Trinity, after he had heard most exceeding lovely sweet Music without
his Chamber, and being refreshed with the Holy Use of the Testament of Christ
at his Supper, his Sons and some Good Friends praying and weeping about him,
with these his last and Comfortable Words,

Now go I hence into Paradise. Meekly and gently sighing, blessedly departed in
the fiftieth year of his Age.

After the Preaching of the Funeral Sermon, he was buried in the Churchyard at
Gerlitz, and upon the Grave a Wooden Cross was set with this Mystical
threefold Figure graven upon it, viz.

An Eagle with a Lilly-Twig.

A Lion with a Sword.

A Lamb with a Mitre.

The Superscription over the Cross was this,

V. H. I. L. I. C. I. V. That is,

Vnser Heil Im Leben Jesu Christi In Vns. In English thus,

Our Salvation is In the Life of Jesus Christ In Us. Which was J. B. Motto, or
usual speech, and Superscription in his Letters.

Also these words were the Inscription of the Cross.

Born of God.
Dead in Jesu.
Sealed with the Holy Spirit.
Rests here Jacob Behme of Old Seidenburg.

Note. 1. The Southern Eagle, stood upon a high Rock, and with one foot trod on
the Head of a Serpent, and with the other held a Palm, and with its Beak
received a Lilly-Twig reached forth-out of the Sun.

2. The Northern Lion was Crowned, and signed with a Cross, and held in the
Right foot before, a fire-flaming-Sword, and in the Left a fiery Heart, and
rested with the hough or hinder part of the Right Foot behind upon a Cube, and
with the Left upon a Globe.

3. The Lamb with a Mitre, walked meekly and quietly between them both in the
Meadows, and by the Brooks and Rivers of Grace.

His Seal or Stamp was a Hand out of Heaven with a Lilly-Twig.

In the Memorial Books of good friends, he used to write these Verses.

Text.

Weme Zeit is it wie Ewigkeit,
Und Ewigkeit wie die Zeit,
Der is it befreyt von allem streit.
Englished.

To whom Time is as Eternity,
And Eternity as Time,
He is freed from all strife.
The outward Form of his Body was almost of no Personage, he was lean and
little of Stature, with a Forehead very much inbowed, high Temples, somewhat
Hawk-nosed, his Eyes were Gray and very Azure, otherwise as the Windows of
Solomon's Temple, he had a short thin Beard, a small shril Voice, an amiable
pleasing Speech; He was modest in his Behavior, humble in his Conversation,
and meek in Heart; his highly enlightened Spirit is to be discerned by his
Writings in the Divine Light.

The following Relation was taken out of a Memorial of Michael Curtz,
concerning what happened at the Departure of the Blessed Jacob Behme.
ON Sunday (November 18.) early in the Morning, he called his Son Tobias, and
asked him: If he heard the Excellent Music, he said, No; then he spoke that
the Door should be opened, that the singing might be the better heard;
afterward he asked what the Clock had stuck, and was told it had struck Two, he
said, It is not yet my time, three hours hence is my time; In the mean while he
spoke these words once.

O thou strong God of Hosts, deliver me according to thy Will.
O thou Crucified Lord Jesus Christ, have Mercy upon me, and receive me into
thy Kingdom.
When it was near about six, he took leave of his Wife and Sons; blessed them,
and said, Now go I hence into Paradise; He did bid his Son to turn him about,
sighed deeply, and so very meekly and quietly departed from this World.

PREFACE.
Then follows in the former Preface Printed, 1647. Thus.
IF it were not for the great Fruit that I conceive may grow to every one that
studieth it; I should be sorry that I am the Instrument, to make such things
known in my Native Language; and much more unwilling it should be published to
the view of so many various Minds, as are now sprung up: But my hope is,
Goodness will get the upper Hand, and that the Fruits of the Spirit will
prevail to the subduing of the Lusts of the Flesh: Now I readily submit to the
Censure of those who have that good desire; and of those who are not proudly
and perversely wedded to their own conceits, (when they have considered this
Authors meaning) whether this will not be as beneficial to us as it has been
to other Nations: Indeed my Mind is led to think, that our troubled doubting
Souls may receive much Comfort, leading to that inward Peace which passes all
understanding; that all the disturbing Sects and Heresies arising from the
Darkness and Malice of Men and Devils, will be made to vanish and cease, by
that understanding which may be kindled in them from it: they that rule will
perceive how to effect all their good purposes, to the joy and happiness of
them that are subjected to their Government; And Subjects will soon learn to
obey in every thing, as the Primitive Martyrs did, though they should live
under such Governors as they had: So God shall be glorified by all men's love
to one another, and Peace will flourish over all the Earth.

It may be some will think it so hard to attain the understanding of this
Author, when they read the Answer to the First Question (which is far more
difficult then any of the other, because it contains the sum of them all in
brief) that they will forbear to take so much pains as they suppose is
requisite; but if it should prove a little harder then other writings, the
profit will countervail the Labor with a hundredfold advantage; yet let every
One read it themselves, or hear it read with their own Ears, that others
misreport, hinder them not from so great a benefit, and they shall no doubt
attain it, for I am convinced by my own Experience, that every one may receive
according to their vast or narrow Capacity, who have according to my own
Measure been satisfied, though I be

One of the unworthiest of the Children of Men, J. S.

Before the Catalogue to the 40. Questions was this Preface to the Reader.
THe Author wrote this Answer to these Questions, chiefly for his Friends sake
that sent them to him, as also for the Benefit of all such as love the
knowledge of Mysteries: this Friend of his was Doctor Balthazar Walter, who
traveled for Learning and hidden Wisdom, and in his return home, happened to
hear of this Author in the City of Gerlitz, and when he had obtained
acquaintance with him, he rejoiced that at last he had found at home in a poor
Cottage, that which he had traveled for so far, and not received satisfaction:
then he went to the several Universities in Germany; and did there collect such
Questions concerning the Soul, as were thought and accounted Impossible to be
resolved sundamentally and convincingly: which he made this Catalogue of, and
sent to this Author, from whom he received these Answers according to his
desire, wherein he and many others that saw them received full satisfaction.

When this Book was first Printed, I endeavored by a Friend to present one of
them to his Majesty King Charles that then was, who vouchsafed the perusal of
it; about a Month after was desired to say what he thought of the Book, who
answered that the Publisher in English seemed to say of the Author, that he was
no Scholar, and if he were not, he did believe that the Holy Ghost was now in
Men, but if he were a Scholar, it was one of the best Inventions that ever he
read. I need not add the Censure of any other Person: knowing none to compare
with this one way or other.

This Author may be easily understood in every thing, by such a Consideration
as this which follows.
THis outward World is to the outward Man, the best Looking-Glass to see what
ever has been, is or shall be in Eternity. Our Minds and the Cogitations
therein, are our best Inward Looking-Glass, to see Eternity exactly in: In God
are all things, therefore every thing has been in all Eternity in God both
unmanifested, and manifested only to himself in himself: but in the world and
in our Minds they are unmanifested and hidden, and also Manifest or capable of
being manifested in their real Truth and Existence, both as they are
uncreaturally in God, and Creaturally in all things. Accordingly one Text says,
Romans 1. 20. The Invisible things of him, that is, his Eternal Power and God
head or Deity are seen by the Creation of the World, being considered in his
works. Romans 1. 19. And another says, Whatsoever is possible to be known of God,
he has manifested in Man. John 17. 3. And it is life Eternal to know thee the
only True God, and him whom thou have sent, says the Son of God himself Christ
Jesus. The Eternal infinite Powers both of Light and Darkness in their own
Immensities in God have always been the same, and have Eternally wrought the
same effects, and produced the same Substances Spiritually, and Invisibly to
any thing but God himself, which they are Manifested to do in the invisible
inward world of God, Spirits and the Minds of Men, and in this visible outward
world; So that we may truly learn to know him who is all things, in our inward
and outward World: all things that are manifested come out from him, and when
they cease to be manifested, they enter into him again as into their Center
unmanifested: So he is the cause of all Causes, and when we know how he causes
any thing to be, as it is manifested to be in it self, then we understand the
Thing, and him that is the cause of it: his works in all things whatsoever are
good, and cannot cease to be so, but when a Creature to whom he has given the
power of the World to come, does use it otherwise then its true property
requires, that only becomes evil in and to the Creature not in God. But God
being every where present in his Total fullness, as himself says, Am not I he
that fills all things? therefore the highest cause of every thing must needs
be in the thing it self. The inward heavenly and Hellish Looking-Glass is in
all our Minds, and outwardly we want not a Corporeal Looking-Glass of
whatsoever is Eternal to instruct our Minds withal. So that if we consider all
the Works of God in the World, both inwardly and outwardly, we cannot but find
and know him, and so know all things in our selves and in Him, and him in our
selves, and in all things else. This I thought convenient to hint in brief as
an Introduction of the mind into the Center of All Mysteries.

John Sparrow.
Sunday, December, 18. 1664.
ERRATA.
FOrty Questions, Jacob Behme p. 2. l. 7. r. such new Presace v. 2. r. Learned
Caldeans. v. 9. l. 10. r. also of that v. 10. l 8. for Beheme r. Behme.
Question 1. v. 3 l. 9. r. Mystery, to v. 22 l. 1. r. First, there is. v. 66.
l. 6. f. one r. none v 77. l. 3. f. discetneth r. discovers. v. 171. l. 10.
f. in r. into. v. 183. l. 7. for r. *. v. 190. l. last r. own self Are and wit.
v. 216. l. 10. Marg. r. half Circles. l. 12. f. one r. on. v. 222. l. 17. f.
world r. word. v. 253. l. 2 r. * One. Margin *. l. 5. f. turns r. turned. v.
254. l. 1. r. or the total. l. 19. Marg. l. 7. for parts r. Parrots v. 256. l.
7. r. Sulphur. l. 9. r. Magia. v. 257. l. 4. f. Magi^k r. Magic. v. 260. l. 4.
f. bears r. boweth. v. 278. l. 5. f. right r. Light. v. 287. l. 5. r. Christ's
Flesh. v. 327. l. 8. r. God put out the Inward. Q. 4. v. 9. l. 2. f. breaths
r. breathed. q. 6. v. 10. l. 8 f. Natue r. Nature q 6. v. 14. l 4. f conanteth
r concenteth. v. 15. l. 4. Marg. f Stolyen r Stoltzen. q. 7. v. 9. l. 5. Marg,
f Wondelt r Wandeit. q. 11. v. 5. l, 4. f Carnal r Council. 16. f Prime r
Prince. q. 11. v. 6. l 4. r Mymick. q. 12 v 27. l 2. r should. l 3. r. to
fill. q 12 v 32 l 9. f have r hear. v 40 l 6 f Charity r clarity. q 14 v 13 l 4
r Self-Desire. q 17 v 19 l 2 f yet r let. v 20 l 2 f the r Thee. l 6 f them r
thou. v 11 l 4 r to, and depend. v 25 l 3 r the Harvest. q 18 v 5 l 1 f they r
then. l 6 f one r and. v 11 l 4 r receives. q 21 v 3 l 1 f Seeks r Sees. v
23 l 5 r taken in. q 23 v 7 l 4 r thereby. v 10 l 11 f cease r seiseth. q 24
v 17 l 4 r Chest, we say. q 26 v 19 l 7 f their r them. v 22 l 2 r acts. q 30
v 17 r of the world. v 39 l 3 f breaking r breathing. v 50 l 8 r such short
words or answer. r 56 l 7. f been r here. q 32 v 15 l 3 f Megia r Magna. v 20
f keep r know. q 35 v 1 l 5 r herein. v 6 l 3 r Distinguish. v 37 l 2 r Self
up. q 36 v 18 l 2 Marg. f Was^er r Wasser. v 26 l 3 f and r as. q 37 v 5 l 4 f
winking r working. q 40 v 10 l 5 r Lises-Essences. Appendix v 6 l 5 r it is. v
29 l 3 r Imaged. v 31 l 9 r or is. v 33 l 5 r Imaging. v 34 l 1 f Men r Man.

The TABLE of the Forty Questions.
1. WHence the Soul existed at the beginning. 2. What the Souls Essence,
Substance, Nature, and Property, is. 3. How the Soul was created to the Image
of God. 4. What the Souls breathing in, was, and when it was effected. 5. How
the Soul was properly formed and fashioned. 6. What the Souls power or ability
is. 7. Whether the Soul be corporeal or not corporeal. 8. In what manner the
Soul comes into Man, or into the Body. 9. How the Soul does unite it self with
the Body. 10. Whether the Soul be Ex Traduce, and propagated humanely and
corporeally, or every time new created and breathed in from God. 11. How and in
what place the Soul is seated in Man. 12. How the enlightening of the Soul is.
13. How the Soul feeds upon the Word of God. 14. Whether such a new Soul be
without sin. 15. How Sin comes into the Soul, seeing it is God's Work and
Creature. 16. How the Soul is kept in such union or connection, both in the
Adamical and Regenerate Body. 17. Whence and wherefore the opposition of the
Flesh and Spirit is. 18. How the Soul departs from the Body in the Death of a
man. 19. Whether the Soul be mortal or immortal. 20. How the Soul returns to
God again. 21. Whither the Soul goes when it parts from the Body, be it
happy or unhappy. 22. What every Soul does, whether it enjoys or rejoices it
self till the Day of the Last Judgment. 23. Whether the wicked Souls without
difference in so long a time before the Day of Judgment, feel any ease or
refreshment. 24. Whether men's wishes benefit them or sensibly come where they
are. 25. What the Hand of God and the Bosom of Abraham, is. 26. Whether the
Souls departed, take care about men, their friends, children and goods, and
know, see, like or dislike their undertakings. 27. Whether they know and
understand this or that art or business, whereof in the body they had good
skill. 28. Whether also they can certainly know and get any more skill in
Divine, Angelical, Earthly, and Diabolical things, than they had in the Body.
29. What their Rest, Awakening, and Clarification, is. 30. What the difference
of the livings and deads Resurrection of the Flesh and of the Soul, is. 31.
What kind of new glorified Bodies they will have. 32. What furthermore in the
other life, their form, condition, joy, and glory, is. 33. What kind of matter
our bodies will have in the other life. 34. Of the miserable and horrible
condition of the damned Souls. 35. What the Enochian life is, and how long it
will continue. 36. What the Soul of the Messiah or Christ is. 37. What the
Spirit of Christ is that was obedient, which he commended into his Father's
hand? 38. Of those things which shall be done at the End of the World. 39. What
and where Paradise is, with its Inhabitants? 40. Whether it be mutable, and
what it will come to be hereafter?
The PREFACE of J. B. to Dr. Belthasar Walter.
BEloved Sir, and my good Friend, it is not possible for Outward Reason, or
Reason judging on things discerned no further than by the outward senses.
Reason to answer to your Questions; for they are the greatest Mysteries, which
are alone known to God.

2. For as Daniel faith to King Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. 26. to the 30.
That which the King asks and desires of the Learned Chaldeans,
Astrologians, and Wise men, Genesis 41. 16.
is not in their power; only the God of Heaven can reveal or manifest the
hidden Thing. It is not in my Reason to answer the King; but that the King may
perceive the Thoughts of his heart, God has revealed it, not that my Reason is
greater than of all them that live.

3. So say I also to you; you shall be answered, not that my Reason is greater
than of all them that live, but that you might perceive and obtain the thoughts
of your heart, your earnest seeking and desiring, it is given to me to answer
you.

4. And you should not in According to the Reason of the outwardman.
such a way so eagerly seek after such things, for it stands in no outward
Reason; but to the Spirit of God nothing is impossible: and seeing we are the
Children of God, and in Christ born again in God, surely the Son must needs see
very well what the Father does in his house's and also learn his skill and work.

5. And seeing we our selves are the Mysteries of God, shall we not so much as
look upon them, as if we ought not to meddle with such Mysteries, as Antichrist
in folly forbids us; for none apprehends any thing of God's Mysteries
unless it be given to him: and St. James says, chap. 1. 17. Every good and
perfect Gift comes from above from the Father of Lights, in whom there is no
alteration nor shadow of change.

6. But seeing you seek these things so vehemently, you are even become the
cause of finding them; for God gives his Mysteries both by means and without
means; but that none might boast, he oftentimes uses very mean people in it,
that it may be known to come from His Hand.

7. You shall be answered with a very firm and deep Answer, yet comprised in
brief, not according to outward Reason, but according to the Spirit of
Knowledge.

8. And though I could have fully demonstrated these things, and set them down
in a larger description; yet seeing they are all plentifully enough described
and explained in my other Writings; I pass them ever now briefly for the
delight of the Reader, and that this may be a brief Memorial of the great
Mysteries.

9. But he that desires to know these things fully, and from the ground of
them, let him seek in the The Aurora, 1. Three Principles, 2.
foregoing Writings, especially in the Threefold life, 3.
Third Part, where he has the whole ground of the Divine Substance; as also of
the Creation of all things, of that which is Eternal; and also that which is
temporary or transitory; and how all has come to be, and act as it does; and
what it will come to be at last.

10. Wherein lies the Mysterium magnum the great Mystery, so far as a Creature
is able to apprehend or bear. Thither I would have you directed for further
Explanation, and commend me to you in Christ, into the Brotherly Love.

Anno Christi, 1620. Jacob Beheme, Called Teutonicus.

The First Question.
Whence the Soul Existed from the Beginning of the World.
1. WE have sufficiently in the Three Principles.
Second and Threefold-Life.
Third Book, explained the Mystery of the Soul, by the Three Principles of the
Divine Substance; where we have described the Eternal Center of the Eternal
Nature; as also the Number Three of the Divine Substance, with many
circumstances; and what Eternity has ever been; and how the beginning of the
Creation came to be; what an Angel and Soul is; as also the heavy Fall of
Lucifer, and then both the Mothers that have so brought it forth; the one
generating the Heavenly Substantiality, the other, the Hellish or, Abominable
substance.
Abomination; also of Light and Darkness.

2. Therefore in this Treatise we are not so very easily to be understood,
unless the Third part of our writings have been read and apprehended.

3. Although that Apprehension does not at all consist in humane power, yet the
way to it is very faithfully shown; so that if any have a mind to attain it, if
he will follow our counsel and advice therein, he will well get a The holy
Spirit.
leader and directer, that will show him the Key the Mysterium magnum, the
great Mystery, to the noble Stone Lapis Philosophorum the Philosophers Stone,
and to all Mysteries, let none account it impossible; for Mark 10. 27.
with God All is possible; whosoever finds God, finds ALL with and in HIM.

4. Ye know from or in Reason, that all things are sprung and come forth out of
the Eternity: and the Scripture tells you, Romans 11. 36.
In God are All things; 2 Cor. 5. 18.
in him we live and move; Act. 17. 28.
and we are all of his Offspring.

5. And though indeed we cannot say of God, that the pure Deity is Nature, but
Majesty in the number Three; yet we must say, that God is in Nature, though
Nature does not contain or comprehend him, as little as the Air can contain or
comprehend the glance or shining of the Sun; yet we must needs say, that Nature
is generated in his Will, and is a Seeking, proceeded out of the Eternity:

6. For, where there is no Will, there is also no Desiring: But there is in
God, an Eternal Will, which is Himself, to generate his Heart or Son; and
that Will, makes the stirring or the exit out of the will of the heart, which
is a Spirit: so that the Eternity stands in Three Eternal Different or
distinct kinds or manners of Subsistences.
Forms, which are called Persons, as we have very exactly explained it in the
Threefoldlife.
third Book.

7. And since we see and know, that there is not only Light and Majesty, but
also Darkness, as is plain before our eyes.

8. Therefore we ought to know, from whence Darkness originateth; for in the
Eternity without or besides Nature, no Darkness can be; for there is nothing
that can afford it; we must only look into the Will, and into the Desiring; for
a Desiring is an attracting.

9. And whereas yet in the Eternity it has nothing, but only it self, it
attracts it self in the Will, and makes the Will fall; and that is its
Darkness.

10. Whereas otherwise if it were not desirous, it would be nothing but an
Eternal stillness without Being or Substance; the attracting therefore makes
Mobility and Essence, which otherwise in the stillness cannot be; and therefore
also it makes austere astringency, hardness, and grosness, as also sharpness.

11. Yet we cannot say neither, that the Darkness swalloweth up the Light, viz.
the Eternal Liberty: for that which is Eternal, suffers not it self to be
altered or changed: but we must say, that Light and Darkness are IN One another.

12. Now the Light is good, and has pleasant virtue or power; and the Darkness
has austere or astringent, hard, cold; and the Wills Desiring, makes Essences
and attracting, that is, a stirring in the hardness: thus the attracted
stirs from the drawing, and is a whirling, whereby in the sharpness, Light
and Darkness become mingled.

13. And thus we are to consider, how the free Light in the sharp stirring, in
the Substance is also sharpened, where we understand the Fire flash of
Lightning, and the earnest severity, and yet cannot say that any rending
asunder is there:

14. For that which is Eternal from no beginning, has no parting of one from
another, but stands as a Wheel or Orb, or Sphere, or Globe of Looking-Glass.
Wheel, that generates it self in it self; as you have a similitude of it, in
the Mind of a man, where there is indeed a will of rising and flying, but no
departing away; and the greater the will is, the greater also is the substance,
and the more Or, express.
potent is the matter or the thing represented, seeing it is sharpened.

15. Thus seeing the still liberty, which is neither Light nor Darkness,
becomes sharpened in the sharp desiring and attracting, so that it appears as
a flash of Lightning that shines.

16. Therefore also we cannot say, that the Liberty holds or captivateth the
Light, for from Eternity it has had nothing: but we may well say, that the
Light and the Glance shines in the Liberty.

17. For that which is Or, transparent.
free, lets in the Light; but that which is not free, as the harsh or
austere astringency, which makes Darkness, and is Material; spoken after a
spiritual manner, that receives not the Light.

18. But we may well say, that which is meek, and not holding or contracting,
receives the Light: as ye see in water, which receives the Light, and the
harsh astringent Earth, not.

19. Also ye have in FIRE a sufficient Or Example or Instance.
apprehension of the Substance of all Substances; for ye see that the Fire
burns out of a harsh astringent, tart, matter, for it is the sharp Desiring,
which thus as a great Anguish enters into it self, and graspeth after the
Liberty, whereby it catches the Liberty as a flash, and with the Lightning
kindles it self, so that it burns or flameth.

20. And though in the Eternal Substance no such Fire is to be understood, as
shines in the Outward, yet it is so in the Inward, in the harsh astringent
Desiring, and the outward remains a darkness: therefore is the Eternal Fire
in the outward, dark; and within in it self, in the will of the Eternal
Liberty, it is a Light, which shines in the still Eternity.

21. Now we understand in the Fire, Ten Or distinct manner of differences.
Forms, which are all generated in the Will, and are all the Eternal Wills
propriety, therefore we rightly say, it is God's; and the Liberty, which has
the will, is GOD himself; for it is the Eternity, and nothing else.

The First Form.
22. First, Th^^ there is the Eternal Liberty, which has the Will, and is it
self the Will. Now every will has a seeking to do or to desire somewhat; and
in that, it beholds it self, and sees in it self in the Eternity, what it
self is; it makes to it self the Looking-Glass of its like: and then it
beholds it self, what it self is: and so finding nothing else but it self, it
desires sit self.

The Second Form.
23. The Second-Form is, that it is Desirous, and yet has nothing but it self;
therefore its desiring draws the Or Representation.
Model: of its will in it self, and impregnateth it self, so that a darkness or
Or, a shadowing every where, to make the representation of figures, as blak
shadowings or drawings on white, or shadowings of all colors, to represent
things lively by, And this is done in the Mind as to all Representations.
overshadowing comes to be in the will, which the will yet would not have; but
the Desiring, the Seeking makes it, and there is nothing that can consume or
drive away the Desiring.

24. For that which is before the Desiring, beyond or besides the seeking, is
Free and a Nothing, and yet it Is; but if it were any thing apprehensible or
comprehensible, it were a Substance, and stood again in a substance, that did
afford it: But being without Substance, it is the Eternity, that is the GOOD;
for it is no source or pain, and has no alteration or change, but is a Rest
and an Eternal Peace.

25. But seeing the great Space is without ground: or foundation, where is no
number nor end, and also no beginning, therefore it is like a Looking-Glass. It
is ALL, and yet also as a NOTHING: it beholds it self, and yet finds
nothing but an A that is its eye; AVge signifies an Eye in the German Tongue.
AVge.

26.
AV: That is, the Eternal Original that something is; for it is the Eternal
Beginning, and the Eternal End. Thus the Abyss sees in it self, and finds
it self.

27.
The A is below, and the V is above; and the O is, AVge, the Eye, and yet is in
it self no Substance; but thus is the Original of Substance: there is neither
below nor above, only its Looking-Glass in the AV is thus a seeing.

28. But since there is no ground, therefore its Looking-Glass is such an O Eye
AVge: For God himself says in the Apocalips, Rev. 1. 8. I am A and O, Alpha
and Omega, the Beginning and the End.
I am A and O, the beginning and the end; the first and the last.

29. GOT in the German tongue is GOD.
Observe this according to its precious intimate sublimity; for we speak not
here in Nature, in a form, but in the Spirit above Nature, in Character GOTTes,
in God's Character or Letter. T.

30. The O is, GOTTes AVge, God's Eye, the Eye of Eternity, that makes and is
a Looking-Glass, and is a round circle like a globe,, not a ring, O. Since we
cannot otherwise describe it, thus understand hereby; the Globe of the
Eternity, wherein stands the ground of Heaven and Earth, and of the Elements,
together with the starry Wheel, Sphere, or Globe.
Wheel or Sphere;

31. For that is a Globe like an eye, and is God's Wonder-Eye, wherein from
Eternity all Substances or things have been seen or discerned, but without
substance, as in a Looking-Glass or Eye; for the Eye is the Eye of the Abyss;
of which we have no pen or tongue to write or speak, only the Spirit of
Eternity brings the Souls eye thereinto, and so we see it, else it would
remain in silence mute, and undescribed by this Hand.

32. Thus there is in the Eternity such an Eye, which is God himself, and yet
is not called GOD, but Eternity; yet as to the Eye, is A and O. Before the A
there is NOTHING, and in the O there is ALL; and in the A and O beginning and
end: therefore we fundamentally apprehend, that in the O there is a Will, and
the Will is the O it self, and makes the A; viz. the eternal beginning of the
Seeking; so that the Abyss beholds it self, and so in it self makes a Or
Figure.
Form like a Globe.

33. For the Eye finds no ground or foundation, therefore it closes it self
up as in a Looking-Glass, into a round Globe, so that it is the Eternities
similitude, that can it self find it self; for in the Abyss there is no
finding, for there is no Or Circumscription.
place or limit, but only the Abyss; and when thus it finds it self in the
Eye, yet then it finds nothing but the Eye, that is the Globe.

34. Now the Eye makes the Globe, and is the Globe; and all this is together
in the Will to seek it self, and so to see what the Eternity is, which becomes
manifest or revealed in the Eye.

35. For the Eye makes a beginning and an end, and yet there is nothing that
affords it, but in gives or affords it self, and is from Eternity in
Eternity, and the Eternity it self; it touches nothing, for it is in nothing,
but in it self.

36. Now being there is a Will, which is the Eye, which Or contains.
holds or retains the eye, therefore that holding is a Desiring, viz. of
the Eye, and so the Desire is attracting into the Eye, and yet nothing is there
but the Eye, and the Desiring only draws it self in the Eye, and impregnateth
the Eye with that which is attracted, so that it is full, and yet is nothing
but a darkness of the free Eye, although the Eye becomes not dark, but the
Desiring in the Eye, impregnateth it self in it self.

37. The will of the Eye is still or quiet, and the desiring of the will makes
it full, and the Eye remains free in it self; for it is from Eternity, free:
and that we call the Eternal Liberty in all our Writings.

The Third Form.
28. Now a Desiring is sharp and drawing, and makes the third Form; viz. a
stirring in it self, and is the original of the Commonly called Qualities.
Essences, that in the Eye and Will, Essences are.

39. And yet the Will cannot endure that it be drawn, for its own right
property is to be still, and hold or retain the Eye in the Circle in the Globe,
and yet cannot defend it self from the drawing and the filling, for it has
nothing whereby it can defend it self, but the Desiring.

40. And here originateth the Eternal Enmity and opposite Will. The Will,
wills not to be dark, and yet its desiring makes it dark, it endures the
stirring readily, for it is its manifestation or revelation, but the in drawing
and darkning it does not love; though indeed the Will becomes not drawn nor
darkened, but the Desiring in the Will impregnateth it self.

41. But now being the Desiring sticks in the darkness, therefore there is a
great Anguish, for it becomes stirred and drawn, and also darkened, and vexes
it self in it self, and desires the Liberty, and draws so eagerly after the
Liberty, and wills to draw it self into the Liberty, and yet makes it self
only the more eager rough and hard, and is like a horrible sharpness, which is
consuming; viz. of the Darkness;

42. For it graspeth the Liberty into it self, but is so sharp, that it
appears in the Liberty as a flash of lightning, which consumes the darkness,
together with the eagerness: Therefore says God, Deuteronomy. 4. 24. and Chap. 9. 3.
Heb. 12. 29.
I am a consuming Fire.

43. Here understand, how all Matter stands in the right Fires, Might; and
how the Mat. 3. 12:
Floar shall once be purged, for that is the original of the Fire, which has
ALL Might and Power, for it consumes whatsoever the desire has made, be it
Stone or Earth: for it is the sharpness of the Eternal Liberty, and gives or
affords, Centrum Naturae the Center of Nature.

44. But that you may search yet deeper, know that the Fire in it self
originally stands in Three Forms, viz. First, In the Desiring; And then,
secondly, in the Matter of that which is attracted, viz. in the Darkness, in
which is Substantiality from the attracting: And Thirdly, In the Anguish-source
or Pain.

The Fourth Form.
45. And the Fourth Form makes it self; viz. the Flash of Lightning, for the
Liberty causes that, and that is the kindler of the Anguish-source: for the
Desiring in the Darkness wills only to have the Liberty; and the Liberty
being a light without shining, is therefore like a very deep Blew Color mixed
with Green, so that it cannot be discerned plainly what color it is of, for
all Colors are in it; and the Desiring in it self in its eager anguish and
sharpness, breaks the colors, and makes in it self the terrible consuming
Flash of Lightning, and changes it according to the Anguish, so that it
becomes Red.

46. Yet the Liberty in the Desiring, suffers not it self to be bound or
held, but alters it self from the Red flash of Lightening in the Light, into
a Whose Color is Yellow.
glance of the Majesty: and that is in the Liberty, an exulting great Joy.

47. For in the Light, the Eye becomes manifested or revealed; as also the
Substantiality in the Will, where then it becomes apprehended what Light or
Darkness is. And thus the Eternity becomes apprehended, And thus originateth
God's Holiness into wonders continually evermore, and from Eternity, and has
neither limit nor beginning; for it is an Eternal Beginning; comprised and
framed into Nothing but into the Wonders, which are its own substance, wherein
there is neither limit nor number.

48. And thus in the still Eternity, is nothing apprehended but the glance of
the Majesty, and the Spirit which is generated in the Will, and is the
Government in the Majesty.

49. Beloved Sir and Friend, understand the sense aright; we mean not that the
Birth or Geniture takes hold of the Liberty externally without it self, but in
it self in the Center, it takes hold of it self in it self, and makes Majesty
in it self; and yet there is no barring in, but is as when out of Death or
Nothing a life comes to be, that thus dwells only in it self; and that is
called a Principle; and that wherein it dwells, is called Nature, and has
Seven Spirits or Forms: as is to be seen in our Three Principles.
Second and Threefold Life.
Third Book.

50. Yet the Principle has but one Spirit, which is the life of the Principle;
and has also but one Will, which is the filling of the Eternity, with the
glance of the Majesty.

51. For the Principle is the power or virtue, generated out of the will of the
Eternity: and the entrance or eternal beginning of the Power, is the Powers
Life and Spirit, which brings the Essences of the Genetrix, and opens the
Original of the Majesty.

52. And the whole Eye which has thus comprised or framed it self into a
Looking-Glass in the A and O, is ALL: it is the Eternity, and brings forth in
it self in the Eye, the Majesty, which is the heart and power or virtue of the
Eye; and also brings forth the Spirit, which in the heart goes forth out of
the Power, out of the fiery-light-flaming Essences.

53. Thus you understand the holy Number Three in one Substance; that the
Father is the Eternity without ground, where is NOTHING, and yet there is ALL;
and in the Eye of his glance or luster he sees himself, that he is All: and in
the Power of the Majesty, he feels himself, and tastes himself, and smells
himself, that he is GUT, GOOD; that is, that he is GOT, GOD, although the The
Tan or Cross.
T, viz. Schwa'rigkeit, the hardness, heaviness, solidity, density, or
ponderosity.
Weightiness, originateth in the Center.

54. And in the Spirit, is the stirring in the Power, and the Multiplicity
without ground and number, wherein an eternal unsearchable Multiplicity does
exist, and all in the Power.

55. For that which has no ground, has no number, and is no closing up, or
comprehension, or shutting in; and that which is within it self, is not
apprehensible out of it self; but as to the Spirit it is feeling indeed. Thus
the Inward drives forth out of it self, and manifests or reveals it self
in Figures, else God would NOT be known or apprehended.

56. Thus God is together ONE Spirit, and stands from Eternity in THREE
Beginnings and Ends, and only in himself; Jer. 23. 24. 1 Kin. 8. 23, 27.
There is no place found for Him; and he has also nothing in himself that is
Psalm. 86. 8.
like unto Him: also there is Nothing that can seek or manifest any thing more,
than HIS Spirit, which always it self, from Eternity in Eternity manifests it
Self.

57. He is an Eternal Seeker and Finder; as, viz. of himself in great Wonders;
and what he finds, he finds in the great Power: he is the opening of the
Power: nothing is like unto Him, and nothing finds him, but what inclines or
gives it self up in him, that goes into him, that which denies it self that
it is, then is God's Spirit therein ALL; for it is A will in the eternal
NOTHING; and yet is in ALL, as God's Spirit it self is.

58. And this, My beloved Sir, is the Highest Mystery, and therefore if you
will find this, seek it not in me, but in your self; but not in your Outward
Reason.
Reason, that must be as dead, and your desirous will, in GOD, and so it is
Phil. 2. 13.
the will and deed in you, and so the Spirit of God brings your will into it
self, and so you may well see what GOD is; and what Spirits child this Hand is,
out of which Spirit, it writes.

59. And I exhort you brotherly, that you would not so toylsomely seek it; you
will not fathom it so with searching, although you are known and beloved of
God: and therefore also this is given you for a Rule or Measuring-line.

60. Yet I have no power without me to give you; only follow my advice, and go
out from your toylsome seeking in Reason, into God's Will, into God's Spirit,
and cast the outward Reason away; then is your Will God's Will, and God's
Spirit will seek you within you.

61. And then finding your Will in it self, it reveals it self in your Will,
as in its own; for if you give up that, then that is its own, for it is All;
and when it goes, then go you forth, for you have divine Power; all which you
then search, IT is there IN, and nothing is hidden to it; thus you see in its
Light, and are its own.

62. Let no fear deter you, there is nothing can take it away but Your
Imagination, let not that into your Will, and then you will work God's Wonders
in his Spirit; and acknowledge me as a Brother in him, else I shall be as one
silent or mute to you. I say this of good will.

63. And since we thus write of the Eternity, to satisfy you at length in your
will and desire concerning the Soul, which is even our purpose in God's Spirit
and Will; we will first clearly show you the Ground of the Soul, also its
Original, and so open your Eyes, that you may be released from your toylsome
seeking.

64. For you have even to your Old age labored in this kind, and as I
understand, have not yet found out the profound deep Mystery in the Spirit: but
seeing it is God's Will, that you should know and apprehend it, and that it is
given to you as a reward of your labor, see that you receive it and use it
aright, and Mat. 7. 6.
cast not the Pearl before Swine, which are not worthy of it; also in Eternity
will not be worthy of it.

65. For that which is herein revealed unto you, belongs unto God's Children;
therefore be faithful, and trade with it according to the Spirit, and not
according to The Reason or the earthly desire of the outward Carnal Man, of
mortal corrupt flesh and blood.
Reason.

66. For it is so subtle, that it endures not that which is earthy generated,
in Covetousness, Pride, or vain boasting and glorying in self: although you are
one of them, yet look into whom you pour Oil, for it is Poison to many; let
themselves seek as you have done; but give the Children their bread, that they
may eat, and praise Our Father in Heaven: to that end it is given you.

The Fifth Form of Fire in the Eternal Will.
67. Thus having opened to you an Entranoe and Looking-glass of the Eternal
Original, whence the Eternal Fire originateth, and what it is; so it is
necessary also further to show you, according to the highest Depth, what the
Eternal Nature in its propagation is.

68. Wherein then Two Kingdoms are to be understood; the one a good and
pleasant one, the other an evil and fierce wrathful one, an eternal envious sad
one. After which two, the Philosophers from the beginning of the world, have
continually sought and labored; but the time of finding has not been yet born.

69. But now it is, so that the hidden thing shall be found, not by me alone,
but by many who will be faithful, and humble themselves in God, and seek in his
Spirit and Will. It will only be found in God's Eye, else no where: therefore
let none enter into any other thing with seeking, else he finds the Devil.

70. Seeing then the Eternity is thus, which yet is NOTHING; but therein is
Light and Darkness, Life and Spirit, which is ALL; therefore there is and must
be in both a seeking, viz. a desiring continually to find it self, where yet
there is nothing that can find but the Spirit.

71. Now seeing it has nothing that it finds, and yet also the Desiring
eternally goes forward, therefore the Desiring is a figure of the seeking
Will, a similitude according to God's Eye, and is a Lookingglass of the Eternal
Eye, which is called God.

72. Now this is in Two ways, one according to the Light, and one according to
the Darkness; for the Seeking is in both, and yet there is no departing of one
from the other: thus the Light is in the inward, and the Darkness in the
outward; whereas yet the most inward of all, is also the most outward; but the
Light is the middlemost.

73. For it is in nothing, therefore it cannot be the innermost of all, for it
has no place or limit, it is its own finding, which the Darkness finds not;
but the will in the Darkness, which desires the Light, that goes forth out of
the Darkness, and that stands Eternally in the Light.

74. Now the Light's desiring, sets before it self a Model of its likeness,
wherein the Eternity stands revealed or manifested, viz. all and every thing
which the Spirit in the Eternal Power of God from Eternity in Eternity finds
in it self.

75. That Model is not God, the Eternity it self, for it begins it self in
the Spirit, and is the Spirits wonder, which it from Eternity seeks and
finds, and stands in Gods Eye as a Figure, and all Wonders of the Abyss of
Eternity are therein, and become seen in the Light of the Majesty, as one
Wonder in many endless Wonders.

76. And that is an Image of God, a Virgin full of purity, and chastity, and no
Genetrix, for the holy Spirit alone opens the Wonders in the Power.

77. But this Virgin is God's Similitude, his Wisdom, wherein the Spirit
discerns it self, and always and in Eternity opens it self therein again;
and the more is opened, the more is therein.

78. For it is without Ground and Number, as also unmeasurable, as the Eye of
God it self is: there is Nothing like it, also Nothing can be found that may be
likened to it; for it is the Eternal Similitude of the Deity, and the Spirit of
God is its Wesen, matter or work.
substance therein.

79. It is a Circle and Model, which opens to us our mind, so that we behold
it, and God IN it, for our will is cast into it, and it stands in our will;
and therefore speak we of God, and see him in himself as in that which is our
own, according to the hiddenness of the Humanity; which Seeing is very highly
dear and precious.

80. Thus we should also speak as concerning the Darkness, which is in it self
a bolting in, and there being nothing to bolt, it bolteth it self, and
generateth it self, and is its own Enemy to it self, for it makes its own
source or pain without Ground and Number, and has no Giver that bestows it,
but the Darknesse's own Form.

81. And that originateth from the First Desiring, where the Desiring
attracteth into it self, and impregnateth it self, so that it is a stinging
bitter astringent, or harsh, hard, cold, fierce, wrathful fire-spirit; for the
Desiring makes astringent, austere or harsh from the attracting in the Will,
and the attracting is stinging, and the suffering is bitter, which the Will
wills not, and thereupon in it self goes forth from the sting, and makes a
Principle of its own; in which the Majesty appears.

82. Thus existeth in the bitter suffering, the great Anguish, whereas yet
nothing is there that suffers, but it is in it self thus, and it is its own
Life; and if this were not, the Glance of the Majesty would not be neither, the
one is the cause of the other, for in the Darkness is the flash of Lightning,
and in the Liberty the Light with the Majesty.

83. And this now is the parting, that the Liberty is a still nothing; which
Liberty receives the Light, and makes the Darkness Material, whereas yet
there is no substance of palpability; but dark spirit and power, a filling of
the Liberty in it self, understand in the Desiring not without, for without is
the Liberty.

84. Therefore is God the most secret, and also the most revealed; and that is
Mysterium magnum, the great Mystery. Thus the Abyss is also secret, and yet
revealed, as the Darkness is before our eyes; but the source or pain is
unsearchable, or unperceptible, till the will Immerseth.
diveth thereinto, then it becomes felt and found, when the will loses the
Light: and herein lies the ground of right believing, or true Faith. Let this
be told you ye Teachers in Babel.

85. Since then there is an Abyss, which is called the Ground, in respect of
the comprehension of the Darkness, where the source or pain is as a cause of
the Life within: for the fierce wrathful slash of Lightening, is the awakening
of the Life; whereas there is nothing there but in it self, therefore it is
also a Desiring, and the Desiring is a Seeking, and yet can find nothing but a
Looking-glass, and a similitude of the dark, fierce, wrathful source or pain,
wherein nothing is.

86. For it is a Or, Representation.
figure of the earnest, severe, fierce, wrathful flash of Lightning, and of the
sharp and strong Might, which is God's, according to which he calls himself,
Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
a Consuming Fire, and an Angry, Zealous, or Jealous God.

87. This Looking-glass is also without Ground, without Beginning and End, and
yet has an Eternal Beginning and End, and is the Eternal Only Cause that the
Abyss is Blew Dusky and Fiery. It is the Cause of the Stars and Elements; for
the Firmament is the other or second Looking-glass generated out of this.

88. Since then there is in all things a Threefold Source, one whereof is the
others Looking-glass, Generating and Cause, nor thing excepted, All stands
according to the Substance or Working of the Number Three.

89. Now seeing there is a Looking-glass in the Abyss, wherein the source or
quality beholds it self, therefore that also is a figure and image of the
source or quality, which stands before the source or quality, and acts or
generateth nothing, but is a Virgin of the source quality or pain, wherein the
fierce Wrath of the flash of Lightning discovers it self in infinity without
Number, and continually opens its wonders therein, with the bitter spirit of
the stirring Essences, which in the flash of Lightening has its Life, so that
it goes swifter than a Thought.

90. Though indeed the THOUGHTS of the Creatures stand and move herein; and the
Spirits of all living Creatures are with their Root standing herein, every Life
according to its Principle.

91. And in this Spirit of the fire-flash, stands the Great Omnipotent Life,
for it is consuming, as the flash of Lightning consumes the Darkness, and that
Fire all things, and yet continues a Life in it self, but it is an Hunger and
Thirst, and must have Substantiality, else it continues a Dark Hunger-fire, a
will of devouring and having Nothing, a will to rage, prick and find nothing,
but it self, out of which cause the Substantiality, viz. the Water, as also
Sulphur is generated and generateth it self from Eternity to Eternity.

92. Here seek the first Root of the Soul, viz. in the Fire-Life, and the
second, in the Light-Life in the Majesty, and then you will find God's Image
and similitude, and the greatest Mystery of the Deity lying therein.

93. Since then there is such an Eye of the fierce Wrath, wherein the earnest
severe stern fire-life originateth, yet is not at all sundred from the
Fire-Life, it is One and the same Life, and has Two Principles; for it burns
in a twofold source or quality, one within another, and is One Spirit in Two
distinctions with two Wills, the one dwelling in the Fire, the other in the
Light.

94. And know for certain assuredly that the Dark Fire-Life is the the Abyss
of Hell, for it is the stern severe Anger of God.

95. And seek it not so, as Babel the great City of Confusion upon earth has
sought, which yet we blame for nothing else, but her negligence and
inconsiderateness, seeking self-honour and power, and so has captivated her
self in the fierce wrathful Anger of God, which has had her a long time under
its Wonders, and drawn many souls into its source or quality. Consider well of
it.

96. In the Threefold Life.
Third Part of our Writings, it is largely described, for that is somewhat
easier to reach than this; but this is the deepest Ground of Eternity, as much
as a Spirit can be capable of, for more it CANNOT bear, yet it may be expressed
much more at large, but not more deeply, for it is comprised in the Abyss in
both Principles; as indeed a Soul originateth in the Abyss in both Principles,
and in the spiritual Will in the Eternity.

97. And therefore if it be not circumspect, the Devil may easily ride upon its
Chariot, viz. upon its Will; but if it be circumspect, and casts it self into
the Into Good Desires.
Will of the Majesty of God, then the holy Spirit of God rides upon its will,
and it is his Chariot.

98. Herein you may clearly discern Heaven and Hell, Angels and Devils, Evil
and Good, Life and Death, if you but search after it, as we shall further
mention to you.

The Sixth Form of Fire.
99. Thus then seeing Two Principles stand in One Substance, as none with
reason can speak against it; for every Life stands in Poison and Light, every
one in its own Principle, according as it has the Source or Fountain Quality,
so has it also its Light. Thus it may be discerned concerning the Sustenance
of the Life; what that is which sustains or preserves the Life, that it starve
or famish not, and what drives forth its Source or fountain Quality, that it
may subsist Eternally.

100. Now this also is in Two distinctions; for the Light-Life has its source
or fountain quality, and driving forth; and the Fire-Life also its source or
fountain quality, and driving forth, each in it self; but the Fire-Life is a
Cause of the Light-Life; and the Light-Life is a Lord of the Fire-Life: and
herein lies the Mysterium magnum, the great Mystery.

101. For if there were no Fire, there would also be no Light, and also no
Spirit; and if there were no Spirit that did blow up the Fire, then the Fire
would smother and extinguish, and would be a Darkness; and so one without the
other would not be; thus they belong both to one another, and yet they sever
one from the other, but without flying away; and yet there is a flying of the
Spirit.

102. To be understood, thus look upon a glowing red hot Fire; First, There is
the Matter out of which it burns; and that is the astringent austere source
attracted bitter Substance, which stands in an anguish Source or Quality,
whether it be wood or whatsoever else, which is a dark Body.

103. Now when that is kindled, then a Man sees three Principles; 1. The Wood
in the Darkness, with the outward Source or fountain Quality of this World; 2.
Which also has its life, else it would not take fire.

104. Now the Fire has a fierce wrathful, astringent or sour, strong or stern,
bitter thirsty desirous Source or Quality, a devouring Consuming, and the Great
Bitterness is its right Life, a rager and a wakener, that has all Essences of
Life in it, and is also the power of the Life, and of the Driving forth, else
there would be no Burning:

105. And that makes the great Anguish-seeking after the Liberty, and in the
Fire it attaineth the Liberty, for it consumes in the fierce wrath, the
Darkness and also the Matter of the Fire, from which the Fire burns.

106. And here we apprehend the One only Spirit, which parts it self into Two
Principles, into Two Spirits, yet not assunder, but one flying from the other,
and yet the one comprehends not the other; and one is the Life and Cause of
the other.

107. And therefore it is Two Principles, since it gives or affords a
twofold Source or fountain Quality and Life; and is but one Root which
affords that: the one gives Life, the other gives food to the Life; and
this is a wonder, and yet Not a wonder, for there is nothing that it self can
wonder at, for it is it self all things in One Substance.

108. Now behold, the Fire is first the seeking, to draw into it self; that is
the Substantiality, the Phur; for the Seeking makes that in the Desiring, in
respect of its drawing, else Nothing would be; and the Drawing is the bitter
sting, a Breaker, which cannot endure the Substantiality, nor will not endure
it; and that not willing to endure, is an anguish in the will, to overpower the
Substantiality with the bitter Sting; and the Anguish penitrateth or presses
into it self, and reaches after the Liberty, and the Liberty is esteemed a
Light in respect of the Darkness.

109. Now the Anguish is a horrible Sharpness; and thus is the Liberty
captivated and sharpened, so that it is a Fire-flash of Lightning; and the
Anguish Will in the sharpness of the bitter Flash of Lightning consumes the
Substantiality, be it wood or any thing else.

110. And when it has consumed it, then is the Anguish again a Darkness, and
the Flash of Lightning remains hidden in it self again, and is an
extinguishing; and the Anguish is in the Darkness, viz. before the flash of
fire, and stands now in a terrible Source or fountain Quality, where the
Bitterness in respect of the rough attracting, becomes continually generated
the more terrible

111. Now observe, this is thus according to the outward Principle of this
World, as is undeniable before our eyes: and so then there is in the Eternity
such a continual subsisting Substance, which we demonstrate to you thus.
Observe and consider the Depth, and read here diligently.

112. The sinking down of the Anguish in the eternal Darkness, is an eternal
Hunger and Thirst, and an eternal Desiring, and the Darkness in it self,
attaineth in the Eternity, Nothing that it can have out of the Eternity for its
satiating or fulfilling; therefore it is rightly the very Hunger and Thirst of
the Abyss of Hell, and of the Anger of God.

113. But the will in the Anguish, being it can reach or find nothing, it
makes to it self a figure and a similitude in the Desiring, with the stern
strong drawing; and the strong, astringent, bitter, dark Substance, is the
material Similitude it self; it devoureth it self, and is it self the Matter of
the Fire, that so the Eternal Flash continues perpetually, and the fierce
Wrath is continually and eternally ever burning, and burns eternally out of
the Darkness, and has its own Life it it self, viz. the bitter Sting of the
Anguish, which raveth and rages, and is the stirring and original of the Life;
and that is a Principle*

114. And understand herein, the Eternal desirous seeking, an Eternal
Covetousness; and yet having Nothing but it self, an Eternal Envious Enmity, a
seeking of the Essences, wherein then the innumerable and unsearchable
Multiplicity in the Will is continually generated, and an eternal craftiness or
subtilty, a continual climing up in the Hunger, and an eternal finding in the
Will; as namely, of the Similitude of its desiring, the Similitude of the
Essences, and in the Flash that is revealed or manifested; for the Flash
raises up it self Eternally above the Darkness; and in the Flash are the
Essences, and are continually brought into the Will.

115. Thus is the Fire-will a seeking of the rising Pride, a contemning of the
Darkness, it contemns its own Root; it is a covetous one, and wills to
devour more then it has, or, then is its right; It has all Lust; for the
desirous Essences become revealed or manifested in the fire; and thence it
comes, that in every will of every Essence, there is again a Center of a whole
Substance.

116. And that is the Cause of the Creation of this World, in that the Model
has thus appeared in A Looking-Glass from Eternity, and has stood in the
Eternal Essences in the Or representation.
Figure, as in a Vigin without generating, and has been seen in the Light of
God: And thence originateth the Matter of the Earth, of the Stars and Elements,
also all Art, Wit or Ingenuity, Craft or Subtilty, Deceit, Falsehood,
Covetousness and high-mindedness, in the Creatures of this World.

117. For this World is a material seeking out of the Eternal, and is in the
Creation, viz. in verbo Fiat, in the word Fiat, through the Water-Heaven,
become material and palpable; as is to be seen in Earth and Stones: And the
Firmament with the Elements is still the seeking, and seeks the Earthly, for
it cannot reach back into the Eternal.

118. For every substance or thing goes forward, so long, till the End finds
the Beginning; then the Beginning swalloweth up the End again, and is as it
eternally was, except this, that the Model remains; for the Model is out of
the Eternal, out of which the Creation went forth into a Substance, like the
Wonder-Eye of God.

119. Also it is mentioned to you, that the Spirit-Air, thus originateth out of
the bitter eternal Fire-Spirit, which also goes forward after the Wonders in
the Will of the seeking of the Essences, as of the Stars, and therefore it
makes a whirling about, and comes from many places; as, from above, from
beneath, from this side and that side, and often as a Wheel, all according as
the Fire-seeking, with the Essences of the Stars, become kindled.

120. And this is together as a wheel of the Mind, and has its own
Will-Spirit, and an Own Self-Life, and an own Will, and therefore it is a
Principle, and stands so long, till the End-findeth the Beginning; then the
Beginning takes the End into it self, and makes the Middle, and whatsoever
was done therein, manifest or revealed: as you should, and will well consider
of this, unless you be foolish Virgins.

121. Also this Dominion stands no longer, then it is in the Number of the
Creation; for every Day of the Creation, is a Circle of a Revolution in the
Eye, ^
and has its Number; whereof Ten is the Cross X, the highest Number: and Man
has the Number Ten, 10 times Ten, viz. A hundred 100. and in the Crown of
Paradise, the number Thousand, 1000. and in the eternal Substantiality in the
Divine Center of the Majesty, it has No Number, O.

122. Now see aright with good clear eyes; God created in six Days this World,
with all Substances or Things, and it was finished in the middle of the Sixth
Day, past Noon, toward Evening; then began the Rest on the Sixth Day, and the
Sabbath was the Seventh Day: Thus the Eternal Rest found the Beginning of the
Creation on the Sixth Day after Noon, that was the End; there came the
Beginning and End together into one, and it was manifested what God had made in
the Days.

123. Now since Man has destroyed the Angelical Body through his Imagination,
and has introduced it into a corruptible Number, viz. into the Outward
Principle; therefore he is also therein, for he has lost the Paradisical
Number, and is set in the hundredth, 100, Number, where indeed also in the
Outward Life, his Leader or Conducter is given to him; that is, he has given
himself to himself; therefore his Number of finishing in the Circle of the
outward Principle, is clearly apprehensible to us.

124. If we fundamentally know, the Hour of the Sixth Day, in which the
Creation was finished, we would set you down the Year and Day; understand of
the last Day, for it stays not one Minute over; it has its Limit, which
stands hidden in the Inward Circle.

125. Therefore know assuredly, that the time is near, for in the sixth Day
afternoon, began the Rest of the Eternal Day, and therefore has God instituted
the Sabbath of the Seventh Day for a Rest, and continual perpetual Remembrance.

126. And as on the Sixth Day toward Evening, began the Rest and the entrance
of the Revelation of the Works of the Creation, where the End has received the
Beginning in again, and so the Six Days in the Circle have stood as a Wonder:
So know this, that ye were created in Paradise, but are gone out of it, and
entered into the Spirit of the fierce wrathful Death, which has now wrought
its Wonders in you above the half sixth thousand year, above 5500 years.

127. And now the End has found the Beginning again, and ye shall see, also
feel and find what the Paradise has been, viz. all those that become generated
or born in God.

128. For the Paradise is become generated or born again; thus spoken after the
manner of Reason, and not in God: but ye cannot escape mortality, also the
fierce wrath in the Flesh, but in the Mind and in the Soul the Paradise
stands now more and more manifested or revealed to the Children of God, and
they have the right taste of the Power.

129. And, no Craft or Subtilty nor Might and Power can keep it back, no
Subtilty can take it away or quench it, nor no Devil destroy it; for the End
has found the Beginning: there is no preventing of it, the Might or Power, and
Falsehood breaks, and there is moreover a waiting for the Bridegroom, for the
Children of God shall become found in Paradise, when the Turba in the fierce
wrath shall be swallowed up. We speak what we dearly and pretiously apprehend
and assuredly know in the Wonders.

130. Thus as abovementioned, (understand us aright) there is generated out of
the fierce wrath of the Anger, out of the Eternal Center, out of which this
World is become generated and created, as a seeking of the Eternal in the
Spirit of this World, in this Principle wherein we now live, and there will
continually be generated, Falsehood, Covetousness, Craft or cunning Subtilty,
Deceit, Enmity in the will, Lying, Murder, High-mindedness, desire of Honor,
own Self-might and power, Art, Wit, the Wisdom of this World proceeding from
Reason; for all is out of this Root, and stands in Gods Anger-Wonders; And
how sine soever Reason and own Self-wit, is, yet it is in the Anger of God, and
springs out of the Abyss.

131. Here behold thy self thou fair World, it is no conjecture, as thou holdst
it to be, it is apprehended in Ternario sancto, in the holy Ternary or Number
Three. And they that cannot reach this Gole or Limit are captivated of
Antichrist, and belong at last to this Lake, out of which they are grown: there
is no time more of lingering, both Doors or Gates stand open; the Turba will
swallow up with it self whatsoever is grown up in it.

132. Thus now observe us, further, concerning the Eternal Fire, and take a
similitude from all fire in this world, for what is in the Eternity, a Spirit,
that is in this world a Substance: Thus ye see that Fire, in it self, is an
anguishing fierce wrathful climing up, bitter substance and source or
fountain-quality, and yet ye see in the Fires own Form, nothing else but the
flash of the shining, the source or fountain quality of heat ye see not, you
must only feel that.

133. Now ye see also that the burning Fire sends a Smoke up from it, and in
the Smoke is a Water, whence Soot comes to be, which cleaves to the wall,
especially if the fire be closed in that it is not free, then is the Soot
manifest as in a Furnace: this is Soot and Water mixed one in another, by
which, understand the Material Earth out of the Eternal Fire, which Lucifer
kindled, where then in the fierce wrath, Time began, and the Creation
proceeded, as in the Threefold-Life.
Third Part is mentioned.

134. Now understand the Great Mystery Mysterium Magnum further: ye see that
every fire gives light, and then ye see that Air goes forth out of the
Firesource or Quality: and ye understand very well, that if the fire had not
Air again, it would smother or go out, as all fires smother, if they have not
Air, and yet they also generate Air; the Air is the Fires life, which
originateth out of the anxious bitter stirring Source or fountain Quality of
the Essences out of the Will.

135. Now ye see also well, that Fire must have somewhat to consume, else it is
a Darkness; and though it devoureth it self, viz. its strong or stern
attraction, yet that very fire is only a source or fountain quality in the
Darkness, whereby we understand the Abyss of the Anger; which in God, is not
revealed or manifested, but only as a Cause of the Life in the Kingdom of God.

136. Ye see this, that every Fire must have substance, if it must burn:
understand this thus, the Fire affords Air, the Air, Water; and it draws
the Air strongly again into it self with the water, whence the Fires source or
fountain quality of heat becomes mittigated or meekned, so that it shines.

137. For without Or Liquor; that is Oil.
Water, no Fire shines, where in a thing, the Water is not to be attained,
there is no shining of the Fire, but only a glimps; as is to be seen in a
glowing or red hot Stone, which has the source or quality of Fire; and of the
shining it has nothing but only glimps, it may be not that: but in the Iron ye
see a glimps, wherein the Fire attaineth the Water. Therefore also Iron is at
length consumed, and gets rust, and a Stone Not. This is thus to be
understood according to the outward Principle of this World. but according to
the inward, viz. according to the Kingdom of God; observe this understanding:
the Eternal Fire burns Eternally, but it is a Spirit, and in the Kingdom of
God, not manifested or revealed in a fierce wrathful manner.

138. Observe this thus, the flash makes a shining, which originateth from the
fire, and dwells not in the fierce wrath of the fire, but it satiateth or
fulfilleth the fire totally, and gives light also externally out of the fire,
and is not held or detained by the fire, and brings also a several source or
quallity, as Meekness, and has yet the Fires virtue or power, Wit or Ingenuity
and Art; for in the Light is first, the Fires Source or Quality in the
Essences, manifested or revealed.

139. Now the Light makes no source or pain, but goes in it self into a
Meekness, and is also desirous, proceeding from the Fires source or Quality,
and its desiring is also an attracting, as viz. of the meekness and virtue or
power into it self, and impregnaeth it self with meekness.

140. For the Light is also a fire, a very yearning fire, a desirous fire, and
a continual finding fire, which continually finds, what is generated in the
Original.

141. All the virtue and power which originateth in the fierce wrathful Fire,
is manifested or revealed in the Light, and the Light desires that, in
meekness; for the Fires fierce wrathfulness and the Lights shining, are Two
Principles of a twofold Source or fountain Quality, each dwells in it self,
and the one comprehends not the Other, in Eternity, and yet the One is the
others Life and Cause, Understand it thus:

142. As we consider, that a horrible anxious Source or Quality, makes a
sinking down in it self, like a death, where then is the parting limit, and yet
the Anguish in it self retains its source or quality, but the sincking into
it self, as a Death enters into its Aethen; where then the Anguish-Life is no
more apprehended, for the sinking breaks it self forth out of the
Anguish-source, like a dying, and is a dying, whereas yet in the Eternity is no
dying, but such an Entrance into another World of another Principle, of another
Source or fountain-Quality.

143. For the sinking goes into the still Eternity, as into the Liberty, and
being the fierce wrathful fires-Source, continues in it self in its life;
therefore is the sinking a going forth out of the Fire-Life, and yet is from
the Fire-Life; but its source or fountain-spirit it has not, for it is broken
off in Death, and is the parting-limit in Death, that so the sinking presses
through Death, and has another Substantiality, viz. another Water wherein the
Light shines, wherein no fierce wrathfulness is.

144. For in the Eternity is no Death that withholds, but only such an
entrance in; for that which has no beginning, that has also no end nor
ground: and thus originateth the Light out of the Fires-Source.

145. For the Light dwells in the Fire, and also not in the Fire, it is in
another world, and is another Fire, which is called Love, Virtue or Power,
Wonder, Sweet, Mild or Gentle, Pure or Clean; and is no Substance, and also not
Nature, but without or besides Nature in another Principle.

146. It is nothing else but a Light-flaming powerful Majesty, and has its own
spirit, which brings the sinking through Death; which from the Anguish is the
sinking through Death, which makes the sprouting out through Death.

147. It is in it self free, both from the Fire and from the Light, and is held
or detained by none, as little as the fire holds or detaineth the Air, and it
goes forth out of the Light, out of the Power of the Light, and opens all
whatsoever is in the Fire-Source or Quality, and also in the Lights-Source or
Quality.

148. But it has no perception in it self of the Fire, but it is a blower up
of the Light-Fire, a bringer of the Love-Essences into the desirous power or
Virtue, an Opener of the Love-Essences.

149. And yet that we may be understood when we speak thus of the
Love-Essences, as of another Fire; Observe it; Behold, when the Light becomes
thus generated through the fierce wrathfulness, so that the one Fire goes
forth out of the other, then the Light-fire desires no more, the fierce
wrathfulness, for it has dyed away from the fierce wrathfulness, and is an own
peculiar fire in it self, and sends its Life out of it self, which is a
sprouting, for it is also desirous and attractive, whence Essences exist, and
has all forms in it, as the Fire-life also has such a rising up or springing.

150. But the Essences are generated out of the Lights power and virtue, and so
the one always tasting the other, there is a mere pure desiring and satisfying
or fulfilling, whereas yet there is nothing that the Love desiring can draw
into it self; therefore it draws it self into it self, and impregnateth it
self out of the Power of the Majesty, so that, that very will is full, and yet
also nothing is there, but such power and virtue, and Image of the Wonder, it
is a Similitude of the Birth or Geniture, and is the power and virtue it self;
It is the Substance of the Spirit, whence the Spirit has its food, for it
goes forth out of the Image, and flows or bubleth, as the Air in this World
does.

151. But now, if the Spirit finds no Similitude, which is without or besides
it, and yet finds it self thus in the Power and Virtue, then it is also
desirous, for it dweleth in the powers or virtues ground, and is not it self
the power or virtue: therefore its desiring also makes a Similitude according
to it; for a desiring is a seeking; and in the seeking stands the the Figure
of the Seeking: the Figure makes the Seeking manifest or revealed.

152. Thus the Spirit dwells also in its own Figure in the Power or Virtue,
and in the Light of the Majesty; and is an Image according to the Spirits
Property.

135. Not that the Spirit is the Image, but the Seeking and its Desiring is the
Image, for it dwells in its self, in its seeking, and is another Person in
its Figure, viz. the Powers or Virtues Figure; and according to this Substance
is God called, Threefold in Persons.

154. But that we may open your eyes wide, to see ALL the Ground of the Deity,
as it now will and must be; therefore behold now the great wonder, which we had
lost with going out of Paradise, where we must labor in the Six Days Works of
this World, and so see what and where we are, and ye will find here such a
thing, as has stood hidden even to Nature.

AEIOV IEOVA
155. Behold, when you will speak of the Trinity, look upon the first Number
upon A, upon the Eternal Beginning, which is the Father, and then look upon the
O in the middle, which is the Son; then look upon the V, which is the Exit of
the Holy Spirit, which goes into it self with the sincking through the sharp
fierce Wrath into the second Principle, which has E, and goes through the
Power or Virtue forth as a light-flaming Flash, which has I.

156. Now take the swift-going of the flaming Flash to it, which is T, Allmach
T, des Ewigen GOTTES, the Omnipotence of the Eternal God; which there in the
fierce Wrath, as a flash, destroys; and in der LIEB, in the Love, in the I,
as a Mighty loving God, exulteth, through presses, and powerfully exalts or
rises up; and if you put the I thereinto, then have you the Matter of the
Divine Substance; in the Power or Virtue, it is Ein Engel, an Angel, and in the
Out-Birth, out of the Center, it is GOLDT, Gold.

157. The World is covetous, and full of boasting, especially those that would
be accounted Masters of Arts; and say, they know Gold, and are blind People,
why see you it not; thou will say, How? Go with the outward life into death,
there must the outward life die, and in the Anguish, give it self forth into
the Number of the Crown, viz. into the Thousand Number, 1000, there is the End,
and Death arises and stands up to a glorious Life, with a New fair Body, and
you need give nothing to it but the Soul, it brings forth manifold fruit;
there thou have an Angel which is free from the fierce Wrath, for it is totally
clean and pure; seek it, and thou will find it.

158. But thou supposest perhaps to find it thus in thy Old Garment; no friend;
we will now teach you another A, B, C; learn that first, then seek, if you will
then have a love to it, if not, leave it; for the * GOT, God. GOLT, Gold,
O is muchnobler and more precious than the L.

159. Observe, take the AV

A O V




A, viz. the Beginning of the AVge, Eye, with the V, which is the Spirits mark,
and go with it through the O; then you will make a stroke, and mark through the
O, thus,

160. Now part the
Two Principles one from another, seeing they part themselves, and set one by
another, each with a half O like a Reinbow, thus,; for so they stand in the
Figure Set the fierce Wrath at the left O and the Light at the right C, for
otherwise a Man cannot describe them so exactly, but they are One Globe.

161. And
take the Spirit, which is generated in the Fire, and go with it out from the
fierce Wrath, into the sinking down, through Death, into the other half Eye,
viz. into the second Principle, then will you see this Figure, which stands
thus:

An Exposition of the Philosophic Globe or Eye, of both the Threefold Or
halves of Circles as joined.
Circles, which especially signify the two Eternal Principles; wherein yet the
Third also is clearly understood; And how a Man should understand them.
162. THese Or halves of Circles as joined.
Circles should be like Though here parted into two half Globes.
A round Globe, having the Cross Though here parted into two half Globes.
go through it; for it is an Eye of the
Eternity, that a man cannot delineate fully; it is the Eye of the Substance of
all Substances, signifying the Eye of God, which is the Looking-Glass of
Wisdom, wherein from Eternity all Wonders have been seen: and hereby is
delinated how it came into substance, for the Reader of this book to Think and
consider of.

163. Not in such a way, as if a Man could fully describe or delineate it, for
the mind or Thought only can apprehend it, and only that Mind which can walk in
the Divine Mystery, not through Art or Outward Reason.
Reason, but through the understanding which the Spirit of God opens to the
humane Souls-Spirit in the Great Mystery, else it can NOT be apprehended.

164. The Reader should take consideration of the Number, and then of what
stands within or without the Or two half Circles, as joined.
Circle, or where every word in the Or two half Circles,
Circle begins and ends, it has all its assured certain signification;
for every word stands in its exact place.

165. That which is without the Or two halves of one Wheel, as joined.
Circle or Wheel, signifies the Libirty of the Abyss without or besides the
Principle.

Number 1. Abyss. 166. The great Mystery of the Abyss, wherein the Divine
Substance in the Looking-Glass of Wisdom, generateth it self in the Ground, is
marked with Number 1. and Number 2. stands by it: so also round about the
whole Circles.
Circle is to be understood.

Of the three *Circles. 167. The Three Or two threefold half Circles, as
joined.
Circles drawn about one another, signify the Eternal Birth or Geniture of the
Divine Substance, together with All Eternal Mysteries, without and within
Nature; viz. the Original of all Things or Substances as they are here marked.

Of that half of the Threefold Or half Circles, as joined, and yet parted.
Circle at the left hand, and of Numb. 2. 168. The Threefold Or half Circles,
as joined, and yet parted.
Circle at the left, where without the Or half Circles, as joined, and yet
parted.
Circle stands Number 2. The Mystery without or besides Nature, signifies
how the profundity or Or unsearchableness in the Text.
groundlesness, brings it self into a Ground; viz. the Eye of Eternity, the
first Will, which is called Father of Eterternity, and of all Beginnings, how
in the Trinity, in the Wisdom, he introduces himself into an Eternal Ground,
and dwells in himself, and possesses himself, and how he brings himself
into Nature; and how Substance originateth, as also Perceptibility and
Perception.

Of that half of the Threefold Or half Circle, as joined, and yet parted.
Circle at the right hand. 169. The other Threefold Or half Circle, as joined,
and yet parted.
Circle at the right, signifies the Divine Substance of the holy Trinity,
together with the Angelical World, which originateth out of the Great Mystery
of the Eternity, and is manifested or revealed through the Principle of the
Fire.

What the Crose signifies. 170. The Cross through the Two Or half Threefold
Circles, being one.
Circles, signifies the Persons of the Deity, how they part themselves in the
Eternal One only Birth or Geniture, as further is mentioned according to the
Numbers.


Of the Eye in the Circle. 171. The Half Eye in the half Circle, thus, which
turned, are a whole Eye, and whole threefold Circle thus, though half Globes,
and joined, make a whole Globe, yet each being every where together, they make
each a whole Globe of dark or light though both together, every where as one;
though also parted as to the Eternal Manifestation, virtually into half Globes,
though whole,
Eye in the Circle, where the Cross goes through, with an Angle or Point and
Line, signifies each of them a World, both at the left and right: At the left
it signifies the great Mystery of the Dark World, where the Wonder-Eye
introduces it self in Nature, At the right it signifies the Light-world,
where the Divine Mystery, has through the Fire, brought it self forth, and
dwells in the majestic Light, with the first Mystery of Wonder.

Of the Heart in the Angle of the Cross. 172. The Heart in the Angle or Center
of the Cross, signifies the ground or the Center of the Deity, not in such a
manner as if it were partible, and did possess a several place, for it is it
self the place or the ground of the Deity, and is every where all over the
middlemost; but that a man may learn to distinguish or difference the Deity
from Nature; and that Christians may learn to understand the Regeneration or
the New Birth, how God in Christ has regenerated us out of his Heart upon the
Cross: for which things sake, this Figure has been thus delinated, that the
Reader should consider and think upon it; for this FIGURE compriseth all
whatsoever God and the Eternity is.

An Exposition of the Circles at the left hand; Numb. 3, 4, 5. 173. The three
Characters or Letters, AOV, marked with Number 3, 4, 5, signify the Mystery of
the holy Deity, without or besides Nature, how it manifests or reveals it self
in Nature.

Of A, Number. 3. and Tincture, Number. 6. 174. A, signifies the first profound or
groundless or unsearchable Will, which is called Father: go about that * Or
half Circle.
Circle to the nether point of it, there stands Tincture, Number 6. which is
the Wills Ens, and the first beginning to Nature; for the Divine Mystery of the
Trinity stands above, and the Mystery of Nature beneath; each Circle
signifies one Person of the Deity in the first Mystery.

Of the O. Numb. 4. and of Principle and of Fire; Numb. 7. 175. The O, with
Number 4. signifies the Ground of the Mystery, viz. the Geniture or Birth of
the Heart or Word of God, which the first will, viz. the A, in the
Looking-Glass of Wisdom, compriseth and holds it in self, as a Ground of its
substance. For the O, signifies also the Eye of the Looking-Glass of Wisdom:
for in the Wisdom is the Eternal Word comprised, which manifests or reveals
it self through the Principle of the Fire, in the Light World. Go from the O,
about that Circle, and so thou find beneath, Principle, and Fire Number 7.

Of V, Numb. 5. and of Substance, Numb. 8. 176. The V, with Number 5.
signifies the Spirit of the Mystery without or besides Nature; viz. the first
eternal profound groundless or unsearchable Will-Spirit, which originateth out
of the Will, and in the Power or Virtue of the Word, in the Great Mystery; and
goes forth out of the Will and Word, and its Exit makes Substance, viz.
Wonders, of the Power, Colors, and Virtue, whereas yet in the Mystery of the
Profundity Groundlesness or Unsearchableness without or besides Nature, no
colors are apprehended: for they lie all in ONE, and it is the twinkling of a
great Wonder, and that is called a Substance of the Wonder.

Go about from V, on that Or half Circle.
Circle, and thou find beneath at Number 8, Substance; signifying that all
Substance is beneath the Spirit of the Number Three, or Trinity; and that men
must always distinguish Substance from the Deity.

177. For in Substance originateth Nature, with its seven Forms; for the Number
Three is only a Spirit in Substance, and yet there is also no Substance without
the Number Three: for the Desire of the Number Three is the Eternal Magia, and
makes Substance, it brings into a ground, according to the Model which the
Spirit opens in the wisdom, out of her is the Creation proceeded according to
the Model of the virgin-like Wisdom.

Further Information Concerning the First Principle, and the Mystery of the
Beginning in the Creation, and of the Dark World, how the Angle or Point of the
Cross, with Number 9. at the left, with its upper and nether Space is
understood.
Of FATHER; Number 9. 178. Number 9. there stands before the Angle or Point
of the Cross, FATHER, and before that the Abyss, signifying the Mystery of the
Father without or besides Nature: for with the Or point or end of the Arm of
the Cross.
Angle of the Cross Nature begins. The first and Greatest Mystery is the
Abyss, where the Nothing introduces it self into a will, which is called
FATHER, or the Original to somewhat: Out of the Mystery of the Father is the
Creation, through Nature, originated: A Man is here to understand the Eternal
Nature, with its Seven Forms, with or by this Mystery.

Soul; Numb. 10. 179. At the Angle or Or end of the Arm of the Cross at the
left hand.
Point of the line, stands Soul, Number 10. signifying the Original of the
Eternal Spirits, viz. Angels and Souls of Men: the Angle or Point, signifies
the Center in Nature, where the Threefold Spirit reveals or manifests it self
with or by Nature, signifying the Magic Fire, in the Fathers Property, out of
which the Angels have their Original, as also the Souls of Men.

180. A man should here understand the Ground and Original of an Eternal
Spirit, for nothing is Eternal, unless it has its orsginal out of the Eternal
Magic Fire. This Original is not understood to be the true or right Spirit,
but to be the Center, viz: the Cause of the Spirit.

Souls Will; Numb. 11. 181. Every true or right Spirit is understood with the
understanding in the Light of Life: for in the Fire there can be no right or
true understanding, but in the desire of the Light. Therefore must the fiery
Will Turn to be like the Light.
turn it self to the Heart of God, viz. to the Power or Virtue of the Light and
understanding, as here is to be seen, where, upon the line of the Cross
stands the Souls Will, marked with Number 11, and there it receives Power
and Virtue from the Heart of God, and is generated or born an Understanding
Spirit.

Will, Numb, 12. and Soul N, umb. 13. 182. For it receives the Power or Virtue
of the Light, in the Meekness and Humility, and goes with its Will-Spirit,
viz. with the noble or precious Image and Similitude of God, through the Power
or Virtue of the Heart, into the second Princiciple, viz. into the Light World,
as here at the right beyond the Heart in the other or second Circle is to be
seen, where stands Will Number 12. and then Soul Number 13. signifying, how
the Soul out of the fires source or quality out of the Fathers Property,
enters into the Sons Power or Virtue and Property, and dwells in the Divine
Power or Virtue in the Lightworld.

HOLY SPIRIT, Numb. 14. 183. Without or beyond the Angle or Or End of the Arm
of the Cross at the righthand.
Point of the Cross, stands HOLY SPIRIT, Number 14. signifying the holy
Spirit, which from Eternity originateth in the Will of the Father at the left
at the Angle or Beyond the end of the arm of the Cross at the left
Point, Number 9. and brings it self through Nature, through the Heart and
Divine Power or Virtue at the right without or beyond Nature; also through the
Angels or Souls-Spirits, Power or Virtue, forth, and dwells in the Liberty in
the Glance of the Power or Virtue and Majesty, and is in Nature, yet of Nature
unapprehended, but only in the Divine Power or Virtues Property.

Image, Numb. 15. 184. Beyond the word HOLY SPIRIT, Number 15. stands Image,
also without or beyond Nature, signifying that the noble or precious Image
sprouteth forth out of the Souls Fire, as a Blossom or Flower out of the
Earth, and has no feeling or sense of the Pain of the fiery Property; for the
Fire stands in it as it were swalowed up, and yet it is there but in another
source or fountain quality, viz. a desire of Love, a light-flaming Fire in
Divine Property.

Abyss, Numb. 16. 185. Beyond Image, stands Abyss, Number 16. signifying;
that the right true Image stands in the Abyss, without or beyond all source
or pain, and dwells in Nothing, but only in it self, and with or through it,
God dwells through and through it, yet is besides it, every where in it.
GOD. Therefore there is Nothing that can find touch or break it, but only the
Divine Power or Virtue; for it stands not in Nature, although indeed, with
the Root it proceeds from Nature, and yet it is another thing; as an Apple is
another thing than the Tree, though it stand upon the Tree, and receive power
and virtue from the Tree, and yet the Sun gives it also power and virtue: So
also the Divine Sun, viz. the Majesty, gives the Image power and virtue.

Of the Word Omnipotence; Numb. 17. and Wrath; Numb. 18. 186. Further at the
left stands Number 17. Omnipotence; and it stands also without or beyond
the Or half Globe of Nature, as parted and yet joined.
Circle, signifying the Fathers Mystery, which, with the Magia, viz. with the
Desire, introduces it self into the fierce Wrath, where then the strong
loudsounding life, and strength, is understood in the entrance of Nature in the
first Three Forms, viz. the astringent, bitter, and anguish, as the word Or
fierce Wrath.
Wrath stands in the space under the Or Arm of the Cross at the left hand.
Line, Number 18. signifying that the fierce Wrath, does not touch the Angle,
or Or end of the Arm of the Cross, whose three upper Arms signify the Trinity.
Point of the Number Three, but is generated or born in the Desire.

Craft; Numb. 19. 187. Under the word Omnipotence, Number 19. stands Or
cunning Suttlety.
Craft, signifying the Essence out of the Looking-Glass of the Mystery: which
Craft or Suttlety in the second Principle is changed into a right or rectified
understanding, and here in the Magic Fire it is only Craft or cunning
Suttlety, for it is accute or pointed and sharp, and a cause of the
Understanding.

Devil; Numb. 20. 188. Over against it stands, Devil, Number 20. in the space
Or within the place of the Dark World, or dark half of the Globe in the lower
space of that from the middle down ward.
of the Dark World, signifying the evilness malignity or malice of the Devil,
in that he is gone away from the Angle or Point of the Number Three, and has
set or put his will into the fierce Wrath Craft or Suttlety, in willing
therewith to rule or lord it over God's Meekness, and himself to use the
strength and might or potency of the Fire, and of the Fierce-wrath.

Devils Art; Numb. 21, 22. 189. Under the word Craft, stands Devils::::: Art,
Number 21, 22. Devils, stands without the Or half Globe.
Circle of Nature; and Art, stands within the Or half Globe.
Circle of Nature; signifying, that the Devil was created, as well out of the
Mystery of the Father, upon the Line or Or Arm:
Stroke of the Cross in the Eternal Nature as the other Angels. But he has
framed or created to himself his Art, Number 22. in the magic seeking of
Nature in the Center of the dark World, whereas yet he should have gotten
framed or created it in God's Heart and Power or Virtue, and that is His own
causing of his own Fall.
his Cause of his Fall and of his Envy, or Hatred and Malice.

Will; Numb. 23. 190. Above the Or stroke or Arm of the Cross.
Line, Number 23. stands, Will, signifying, that the Devil has has swung
himself aloft above the Divine Line, upon or in which he was created as a proud
or haughty stately Spirit, that would himself have been Lord, and have governed
in own Self, Art and Wit.

Darkness, Numb. 24. 191. As now at present, the pride or state and
haughtiness, and cunning subtle Policy and Prudence of Men does, which swingeth
it self also thus, from the Line of God, up into own self, wherein it cannot
reach or attain the Divine Power or Virtue and Light within, but falls in it
self into the Dark anguishing Magic Fire, as above the word Will is marked
Number 24.

First into Darkness; for Reason loses the Divine Understanding and Desire,
wherein it can take hold of and receive God's Substance, and so impregnate it
self with Power and Virtue out of or from God.

Fire, Numb. 25. 192. And then the Magic Fire Geitz-fewer, Covetousness-Fire
of Covetousness, kindles it self, in that it wills to have much, and yet
has not enough; as here Number 25.

Anguish, Numb. 26. 193. And when it has filled it self with Covetousness,
then begins the Magic Fire in the Anguish, Number 26. to burn. For that
which is brought in by the Covetousness, and laden the fire with, is the Magic
Fires wood or fuel wherein it burns: and there is Death generated or born;
which must separate what the Covetousness has laid in.

Death, Numb. 27. 194. And here is also the Schwere; or weighty.
heavy Fall of Adam, who imagined as the Devil did, and desired the
multiplicity of this world for his own; he would be wise or subtle and prudent,
and get much Wit or crafty Ingenuity, and also the earthly and hellish source
or fountain quality in the wit. Had he remained upon the Stroke or Arm in God's
Line, then he had not become earthly; for his will-spirit had dwelt in God, and
had introduced Divine food into the Body; but now he stands in the Anguish,
Number 26, and must again go through the Principle, into Death, Number 27,
where his Body must in the Mystery, be consumed.

195. And if he has not in this time, converted his will into the Cross of
Christ, as in this Figure is to be seen, then is he in the Mystery reserved to
the Judgment of God, and there he shall be tried in the Fire whether his
will-spirit has Divine Power and Virtue in it or not, or whether he can
subsist in the Fire: And there the proud stately or haughty earthly works will
be burned away from him, and the soul will remain in the dark Magic Will-Fire,
for it self is also a Magic Fire, when the Divine Light-Fire is not in it: and
so now one Magic Fire lays hold of another, out of which there is no remedy
to help.

Will, Numb. 28. Light, Numb. 29. Spirit, Numb. 30. Man, Numb. 31. 196. But
that Soul which has in this time converted again, and has with its will given
up it self into the Death of Christ on the Line of the Cross, Number 27. that
soul is sunk down from its proud or haughty evil works, and is as to them
willless, or free from willing, and is entered into the Death of Christ, and
sprouteth forth with the Will-spirit, Number 28. through the second Principle
in the Divine Power and Virtue, out of the Death of Christ, where then the
Will-Spirit, viz. the Image, attaineth again the Divine Light, Number 29. and
the Image stands, Number 30. again in the Divine Man, Number 31.

Image, Numb. 32. God, Numb. 33. 197. For when the Will Spirit enters into
Death upon the Cross, then it draws again Divine Substantiality, viz.
Christ's Flesh to it self, and brings the same with it self into the Light
into the Light world, there the Divine Life sprouteth again into the holy Body,
and the Image stands free again. As here Number 32. is to be seen, and
dwells in God, Number 33. and eats of God's Word or Substance; for the
Image is here without or beyond Nature in the Liberty; but the Humanity is
within Nature, as is described.

198. But as to those Souls which stick in their proud or stately and haughty
covetous Works in the Anguish, Number 26. they stick indeed in the Magic
Anguish-Fire, and their works are wood, or fuel, to or for the Fire.

199. But if the Will-spirit do yet turn in it self a little into the Death of
Christ, and yet also is fast bound to the fierce Wrath, that soul hangs as by
a thread to the Death of Christ.

The Ninth Number, Numb. 34. 200. This Soul may well thus burn a while, till
the Will-Spirit can enter into the Death of Christ, till its sydereal wood or
fuel be burned up: when the earthly body dies, then must the Image bathe:
which the present too wise and subtle world contemns, but in Death does find
it by woeful experience: There must this little sparkle, which hangs only by a
thread, wind it self into the Death of Christ; for it has lost body and
substance, and stands naked and bare without Divine Substance or Body in
God's Mercy or Compassion in the Divine Tincture, viz. in the Ninth Number,
Number 34. and waits for the last Judgment; wherein God will in the Tincture,
bring and restore again whatsoever Adam lost; but its here-acted works, will
not go or pass through the Fire, but the dark Magic Fire, has swallowed them
up into its Mystery into the Dark World; Let this be said to thee, O Man.

Souls Eternal Habitation, Numb. 35. 201. After Ninth Number, stands the
Souls Eternal Habitation, Number 35. signifying, that these escaped Souls are
notwithstanding in God, in the Angelical World, but without their works, and
cannot so highly attain the Glance or Luster of the Majesty, as those Souls
which have here clothed themselves with God's Power and Virtue. The word
Habitation goes into the Liberty without or beyond Nature, as also above,
Image, does; for the Soul must stand in Nature; but the Images Habitation is
without or beyond Nature in the Divine Liberty.

Angelical World, Numb. 36. 202. Without or beyond this Habitation, stands
the Angelical World, Number 36. signifying the Angels Courts and Quires, or
Princely Thrones, in the Liberty of the Divine Majesty, where yet their root
also stands IN Nature, but is not apprehended.

Proud Devil, Numb. 37. Will of the Devil Lucifer, Numb. 38. 203. At the At the
left hand or left half Globe or Eye or Looking-Glass, in the upper space or
quarter of it above the left Arm of the Cross.
left in the upper space, Number 37. stands Proud Devil, or stubborn Devil,
with two Strokes or legs drawn with pricks.
Lines, one reaching up upon the Character or Letter O, Number 4. and the other
reaching up Above the three half circles of the left half Globe, Eye or Looking
Glass.
above the Great Mystery of the Number Three, where stands Will of the Devil
Lucifer, Number 38.

204. Here is the Devils Fall to be considered, he has brought his proud or
stubborn Will up from the Line or Stroke of the Cross, aloft, and has willed
to rule over or above the Mystery of the Divine Wisdom, in wit and cunning,
suttlety and fierce wrath in the Fires might or power, and to kindle the
Mystery of the Number Three, that he might be Lord: As indeed he then kindled
the Substantiality in the Mystery; whence Earth and Stones have come to be, and
has willed to fly out above the Mystery of the Number Three, Number 38. as
still at this day he desires to fly out above the Angelical Princes-Thrones.

Abyss of the Dark World, Number 39. Eternal Hell of Devils, Number, 40. 205.
And upon this has followed his thrusting out from the Divine Mystery, so that
he is Thrust out from the Superior Thrones into the Dark Magic fire, and is
Thrust down below, that is, into the Abyss of the Dark world; For he must
dwell externally without the Principle in the Fire-crack, viz. in the first
Three Forms to Fire in the Anguish, there he has his Hell as below at Number
40. is to be seen, and thereinto also the Damned souls fall back, so that
Eternally they cannot see or behold God.

The second Cross Line upwards thus 206. Over the line Number 1. above aloft,
stands, Abyss, Eternity, signifying the Liberty, without or beyond the
Principle; and thereby is understood the Mystery of the Eternity, wherein every
Creature stands in its source or fountain Quality, in its own Fire, be it in
Darkness or Light, and has therein no other Light than shines within it,
which light also it apprehends Externally without it self; there are Both
worlds, viz. the Light-world, and Dark-world, are there in one another. But the
Light becomes not attained, unless a creature be capable of it.

207. There are Angelical Thrones, which we know nothing of Experimentally, our
knowledge reaches but only into the Extent of the Place of this world, so far
as the kindling in the Creation reached, and of THAT is this Or these two
halves of the whole set back to back with the Cross appearing in the midst.
wheel made with the Cross.

SON, Numb. 41. and of the Heart. 208. Above the upright Line, stands SON,
and at the Left Angle or Point, Number 9. FATHER, and at the Right Line, Number
14. HOLY SPIRIT, signifying the Birth or Geniture, and Persons of the Holy
Trinity. The Heart in the Cross is the Center, and signifies the Eternal Band
of the Or Threeness.
Ternary.

209. The Word SON, Number 41. signifies the WORD, which the Eternal FATHER,
continually and from Eternity, speaks in the Light and Dark world, according
to each worlds source or fountain Quality or Property.

210. But in that the Three Persons at the Cross are free, and touch not the
Line, it signifies that God is free from Nature, and not Or liable to the
apprehension of Nature
in the apprehension of Nature, but he dwells in himself, indeed in Nature,
but unapprehended, by that which does not give up it self into Him.

Of the Heart in the Cross. 211. The Heart in the Cross signifies, that God's
Heart has manifested it self in Nature, by or with the Principle of the Fire,
whence the Majestic Light originateth. Secondly, It signifies the
Manifestation or Revelation in the Humanity, wherein God's Heart has
manifested it self by or with a Humane Heart, and how that Humane Heart has
attained the comprehension of the Holy Trinity. As indeed it is the Center in
the Cross, by which a Man is to understand the Inward Man, viz. the Inward
Heart.

212. And you see, that the HOLY SPIRIT at the Right, on or in the Line, and at
Number 14. goes forth from the Heart into the Light World, signifying that the
Holy Spirit, dwells in the Regenerate or New born Heart, viz. in the Image,
and continually introduces the Images Will into the Divine Light-world. And as
this Heart in the Cross is united with the Holy Ternary; so must the Humane
Heart, understand the Inward-Man, be united with the Deity: that God may be in
it, All in All, its Will and Deed.

213. But that the word SON, Number 41. above the Cross Line a loft stands
distinguished from the Heart, signifies that the Man Christ is become Lord
over all, and is the King over this Or two half Cir les or Globes joined in one.
Circle: for, God has manifested himself in the Humanity, and this Man
compriseth the whole Divine Substance in himself, for within him and Externally
without him is one and the same fullness, One God and Divine Substance: there is
no other place, where we can be able to apprehend God then in the Substance of
Christ, there is the whole fullness of the Godhead or Deity Bodily or
Corporeally.

Heaven, Number, 42. 214. The Word, Heaven, on the upright Cross-line: Number
42. signifies, that the Heaven is in the Man Christ, and also in us, and that
we must through his Cross and Death go to him into his Heaven, which himself
is; for on the Cross is Heaven become opened to us again, or Newborn and
Regenerated to us. Secondly, It signifies that the right or true Divine Heaven
is an Habitation of the Divine Desire, viz. of the Divine Magia; therefore it
is called not aningoing, but an ingeneration of God's Fire, into Divine
Substantiality, and that even only on the Cross, viz. through and in the Birth
or Geniture of the Holy Dreyfaltigkeit.
Trinity.

Pure Element, Number, 34. 215. The word, Pure Element, on the Crosse's upper
Line, Number 43. signifies the inward world, out of which this outward, with
the Four Elements, is become generated forth, and stands in the Inward Root
in the Substance thereof.

Holy Spirit, Number. 44. Son, Number. 45. 216. Moreover it is to be observed
exactly, how the Words stand, begin and end, for they begin on the outward Or
half Circle.
Circle at the Left, where above Number 5. the Holy Spirits Character or Letter
V. stands; and beneath Number 8. Substance, and goes through the two Or half
Circles.
Circles at the Right, even into the second Space, which signifies the Pure
Divine Elements Original, its indwelling and Substance, whence it Originateth,
viz. from the Spirit of the Eternal Mystery in the Divine Substantiality, viz.
in the Substance of the Great Mystery, and yet is only manifest or revealed in
the second Principle, viz. in the Substance of the Son and Holy Spirit, as
above one the Or half Circles.
Circle at the Right is to be seen, Number 44. and 45.

Father, Numb. 46. Holy Spirit of Divine Wisdom and Understanding, Numb. 47.
217. The Pure Element is the working in the right true Heaven, and shuts it
self in and out with or by the Cross, it is the springing or flowing and moving
in the Fire and Light-Heaven, from or by with the Divine Substantiality,
understand Substance, and not the Spirit, of God, is a life for it reaches not
into the Substance of the Father, Number 46. where beneath on the Circle,
stands Divine Wit or Understanding, for the Element gives or affords not
divine Wit, but the Holy Spirit, Number 47. gives Divine apprehension,
knowledge or skill and wit or understanding.

218. The Element is a Substance in respect of the Deity; as the Life in the
flesh is understood to be, in respect of the Soul; For the Tincture is higher,
and gives the ENS of the Spirit, wherein the Light-Fire is understood.

Humanity, Flesh, Numb. 48. 219. Under the word, Pure Element stands at
Number 27. on the stroke of the upper Line of the Cross, Death, and the word
begins laying hold on the left Half Circle.
Circle, and goes through the Cross through the first right Half Circle.
Circle: There observe both the outward Circles at the left and at the right,
above and beneath, and then thou will soon find, what the right or authority of
Death is, and how it is the dying source or fountain quality in the Magic
Fire, and holds the Substantiality captive in itself; as at the left beneath
at Number 8. and at the right, beneath at Number 4. 8. is to be seen; and then
above on the same Circle at Number 44. and at the left above, at Number 5.
there a man sees, how the spiritual Life goes and sprouteth forth through the
Death, and possesses the highest The outward Circle being accounted whole.
Circle: For all whatsoever wills to reach or attain the Divine Life, must go
through the Dying Magic Fire, and stand or subsist therein; as the Heart on
the Cross must and does stand or Endures everlasting Burnings. Isa. 33. 14.
subsist in the Fire of God.

220. Further it is to be known, that we in Adam have turned our selves away
from the Cross, and are with the Desire of Lust or Pleasure, gone with our will
above the Cross at Number 23. into an Own self Rule or Government; and now
Death has captivated us in it self, therefore we must now sink down out of
Death on the Cross at the Line of Christ again into the Heart, and become new
born or regenerate in the Heart, else Death holds us captive in it self. For
now Death stands on the Cross-Line: but at the Judgment it shall be given to
the Dark World: For our Will must now enter through Death on the Cross, into
Rest; but the outward Cross shall be taken away; and then Col. 2. 15.
Death is a spectacle or scorn and derision.

221. Thirdly, it signifies that the Life of God in Christ, bare * Death as a
show or spectacle of Triumph on the Cross, when Death became broken on the
Cross in the dying of Christ, where the Life sprouted through Death, and the
Heart gave up or yielded it self into the middle, viz. into the Center, as 1
Cor. 15. 54.
victorious Lord or Conqueror of Death.

Paradise, Numb. 49. 222. Under the Heart at Number 49. stands Paradise; the
Word begins at the left on the outward Circle, where above at Number 5. is
marked, the Spirit of the Great Mystery of the Profundity or unsearchableness
of Eternity, viz. V. and it goes through the Cross at the right, through all
the Three Or halves of the whole Circles.
Circles, even into the Liberty: this signifies the constitution or existence
of Paradise; it originateth in the Mystery of the Eternity, and prouteth
through the outward, and also hrough the Light World, hidden in the outward
World, and manifested or revealed in the second Principle, in the Light World,
as therefore the World penetrateth through all the Three Circles, showing the
humane Bodies original.

Divine Substantiality, Numb. 50. 223. For in or at this place, out of this
substance, Adams Body (understand the outward Body) was created according to
the Third Principle, and the inward Body, (understand the Images Body) out of
the Divine Substantiality, as at the right, near Paradise, is marked with
Number 50.

Christ, Flesh, Numb. 51, 52. 224. That very Divine Substance, understand Note.
Substance, not Spirit, is included in the Wisdom of God; and therein is the
heavenly Tincture: For God's Word that became Man, brought this Substance into
Mary, into her in Death enclosed Substantiality, viz. into the Images Body, and
thereby God and Man became One Person.

225. For this Flesh is Christ's Flesh, according to the Heavenly part;
therefore beyond Substantiality, stands, Christ's, Flesh, Number 51, 52.
Christ bare such Flesh in the Inward Man, as Adam had before his Eve was, when
he stood in the Divine Image in Purity. Therefore can no Man go into Paradise,
unless he attain that Flesh again, that Adam had before the Fall, and Christ
attained in the becoming Man or Incarnation. Therefore must we all become born
out of the Heart upon the Cross, and Romans 13. 14. Gal. 3. 27.
put on Christ.

Mystery, Numb, 53. 226. Under Paradise, Number 53. stands Mysterium,
Mystery, and the word begins at the left in the second Or half of the Circle
on the left side.
Circle, where above on the same Or half of the Circle on the left side.
Circle, Number 4. the Character or Letter, O, stands, and beneath Principle,
and Fire, Number 7. and goes to the right, through the Cross, through the
first Or half of the Circle on the left side.
Circle at the right. This signifies rightly and exactly Man's Creation
according to the Body.

227. For the Body, is a Mystery, taken out of the inward and outward World,
from above and from beneath, understand out of the Earths Matrix; This is the
Earths Matrix; out of this Mystery was it created, and a Man sees how it was
created out of the inward and outward Substance, viz. out of the dark and light
World, and is mixed with evil, viz. with fierce-wrath, and also with Good.

Wonder, Numb. 54. Angel, Numb. 55. Spirit, Numb. 56. 228. But Man was out of
the Mystery created, an Image and Similitude of or according to God, to or for
God's Wonder; Therefore at the right, Number 54. stands Wonder. For he was a
Wonder of all things or Substances, a Lord of All things or Substances, taken
out of all things or Substances, and was in the Inward Image, an Angel. As next
Wonder, in the Liberty, stands Angel, Numb. 55. For his Spirit dwells in
the Liberty of God, viz. in the Majesty, as beyond the word Angel, Number 56.
Spirit stands. Which all, signifies, the right or true Man, viz. the First
before the Fall, and the second in Christ, into which he must enter again, or
is rent or separated from God.

Four Elements, Numb. 57. 229. Under Mystery, Number 55. stands Four
Elements; they begin at the left, on the outward- Or that half of the Circle at
the left.
Circle, and go to the right through the Cross, through Or the two Halves at
the right, of the two first Circles.
two Circles; signifying the outward World, which originateth as an Out-birth
out of the inward Substance on the outward Circle, and brings its Wonders
into the Mystery, first into the second Principle, into the first two Circles;
for they shall not go with their Substance into the Liberty, through the Or
third half at the right of the third Circle, and so into the Liberty.
Third Circle at the Right, but pass in the Principle into the Mystery, and in
the Principle be tried or purged in the Fire. For there is the Limit of
Separation.

The Souls Joy, in Ternario Sancto, Number, 58. 230. Above on the second Circle
at the Right Number 45. stands Son, the same is the Judge and Separator, and
beneath on the By this it appears the Circles are whole though parted, and the
words in the Liberty go round at the ends of the halves of the Circles, as if
the Circles were joined, and yet are considered as invisibly in the Liberty.
same Circle, Number 58. stands Souls Joy in Ternario Sancto, in the Holy
Ternary, signifying, that the Soul shall have joy in its works, which it has
wrought in the Four Elements, to the Praise and Glory of God, which it has
introduced into the Angelical World into the Mystery. For the Four Elements
stand, with their Root in the Great Mystery.

231. And were the Earth not come into such a perished Condition, and that the
Devils Poison and kindling or inflammation, had not been done, it were still one
and the same Substance with or in the other Three Elements, as indeed it is
now, in the Heavenly Substance.

Spiritual Bodies Habitation, Number. 59. 232. This Bit, has Adam swallowed down
into himself, and thereby Lost his Angels Form. For the Four Elements should
stand hidden in him, and he should live only in the One Element, in Gods Power
and Virtue, and know or experiment nothing of the Evil: As at the Right, in the
Liberty, Number 59. stands, the Spiritual Man's Habitation, there should the
Images Body dwell, viz. the Souls Body, but that became hindered from it; it
must now under the Earth, and become included or shut up in the Earthliness.

Earth, Number 60. 233. Under the Four Elements, stands Earth, Number 60.
signifying that the Earth is wholly fallen back to the Inner World. For the
word touches neither the The left or the Right half of the one Circle.
Left nor the Right Circle, it is as a Death, but the Cross goes through it,
signifying its Restoration, or bringing again to what it was, that the Humane
Earth is Newborn or Regenerated on the Cross, and that the Heavenly and Divine
Substance, shall be severed from the Dark worlds Substance, through the Fire of
God, where then shall be new Earth in a Heavenly Source or Fountain Quality,
Form, Essence and Property, and that which is hidden in the Earth, in the
Heavenly Part, shall sprout or spring again. Further is to be Considered, that
the Earth stands thus upon or in the Abyss, for it reaches no Principle,
therefore it must pass away, or vanish.

Earthly Man, Numb. 61. 234. Underneath stands Number, 61. Earthly Man, where
the Cross goes through the midst of the Word, which signifies the fallen
Earthly Man, who is fallen under and into the Earth, that is, he is fallen home
or back to the Earth, and the Cross parts or separateth the words, Earthly
and Man; for Man shall again become separated from the Earth, and enter into
his Eternal Part, either into the Light or Dark world.

Wonder, Number 62. 235. Under the Cross Line stands Number 62. Wonder,
signifying that the evil Or Wonders, or Works, or Products.
Wonder, also the Evil part of the Earth, shall in the Judgment of God, when
God will make separation; fall home or back to the Abyss of Darkness, and that
shall be to All Devils and Evil Men their Earth, on which they shall dwell one
among another, for the Abyss stands under it below, at Number 1.

Babel, Number 63. 236. Near Wonder stands Babel, Number 63. signifying, how
Babel is only a Wonder of the Abyss, and works only Wonders in the Abyss.

Own Reason in Babel, Numb. 64. 237. Further, above under the Or half outward
Circle at the Right.
Circle at the Right, after Earthly Man, Number 64. stands Own or self Reason
in Babel, which goes round about the outside of the Circle of the Second
Principle, and goes in own self Authority under the Divine World, backward,
and supposes She is in God, and serves or worshippeth him, but is without God
in self, She or it Teaches, and does only its own Things or Matters for it
self, for its own Ends, it Rules the outward world in own self Reason, without
Gods Spirit and Will, only according to its own Will. Therefore it goes about
the Light world, dissembling in Hypocrisy, and gives God good Words, and
continues only without God, upon or in the Abyss, and thereinto also it
falls back and enters.

Wonder of the Great Folly, Number. 65. 238. Under Own Reason, Number 65.
stands, Wonder of the Great Folly, signifying Babel, who has found all Art,
Suttelty and Cunning, Politic Devices, and Lost it self; It seeks Gold, and
loses God; it takes Earth for Gold, Death for Life: and that is the Greatest
Folly that is found in the Substance of All Substances; as is sufficiently
mentioned in other Places.

The Conclusion.
239. Thus we see, when we are at home, not in this World, but in the two
inward Worlds; in which soever we labor here, into that we enter when we die:
we must Lose the outward, we must only be newborn or Regenerated on the Cross.

240. Babel has turned it self wholly away from the Cross, which signifies
the Proud own self Reason-Wise, Subtle Men, who rule and order themselves in or
according to the Wit or Ingenuity of Folly.

241. The Earthly Man on the Cross, Number 61. signifies the simple heap or
company, which yet hang to the Cross of Christ, and become at length newborn
or regenerated through the Cross.

242. But Outward self Reason,
Reason has even rent and torn it self off from the Cross in its own self
Pleasure and Voluptuousness, in its own Pomp, Might or Power and Laws, and
that is a Wonder of Folly, which even the Devils do scorn and deride.

243. This the Reader should further consider of, for there lies much under
it, it has the understanding of all the Three Worlds. See thy self therein, it
is a right true Looking-Glass, for the Number Three is a Cross, and has Two
Kingdoms in One, parting themselves thus by the sinking down through Death.

244. Therefore would the Devil be above God, and therefore God became Man,
that he might bring the Soul out of the fierce Wrath through Death into another
Life, into another World, which yet stands in the First; but they turn their
backs, as this
Figure stands, and the Cross stands between both the Principles, and goes
out of the Fire-Life, into the Light-Life.

245. Beloved Sir, understand us thus, the Soul originateth in the Fire-Life,
for without the fire source or fountain quality, no spirit does subsist, and it
goes with its own self will, out of it self, forth through Death, that is, it
esteems it self as dead, and sinketh down in it self, like Death, and so
falls with its will through the fires Principle into God's Light-Eye, and
then it is the holy Spirits Chariot, on which he rides.

246. But when it will go of it self, it then continues in its own Fire-Nest
in the Original, where it was awakened, like Lucifer: for it was awakened at
the beginning Point of the Cross, at the left, as in this Figure is to be seen;
that is its original, as shall be further mentioned.

247. The Soul is a total Figure of a Cross, and is like a Cross-Tree,
according to the outward Image of the Body, the Body having two Arms, which
signify two Principles, the Body standing in the midst, as a whole Person; the
Heart is the First Principle, the Brain the Seond; the Heart has the Soul, and
the Brain the Souls-Spirit, and it is a new Child, and yet not a new one; the
Stock is from Eternity, but the Branches are born or generated out of the Stock.

248. Though indeed it has not been a Soul from Eternity, yet it has in the
Virgin of the Wisdom of God upon the Cross from Eternity, been known; and in
the Root belongs to God the Father, and in the Soul to God the Son, and in
the Will to God the holy Spirit.

249. And being it could not stand in the Father in its will, when it would
rule in its will, and thereby fell into the fire of the fierce Wrath; therefore
the Father gave it to the Son, and the Son took it into himself, and became in
it, a Man; and brought it again with or by the word Fiat, into the Majesty,
into the Light; For the Son introduces it through the Angel and Death again
into the Eye of Holiness at the right, into another World, in God, to the
Angels; of which here-following shall be mentioned further.

250. Now come we again to the Sixth Form of Fire: and it is to be known, why we
set the Cross here, which else is the Tenth Number, accounting according to the
order or X.
way of Outward Computation in the Roman Numbering with Capital Letters.
Reason, but according to the two Principles, the Eye appearing parted, the
Cross belongs to the place between the fifth and the sixth Form, wherein Light
and Darkness part.

251. But know, that God is the Beginning and the End, therefore we set the
Cross according to reason at the End, for there we go through Death into Life,
it is our Resurrection.

10.
252. The Tenth Number, 10. is again the first, and also the last, and beyond
through that is Death, and after or beyond Death, the Hell, that is the fierce
Wrath of Darkness, that is externally without or beyond the Cross, for it
falls again into the A; and in the A is the Creator, into which Lucifer would
have flien back, but was thrust out into the Darkness, and there is his Kingdom
in the Source or Torment.

253. You should understand us thus, that we by the Twofold Eye understand one
That is, Two halves of one round Globe, conceived thus virtually partible, and
yet always whole and entire.
round Globe, thus partible, or each half divided assunder, and turns away from
the other, where the Cross is standing from Eternity within it: A man cannot
fully describe it with any pen or pencil, for it is so in one another, it is
but ONE only, and yet TWO, the Spirit understands it only; and whosoever does
not enter into the Regeneration, through the Death upon the Cross, as viz. into
Gods Body, he understands not this, and let him leave it uncontrouled, or he
will be a Maker and Controuler-Devil. We would have the Reader faithfully
warned, and it is in earnest Sincerity and true Zeal.

254. For this Figure has All, or total Ground, or the Foundation of All
things, as deep as Or any.
a Spirit is in it self, and is not apprehensible or knowable to the Reader
without Right or True Spiritual Eyes.
True Eyes, also a man cannot set it down in due and exact Order aright with
Every word stands as it does and every where also; therefore it is impossible
to express it with any words.
any words, for the first is also the last, and the middle goes through All,
and yet is not known or apprehended but IN it self: Therefore searching is not
the chief or most especial means to know or apprehend the Mystery, but to be
born or generated in God, is the right Or the very Invention it self.
Invention or finding; for without that is All is but Babel the Knowledge of
all Mysteries; rightly as the Apostle mentions, Without Charity, which is the
New Birth, is but a tinckling Cymbal; or Babel a mere babble, of parts, words,
if not understood by them that speak them, in the true experimental sense of
the Spirit.
Babel.

255. All lies in the Will and in the earnest Sincerity, that the Will enter
into the Magia, for the Eternity is magical, All is out of the Magia come into
Substance, for in the Eternity, in the Abyss, is Nothing; But that which is,
is the Magia.

256. And out of the Magia, existeth Philosophy, which searches out the Magia,
and seeks therein, and finds Astrology Eternally; and Astrology seeks
again, its master Preceptor or Teacher and Maker, Composer or Producer, viz. A
stronomy, the Sulpher and the Mercury, which has a Principle of its own, and
the third Magia is therein; viz. the Medicus the Physician, who seeks the
Corrupter or Disease, and will heal or cure it; but he finds the fourth
Magia, viz. the Theologus, the Divine, who seeks the Turba in all things, and
will heal the Turba; but he finds the Eye of the first Magia, and there he
sees that all is the wonder of the Magia, and there he leaves seeking, and
becomes a Magus in the first Will, for he sees that he has all power to find
and to make what he will and there he makes of himself an Angel, and
continues in himself; and thus he is free from all others, and continues
standing Eternally; This is the highest Ground of the Substance of all
Substances.

257. And though indeed, the Whore at Babel will not relish this; therefore we
say with good ground, that Babel in her Children, are in Magic, Philosophy,
Astrology, Astronomy, Medicine or Physic, and Theology or Divinity, born or
generated of Whoredom.

258. Babel is the true Child of none of these, she is a perverse stubborn
obstinate Bastard; we have apprehended or known her in the A and O, by
searching of her Philosophy and Astrology, and have found her in all
Looking-Glasses to be a Whore, who commits Whoredom in all Looking-Glasses.

259. She says She is the Eye, but she has a false or adulterous Eye, that
glanceth out of or from her Whoredom, out of Pride, Covetousness, Envy and
Anger, and her seat in the Magia, is the averse backturned left Eye; Pra^get
Boasts and makes a glorious show in Pomp and Pageantry, as in Theatrick Sceens
and Masks.
She triurnphs upon the Cross, but she enters not in into the Center, She will
NOT go through Death into Life.

260. She says She lives, but has ar injurious unrighteous life, yet that is
her right or proper life, if she would live in it alone to her self, but she
oppresses, borneth and compels the Children that are born or regenerated on
the Cross, and treads them under foot.

261. Therefore has the Crossbent and drawn its Bow, and will shoot away Babel
from the Cross, signifies the Spirit of Wonders in the Magia.

The Seventh Form of Fire.
262. One Magia goes always out of the other, and is the others Looking-Glass
and Eye, where the Wonders are apprehended or known and propagated, for in the
Abyss is NOTHING, and in the Magia, is ALL: Every Looking-Glass is a Center,
and yet of its own; for the first pleasure or longing, seeking and desiring,
generateth that, it is the model of the first.

263. For when I search for the Beginning of Substance, then I find the Eye,
which is God, that is a desirous Will of Eternity, which enters in into it
self, and seeks the Abyss in it self.

264. It is in nothing, but it is the Abysses Looking-Glass, and seeks it
self, and finds it self, and that which is found seeks again a Or
Representation.
model, that it may seek, find, and see it self therein.

265. And that goes on to the Number X. 10.
Ten, and then the last, finds the first again in it self; and thus the Last
is a model or looking-glass of the First, and the First of the Last, and is as
an Eternal Band, and stands or consists in the Will, in the desiring
seeking and finding: and in this Substance is the Mysterium Magnum; or great
Mystery contained or included.

266. But now will the Middle in the Desiring have a satiating or fulfilling,
wherein it may rest, else all would stand or be in an Anxious Source or
Torment, and the Desiring draws the Middle out of all Forms, wherewith it
fills or satiateth its hunger, wherewith or whereby in it self, it stands
in Perfection in Joy, and so out of the Anguish, a Love comes to be, a
satiating fulfilling or easing of the Source or fountain Quality of Pain, and
the middle is Sulphur; with that, the Spirit refreshes it self in the Will;
For Sulphur has two Forms in it self, viz. Power or Virtue and Light.

267. And that is together, the Substance generated out of All Forms, it is
Matter, Substantiality, Corporeity, God's Body, Christ's Flesh, the Heavenly,
and is the total or universal fulfilling or satiating of the Spirit in the O;
it is the Rest and Manifestation or Revelation of the Deity, and stands in
the Virgin of Wisdom.

268. The Cross is its limit, and is the Substantiality, which goes with the
sinking into Death as above mentioned, where the fierce Wrath remains in
Death, and it is still and quiet as a Death or a Nothing, and the Life
sprouteth out of it into another Principle.

269. It is not the Principle, only the Principle becomes generated in it, in
it are all Looking-Glasses of the Magia, manifested or revealed, moreover the
Wonders of the Genetrix: It contains the Mysterium Magnum, the Great Mystery,
and out of it, the Spirit opens the Wonders of Eternity, the Spirit gives it
the Essences, for that is its food for its hunger.

270. It is a substance of wonders without number and end; and is also of no
Beginning; for the Spirit in the Desiring begins it from Eternity, and
continues in Eternity, it is a Body of the Number Three, which is called God,
and a Body of Angels, so that the Spirit stands or is in an Image, else it
would NOT be apprehended or known.

271. Thus it knows it self in the Image it self, and seeks the best Magia,
and what it seeks, that it finds, and eats it, and therewith or thereby
gives to the Body of God, its will, so that there is an unity in the holy
Principle.

272. For in the Will of the corporeal Spirit rise up the Wonders, those the
Spirit of Eternity, viz. the holy Spirit receives or apprehends, and so
there is a ringing and song out of the eternal Wonders, for the corporeal
Spirits will is therein.

273. And in these seven Forms the Joy of the Deity, becomes multiplied and
perfect, for it is a fulfilling of the eternal Desiring, and is the Eternal
Food.

274. But seeing all things or every Substance originateth from the Fire, we
will clearly set before you the Mysterum Magnum, the Great Mystery, and plainly
show you Paradise, if any will be blind, to him it is told and discovered; let
him go away with Babel.

275. Ye know that in Fire fire and Water {water}, all Life stands or
consists, and the Substantiality is its Body, and the Body is or existeth out
of the Power or Virtue of the Spirit, for it is the Spirits Food, and the
Spirit is again the Bodies Food, and the highest and greatest Nutriment is in
it self; for the outward would not hold or retain it, if the right or true Life
were not in it self.

276. Therefore now the Fire, is the first cause of the Life, and the Light
thereof is the second cause, and the Spirit the third cause, and yet is but one
substance or thing, which closes it self into a Body, and manifests, and so
with seeking finds.

277. And every Substance is or consists in two Substances, viz. in an
outward and inward, the one seeks and finds the other; the outward is
Nature, the inward is Spirit above Nature, and yet there is no schism or
rending asunder, but only in that which is included in a time, therein the time
severeth the limit, so that the End finds the Beginning.

278. Thus ye see also, how out of the Light, the right or true Substantiality,
exists; for it is a fulfilling or satiating of the Will: The Water existeth out
of the Meekness of the fight, for the desiring lays hold of the Meekness, and
retains it, for it is a good relish; thus is the Meekness Substantial, and a
Substance of the Fire, a fulfilling of the desirous fierce Wrath, an allaying
of the fierce Wrath, and a corporeity of the Time; for when the Body falls
away, then is its Spirit in the Beginning, in that which has given it forth,
in that looking-glass it is.

279. So then seeing the Source or fountain Quality is twofold, therefore is
the Water also twofold, viz. an outward and an inward; the one belongs to the
Spirit, the other to the outward Life; the outward is accounted a Death, the
inward is its Life, the outward stands between the fierce Wrath and Paradise,
in the in-sunk down Death; and the inward is the Paradise it self, for the
Spirit sprouteth therein out of the Eternity.

280. And you may see that this is true thus; Consider Winter and Summer, also
Cold and Heat, and you will soon perceive it, if you be born or generated
internally and not externally only, but with the first Magic Will or Desire to
find God, for that is done in the twinkling of an eye.

281. For the Water in the Deep, originateth from the Fire, yet not from the
fierce Wrath, but from the Light, for the Light goes forth from the Fire, and
has its own seeking or longing, it seeks to it self a Looking-Glass, that it
may behold it self, and have it for a habitation, and draws it in the
Desiring into it self, and dwells therein; and that which is drawn in, is
Water, which apprehends the Light, else the Deep of the World would not
apprehend the Light, if the Light did not dwell in the Water: the Water is the
fulfilling or satiating of the Light, in its desiring.

282. And the Water seeks again a Looking-Glass, and wills to have a
habitation, which is Flesh, as ye see, that the Water, receives the glimps or
shadow of all Substances or Things in their Body, so that the Body it self is
represented in the Water, which is because the seeking of the Fire has taken
hold of it.

283. Further herein is seen the End of Nature, for the Eye finds its Life in
the Water, and thus it goes back into the seventh Form, and seeks its Body
in the Water, and there is further no desire more in the outward; this Body
desires no other Body more in the outward, but it looks back after its
mother, of which ye have a right and true Example in a Looking Glass, which is
Fire and Water, and that receives the Image very clearly.

184. And thus ye see, that the End goes back again, and seeks the
Beginning, and nothing further in the outward: for this World is at the limit,
and is included in a Time, and runs on to the Limit; and then the End
finds the Beginning, and this World stands as a Or Representation.
Model, or as a Looking-Glass, in the Beginning. Let this serve you to the
finding of the Mystery, and remit your self rightly into the Beginning, that ye
may be apprehended or known to be a wonder in God's Love.

285. And thus ye are to know, that the the second Form of the Water,
consists in the Spirit, it is its Fathers Looking-Glass, its Makers, which
dwells in the Spirit, and is found only by its Maker, it self finds not it
self; for so long as a thing goes forward externally, there is no finding in
the Inward internally, only the Spirit which dwells in the Inward, finds it
self in the Outward.

286. But the outward Life finds not the inward, unless it have the inward
Spirit, then is the finding, and it is done according to the inward Spirit, and
then the outward Life speaks of the inward, and yet knows it not; only the
inward Spirit fills the outward, so that the outward is a Mouth, and the
inward has and produces the Word, so that the inward Kingdom, stands
manifest in the outward in the sound, and that now is a wonder.

287. The inward is a Prophet, and the outward apprehends it not, but if it
do come to apprehend it, then it has God's Substantiality in it, viz. God's
Flesh, Christ 's Flesh, the Virgins Flesh, and yet the Prophet stands or
consists in the Spirit, but that Flesh conceives its Power or Virtue, and
assures the outward Man, that he does even that which his Maker wills; as
indeed this Pen is in such a condition, and no otherwise.

288. Thus we apprehend the ground of this World, that it is a Or
Representation.
Figure of the inward, according to both Mothers, that is, according to both
Fires, viz. according to the Fire of fierce Wrath; and according to the Fire of
the Light; as the Model, viz. the Lookingglass of the Light of Eternity, is the
Sun, and the Looking-Glass of the fierce Wrath is the outward Fire, and the
Substantiality of both is the Water and the Earth, the Earth is the fierce
Wraths, Substantiality, the Water, the Lights; the Air, the Eternal Spirits,
which is called God the holy Spirit.

289. Yet ye are to know, that this World, is not the Substance of the
Eternity, but a Shadow, Representation, or Resemblance.
Figure, a Looking-Glass, therefore it is called a Principle of or by it self,
because it has a peculiar Life of its own, and yet stands in the Magic
Seeking of the inward.

290 The Word Fiat is the Master of the outward, for it holds the outward in
its conceived or framed Looking-Glass, it is not the Looking-Glass it self, but
a Similitude, in which its Spirit discovers it self in deeds of Wonder, to
behold the Wonders of Both Fires, viz. of the Wrath and of the Love; and thus
continually brings the Substance of all Substances into the Beginning: And
therefore is this World turning as a Sphere or Globe.
Wheel or Orb, for the End seeks continually the Beginning, and when it
finds the Wonders, then the End gives the Wonders to the Beginning; and that
is the Cause of the Creation of this World.

291. The Life of all and every Creature is a Wonder before the Beginning, for
the Abyss knew nothing of it, and the beginning of the Eye finds it all, and
sets or places the Model in it self, so that it has an Eternal Number, and
recreateth it self in the Number of the Wonders.

The Eighth Form of Fire.
292. Seeing thus there is ONE Substance in TWO Forms, one that takes on an
unsearchable Beginning in it self, and holds it Eternally, and another that
is the Eternal Model, which compriseth, and with its Body is included in a
limit; therefore we are to consider of the Turba, which breaks the included
comprised Life, again, and sets the Model of the comprised Wonders in the
Beginning, and presents such things to the Beginning as were not from
Eternity, but came to be in the comprised Time.

293. Beloved Friend, to you and such as you are, who seek the Beginning, is
this thing shown, for your Mind is our Mystery, seek it in U S, not in ME, I,
the outward Man have it not, but the Inward in the Virgin, in which God
dwells, THAT has it; and that calls it self twofold.

294. My outward Man is not worthy of the Mystery, but God has so ordained it,
that he might manifest or reveal it to you by means, that you might know him by
Means, and not say, it is from my own wit and understanding.

295. And seeing you are a learned Person, you should know, that God loves
also the silly and despised of this World, if he seek God, as indeed I have
done, and that the right and true finding or invention, sticks not in Art,
but in Gods Spirit and Will.

296. For this hand is simple, and accounted foolish in the esteem of the
World, as you know, and yet there lies such a hidden secret or Arcanum
therein, as is unsearchable to Reason.

297. Therefore have a care, pour Oil into the Wounds that desire or require
healing, and consider well what Christ says, Mark 10. 24.
How hard it is for a man to enter into the Kingdom of God, who is captivated
with cares of the Belly, in Might or Potency and Honor.

298. You will not find this Plant in the Highness and Exaltation of the world,
for you cannot, you are a Mystery to them: The Spirit it self seeks the
Beginning; look to it, flatter none; for the Beginning is Paradisical, that the
impure come not into the pure, and at last the Serpent beguile Eve again.

299. Let there be no fair gloss in you, but speak roundly or sincerely with
your Mouth, with Yea and Nay; also fear not, for that which is Eternal,
remains standing, and it is only the filth and vanity, that causes, that the
Turba together insinuates it self as a breaker or corrupter; have a care of
that, for the Old Serpent is subtle, that ye may be pure in the Beginning and
in the End.

300. For, this work, suffers not much Glossing upon, it has a clear ground,
also it belongs not to the Turba, but in and to the Beginning of the Clarity,
or bright Transfiguration or Glory: Therefore take heed of those who are born,
or become of a wolfish disposition, whose Spirit is a subtle Serpent; this we
speak out of Good will toward you.

301. Every thing that begins it self, is sought of the Beginning, for the
Beginning seeks through the Deep, and wills to find the ground: If now the
Beginning do find the ground, that there be a limit in a Thing, then the
Beginning, slips into the limit, and leaves or forsakes the first, and
seeks further so long, till it finds the Abyss, and there it must stand in
it self, and can go no further, for there is nothing more.

302. But if the first be forsaken of the Beginning, then it is fallen home to
the Turba, which breaks it, and makes it again, what it was in the Beginning.

303. And then if the Thing be broken, then the Turba stands naked without a
Body, and it self also seeks it self, and finds it self, but without
Substance, and then it enters into it self, and seeks it self even in the
Abyss, and then the first Eye becomes found, out of which it became generated.

304. But being it is bare and raw without Substance, therefore it is put back
or home to the Fire, for it puts it self therein, and is in the Fire a
Desiring, viz. to seek its Body again, and so the Fire of the Original becomes
awakened.

305. And hereby apprehend we the last Judgment in the Fire, and the
Resurrection of the Flesh, for the Turba in the Fire, is desirous of the Body
which it has had, but was broken in the limit; and its desiring, was the
Bodies Life, viz. the Soul.

306. Therefore being the Fires are TWO, the Turba also must be apprehended in
a Twofold Form or Kind, viz. in a corruptible Body, and in an incorruptible
Body, viz. one in the fierce wrathful Fire, and one in the Light-Fire, wherein
or whereby we understand God's Body, and in the fierce wrathful Fire, the
Earthly Body, which the Turba corrupts or breaks, for it finds its Limit.

307. Therefore now the Eternal Fire in God's Eye, is, to be understood, both
the fierce wrathful; and also the Light-Love-Fire: And we give you to
understand, that the Spirit without a Body, must remain in the fierce wrathful
Fire, for it has lost its Substantiality, the Turba has swallowed it up in
the Fire.

308. But the Spirit with a Body, which the Turba is not able to devour,
remains Eternally in the Substantiality in God's Body, wherein his Spirit
stands; viz. the Body in the Love of God, which is the hidden Man, in the Old
Adamical, which there has Christ's Flesh in the corruptible or fragile Body.

309. Thus we understand the Soul to be an awakened Life out of God's Eye, its
Original is in the Fire, and the Fire is its Life; and so if it goes not out
from the Fire with its Will and Imagination into the Light, viz. through the
fierce wrathful Death into the Second Principle into the Love-Fire, then it
remains in its own Original Fire, and has nothing but the Turba for a Body,
viz. the astringent fierce Wrath, a desiring in the Fire, a consuming and a
hunger, and yet an Eternal Seeking, which is the Eternal Anguish.

310. But the Soul which with its desirous will, enters into it self, and in
its reason, that is, in its desiring, sinketh down, and seeks not it self,
but God's Love, is in its Fire as it were dead, for its will which awakeneth
the Fire, is dead to the Fire-Life, and is gone out from it self, into the
Love-Fire; that Soul is fallen home to the Love-Fire, and has also the
Love-Fires Body, for it is entered thereunto, and is a great Wonder in God's
Body, and it is no more it self, for it has killed its will, and so its Turba
also is as it were dead, and the Love-will fills or satiateth the Fire of the
Original, and therein it lives Eternally.

311. But those Souls which have awakned the Turba, they have lost the Image:
For the Turba has swallowed THAT into it self, and therefore those Souls get
or acquire in the Anger and in Hell, Beastial Images, according as the Turba is
in them, as Lucifer got a Serpents Image, all according as the Will or Mind
has here been figured or framed, so it stands then naked and apparent.

312. For, the fierce wrathful Turba, seeks continually the Image, and
finds it not, therefore it figureth or frames the Image according to the
Will; for the earthly Desire sticks in the Will, and such an Image stands
now in God's Wonders, in the Eye of the fierce wrathful Principle.

313. And here we understand the eighth Form to be the Turba, which seeks the
Image, and if it finds the Limit, it breaks it, and goes into it, and
seeks further into it self, and finds at last the Abomination of that,
which the Soul had done here in this life.

314. And then we understand here, the Fire which at the End shall purge the
Floar, and the earnest severe Judgment: And we understand how every Fire, will
receive its Substance from the Turba, and what that is.

315. Where then the Fire, will swallow up the Earth, and draw the Elements
with the Wonders in them into the Beginning, where then the First will be
again, and the Elements in One; And every thing will set forth its wonders
there, every thing in its own Fire, into which the Will is entered.

316. Let this be said to you ye Children of Men, it concerns you, for No
Beast is come out of the Eternal Beginning, but out of the Model of the
Eternal, and in its Spirit reaches not the Eternal, as the Soul of Man does.

317. Also the corrupt or perished Body, cannot possess the Eternal, it is
fallen home back to the Turba, but the New Man generated or born in God, will
possess the Eternal, for it is gone forth from the corruptible, and has put on
God in Christ, which has God's Body in the Old Body.

318. The earthly source or fountain quality, the Turba takes that along with
it, the outward Body from the Earth, remains with the Earth, but the will
takes its Substance doings or works along into it self, for they stand in the
New Body, and follow after it, therefore a Man should consider what he does in
this Life.

The Ninth Form of Fire. The great earnest Severity.
319. Thus we understand that all proceeds out of the Beginning, and so one
goes out of the other; and we understand, how the Fire is a cause of the Life,
and how the Life divides it self into two parts, and yet breaks not; but only
the outward Life, which falls home back to the Turba, which breaks or
destroys it; therefore we ought to consider, wherein it is that the Eternal
Life consists, what its preservation is, that the Body breaks not; for
Substantiality has a beginning.

320. And yet we can say with good ground, that no End is therein; for it must
have a Ground, else it belongs to the Turba, which finds the Limit: the
Eternal Body must stand in no Limit, but be free in the Abyss in the Eternal
Nothing; else there would be another substance or thing again in that substance
or thing, which would cut that assunder and make a Limit.

321. It is said before, how all must go or pass quite through the Fire, that
will endure Eternally, for that which remains in the Fire, the Turba takes
that: there is no spirit created in the Fire, that it should remain in the Fire.

322. Only the Turba has captivated mary of them, but not from or by God's
will or purpose; for God's will is only Love; but the Turba is his Anger-will,
which has with its vehement hunger, brought a great Kingdom of its
Manifestation or Revelation into his wonders; viz. the Devils and wicked Souls
of Men.

323. But being the Eternal Life stands in Meekness, and has no Death nor
Turba in it: Therefore we must needs say, that the Soul and Spirit, stand not
in the Turba, especially the Soul Body, else the Turba would break or destroy
it.

324. To be understood as above mentioned, thus; that the Will in the
Anguishsource or quality, in the Fire, understand the Souls Will, sinketh down
into it self, viz. into Death, and should not live in the Fire, and then that
very Will falls into another will, viz. into the Beginning; or to express it
better, into the Free Eternity, into the Eternal Nothing; where there is no
source or quality or pain, nor nothing that can either give or receive it.

325. But now there is in the sunkdown will, no dying, for it is gone out from
the fiery Beginning in the Eye, and so brings its Life into another
Principle, and dwells in the Liberty, and yet has all Forms of the Essences
out of the Fire in it self, but unperceptibly, for it is gone quite out from
the Fire.

326. Therefore its Life of its Essences are in the Liberty, and is also
desirous, and receives in the Desiring into its Essences, the Power or Virtue
of the Light, which shines in the Liberty, that is, Power or Virtue without
Turba: for that Fire is only Love; which consumes not; but continually
desires, and satiateth, so that the will of the Soul attracteth a Body.

327. For the Will is a Spirit, and the Soul is the great Life of the Spirit,
which upholdeth or preserves the Spirit, and thus the Soul becomes endued
with Power and Virtue, and dwells in Two Principles, as God himself does; and
according to the outward, in Three Principles; and is the Similitude of God.

328. The inward Water in the Spirit of the Soul, is the Water of the Eternal
Life: concerning which, Christ says, John 4. 14.
Whosoever drinks of the Water that I give him, he will never thirst more;
this is that Water.

329. The Substantiality of the Spirit, which becomes put on to the Soul, is
Gods, Christ's Body; concerning which, he says, John 6. 56.
Whosoever eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, continues in Me, and I in
Him.

330. But the right true Life in the Light of the Majesty in the Ninth-Number,
is the Virgin Tincture; it is a Fire, and yet not a Fire, it burns, but
consumes not; it is the Love, the Meekness, the Humility, this is God's Life,
the Holy Souls Life, an uncorruptible Life; and an unsearchable Life, for it
stands in the Abyss in it self, there is a Center therein, which Center is
its First Life, and yet it does not comprehend it, as the Fire does not
comprehend the Light.

331. Thus the Ninth Number is the Life in the Fire of God, and is called the
Life in the presence of the Number Three; As an Angel, which stands before
the Cross to or for God's Deeds of Wonder, and to or for the Manifestation of
the Heavenly Honor and Glory.

The Tenth Number and Form of Fire. The Gate into the Holy Ternary.
332. We know in Reason, that where there is a Root, therein also is a desirous
will, as, viz. the Noble Tincture, which drives upwards and forwards, and
seeks a Similitude according to its Form.

333. The Tincture is a Virgin, and is known or apprehended in God's Wisdom in
the Wonders; It is no Genetrix, but an opener or manifester of the Wonders
which stand in the Wisdom, it seeks no Looking-Glass, but merely opens or
discovers the Essences, that so a total Similitude may generate or produce it
self out of the Essences, it drives the Twig or Branch out of the Tree.

334. This we understand as to Angels and Souls, which are proceeded out of
God's Essences, out of the total Tree, the Angels out of two Principles; and
the Soul with the Body of the outward Life out of Three Principles: And
therefore Man is higher dignified than the Angels, if he continue in God.

335. And in the Tenth Number upon the Cross, are the Angels and Souls awakned,
and become corporised in the Heavenly Substantiality, although the Tenth Number
belongs to the place, between the Fifth and the Sixth; but in a Globe, to be
understood so, that the Heart is in the midst in the Center, which is God's
Heart, that is, God's Word, the Power and Virtue in or of the whole Tree, as
the Kernel or Pith in the Wood, has the Essences, Virtue or Condition of the
whole Tree.

336. Thus God is a Spirit, and the Word is his Heart, which he speaks forth
out of all Powers or Virtues and Wonders; therefore Isaiah calls it, * Isa.
9. 6.
Wonder, Council, Power, Prince of Peace, viz. a Pacifier of the Anger, and an
Eternal Power of Wonders, a Counselor of the Genetrix.

337. For the Word upholdeth or preserves the Center of Nature, and is a Heart
and Lord of Nature, it is the Genetrix in God's Eye, a Giver of the Power and
Virtue, and the strength of the Omnipotence: It holds the Fire-Center captive
with the Love-Fire, so that it must be dark in it self, and the Word has only
the Light-Life.

338. We cannot apprehend the Tenth-Number any otherwise, then that it is a
Cross, and is the Original of the Substance of all Substances; which Substance
parts it self into Three Beginnings, as above mentioned, whereof each has
its Substance and are in one another, and have no more than one Spirit.

339. And in the middle of the Point is the Center, which is the Cause of the
Life, and in the Center, is the Light of the Majesty; out of which the Life, as
another Principle, existeth, out of which the Tree of the Eternal Life has
ever continually grown from Eternity, and the Twigs or Branches grow out of the
Stock.

340. Which are the Spirits of Angels, which indeed have not been corporeal
from Eternity, but the Essences or Qualities have been in the Tree, and their
Or Representation.
Image has been Shone forth.
discovered, and have appeared in the Virgin of the Wisdom from Eternity: for
they have been a Or Representation.
Figure from Eternity in the Tincture, yet not Corporeal, but Essential,
without Corporisation.

341. And therefore this is the greatest wonder that the Eternity has wrought,
that it has created the Eternal into a Corporeal Spirit, which no Reason
apprehends, nor no Mind finds, also it is not thoroughly searchable or
fathomable to us.

342. For, no Spirit can thoroughly search out or fathom it self, it sees its
own deep very well even into the Abyss; but its framer or moudler it
comprehended not, it beholds him well, and searches into him, even into the
Abyss, but yet it knows not its making, all that is hidden to it, and nothing
else.

343. For a Child knows its Father and Mother well, but knows not how his
Father has made or begotten it; it is also as high in Degree of Nature as its
Father; but it is hidden to it how it was in the Seed; and though it search
that, yet it knows not the Time and Place, nor did not; for it was in the
Seed, in the Wonder; and in the Life a Spirit in the Wonders.

344. And here it is forbidden us to search further, and commanded us to rest
from it and to be silent, for we are a Creature, and should speak so far as the
Creature reaches, both in the inward and outward, in body and soul, in God,
Angels, and Men, and Devils, also in Beasts, Fowls, Worms, in Leaves and Grass,
in Heaven and Hell, all this we can search, only our own Making, not.

345. Yet of that, we know the Fiat, and know how we are made, yet we know not
the first moving of God to the Creation: The making of the Soul, we know well,
but how that which has stood fixed in its Substance from Eternity, is become
moveable, of that we know no ground, for it has nothing, that has stirred it
up, and it has an Eternal will, which is without beginning and unchangeable.

346. But if we should say, the Angels and Souls, have been from Eternity in
the Spirit; the Propagation of Souls will not permit that, as it is before our
eyes; Therefore this is God's Mystery alone; and the Creature should continue
under God in humility and obedience, and not elevate it self further; for it is
not altogether as God himself is.

347. God is a Spirit from Eternity, without Ground and Beginning; but the
Souls and Angels Spirit, has an Original, and stands in Gods hand, the Third
Number, has the casting shovle, and purges its Floar; Only Patience and
Humility in Obedience is requisite, else it avails nothing to be or exist
from God: The Devil was also an Angel, yet his highmindedness, throws him
notwithstanding into the Darkness: Let none climb up above the Cross, else he
falls into Hell to the Devil.

348. God will have Children, and not lordly ones about him; he is Lord and
none else, Joh. 1. 16.
of his Fullness have we received, out of his Essences are we born or generated,
we are his right and true Children, not stepchildren, of a strange
Looking-Glass, also not only a similitude, but children; yet the Body is a
similitude, and the Spirit is a similitude according to God's Spirit, but the
right and true Soul is a Child born or generated out of God.

349. Romans 8. 16.
God's Spirit gives witness to our Spirits, that we are God's Children, not in
that kind as Babel makes a rumbling noise, which so would fain be God upon
Earth.

350. No, but our selves are Children begotten of God's Seed, our heavenly Body
is out of or from God's Body, which the holy Soul carries about it, hidden to
the Devil and to the Old Adam.

351. Therefore beloved Brother in God 's Body, know this clearly, and it is
our Answer, upon your first Question; Whence the Soul originateth:

352. Viz. It originateth out of God, from Eternity, without Ground and Number,
and continues or endures in its Eternity: But the beginning to the moving of
the Creature, which is done in God, that should not be mentioned.

353. Only we give or offer you this, that the Number Three has pleased
delighted or longed to have Children like it self, out of it self, and so has
revealed or manifested it self, in Angels and in the Soul of Adam, and passed
or transmigrated into an Image, as a Tree which brings forth Fruit, and
generateth a Branch out of it self; For that is the right manner of Eternity,
and no other.

354. It is not a strange or different thing, but one Looking-Glass out of the
other, one Substance out of the other, and all seek the Beginning, and is all a
Wonder.

355. This is the entrance, and we should but in brief give you summary Answers
upon the Questions, because you see in this description clearly all your
Questions, Answered; yet to pleasure and accommodate the simple, and such as
have not our knowledge, we will go through with them particularly.

The Second Question.
What the Soul is in the Essence, Substance, Nature and Property.
1. THE Souls Essences are out of the Center of Nature, out of the Fire, with
all Properties of Nature; All the Three Principles lie therein; All whatsoever
God has, or can do, and whatsoever God is in his Number Three, that, the Soul
is in its Essences, as a Branch out of the Power and Virtue of the Tree, its
Substance is heavenly created, out of the heavenly Divine Substantiality.

2. But its Will is Free, either to sink down in it self, and to account it
self Nothing, but to sprout as a branch out of the Tree, and to eat of God's
Love, or to climb up in its Will into the Fire, and be its own Tree of it
self, and of which soever it eats, of that it gets Substantiality; viz. the
Body of the Creature.

3. Is Nature is the Center it self, with Seven Spirits to generate or
propagate with; It is a Total Substance out of All Substances, and a Similitude
of the Number Three, if it be in God; If not, it is the Similitude of Lucifer,
and of all Devils; all furthermore according to their Properties.

4. Its Property, was in the First Soul created according to both Mothers, upon
which followed the Command, and the Temptation, that it should not suffer it
self to Lust to Eat of Evil and Good; but of Heavenly Paradisical Fruit only,
and should with its Will and Property be directed and inclined to be in God.

5. But all Properties lie in it; it may awaken and let in what it will, and
whatsoever then it awakeneth and lets in, that is acceptable to God, if it
stand converted with its will into Humility, and into Obedience into God's
Love; then may it do what All outward Works are the Wonders of God in this
World.
wonders it will, it stands or serves all to Gods Honor and Glory.

The Third Question.
How the Soul is created to the Image of God.
1. IT is clearly shown, that the Number Three, with all the Three Principles
has pleased or longed to have a Total Similitude in Substance and Property,
according to the Sustance of all Substances.

2. And the pleasure or longing to have that, has become awakened in Gods
Heart, as a Great Wonder.

3. And that awakening was the harsh or astringent Fiat, viz. the desirous
attraction, which has drawn out of ALL into ONE, and is become an Image
according to the Similitude of God; according to Heaven and this World, and
also according to the Anger-World; It has created all; viz. the Total Fiat, in
verbo Domini, in the Word of the Lord, out of God's, and out of the
Anger-Kingdom.

4. And as there is nothing higher than the Soul, so there is nothing that can
break it, for all is under it and in it; it is a child of the Total Substance
of all Substances: Thus it was created.

The Fourth Question.
What the Breathing in of the Soul is, and when it is done.
1. EVery Spirit without a Body is raw or void, and knows not it self:
therefore every Spirit desires a Body, for its food and for its habitation.

2. Now being God had before the Soul created the Third Principle, as a
Looking-Glass of the Deity, therefore was the Looking-Glass clearly appendant
to the Eternal, for it was generated out of the Eternal Wonders, and so
created: Therefore also the Third Principle would not leave the Soul free,
being it also was created out of God's Wonders, and stood in the Beginning as a
Figure in God's Wisdom; and desired, seeing it was material, that it also might
have a material Similitude in or on the Soul, and so stirred up in the Souls
Creation, also its Spirit, together in the Fiat.

3. And there was the outward Image according to the Spirit of this World, laid
hold on by the outward Fiat, and became a Body created out of the Earths
Matrix, A Mesch a Mixture, a Red Earth, consisting of Fire and Water.

4 And the Heavenly Matrix longed also after the Soul, and would that the Soul
should bear its Image, and with the Bodies creation laid hold of its own Fiat,
and did create before the earthly Fiat created; that was the First, for out of
the Center of the Word, went the Fiat forth with the Word: thus was the Third
Principle Created in the Second.

5. The Virgin-Wisdom, surrounded the Souls Spirit first with heavenly
Substantiality, with heavenly Divine Flesh, and the holy Spirit gave the
heavenly Tincture, which made heavenly Blood in the Water; as in our Threefold
Life.
Third Book is mentioned at large.

6. Thus stood the inward Man in Heaven, and its Essences were Paradisical, its
glance in the inward Eye, was Majesty, an incorruptible Body, that could
understand God's and the Angels Language; the Language of Nature, as is to be
seen in Adam, that Genesis 2. 19, 20.
he gave all Creatures their Names, every one according to its Essence and
Property; he stood thus in the outward Image, and yet knew not the outward
Image by Experience, as indeed the outward Body has no apprehension.

7. Note the Hour when Christ was hanged on the Cross.
In this Twofold Body, which was created on the Sixth Day on the Sixth hour of
the Day, even Mat. 27. 45. Mark 15. 33.
in the Hour when Christ was hanged on the Cross, was the Kingly or Royal Soul,
after the finishing of the Body, breathed in by the holy Spirit, into the
Heart, into the holy Man, into its Principle; like an awakening of the Deity.

8. The Third Number, has moved it self with the Souls breathing in, for it
was upon the Center in the Seed, as a sprout of the springing of the Essences;
thus it was breathed in into the inward Center, into the inward Man, into the
Heavenly Heartblood, into the Water of the Eternal Life, with all the two inner
Principles.

9. And the Outward Spirit, viz. the Air, with the total outward Principle,
with Stars and Elements hung to the Inward, and the outward Spirit breaths
into him its life, together also with the Soul, Genesis 2. 7.
through the Nostrils into the Heart, into the outward Heart into the Earthly
Flesh, which yet was not so Earthly; for it became corporeal out of the Matrix
out of the seeking out of which the Earth came to be.

10. Thus the Holy Spirit rode upon the Souls Chariot upon the Inward Majestic
Will, and moved upon the Water; for the Water comprehended him not, therefore
he moved upon it and in it, it is all one; and the Soul did burn or flame out
of the Heart-blood, as the Light out of a Candle, and went through all the
Three Principles, as a King over his Country or Dominion.

11. It could potently rule over the outward Principle, if it were with its
will entered again into the Heart of God, into the Word of the Lord.

12. Also the Source or Quality of the fierce Wrath did thus together press in
with the Breathing in; viz. with the Original of the Soul.

13. And the Soul could not otherwise continue to be God's Image, unless it
continue in Humility and Obedience, and incline or set its will into God's
Will; wherein it was an Angel and God's Child, else there was great danger, for
a Creature to overpower two Principles, viz. the Angry, and the Outward, which
was generated out of the Anger.

14. Therefore its Temptation, was not the mere biting of an Apple, and has
endured for a few hours only, but Forty Days, so long as Christ was tempted in
the Wilderness, and even by all the Three Principles, and Israel in the
Wilderness, when Moses was Forty Days upon the Mount; when they also stood
not, but made a Calf.

The Fifth Question.
How the Soul is peculiarly formed and fashioned or framed.
1. When a Twig or Branch grows out of a Tree, then its Fashion or Shape is
from the Tree, it is not the Stock or the Root, but yet its Form is like the
Tree; So also when a Mother breeds a Child, it is an Image of her.

2. And that cannot otherwise be, for there is nothing else that can make it
otherwise, unless it be fallen back home to the Turba, which often awaketh a
Monster, according to the Spirit of this World, according to its beginning or
inceptive Maker, viz. the Moon, where, the Fiat, makes a Or a Menstruous
Monster.
Moon-Monster in the Turba.

3. Thus we are to apprehend and know in what Form it is, viz. of a round
Globe, according to God's Eye, through which the Cross goes or pierces, and
parts it self into two Or halves: The halves set forward are two Eyes,
parts, viz. into Two
Eyes, which stand back to back, as we have made the Figure above with a
twofold As two Halves of one whole Circled Rainbow.
Rainbow, where the Cross goes or pierces through both, and in the midst
between the Or two Rain-Bows.
Bows, one Arm or Point of the Cross reaching up aloft, which signifies a
Sprout through the Fire, through the Anguish, viz. through Death, and yet it is
no Death, but an Exit out of it self, into another source or fountain quality,
where it stands thus before the two Bows in the midst as a sprout out of the
Cross.

4. And the Arm of the Cross at the Right hand, signifies its Spirit, which
enters into the Light of the Majesty; and puts on to the Soul, viz. to the
Center, Divine Substantiality.

5. And the Arm at the left of the Cross, signifies its Original in the Fire,
and holds or contains in it the first Principle; that it belongs to the
Father, and stands in the Original Eye, in the strong and stern power and
might; as a Lord and Potentate or Ruler of Nature.

6. And the under Part or Arm of the Cross, signifies the Water, viz. the
Humility or the Death, so to resemble it, that it should not rule in Fire, nor
kindle that, but sink down in it self and under it self, before God's Majesty;
and account it self as dead in its will, that God might live in it, and the
holy Spirit conduct its Regiment or Government; that it may not do what the
Will of the Turba in the Fire, wills; but what the Will in the Light wills.

7. Therefore should its Will sink down under it self, into the meek Humility
before God; and so it goes out from the Turba of the Fire, for its Will is not
therein, and so also there can no Imagination be acted out of which, that
Looking-Glass, can be born or generated, so that it can behold and apprehend it
self experimentally in the Fire, that it is Lordly, whence it becomes proud,
arrogant or stubborn, and will rule it self in or according to its own might or
power; as Lucifer did, and Adam in Paradise.

8. Understand us aright, thus; The Soul in it self, is a Globe, with a Cross,
with two Eyes, one Holy Divine, and one Hellish Wrathful one in the Cross; this
it should shut up, and rule hiddenly through the Anguish, viz. through Death in
the Second Principle therewith in the Love.

9. And if it conceives or apprehends the Love, then is the fierce wrathful
Fire as it were dead, and imperceptible: But it is the Joy-Life of Paradise,
else in the Meekness would be no Life and Government or Dominion, if the Fire
did not give it self thereinto; but it would remain the still Eternity without
Substance, for all and every substance or thing existeth in the Fire.

10. And thirdly, the Soul is formed, according to the Total Body with all its
Members.

11. Which understand, thus; The Soul is the Stock, viz. the Root, which
appears like the Center of the Number Three, as an Eye a Globe a Cross; and
then its will, which originateth our of the Eternal Will, is a Spirit, which
the right or true Soul has in its power, and that Spirit opens the Essences
in the Fire and Water.

12. So that its whole Form appears like a Tree with many Twigs and Branches,
and is distributed into all the Branches of the Tree.

13. Which is thus to be understood, the Spirit distributeth them into the
whole Body, understand in the Tincture, into all the Members, they are all its
Branches, it appears in its Spirit no otherwise than as the whole Man with
all Members.

14. And herein it is also the right true Image of God: for the Holy Spirit
dwells in the Spirit, if it be true and faithful; if not, the Devil dwells
therein; to which soever it gives up it self or inclines it self, whether to
Covetousness and Highmindedness, or to Love and Humility, that is own it is.

15. But if it persist in Abomination and loses Or Goodness.
God, then it loses the Cross, and its Eye is a Hellish Eye, whereby the Turba
introduces the Form Shape and Model of an Abominable Beast into the Eye, into
the Will and Spirit.

16. Therefore did Christ call the Pharisees Mat. 12. 34.
Serpents and Generation of Vipers, for so stood their Figure before him, in
their Spirit, in respect of their Pride State and Covetous Will, that they
would be Lords, and not Servants of God in Love and Humility.

17. And thus also stands the Figure of Antichrist in Babel, as a Dragon with
Seven Heads, which are seven Spirits, upon which its Hypocritical Spirit rides
in Man's Image, into the Abyss, it will needs be an Angel, and yet is a
Monster, in respect of a right true Child of God; it bears the Name indeed,
but its Heart is that Beast in the Revelation of John: It would have God and
the Devil too, and therefore is such a Monster, as is like a Man, and yet
hides the Devil in and under it self.

18. O Child of Man, fly away, the door is open, the Turba is come, which will
destroy the Image; if you will not go away, you must along with it; there is
neither counsel nor remedy, but only to seek the right and true Image in the
Love, or else there is nothing further to be expected but necessity and
calamity and death, says the Spirit of Wonder.

19. This now is our direct Answer; That the Soul in the First Principle
according to the Original, has the Form of an Eye, and yet twofold like a
Heart, wherein the Cross stands.

20. And in the Second Principle it is a Spirit, and a total entire Image, such
a one as the outward Man is.

21. And in the Third Principle, it is a Looking-Glass of the whole World, all
lies therein, whatsoever is in the Potentiality of Heaven and Earth, even the
Properties of all Creatures: for that Looking-Glass is as the Firmament and the
Stars and Constellations.

22. It is such a Crown as that, and therein stands the Outward Man's Number,
the end and termination of his Life, withal Prosperity and Adversity, if the
outward Life be ruled by the Spirit of this World.

The Sixth Question.
What the Ability or Potentiality of the Soul is.
1. IT is apprehensible to us; that whatsoever comes out of the unsearchable
Profundity, and is the Ground of it self, that it is able to do all things; for
it is its own Substance, and makes it self.

2. And though indeed the Soul be a Twig or Branch sprung out of this Tree, yet
it is now come into the Being of a Creature, and is its own; it is now an Image
of the whole, and a Child of the whole; for when a Child is generated or born,
then is the Mother and the Child Two, they are two persons; but whilst it is
yet in the Seed in the Mother, then the Seed is the Mothers, and the Mother
has dominion over it; for when the Child is generated, then it has its own
life in it self, and has the Center of Nature in its own Form, it rules not
only in it self, but also externally without it self, in whatsoever is Seed.

4. Understand us aright, thus; God's Spirit and the Soul's Spirit are two
Persons, each is free from the other, and yet they stand both in the first
Beginning, each has its will.

5. But now it is right and just, that the Child should be obedient to the
Father, upon forfeiture of the Fathers Inheritance; the holy Spirit was the
Souls work-master, and had created it, to that should the Souls Spirit be
obedient, upon loss of the holy Spirits inheritance, viz. of the DEITY.

6. And though much might be written, yet it is very dangerous, in respect of
the false or wicked Magia, for if the false or wicked spirit knew it, it would
practice Witchcraft therewith.

7. Therefore we will so speak, that we may be well understood by the Children,
and reserve the full or plain speaking of it for the Children, for it is not
good to write that, seeing a Man knows not who will be the Reader.

8. But to the wicked and ungodly, we say, that they belong to the Devil, and
shall have no part in our Writings, we shut them out with a thick wall or
enclosure, and strong fortification or bullwark, that they may be blind, and
not know our Spirit; for we would not set the Serpent therein, our will and
mind is gone out from them, therefore shall they not know us, though they carry
us in their hands, there is a fast seal upon it.

9. Christ says, Mat. 17. 20.
If ye have Faith as a grain of mustard seed, then ye might say to the
Mountains, be ye removed and cast into the Sea; that is not an empty void word,
without truth and effect.

The First Power of the Souls Will.
10. The The strong desire is faith.
will if it go strongly forward, is Faith; It frames its own Or,
Representation.
form in the Spirit; it has also the Might or Power, that it can form or frame
another Image in the Spirit, out of the Center of Natue.

11. It can give to the -Body another Form, according to the outward Spirit,
for the Inward is Lord of the Outward, the outward must be obedient to it; and
it can set the outward in another Image, but not permanent.

12. For Adams, Soul had let in the Turba of this World, so that the Turba if
it sees a strange Child, is suddenly uppermost, and breaks or destroys it;
only it continues so long, as the Inward Spirit can tame and overpower the
Outward.

13. And this Form Kind or Manner of Power, is called, Nigromancy, a
transmutation or changing, where the Inward does overpower the Outward; for it
is natural, as we consider, that when 1 Cor. 15. 51.
we shall be changed, it is done by that very Turba, which has the First Fiat.

14. For the Body is Sulphur, and sticks in the Tincture, and the Spirit
conducteth the Tincture; therefore now if the First wills therein or
conanteth thereto, viz. the Soul, then can the Spirit of the Soul, make another
Form or Manner of Image in the Sulphur; but the Devil mixeth himself readily
therein, for it is the Abysses Wonder, wherein he is Lord.

The Second Power of the Souls Will.
15. Also understand us, thus; The earnest will, which otherwise is called
Faith, can with the Spirit do great things: the Will can set or put the Spirit
into another Form or Condition, which is thus: If the Spirit were an Angel, a
Similitude of God, yet the Will can make of it a proud or Stoltyen, Obstinate.
stubborn Devil, and also of a Devil an Angel, if it sink down it self into
Death, into Humility under the Cross, and cast it self again into God's Spirit,
that he may lead it by his government, then it sinketh down into the still
Eternity, quite out from the source or quality of Torment, into the still or
quiet NOTHING, which yet is ALL, and then it stands in the Beginning where
God created it, and the word Fiat receives or embraces it again, which
contains God's Image.

The Third Power of the Souls Will or Spirit.
16. And then thirdly, the Souls Spirit, has ability or power, to enter into
another Man's Marrow and Bones, viz. into the Sulphur, and if he be false or
wicked, to introduce the Turba into him; so far as any is not armed with God's
Spirit, but that he be found naked in the Spirit of this World; as is to be
seen by the bewitching Whores or Sorcerers.

The Fourth Power of the Souls Will.
17. Fourthly, It has power, if it be God's Child, that it can lead the Turba
captive, and can pour it out upon the house of the wicked and ungodly; 2.
Kings. 1. 10. 12.
as Elias did with the Fire; and Exodus 7. and 8.
Moses before Pharaoh; for it can throw down Mountains and break Rocks.

18. This is understood, to be, so far as a place is capable of the Turba, that
it has made the Anger stirring, then it can be; but if not, and that God's
Spirit be in a thing, then it cannot be; for Water will be poured into the
Fires Turba, and it is as it were dead, and its ability or power lies in the
dirt.

19. And therefore is the Heaven the middle or medium, between God and Hell,
viz. between Love and Anger; which Genesis 1. 6.
Heaven is created out of the midst of the Waters, so that the Devil cannot
rule with his Turba, the Water turns his purpose into scorn and derision; as
therefore the false or wicked Magia is drowned in the Water with its
enchantment and Blendung.
delusion.

The Fifth Power of the Souls Will or Spirit.
20. Fifthly, The Soul has might or ability, that, it may and can seek or
search out all Wonders or Inventions.
Works, which are in Nature, viz. Arts and Sciences, Languages, Building,
Tilling or Planting, and Destroying; it can subdue the Starry Heaven; as Josh.
10. 12, 13.
Joshua commanded the Sun that it stood still, and Moses the Sea, that it stood
up, also he commanded the Darkness, and it came; also it can make or produce
the Earthly Life; Exodus 14. 21. 10. 22. 8. 6. 16. 7. 12, etc.
as Moses the Lice and Frogs, also Serpents and other Wonders.

21. Also it has Death in its power or might, that it can overpower that, if
it ride upon the Brides-Chariot; it can subdue and overpower the Devil, if it
be in God.

22. There is nothing which it cannot subdue: only understand it aright, The
Soul has such might or ability from its Original, and such a Spirit it could
have given forth out of it self, if it had not let in the Earthly Great Turba,
which now gives the stop: unless it be so, that the holy Spirit rides upon
its Chariot; as with Moses, Elias, and all the Prophets, with Christ and his
Disciples, also still continually, with the holy Children of God: they have all
this Power or Authority, they can awaken or raise the Dead, heal the Sick, and
expel all Diseases, it is natural, the Spirit only rules therewith, over the
Turba.

24. But there is this on the other side to be considered, that the Soul
knows very well what covenant, compact or agreement it has with the Devil,
and what propriety or part he has in it; it goes not naked, unless it be so,
that the Spirit of God conduct it, so that it has him for a shield or defense,
so that the Devils suttlety cannot press or slip into it.

25. It makes no wonder, unless God's Spirit awaken or stir it up, it gives
God the Honor and Glory, and attributes the might and power to him; it does
as a humble Child, and remains standing under the Cross, and lets the
Devil bluster over it, but it self sprouteth in Humility and Meekness through
Death into the Eternal Life, and brings forth much fruit in Patience.

26. Thus the Devil can do nothing to that Soul, it is as it were dead to him;
he may with his Turba in the Earthly Life, with his helpers and instruments,
wicked and ungodly Men, make a stir and racket, but he has only scorn and
derision in the presence of God for it, for he is a proud arrogant spirit, and
would fain be above God's Wonders, but an Humility can bind him, or subdue him.

27. In such a manner may every man escape the false and wicked Magus, and also
the Nigromancer; for no power takes hold on them where God dwells: As Christ
Heb. 2. 14.
in his Death overcame the Devil and Death: so also we in Christ; for the Word
that became Man dwells in us, and in that Word, we can rule over the Devil
and Hell, there is no hinderance.

28. Thus we give you for an Answer, upon this Question, that the Soul in its
Original is greatly powerful, it is able, and can do much, but only in that
Principle into which it looks or stands, is its power and might; for the
Devil cannot rule over God: Its might or power is not given to it, as a King
gives Might, Power, Authority or Favor to any, but it stands in
Natures-right, therefore we are Children of the Omnipotency of God, and inherit
his Goods in the Omnipotency.

The Seventh Question.
Whether the Soul be Corporeal or not Corporeal.
1. A Thing which is from no Beginning, has also nothing, that can give it any
thing; and if it be something, it must seek the Beginning in it self, for every
spirit dwells in the deepest Abyss of its substance, but if it must make the
substance to it self, it can dwell in Nothing that is strange to it, but in it
self in its own substance.

2. When God created the Soul, the holy Spirit surrounded it with the Tincture;
for it stood therein, as to one part in it self it was raw or red as the
glowing of the fire is raw or red, and is surrounded with the Tincture.

3. As you understand, that from the warmth the growing existeth, that is a
driving of the Tincture; which drives the Twig or Branch out from the Root,
viz. out of the same Fire, be it cold or hot.

4. For the Darkness has a Cold Fire, so long till it reach the Anguish, and
then it kindles it self in the hot, as is to be seen in an Herb, if it come
into another quality.

5. Thus we give you to understand, that the Tincture, is the right and true
Souls Body: for the Soul is Fire, and the Tincture goes forth out of the Fire,
which the Fire draws again to it self, and meekneth or allayeth it self
therewith, so that the fierce wrathful source or quality extinguisheth.

6. Thus the Tincture stands in meekness, and it has no substance or might
or power in it self, but the Water is its might or power, there comes out of
the meekness of the Tincture, water to be.

7. For the Fire is desirous, and where there is a desiring of the Original,
there is also a finding of the Original, thus the Fire finds in the Tincture,
Water, and turns that into Sulphur, according to power or virtue of all the
Seven Spirits of Nature, that is a Water of Life.

8. For the Tincture drives up in the Water as a sprout, and the Fire in the
Abyss causes that.

9. Thus is the Water in the Sulphur of the Seven Spirits changed into the
Mystery, and the great Areanum or Secret lies therein, Whatsoever God and the
Eternity can do: Thus the Mystery contains Two Forms, viz. Fire and Water,
and Wondelt.
changes it self according to Both, viz. according to the Fire, into Red, and
according to the Tincture, into White; so that a clear shining or glance
existeth from the Fire; so that the Life sees or knows it self, out of which
Reason and Thoughts exist, and the Mind is in the Wheel or Orb of the Anguish
in the Fire, out of which the Essences exist.

10. And thus you see what the Blood is, viz. a House of the Soul, but the
Tincture is its Body.

11. The right or true Soul has no palpable Body which is called Soul, but in
the Tincture grows the Body in the Sulphur out of Sulphur, that is, every
Spirit of the Seven Spirits of Nature desires Substantiality, which is
together Sulphur.

12. For Sul is power and virtue out of the Light, and Phur is power and virtue
out of the Four Forms of Natures Original; as in the Three-fold-Life.
Third Book is mentioned at large.

13. Thus the Phur desires Flesh, that is a Mixture out of Fire and Water, and
is in the Tincture conceived and generated or born.

14. And the Tincture is the growing of the Body; and the Fire is an Original
of the Spirit through the Tincture: For in the Tincture the Souls Spirit takes
its Original, which, viz. the right true Image figureth according to God's
Image, that is, according to all the Three Principles: for in the Fire the Soul
is no Similitude of God, but in the Spirit, it is the Image of God.

15. For the First Soul was together incorporated with the Divine
Substantiality, so that it had God's Body in the Virgin of Wisdom, in which the
Tincture stands; this is the Angels Image.

16. And I give you for Answer; that as to what concerns the Soul merely and
purely, by which we understand not the Spirit; it is a Fire-Globe with a
Fire-Eye, and with a Light-Eye, which turn back to back, and one within
another, as A Wheel within a Wheel.
the Wheel in Ezekiel, that can go on all sides; Ezekiel. 1. 16.
though Babel have made clean another understanding upon it, but a blind one
without Spirit.

17. But as to what concerns its Tincture out of the Light, which existeth out
of the Fire and Light, it is a Spirit, where the Original of the Soul and of
the Spirit, in Eternity cannot separate assunder, Note.
it is an Eternal BAND; and when the Blood goes away, and the Body dies, then
this Band continues in Eternity.

18. The Body, as to what concerns the Soul purely, belongs not to the
Substance of the Soul, they are Two Substances, for the Body is the Souls
Looking-Glass and dwelling House, also its proper portion, and it is also the
cause that the mere pure Soul alters or changes the Spirit, viz. according
to the Pleasure or Longing of the Body, or of the Spirit of this World.

19. By which then the Image in the Spirit becomes attered, all according to
what is contained in the Will, which the Soul has framed or contrived, or
brought forth out of the Center, also out of the Fierce Wrath into the Light,
viz. according to the Imagination.

20. And we give you to understand, that the Spirit can alter it self in this
Time of the Body, which is done without its knowledge or apprehension through
the Imagination, viz. through the seeking Lust or Longing Pleasure and Delight,
where the desiring figureth such a Form in the Souls Will, as the lust or
longing Pleasure is, to Evil, or Good.

21. And we say, that the pure Soul, is not corporeal, but there grows a Body
in the Tincture either heavenly or hellish, and yet it is no palpable body
according to the outward, but a Power-Body, God's Body, Christ's Heavenly Body,
heavenly Flesh, which Christ gives us to eat in his The Lord's Supper.
Testament.

22. It is a Body which the Turba cannot touch, or apprehend, it is immortal,
unfadable, comprised in Nothing but only in the noble or precious Tincture,
which is without substance; and this body is to the outward Flesh
incomprehensible.

23. But the Outward Spirit, if the Soul do not hinder it, but lets it in,
brings its Imagination thereinto, and covers, vaileth or obscureth it, so
that another strange Image comes to be in the Spirit, in the Tincture,
according to the contents or condition of the longing Pleasure, or lust, viz. a
Covetous of a Wolf, an Envious of a Dog, a Proud of a Horse, Peacok or other
Beast or living Creature; also of Toads, Adders, Vipers, Serpents, and other
Worms or creeping things, which Image, God's Spirit, so long as it stands or
continues so, does not receive or accept.

24. And therefore Christ says, You must be born anew, of Water and the
Spirit, if you would see the Kingdom of God: and therefore God became Man, and
brought the divine Image again into the Souls Tincture, being it was perished
in Adam, so that now we must be born anew in Christ, if we will see God.

25. And this is done through the Imagination or Faith or Believing, for
believing is eating of God's Body: and every Body grows by eating.

26. And the New Birth is not in such a Manner as Babel teaches, her Matters
are only a Looking-Glass of the right and true way into God; which
Looking-Glass must be broken: For Moses his cover or vail is done away, we
should see further with clear Paradisical Eyes, understand thus much ye
Children of God.

The Eighth Question.
In what Manner the Soul comes into Man, or into the Body.
1. THis Question I understand of the Souls Propagation; For how it came into
Adam, Moses tells you, and it is mentioned above; but because you ask
concerning its Propagation, how it comes into a Child in the Mothers Womb; we
must put on another Habit or Garment.

2. In our Three fold Life.
Third Part, it is written very exactly and at large, with many Circumstances,
concerning its Propagation, how Adam was created in an Image; He was Man and
Woman before his Eve; he had the fires and waters Tincture, that is Soul and
Spirit, and should have generated his like, an Image of himself, out of
himself, through his Imagination and own Love; and this he could have done
without disrupture.

3. For, as it is above mentioned, that the Soul has such might or ability, to
change the Body into another Form; so it has also had ability, to generate a
Branch out of it self, according to its Property, if Adam had stood out the
trial or Proba.

4. But being he imagined after, or desired the Omnipotence, and let the Spirit
of this World into the Soul into the Tincture, and the Serpent, and gazed on
the Earthly Fruit, longing to eat of Evil and Good: then also his Tincture
conceived such an Image, viz. a Monster, which was half earthly, thereinto also
instantly the Turba insinuated it self, and sought the Limit.

5. Thus the noble or precious Image was found in the Earthly, where then
Fragility, Corruption and Death Began: and Adam could not then generate, for
his Omnipotency was lost.

6. And would indeed for ever have been lost, if the Heart of God had not
suddenly with the Word of Promise, turned in it self into Adams Soul, which so
preserved it, that so Adams Image must break; and the Soul with the heavenly
Body, sink down through Death into the New-Life, where its Spirit became
renewed again.

7. Thus Adam fell into inability into sleep, and the other or second Creation
began; for, God took the Waters Tincture, as in a Twig or Branch out of Adams
Soul, and a Genesis 2. 21.
Rib out of Adam,; and the Genesis 2. 21.
Half Cross in Adam, and framed a Woman out of it.

8. As ye know that the Woman has the one half Cross in her Or Scull.
Head, and the Man the other; for in the Head, in the Brain dwells the Souls
Spirit, out of which God has taken a Branch, viz. a Child, out of Adams Souls
Spirit, and given it to the Woman, that she should not generate or bring forth
Devils.

9. And the Man has the Fires Tincture, viz. the right true Original of the
Life.

10. And therefore has the Woman gotten the Matrix, viz. Venus's Tincture, and
the Man the Fires-Tincture, understand, the Woman has the Lights-Tincture,
which can awaken no Life, the Life stands in the Fires-Tincture.

11. But now being it could not be otherwise, they must propagate in a Beastial
Manner, in Two Seeds; the Man sows Soul, and the Woman Spirit, and is, being
it is sown in an Earthly Soil or Field, conceived or hatched, after the kind
and manof all Beasts,

12. And yet nevertheless, all the Three Principles are in the Seed, but the
Inward is not knowable or apprehensible to the Outward; for in the Seed there
is no living Soul, but when the Two Tinctures come together, then it is wholly
in Substance, for the Soul is in the Seed, Essential, and in the Conception or
Hatching it becomes Substantial.

13. For, so soon as the Fire is struck up by Vulcan, then is the Soul in the
Substance wholly perfect, and presently the Spirit goes out of the Soul in the
Tincture forth, and draws the outward Dominion, viz. the Stars with or by the
Air.

14. And thus is an Eternal Child, and and has also the frail or corruptible
Spirit with the Turba hanging to it; which Adam through his Imagination took in.

15. And there the Turba instantly sees the Limit in the Spirit of this World,
and will enter into the limit, and then is the Body old enough, as soon as the
Soul has its Life, to dye: also many a Soul perishes in the Essence while it
is a Seed in the Sulphur.

16. But you are to observe this, that the Man has the Fires Tincture, and the
Woman the Lights Tincture in the Water, viz. Venus's Tincture, as is to be
understood by both their vehement Imagination one toward another; for the Seed
in the Essence seeks vehemently the Life: the Masculine in the Feminine in
Venus, and and the Feminine in the Fire, in the Original of the Life. As we
have very clearly explained it in the Threefold Life.
Third Part, to which we refer the Reader.

17. And we give you for Answer, that the Soul comes not at all or is breathed
in from without into the Body, but the Three Principles, have each of them its
own workmaster, the one forgeth or strikes Fire in the Center, and makes the
Center of Nature, and the other, Tincture and Fire, and the Third Mysterium
Magnum, the Great Mystery, Earthly.

18. And yet is nothing new, but the Seed of Man and of Woman, is that very
thing, and in the Mixture it becomes conceived or hatched, there grows only
a Twig or Branch out of the Tree.

The Ninth Question,
In What Manner the Soul uniteth it self with the Body.
1. THis is explained above, that all the Three Principles are in one another,
and they generate a Child like themselves, all stand one in another, till the
Turba breaks the Body, and then the Soul stands in the inward Body, viz. in
God's Body; or if it be false or wicked, it is in the Turba, which gives it a
Body according to the Imagination, all according to the the here-acted or
committed Abominations.

2. The Soul stands in the Blood of the Heart, there it has its seat and
original, the outward Water and Blood mixeth it self, but it does not wholly
captivate the Water of the Blood, but with the Imagination it is captivated.

3. Indeed it naturally captivateth the inward Water, but the Light of the
Majesty, together with the Lights-Tincture, it captivateth not, but only
through the Imagination; therefore a Child is often more blessed than one that
is old, who has the Devil for an Inmate.

4. But there are not many born holy, but only out of or from good seed, where
yet oftentimes according to some potent or mighty strong Constellation, a
fierce wrathful Turba insinuates it self; as is to be seen, that often honest
or godly Parents, have evil Children, but God knows who are his.

5. This a Man may see by Jacob and Esau, who strove in the Mothers Womb, also
by Cain and Abel, Isaac and Ishmael, and many others.

The Tenth Question.
Whether the Soul be Ex Traduce, by Production, and humanely Corporeally
propagated, or every time newly created and breathed in, from God.
1. IT is a high Wonder to me, what kind of Understanding and Philosophy the
World has, that it cannot resolve this, though hereby I do not blame you, for
I know that such Questions pass among the Learned, in the Schools, where Men
continually dispute and contend; and their arrogant blindness must needs be a
wonder to me, that there is altogether no knowledge of God in Reason of the
Outward Man.
Reason.

2. Here behold your selves ye wise Men, what ye are, or what ye understand,
even nothing at all of the Mystery; how will you then be Teachers? a Shepherds
Crook were better in your hands, then for you to put on the Garment of Christ.

3. O, ye shall give a severe account, for seducing the World and leading it
astray, and yet ye boast, and set up your selves, as if ye were God, and
ascribe to your selves Divine Power and Authority; see what you do, you shall
see against whom you have kicked; I fear that ye are for the most part of you
in Babel; awake, it is day.

4. But to you my beloved Friend, it is answered, that the Soul is not every
time newly created and breathed in, but is humanely propagated, as a Branch
grows out of a Tree; or as I may better render it, as a Man sets Grain or
sows Corn, and so a Spirit and Body grows or sprouteth out of it.

5. And this only is the difference, that the Three Principles are ever
wrestling about Man, each of them would fain have him, so that many times a
wonderful Turba, becomes introduced, while it is yet a Seed.

6. But where the Parents, have Christ's Flesh, God's Substantiality in their
Souls, so that Father and Mother are so, there it cannot be; for Christ says,
Mat. 7. 18.
A good Tree cannot bring forth bad Fruit; but the Turba can with or by Acting
according to selfish Reason of the outward old Adam.
Reason, in this time get or enter thereinto.

7. So also Mat. 7. 18.
an evil Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit; that is when the Parents are both
evil, and captivated by the Devil, then an Evil Soul is sown; But the
Principles cannot yet judge it, nor the Turba cannot, it is indeed an evil
Child; but CAN, if it convert, through its Imagination, enter in Verbum Domini,
into the Word of the Lord.

8. But it is rare, and seldom done, that out of a black Raven a white one
comes to be; yet where it is half in half, there it may more easily be done,
yet it is possible it may well be done; God casts no soul away, unless it
cast it self away, every soul is its own judgment.

9. Observe this ye evil Parents, ye gather or procure Money for your Children,
gather or procure Good Souls for them, that is more necessary for them.

The Eleventh Question.
How and in What Place the Souls seat in Man is.
1. A Thing that is without Ground, and yet seeks and makes a Ground in it
self, has its original and seat in the first compaction or comprehension,
where it compriseth it self in it self, there is the limit in the most
innermost, and it goes forth out of it self, and seeks forward, where then
it makes one Looking-Glass after another, till it finds the first again,
viz. the unsearchable limit.

2. Thus also is the Soul, it is comprised by God in the Heart, and the Word
which compriseth it, was in the Heart, viz. in the Center; thus it continued in
the Figure and Seat, as it was comprised by the Fiat, and is so to this day.

3. It dwells in the Three Principles, but the Heart is its Original, in the
Heart therein, in the inward Blood of the Heart, it is the inward Fire, and in
the Tincture is its Spirit, which has a Glimps from the Fire, for it is
surrounded with the Tincture, and burns in the Heart.

4. And the Spirit moves upon the Heart in the Pit or Concavity of the Heart,
where the two Principles sever themselves, and burns in the Tincture, as a
Brimstone-Light, and distributeth it self further forth in the whole Body into
all the Members: for the Tincture goes through all the Members.

5. But the right and true Fire-Smith, in the Center, sits on the Heart, and
carries his dominion with or by the Spirit, into the Head, and has his carnal
house, viz. the Mind and Thoughts, and the Five Prince-Counsellors, viz. the
Five Senses, which exist out of the Five Spirits of the Original, as we have
mentioned in the Threefold Life.
Third Book, as also in the Three Principles.
Second and in the Aurora.
First.

6. The Soul sits indeed in the inward Principle, but it rules also in the
outward, viz. in the Constellation and the Elements, and if it be not a mymmick
Ape, and suffers it self to be captivated, then it is powerful enough over
the outward, and the outward must suffer it self to be subdued, if the Soul
sinketh it self down into God, and comes upon the Chariot of the Bride again
into the outward, that it has the holy Spirit for an assistant.

7. Then no hinderance from the Devil avails any thing, it destroys his
nest, and drives him out, he must stand in scorn and derision.

8. And this is our Instruction and Answer to this Question; that it is not so
to be understood, that when a man's Head is cut off, and the Blood runs out,
and the outward Life breaks, that it hitteth and kills the Soul.

9. No, it loses indeed one Principle, but not the Substance of that
Principle; that follows after the Soul, in the Tincture in the Spirit, as a
Shadow, for the outward Substance reaches not the inward in the Soul, but only
through the Imagination.

10. Else there is nothing in this World that can touch or kill the Soul, no
Fire nor Sword, but only the Imagination, that is its Poison; for it is
Originally proceeded out of the Imagination, and continues Eternally THEREIN.

The Twelft Question.
How the Souls enlightening is.
1. WE are to consider, that if the Sun were taken away out of this World,
then all things would be in Darkness; and then outward Reason might say, we are
in Dark Death, and in the fierce wrathfulness of the Cold, and it were so
indeed.

2. Now behold, O beloved Mind, consider when thy Body perishes, then thy
Spirit also loses the Sun; and then how thou will be in the Light, and by what
means thou will see, I offer to you in simplicity for your mind to consider of.

3. A thing, that is in the Eternal Liberty, if it continually enters into
the Eternal Liberty, has no Darkness, for it dwells in nothing which
affords that, it is free, as the Eye of God, which sees into it self by or
through the Substance.

4. When it imagines in or according to the Lust, Pleasure or longing after
any thing, then the Will goes into that thing, which the desirous Pleasure or
longing it self, makes, that very thing receives or takes in the will into
it self and overshadoweth it, so that it dwells in the Darkness, and can have
no Light, unless it go out again into the Liberty.

5. Thus we give you, earnestly to understand, that in all our matters and
doings, we have no Light, if we enter with the will into that which is done or
acted, if we set our Heart and Will, Or Sacrifice to out own Net. Hab. 1. 16.
upon the Work of our Hands, viz. upon Covetousness. Then we are in our Souls
totally blind, and have no Light in us, but only the outward Light of the Sun,
which gives light to the outward Body; if that breaks or perishes, then is
the Soul captivated with that thing.

6. Understand here; The Souls Spirit and Will, for the stock or stem of the
Soul is a dark valley, it has no Light, and if perhaps it lift up and kindle
it self, yet it is but a fierce wrathful Fire-Flash, and is like the Devil, and
cannot attain the Divine Light in it self.

7. The Cause is, it has introduced Abomination into its Will and Spirit,
which darkneth the Spirit, and holds it captive with the Turba, for God's
Light goes not back again, but forward into the Eternity.

8. And therefore is God's Eye twofold or in two parts, and stands back to
back; as is showed above in the
Figure; One part goes forward into the still Eternity, into the Eternal
Nothing, viz. into the Liberty.

9. The other goes back again into the Desiring, and makes darkness in the
Desiring, and therein the Center of Nature, and drives on to the great Anguish
and Sharpness.

10. Where then the Will sinketh down again out of the Anguish, through the
Darkness into the still or quiet Liberty, and so brings along with it, out of
the Anguish, the fierce wrath of the Mobility, and the earnest severe Sharpness.

11. In which Sharpness, the Liberty (when the will brings the sharpness
thereinto) becomes a high Triumphant majestic Light, which is called God's
Light, which gives light Eternally, and can be barred in by nothing, for it
gives Light in the Eternal Liberty, and desires nothing more.

12.

And now if thou earthly Man should think, that God would receive thy Spirit
into his majestic Light, whilst thou introducest Abominations, viz.
Covetousness, which has pride and state, which is the Fire-Life of
Covetousness, into thy will; then thou would thereby darken God's Majesty,
and thy will and spirit, would stick still only in thy Covetousness, and would
burn with the fire-source or quality of the Soul, in the glance of a
looking-glass, viz. in pride or state, and could not reach or attain God's
Majesty.

13. And if thou did sit in the Cross of the holy Number Three, and were
surrounded with all the holy Angels, yet thou did but sit in the darkness,
and thy spirit would give Light only into the Looking-Glass of that substance
or thing, which thou thy self have introduced into the Spirit.

14. Therefore now if the Soul with its Spirit in its Image, will behold God,
and see into God's Majesty and Eternal Light; then must it in this world go two
ways; and then it will retain the Eternal Body, viz. God's Image, as also the
outward Life, together with the Earthly Body, and will introduce the Wonders
for which God has created it in the outward life, which it shall awaken in the
outward life, even ALL of them into the inward life, and eternally rejoice it
self therein, and have them as a Looking-Glass, and the right and true way is
as follows.

The highly pretions Gate of the Morning Redness or Aurora.
15. Behold thou beloved Soul, if thou will have God's Light, and see with
God's Eye, and wilt also have the Light of this world, and nourish thy Body,
and seek the Wonders of God, then do it as God himself does it.

16. Thou have in thy Soul Two Eyes, which are set back to back one of another,
one sees into the Eternity, and the other back into Nature, and goes always
on forth, and seeks in the Desiring, and makes one looking-glass after
another, let it be so, it should be so, God would have it so.

17. But the other Eye, turn not that back into the seeking, but with the right
Eye always draw the left backwards to thee, and let the Eye, together with the
will of the wonders, not go from thee, from the Eye which is in-turned into the
Liberty; draw its opened and made or acted Or works.
wonders to thee.

18. Let that very Eye, seek food for the earthly Life, but let it not go into
the food, viz. into covetousness, but draw it hard and close to the seeing Eye,
and let it not go.

19. But let the hands work and make or procure food, and let the Eye draw the
Wonders to it, but not matter, else that which is drawn in will be darkness to
thee.

20. Let the Devil behind thee roar before thy left Eye, he cannot enter in,
unless thou let thy Eye take in matter.

21. Thus will thou, when thy earthly Body breaks, see all the wonders in the
left Eye with the right, which thou have made or acted and found here in this
lifetime: and so when the earthly Body falls away, then is also thy left Eye
free from the Ephesians. 2. 3. (...).
Nature of the fierce wrath.

22. And though it has Nature, for it is Nature it self, which awakeneth and
retains the wonders, yet it stands then with the wonders in the Eternal
Liberty, being it has let in nothing of matter, therefore it is free.

23. And Nature with the Wonders, is a fire-sharpness, and lays hold of the
Eternal Liberty, and so makes Majesty in the Liberty in the Wonders, from
which the right Eye, which accounts it self here in this life as dead,
becomes enlightened, and rejoices it self Eternally with the left Eye in the
Majesty of the highly joyous Kingdom, and eternally sees God with BOTH Eyes.

24. This is one Gate, whosoever rightly in the spirit apprehends and sees
THIS, he sees ALL whatsoever God IS, and CAN do: He sees also therewith or
thereby, through Heaven, Hell and Earth, and through the Substance of all
Substances; and is the whole Scripture, of whatsoever has been written from
the beginning of the world: but it is a precious sight: the Old Man knows it
not, he sees it not, but the New Man born or generated in God.

25. But being we are so hard to be understood by the purblind mind, therefore
we will render it more simply: behold when thou will with thy Soul, see God's
Light, and wilt that it be enlightened from God, then do it thus.

26. Thou art in this World, and if thou have a lawful honest Calling or
Employment without falsehood or wickedness, continue therein, work, labor trade
and manage it as necessity requires, seek Curious Works of Artifice.
Wonders both in the Elements and in the Earth, be it in what Art, Science or
Employment it will, it is all God's Work; seek in the Earth Silver and Gold,
make artificial works thereof, build, till and plant, it is all to God's God's
Works in Nature.
Deeds of Wonder.

27. But listen to this A. B. C. thou should not suffer thy spirit to enter
thereinto, fill or satiate it self therewith, and make a Mammon of it, and to
set thy self therein as in a Darkness; else it is but God's Fool therein, and
the Devils mymmick Ape, and setteh its will therein.

28. And thy noble Image becomes altered according to thy Imagination in the
Spirit, according to thy will which is in Covetousness; thou losest God's
Image, for it is Magical, it is as subtle as a Spirit, and much subtiler, yea
much subtiler and thinner than the Soul it self.

29. It is as God is, who dwells in the Eternal Liberty unapprehended by any
thing, for it is thinner or purer then any thing; and so is also thy noble or
precious Image, which yet stands in Heavenly Flesh and Blood, and is the
Substantiality out of or from God's Body.

30. It is Christ's Flesh and Blood, and thy Soul dwells therein, it is the
Fire of the Majesty therein.

31. And the holy Spirit sits in the Heart of the Image, and goes out of
the Image forth, with Voices, Languages, Wonders, Songs and Sounds; Into this
Image thou bring thy Wonders, if thou art true and faithful; and do it thus.

32. Put thy left will into the work which thou do; and consider that thou
art God's Servant, in the Vineyard of God, and labor faithfully, and put thy
right will into God, into that which is Eternal, and see that thou be at no
time secure or careless, but consider that thou art only in thy day labor, and
should continually listen to have the voice of the Lord, calling thee to come
home; give Reason no place to say, this is my Treasure, it is mine own, I have
enough, or I will get or gather much, that I may come to honor in the World,
and leave much to my Children.

33. Consider, that thy Children, are God's Children, and thou God's Servant,
that thy work is God's work; and that thy Money, Goods, Labor and Blood
stands in God's hands.

34. He may do with them what he will, when he calls thee to go home into thy
own Country, then he may take thy Labor and give it to another.

35. And give thy heart no place to introduce into thee the Will-spirit of
Highmindedness, into the Image.

36. Sink down thy Will-spirit always into Humility before God, and so thy
Image goes always in the Humility with thy will into God's Majesty, and thy
Image becomes continually enlightened with the high-triumphing Light of God.

37. O how cheerful is the Soul, when its Anguish Source or Quality of the
Fire, Kostet.
tastes Gods Light, how very friendly kind and courteous is it, how it boweth
it self before God! Thus stands the Soul and also the Image in the Spirit,
all three one in another: for it is a Substance according to the holy Trinity.

38. Thus my beloved Brother, we give you in answer to this Question, that the
Soul can no otherwise be enlightened than thus, this is its enlightening: It is
in this world, and also in God; it is here in this life, a Servant to the
Wonders of God, those it should open with one eye, and bring them with the
other into the Beginning, before God, and put all its substance and doings into
God's Will, and by no means say of any thing in this world, this is mine, I am
Lord over it, for it lies, if it say so.

39. It is all God's, it self is Servant, and should converse in Love and
Humily toward God and its Brother, for its Brothers Soul is a Fellow-Member of
it self, its Brothers Joy in Heaven with God, is also ITS Joy, his Wonders are
ITS Wonders, for in Heaven 1 Cor. 12. 6. chap. 15. 28. Col. 3. 11.
God is all in all, Ephesians. 1 23.
He fills all.

40. The holy Spirit is the Life in all, there is mere joy, no sorrow is there
known, there all is God's, and all belongs to the Image of God, there all is
common and universal, one rejoices at another virtue and power, charity or
glory, brightness and beauty, there is no grutching or envy, all that remains
in Death and in Hell.

41. Therefore ye Elect Children of God Regenerated in Christ, take this into
consideration, go out from Covetousness and own Self-will, ye have been a long
time lead blindfold in Babble, Rev. 18. 4.
go out from her; ye are called with a strong loud voice, it will shortly
awaken or raise the Dead, let it prevail with you, that you may attain Eternal
Joy in God.

42. The Spirit signifies clearly, that whatsoever will not grow forth
together with the new Sprout, that springs forth in the Mother, Rev. 19. 20.
shall and must go into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, together with the
Dragons Whore in Babel.

43. It is a time of earnest Severity, look not upon it with earthly eyes, it
concerns thee nearly, thou will well see in thy Death, what kind of Judgment
it is, in what time and under what Turba thou have lived; this we speak most
earnestly as we ought.

The Thirteenth Question.
How the Souls feeding out of the Word of God is.
1. When the Soul enters into the majestic Light as above mentioned, and
receives the Light of God, then is it altogether longing and Psalm. 42. 1.
panting after it, and continually draws into its desire, God's power and
virtue, that is, God's Body, into it self; and the holy Spirit is the power and
virtue of God's Spirit; thus it acquireth God's Body and Spirit, and eats at
God's Table; all whatsoever the Father has is his Sons, and whatsoever the Son
has is his Images.

2. It eats Gods Flesh, Christ's, Flesh and from that eating, God's Body
grows in it, so that it also has Gods Body, and is Gods Child, not only his
similitude, but Child, it is born in God out of God's Essence, and lives in
God.

3. When it hears in this world God's Word taught or spoken from or by God's
Children, then it lays hold of the same, and eats it.

4. The outward Man eats earthly Bread, and the Soul eats God's Bread,
concerning which Christ said, John 6. 27.
he would give us his Body for food.

5. And his Testaments are nothing else, we eat not spirit without body, for
the Soul is Spirit beforehand, it would have a body, and thus it gets Body
and Spirit together.

6. Let this be told thee, O Babel, and consider how thou managest Christ's
Testaments, what thou teach; when thou say, Christ's Testaments are
Spirit, without Body, thou denyest God, thou denyest God's Substantiality,
Christ's Heavenly Body, which is greater than All, which is the Fullness of all
things; but in its own Principle.

7. Thou earthly Mouth shall not chew it with thy teeth, the Soul has another
Mouth, and receives it under the outward Element; the outward receives the
outward, and the inward receives the inward.

8. Christ's last Supper with his Disciples, was even so, the outward is a
Remembrance, the inward is the Substance, for Romans 14. 17.
the Kingdom of God consists or stands in Power and Virtue, it is magical,
not as a thought, but essential, substantial.

9. The Magia makes Substance; for in the Eternal Nothing, there is Nothing,
but the Magia makes somewhat where nothing is.

10. There is not only and barely Spirit in God, but Nature, Substance, Flesh
and Blood, Tincture, and All: This world externally is a Similitude of the
Inward World.

11. We tell you, we speak what we see, feel, taste, and know, and it is not
fictions and conceits, and that not for our own sake, but for yours, as one
Member is bound in duty to another, that our joy may be in you, and that we may
partake with you as brethren in ONE Substance. He that desires to know more in
this, let him read our Three fold Life.
Third Part or Book, where he shall find the Circumstances concerning the Souls
eating, and of Christ's Testaments.

The Fourteenth Question.
Whether such New Soul be without Sin.
1. WE understand here the Propagated Soul in a Child newly born; my beloved
Friend, this is a very acute Question, but to you my beloved Friend, it shall
be answered, that the time of the opening is born or generated, the day dawneth
or breaks, the night is passed away; praise and Col. 1. 12.
thanks be given to God for it, that has generated us again to the Light, to
an uncorruptible or unfadable Inheritance, and has received us for his beloved
Children.

2. You my beloved Friend know well the heavy Fall of Adam; as we have exactly
set it down in all our Writings, viz. that the Soul with its right Eye, has
turned it self away from God into the Spirit of this World, and is become
disobedient to God, and has destroyed its noble and precious Image, and has
introduced a monstrous Image, and let in the spirit of this world, whereas it
should with its will, have strongly ruled over it, and not at all, with the
Soul, have eaten Evil and Good.

3. But now it has done against God's Command, and put its Imagination into
the Earthly Spirit, where suddenly the Turba captivated it, which has
introduced the Earthly Monster into the noble Image: And thus the Turba
suddenly sought and found the Limit, in which the Image became broken; and if
the Word had not instantly set it self in the middle, it had Eternally remained
broken.

4. And now also the Turba is become seated in the earthly Abyss, and has
captivated both Body and Soul, and brings the Body continually to the Limit,
where then it breaks it and casts it away, and then the poor Soul remains
raw and naked without a body.

5. Therefore it is necessary that it convert and turn with its right Eye into
the Word again, and acquire again a Body generated or born of God, else it is
raw or naked, and has the Turba in it, which the Fire awakeneth in its great
Anguish, for it is a vehement hunger, a seeker and a finder.

6. Thus it is now very apprehensible to us, that we are tied and bound to the
Spirit of this World with the Soul, for the Turba holds us captive in the
fierce wrathful Anger of God.

7. And though our Soul do go forth, and become generated in God, yet it has
the Turba belonging to the outward Body, which consumes it, for it searches
through it even into the Abyss, and there it finds that it is only a
Looking-Glass of the Eternal: and then it goes forth out of the Looking-Glass
into the Eternal, and lets the Looking-Glass lie in the Nothing.

8. Thus you know very well, that the Soul with the Body in the Seed, is half
earthly, for it is Sulphur, that is Phur and Sul, one among another, and the
Turba is therein, which has indeed might and power enough to break or destroy
the Seed.

9. How then can a pure clean Soul be generated? It cannot be; It brings the
Turba along with it into the world, and is sinful in the Mothers Womb.

10. But know, that God is become Man, or Incarnate, and has put the word Fiat
again into the Seed, though now the Turba be also in the earthly part, so that
the Seed is not altogether free.

11. Yet it is in this manner with the Soul, so far as the Father and Mother
are honest and virtuous, and in God, that the Soul is not left or forsaken of
God, for it proceeds out of the Fathers and Mothers Soul; and though a Child
die in the Mothers Womb, as it were without Baptism, yet it is baptized with
the Fathers and Mothers Spirit, viz. with the holy Spirit, which dwells in
them, and the Turba will be broken off in death, for the Faiths part presses
into God.

12. But with wicked and ungodly Parents it is in another manner; The Soul, if
the Child dies in the Mothers womb, falls home to the Turba, and in Eternity
reaches not to God; also it knows nothing of him, but is a Life according to
the Essence and Property of the Parents.

13. Where yet it does not reach to the kindling or burning, for the Soul had
not it self acted or committed sin, but is a fountain-quality-Spirit, without
self-desire and wonders, like the flame of Brimstone, and like an Ignis Fatuus,
which cannot reach to God, but remain so between Heaven and Hell, in the
Mystery, till the Judgment of God, which will gather in its harvest, and give
every thing its right and true place of Repository.

14. Though perhaps our learned Masters in this may have another kind of
Philosophy; but we enquire not after their Art, we have eyes, they have Arts,
we speak what we see.

15. Thus we give you to understand, that no Soul is generated or born into
this world, without sin, how honest virtuous and godly soever the Parents are,
for it is conceived and bred forth or hatched in earthly Seed, and brings the
Turba of the Body along with it, and that has also surrounded the Soul.

16. Therefore in the Old Testament God made a Covenant with the Children in
Circumcision, and so Sich in Bund Gethan.
ordered in the Covenant that they must shed their Blood, and drown the Turba
of the the Soul therewith.

17. And in the New Testament there is the Baptism, wherein the holy Spirit
with the Water of Life, washes off the Turba of the Souls water, that it may
come to God, and become God's Child.

18. But if any will say, that every one that has not baptism, as Jews and
Turks and other People, with whom is not the knowledge thereof, who have not
the Candlestick among them, that they are all rejected of God, although they
never so vehemently press with their teaching, Life, and Death into the Love of
God, that is a fancy and Babel-like spoken without knowledge.

19. Blessedness and Salvation lies not alone in the outward Word, but in the
Power and Virtue: Who will exclude those that enter into God?

20. Is it not Babel who seduceth, and confounds the whole world; so that
they have divided People into Opinions, and yet in their wills go but one way?
who is the Cause of this, but the Antichrist, when he drew the Kingdom of God
into his might, authority and power, and made fictions concerning the
Regeneration, of which when it comes to be day, the very Children will be
ashamed of them?

21. A Man may say with good ground, that Antichrists Doctrine, is a fighting
with a shadow as in a looking-glass, and a falsehood and wickedness of the
Serpent, which continually beguileth Eve.

22. Thus it is apprehensible to us, that no Soul comes into this world
without Sin, every one brings the Turba along with it; for if it were without
Sin, then it must dwell in a totally pure body, which has no evil will or
inclination at all, in which there is no earthly seeking or desire.

23. But thus indeed is every body and soul tied and united together, till the
Turba finds the Limit of the Body; and then the Turba seeks the works or
actions of the Body; as has been mentioned above.

The Fifteenth Question.
How Sin comes into the Soul, being it is God's Work and Creature.
1. IT is in such a manner as is above mentioned; The Turba together with the
earthly seeking, came along with it into this world: and so the Soul becomes
vehemently drawn by two parties; first by the Word of the Lord, which is passed
into the middle, which there of Love is become Man or incarnate, that draws
the Soul continually into God's Kingdom, and sets the Turba before the eyes
of the Soul, so that the Soul sees in Nature what is false or wicked and sin;
and if it suffers it self to be drawn, then it becomes regenerated in the
Word, so that it is God's Image.

2. And secondly, the Turba also draws the Soul mightily with its bands, and
brings the Soul continually back into the earthly seeking or longing,
especially in youth, when the earthly Tree sticks full of green sprouting
driving Essences and Poison, and then the Turba thus flies strongly or
mightily in, so that many a soul in eternity cannot become freed and loosed
from it.

3. A thing which is from two beginnings, which stand in equal balance or
weight, does by putting in more weight on the one part sink down, be it either
by evil or good.

4. Sin makes not it self, but the will makes it, it comes from the
Imagination into the Spirit, and then the Spirit goes into a thing, and
becomes infected from the thing, and so the Turba of that thing comes into
the Spirit, and destroys first the Image of God.

5. And then it goes further, seeks deeper, and so it finds the Abyss,
viz. the Soul; and seeks in the Soul, and so it finds the fierce wrathful
Fire, by which it mixeth it self with the thing introduced into the Spirit: and
so now sin is totally generated or born: and so now all is sin, which desires
to bring that which is outward into the Will.

6. The will should simply or singly be inclined and exercised in Love and
Meekness, as if it were a nothing, or dead; it should only desire God's Life,
that God may work, act or create in it, and whatsoever it does besides, its
will should be inclined or intended so, as to do it for God.

7. But if it put its will into the Thing or Substance, then it brings that
thing or Substance into the Spirit, which possesses its Heart, and so the
Turba becomes generated, and the Soul captivated with that Thing.

8. Thus we give you for an answer, that no Soul comes pure and clean out of
the Mothers body or womb, be it begotten by holy or unholy Parents.

9. For as the Abyss and Anger of God, as also the earthly world, do all
cleave to and depend on God the Father, and yet cannot apprehend or touch his
Heart and Spirit; so it is also with the Child in the Mother Body or Womb.

10. If it be begotten of godly pious Parents, then each Principle, stands in
its own part, by it self; when the Turba takes the earthly Body, then the
Heaven takes the Spirit, and so the Majesty fills the Spirit, and so the
Soul is in God, and is free from pain.

11. But while the Soul sticks in the Earthly Life, it is not free, and it is
because, the Earthly Spirit continually brings its Abominations, with its
Imagination, into it, and the Spirit must continually stand in strife against
the Earthly Life.

The Sixteenth Question.
How the Soul both in the Adamical Body, as also in the Newborn or Regenerate
Body is held or preserved in such union together.
1. WE have mentioned above, that there are Three Principles, which moreover
are all Three in the Soul, and stand in one another as one thing: and we offer
you this, that the strife in the Soul, begins in the Seeds while they yet
lie shut up in both sexes in the Man and in the Wife, then clearly the Turba
stirs it self, in that the Essence of the Seeds drive up to a false or
wicked Imagination, to a false or wicked desire.

2. And though indeed the Spirit does subdue the Body, yet Note.
it imagines, and that the Turba causes in the Seeds, and no Man can well
deny, but that to many that very Imagination it self is offensive, and they
wish it banished from them, where there is a right sincere Spirit; therefore ye
are to apprehend that the Souls Spirit sticks in a miserable Pinch, and
cannot be freed or loosed till the Turba takes the Body.

3. There is no full union or agreement between the outward and the newborn or
regenerate Man: the outward would continually devour the Regenerate, for they
stand in one another, but yet each has its own Principle, so that the outward
cannot overpower the inward, if the Spirit do but continue in strife.

4. And they can thus well cleave one to another: for they all three stand or
serve to God's Wonders, if they stand in their right and due order or
subordination, each standing or continuing in its own Principle.

5. For the Soul has the Fire-Dominion, and is the cause of the life of all
three [Principles;] and the Spirit has the Lights Dominion, in which the noble
or precious Image stands together with God's Love; and the outward Spirit
has the earthly Life's dominion, which should seek and open the Wonders, and
the inward Spirit should give it wisdom wit and understanding to do it; and the
Soul should manifest or reveal to it the Abyss, viz. the great Secresy.

6. The Soul is the Jewel, and the Souls Spirit is the inventor or finder of
the Jewel; the earthly Spirit is the seeker, and the earthly Body is the
Mystery wherein lies the Arcanum of the great hidden Secresy; for the Deity
has manifested or revealed it self, with or by the Earthliness, as in a
comprehensible Substance; therefore now THREE Seekers belong to the Soul.

7. And you should not look upon it so, as if we undervalued the outward Life,
for it is the most profitable for us of all, as to the great Wonders of God;
there is nothing more profitable to the whole Man, then that he stand still in
his Threefold Dominion, and not go back with the outward into the inward, but
go with the inward into the outward.

8. For the outward is a Beast, and belongs not to the inward, but its
Wonders which are generated forth out of the inward, and have opened or
discovered themselves in a comprehensible Substance, they belong with their
Figures, not with their Substance to the inward, those should the inward Spirit
receive and take in, viz. God's Deeds of Wonder, for they will in Eternity be
its JOY.

9. But we say, that the Soul, can very well be retained or held in the New
Man, if its Tincture Spirit do but hinder the seeking and Imagination; and
though the outward Spirit be Beastial, yet the inward understanding Spirit can
hold the outward and subdue it, for that is its Lord, but he that lets the
Beastial Spirit be Lord, he is a Beast, and has also a Beastial Image in the
inward Figure in the Tincture.

10. And he that lets the Fire-Spirit, viz. the Turba, be Lord, he is a
substantial Devil in the inward Image; and then it is necessary, for the
outward Spirit to pour water into the Fire, that it may hold the stern Spirit
captive, whereas (whiles it will not be God's Image) it is a Beast according to
the Inward Image.

11. And when we consider our selves in or as to the union, the outward Spirit
is very profitable to us: for many a soul would perish, when the Beast-spirit
acts, which yet holds the Fire captive, and sets the earthly beastial
Labor and Joy before the Fire-Spirit, wherein it can delight it self, till it
can through the Wonders somewhat discover its noble or precious Image in the
Imagination again, so that it seeks it self again.

12. You my beloved Children who are generated in God, to you it is said, that
it is not done without cause, that God has breathed the outward Spirit into
Adam, viz. the outward Life into his Nostrils.

13. It was dangerous for this Image, God knew how it went with Lucifer, and
what the great eternal Magia can do; Adam also might have become a Devil, but
the outward Looking-Glass hindered that, for where water is it quenches the
Fire.

14. And many a Soul in its malice and wickedness would in a little while
become a Devil, if the outward Life did not hinder it, so that the Soul cannot
quite and totally kindle and inflame it self.

15. How evil wicked and venomous is many a one, that he would murder and
commit abominable evil and wickedness; but that his Fire has Water, else it
would be done and committed: as is to be seen in the Gall which is a fire
poison or venom, but is mixed with water, so that the pomp and fury of the
Fire is allayed.

16. Thus it is also with the inward Substance; the Spirit of this World has
insinuated it self in the Abyss into the Soul, and has in its Source or
Quality mortal Water, wherewith it often moisteneth the Soul, when it would
spit fire.

17. Also the outward Spirit could not without the Fire have a Life, and though
it has Fire in all Creatures, yet the Fire is only the fierce Wrath of the
inward Fire.

18. The Inward Fire, consumes Earth and Stone, also Body and Blood, as also
the Noble and precious Image, if it becomes kindled or inflamed in the Will,
and there the Water is a Medicine for it, which lays the pomp or fury of
going forth aloft over the Meekness of God, as Lucifer did.

The Seventeenth Question.
Whence, and wherefore, there is Contrariety of the Flesh and the Spirit.
1. YOu know beloved Brother very well, that Fire and Water is at Enmity, for
the Fire is Life, and the Water is its Death, which you see very well; when
Water is poured into the Fire, then is the source or quality of the Fire out,
and the Fire is in Death;

2. But in Man it is not so totally in Death, in respect of the Light, which
continually causes the Fire, yet there is an Enmity, as between God and Hell
there is Enmity, and yet Hell or Anger-Fire is Gods.

3. And God's Majesty would not be if his Anger were not, which sharpneth the
Divine obscure hiddenness of the Eternity, by the fierce wrath of Nature, so
that it becomes turned into Fire, out of which the high Light in the free
Liberty becomes generated, which in the meek source or quality makes Majesty.

4. And yet the Fire is the only Cause, that in the Light, in the Meekness
there is a Springing; for the Light existeth from the Glance of the Fire, and
has in it the source or quality of the Fire.

5. But as aforementioned, the Will sinketh in the Anguish into Death, and
sprouteth forth again into the Liberty, and that is the Light together with the
Fires source or quality, but it now contains or holds another Principle in
it, for the Anguish is become Love.

6. And just such a manner and kind it has in the Body, for the Flesh striveth
against the Spirit, the outward Fleshes Life is a Looking-glass of the most
inward Fire-Life, viz. of the Souls Life, therefore is the Souls Spirit-Life,
together with the Light in the Tincture the Middlemost Life, and yet becomes
generated out of the Soul.

7. But understand us according to its precious height; the Souls Spirit
wherein the Divine Image stands, originateth in the Fire, and is first the
Will to the Fire; but when the fierce Wrath to the Fire so sharpneth and
kindles or inflameth it self, then the Will comes into great Anguish, like a
dying, and sinketh down in it self, out of the fierce Wrath, into the Eternal
Liberty, and yet it is no Dying, but thus the other or second World comes to
be out of the first.

8. For the Will now sprouteth into the other World, as a Sharpness out of the
Fire; but without such Quality flowing forth, in the Eternal Liberty, and is a
moving, driving, and apprehending of the Anguish Nature; it has all Essences,
which are become generated in the first sharp Fire-world in the Anguish; but
they are as one that goes out of the Fire into the Water, where the Anguish of
the Fire remains in the Water.

9. Understand us thus; Concerning this Life of the Souls Spirit-Life; the Soul
is the Center of Nature, The Spirit is the precious Noble Image, which God
created to his Image, herein stands the High-Kingly and precious Image of
God, for God is also thus, and comprehended in the same Life's quality or source.

10. The Spirit is not severed from the Soul; No; as ye see that Fire and
Shining is not severed, and yet also is not one and the same; it has a twofold
source or quality, the Fire, fierce wrathful; and the Light, meek and lovely;
and in the Light is the Life, and in the Fire D is the Cause of the Life.

11. Thus you may very easily and without much seeking find the Cause of the
Contrariety of the Flesh and of the Spirit, for the Inward Spirit has God's
Body, out of or from the Meek Substantiality, and the Outward Spirit, has the
fierce wrathful Fires-Looking-Glasses Body, viz. the Souls Looking-Glasses
Body, which would continually awaken the fierce Wrathfulness, viz. the Great
Wonders which lie in the Arcanum or secrecy of the Souls Sternness, therefore
the Inward Love-Spirit, hinders it, that it should not lift up it self and
kindle or inflame the Soul, else it would lose its Love-habitation and Image,
and the Souls Fierce-wrath would destroy it.

12. The Contrariety is thus; the inward Spirit would be Lord, for it Subdueth
the outward; and the outward would be Lord, for it says, I have the Great
Wonders and the Arcanum or Secret, and thus Glories about the Mystery, and yet
is but a Looking-Glass of the Mystery.

13. It is not the Substance of the Mystery; but a Seeking or Searching, like a
palpable Looking-Glass, in which the Mystery becomes seen, he will needs be a
Master, being he has attained one Principle, and is an own Self-Life; but he
is to be accounted a Fool in respect of the Mystery.

14. Therefore loving Brother, if you would seek the Mystery, seek it not in
the outward Spirit, for so you will be deceived, and get but a Glimps of the
Mystery: go in even to the Cross, then seek Gold, you will not be deceived, you
must seek the pure Child without blemish, in another World, in this world you
find only the Rusty or Drossy Child, which is altogether imperfect, and now
take this right thus.

15. Go from the Cross back into the Fourth Form, there you have Sun and Moon
one in another, bring it into Anguish into Death, and drive on the made or
framed Magic body so far, till it become again, what it was before the Center
in the Will, and then it is Magical and hungry after Nature;

16. It is a seeking in the Eternal Seeking, and would fain have a Body,
therefore give him for a Body, Sol, viz. the Soul, and then it will suddenly
make it a Body according to the Soul, for the Will sprouteth in Paradise with
very fair heavenly fruit without spot or blemish.

17. There you have the fair noble and precious Child, you Covetous
stiff-necked Person, we must indeed tell you, seeing it is together born and
generated with the time, and yet we will hereby only be understood by those
that are Ours.

18. For we mean not A Looking-Glass or Heaven; but Gold; wherewith you boast,
that has so long time been your Idol: That is born or generated, and puts the
Eyes of the blind Cow or Beetle quite out at last, so that it sees less than
before; but the Children shall see, eat and be fat, that they may praise God.

19. We speak wonderfully here, yet only that, which we should speak, which
yet none wonder at, that he knows the Mystery, who never learned it. Does not
an Herb grow without your counsel or advice, it enquireth not after Art; so
also is the Mystery grown without your Art; It has its own School, like the
Apostles on the day of Pentecost, who spoke with many Tongues and Languages
without the precognita or the fore-skill of Art, and so is this Simplicity.

20. And it is a forerunning Message to thee Babel of thy Overthrow, that thou
may know it, no fierce Wrath or Anger will avail; the Star is born or
generated, which leads the Wisemen out of the East, but seek them only where
thou art, and find thy self, and cast the Turba away from thee, and so thou will live with the Children; this we speak earnestly, there is no other Counsel
or Remedy, thy Anger is the fire, which will devour thy self.

21. Or do thou suppose that we are blind? If we did not see we should be
silent; how would a Lie be pleasing to God? and so we should be found in the
Turba, which sifteth through the work and doings and substance of all men; or
do we this service for Wages? is it our living? why do we not hold to; depend
on Bread according to our outward Reason?

22. If it be our day Labor, we should do as the Father will have us, For Mat.
20. 8.
we shall give an account of it in the evening; this we speak dearly and
earnestly with deep seriousness.

23. Thus we can certainly understand the Contrariety of the Spirit and of the
Flesh, and apprehend very well, how Two Spirits are in one another, one
striving against the other; for the one would have God, and the other would
have Bread, and both are profitable and good.

24. But let this be said to thee O Child of Man, lead thy life Circumspectly,
let thy Souls Spirit be Lord, and then thou will 2 Timothy 4. 7.
have fought a good fight here, for here it is a very short Time.

25. We stand here in the field or soil, and grow, let every one have a care
what fruit he bears; at the End of Harvest, every ones work will be put into
its own Barn.

26. It is better to labor a little while in irksomness and Toil, and expect
the great reward, wages and refreshment, then to be here a little while a King,
and afterward to be a Wolf, a Lion, a Dog, a Cat, a Toad, a Serpent and Worm
in Or shape.
Figure.

27. O Child of Man consider it, be warned, for we speak precious things out of
a Wonderful Eye, you will suddenly know it by Experience; there is yet but a
little Time, For, the Beginning has clearly found the End, and this is a A
Rose bud.
little Rose out of the Beginning, pray become seeing, put away Covetousness
from your Eyes, else you will wail and lament, and none will have pity on you;
Gal. 6. 7, 8.
for that which any one sows, that he will also reap, and then what will Pomp
and Honor avail you, when it falls away from you.

28. Ye are here very Potent, and afterward very Impotent: John 10. 34, 35.
ye are Gods, and yet your selves run to the Devil; take pity of your Life,
and of your fair Heavenly Image.

29. You are God's Children, be not the Devils; let not the Hypocrites with
praise and flattery keep you back, they do it for their Belly and Honor sake,
for Moneys sake, they are the Ministers or Servants of the Great Babel?

30. Search thy self, ask thy Conscience, whether it be in God, it will
complain against thee and say, drive the flatterer and hypocrite away from
thee, and seek the clear Countenance of God, see not by a Looking-Glass.

31. God is for you, he is IN you, worship him, come with the lost or prodigal
Son, to him, else none can take the Turba from you when you give him good
words; you must only through Death go into the other world, whereinto your
hypocrisy and flattery cannot enter, else there is no forgiveness of sins; and
if you give all to the Hypocrites or Flatterers, yet you are at one time as
well as the other, captivated in the Turba.

32. It is not so, as if one stood by and did take away the Turba from you, if
you give him good words, No No, it is Magical, John 3. 3.
you must be born again, as Christ says, else you cannot attain God, do what
you will, all Hypocrisy or flattery is deceit.

33. If you would serve God, then you must do it in the New Man, the Earthly
Adam can do him no service, which is acceptable to him, Sing, Ring, Call, Cry,
Pray, and what he will, and whatsoever he does, it is but fighting before a
Looking-Glass, the Will must be in it, the Heart must give it self into it,
else it is a Conjecture and a fable or fiction of Antichrist, which fills the
whole world.

34. The WILL is Greater and Mightier, then much Crying, it can destroy the
Turba, and enter into the Image, it has might or power to be God's Child, it
can cast away Mountains, and raise the Dead, if it be born or Generated in God,
and that The Holy Spirit give it leave.

35. For it must converse in Obedience and great humility, and Only cast its
will into God's Will, that God in it, may be the Will and Deed, that is the way
to Blessedness and Happiness, and to the Kingdom of Heaven, and no other; let
the Pope or Doctors, Preach what they will to the contrary, all is lying and an
Hypocritical flattering, fighting before a Looking-Glass.

The Eighteenth Question.
How the Soul departs from the Body in the Death of a Man.
1. HEre we will invite the World for a Guest, especially Babel the Whore, to
try whether a Child can be made out of her; for Death is a Terrible Guest, he
throws the Proud Rider with the Horse to the Ground.

2. My beloved Friend, that is a very sharp question, and needs the Eyes of
all the Three Principles, which can see very well, they must not die in Death,
if they will enter in and see this, it must be Poison to Death, and a
Pestilence to Hell, it must take Death Captive, if it will see, else it gets no
understanding, unless it self come into Death, then it will well feel what
Death is, it will well taste, what that is, when one Principle breaks, viz.
one Life.

3. You have perceived above, that all Substances or Things are Magical, one
being the Looking-Glass of the other, where in one Looking-Glass the desire of
the first Looking-Glass, becomes opened and comes into Substance, and then as
in all substances or things, the Turba is, which breaks or destroys all to
the first substance, and that is alone and has no breaker or destroyer.

4. For, there is nothing more, it cannot be broken or destroyed, it stands
in it self and out of it self, and goes whither it will, and then it is every
where in no place; for it is in the Abyss, where there is no place of Rest, it
must only rest in it self.

5. They seeing all Substances or Things, are come or proceeded out of One,
therefore is the Beginning also in the Last Substance or Thing, for the Last is
again turned back into the first, and seeks the first; and finds it in it
self, and when it finds the first, it lets all the other go, and dwells
in the Limit, and there it can be without source quality or pain.

6. For, there is nothing that can give it source quality or pain, it is it
self, the thing of the first Substance; and though it be another thing, yet it
is but its Twig, or Branch, and has its will, and none other, for there is
nothing that can give it another will.

7. We give you to understand concerning dying, thus; the beginning seeks the
Limit, and when it finds that, it casts the seeking away, that is the
Earthly Life, that will be cast away, it must break or destroy it self.

8. For, the Beginning, viz. the Soul, continues in the Limit, and lets the
Body depart, and there is no complaint about it; also the Soul desires it no
more, it must go into the Limit, viz. into the Wonders of that which has been
done or wrought.

9. The Souls Spirit has no woe done to it, when the Body departs, but woe
is done to the Fire-Life; for the Matter of the Fire, which has generated the
Fire, that breaks away, but only in the Substance.

10. The Figure, remains standing in the Will, for the Will cannot break, and
the Soul must continue in the Will, and takes the Figure for Matter, and
burns in the Will; for the first Glance of the Fire, goes not away, but its
Matter of the Earthly Life, viz. the Phur, will be broken away from it.

11. Thus the Fire becomes impotent, and passes into the Darkness, unless it
be so that the Spirit have Heavenly Substantiality, viz. God's Body, then the
Fire, viz. the right or true Soul, received that same meek Body for a Sulphur,
then the Soul burns in the Love-Fire, and is wholly gone away out of the
first Fire-Life.

12. It is now in God's Principle, the first fierce wrathful fire cannot touch
it in Eternity, for it has gotten another Source or Quality, and is rightly
and truly New born or Regenerated, and knows no more of the first Life, for
it is swallowed up in the Magia.

13. The Turba remains in the Earthly Body, and becomes that again which it
was before the Body was, viz. a Nothing, a Magia, wherein all its doings
matters or substances stand in Figure, as in a Looking-Glass; but not
Corporeally, but according to the Manner of the Eternity; as we apprehend that
all Wonders, before this world stood in a Mystery, as in the Virgion of Wisdom,
but without Substance.

14. Thus now we apprehend also here, that, that very Mystery, in its parting
became so Manifested, that it cannot in Eternity be extinguished, but remains
Eternally standing in the Distinction and in the Separation, and is seen in the
Magia, in the Separation or Parting, after that manner as it has here formed
it self.

15. Thus it is apprehensible to us, what the Separation or parting is, viz.
This; the Turba has found the Limit of the Substance, for sickness to Death is
nothing else, but that the Turba has kindled it self, and will break or
destroy the Substance; It is at the Limit, and will cast away the Introduced
Medium or Middle.

16. And this is also the Cause that the Body Dies, the Turba passes into it
self into the Fire, and so the Outward Life extinguisheth, for the Life's fire
becomes withdrawn from it, and then it goes into its Ether, and is at its
Limit.

17. And so now if the Souls Fire has not in its Spirit, God's Body, nor in
its will, in its Desire, then it is a Dark Fire, which burns in Anguish and
in great horror, for it has only the first four forms of Nature in the
Anguish.

18. And if the Will has nothing of the Power or Virtue of Humility, then
there is no sinking down or into it self, through Death into Life, but it is
like an anxious furious Wheel, that would fain always go upwards, and yet it
goes downwards on the other side; It is a kind of Fire, and yet it has no
Fire burning or flaming.

19. For the Turba is the very stern or strong Austereness or Astringency and
Bitterness, where the bitterness always seeks the Fire, and would strike it
up, and the harsh Astringency holds it Captive, so that it is only a horrible
Anguish, and goes always in it self as a Wheel, and Imagines; yet it finds
nothing but it self, it draws it self in it self, and impregnateth it self,
it devoureth it self, and is its own Substance.

20. It has no other Substance but this, viz. what the Souls Spirit has made
or acted in the outward Life, as Covetousness, or High-mindednesse, Cursing,
Swearing, Scorning, Jeering, Disgraceing or Backbiting, Slandering, Envy, and
Hatred, Fierce Wrath, Anger, Falsehood or Wickedness, that is its Food and the
pastime of its Exercise, for the Turba takes its Substance Matters or Doings
along with it in the will, As Rev. 14. 13.
its works follow after it.

21. And though perhaps it has done or acted somewhat that is good, yet that
is done but in a Glymps for a show in appearance, out of a vain Glorious or
Hypocritical Mind; and so it stands afterward in a continual Climing up, it
Elevateth it self continually, it would always be above the Meekness, and yet
apprehends or knows it not, nor sees it, it is a Continual Elevation above
God, and yet is but an Eternal sinking down, it seeks the Ground or
Foundation, and there is None, and this is its Life.

22. And if it has in its lifetime, laid hold of any thing that is pure of
the Love, as many that at Last convert in the End, those sink down thus in
themselves, through the Anguish; for the Humble sparkle, goes down through
Death into Life, where indeed the Souls Source or Quality and Pain takes its
End; but it self is a little Branch or Twig Sprouting into God.

23. Now what Purifying-Fire or Purgatory, the Soul has, before it can enter
into it self with the little Sparkle, cannot sufficiently be written or
expressed, and how it is then detained and plagued by the Devil, which the too
wise and politic world will not believe, it is so Cunning, and yet so blind,
it understands it not, and yet continually hangs or depends upon the
LETTER. Oh that none might come into it, we would willingly be silent.

24. But we speak of no strange source, quality or pain, but only of that which
is in the Turba, also of no Power of the Devil over the poor Soul, but only its
terror and horrible Apprehension of what is represented before it, so that the
Souls Imagination is sufficiently terrified therein.

25. It is not by far in such a manner with the Soul, as Babel teaches,
saying, the Devil beats and torments the Soul; that is very blindly spoken; the
Devil is not at Odds with his Children, they must all do his will; the Hellish
Anguish, and horror is torment enough to them, every one in his own
abominations; Every one has his own Hell, there is nothing else that lays
hold of it but its own Venom or Poison.

26. The Four Forms of the Original of Nature, is the Common or Universal
source quality or Torment, which every one feels according to his Turba, one
different from another; as a Covetous one has Frost, an Angry one Fire, an
Envious one Bitterness, a Proud stately one, has flying up and yet Eternal
sinking down, and falling into the Abyss; A Blasphemer swalloweth up into
himself the Turba of his belched forth Abominations: A false or wicked
Deceitful Heart has the fourth Form, viz. the great Anguish.

27. For, the Turba stands in the Fire The Fire-circle or the Globe, makes
the Heart or Desire, whose Center and Circumference is all one every where.
Circle or Globe, viz. in the Heart of the Soul, and false or evil speaking,
Lying, and untruth or unfaithfulness are an horror or abomination and Gnawing,
a Cursing or Anathema in it self, and so on.

28. A Potentate, who has oppressed the poor and Miserable, and consumed his
sweat or Labor in Pride, he rides in the Curse of the Miserable in the full
height of the Fire, for the necessities and distresses of the Miserable stick
all in him.

29. He has no Rest; his Pride climbeth up Continually, he does in his
condition there, as he did here, he seeks continually, and yet wants all
things; that which he had too much of, that he has now too little of; he
devoureth himself continually for Substance to feed on, and yet has none, for
he is Magical.

30. He has lost his right true Image, and has as it were the Image of a
Proud Prancing Horse, or of that which he has here been Conversant about, that
which he takes with him in his will, that is his Image; Mat. 6. 21.
where his Heart is, there is his Treasure also, and that in its Eternity. But
Sir, smell and consider, what the Last Judgment brings with it, wherein all
shall pass through the Fire, when the Floar shall be purged, Mat. 3. 12.
and every one go into his own place, at which the very Devils do Tremble.

The Nineteenth Question.
How the Soul is Mortal, or how it is Immortal.
1. A Thing which has an Eternal Beginning, has also an Eternal End; as the
Essence of the Soul has.

2. But as to what concerns the Image which God created, which has a
Temporal beginning, that is generated out of the Eternal, and will be set in
the Eternal Substance without source quality or pain.

3. And where there is no source quality or pain, there is no Death; and though
there be source quality or pain, as in Heaven there is source quality or pain,
yet it is in One will or in Harmony, and that is grounded or founded in the
Eternity: There is nothing that finds it, and so nothing can come into it.

4. And now where there is one will, as in God, who is all in all, there is
nothing else that can find the will, there is no Turba there, for the will
desires nothing else, but only it self and its Twigs or Branches, which all
stand in one Tree in one Essence; the Tree is its own Beginning and its own End.

5. The Soul is proceeded out of God's Mouth, and goes in the dying of the
Body, again into God 's Mouth, it is in the Word, the Substance, and in the
Will, the Deed.

6. Who will now judge or condemn that thing which he has in his own Body? as
the Souls is, which is in the Body of God, it is hidden from all Evil, in God;
Who will find it? none but Gods Spirit, and one Soul another, and the Communion
and Fellowship of Angels.

7. But the wicked Soul has lost its Image in the Limit, for it is entered
into the Limit, and the Limit is the End of the Image; the Turba destroys the
First Image, and draws the Wills Substance or Actings to it for an Image, and
these are also Immortal, for the Eternal Nature dies not, for it is from no
Beginning.

8. If the Eternal Nature in the Angerfire, should die, then also God 's
Majesty would Extinguish, and of an Eternal something, there would be an
Eternal Nothing, and that cannot be; that which is from Eternity continues
Eternally.

9. The False or wicked Soul can awaken no other Source or Quality, but only
that which has stood from Eternity in the Anger-Eye, viz. in the Center of
Nature,

10. All has been from Eternity, but Essentially in the Essence, not in the
Substance of the Essence; not Substantial Spirits but Figured Spirits, without
Corporising, have been from Eternity, as in a Magia, where one has swallowed
up the other in the Magia.

11. And out of Both, the Third is come to be, according to the Form or Manner
of them both: there has been a stirring up from Eternity, and a figured
Substance, and the Creation has set all in Or Works of Wonder.
Wonders, so that in the Eternal Magia now and in Eternity all stands in
Wonders.

12. If the wicked Souls had introduced no Substance in their will, then there
had been no Woe in them, there would have been no feeling or perception of pain
but Magia; but the Substance is an Image, and is in the Turba, and so there is
a perceptible source quality or pain.

13. It is a dying and yet no dying, but a will of Dying, viz. an Anguish in
that same Substance or Thing, which is introduced into the will.

14. And that causes that all things pant after God, and yet cannot reach him,
and that makes Anguish and Sorrow for the Introduced Evil, Note.
the Soul continually thinking, if thou had not done this or that, thou
might have attained the Salvation of God, and so the Evil Substance Matter
or Thing done or committed, makes the Eternal Despair.

15. Therefore we say, that no Soul Dies, be it in God, or in Hell, and its
Substance or Doings remain standing Eternally to the Glory of God's Wonders.

The Twentieth Question.
How the Soul comes or returns to God again.
1. THis is clearly enough explained already, that it has been spoken out from
God's Mouth, and by the Holy Spirit created into the Image of God.

2. Therefore if it continue so, then, when it passes out of the Earthly Life,
it is clearly in God's Mouth; for it is in God's Body; No Source Quality or
pain touches it.

The One and Twentieth Question.
Whither the Soul goes when it departs from the Body, be it Saved or not
Saved.
1. HE that understands rightly the three Principles, has here no further
question: for the Soul goes not out at the Mouth, for it went not in at the
Mouth; but it passes only out of the Earthly Life, the Turba breaks off the
Earthly Life, and then the Soul remains standing in its Principle.

2. For, the Body does not lay hold of it, no Wood nor Stone lays hold of it,
it is thinner than the Air, and if it has God's Body, then it goes directly
as a Conqueror quite through the Turba, viz. through the Anger of God, and
quite through Death, and when it is through, then it is in God's Body:

3. It continues with its here-made-Wonders and Substance or Matters and
Doings, it seeks God's Majesty and the Angels Face to Face.

4. Where it is, it is in the unsearchable World, where there is no End nor
Limit, whither can it then go away from thence? Mat. 24. 28. Luke 17 37.
Where the Carcass is, thither the Eagles gather together: It is in Christ's
Flesh and Blood, with Christ its Lord.

5. And though it should go a Thousand Miles, yet it would be in that Place
where it was when it went forth, for in God there is no Limit, near and afar
off is all One, in him.

6. It is as swift as the Thought of a Man; it is Magical, it dwells in its
Or Works and Actual Thoughts, Words and Deeds which it Exercised in this Life.
Wonders, they are its Therefore in our Fathers house are many Mansions or
dwelling places or particular Houses
House or Mansion or Habitation.

7. The Substantiality Externally without it, is Paradise, a springing or
sprouting, blossoming and growing, of all bright fair Heavenly Fruits: As we
have all sorts of Fruits in this World, which we feed on in an Earthly Manner:
So also there are all manner of Fruits in Paradise, which the Soul may Eat of,
they are in Color and Virtue and Power as also in Substance, not as a Thought,
though they are as Thin and Subtle or pure as a Thought, yet Substantial,
comprehensible to the Soul, palpable to be felt and handled, full of Virtue and
Power, also Jucy or full of the Sap of the Water of Life, all from the Heavenly
Substantiality.

8. The Heavenly Body of the Soul, is from the Pure Element, out of which the
Four Elements are generated, and that gives or affords flesh, and the
Tincture, Blood; the Heavenly Man is or consists of Flesh and Blood, and the
Paradise is the power or virtue of the Substantiality: It is Heavenly Earth,
not comprehensible to our outward Reason.

9. But we will now once more teach another A. B. C. All have not Christ's
Flesh on them in this World hidden in the Old Adam, indeed of very many scarce
one, only the Regenerate, who are gone forth from their own Will into Gods
Will, in whom the Noble and Precious Mat. 13. 31. Chapter 17. 20. Luke 17. 6.
Grain of Mustard Seed is sown, there a Tree is sprung up and grown.

10. Most Souls go from the Body without Christ's Body, but they hang by a
Thread, and are in their Faith at last entered into the Will, which Souls are
indeed in the Spirit in the Image, but not in the Flesh.

11. They wait for the last Judgment Day, wherein the Image, viz. the Body
will go forth out of the Grave out of the first Image, for God will awaken or
raise it up through Christ's Voice, even that Image which Adam had in his
Innocence, which is sprouted or grown with or by Christ's Blood.

12. But the Earthly Body shall not touch it, that must also in the Turba come
before the Judgment, but after the Sentence of the Judgment the Turba
swalloweth it up, and the wonders only remain standing.

13. Understand us aright thus; Those Souls which must thus wait for their
Bodies at the Last Judgment Day, they continue with their Bodies in the still
Rest without feeling any pain, till the Last Judgment Day, but in another
Principle.

14. They have in the Earth no Darkness, also no Majesty, but they are in the
One only still-Liberty in Rest, without pain, without touching of the Body;

15. But they see their Their Thoughts Words and Deeds but Act nothing with
them.
Wonders, yet they perform nothing in them, for they wait upon God, and are in
Humility; for they are sunk down through Death and are in another World; but
there is yet a Cliff or Gulf, between them and the Holy Souls in Christ's Flesh
and Blood, yet not a Principle, for they are in one and the same Principle.

16. But a Spirit without a Body, has not that Might or Power, as that Spirit
which is in the Body, therefore they are in the Rest, they are under God's
Altar;

17. When the Last Judgment Day comes, it will then go forth, and eat of
God's Bread, and put on God's Body, as is mentioned in the Revelation of John,
where the Souls Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11.
in white Garments under the Altar; say, Lord when avengest thou our Blood? and
it is said to them, that they should rest a little while, till their Brethren
come to them, which shall be slain for the Witness of Jesus.

18. But the wicked Souls have another place, viz. in the most innermost, which
also is the most outermost, in the Darkness: those Souls dare go no whither,
they remain directly with the Body, in their Substance or Doings, but not in
this World; also they do not touch the Earth.

19. They are indeed powerful over the Earth, they can open it without
Substance or Labor and Feeling, but the outward principle they have not, they
are not powerful enough over the outward Spirit, and yet it can a long time
play juggling Tricks in the Astral starry or Airy Spirit.
Sydereal Spirit.

20. As many of them appear again in the Starry Spirit, and seek rest or
Abstinence, also cause much terror and hurliburly in Houses, all which they do
through the starry Spirit, till that be consumed, and then its Pomp lies in
the Darkness, and expects the Last Judgment.

21. Our Babel says, it is the Devil which goes about so in the form or shape
of the Soul; indeed there are right Devils enough with a Damned Soul; but it is
not a very Devil, such a one, as is in the Abyss, and very readily plagueth
the Soul in the time of the Body, in the Abyss of the Soul.

22. Though indeed it is not difficult for him to put on a Deceivers
Hypocritical Garment, he can easily put on an Outward Garment, to seduce and to
terrify Man.

23. But this we must complain against Babel, that she is so altogether blind,
and has so little knowledge of God: she has cast away the true Magia and
Philosophy, and taken in the Antichrist; now she wants Wit Ingenuity or
Understanding; she has Art, but only Wit and Understanding fails her and
breaks, she has broken the Looking-Glass, and sees with Spectacles.

24. What shall a man say? the world is blindfold, men draw it into a Snare,
and lead it captive, and it sees it not, and it were indeed free, if it did
but see it, there is wicked knavish Cunning in the String men bind it with:
Thou will soon become seeing, it is bright day, only Psalm. 44. 23. 121. 4, 5.
Awake thou keeper of Israel.

25. Thus beloved Friend, be informed of this, that there is great difference
of Place and Condition among Souls, all according to that into which a Soul is
entered. Is it holy and born anew or Regenerate? then it has a Body, which
waits only for the Wonders of the Body, at the last Judgment Day; it has
comprised them clearly already in the Will, but they shall stand before the
Judgment at the Last Day: All Souls the Good and the Evil, every one shall
receive its Sentence and Wages:

26. The Holy shall be set in the sight of the Wicked, that they may see and
taste the Causes of their Source and Torment.

27. If any shall conceit a several place or space, where they shall sit one
among another, that is quite contrary to the Magia; every one is in its own
Land Soil or Country, and not bound to the place of the Body, but it may be
where it will, and and then wherever it is, it is there either in God or in the
Darkness;

28. God is every where, and the Darkness is also every where; the Angels are
also every whery; every one in his own Principle and in his own source or
quality.

29. The Conceits of outward Reason, without apprehension and knowledge of the
Principles is a fighting with a shadow in a Looking-Glass; If I did ask a
Thousand times, and should be always answered something concerning God, if I
were but still in Flesh and Blood; I should look upon it as Babel does, which
supposes the Soul goes up into a Heaven above the Stars; I know nothing yet
of that Heaven, and I can well forbear being there.

30. It is indeed above, and there are the Angelical Prince-Thrones, but this
Eye or Globe.
Eye of this Ether, is OUR Principality and our Kingdom.

31. Indeed it is all one with them that are in the UPPER Heaven and with them
that are in OURS, but our Creation and Substance or Doings is in our Ether; A
Soul may well go thither if it desires, it will be very lovingly received and
entertained by Gods Angels.

32. For there is the same Substance of God with them as with us, and this only
is the difference, that they have Angelical works among them wholly pure
without spot or Blemish, and we have the Great Wonders, therefore they delight
also to be with us, and they are besides that, Heb. 1. 14.
Our Ministering Servants during the Life of the Body, and resist the Devil.

33. Now being the Angels are in this World in the Holy Principle, whither
should the Soul then first go? perhaps into Pride as Lucifer did, might Babel
think; O no, it remains in Humility, and looks upon Gods Or Works.
Wonders; as God's Spirit goes, so that goes also.

The Two and Twentieth Question.
What every Soul departed does, whether it rejoices or no, till the Day of the
Last Judgment.
1. THis Question compriseth or treats of the richly Joyful Glorious Gate to
the apprehension of the Or Souldierly triumphant prize-Garland.
Victorious Garland of the Soul.

2. When a beloved Son travels abroad, for Arts and Sciences and Honor into a
strange Country afar off, he often thinks of Home, and of the time of return
to enjoy his Parents and Friends; he rejoices at the thought of that day, and
waits for it with inward Joy and Longing, and exercises himself in his
Substance or Matters business and employment.
affairs, that he may get also Art and Ingenuity or understanding and
experience, wherewith he may rejoice his Parents Kindred and Friends.

3. In like manner we offer to your Mind, and give you this to Consider of,
that the Soul without the Body, has great inward Joy, and waits for the last
Judgment Day, with great inward desire, when it shall get its bright fair Holy
Body with the wonders again.

4. Also its rest in its Will, where then it sees its works according to the
kind and manner of the unsearchable Magia, which it will first get in the
Figure at the last Judgment Day, with the New Body out of the Old.

5. And it is highly apprehensible and perceptible to us, but in the Spirit
according to its knowledge, that the blessed Souls, rejoice in their
here-Exercised-Labour, and do exceedingly recreate themselves in their Wonders
which they see Magically; For those which have brought many to Righteousness,
those have their wages in the Magia in the Will, before their Eyes.

6. Those who have suffered much persecution for the Truths sake, they see
their bright Triumphant Garland, which they shall at the Last Judgment Day,
set upon the New Body.

7. Those that have done much good, shall have it shining in the Will before
their Eyes.

8. And they that have been for Christ's Doctrine and Truths sake, despised
persecuted and slain, their Tryumphal Victory is before their Eyes, like one
that has overcome his Enemy in Fight, and represents the Victory before his
King and Prince, which he has in Great Honor and Glory, where his King
receives him with great Joy, and keeps him by him as his faithful Assistant.

9. Now what joy is in these, we have no Pen to Write; only we apprehend that
those for the most part, in this world have put on God's Body, and so are in
greater Perfection then the other; they wait for the Last Judgment Day, with
Great Joy Honor and Glory, when their Works in the Heavenly Figure shall pass
before their Eyes, and the wicked shall see Acts 9. 5.
against whom they have kicked.

10. Every such Soul rejoices in great Hope before the Face of God, at that
which shall befall it: for it apprehends its wages, but cannot receive that
without the Body, for it has done its Labor in the Body, therefore it will
get that again also which will follow after it in the New Body.

11. For although the highly precious Holy Souls have in this world put on
Christ's Body, so that they stand as an Image of God in Heaven, yet all their
works have been made or wrought in the Old Body, which was God's Looking-Glass,
and they shall in the Resurrection be presented to them in the Figure exactly
Heavenly in their Body.

12. For the first Image which Adam was before the Fall, is become Regenerated
in Christ, and will be put on to the Soul again with its Wonders, and though it
has Gods Body aforehand, yet the Wonders stand in the first Image.

13. But the Turba, with the outward Kingdom of the outward source or quality,
is gone, for it was a Looking-Glass, and is now become a Wonder; It lives
without Spirit as a Wonder, and will be put upon the Soul in great clarity or
Brightness from the Light of God: which the Holy Souls rejoice at exceedingly,
and wait for it with great longing.

14. And we present to your apprehension, that every blessed Soul Mat. 29. 6. 7.
trimmeth its lamp, that it may go to meet its Bridegroom at the Last Judgment
Day, they renew their Wills continually, and consider how they shall rejoice in
their New Bodies in the Wonders with all holy Men and Angels; there is a
Continual rising up of Joy in them, when they think of that which is to come,
every one according to their virtue or capacity.

15. As their works have been different upon Earth, so also is their Hope; for
a day Labourer who has done much service, rejoices at his wages, so also here
there is a friendly Substance of Solace among them and in them.

16. All scorn and blasphemy laid upon them, which they were not guilty of, is
a great Victorious Honor and Glory to them, that thus have suffered in
Innocence wrongfully, and put on Patience in Hope, and this they have moreover,
that death cannot take from them nor add to them, the Soul takes along with it
what it has comprehended.

17. Their often hearty Prayers well wishing and well doing to their Neighbor,
is their food, which they eat, and rejoice themselves, till their New Body
shall eat Paradisical Fruit.

18. But those which have put on God's Body here, they eat without Ceasing at
Gods Table; but the Paradisical Fruit belongs to the Body of the Wonders,
which shall arise out of the Grave, which was created in Paradise: For it was
made out of the beginning, and brings the End with the Wonders again into the
Beginning.

19. And wonder not, as if we speak, as likely we are understood in your Eyes,
concerning TWO Bodies of the most holy Saints, indeed there is not two of them,
It is but ONE; consider only how God's Substantiality fills all, and that is
God's Body, which is in this Life, put on to the holy Souls.

20. For they cast their Will into God's Will, and so they receive also God's
Body, which fills All: their Will dwells in God's Body, and eats in
God's Body, of God's Word, of God's Fruit, of God's Power and Virtue, and
Christ is in God, God is become Christ:

21. Thus they carry about them Christ's Body in God, and yet nevertheless wait
for their First Adams holy Body with the Wonders, which shall be put on them
with Paradisical source or quality.

22. For, God's purpose must stand, he created the first Body in and for
Paradise, it should remain eternally therein; It must go in thither again, and
the Soul upon the Cross of the Number Three, into the Mouth of God, from whence
it came; and and yet the whole Person with Body and Soul remains one in
another; but God fills all in All.

23. O, that we had a Humane Pen, and could according to our Apprehension write
it down in your Souls-Spirit: How would many convert out of Sodom and Gomorra,
out of Babel and the Covetous proud valley of Misery, which yet is but Anguish
and Source Quality or Torment, full of fear pain and terror.

24. Thus we give you to apprehend, and give you highly to consider of, the
Lamentable and Miserable State and Condition of the Damned Souls; what they
have to Expect, and but briefly, because the next question does it at large.

25. Their Expectation is like a Captive imprisoned Malefactor that continually
listeneth, when any thing stirs, when the Executioner should come and
execute Justice, and give him his Reward; so also they:

26. They have a false evil or wicked Conscience, which gnaweth them, their
sins present themselves continually before their Eyes, their works they see
also Magically; they see all the injuries and unrighteousness they have done,
their vanity and voluptuous wantonness, their unmeasurable Pride pomp state and
surly highmindedness, they see their Oppression of the Needy and Miserable,
their scorning and domineering Implacableness.

27. Their false or wicked Refuge Confidence and relyances flies from them,
their Hypocrisy and slattery, was but a fighting with a shadow as in a
Looking-Glass, it did not reach the The Heart of Gods Love shed abroad in their
own Hearts.
Heart of God, these stand indeed before them in the Magia, viz. in their Will
and Mind visibly, but when they seek and search therein, then they stir up the
Turba of the Fire, which will always consume the Looking-Glass, and then there
is fear and terror.

28. For, they see and know, that at the Last Judgment Day, all shall be tried
by the Eternal Anger-Fire of God, and they feel very well, that 1 Cor. 3. 15:
their works will remain in the Fire.

29. This does astonish even the Devils, when they consider their Fall, which
now stands in, or liable to, God's Judgment, expecting what he will do,
which the Holy Scriptures mention sufficiently to us, especially the Judge
Christ himself.

30. And thus we give you to understand the total Miserable Estate and
Condition of the Damned, so that when they should trim their Lamps for the
Bridegroom, then they tremble, and their works wound them, which yet the Turba
continually sets before their Eyes.

31. Now those that are highly Damned Souls, are Desperate, they renounce God,
they Curse and Blaspheme him, and are his Enemies to the utmost.

32. They hold their Cause to be just, they resolutely set themselves against
God, and think thus with themselves, Is there Fire with him, so are we Fire; Is
there source quality or Torment with him, so will we climb up in the Fire
quality or Torment above God and Heaven; what care we for humility, we will
have the Might Power and Strength of the Fire, we will be above God, we will do
Wonders by our own Power Might and Ability.

33. We have the Root, God has but the Glance; let us be Lord Paramount, God
shall be our Servant; our Mother is his Life, we will at once destroy his
strong City, and Fortress.

34. They have the same thoughts that Soldiers have, who storm Walls Forts and
Towers, and think the City is their own, though it cost them their Lives.
Understand us thus, as there is a Hell, so there is a Heaven, and as there are
Inhabitants in the one, so there are Inhabitants in the other, and that in God
is a Great Wonder, all stands or serves to his Glory.

The Three and Twentieth Question.
Whether the Wicked Souls without difference in so long a time before the Day
of Judgment, find any Mitigation or Ease.
1. A Thing that goes into an Eternal Entrance, that is also at the Eternal
End; who will or can give any thing into the hand of him that is a far off, and
is not present, that so he might have the thing given him; surely that only is
given to him, which is in that place where he is; and a thing that goes forth
with its Will out of its self, can receive nothing within it self, for it
desires nothing within it self.

2. Thus is the Wicked in this World inclined, he is gone forth with his Will
out from himself, into Covetousness, into Pomp Pride and Voluptuousness, into
Blasphemy, Gluttony and Drunkenness, Whoredom and Wantonness, his Will is
continually Conversant in scorning and despising the Miserable, in disgracing
and Contemning, plaguing and vexing the Righteous, and to tread him under foot
with Power and Authority.

3. The Right and Truth he has mixed with Lies and Falsities, and continually
Job 15. 16.
swallowed down unrighteousness as a Cow does Water, his going forth has been
bitter Anger, and that he has esteemed to be his Might and Power, his Will
has been willfulness, he has done what he listed, he has Danced after the
Devils Pipe, and has only entered into Covetousness, he has accounted his
Money and Goods for his only Treasure, into which his Will and Mind has
continually entered.

4. He has not entered into himself and sought the Love, much less Humility,
the Miserable and needy have been accounted his Footstool, he has oppressed
them without Measure, and has counted that for Art and Wit, when he could
Circumvent the simple, and take away the Fruit of his Labor; he has supposed
he has used good Policy in it, that he might gain somewhat to himself, that he
might be able to do what he will, thus artificial is he and dextrous, and
stands in Great Wisdom.

6. All this and much more he has framed in his Will and Mind, and therewith
has he filled the Image of his Souls-Spirit, and all stands in its Figure,
and now when the Body deceaseth, then has the Turba comprised all this in the
Spirit.

7. And if the Spirit would now go into it self, then the Turba goes alone
with it, and seeks the Ground, viz. the Souls Root, and so the Fire does but
there become kindled.

8. And we give you to understand that the Souls of the Wicked have no
Mitigation; it is their best Mitigation and Joy, when they clime up in their
Will and Mind with their here-acted Works and Matters, and they desire still
continually to do those things, it grieves them if they have not sufficiently
oppressed an honest or virtuous Man.

9. Their Will and Mind is just as it was here; they are Spirits of Pride as
the Devil is, also of Covetousness, and so they swallow down their Abominations
which they have here In Thought Word or Deed.
Acted: Their Joy is only to think how they will despise and scorn God, and be
their own Lords and Masters, that is their Ease and refreshment, and no other.

10. For, where will they get any other Ease? They dare not for shame lift up
their Eyes to God, and they dare not fly to the Holy People which they have
here despised, they are ashamed of that, for their falsehood and wickedness
smites them on the Face continually, and their Malice and Wickedness rises up
from Eternity to Eternity: If they think of the Last Judgment Day, then Fear
and Terror cease on them, they had rather let that thought alone and
recreate themselves with high-mindedness.

11. And that is also a Wonder, and the Greatest Wonder of all, how out of an
Angel such a furious Devil is come to be.

12. Thus is the Might and Power of the Anger in God, become manifested; for
God has manifested himself, according to both Eyes, viz,. both in Love and
Anger, and Man stands free, he may go into which of them he will, God casts
none into Anger, the Soul casts it self thereinto.

13. But know this, that the Anger has set its Jaws wide open, and draws
mightily, and would devour all, for it is the Covetousness and Pride, above
humility:

14. And so the Love and Humility have also set open their Jaws, and draw with
all their Power and Virtue, and would draw all into Love into Heaven.

15. Now into which soever the Soul departs there it is, and in that it
grows, be it either in Love or Anger, in that Tree it stands, and from
thence is no deliverance in Eternity; here in this Life the Soul is and
stands in the
Angle in the Balance or even weight, and can if it have been Evil, become
regenerate in the Love; But when the
Angle or Balance breaks, then it is past recovery, it is afterward in its
own Country, in its own Principle.

16. Now who shall break or destroy that which is Eternal, where no breaker or
destroyer can be found? for it is its own Maker or Framer; whence will another
Turba come, when a thing is in the Eternity, where there is no limit more?

17. And that yet you may see that God wills not the Evil, he causes his
Will to be made known; Mat. 21. 34, 36.
He sends you Prophets and Teachers, and gives them his Spirit, that they
may warn you; now if you will not Convert, then you let the Anger withhold you,
which is also your Wages and your Kingdom.

18. It is grievous to you that you should be snatched from your own will, from
your Pleasure and Voluptuousness, your Pride your sumptuous delicate Life; go
to, so will the Hellish Dregs hereafter relish pleasingly also.

19. We teach you the Cross, and the Devil teaches you pleasure, now you may
lay hold of which you will, and that you will have, whether it be Love or Anger.

20. We labor for you, and you despise us; what should we do more for you? are
we not your very slave? If you will not convert, away, and take that which is
yours with you, and we will take that which is ours, and so we are Eternally
parted.

21. We will still work in our Day-Labour, and do what we are Commanded to do
Mat. 13. 30.
in the Harvest, we shall come one before another, and there you will know us,
and do that to your selves, which you had done unto us here, this we should not
hide from you, but speak what we see.

The Four and Twentieth Question.
Whether Men's Wishes profit them any thing, or sensibly come where they are; or
not.
1. MY beloved Friend, look upon the Luke 16. 20. to 24.
Rich Man, and Poor Lazarus, and so you shall find that there is a Great Cliff
or Gulf, between them and us: so that those that would with their Prayers and
Will, go to them, cannot, neither can they come to Us; there is a Principle
between us.

2. The Prayers and Wishes of the Righteous penetrate into Heaven, and not into
Hell; also the Scripture says, Out of Hell there is not Redemption, they lie
in Hell as Dead Bones, they Cry and none hears them; No Prayer avails them
at all.

3. And though many Pray for the Damned Souls, yet their Prayer continues in
their own Principle; and goes into Heaven, not into Hell: out of Hell there is
no Recalling, says the Scripture.

4. Ye know what Christ said to his seventy Disciples, Mat. 10. 12. Luke 6. 49.
When ye enter into a House, Salute that House: if the Child of Peace be in it,
then will your Wish and Salutation rest upon him; if not, then your Wish
returns to you again: so it is also there.

5. No good Wish goes into Hell; but it is thus, if the Wicked leave much
falsehood wickedness and deceit behind him, so that Hell Torment is wished to
him in the Grave, that goes to the wicked Soul, that is the Wish that comes
where they are, that they must swallow up into themselves from their here-made,
acted or committed, Abominations, that is their food, which the Living send
after them.

6. But yet very wrongfully, and it does not belong to God's Children to do so,
for they sow thereby into Hell, into God's Anger, they should have a care that
they do not reap the same in the Harvest which they have sown: assuredly if
Repentance and Conversion be not exercised, it will be no otherwise.

7. Further, we offer you this according to our apprehension in the Spirit, not
according to the outward Man, in Conceit and Opinion, but according to our
Gift; that it is with the Soul, which thus hangs by a Thread, and yet at the
last in the End enters into sorrow, and so lays hold on the Kingdom of
Heaven by a Thread, where Doubting and Believing is mixed, it is with such a
Soul in this manner, that a Hearty Prayer and Wish, comes to them, which with
total Earnestness presses to the poor captive Soul into its source quality or
pain.

8. For that Soul is not in Hell, also not in Heaven, but in the Gate in the
Midst in the source or quality of the Principle, where Fire and Light part, and
is detained by its Turba, which continually seeks the Fire, and then that
comprehended little Twig or Branch, viz. the weak Faith, sinketh down in it
self, and presses after God's Barmherty igkeit. Warm-heartednesse.
Mercifulness, and gives it self patiently into the Death of the sinking down,
out of the Anguish, and that sinketh down out of the source quality or pain
into the Meekness of Heaven:

9. And though many a Soul be detained a Tedious while.
competent time, yet can the Anger not devour that little Faith, but must at
last, let it go.

10. But what that is, I leave to them to try, who wilfully and obstinately
persevere or continue in sin, till their End, and will then first be Blessed,
then the Pfaff.
Priest must make him Blessed, he should consider it.

11. But this we say, that a Man's Hearty fiery or Zealous Prayer comes to
them, for a Faithful Earnest Prayer has Might and Power to break open the
Gates of the Deep: it breaks open a whole Principle: and seeks or
searches, and if there be any thing therein that its Will or Mind is capable
of, then it takes hold of that, viz. the Poor Soul in its sin source quality
or pain, lays hold on its loving Brothers divine Earnest Will; so that it
becomes strengthened, and can sink down out of the Anguish in his Brothers
Spirit and Will, through Death, and attain God's Kingdom.

12. But into its Glorification he cannot help it, for that shines out of the
Souls own Substance or Doings and Will: also the Soul of a Neighbor goes no
further with him, though that is not the Soul; but the Souls Spirit that does
this, then into Death, where the Anger severeth it self; where it is freed from
the fierce Wrath, and then the Spirit passes or enters again into its Soul:

13. Here in Popery much Juggling has been contrived, with Seel-Messen.
Souls-Meals.
Masses for Souls, only for the sake of Money; but it has been a Gross deceit
of the Babylonish Pfaffen.
Priests, for earnestness is required to strive with and Overcome the Anger of
God.

14. We say assuredly, and readily acknowledge it, that the Congregation of
Christ has great Power and Authority, to Ransom such a Soul: if it be
fervent, and do it with earnestness, as it was done in the first or Primitive
Churches, when they had Holy People and Holy Priester.
Priests, whose Service and Ministry was Earnest:

15. They have indeed effected somewhat, but not in such a kind and way as the
Bapst.
Pope Boasts, that he has the Key, he can let a Soul out with his Blessing
when he will, if a man will give him Money; but that is a Lie.

16. Is he HOLY? then he bears the Great Mystery, and is Christ's Shepherd
over his Sheep, and then he shall with the Congregation, in Great Earnestness,
press into God in great Humility, and come to the Place of the Poor Soul, but
NOT for Money.

17. In Money there is always Covetousness, and it never reaches the Earnest
Principle, the Prayer of the Covetous enters into his Chest, we say, that all
whatever is done and administered in the Churches of Christ for Money, belongs
to Antichrist in Babel, for they hang their Hearts upon it; it were better Men
did give them Meat and Drink, and other Necessaries, and no Money, and then
they would not so set their Hearts upon it.

18. What can that Spirit seek and find in the Mystery, which is not it self
in the Mystery? O, there is a great deceit herein, when it comes to be Day, you
will see that it is so; you are still in Darkness in the Mystery, Babel has so
blinded you.

19. And therefore it is, that you have looked upon Art and Favor, and not
upon God's Spirit; are not exceeding errors 2 These. 2. 11, 12.
and strong delusions come upon you, that you believe lying Spirits, who speak
in Hypocrisy and Deceit, and ye depend hang and cleave to them, and commit
Hyprocrisie with Error, and exercise flattery with delusion? See what the
Revelation of John, and Daniel say to you; It is Day, the Wages will soon
follow.

20. You have now Teachers, which suppress and throw to the ground the First or
Primitive Church with its Spirit; prove and try them and you will find, that
for the most part they are Wolves and Harlots, which first sprung up and were
generated in the Primitive Churches, when Men slept, and they will indeed
devour the Whore.

21. But prove and try them, they are Wolves, sent from the Turba, they must
do it, God suffers it to be done, and will have it done, that so he may with
one Besom sweep out the other; but they are Besoms, and will after the
finishing of the Wonders of the Anger, be given up to the Turba together.

22. Suffer this to be said to you by this Spirit, it is your Own Prophet, it
is generated out of your Turba upon the Crown, awake or else you must thus be
devoured by one another.

23. For No stranger consumes you, but your own Turba, which is come to the
Limit; boast not your selves of a Golden Time, it is a Time of Wonders.

The Five and Twentieth Question.
What the Hand of God, and the Bosom of Abraham are.
1. THis is indeed sufficiently explained already; for it is the
All-Substantial or All-Being, every-where-presence of God; but in its own
Principle; as the Rich Man, who was in Hell, could not prevail with Abraham to
send Lazarus to him with a Drop of Cold Water, to cool his Tongue in the
Flames, Abraham said there was a great Cliff or Gulf between them, that is a
whole Principle.

2. The Bosom of Abraham is thus to be understood; Abraham was the Father of
the Faithful, and God gave him the Promise, that in his Seed all People of the
Earth should be Blessed; this was to be understood in the Messiah Christ, who
would become Man in the Faithful; and as in Abraham's Seed he became Man, so he
would also become Man in the Children of the Faithful, and bless them.

3. And this is now the Holy Christian Congregation generated in Christ, that
is the Bosom of Abraham, and we are in Christ all one Body, and to Abraham was
the Promise Given, he was the Patriarch, or Arch-Father; and we are all become
generated in that Promise, understand, in the Newbirth in Christ, and are in
that Bosom, which takes us into it.

4. When we through earnest Repentance, enter into Abraham's Promise, then we go
into the Bosom of Abraham, viz. into Our Promise, and in the Bosom of Faith
Christ becomes generated or born in Us, and that is the Fulfilling.

5. Thus we are in Humility with Lazarus in the Bosom of Abraham; for Christ is
Abraham, and to Abraham was Christ Promised, now he has him, and we with him,
and thus we come into his Bosom, and are his Children in the Promise, and
CHRIST is the Fulfilling.

6. Thus we sit in the fulfilling in the Bosom of Abraham, and are Abraham's
Seed according to the Spirit. Here ye blind Jews, open your Eyes, what did
Abraham in the Circumcision signify? nothing else, but that Sin should in the
Blood and Death of Christ, who shed his Blood for the Children of the Faith of
Abraham, be drowned, and in that Blood as in a Heavenly Tincture become
Regenerate again.

7. Abraham and his Children drowned Sin in their Blood in the Faith on Christ,
who in their Blood was to become Man, and now it is fulfilled, and therefore
has God set the Seal of Faith in the Substance, and now we are and should be
born a new or Regenerate in the Real Blood of Christ.

8. Christ's Blood takes away the Turba from us, and we rise again in his
Blood, as a New Man out of the Old, and bear or carry Christ's Image, Christ's
Flesh and Blood in us in Our Image, if we are the Children of Abraham and Not
Ishmaels.

9. For to Isaac belong the Goods of the Image of the Body of Christ; the
Circumcision is Ishmaels, for he converseth about Works, but the Goods are
Isaac's, and Ishmael shall at Last dwell in Isaac's Tents; but the Kingdom
belongs to Sem.

18. Romans 11. 6.
Not out of Merit by works have we Isaac's Goods, but out of Grace, out of Gods
Love, we cannot attain it with the work, but in the Faith, Phil. 2. 13.
in the Will and Deed, in the Entering in.

11. But he that enters into Herrschafft.
a Dominion, which is not his own by the right of Nature, he enters into it
by the Grace and Favor of the Giver or Donor; why is the Servant in the House
Angry and Discontented at it that the Lord is so Good and Gracious, and gives
a stranger the Dominion?

12. We were Strangers, and the Work was in the Family, but the Lord has given
us the Promise in Paradise, he would bestow upon us again his Kingdom out of
Grace; he left Cains Offering, but to Abel he gave the Kingdom of Grace, for
Abel sought it in the Spirit, and Cain in the Work.

13. Thus understand how God's Kingdom is Magical, for, the first Will
attaineth it, and the Will in the Substance or Work NOT, for it remains in
the Substance or Work; but he that goes free, finds the Eternity, and the
Kingdom of Grace therein, and the Promise with the Substance or Work together;
and then the Work dwells in the Will, and is the Wills Household Servant;

14. Thus ye understand, if ye be seeing, the whole Old Testament, this is the
Only Ground, but comprised briefly; and if we come to write upon Moses, you
shall find it wholly: and thus we have shown you the right and true Ground of
the Bosom of Abraham, and of the true Christian Religion.

15. Whosoever teaches otherwise is of Babel, beware of him, he has not
Christ's Spirit, but he is Ishmael, and seeks or gropeth in his own conceit.

16. O thou Worthy and Precious Christendom, be yet seeing, else it will no
more shine so clearly to thee, go yet to Lazarus into Abraham's Bosom.

The Six and Twentieth Question.
Whether the Souls of the Deceased, take care about Men, their Children Friends
and Goods, and know see like or dislike their Purposes and Undertakings.
1. MY beloved Friend, this Question is above all humane Reason, and knowledge
according to Outward Reason; but being we are Abraham's Children, therefore we
have Abraham's Spirit in Christ; And as Abraham looked backward upon the Promise
in Paradise, and forward upon the fulfilling of the Promise, so that he saw in
the whole Body of Christ, what was to be in the Middle, Joh. 8. 56.
and saw Christ afar off; so also we.

2. And being you so vehemently long after the Great Mysteries, and desire them
with earnest seeking, giving God the Glory, and accounting your self in your
high knowledge very unworthy of it, and so humbling your self before God,
therefore God also gives it you, though by so slight and mean an Instrument,
who accounts himself much more unworthy, yet does not desire to resist his
Will, thus you are the finding in this Hand, and the Cause of attaining it.

3. For this Hand, knew nothing of the Mystery, it sought only Abraham's Faith,
but Abraham's understanding was also given to it, which you have caused by your
seeking.

4. Now see that you attain also Abraham's Spirit, which has written in the
Knowledge and Apprehension of this Hand: we will set you it down in a Brotherly
manner, for we are not your Lord in the Mystery, but your Servant.

5. Apprehend us aright, we are Lazarus, and you are in respect of us to be
accounted Abraham; you have labored much more then we, but we are fallen into
your Harvest, not of Merit but of the Grace of the Giver, that no Tongue might
boast before God, and say, this has my Understanding done.

6. You ask a high Question, I understand it not; for if I should apprehend it,
then must I be in the Departed Soul, and must be in that Souls Spirit and
apprehension.

7. Nevertheless, being we are in Christ one Body, and have also Christ's
Spirit, therefore we see all in Christ, out of one Spirit and have its
apprehension; for he is in us become Man, and all Holy Souls are our fellow
Members, ALL begotten from or out of ONE, and we have all, one Will in Christ,
and the right and true Bosom of Abraham.

8. And so now we have gotten Might and Power to Manifest or Reveal unto you
that Hidden thing in Christ; for our Soul sees in their Souls, not that they
press and come to us, but we press and go to them, for they are in Perfection,
and we but in Part.

9. And Now we can Answer you, not from Reason of the outward World, but from
or out of the Image of Christ, and out of his and our Spirit.

10. You ask whether the Souls Departed take care about Humane Matters or
Doings, and see, like or dislike them? Now this is to be understood in Three
several ways, as to Three sorts of Souls, as indeed there are Three distinct
kinds of them.

11. First. I. concerning the Souls that have not yet attained Heaven,
which-stick in the source quality or pain in the Principle in the Birth, these
have still humane Matters with the works on them, and they search diligently
after the Cause of their Detention.

12. And therefore many of them come again with the Starry Spirit, and walk
about in Houses and other Places, and appear in Humane Shape and Form, and
desire this and that, and often take care about their Wills and Testaments,
supposing thereby to get the Blessing: of Holy People for their Rest and Quiet.

13. And if their Earthly business and Employment stick in them and Cleave to
them still, then indeed they take care about their Children and Friends, and
this continues so long, till they sink down into their Rest, so that their
Starry Spirit be consumed, then all is gone as to all care and perplexity, and
they have no more feeling knowledge thereof, but merely that they see it in the
Wonders in: the Magia.

14. But they touch not the Turba, nor seek what is in this World, for they are
once sunk down from the Turba through Death, they desire that no more, neither
do they take any more care, for in care, the Turba is stirring; for the Souls
Will, must enter with its Spirit into Earthly things, which it would fain
forsake, for it hardly got rid away from them before, it would not cumber it
self to let in the Earthly Spirit again.

15. This is an Information concerning that one part or sort of Souls: and we
speak freely and certainly, that this Part or sort, do no more, after they are
come to Grace, purposely, take care about Humane Earthly Matters: but about
Heavenly Matters, which come to them through Man's Spirit, they see them, and
have their Joy therein.

16. But there remains this still to be said; that a Living Man has such Power
and Authority, that he can with his Spirit reach into Heaven to the Souls
departed, and stir them up, often in a Question, or a hearty Desire: but it
must be Earnest, there belongs Faith to the breaking open of a Principle.

17. Such a thing we see in Samuel the Prophet, whom the King of Israel raised
up, that he might manifest his Will to him; though some look upon it otherwise,
of whom we say they are blind without apprehension or knowledge, and speak
their School-Conceits, and make meanings and Opinions, about that they have no
knowledge of in the Spirit, and that is Babel.

18. And secondly, II. The second Part or sort, which sink down in their Dying
without a Body, they are with the first sort, which are now sunk down further
then they were, all in one and the same Place of the Principle, these all take
upon them no evil business or Matter, wherein the Turba sticks:

19. But as concerning the Living honest virtuous Souls which send their works
with their Spirit and Will to them, they rejoice therein, and are so Courteous
and Friendly and Ready, that they appear to Men Magically in their sleep, and
show their Good Ways, and often reveal Arts and Skill to them, which lie deep
hidden in the Secret or Arcanum, viz. in the Souls Abyss.

20. For, while the Earthly Spirit draws the Mystery before the Soul, and
holds the Soul Captive in the Mystery, the Souls Spirit cannot always reach
the Deepest secret or Arcannm of the Soul: But after the departure of the Body,
the Soul is free, and especially without a New Body, that Soul sees it self,
and also its Wonders, it can indeed to one that is living, show somewhat in the
sleeping Magia, if the Man be honest or virtuous, and has not awaked the
Turba: for Dreams are all Magical, and thus the Soul without a Body is in the
Magia of God.

21. Thus know, as concerning wicked Matters or Doings, the Soul which is
departed from the Body, enters not into them, unless it be a Damned Soul, and
that Soul goes Magically into them, and has its recreation therein, and
teaches many in Dreams great Masterpieces of wickedness, for it serves the
Devil.

22. Now, that which an Evil Man desires, that the Devil acted for him very
readily; for he can better do it by or through a Humane Soul, then by or of
himself; he is too rough, and terrifyeth the Magia, which astonisheth the
Elementary Spirit, and awaketh the Body: and we acquaint you, that all is done
Magically in the Will, without awakening or stirring up of the Source Quality
or pain; for, No Soul awakeneth or stirs up its Essences to please Man,
unless a Man awaken them and disquiet them himself.

24. Also there are many pieces of wickedness in Nigromancy, which many times
can torment the Spirit of a Man, but of No Soul which carries about him
Christ's Substantiality, for that Soul is Free.

25. The Third Part or sort of Souls Departed, are those which are in the Bosom
of Abraham, in Christ with Heavenly Substantiality, those none can stir unless
they will themselves, that they bear favor, to a Soul, which is like it self,
these take not upon them any Earthly Thing at all; unless it serve to Gods
Honor and Glory, and then they are very diligent and restless to reveal
somewhat in a Magical Manner.

26. But they let in No Turba, neither do they pray for us, in the presence of
God; what comes to them, that they have Joy in Luke 15. 7.
among the Angels of God, for the Angels rejoice at a Sinner that Repents,
much more the Souls:

27. What should they pray for to God for us? It lies not in their Prayer, but
in Man's Entering in to God, when he p^^teth his Will into God, then God's Spirit
helps him unprayed to by them;

28. Romans 10. 21.
For his Arms are stretched forth Day and Night to help Man, what need then
their Praying? It is the Will of God, that Man should come to him.

29. Why then should a Soul be so perverse, as to account God to be so severe a
Judge, that he will not recieve a Converting Sinner? such a thing were not
agreeable with the apprehension and knowledge of God: but if the Blessed Souls
see that a Soul with the Spirit presses to God, then they rejoice that God's
Kingdom is increased.

30. The Heavenly Soul has God's Will, what God wills, that it wills also;
but it is Gods Spirit it self, that will help a Converting Sinner.

31. The Souls see very well how God's Spirit penetrateth into a Soul, if the
Souls Will do but give Way and Place ^o if, it needs not the Prayer of any
Angel, they all wish that God's Kingdom may come into us, and God's Will to be
done, but in the Dominion they give God the Glory.

32. But that Men in Popery have prayed to the Great Saints Departed, and that
they have then appeared to Men, and wrought Wonders, all that we affirm, it is
true, though perhaps now it be taught to the Contrary, yet there is not any
true apprehension among them; it has another A. B. C. which neither of the two
Parties understand.

33. One Faithful Soul lays hold of the other, the Livings Faith has laid
hold of the Deceased Saints Faith, and the Faith has wrought Wonders.

34. Yes it is so powerful that it can remove Mountains, should then the Pure
Faith of the Saints be able to do nothing in the Livings Faith? they could even
dissolve the World, if God would give leave;

35. As God has given leave, that the Heathen have been converted by such
means, when they have seen such Wonders done at the Burial of the Saints.

36. Should a Soul in Heaven not be willing to afford its Faith to serve the
Glory of God and his Deeds of Wonders; the Wonders are done in the Holy Spirit,
who has wrought the Wonders through the Faith of both the Parties, and they
are only the Wonders of God and his Children.

37. But that this way is so wholly thrown to the Ground, and that now there is
so learned a School, that it contemns all Gods Wonders, that is Babel and not
Spirit, it is Envious Pride, for a Man to stand up and Cry, Come ye all to me,
Mat. 24. 23. Mark 13. 21. Luke 17. 21, 23.
here is Christ, here is the Gospel; Indeed there is Pride, Covetousness,
seeking of Honor and Vain Glory, own self will, an Exalting of Proud Obstinate
Babel:

38. It is even the Old Antichrist, they are young Branches sprung out of the
Old Tree, they have awakened the Turba with their strong fierce wrathful sap,
which will root out the whole Tree, for God has said it, it is altogether evil
and Worm-eaten it must fall,

39. For it self is a Young Tree sprung out of the Root, even out of the Old
Root which will make known the Old Tree, what it has been in its Wonders.

40. But we would hereby despise none, but we speak thus of our Wonders and
say, that the Servant shall enter into the House, and become Free; for the time
is near, Luke 15. 22, 23.
that the Servant should eat with the Son, and be Merry and rejoice with him.

41. And thus we give you for an Answer to this Question summarily, That indeed
the Holy Souls, know and like our Holy Works; but they do not meddle about our
false or wicked works, for they dwell in another Principle: No evil work comes
thither, neither do they look upon it or regard it, what belongs to the Devil
they take no notice of, only of what belongs to their Principle.

42. Their Children Parents Friends are all alike to them with strangers, for
in Heaven we are all Brethren, they have no greater care about their Children
and Parents, then about others, unless they work and Act in God, and then
indeed their service of God is much more full of Joy to them: but they enter
not into their Turba,

43. For after the Last Judgment Day, the honest Parents, will know Nothing of
their Children that are in Hell: And so it is sufficiently apprehensible to us,
that they now take no care about their wicked Matters or Doings.

The Seven and Twentieth Question.
Whether the Souls in Death, know or understand this or that Business and Art,
in which they were skilled when they were in the Body.
1. THis is as in the following Question, all their Substance or Matters and
Doings, appear to them in their Will or Mind, in a Magical kind or manner, they
see it, but the Figure or Frame of them will first be given to them in the Day
of the Restoration, that they may be able to look upon them aright, for they
must first be tried by the Fire, and that which is false or wicked must remain
with its Turba in the Fire, according to the purport of the Word of Christ.

2. But, if the Question be concerning Arts, whether they know them: surely
they know all Arts, though never so Deeply founded, but they dare not awaken or
stir them up, that they should appear in their Spirit, for Arts are Generated
in the Center of Nature, out of the Essences wherein the Wonders stand, which
they have sought in this World, so much as has been opened to them in the
Mystery.

3. A Soul without Gods Body goes not into the Mystery for Art, it stands
still and quiet in its Rest, it fears the Turba, it gives Glory to God.

4. But the highly Enlightened Souls, which carry Heavenly Substantiality in
their Spirit, they have the skill and knowledge of Heavenly Matters, and of all
whatsoever lies in the Mystery, especially those which have been conversant in
the Mystery here, the other do not use to search into the Mystery.

5. For every one continues in his own Calling and Employment, which he has
here loved and delighted in, though indeed there be no such working or Labor
there, yet they have Joy in it; for in Heaven there is a simple humble
Childrens Life.

6. Why should Men there enquire after Arts and Sciences? The whole Mystery
stands Open: God fills all in all, there are mere Wonders, they live all in
Wonders, and are all the Art of God, they have all great skill and knowledge,
but in a Paradisical simple Childrens Life.

The Eight and Twentieth Question.
Whether they have any more skill or knowledge of Divine Angelical and Earthly
things, and also of Devilish, and can have more certain Experience and
Knowledge of them then they had in the Body.
1. Concerning Divine and Angelical Skill and Knowledge, they have certainly
much more, for they are in the Principle of God: and the Son sees very well
what the Father does in his House, so also the Soul sees what is in Heaven.

2. Their skill and knowledge, is very various; for the highest skill and
knowledge is apprehended in the Majesty, and there must most Souls wait till
the Last Judgment Day, when they shall get their New Bodies:

3. But the highly Enlightened, How Souls, that are in God's Body and Power,
they have surpassing overflowing skill and knowledge of God, and of the Angels,
for they are in the Wonders of God, till their own: Wonders shall be presented
also to them.

4. The Souls without a Body, are in Heaven in God, as it were Magically, they
awaken or stir up no Wonders, but are under Gods Altar; and wait for the
Wonders at 2 Timothy 4. 1. Tit. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 7.
the day of Appearing.

5. They take no care about Devilish things, for that belongs to the Angels
to strive with the Devil, and defend Men, No Soul Imagines into Hell, it is
Enmity to them.

The Nine and Twentieth Question.
What the Souls Rest, awakening and Clarification are.
1. THis is also clearly enough Explained, its Rest is without Or Works.
Substance in the stilness, where they are in God's Hand, and no source or pain
touches them, they have no feeling of any pain. but it is as one that lies in
a sweet sleep, and rests quietly.

2. Their Or Glorification.
Clarification during this time, is when they think and consider of the Joy to
Come, then the Spirit enters into the Majesty of God, whence they have Joy
and Clarity or Glory, and so during all the time they Mat. 25. 6, 7.
trim their Lamps, that they may be ready in their New Body to be received by
their Bridegroom.

3. There is a very sweet Paradisical Joy in them, but Paradise is not stirring
in them, with full perfection, for that belongs to the New Body out of the
Earth, The First Body which God Created, which Christ has redeemed by his
Death, that will bring the Wonders, and enter again, into Paradise, and be
surrounded or Clothed with God's Majesty, and then is Note. Rev. 21. 3.
the Tabernacle of God with Men.

The Thirtieth Question.
What the difference of the Livings and Deads Resurrection of the Flesh, and of
the Soul is.
1. COncerning this says Christ, there shall be great difference, wherefore we
remit you to the Scripture, for it shall all be according to the Scripture.

2. But seeing this is unsearchable and unapprehensible to Man's Reason,
therefore I know not how to answer you more then the Scripture says, but
seeing you long and desire to know these things, therefore you are also in your
seeking, the finding: and I am only the Instrument.

3. And though it be given and opened to me, yet it is not from my own
understanding and knowledge, but the knowledge stands in the Spirit of
Christ, according to which; this Hand calls it self Twofold, and says WE,
for it speaks from Two Persons; and two Persons say not I but We, and speak
of Two; as a Lord that speaks of his Person and of his Dominion.

4. And so Gods Children and Servants, should not say, the knowledge is Mine,
the understanding is Mine, but give the Honor and Glory to God, and in their
opening or manifesting the Or declaring the Works of God.
Wonders of God, should speak of two, viz. of the Giver and of the Receiver.

5. Neither should any understand our Writing so, as if the hand did boast or
Glory of it self, according to the Authority and worthiness of Man, though
indeed in Christ we are worthy: but according to the Outward Man, we would have
no boasting or praise and honor, for the Praise is Gods.

6. We are Children of the Father, and should do that which he would have us
do, and not Mat. 25. 25, 28.
hide or bury in the Earth, the Talent which he has given us, for the Father
will require it of Us with Increase, and if nothing be increased with it, then
he takes it again from him, to whom he had given it, and gives it to him that
has gained much; which would be a Miserable taking away from me, to have God,
and to know him, and lose that again, it were better to lose the World and the
Outward-Life, then to Lose God and the Kingdom of Heaven;

7. It is not a thing to be dallied with, to be disobedient to God, see what
befell Corah Dathan and Abiram, about Moses, the same will befall the Disobedient
and Scorners:

8. Indeed the Scorner feeth not his punishment presently, but his Turba takes
it in; now has he laughed any to scorn in derision, and would fain be freed or
released from the Turba thereof? then he must in Sorrow and Lamentation grieve
before God for it, or else he will bring his scorn along with him into the
Anger-Fire, and that will Eternally gnaw him, this we would have said for a
Warning.

9. For here we write of an: earnest or severe business, it is not to be
slighted: be not led astray, Gal. 6. 7.
God will not suffer himself to be mocked or scorned, the fierce wrathful Anger
is in his Might and Power, he has Hell and Heaven in his Power.

10. The last Judgment is an Earnest or severe work, but being we are to set
down the Resurrection of the Dead, therefore we must write the Manner of it,
how it shall be performed, in what power this world shall pass away, and the
Dead arise, it will be earnest or severe, let none slight it, we will speak of
the ground of it.

11. And think not that it is a Conceit, it becomes generated out of the Turba
upon your Crown, the Turba of your own Spirit tells you that, for the End
has found the Beginning; thus the whole Substance Matters or Works of the
World stand in the Middle, in the Light, and out of that goes your Prophet,
viz. out of your wrought Wonders or practiced works.

12. For it is not the Spirit of the Turba that will govern, but the Spirit of
Christ; it has overcome Death, and taken the Turba captive; Ephesians. 4. 8.
He lead-leadeth Captivity Captive as a Conqueror.

13. But the Turba will execute the Judgment or Justice, for it is God's
Servant in the Anger, not his Lord, but Servant; therefore the Thunder which
will terrify the Earth, goes out of the Mouth of God, which will kindle or
inslame the Firmament and the Elements.

14. The last Judgment, belongs to the Judge Christ, together with the Holy
Spirit; For here will the Eternal Spirits Center stir it self, which also has
parted it self into Three Principles, viz. One in the Anger-Spirit, and One in
the Divine Love-Spirit, and One in the Air-Spirit of the outward World.

15. The last moving belongs to him, he is in Christ's Mouth according to the
Deity, and according to the Anger, in the Hellish anguish source quality or
Torment, and according to the Wonders, in the Spirit of this World.

16. He was the Work-master of All Things or Substances, and he it is also that
will give to Every work its Eternal Lodging, and Mat. 13. 30.
gathers every thing into its Barn.

17. For he has many helpers, for the Angels shall sever and separate all
things; and then will the Mouth of God the Father with the Word of the Lord,
through the Mouth of Christ speak the Sentence, and then Begins the burning
World, and the Entrance of Every thing into its Barn and Reservatory.

18. For the Reservatories will be manifold, not only two, viz. in two
Principles, yet in two Principles, but in many distinctions all according to
the several power and virtue.

19. For every work stands in a Magic Principle as a several distinct
Wonder, both in the Heaven and in the Hell, every one according to its Spirit;
and so will its Form or Condition be and appear, according as it is good or
evil, and so will its Power and Virtue be, like the Flowers or Blossoms of the
Earth in their Varieties, and so will Man also have Joy and Glorification all
according to his here-wrought acted Substance or Works.

20. But we understand Substance or Works of Faith, the Power and Virtue in the
Love-Substance or Works, not of the outward works, for all shall be presented
or set forth in the Figure in the Wonders, and that will be so with its
Beginning and Circumstances.

21. When the Last Judgment Day shall Dawn, then all shall open it self once
more, viz. the Third Time, the Deity in all forms in Love and Anger; then will
all stand equally manifested at once, and visibly before all Creatures; and
that is done thus.

22. The Beginning of the Creation, in the Word Fiat, has included this World
as a Model in it self, and founded the limit, wherein now the Wonders are
become included, which should be manifested or opened in the middle and in the
time, and come to Substance or Effect, which were seen from Eternity in the
Wisdom of God's Magia, and so those Wonders are then all in the Substance or
Work, and then the Limit is at hand, and no time of seeking more; for it is
finished; whatsoever God has in his Eternal Council, that he has comprised
and opened in a Time.

23. And now is the End of Time, and the beginning has then found the End, and
the End is then the beginning, and passes again into that which it was from
Eternity.

24. But the middle in the time, with its opened wonders, remains Eternally
in the beginning and in the End, as an Eternal Middle with its Wonders, viz.
with Angels and Men in their Substance or Works, as also the Figures of all
Creatures, as also all Creatures, and all whatsoever has become Essential at
any time, the Earth with its Metals Stones and all material Substances things
or works, as also Trees Herbs and Grass, all of them stand in the Figure in the
middle and in the Wonders, but without such Essences and Life [as they have
here.]

25. For no Beast comes again, but its Figure in the Magia remains standing,
for it is originated out of the Eternal Looking-Glass, therefore also it must
now when the outward Earthly Looking-Glass breaks, stand in the Eternal as a
Wonder to Gods Honor and Glory:

26. And these very Substances belong all to Paradise, for it will be the Holy
Paradise, wherein the Heavenly Elements will bear Substantial palpable Fruits.

27. And as we here in this Life, account the Fruits of the Earth, out of its
Essence, as dead things without understanding; so will also the Beastial and
Earthly Images of this world appear as dead Substances things or works, as also
all other Creatures Substance or Work, it shall stand as a shadow; but the
Paradise has and bears Fruit out of the Eternal Life's Power and Virtue, viz.
out of God's Essences.

28. This all, which for the most part lies hidden to us, is included in the
word Fiat, in the beginning and End, and lies therein as a great VVonder.

29. And now will the Spirit of the first Creation, move all the Three
Principles, and before that is done, the Word of God compriseth it self with
or by that Spirit, like an Elevation or Manifestation of the Deity.

30. For, the Spirit stirs up the Turba of all things or Substances in all
the Three Principles, and then in one hour all will stand manifest, whatsoever
is in Heaven Hell or this World.

31. For the Turba stirs up all things substances or works of all Creatures,
and all will be visible, whatsoever is in Heaven or Hell, and every one will
see the work of his Heart good or Evil.

32. And in this hour appears also the Judge Christ, upon the
Bow of the Number Three, like a Rainbow; for according to the Principle of
this World it is a Natural Rainbow, but according to the Principle of God, it
is the Number Three, The Cross with a Doubled Rainbow, one part whereof
stands turned into the Inward Principle, viz. into the Abyss of the Anger,
there he sits upon God's Anger, and that the Devils and all wicked Men shall
see;

33. For that Bow is included in all the Three Principles, and this Judge
Christ sits upon and in the Omnipotence of the Eternity, above all whatever
is called Substance or Thing.

34. And there will rise up the lamentable horror of all Devils and wicked
Men, and they will tremble yell and cry, Mat. 25. 8.
and say to the wise Virgins, give us some of your Oil of Joy and Gladness.
Heb. 1. 9.
Oil, comfort us a little, and teach us what we should do, give us some of your
Holiness, that we may stand before the Angry Countenance of God, for the Eye of
Hell stands wide open, whither shall we fly from this Anger?

35. And the wise Virgins, viz. the Children of God will say, Mat. 25. 9.
Away to your Sellers, and buy of them, we have Oil only enough for us, lest
you and we both want; away to your Hypocrites Flatterers and Deceivers, who
have tickled your Ears with Hypocrisy for your Money, buy of them, we have
need of ours: have we not been your Fools? Now away with the Glistering of your
deceit and Hypocrisy, we will not make our selves partakers with you, lest we
suffer what will come upon you.

36. There will they stand in great horror, yelling and Crying to the Judge
Christ, but his Anger-Eye with their Turba gripes them in the Heart, quite
through Spirit and Flesh, through Marrow and Bones; for the Soul, is in the
Turba with the moving of God, clearly stirring in the fierce Wrath.

37. And then for very Anguish they will fall to the Earth, and one part of
them will bite their Blasphemous Tongues; the Proud will say, Luke 23. 30. Isa
2. 19. Hos. 10. 8. Rev. 6. 19. 16.
O ye Mountains fall on us, and ye Hills cover us, from this Eye of the fierce
wrath, they will creep into the Holes, into the Cliffs of stony Rocks and
Mountains to shelter them; they would fain put themselves to Death, and yet
there is no more Death; they use Weapons to put themselves out of the Body,
but there is no dying there, but only fierce Wrath and Anger.

38. In this horror will all buildings in the World fall down, for the Earth
will Tremble, as shaken with Thunder, and the horror will be in all and every
Life, every one according to its source quality or pain; A Beast has no such
source or quality or pain, as the Soul, only it is afraid of the Turba.

39. And in this Elevation and moving all the Waters will flow up above all
high Mountains, that there will be no breaking upon the Earth, it will be so
high as if they were all consumed; for they will all be comprised in the Anger
in the Turba, so that in the Elements there will be nothing but Anguish.

40. All high Rocks and Mountains will crumble and fall down, the Stars will
fall to the Earth with their strong or stern power or virtue, and all this will
be done in several Days, all accordingly as the World was Created, so it shall
also have an End: for the seeking of the Earth in its Anguish, will draw the
Stars to it, as they have always done in this time, so that the Earthly Body
has drawn the seeking or influence of the Stars to it.

41. For the Stars are a Magical seeking, which have awakened Life, so that now
the Earth stands awakened in the Creat Turba, and therefore it is so hungry
and thirsty, that it will draw the Stars to it, such an Anguish will be upon
the Earth.

42. But the Children of God will lift up their Eyes with folded hands to
Christ, and rejoice, that Luke 21. 28. Romans 8. 23.
the Day of their deliverence is come, for the Anguish touches them not.

43. And in those days (which are hidden in God how many belong to it; for
Genesis 2. 1. Exodus 20. 11.
in six days the World with its Hosts was Created, this is hidden from us) the
Water will find it self again, and fill all deeps, more then before.

44. For now Death comes with it, and in that hour all Creatures except Man
shall the, and all the Men that have crept into the Clefts of the Rocks and
Mountains, will come forth again, but with Anguish of their Consciences, though
now the Turba has permitted that the horror stand in Death, for the falling
of the Water takes hold of the Turba.

45. And then will the voice of the Holy Number Three according to all the
Three Principles open it self, and through the Mouth of the Judge Christ, say,
Arise ye Dead and come to Judgment.

46. This voice is the Original Eternal Spirit, which holds or preserves the
Life of all things, and has always ruled in all the Three Principles, for it
is the Spirit out of which all and every Life is existed, and in which it
stands in Eternity, which has been the Life and moving of all things, in
which the Beginning of Every Life has stood, as also its End, and the
Eternity, for it is from Eternity and the Creator of all things.

47. It has two Eternal Beginnings, viz. in the Fire and in the Light, and the
Third Beginning has been a Looking-Glass of the Eternal, viz. the Spirit of
this World; It has been as a Wonder in this World, and through it the Wonders
are become manifested or revealed, and that it is which possesses the last
Judgment, its Motion is the Last.

48. For in the Creation it moved the Father, and in the Incamation or becoming
Man; it moved the Son, and now the last moving and Judgment is its own, it will
bring home every thing into its Eternal Place; and this is done through the
Voice of the Word out of the Mouth of Christ.

49. And the Spirit goes forth in God in Two Principles, viz. in the Anger,
viz. in the Fire, it goes forth as the Earnest or severe fierce wrath of the
fire-life; and in the Light of the Love, it goes forth as a flame of the
Divine Majesty, and in the Spirit of this World, as a Wonder of Life, as indeed
all this is undeniable.

50. And if there were one that would seem to be so highly Learned as to deny
it, he is required to show it in any thing; we will not have any thing in this
World excepted, but it shall give testimony to Us, let him come when he will,
he ought not to for bear and say, We are Mad, such a short words answer are not
enough, we will demonstrate it to him so, that he shall find himself, and see,
who he is, and though the Devil should burst for Anger, yet we will set it
before his Eyes.

51. And being that Spirit has the Word Fiat, viz. God's Word, with the
Center of Nature, out of which it has originated from Eternity, and as the
Spirit of the Center goes forth in two ways, viz. one in the Fire, in the
Essences of the Life's Original, in the Ground of the Souls Original; and then
secondly in the Light of the Fire, viz. in the second source or quality, which
sprouteth through Death, and is called God's Kingdom, where in the Light it is
the Flame of Love, and in the Fire, the Flame of Anger;

52. So it will also shake the Gates of Death, and awaken or raise the Dead,
and it has the word Fiat in it, and that Fiat is in the Soul and also in the
Body, and though it has consumed the Body long ago, yet the Turba with the
Wonders of the Body are remaining in the Fiat.

53. And now must the Elements give the Substance or Works, which they have
swallowed up, again to the Fiat, for the Word of the Lord is therein, but in
its own Principle, every one of them must render or give up what it has
received, viz. the Earth, the Body, viz. the Phur; and the Water also its
Essences; the Air the sound of the Voice of Words; and the Fire, the Essences
of the Soul; for it shall all be judged distinctly, and sentenced.

54. All words which the Mouth has spoken, which the Air has received into it
self, and the Words which it has served to make, those the Air shall set forth
again, or represent again, for it is the Looking-Glass of the Eternal Spirit;
the Spirit sees all in the Looking-Glass.

55. And now will Man in Heart Mind and Thoughts be proved and Judged; for the
Turba stands in all Evil, Malice, or wickedness, which is against the Love,
and there will not much excuse be made, for every one complains of, or
accuses himself, his Turba accuses him.

56. Understand us thus, that Spirit which is all in all, will awaken and raise
every Life that has been immortal, and with or by the Fiat, give it to the
Body, for the Fiat draws the Body to the Soul, with all its Deeds and
Wonders, with all whatsoever it has been done, with Words or Works; all
whatsoever has reached, the Souls Abyss, that must come forth.

57. For in the still or quiet Eternity, there shall be no Turba, more, and
therefore shall all things or Substances, be tried by the Fire, and the Turba
shall remain in the Fire, with all whatsoever has been Evil and capable of the
Turba, unless in the Time, it has been washed in the Water of Life by the
Souls Conversion, else it must remain in the Fire:

58. Now 1 Cor. 3. 15.
many having sown in the Fire, will suffer loss is Christ tells us, that the
works of the wicked will remain in the Fire, and he will suffer loss.

59. Understand us aright thus; The Body which has conversed here upon the
Earth, that evil perished Body, which has swallowed up that Noble precious and
fair of bright Image of Paradise, shall come, and present it self, with the
Precious Image in it, and give an account of God's Image.

60. Now it is well with those, who have Christ's Spirit, they have their first
Image in the word Fiat, and that they must give again to the Soul, and that in
the Adamical Body;

61. But those which have not Christ's Spirit, they will stand indeed presented
in the Evil Body, but their Soul will have lost the right and true Image, and
will have an Image in their Souls-Spirit; what their daily Lust or delight has
been, such will their Image be.

62. And in this hour, will also the fierce wrathful Fiat of the Darkness,
present the Devils, which now also shall receive their Wages and Habitation, at
which when they hear of it they Tremble.

63. And thus will all the Dead both Evil and Good arise, every one in his
Twofold Body, and will have the Soul with the Spirit in the Body.

64. One will have the outward Earthly Life, and therein, a Beastial Image in
the Souls-Spirit, and will have the fierce wrathful Angers Substantiality or
Works in the Inward Image.

65. And another will have, the outward Body, and therein Christ's Image, and
in the Souls-Spirit will God's Love-Spirit give Light, on to these the Word
Fiat draws the right and true Adamical pure Image, again;

66. For the pure Image stood in God hidden in the Word, which was Incarnate or
became Man; And now when the Soul stands at the limit, it gets that again,
with the fair Virgin of the Wisdom of God.

67. For the Noble and Precious Image was destroyed in Adam, when the Woman was
made out of him, so that he only retained the Fires Tincture, now each of them
comes whole home again;

68. For the Woman will in the Fire of God receive the Fires Tincture, so that
she will be as Adam, neither Woman nor Man, but a Virgin full of Chastity and
Modesty, without Feminine or Masculine shape or Members:

69. And here it will no more be, as we are, and say, thou art my Husband, thou
art my Wife, but they are Brethren: In the Divine Magical Wonders, somewhat of
it will be apprehended, but none will regard that, but there we are all only
Gods Children, in a Life and Love Sport of Children.

70. All this will be done before the Sentence, for the Sentence will first be
on the Last Day of the Judgment, and the Living will not then Die, but be with
the Voice of God presented together before the Judgment of God.

71. For the word Fiat, will bring them all thither, and all will be presented
in its order by the word Fiat, viz. a King and Emperor with his Subjects over
whom he has Ruled, a Prince, Nobleman, Burgomaster and Superior Magistrate,
each in his own Office and Employment.

72. And here shall every one who have set themselves up for Shepherds of
Christ without God's calling, stand with the flock of their Sheep, and give an
account of their Doings and Doctrine, whether they have been Christ's
Shepherds, and have pastured the Sheep; or whether they have been their
Belly-Shepherds; here will the Spirit make enquiry after their calling and
office, whether they have from his Election and power or virtue, entered into
the Office of a Pastor or Shepherd, or through Man's favor, without God's
Spirit and Election.

73. For the Judge will say: Luke 16. 2. Mat. 12. 36.
Now give an account of your Lives, of your words Works, Deeds and Matters or
Substance; then will the Turba tell every Man, what his Substance or Matters
have been: for now will all within them and without them stand in the Figure
before them, that so there may be no denial; for the Spirit tries with the
Turba, Soul Spirit and Flesh, here all is manifest.

74. The Kings and Princes shall give an account of their Subjects, how they
have governed and protected them, what Government they have exercised, why they
have taken away the lives of Many in Tyranny, and shed innocent Blood, why they
have made War for their Covetousness and pleasure sake:

75. In like manner other Superiors, why they have intruded themselves, and
have set themselves up for Lords over the simple, oppressed and squeezed them
and taken away their sweat and labor from them and Consumed it in Pride.

76. Now will the Root of every thing be enquired after whence it comes, and
out of what it is grown, whether it bear God's Ordinance, and whether it
Originateth in the Heavenly Fiat, or in the Hellish out of the Anger, there
shall every one give an account of his State and Condition, whether he have
intruded out of Coverousness and Pride, and made himself a Lord and Master, or
whether his Government be ordained of God.

77. There see O ye Worldly Rulers, ye Potentates, whether ye be God's
Ordinance; whether ye sit in a right and true Divine Ordinance; what you do
with the miserable and needy; now they stand before your eyes, and complain of
you, that you have been the Cause of their sins and of all their Evil;

78. For there one will cry and complain against the other, that he has caused
him to commit such and such abominations, and will curse him; the Inferior the
Superior, the Superior his Superior, the Prince his false or wicked
Counselors, the Counselors, the Priests, who have not reproved their
Courses, but soothed and flattered them for advancement and honors sake.

79. Oh how will you now subsist ye high Schools and Doctors, all you that have
sitten in Christ's Sear, that you have so contended about Christ's Cup, about
his Honor Glory and Doctrine in your Pride, and have irritated or stirred up
and constrained the Princes of your Countries, who are the Ordinance of God, to
Wars and Bloodshed, for your Words sake, which you your selves have forged.

80. Where is now Christ's Spirit, in the Love, which says, Mat. 13. 34, 35.
Love one another, thereby men shall know that you are my Disciples? where is
now your Love? see your Bloody provocations wherewith you have involved them in
War, and led the World astray from Love and Condescension;

81. You have made Rents and Divisions, so that Kings have divided, and been at
Enmity for your Pride sake, in that you have drawn Christ's Word about by the
Hair, and not considered, whether you have Christ's Spirit and Will or no;
there you above all others shall give a severe account, for you have known the
Lord's Will and have not done it: you have run, and intruded your selves into
Christ's Office, only for Gain Favor and Honor sake: you have not regarded
God's Spirit, therefore the Spirit calls you Babel, a Confusion of all that
live;

82. You have set the whole World at Odds, you should teach them Love, and you
have taught them strife and Contention, so that one Brother hates and
persecuteth the other for your contrivance sake; how is the Name of Christ
despised for your Contentions sake! whither will you go, and where will you
abide when the whole World shall Cry, Woe, woe, on you?

83. Here the Angels will be the Dividers, these will separate them into two
Heads, and set the Honest and Godly at the right, and the evil and wicked at
the Left, viz. at the Anger-Eye: For the right is here called the Lights
Principle, and the Left, the fires Principle;

84. And there will the Judgment be set; all the Great Shepherds which God has
sent for Lights into the World, who have reproved and taught, viz. the
Patriarchs, concerning the Promise of Christ, together with the Prophets and
Apostles, at the right hand of the Judgment; and Moses and all teachers of the
Law, at the left hand of the Judgment:

85. For Moses and Elias, have the Fire-Sword, together with all highly worthy
Teachers of the Law, and require God's Justice and Righteousness; and those at
the Right, God's Mercy.

86. And in this hour is the Last Day of the Judgment, when the Judge will
say, Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36.
Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Beginning; for I have been hungry thirsty naked sick, and in Misery, and you
have served or Ministered unto me.

87. And to the wicked Crew, Mat. 25. 41, to 45.
Away ye Cursed; I know you not; into the Eternal Fire: For I have been hungry,
thirsty, sick naked and in Prison, and ye have not served or Ministered unto me.

88. And then they will excuse themselves as to the Judges Person, Lord we have
not known thee: and he will say, what you have not done to my Children in
Misery, you have not dono unto me.

89. And here will the Spirit of God first move himself to Justice in all the
Three Principles, and awaken the Center of Nature; that it may burn in the
Anger-Fire; for All will stand in the Fire, both Heaven Earth and the Firmament;

90. And the Turba will swallow up the Earthly World into the Fire, and set it
in that condition again, as it was before the Creation; only the Wonders
remain standing in both Principles; the Third passes away all to the Wonders,
which will be set in the Beginning again.

91. And there will the Earthly Life with the Earthly Body fall away, and the
fire will consume them.

92. And in the Righteous, will the Glorious bright Paradisical Body pass
through the Fire with its Wonders or Works, which will follow after it; and
that which is false or wicked will remain in the Fire.

93. And they will be snatched through the Fire in the twinkling of an Eye,
although the Fire will not take hold of them; as little as the Fire can detain
the Light or the Wind, so little also can it hold the Light of the Holy Men or
Saints: for they can dwell in the Fire without feeling any pain.

94. And then instantly with the kindling of the Fire, is God's Majesty
prepared, and the Paradisical Life, into which they go as Children, and live
Eternally with their Father, in one Love, in a simple Loving Child's Life, and
there is a Communion of Saints or Holy Ones.

95. No Days and Nights, for the Sun passes away, and the Stars pass away,
and their Wonders only stand in the great Magia to the Honor and Glory of God:
thus they will sever themselves.

96. The wicked must also go into the Fire, and their Earthly Life also fall
away, and in their Spirit will be seen their Vizard-Image: according to all
manner of Abominable Beasts like the Devils.

97. For they dwell in one and the same Principle, and Luoifer is their
Great-Prince, whom they have here served and ministered unto: and it was so that
they did hang to their flattering Hypocrites for the sake of the Joy of a Fools
Paradise.

98. Thus beloved Friend ye have a short explanation and information concerning
the Last Judgment Day; for all in this World will pass away:

99. The Earth and all Rocks and the Elements, will melt away, and THAT only
will remain which God would have, for the sake of which he created this World.

100. There has before clearly both Good and Evil been seen in Eternity, and
has in this World been only brought to Substance, and that is a Wonder, and it
stands afterward so in Eternity.

The One and Thirtieth Question.
What manner of New Glorified Bodies the Souls will have.
1. THis is also sufficiently declared already: For according, as any is endued
with the Power of Love, Righteousness and Purity, he will accordingly have fair
bright Works of Faith, and so he will shine and give Light.

2. But this will be very different, the works of Many will almost all remain
in the Fire, and themselves will scarce escape, and such a one is not so fair
and bright as the Holy are.

3. For, as the Scripture says, 1 Cor. 15. 41.
They will excel one another as the Stars of Heaven, but there will be no
disrespect for it, but one will rejoice at the beauteous brightness of another,
for there is no other Light but this, viz. that Ephesians. 1. 23.
God fills all in all.

4. And thus every one will receive God's Glance or Luster and Majesty,
according as his virtue or power will be capable of the Light, for after this
Life there is no bettering, but every one remains as he entered in.

5. For here will the Judge 1 Cor. 15. 24.
Christ, deliver up the Kingdom to his Father; and then we shall need no
Teachers and Conductors more, but he is our King and Brother: there is no
intercession, but we are with him as a Child with the Father, and what we do
then is good, for there is no falsehood or wickedness more.

The Two and Thirtieth Question.
What other Form, State and Condition, Joy, and Glory, there will be, to Souls,
in that other Life.
1. IN this Question Paradise is to be Considered by us: For this outward World
with its Fruits and Colors has been a Figure Type or Resemblance of Paradise,
for Paradise was in us, and the Outward Spirit robbed us of it, and drew us
into it self; when Adam lusted after that, then his lust laid hold of him:

2. But now we shall be in Paradise again, and Eternally Rejoice therein, and
enjoy the fair bright springing of all manner of Flowers and variety of Forms,
as also of Trees and Herbs, and all sorts of Fruits; but not so Earthly, Thick
or Gross and Palpable:

3. For our Bodies shall not be so, how then shall the Substance of Paradise be
so? All is Angelical: Those Fruits are all Clearer and Subtiler, then the
outward Elements now are: we shall have no intrails into which we shall need to
stuff our stomachs as here in this sack of Worms or Carcass: but all is in
power and virtue, we eat in the Mouth, not into the Belly, we shall not have
need of Teeth to Chew with, all is virtue and power, and yet in a right and
true natural form and shape with clear bright Colors.

5. Also Romans 14. 17.
the Kingdom of Heaven consists not in Eating and Drinking, but in Peace and
Joy in the Holy Spirit, with singing and sounding forth God's Deeds of Wonder,
concerning the Corporiety of Paradise.

6. We lead there a Child's Life, and like them when they rejoice and are
chearly upon a Mount; for then there is no sorrow in our hearts, nor fear of
any thing, but a sporting with the Angels:

7. This World will be no more regarded, for all earthly knowledge and skill
and thoughts remain in the Turba of the Earthly Body in the Fire.

8. We are concerned no more in knowing of our Parents or Children or Friends
which are in Hell.

9. But we shall all know one another by Name that are together, though yet the
Earthly Name will remain in the Turba; but we shall have our first Name, a Name
according to the Language of Angels, which here we do not understand fully; in
the Language of Nature we understand somewhat of it, but we have here no tongue
to express it withal.

10. None says to the other, thou art my Husband, or thou art my Wife, thou
art my Son, Daughter, Manservant or Maidservant, all are alike as to that,
we are all Children, not Husband nor Wife, Children nor Man-Servants, nor
Maidservants, but all free, EVERY ONE is ALL; and yet there is but one Sex,
viz. Heavenly Virgins, full of Modesty, chastity and purity.

11. We all are God's Spouse and Wife, he is our Husband, he sows his power
and virtue into us, and we generate or bring forth to him, praise and honor:

12. There are also Dancings round and Singings, as Children use to do, which
take hands and sing, and dance a Ring together.

13. All Art will not be regarded: but know, that those who here have born the
Mystery, and have had it opened to them, they have great Ingenuity or Wisdom
and understanding above others, and exceed others.

14. Indeed not in Contention and Doctrine, but their Wisdom begins all
manner of Exercise out of the Mystery, so that the joy is stirred up; for as
Children run together when one begins to sport, so also here.

15. And little Children are our Schoolmasters, before they Meddle with Evil,
that the Turba Magra the Great Turba lays hold of them, for they bring their
sport with them out of their Mothers Womb, which is partly from Paradise, else
all is lost, till we attain that again.

16. A King avails no more there then a Beggar: if he has ruled well, then his
virtue follows him; and he will have Clory of it in the Majesty, for he
attaineth a bright Glorification, as a Shepherd over his Sheep.

17. But if he has been Evil, and yet at last become converted, and enter in
as it were by a Thread, then his Kingly Royal Works remain in the Fire, and
here he will avil no more then a Beggar; who has been honest, nor be so
beauteous neither.

18. In the works of every one, men will apprehend what every one has been,
when they shall open their Packets and present them in the Heavenly Magia, as
the Children do in their Sport.

19. Yet know that it will not be a Kingdom of Sport, only, for Men will speak
of God's Wonders and Wisdom, and of the Great Mysteries of the Heavenly Magia;
The Rev. 15. 3.
Song of the Driver will remain to the Scorn and reproach of the Devil, and to
the Praise and Glory of God.

20. Yet men will keep somewhat of Hell, but see it no otherwise then in the
Magia in the Mystery; for the Devils must dwell in the Darkness, the fierce
wrathful Fire in them is their Light, they have Fire-Eyes with which they see,
else all Fire is gone, for the Majesty has diffused it all, that it may burn
in Love.

21. Although yet there is Fire in the Center, from whence the Majesty
Originateth, but that will not be afforded the Devils, they will be thrust out
into the darkness, Mat. 8. 12.
where will be howln^g and gnashing of Teeeth, where there is more Frost then
Heat.

The Three and Thirtieth Question.
What kind of Matter our Bodies shall have, in the other Life.
1. MY Beloved Friend this is a hard Question; which the outward Man should do
well to let alone and not meddle with it, for it is not worthy of it.

2. Ye know very well, that God is become Man, and has taken upon him our
Flesh, Blood and Soul: But now says Christ; John 3. 13.
I am from above, none goes to Heaven but the Son of Man which is come from
Heaven, and who is in Heaven:

3. Understand ye that which he says, that he was then in Heaven, he spoke not
only of his Deity, viz. of the Word; but of the Son of Man, of the Word that
became Flesh, that is now to be considered by us: for in that Flesh and Blood
we shall live Eternally, and must have Christ's Body if we will subsist in God.

4. Yet we know of no other Body that we shall have, but our Own out of the Old
Body, as the Blade grows out of the Grain: and such a Body also Adam had in
the Creation; but he became captivated by the Kingdom of this World, so that he
became Earthly, and that was his Fall, and that caused God that he divided Adam
and framed a Woman out of him, as is written very largely in our Threefold Life.
Third Book.

5. Now we know very well that Adam was a Chaste Virgin before his Eve was,
before his sleep, and afterward became a Man, like a Beast with deformity,
which we at this day are ashamed of in the presence of God, that we have
beastial Members for propagation.

6. Yet now Adam had the Virgin of the Wisdom of God in him: but when he fell,
then it remained standing in its Principle and Adam went out from it:

7. And know that Christ is in that very Virgin in the Earthly Mary Incarnate
or become Man, for the Word of the Lord brought that with it in Mary's Body or
Womb.

8. And understand us thus, that Christ is become Flesh in the Water of the
Eternal Life, Col. 2. 9.
which the whole Deity fills; and even in the Essences of the Earthly Mary.

9. But Mary was blessed with the Heavenly-Virgin, so that Christ became Man in
a pure Vessel, and so the outward Man hung to him.

10. For it was for the sake of the Soul which he assumed from Mary, that he
must take Mary's Flesh, but in the Blessing of the Heavenly Virgin.

11. The Tincture of the Blood in the Heavenly Virgin was Heavenly, for an
Earthly had not been able to go through the Anger of God and Through Death,
also it had not had might or ability to have arisen out of the Grave.

12. The Word that became Flesh had the Water of Eternal Life, it was out of
God's Majesty, and yet also in Mary's Blood, here we refer you further to our
Third Book, viz. of the threefold Life, there it is written of at Large.

13. Thus we intimate to you that we shall have a Body in flesh and Blood, a
Body as CHRIST had: for Christ is with his Incarnation or becoming Man also
born in US Men.

14. When we become Newborn out of the Spirit and Water, then are we in
Christ's Spirit, new born out of Christ's Flesh and Blood.

15. We put on Christ, Christ is born in the Converting Sinner, and he in
Christ becomes God's Child, and that very Body shall we have in Heaven;

16. Not gross Beastial flesh, as we have in the Old Adam, but subtle Flesh and
Blood, such Flesh as can go through Wood and Stone, unhurt by the Stone; John
20. 19, 26.
as Christ entered in to his Disciples through the shut-Door, that is a Body, in
which no Turba or fragility is; for Hell cannot lay hold of it; it is like and
conformable to the Eternity; and yet is very true Flesh and Blood, that our
Heavenly John 20. 27. 1 John 1. 1.
hands do handle feel and take hold of, a visible Body as here in this World.

17. We offer to your Consideration, how such a Body, as we here carry about
us, would be capable of God's Majesty: It must needs therefore be such a Body
as is like the Majesty, so that the Majesty can give light and shine out of the
Body, out of the Tincture and Water of Eternal Life.

18. We shall here indeed be silent to Reason, but to our Brethren Intelligible
enough: it belongs to the Children, a Wolf would have his Mouth filled with a
piece of Flesh that he may devour into his Guts, of such a One we speak not,
but of such a one as Christ has given us in his His last Supper.
Testament and left us at Last, which is, John 6. 58. 1 These. 4. 17. John 15. 4.
that he will remain with us Eternally, we in him and he in us.

19. Thus we say, that we shall have Christ's and God's Body, which fills the
Heaven; not that we shall stick in his Creature, but be one with another as
members Brethren and Children: It is all ONE Life in US, not Mortal, all out of
the Eternal; nothing that begins but only the Wonders: our Substantiality is
come to be out of the Eternal; we are as Gods, God's right and true Children
out of his Essences in Body and Soul.

The Four and Thirtieth Question.
Of the Lamentable Horrible Miserable Condition of the Damned.
1. THis is also sufficiently mentioned above: for God's Anger is their
Habitation in the Darkness; their Light shines out of their Fiery Eyes, that
glimmer out of the Fire-flash, else they have no Light; for they dwell in the
outermost, and fly out of Highmindedness above the Thrones as Potent
Commanders, and yet one otherwise then the other, all according as his Spirit
is.

2. For a Dog acts in a Dogish manner, a Wolf in a Wolfish, also a Horse, a
Fowl, Todes, Serpents, after their Manner; but they are all flying and swift as
a Thought.

3. They have yet their Joy in their Abominations and that is their best Joy,
that they reproach God, and say that they are Fire-Spirits, and God, a
Light-Spirit.

4. Their boast is always of their strong fires Might; as a Dragon that
spitteth Fire; so also they, they seek Perdition and find Abomination:

5. Also Fruit grows to them out of their Principle, all according to the
Abominations of their Will:

6. They have a sport, like that of Fools, that spit fire out of Rockets,
Juggling and Fooling is their pastime, though indeed there is no Time; and also
after the Last Judgment Day no fear more of any other Source or Quality or
Torment then they have, but their whole Life is a continual fear, a Horror and
Lamentation, every one has his Works in the Figure, what he has here done;
and then it awakeneth the Turba and rides in the Fire.

7. The Soul has no feeling, for it is without the Fire; only the Turba with
the Introduced Abominations, plagueth it; there is an Eternal Despair in them,
and therefore they are also God's Enemies.

8. Whatsoever belongs to Blasphemy and Cursing, that is their best power and
virtue, they devour Hellish Brimstone and Abominations: For their Fruits are
such manner of things, a kind of Matter, that is outwardly fair, and inwardly
mere fierce wrath, and as they have been such flattering Hypocrites upon Earth,
therefore also their Heaven gives them such Bread to Eat.

9. They are at Large, shut up in Nothing, they may go as Deep as they will,
yet it is every where the Abyss and the Darkness, and yet they are but in
their First Place; the Deeper they desire to swing themselves, the Deeper they
Fall, and yet are no where at an End, or at the Ground or Bottom.

10. Their Number is no Humane Number, their delight is a stink of Fire and
Brimstone, because of their Cursed Blasphemy, that they were Angels and now
Devils, when they consider themselves then first rises up the gnawing Worm
that Devoureth and Tormenteth them:

11. What should a Man write of their Cursedness? they are filthy Evil Beasts,
all that they have practiced upon the Earth, that follows after them, and
that they would also do there; they swallow down Abomination and Cursing
without Measure; a Man cannot apprehend their Dominion better, then by the
Antichristian Horse, and by Cursing blaspheming Men, which are Mad with
Cursing, though it be but a Looking-Glass, in respect of the Hellish
Abominations; and we will not further mention them, for they are not worthy to
be named.

The Five and Thirtieth Question.
What the Enochian Life is, and how long it lasts.
1. THis is also above Humane Reason, and which no outward Reason can
Comprehend: but seeing it is born or generated, therefore it shall stand open,
for there stick such Mysteries here, that the World cannot comprehend, and we
shall not mention them at large, for it has its limit, how far it shall go;
for in this [Time] shall Wonders be done upon Earth, for which cause our speech
is taken from us that we must be silent.

2. Yet we shall show what kind of Life it is, or whither Enoch is gone, as
also Elias and Moses: It is no Conjecture, we speak what here is given us, we
shall further be silent, and not believe Reason, it is a Fool herein.

3. And we may well mention this, for the Time is Born, that Enoch speaks,
and Elias works Wonders, which Babel shall try by Experience: For Moses has
Horns, and yet is a Patient or Meek Lamb.

4. O how would thou rejoice, if thou would go amongst Moses Flock: for he
has a good Message or Embassy, rejoice ye Heaven and be merry ye Earth; for
Enoch is in the field and keeps his Flock.

5. What will Elias do? He had a white Garment on, and was with Christ on the
Mount, and spoke to him concerning the finishing the Redemption of Mankind, and
spoke to him also of the Entrance into Paradise, and of the final Deliverance
from the Driver or Persecutor.

6. He that is born Blind sees Nothing: how can a Lame Man run to the limit
for the Prize, and a Deaf Man distinguish^^^ Words and Languages? Does not the
Sun shin all the Day, and yet the Mole remains blind still; Will Babel then
come to see? We say she is a Scorner, and therefore also she must be blind
though the Sun shines to her:

7. How can any see what is in TWO Worlds, that dwells always but in ONE? Or
is it not Art and Wit, that has understanding, that can search the Deep Gates?
But it flies aloft like a Wind, that holds nothing, and yet makes such a
Bluster; so also Babel.

8. When we will speak of the Enochian Life, we must consider the Scripture,
and see who Enoch was, and what Life he lead; and then we may soon find, where
he is, and what his going away and taking up is.

9. The Scripture says, his Father was called Jared: if you understand the
Language of Nature, you had the whole Ground;

10. And Enoch begat Methusalah, who attained the Highest Age of any Man; and
after he had begotten him, he continued in a Godly or Divine Life, till the
Lord took him into his Principle.

11. And we are not so to understand it, as if he were wholly perfect in the
Light of God's Majesty, and should not appear at the Judgment Day: He is indeed
in God without necessity and Death, also in God's Love, but in the Birth of
God's Principle; for he had also Adam's Flesh.

12. So you know very well, that the outward Kingdom, with the Earthly Flesh,
belongs to the Turba, though indeed, he had in the outward Body, the Body of
God's Wonders, as to which he was taken up into the Mystery, so that the
outward Body, was as it were swallowed up of the Mystery.

13. But now must the Mystery give up again, all whatsoever it has swallowed
up, as ye know that at the End it shall present the outward Body with all
Substances or Works, before the Judgment of God, so also is the Turba still in
the outward Body with the Wonders, which shall be manifested and tried in the
Fire.

14. Seeing then Enoch is taken up, with Body and Soul, with both Bodies,
therefore his outward Body is in the Mystery, and the inward Body is a Heavenly
Mystery in the Arcanum or hiddenness, and so he lives in two Mysteries,
invisibly and incomprehensibly to the outward World: as we give you to
understand, that Paradise is still at hand and not vanished, but is as it were
swallowed up by the Curse of God, and lies yet as a Mystery uncorrupted in the
Curse.

15. For we can with good ground of Truth, say; that Paradise is still upon
Earth; but we are not therein, yet Enoch is therein; but he has still the Body
of the Turba in the Mystery, and in the Heavenly Mystery he has God's Body, a
Paradisical Body, that is capable of Paradise: thus he is a Wonder, and is a
Prophet on the Crown at the limit of the Wonders.

16. For ye know, the Scripture says, that after he begat Methuselah, the Man
of the highest Age, that afterward he continued in a Divine Life: and that is
significant.

17. Methuselah shows the end of the Wonders of this World, and Enoch in his
Divine Life after the Birth of Methuselah, shows as to his Three hundred
years, the opening of the Wonders, and the open Ministry, viz. a preaching of
Righteousness, whereby every one has his Turba shown him, and the End of the
Wonders of this World is showed, viz. God's punishment and reward to the Good.

18. And the Time after Enoch, wherein Enoch lived till the Number of the
Crown, when Enoch with his Preaching was taken up, shows that the Enochian
Light, which appeared in his Time, will pass again into the Principle, and will
seek the Earthly Body of Enoch, and it will be found that the Turba is still
therein, so that there is no seeking more, for the Turba is found at the Limit,
and works only to the Fire and to the Judgment.

19. Thus the End of this World is as the Dreggs of the Cup, and works in the
Turba, to the blowing up of the Fire, and to the Judgment; for the outward
World is become generated out of the Turba, and has taken its beginning in the
Turba, and the Turba is its proper own, thus the Beginning seeks the End
again in the fierce Wrath.

20. And as this World is become Corporeal in the fierce Wrath, so also will
the beginning at the End, have the Spirit again in the fierce Wrath; for the
Beginning and the End is all one; therefore you see very well, that in the
Beginning the Turba swallowed up Adam, and brought him into Anger and Murdered
Abel.

21. Therefore ye Elect, desire none of you to live to the time of the End,
after Enochs taking up; but consider, that when Enoch Preaches, the Sun
shines, then go out of Babel it is a Golden Time; but your Turba causes that
Enoch shall be taken up.

22. Enoch is not flyen away out of this World, he is passed into the Mystery
in the Wonders; for he is God's Preacher, and after that the Turba has
overcome the World, then must he be silent, till the six Seals have ended
their Wonders, and the Angels of the Turba poured forth their Viols, and then
are the Wonders of the Anger finished.

23. Then comes Enoch again out of the Mystery, and goes into the Mystery,
and tells what has been done, and reproves the World because of the Turba,
hecause they have let the abomination come into them, and have not withstood it.

24. And after the world becomes fat and wonton in the Golden Year, and
seeks Sodom and Gommorrah again, then will also their Turba be fat and
Wanton, and seek the fierce Wrath and the Limit, and the Golden Time comes to
an End, and will be swallowed up in the Turba, and then Methuselah, the oldest
Man dies, and suddenly comes the Sin Deluge in the Fire; think of it, it is
an Earnest severe thing.

25. We say not, that you shall feel Enoch with your hands, No! Enoch preaches
not from the Earthly Life's Spirit, but from that which was a Prophet which
introduced the outward Man into the Principle: thus you shall not touch the
outward Enoch, but hear the Prophet which speaks out of Enoch out of the
Mystery;

26. Babel holds it in derision, and despises Enoch for a time, then Enoch
calls Noah, but they account him an Old Fool, for Preaching of the downfall of
Babel.

27. And Noah passes into the other World through the Water, and calls to
Moses, with his Wonders, and he Comes, for he has God's Wonders.

28. For, he is gone through Death, and has brought his Body through Death,
where then the Turba desired to consume it, and the Devil contended about it,
and would have the Turba in Moses, because he had been an Angry Man, and
brought the Turba on many.

29. But it was said to the Devil, that the Turba in the fire did not belong to
him, for it served to the Majesty of God, and has the Wonders: to him
belonged the Turba in the Darkness in the fierce wrath, and is without the
City, it shall not dwell in the City in the Principle, but without it;

30. For, God has not Created him in and for the Fire, he may continue in his
own awakened fire-Life, for he has nothing to do with Moses Body; for Moses's
Wonders in the Anger belong not to his Turba, he is an Outcast a Castaway.

31. And Moses's Body is gone through Death, his unfadable Body, which has the
Wonders, has swallowed up the Earthly in the Turba, and yet not in a fadable
manner consumed it; but he is also in the Mystery: and his Turba which killed
the first born in Egypt, and drowned Pharaoh in the Water, and slew the
Worshippers of the Calves, also swallowed up Corah Dathan and Abiram with the
Earth; that remained in Death;

32. When he dyed, then went his Spirit and Soul forth out of the Turba, and he
remained in the Wonders in the Mystery.

33. And now he is become a Lamb, and brings his works into Isaac's and Sems
Goods, as a Mystery of God in his Deeds of VVonder; But the House is Isaac's,
and they all dwell in Sems Tents, in his Kingdom: Consider that, ye Jews and
Christians.

34. Now seeing Moses is gone from the contention of the Turba and of the
Devil, with Righteousness, into the Mystery, and has likewise his first Body,
yet unfadably on him, brought out from the Turba, but yet it shall be tried in
the Fire, at the End of the Day, therefore his Prophet is in the Mystery:

35. And seeing he is become a Lamb after the Turba, therefore he has sent his
people many Prophets, to Preach of the Mystery, as in the Mystery there is not
only the Law and Works, but also the Lamb Christ, into which he also Entered and
made his Law to be of the household of the Lamb, so that his Wonders dwell in
the lodging of the Lamb.

36. This Moses calls to Enoch, seeing he also is in the Mystery, and has
the white Garment on, which he gat from the Lamb in the other World; to whose
help Moses comes, with the Lamb's Deeds of Wonder, seeing they call Noah Fool,
who without Wonders teaches as an honest or virtuous Man.

37. This will not Babel endure, for so her pomp and loftiness will be taken
away, she sets her self against Moses and Enoch, and persecuteth them, she
would kill them; but Moses is dead already, and Enoch is taken up, and none in
the outward Life is with them: They say, well, where is Enoch and Moses, let us
see their Wonders, and they are blind, and cannot see them: thus they rage
against Moses and Enoch, and go forth to Battle.

38. Then Moses calls to Elias, which went out of this World in the Fire of
God, in the Abyss of the Principle, with Body and Soul, he dwells in the
Principle with strong Might, and when he comes and sees the Cry that Babel
stands in the Fire, then he kindles the Turba, wherein the Great Fire
Burns, which consumes Flesh and Blood, also Stones and the Elements, and
then shall Babel drink her last Draught.

39. And after that Enoch has peace a little Time, and it is the Golden Year,
till my Beloved become fat and wanton, and stuffeth his Turba well, so that it
seeks the Limit, and then comes the End of all Time.

40. Let it not be a Wonder to you, we will stay in the mean while with Noah,
till Moses and Elias, come; and then you will find it by Experience, all you
that are the Children of God,

41. But to the wicked it remains hidden, till the Turba devoureth them; they
look upon it, as the Jews did upon Christ, and the first World upon Noah; what
should a scorner do with the Mystery? he seeks only for plenty to Eat and to
Drink, and looks how he may satisfy his Pomp, wherewith he might Ride on in
Babel.

42. Thus, my Beloved Friend, we have given you a short hint of the Enochian
Life, also what his Office and Condition is, as also of Moses and Elias: you
should further consider of them as a discerning Man; for we dare not speak
otherwise of it; also our Understanding and Will is turned into such a way of
Speech, and in this place at this time I am not allowed to write more
fundamentally with a simple understanding,

43. If God permit, and that it be given to Us, to write somewhat upon the
Genests finnished.
first and also the Exodus none of it exstant.
second Book of Moses, more may be opened; for the Names that are set down of
the Fathers before the Deluge or Flood, belong all to the Mystery, and there
are Great Wonders therein; when it will be Day, then you shall by them
apprehend the whole Course of the World.

The Six and Thirtieth Question.
What the Soul of the Messiah or Christ is.
1. THis we have explained in our Third Book, concerning the Threefold Life of
Man, yet seeing every one that reads this has not that at hand, also because
of the Question, more must be answered, therefore it also shall be set down:
for you ask in the following Question, concerning Christ's Spirit, which was
obedient, and which Christ Commended to his Father.

2. Here shall be given to the Old sick Adam, a Good reviving Cordial, a
Medicine for Death, that he may be awakened: for his Mother will bear or bring
forth a young Son, who shall live in her Bosom, and shall rejoice at it.

3. And now if we will consider of Christ's Soul, we must our selves seek it
and find it, for Christ's Soul is a Hamane Soul, conceived in Mary in the
twofold Virgin.

4. Though we acknowledge the outward Mortal Life in Mary for no Pure Virgin,
for that which is Mortal has the Anger, and the Turba, which breaks or
corrupts all purity, so that no pure Virgin is born of Eve, but all are her
Daughters.

5. And Eve her self, was but half a Virgin, for Adam was the other half,
according to the Two Tinctures, wherein man appeared in a total entire Virgin
and pure Love, and God through him, as the Original through the Creature, which
he made out of himself.

6. And thus also in one whole or entire person there is a pure Love and
Chastity, for it seeks no other Mixture; it is it self the Mixture of both
the Tinctures, viz. of the Souls Tincture, and of the Spirits Tincture, and
therein is power and ability, that it can generate a Spirit out of the Fires
-Tincture, which is called Soul and Spirit;

7. Which Adam squandred away, when he let the Earthly Life captivate him, and
therefore he must be broken and a Woman be made out of him, which must set her
Love Delight Longing and Imagination into Adams Tincture, if she would be
impregnate with a Soul:

8. And None can say, that Eve, before the Touching of Adam, was a pure Chaste
Virgin: for as soon as Adam awaked out of sleep, he saw her standing by him,
and imagined suddenly after or into her, and took her to him, and said, This is
Flesh of my Flesh, and Bone of my Bone; she shall be called a she-Man or Woman,
because she is taken out of Man.

9. And she Eve also suddenly Imagined into Adam, and one kindled the other in
the seeking.

10. And where is now the pure Chastity and Modesty? It is not Beastial, is not
the outward Image become a Beast? As is sufficiently to be seen in the Will and
Substance or Doings, that Man does as a Beast, and more foolishly; for he has
Reason, and rides on in Reason so senslesly.

11. But that it might be remedied, and the Image come into One again,
therefore is the Word, which spoke the Soul forth out of God's Mouth, and by
the Holy Spirit, breathed it into the Image, become Man, and is entered into the
Earthly Image, viz. into the Turba of Destruction,

12. And you know very well, that the Word has the Water of the Eternal Life,
and the Fire of the Deity, and out of the Fire, the Tincture of the Deity, and
in the Tincture, the Spirit of God; which goes forth out of God's Mouth, and
in the going forth, is the Glance of the Majesty in the working of the Spirit,
Manifested.

13. That very word, is in the Virgin of the Wisdom of God, and surrounded with
the Eternal Wonders; and that now out of the Great Love and Humility toward
our Image, which was destroyed to us in Adam, is entered into us again, and is
in Mary, understand in the Earthly Mary, but with the Blessing, become Man or
Incarnate.

14. The Blessing is this, that to the Soul of Mary the Heavenly Virgin the
Wisdom of God was put on, which Adam had lost, and therefore the Angel called
her, Luke 1. 42.
the Blessed aamong Women.

15. No Woman from Adam to this Day, had the Heavenly Virgin put on to her, but
only this Mary; and therefore with the Blessing she became Chaste and full of
Modesty, for the Spirit goes not into the Earthly, it Mixeth it self not with
the Looking-Glass: for that cannot be, that the Looking-Glass, should be as the
Life it self.

16. Thus understand us dearly according to its precious Depth; Man's Soul is
out of God, and out of the Eternal; but Man's Body is a Looking-Glass of the
Eternal. Thus has God put on to the Virgin Mary, God's Virgin; but in the
Souls Principle, not in the Earthly Flesh, as if she were Deified; no, she must
die, as all mankind does.

17. And in that very Virgin has Gods Word, out of God the Fathers Heart,
assumed the Seed of the Woman, viz. the Souls Seed, and the first Images Seed,
which now stood so long time in the Mystery, broken:

18. And now God's Life came thereinto, and made again a whole or Entire Image,
for the Water of the Eternal Life, out of God's Heart mixed it self with the
Souls Geist-Wasser.
Spirit's Water, for the Spirit existeth out of the Water, and the Soul is Fire.

19. Thus the Word, took hold of the Souls Tincture, and the Holy Spirit of the
Spirits Tincture, viz. of the Waters Tincture, and out of Both became one Soul,
and yet the Creature remained distinct from God's Spirit: but God's Spirit
dwells therein, and so out of God's Water and Tincture, and out of the Seed
of Mary, out of her Tincture and Water in the high Blessing, came one Flesh and
Blood; so that a Heavenly Man Equally at once in the Earthly, became Man, or
was Incarnate.

20. So that a Man might say, this is the Woman's Son, viz. Mary's right true
bodily natural Son with Soul and Body, with Flesh and Blood, and all
whatsoever a Man has; and also God's true Son, which was generated out of
God's Eternal Substance from Eternity, before the Foundation of the World was
laid, which stood in the Majesty of the Holy Number Three, and also in the Body
of Mary equally alike at Once:

21. And the Soul of Christ belongs half to the Principle of this World, and
half to the Holy Spirit: for the Soul of Christ made use of the outward Spirits
Air of the Stars or Constellations, with the Power and Virtue of the Elements,
and also of the Word of God, and of Divine food: for such a Man was Adam in
Innocence.

22. Thus has God in Christ Regenerated us anew, and thus are we, born anew in
Christ, out of God's Word and Spirit, through the Water of the Eternal Life,
and thus are we Gods Children in CHRIST; and if we give our selves up into
Christ, out from our The outward Reason of the Old Adam in Corruptible Flesh
and Blood.
Reason, then we are endued with Christ's Body, and our Will and Spirit lives
from or of CHRIST in US and we in him.

23. Thus you may understand what Christ's Temptation was, viz. that the New
Regenerate Man, should now hold out or endure Adams temptation, to try whether
his Soul could stand in God, and there he was tried in the Turba, to see
whether he could rightly stand in the Three Principles, and rule over the
Outward: and therefore his food of the outward Life was withdrawn from him,
that the inward Life might overpower the outward, and eat of the Word of the
Lord, and hold the outward in its own power and full Omnipotency, and also hold
Death Captive, that it should not destroy the outward Life, this must needs be
a Great Combat.

24. And then the other two Temptations were these, he was tried whether Man
would live in full obedience to God, and let God work in him, or whether he
would lift up himself again, and free himself from God as Lucifer did: and
therefore the Devil must tempt him, seeing this Man was to possess his Kingly
or Royal Throne.

25. Therefore the Devil complained, that he was not able to stand, the Mother
of the fierce Wrathfulness drew him so hard; therefore, it was now permitted to
him, that he should tempt and try it in this Man, and should set before him,
that which was set before himself; and if this Man did overcome; he should be
the Devils Judge, who was found to be a Liar.

26. For he Tempted him in the second and third Assault fully to try, whether
he would fly in his own self might, and he himself had done, and had awakened
the Anger, or whether he would put his Trust alone in God, and live in God,
with Will and Substance or Deed, as a Child in Obedience to the Father; and
this he tried so long with him, as Adam was in the Temptation before his sleep.

27. Thus must we also Continually be Tempted; but in Christ who has overcome
we can have the Victory, for his Soul is our Soul, and his Flesh our Flesh, if
we trust in him and give up our selves wholly to him, as Christ gave himself up
to his Father.

28. And thus beloved Friend; you understand what Christ's Soul and Body is,
viz. Our Soul and Body, if we cleave to God; but if not, then we are rent off,
and are according to the outward Life, fallen home to the Spirit of this World,
viz. to the perished corrupt Adam, and according to the Soul, fallen home to
the Devil in the Anger of God; seek this more at large in our other Writings,
where you shall find the whole ground of Heaven and of this World.

The Seven and Thirtieth Question.
What the Spirit of Christ is, which was Obedient, and which he Commended into
his Fathers Hands.
1. THis is that Great Jewel, for which we highly rejoice, that we know it, so
that we know our selves what we are, and it is more dear and acceptable to us
then the whole World; for it is that Pearl Mat. 13. 46.
for which one sold all his Goods and bought that Pearl, of which Christ
speaks.

2. For it is more profitable to Man then the whole World, it is more Noble and
Precious then the Sun, for the Noble or Precious Stone of the Wise Men, the
Philosophers Stone lies THEREIN, it has the Mysterium Magnum, The Great
Mystery, Heavenly and Earthly; and there is nothing like it in this World, but
only the mean simplicity, which stands still, and generateth or awakeneth no
Turba, this has the Jewel hidden in it; as the Gold lies in the Stone.

3. And continues unconsumed, if a Robber with the Earthly Turba comes not
upon it, and destroys it, and yet attaineth it not, so is also the own
self-Reason in the Mystery.

4. Therefore we dare, and can with good ground say, that a simple Layick,
which in simplicity, without much Skill and Art cleaves to God, has the
Mysterium Magnum better and surer, also undestroyed, then a high learned
Doctor, that flies aloft in his Reason, and destroys the Jewel and sets
it in Babel; this indeed will not relish well, but we are not much concerned in
that, we should set forth the Truth and baulk or shun none.

5. Now when we speak of Christ's Spirit, then Reason understands the Soul,
or indeed the outward Life's Spirit, which stands in power and virtue and
winking of the Stars and Elements; but no, it is another thing, wherein the
Image of God stands; the outward Spirit belongs not to the Deity, but to
the Wonders.

6. We have truly and clearly mentioned before, but since it is hinted expressly
in the Question, that Christ commended it to his Father in his Dying, therefore
we must speak thereof how it was.

7. You have sufficiently conceived before, in what manner the Soul is the
Center of Nature, the Original of Life, and the Mobility; as viz. a Fire of
God, which should be turned and inclined into Gods Eternal Will, wherein it is
Originally generated out of the Magic seeking, and out of the Eternal Nothing
is become a Great Mystery, wherein ALL Things lie; The Deity, with all the
Three Principles, and all whatsoever is or is called Being or Substance or
Thing.

8. Also it is explained, how out of the Fire, the Light is generated, and the
Spirit-Air, and then how the Fire draws the Spirit-Air again into it self,
and so continually blows up it self again, and so with the Light and the Air,
and the source or quality of the Fire, is the Life of its own self.

9. We have also mentioned moreover unto you concerning the Noble or Precious
Tincture, which thus arises in the Light, in which is the Light's meekness,
which is Generated out of the Anguish, as a Therefore Mortify your Members
which are on the Earth. Col. 3. 5.
Mortification or killing, and sprouteth forth out of the Mortification: as
another life of another source or quality, where the Fires-source or quality,
is apprehended to be a Tincture, like a driving forth of a Spirit, and yet also
is desirous, and so draws the power and virtue of the Light, into it self,
and makes it be a Substance, viz. Water,

10. Wherein the two Forms become apprehended, one according to the Fire-source
or quality, viz. Red, and therein the power and virtue, viz. Sulphur; and the
other as a Thin Meekness, and yet Substantiality, viz. Water, which the
desirous Tincture draws and turns into one in a thing, so that it becomes
Blood.

11. Now in the Blood is the Original of the Fire, viz. the Warmth, that is a
Tincture, a Life, and in the power and virtue of the Tincture, goes forth out
of the Thin Water of Life, the power and virtue out of the power and virtue,
and the virtue and power receives that going forth or exit continually again,
and that going forth is free from the Fire; and also from the power and virtue,
for it is going forth and yet is generated out of the Power and Virtue:

12. And this is now the right and true Spirit, that becomes generated out of
the Soul, wherein the Image of God with the Divine Virgin of the Wisdom of God,
stands: for in the Spirit lies all Wit or Ingenuity, Wisdom and
Understanding; it has the THOUGHTS, and the Noble or Precious Life, which
uniteth it self with God, and is so subtle, that this Spirit CAN and may enter
into God.

13. And then if this Spirit do give it self up into God; and casts away its
Souls Fire-pomp and Wit, then it attaineth God's Image and God's Body; for it
goes with the Will into God, and dwells with Power and Authority in God;
Thus it has God's Substance on it or in it, and is without this World in the
Life of God.

14. But being this Spirit out of the Center of Nature, first originateth out
of the Fire-Life, though it is not the Fire-Life, but its Spirit, and the
Fire-Life with the Original in the Abyss stands in the quality or source of
the Anger of God: therefore has Christ not Commended this his Spirit, to the
Fiery-Life, but to his Father, into his Hands.

15. His Hands are the Love Desiring, wherewith he reaches after our Spirit,
when we enter into him, and Commit or Commend our selves to him:

Note.
16. For now when his Body was to die on the Cross, How Christ descended into
Hell.
and his Soul was to go through Hell, God's Anger: then the Devil waited and
thought, we will surely keep him well enough in our Turba in the Fire,
therefore CHRIST Commended his Spirit into God 's Love.

17. And thus came now the Soul of Christ with the Spirit, into God's Hands
comprised in the Anger-Fire in Death; there Death would have held him, but it
was broken and made a scorn of:

18. For it slew the outward Man, viz. the outward Life, and took it away, and
thought, now must the Soul needs stay in the Turba, but there was a stronger,
in the Soul, viz. God's Word: that took Death Captive, and destroyed the Anger,
and quenched the fierce Wrath with the Love in the Spirit of Christ.

19. That was a Poison to Hell, that the Love of God came into it, and slew it
in the Soul, and was Heb. 2. 14.
to Death a Pestilence and a Dying, a Breaking and destroying: it must now
suffer that an Eternal Life grow up in it.

20. Thus the Spirit of Christ, took the Devil Captive, and brought him out of
this Souls-Fire forth into the Darkness, and thrust him into Darkness, out from
the Souls Fire, and out from Gods Fire, into the fierce wrathful harsh
austereness and bitterness in the Cold, there he may heat himself lest he
freeze for Cold.

21. Consider the first four Forms of Nature, and then you may be informed what
the Devils dwelling house is; For, before Christ he held the Soul Captive in
the Turba with the Fire: and though clearly he does not hold the Souls Spirit,
yet he had the root in the Turba; but there the forbearance was commanded him,
and he was thrust out, and brought into the Darkness, and his Malice and
Wickedness was thus destroyed by Christ's going into Hell, and Christ became his
Judge.

22. Thus ye have in brief, described, what Christ's and our Spirit is, viz. not
the outward Life, but the Spirit of the Soul, not the Soul it self, but its
Lifes-Spirit.

23. As there is in God, the Holy Number Three, a Distinction, of Three Persons
in One Substance, and yet but ONE God, where the Son has the Spirit, viz.
the Life, proceeding out of his Heart and Mouth; and the Heart is the Flame of
Love, and the Father, the Source or Quality of Anger, and is meekned and
allayed by his Son in the Love, so that ALL in God is ONE Will and Substance or
Deed.

24. So it is also in Man, and no otherwise in one Syllable: whatsoever God, in
Christ, is; that are we also in Christ, in God; his true Children, and
therefore should we also commend our Spirits into his hands, and so we may also
enter through Death into Life, with Christ in God.

25. Be not led astray and deluded by the facetious pleasant specious shows, as
Men hither to have been in Babel, where they have conceited this and that
concerning the Soul, and its Spirit, one thus, another otherwise; there is no
Ground but Conceits and Opinions.

26. The Understanding is generated in God, not in the Schools or Universities,
from Art, though we despise not Art, for if it be generated in God, it is a
TEN-fold Mystery, for it attaineth always the Tenth Number in Wit or
Understanding, more then the Layick, for it can of many Numbers make One:

27. But it stands not in own self ability, No; the Entrance upon the Cross,
must be in One as well as in the Other, be he Doctor or Layick, in God's
Mysteries there are none Doctors but only Scholars: yet a Learned Scholar, can
go far.

28. Had this Hand the High Art, and also this High Gift, you should well see
it; but God would have it as it is, it pleases him well, that he might 1 Cor.
1. 20.
turn the Wisdom of this World into Foolishness, and he gives his power to the
weak, that every Life, may bow before him and acknowledge him that He is Lord,
and does whatsoever he will.

The Eight and Thirtieth Question.
Of those things which are to be done at the End of the World.
1. MY Beloved Friend: here we ought not to answer your Question, also it
stands not in our Ability, neither ought any to Ask, for it is the secret
Counsel of God; and none should Esteem himself as God, and know, ALL, before
hand.

2. Our knowledge, stands in God's Spirit and Will, when that moves, then go
you on in the Heavenly Magia, and pass into the Wonders of the Earthly: Now is
the Prophet Born, for he stands upon the Crown and speaks Magically,
concerning the Beginning of the Wonders and of its Turba, and how it shall come
to an End, and break again, and come into the First.

3. For all Prophets speak out of the Turba, they declare what is false or
wicked, and show that which is better, which goes in God's Will.

4. Therefore do not burden us with this Question, for we should be captivated
by the Turba, you may understand it well enough in all the other Questions,
what is to be done, and it is explained enough.

5. We dare not answer concerning future things, otherwise then after a Or by
way of similitude.
Magical Manner, and the Cause is this, the Future Wonders are all seen in the
Turba, and if the Spirit sees them, then it speaks clearly out, how the
Turba is loaded with Evil or Good:

6. But it sees that all is mixed; for God is become Man, and sets forth
his Mercy every where in the Anger, and hinders the Perdition, and therefore
must the Prophet now speak Magically, and not with Runden Worten.
plain Words; for it comes to pass many times, that a thing that is Evil in
the Substance, yet there grows suddenly a small Twig or Branch out of it,
which breaks the Turba, and so there comes a Conversion into it.

7. Therefore God causes you to be admonished, that you should subdue and
resist the Heaven of the Firmament, and then often, the Evil, which the
Firmamental Heaven sheddeth abroad, becomes turned into that which is Better:

8. Else, if all must needs come to pass, which the Firmamental Heaven has,
Men would need no Teaching, but it would all be a certain steadfast and Eternal
Calender.

9. You know very well, what Daniel Ezekiel as also David Mentions in his
Prophecies, especially the Revelation of Jesus Christ, there ye have all lying
in them, whatsoever is to be done, they have spoken Magically of things to come.

10. But in our Writings ye have them clearer, for the time is now nearer the
End, and the Beginning has sound the End: therefore it appears clearer, what
shall be done at the End.

11. And I would have you directed to the other Questions, where you shall find
enough concerning it, for the Evil World is not worthy of a round clear
explanation; for always the Great Mystery is touched thereby, which belongs
only to the Children of God: for God would not have men Mat. 7. 6.
cast Pearls before Swine, Mat. 15. 26.
but to give Food to the Children.

12. Thus do you also, it lies not in this, that the Mystery should stand
under a Worldly Protection or Patronage, that is a Folly, and God would thereby
be rejected, as if he were not able enough to Protect it.

13. You ought not to seek the Mystery among those in power, or rely upon them
above others, for there comes a Turba suddenly, thereinto, viz. by a Law: and
then is God's Spirit as it were bound or tied up, and that thing becomes an
Antichrist.

14. Look upon Israel, when they rejected Samuel and their Judges, and
supposed, when their Teaching stood under a worldly Arm and Power, and that
they had a King, then they would keep their Law; as it came to pass that their
King introduced the Turba thereinto; and made Calves for the Service and
Worship of God, and compelled the Congregation or People, to Honor and
Worship those Idols, this we say from a good meaning.

15. And we give you no Answer to this Question particularly by it self, you
will find enough of it in the other Questions, for we ought to do no otherwise.

The Nine and Thirtieth Question.
What and where Paradise is, with its Inhabitants.
1. THis has been explained to you in the Enochian Life, that it is in this
World, but in the Mystery as it were swallowed up, whereas yet in it self it is
not altered: It is only withdrawn from our Eyes, from our source or quality;
else if our Eyes were open we should see it.

2. Nay God in his Number Three is with us, how then should Paradise be lost?
indeed we have lost the quality or source and fruit of it, in the outward Life;
as the Devil lost God, when he with his own self will went forth as a proud
arrogant Spirit, and would be Lord, so it has gone with us;

3. When Adam would have Eaten of the Earthly Fruit, Evil and Good, then he gat
also an Earthly Life, Evil and good, and became thrust out of the fair
delightful Garden of Paradise, where Heavenly Fruit grew, into the outward Life.

4. Many have written wonderfully of Paradise, but their blindness appears now
in the Day Light, whom yet we shall not contemn, for they have been seekers,
every Age has had its seekers; who have sought the Mystery; but it has been a
long time very dark in Babel.

5. Now within two hundred years it has begun to open it self again, wherein
Antichrists Fall has been discovered, where Men have begun to storm Babel on
One side, but the strong Fort in Babel stands firm still; Men have revealed
or manifested the Whore indeed, but her Beast, is but the more grown.

6. Therefore there is yet a Wonderful time at hand, which shall change all;
Many Ezekiel. 38. 20.
high Mountains and Hills shall be made a plain Field, and a Fountain shall
flow out of Sion, wherein the Miserable shall drink and be refreshed.

7. And they shall be led to Pasture with a staff, and the Shepherd will
rejoice with his Sheep; that God is so Gracious.

8. For Silver and Gold is as common as in Solomon's time, and his Wisdom Rules
over the Face of the Earth, this is a Wonder.

The Fortieth Question.
Whether Paradise is Alterable, and what shall be afterward.
1. AS little as God is alterable, so little also is Paradise alterable; for it
is a part of the Deity; when the outward Dominion shall pass away, then will in
the Place where this world now stands, be mere Paradise, For there will be an
Earth of Heavenly Substantiality, which we may be able to dwell in Through and
through.

2. At the Last Judgment Day, we shall not fly away from the Place of this
World, but continue so in our Native Country, and go home into another World,
into another Principle of another source or quality.

3. For there will be no Frost nor heat, also no Night, and we shall be able to
go through the Heavenly Earth, through and through, without dividing or
disturbing any thing.

4. This Earth will be Rev. 4. 6.
Like a Cristalline Sea, wherein all the Or Works that have been in the World.
Wonders of the World will be seen, all very Transparently, and God's Glance
Luster or brightness, will be the Light therein; and the Holy Jerusalem the
Great City of God, where Men shall offer to God the Calves of their Lips, there
will be Paradise, Note. Rev. 21. 1, 2, 3, 5.
And the Tabernacle of God with Men: For it is Written, Behold I make all
things New, a New Heaven and a New Earth, so that Men shall not regard the Old
any more; in that will the fair bright City of God, with the Wonders and
Wisdom, stand; and the Temple of God, the New Jerusalem, will stand upon the
New Earth, which is prepared and made ready out of God's Power and Wonders:

5. ALL whatsoever the Prophets have written will there be fulfilled, for God's
Word and Wonders, will spring and grow as Grass upon the New Earth;

6. Rev. 21. 4.
There is no more Death, also no fear, or sorrow or sadness, No sickness, No
Superior Lord but only Christ, who will dwell with us; and we shall be in one
Communion with the Angels; Our Fruits will Spring and grow to us there
according to our Desire and Wish.

7. There will be no old Age there, but a Man of a Hundred Years, will be as a
Child newly Born, and live in mere delight of Love,

8. All whatsoever is Joy will be sought after, and which way soever one can
procure Joy to another, to that is his will inclined.

9. We shall lead a Holy Priestly Life, and all speak of God's Wisdom and
Eternal Wonders; for the Divine Magia has Wonders without Number, the more is
sought, the more is therein, and that is the Multiplication and increase or
procreation of the Will of God;

10. And to this End has God manifested himself in Images Created, as in
Angels and Men, that so he might have Joy in himself, and rejoice himself with
his Lifes-Essences Eternally. Hallelujah.

Conclusion.
11. THus my beloved Friend, is set down a round Answer to your Questions,
according to our Gifts, and we exhort you Brotherly, not to despise us, in
respect of our simple Speech and Incongruity.

12. For, we are not born of Art but of simplicity, and speak great things with
simple Words; take it as a Bounty of God, you will find so much therein and
more then in the High Art of the Best Eloquence, unless they also be born or
Generated from this School, whom we will not undervalue but acknowledge them
for our Beloved Brethren in Christ, with whom we expect Eternally to rejoice in
the Heavenly School, of which we here have attained a little foretaste:

13. And here Our knowledge is only in part; but when we shall attain the whole
perfection, then will we say what God IS and CAN DO.

AMEN.
ANNO, 1620. Jacob Behme.

A Short Summary Appendix concerning the Soul and its Image and of the Turba
which destroys the Image.

Written in High Dutch, Anno. 1620, by Jacob Behme called Teutonicus
Philosophus,

Printed in the Year, 1665.

Of the Soul, and of its Image, and of the Turba which destroys the Image.
A short Summary Appendix; which in the other Books is written of more at Large
and Fundamentally.
1. THe Soul is an Eye in the Eternal Abyss, a similitude of the Eternity; a
Total Figure and Image according to the first Principle: and, is like, God the
Father, according to his Person; according to the Eternal Nature.

2. Its Essence and Substantiality; as to what it is purely of it self, is
first, the Wheel of Nature, with the first four Forms.

3. For the Word of the Lord, with the Eternal Fiat, comprised the Soul in the
Eternal Will of the Father, in the Center of the Eternal Nature, and opened it
by the Holy Spirit, or blew it up as a Fire, which has lien in the Eternity:
wherein, from Eternity stood all the Forms of the (...), and were only
apprehend ed in the Wisdom in the Divine Magia, as a Figure or Image without
Substance, from Eternity.

4. Yet that thing was not Substantial but Essential; and was apprehended in
the Principle in the Flash of Lightning, where the Fire originateth: but the
Shadow of it has fashioned it self into a Figured Image in the Desirous Will
of God; and has stood before the Number Three of God, in the Magia in the
Wisdom of God, as a similitude of the Holy Trinity; in which as in a
Looking-Glass God has manifested or revealed himself.

5. The Substance, and Image of the Soul, is to be considered in a fair Flower
that springs out of the Earth, and in the Fire, and Light: as men see that
the Earth is a Center, and yet No Life; but it is Essential: and out of it,
grows a fair flower, which is not like the Earth; also it has not the Smell
and Taste thereof: much less its Figure; and yet the Earth is the Mother of the
Flowers.

6. Thus is the Soul also discovered out of the Center of Nature, out of the
Eternal Essence with the Word Fiat, in the Will of God, and held or preserved
in the Fiat, so that is a Fire-Eye, and a (...) of the First Principle;
discovered in a Creaturely Form and Substance.

7. And our of this Eye, is gone forth the Glance of its Fire; as a Lightout of
the Fire, and in that Glance of its own Fire, was the Eternal Image seen, which
is in the Wisdom of God, and comprised by the Will of the Heart of God, in
the second Principle: understand; by the Word Fiat, of the Second Principle,
in the Love and Power or Virtue of the Holy Trinity; in which the Holy Spirit
goes forth.

8. Thus is the Soul become a Total similitude and Image of the Holy Trinity,
where a Man is to understand, the Soul, to be the Center of Nature; and its
Fire-Life to be the first Principle; but the Sprout, or the Image of the Soul,
which is a Similitude of God, grows forth out of the Soul; as a Flower out of
the Earth: and is Ergriffen Compacted.
comprised by the Holy Spirit; for it is his Habitation.

9. If the Soul, puts forth its Image, understand out of the Fire Source or
Quality, into the Light of God, then it receives the Light, as the Moon does
the Glance of the Sun: and thus its Image stands in the Majesty of God, and
it self, viz. the Soul, in the Light of God; and its Fire-source, becomes
changed into Meekness, and desirous Love; wherein it is acknowledged for God's
Child.

10. But being the Soul is Essential, and its own Substance a Desiring,
therefore it is apprehensible, that it stands in two Fiats, the one is its
Corporeal Propriety, and the other is the second Principle, out of the Will of
God, which stands in the Soul; in which God desires IT for his Image and
Similitude.

11. Besides, God's Desiring, is like a Fiat in the Center of the Soul, and it
continually frames or inclines the Will of the Soul, toward the Heart of
God: for the delight or longing of God wills to have the Soul; on the
Contrary the Center in the Fires-Might, wills also to have it:

12. For the Life of the Soul Originateth in the Fire: therefore now there is
strife about the Image of the Soul; and that form or quality that overcomes,
whether it be the Fire, or the Meekness of the Love, according to that, is the
Soul qualified or conditioned; and out of the Soul, such an Image appears, as
the Will of the Soul is qualified.

13. And we are to know, that if the Will of the Soul Alters, then its Form
becomes altered also; for if the quality or source of the Soul be fiery, then
also appears such a fiery Image out of it.

14. But if the Soul in the Center, Imagines Or according to.
into the stern harshness and bitterness, then its fair Image becomes
captivated, with the Dark harshness; and infected with the harsh fierce wrath.

15. And then is that fierce wrath become a Turba, which possesses the Image,
and destroys the similitude of God, for in God is Love-Light Meekness; and in
this Image, is Darkness, Harshness and Bitterness; and its Essential Quality,
is Fire, out of the fierce wrathful Essences, and so this Image, as long as it
stands in such a Quality and Form in the Darkness, belongs not unto God's
Kingdom.

16. Further, in the Fire, ye have a similitude of the Soul; the Soul is an
Essential Fire, and the Flash of the Fire, makes in it, the Life; the Soul
resembles a fire-Globe or a fire-Eye.

17. Now, the burning fire, in the source or quality, signifies the first
Principle and the Life; whereas yet the fire is not the Life; but the quality
or Pain-Spirit, which existeth in the Anguish of the fire; and which goes
forth out of the fire; like Air, that is the Right Fountain Quality or
Source-Spirit of the fire-Life; which continually blows up the fire again so
that it burns.

18. Now the fire gives forth a shining and Light, forth out of the quality or
source, which dwells in the quality or source, and shines forth from it: and
yet the quality or source, comprehends not the Light, that comprehends not
the second Principle; wherein the Deity dwells.

19. For Men apprehend, that the Power and Virtue is in the Light, and not in
the fire; the fire gives only to the Light Essences, and the Life or the
Light, gives Meekness, and the Substantiality, viz. Water.

20. Now, we understand, that in the Light, is an amiable Life without source
or pain: and yet there is a source or pain in it, but not perceptible: it is no
other then a longing Delight, or Love-Desire.

21. Where we apprehend that source or quality to be a Tincture, in which the
growing and Blossoming of flowers springs up: and yet the fire is the cause
of it: and the Meekness is the Cause of the Substantiality; for the Love-desire
in the Light, draws, and retains it, so that it is a Substance, but the
fires desire, consumes the Substantiality.

22. And we are to conceive of the Soul thus: as to what concerns the Soul
solely and purely in the Center, it is an Essential fire in the Eye of
Eternity; and yet that Eye is desirous, viz. a Figure and Image according to
the Wisdom of God.

23. And in its desiring, in its Imagination stands the Image; for the Word
Fiat, has laid hold of it, that it might be a similitude according to the
Eternal Wisdom of God, in which he dwells, in which he may manifest himself
with his Spirit, and whatsoever has been in his Eternal Wheel, Orb, Sphere or
Globe.

24. Thus the Majesty of God flameth in the Image, in the Essential Fire, if
the Essential Fire introduces its desire into the Majesty; but if not, then is
the Image Row and Naked, without God; and the Tincture becomes false or evil.

25. For, the Image stands in the Tincture, and Originateth in the Tincture,
in the Light, not in the fire source quality or pain: as God's Heart or Word
takes its Original in the Light of the Majesty in the Eternal -Fires-Tincture
of the Father; and so also does the Image of the Soul.

26. The Image, dwells in the Fire of the Soul; as the Light dwells in the
Fire; but it has another Principle, as also the Light is another source or
quality then the Fire.

27. Thus the right and true Image of God, dwells in the Light of the fire of
the Soul; which Light, the fiery Soul must frame in the Love Fountain in the
Majesty, through its Imagination, and glving up.

28. And if the Soul does it not, but Imagines in it self, in its fierce
wrathful Form to the fire source quality or pain, and not in the Love Fountain
in the Light of God, then arises its own source or quality, of its harshness,
sowerness, and bitterness; and the Image of God becomes a Turba, which
swalloweth up the Image of God, in the fierce wrath.

29. And then the sower Fiat in the fiery Essence of the Soul, figureth or
frames an Image for the Soul, according to its Imagination in the Will, so
that whatsoever the Essential Fire of the Soul desires, that becomes Imagined
in the Soul, viz. Earthly Figures: whereinto the Will of the Heart casts it
self, and such an Image, the Fiat of the Soul makes, understand, according to
the ability or power of the Third Principle, according to the Spirit of the
Stars and Elements.

30. Seeing the will of the Soul casts it self into the Kingdom of this
World, therefore now the outward Kingdom has power and ability to introduce
its Imagination into the Inward Principle: and if the Inward Fiat discovers
that, in the fire of the Soul, then it becomes impregnated therewith, and
retains the same.

31. And now the Soul has a Beastial Image, according to the third Principle,
and it cannot be broken in Eternity: unless the Soul with its will, goes out
again from the Earthly Lust longing or delight, and press into the Love of God
again, and then it gets God's Image again, which can only be done in this
Life, while the Soul stands, is in its own Aother or soil, in the growing of
its Blossom or flower, Essentially; and after this Life, it cannot be.

32. Thus, we give you to understand, what the Soul, Spirit, Image, and Turba,
is: the Soul dwells in it self, and is an Essential Fire: and its Image
stands in it self in its Imagination, in its Light; so far as it cleaves to
God; if not, then it stands in Anxiety, in the fierce wrath of the Darkness,
and is a Visards Image, and an Image of the Devil.

33. Its Turba, which, breaks the Divine Image, is the Essential fierce
wrathfulness, and it is done through the Imagination; or false or wicked Love
and Imagining: therefore it lies wholly in the Imagination; whatsoever a Man
lets into his desire, in that stands the Image.

34. And it is highly necessary, for Men continually to strive against the
Earthly Reason in flesh and Blood, and give up his Spirit and Will to the Mercy
and Love of God, and continually cast himself into God's Will, and NOT account
Earthly Goods or Pleasure its Treasure, and so set its desire therein; which
destroys its Noble or Precious Image: for that is a Turba of the Image of
God: and brings Beastial properties into the Image.

35. In sum, Christ says, Mat. 6. 21.
where your Treasure is, there is your heart also: and according to that, Romans
2. 16.
will God Judge, the Secrets of Mankind, and separate the clean from the
unclean, and give that which is false or wicked to the Turba of the fire to be
devoured; and that which is Holy, which is Entered into God, he will introduce
into his Kingdom; AMEN.

FINIS.

