A REMONSTRANCE OF SOME Fallacies and Mistakes, Whereof the INFORMERS Who have
hitherto attempted against THE HOUSE OF THE STILLYARD, Suppressing the Truth,
and by False Suggestions deceiving at once those who do not heed, and those who
are ignorant of the Matter, or at least those who are too credulous, have made
use of.

WITH Particular ANSWERS to all, and a Conclusion and Petition on every Point.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1659.

A REMONSTRANCE OF SOME Fallacies and Mistakes, Whereof the Informers who have
hitherto attempted against the House of the Stillyard, suppressing the Truth,
and by false Suggestions deceiving at once those who do not heed, and those who
are ignorant of the Matter, or at least those who are too credulous, have made
use of.
With particular ANSWERS to all, and a Conclusion and Petition on every Point.
The First Fallacy.
THey oftentimes pretend, and almost every where lay it for a ground, That the
Right and Privileges of the Stillyard have no other foundation but the mere
Grace of the Kings in former Ages, not so well regarding the Interest of the
People; and therefore at any time easily revocable.

But this is a mistake, As if the Hanse-Towns had obtained these Rights through
the mere Grace of the Kings; for they profess to have merited the same,

1 By Supplies and Aids at their great Expenses, in former Ages administered to
England, against the French and other Enemies.

2 By many valiant Conflicts for the English, and suppressing of their Enemies.

3 In lieu of Damages unjustly in former times sustained by the English.

Of and for all which England having in those times confessed it self unable to
make Payment and Reparation, these Rights obtained the place of a Debt.

And this is most evident, and in express words from the Agreements and
Conventions of Henry the Third, the Treaty of Utrecht with Edward the Fourth,
and many other Public Writings, the Originals whereof are kept amongst the
Records of the Hanses in their Chamber of Lubeck.

Hence it follows,

1 That it is not true, That (as the Informers ever and anon assert) any of
these Rights come to the Hanse-Cities to the prejudice and against the benefit
of the people of England.

2 But on the contrary it is most true, That these Rights and Agreements are
Obligatory on both sides.

3 And that indeed for ever; for as much as the Causes thereof are mutual, and
oblige reciprocally.

4 And therefore cannot be revoked at the pleasure, or for the advantage of the
one party, the other not consenting, without breach of that Law which is
between Nation and Nation; no more then Goods once sold and delivered, can be
recovered or claimed back by the Seller.

5 And although even the said Cities should consent to such Revocation, yet
unless first Restitution and Reparation were made unto them of and for those
Expenses and Services, by which Ancient Merits they obtained these Rights, and
of the Damages by them sustained, it were not just to deprive them thereof. And
then they ought to be refunded,

1 Of those Auxiliary and Warlike Charges expended for the benefit of England,
together with the Interest of Four hundred years.

2 Satisfaction ought to be given for the Services they did in those times of
War.

3 The Damages ought to be repaired which were sustained by the Hanses so long
since, with Interest for so long time past.

Which Damages alone, even as they then were confessed and calculated by the
Parliament now above Two hundred years past, did exceed the sum of 200000 l
Sterling. From which it may be easily apprehended to what vast sum of Debt the
whole would amount, if all three, together with the accruing Interest, were to
these times exactly computed.

6 And therefore they having for so many Ages past borne the Adventure of so
high an Obligation, and the Hanse-Cities still not esteeming the same so much
as they do the Amity and Mutual Correspondence of England; they think it equal
that they should be so much the more reciprocally favored, and their
Privileges cherished, maintained, and by all good means augmented.

7 Much less beseeming would it be for no Default or Crime on their part,
without recompense for so many Services and Expenses, and that also upon false
and frivolous Suggestions against the Laws of Amity, to cast them out either of
their Possession, or those Liberties, Exemption from Taxes, and other their
Rights by them obtained in perpetuity; as some Informers do endeavor to despoil
them.

The Second Fallacy.
AS often as these Men discourse of the first Rise, Title, and Authority, by
which the Hanse-Cities possess the Stillyard; they speak as if they had
obtained the same without the knowledge, and against the consent of the people;
and therefore they mention only the Kings Grants, but omit those of the
Parliaments: And this to no other end, but to traduce and render the more
odious their whole Right before the people, and those of the generality and all
others, who are unversed in and ignorant of the Verity of their Case. Whereas
indeed,

1 The Kings alone in their Private were not the sole Authors of these their
Rights, but the same were also publicly seen, considered, approved, solemnly
ratified and confirmed by the Parliaments: Of which Ratifications, the several
Originals, together with the Kings Letters Patents, are to be found among the
Records of the said Hanses.

2 As moreover in the same are Extant in Authentic Form, some Solemn Acts of
the City of London, acknowledging and accepting the same Rights and Privileges.

From hence it follows,

1 That it is not true which the Informers feign, as if our Right did depend
upon the sole authority and grant of the Kings.

2 But it is much less true, That the same were obtained without consent of the
People; being the People is, and always will be representatively in the
Parliaments.

3 That it is most untrue (as sometimes it is suggested) as if the same had
been obtained by any sordid or unlawful means; yea the Opposers of our Rights
(when at any time there have been such) by abusing the lenity of the Kings,
have indeed rather prevailed in whatsoever they obtained against us in former
times, by sinister diversions of their grace and favor* And therefore the same
having been detected, they have failed in their attempts, and hitherto our
right has remained entire.

4 Hence it appears, That our Right by the accession of the authority of
Parliament is altogether become irrevocable: For as the People can never die,
but that the People is always judged to be the same, so also Parliaments
meeting in the place of the People, do always represent the same and one
Parliament. Wherefore however a lawful Parliament may abrogate the Acts of
Kings, yet nevertheless it cannot revoke the Acts of a Parliament alike equally
lawful; Forasmuch as Par in parem non habeat imperium; And it is to be believed
they will not, as neither being consistent with the Commonweal, nor that one
Parliament will easily do that to their predecessors, which it would not have
done to it self by their successors.

The Third Fallacy.
BUt it is said, That all their Rights were granted under certain conditions
and for some certain end, amongst which principally was the Exportation of
English Clothes in such abundance, as the whole Nation should be sensible of
the benefit thereof.

But that now no Clothes are any more exported by the Hanses, but that this
Trade is reduced to the Merchants-Adventurers, and that they oftentimes in one
year have exported more then double the number which the Hanses formerly
exported in two or three years; And therefore the Condition and End ceasing,
those Rights also ought to cease.

But, 1 As to what concerns England, the benefit of the Trade of Clothing was
not the sole condition or cause of the Hances Right, but rather alone that the
Nation of England should be discharged of a vast Debt wherein it was obliged to
the Hanses; And at that time it was to them a great advantage, that the
Hanse-Cities would in satisfaction of this Debt rather accept some Rights and
Privileges for so great a Sum of money, which otherwise England was obliged to
pay them.

2 So as there was not only regard had to the benefits which in future times
England might reap by these Privileges, but this principally was intended,
that the Hanses in the the coemption and exportation of Clothes should for ever
enjoy a prerogative above other Nations, and that for their known merits and
the damages by them sustained.

3 But moreover to clear this point, to what end or on what condition this was
contracted, if it were so, it ought to have been expressed in the Convention it
self, being otherwise there might be many accessory Ends assigned of one and
the same thing; Neither can every Condition have the force of a Resolutive
Agreement, but that alone which is so especially inserted in the Contract, that
the same ceasing, the Contract may be understood dissolved, or such as was the
sole and only cause of the Contract.

4 And this is worthy to be observed, That it is not to be imputed to the
Hanses, that they have not hitherto continued in the Exportation of Clothes.
And no man, without it be by his own default, ought to be punished.

Hence it follows,

1 Being the Hanses have obtained their Right by a very hard and chargeable
Title, the same ought to remain unto them for ever and irrevocable.

2 Nor can the same be revoked or altered by a Condition however extrinsick and
necessary.

3 As likewise neither one other accessory End ceasing.

4 Much less for any cause of private benefit.

5 Being it is neither lawful naturally, to recede from such a Contract on one
party in respect of his own advantage against the consent of the other party,
who especially is so much damnified.

6 And therefore these Informers go to work frivolously, whilst by such
fallacies they seek to mislead the improvident and heedless.

The Fourth Fallacy --
IS almost of the same stuff as the former. They would have it be believed,
that all the Right of the Hanses, and so their Right to the House of the
Stillyard are become void, because forsooth the Corporation it self, (that is)
the Body and Subject upon which that Right was conferred, is no more a
Corporation: And so the Commerce of the said House ceasing, being intended for
the Advantage of England, the Right it self should withal cease.

But, 1 It is before shown, that the Hanses did not obtain the possession of
the Stillyard, for this cause of Advantage to England only.

2 Neither that as it may be advantageous or profitable to one Party, a
Contract can be presently rescinded or dissolved.

3 The objection it self, if it relate to the Hanse-Cities themselves, is
manifestly false: For who can be ignorant, that the Confederation of the Hanses
between these principal Cities, viz. Lubeck, Breme, Hamburgh, Brunswick, Colen,
Munster, etc. does not continue to this day? nor ever to have been
extinguished? although of seventy two Cities (of which anciently they
consisted) many, because of their decayed and weak estate, have withdrawn
themselves, and others through their own default have been excluded the
Society? There is nothing more certain then that hitherto they observe their
Conventions, and jointly send forth their Ambassadors; and that in the public
Constitutions of Germany, as well ancient as modern, they have an honorable
place; and in France, Spain, Sweden, Denmark, Mosco, Poland, and the
Netherlands, they both are acknowledged under their common Denomination, and
also enjoy their Rights as a Body Confederate. But if this reflect on the
Merchants residing in the House of the Stillyard, How can it be that their
paucitie, and any act of theirs, can be any argument that the House it self
should be taken from the Hanse-Cities?

Being, 1 That those Merchants are not the Proprietors of the said House, but
the said Cities.

2 Nor if they were, have we hitherto ever heard it proved, that as yet they
have committed or done any thing worthy to deprive them of this Right in Law.

3 And although they had committed any thing against the Law, yet, Paena suos
tenere debet Autores.

4 And for their small Number, this also has not come to pass through their
own fault; For the truth is, that they have by little and little been so
discouraged by the English, that the rest have given place.

5 The Informers themselves use this for one principal Argument; Strangers are
to be restrained of the English Comerce. But these are contraries, both to
require and plainly to intend the exterminating of Foreign Merchants, and yet
at the same time to punish ours by taking away their Rights for this cause,
that being reduced to such a paucitie, they do not exercise Trade here in
greater number. This certainly is against all reason of Natural Justice, that
he who for the benefit of another has relinquished part of his Right, should
be deprived of all the rest for this only cause, That he has relinquished a
part.

6 And lastly it is a Rule in Natural Reason, That a College or Corporation
which had its beginning in many, may yet be conserved in three or two persons.

Hence it follows,

1 That it is plainly false and contrary to the most evident truth of the
matter which is suggested, either of the taking away or of the ceasing of this
Corporation.

2 That it is not the question, What profit at this day the House of the
Stillyard contributeth either publicly or privately to England, (for before
the invalidity of this Argument is demonstrated) but whether the Hanse-Cities
for their own benefit will, and yet may enjoy the same to their own commodity.

3 That even three or two, yea one Merchant in the name of the Hanse-Society,
does conserve the right of the Hanses.

4 That the Delinquencies of any single person (if any such can be proved) do
not prejudice the Hanses, but reaches alone the Authors.

5 That the Actions of single persons are to be distinguished from the Cause of
an whole Society.

6 And therefore these Informers both deceive themselves, and also would impose
on the Parliament and people of England, so often as they make use of this
argument to impeach the Rights of the Hanse-Cities in the House of the
Stillyard.

The Fifth Fallacy --
IS the common benefit to this Commonwealth of England and the people, whilst
they say the Revenue would be augmented yearly Two thousand pounds sterling, if
the House of the Stillyard were seized: By which specious insinuation they not
only deceive the incautelous, but seek to set the mouth of the people on water
and to excite them against the Hanses.

But, 1 It is before made appear, that between those who are equal in right, no
Right can be taken away from the one party for any consideration of the
commodity or profit of the other party.

2 And what Reason did ever justify this for a Law, That it should be lawful
for me to take away that from another, which he possesses by a Right obtained
in perpetuity?

3 Also what profit can accrue by that which not only is repugnant to the Rules
of Honesty, but also would be prejudicial to the glory and renown of the
English Nation?

4 But yet this also by which they plainly insinuate the Public Revenue to be
impaired through the House of the Stillyard, and from which they make up the
account of Two thousand pounds sterling. per annum, has never hitherto been
proved, and is of it self evidently false.

5 It is to be believed, that whatever profit from hence may be gained, is
rather aimed at by some private Persons, to their own Lucre, then for any
intent to advance the Public good.

6 If any public benefit ought to be in this case aimed at, the most Renowned
Parliament in their great wsdome, will rather judge and discern this point,
Whether it were better for so small and indeed unjust and inconsiderable a gain
(for such a sum would no more add to the increase of the Treasury of England,
then the smallest drop of water would to the British Ocean) by mere Power to
take away the Rights of the Hanse-Cities with the hazard of the ancient Amity
and neighboring German Comerce, (for all the Maratine Comerce of Germany is
for the most part in those Cities) or rather not to preserve entire the Amity,
and the Rights and intercourse of Trade of above 400 years, not to say, to
augment the same, which yet might be done to the great and mutual benefit of
both parties.

Hence it follows,

1 That it is a deceit and a mere empty pretect, whatever is in this Argument
speciously insinuated, concerning public profit.

2 That on the other side it is more expedient, and for the Interest of
England, that the Right of the Hanses should be preserved, yea augmented.

The Sixth Fallacy --
IS, that some deceased Kings have before this taken possession of the House of
the Stillyard, and that therefore the present possession of the Hanse-Cities,
as afterward obtained by force and intrusion, is unlawful and unjust.

But, 1 Here is manifest false dealing, whilst the Public Acts are neither
bona fide, nor fully alleged, for they set forth the beginning of the Fact,
but the defenses and issue of the matter they wholly omit. They by pieces
suggest that which one or other King, upon importune Petitions perhaps, before
the Cause was fully examined, did resolve to do; They smother and take no
notice of what followed thereupon, what resolutions after hearing of the Cause
and discovery of the Injustice of those Petitions finally issued, and how this
Cause suppressing all process at the Common Law, was always remitted to
special Conventions, Conferences and Amicable Treaties.

2 But yet it never came to that point, that in the time of any King or Queen,
the Hanses were ever ejected out of their possession.

3 For that the Queen did attempt to possess the House of the Stillyard, it was
not long; for still and nevertheless the Cities did remain in continual and
perpetual, as well Natural as Civil possession, which the Fact it self proves,
and is known to the whole World.

Hence it follows,

1 It is false'y and absurdly asserted, That the Stillyard having been formerly
seized by the Kings, is devolved to the Demeans of this Commonwealth, and at
this day so remains.

2 It is also a fable, that the Hanses Repossession is by force and Intrusion.

3 For how probable is it, that a few Merchants of the Stillyard could
repossess themselves by force and intrusion of any Estate in the face of Kings
against their will, and particularly in opposition to Queen Elizabeth, or
against the Parliaments, the City of London looking on and being Spectators?
What force, what Intrusion could defend them against these Kings, Queen and
Parliaments?

4 The Hanse-Cities therefore have remained always, and are at this day in
lawful, perpetual and continued possession of this House: Lawful, because
obtained from the beginning upon more then valuable consideration, and a most
chargeable Title; perpetual, because continued; continued, because never
interrupted.

The Seventh Fallacy.
THat this Cause is the Cause of the Revenue and Demean of the Commonwealth of
England; that therefore of such Causes the Barons of the Exchequer are
competent Judges.

But, 1 Every cause whereby every Possession and Right is pretended to be in
the Demean of the Commonwealth, does not appertain to those Judges, but only in
Cases where the Action lies against either the Subjects of England, or any
private Stranger usurping against the Right of the Commonwealth: For these,
because they are subject to the Courts and Ordinary Judicatures of this
Commonwealth, are rightly there convented; but this is not the Case of the
Hanse-Society, which being as to Comerce absolutely free and at its own
arbitrament, whatsoever is contracted is transacted as with a free Foreign
people; so that the Confederacies, Pactions and Conventions made with them, and
all Rights thereby obtained, cannot be brought before the ordinary Judicatories
of England.

2 Otherwise it would follow from this Principle, That the Alliances and
Contracts of all Kings and Republics with this Commonwealth might be
questioned in the same, and that all Foreign Nations hitherto have been bound
to submit themselves unto these Judicatories; which can with no more Equity be
done against Foreign Nations, then the People of England would think it just
that the same were done to them abroad.

3 But moreover, these which are called the Hanse- Privileges, are mere
Contracts between this Commonwealth and those Cities; and therefore if any
difference do arise about the same, the Controversy ought to be determined,
not by the Private Judicatory of any one Party, but by Commissioners of both
Nations.

The Eighth Fallacy.
LAstly, They conceive that the House of the Stillyard may be with good reason
taken away, because the Hanse-Cities have planted other Residences of their
Comerce, in Norway, Moscovia, etc.

But it is grounded upon no Reason; For when their Ancestors obtained these
Privileges of England, they were not limited for their Comerce to England
alone, nor by any other condition were prohibited to Traffic any where else;
yea, never any King or Parliament ever required, that they should not Traffic
in any other place but England: And to say no more, These objections can no
better be confuted, then by the notorietie of the fact, by which it is evident,
That for above Three hundred years past, the Hanses have constantly exercised
their Comerce in the said Countries, and yet nevertheless, in the mean time
enjoyed their Trade in England, with all Rights depending thereupon.

From all which, it is concluded,

1 That the pretenses of the Informers are unjust against the Stillyard, by
which they seek to invade without just cause, a Right due to another, against
that most general Law of all others, Quae tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne
feceris; contrary to Christian Charity, and repugnant even to the Laws of
England, which never deviate from the Laws of God and Nature.

2 And therefore their Arguments ought not to be heard, but rejected.

3 Yea to be esteemed as prejudicial and derogatory to the Honor of the English
Nation; whilst they are so bold under the false Representation of a small
lucre of Two thousand pounds per an. to violate an Amity of Four Ages, the
intercourse of the Commerce of all Germany almost, and especially the Faith and
Constancy of so many Treaties and Agreements: Not at all observing (to omit
many other) how much benefit the people of England have thence reaped within
few years past, in their great necessity, by the supply alone of all manner of
Corn; and how much Hamburgh to this day, and Lubeck now lately have
accommodated this Nation, by permitting them liberty to pass their Commodities
and Merchandises by their Ports.

4 And on the other side, That the Hanse-Cities ought without any violation be
left peaceably in their Possession and Right.

5 And that no Man ought to be permitted to make any attempts in prejudice
thereof.

6 Which if the Affair be rightly esteemed, will be both glorious to the
English Nation, and also as to the Public of very great advantage and benefit.

And therefore I do in the name of the said Cities, and the whole Society of
the Confederate Hanses pray,

1 THat such Informations, and the like attempts against the manifest and known
Rights of the Stillyard, may be altogether rejected and suppressed.

2 That if any Question do arise touching the said House, or the Rights
thereof, the same may according to the Custom of Nations, and as hitherto has
been observed between England and the said Hanse-Cities, be reserved and
referred to amicable Treaty between this Commonwealth and the said Cities.

3 That all things in the interim may remain entire and inviolate, and in
particular, That the Exemption from Taxes, both Real and Personal, which the
Inhabitants of the Stillyard have hitherto enjoyed, may be preserved unto them
without any breach, according to the Ancient Privileges.

4 And lastly, That the Freedom of Trade throughout the Dominions of England,
as hitherto, so also for the future, without any Restriction, may peaceably be
permitted to the said Hanse- Merchants, as well for the preservation as
augmentation of mutual Commerce between the People of England and Germany.

LONDON, 3 August, 1659. Martin Boekell Counselor to the Commonwealth of
Lubeck, and Special Envoy of the Society of the Hanse-Cities.

FINIS.

