Summum Bonum, OR AN EXPLICATION OF THE DIVINE GOODNESS, In the Words of the
Most Renowned BOETIVS.

Translated By a Lover of Truth, and Virtue.



OXFORD. Printed by H. Hall. for Ric. Davis. 1674.

Imprimatur

Rad. Bathurst Acad. Oxon. Vice-Can:
March. 6. 1673./4.
To the Nobility, and Gentry of England.
SIRS!
I Here Present you the most Profound Meditations of one of the Bravest
Spirits, that was ever Clothed with Flesh, and Blood, viz. the CONSOLATIONS of
the most Honorable BOETIVS in the midst of His Greatest Sufferings; With My
Earnest Desires that Your Selves, and Your Posterity (Escaping His Misfortunes)
may ever Follow the High Example of His Heroic Virtues: which Virtues
whosoever shall Attein unto, he certainly will be More than Conqueror in All
the Changes and Chances of this Mortal Life, which both in Sacred and Profane
Writ is termed a WARFARE. That Famous Apophthegm of SOCRATES in Defyance of
His Blood. Thirsty Enemies, might well have been spoken in the like Case, By a
Greater Philosopher than SOCRATES, the Renowned BOETIVS: They may Kill Me, but
they Cannot Hurt Me. Though He does not make any Express mention of JESUS
CHRIST in this Philosophical Discourse; yet it is well known, how Zealously He
Contended for the Truth, Against those Execrable Haereticks that Deny HIM to be
GOD, Whom the Universal Church ( According to the Scriptures) Acknowledges to
be GOD of GOD, LIGHT of LIGHT, Very GOD of very GOD, Begotten, Not Made, Being
of one Substance with the FATHER, By Whom All things were Made. I Pray GOD we
may All Hold the Mystery of the Faith in a Pure Conscience: As did this
Excellent Man, Whose Thoughts of the Nature of True Happiness (though in a
Style, I must confess not Answearable to His Great Wit, and Eloquence) I have
Endeavored to Express in the English Tongue; which has been no less Adorned by
those Admirable Writings of Our late SOVEREIGN, than the Latin Tongue by those
which the Learned BOETIVS composed IN HIS SOLITUDES, AND SUFFERINGS. HE, and
BOETHIUS, and All the Noble MARTYRS, give Testimony to this Truth, so Elegantly
Expressed by His ROYAL Pen: The Assaults of Affliction may be Terrible, like
Sampson's Lion, but they yield much Sweetness to those that dare Encounter, and
Overcome them; who know how to overlive the Withering of their Gourds without
Discontent, or Peevishness, while they may yet Converse with GOD. Wishing You
all the Experiences of the Unspeakable Sweetness of the only True Honor, and
Virtue, I Rest

Your Affectionate Humble Servant

To the Reader.
AFter I had perfected the Translation of all I intended to Translate of
BOETHIUS, I received from a Learned Friend the Notice of a very good Translation
of all His Five Books Consolationis Philosophiae, which was Published 1609. The
Author has given us the knowledge but of Two Letters of His Name, I. T. Though
I have not taken so much as one Expression from this Excellent Person, yet I
think it my Duty to pay this Acknowledgement to His Memory, (for I suppose He
was in Heaven long since) that His Book affords Me an Abundance of the purest
Delight, and Satisfaction, whilst I Double as it were Mine own Notions of the
SOVEREIGN GOOD, by their Complication with His. I do not Appropriate these
Notions to BOETHIUS, and His Translators, and those others, who have been
Addicted to the Study of this Incomparable Book; they are Common to Us with
All those that LOVE the LORD JESUS in Syncerity: For this LOVE Essentially
implies a Deep Sense of GODS ALL SUFFICIENCY, And of the VANITY and
Dissatisfaction of All things under the Sun.

I Requested My ever Honored Dear Friend Mr. H. H. to send me some of His
Reflections on BOETIUS'S Discourse of the Sovereign Good, and He was pleased to
Oblige Me with this Answer.

"Dear Sr!
I received both your Letters, with the Copies of the Latin Tractate, you
published; wherein you endeavor to bring men to a right understanding of the
Sovereign Good of Humane Minds; a glorious employment in it self, and never
more useful than in this our Age. For your desire that I would say something by
way of Praeface to your Translation of Boethius, though I am sensible you may
much better, and with greater Advantages recommend it to the World, than I, yet
to assure you of that Great affection, and service I have for your Person, I
have sent you my present thoughts.

When Mankind was at first Created, they lived, and acted under the Divine
life, and Nature, freely enjoying, and participating of the Communications of
the First, and Universal Good; but being lapsed into a State of Sin, Indigency,
and Penury, they quickly lost sight of those Glorious forms, and the
Influences of Heaven were sealed up. But yet though their Case was sufficiently
deplorable, the Deluge of Iniquity, and Vice, had not so far defaced the
Beauteous Structure of Virtue, but that the remaining Ruins showed the Glory
of the Ancient Fabric, and men still knew God, and searched after the Author
of their Beings, and the Reason of their Natures led them to a Pursuit of
Happiness. Hence it came to pass that the wise men of the World were divided in
their Opinions concerning the Universal Good, and Happiness of Humane Nature;
some placing it in the bare, and naked Pleasure resulting from the exercise of
Virtue; others in a perfect Apathy, Insensibility, and deadness to all Passions
whatever; and others again in a full Gratification of all the Corporeal
Faculties. But we, who through the Gracious Bounty of God, live under a more
Radiant, and Refulgent light, than that of Nature, have a perfect sight of that
which they through the clammy mists of Ignorance, and Darkness did but feel
after; and we know that the Happiness of Humane Nature consists in it is Union,
and Conjunction with the Eternal Good. Which being the Highest, and Utmost
Perfection of our Souls ought certainly to awaken our drowsy, and stumbring
minds to a vigorous Prosecution of so transcendent a state of life: a life, so
full of solid, and substantial Joy, and Pleasure, that if we did not take
false measures, and estimations of things, we could not but think it infinitely
beyond the fairest and best of all Sublunary Felicities. And indeed the Mind of
man is then in a wrong state of Position, when it is Appetites, and Desires are
fixed, and terminated upon Terrestrial Good, such as is so far from any
Harmony, or Agreeableness with our Intellectual Frame, that it vilifies, and
Degrades it, and sets it at a vast Disproportion to it is true, and Proper
Object. And this is that false, and Adulterate Beauty, that so often cheats us
into a liking, and Approbation of it: A mere Shadow of Happiness, which we
possess only in our Fancies, and Imaginations. For if there were really any
Substantial Felicity, or Good in Riches, Honors, Worldly Glory, and Corporeal
Pleasures, the mind of man would then be full, and at Rest: it would then have
no more Passionate Thirsts, and Aspirations, when once it were possessed of it is
True Object. But we finding still a Perfect Dissatisfaction, and Inquietude
amidst the largest Measures, and fullest Comprehensions of Sublunary
Enjoyments, it is very easy to conceive that there is something else yet
required to Perfect, complete, and fill the Capacities of the Soul of man. And
this can be no other than that Eternal, and Immortal Good, which has left some
signatures, and Impressions of it self upon every thing in the Whole Creation:
From whence it is that men beholding some Shadows, and Adumbrations of the
Absolute Good, are ready to catch at, and embrace it in the things below; not
considering that all the fine shows and splendid Appearances of the Corporeal,
and Visible World, are but so many Powers full Charms, and Inescations to
allure, and draw our Minds from a steady Contemplation of that Holy One, in
whose Presence is Life, and Felicity, truly so called. And that we may not
fright our selves from so desirable a Condition, as our Union, and Conjunction
with God, nor our Endeavors after this Immutable Good cool, and flag by
drawing a Scene of Humane Life full of miseries, and Calamitous Circumstances,
and representing unto our selves the black side of Providence, wherein Innocent
Virtue is afflicted and oppressed, and Iniquity, and Vice Prosperous and
Triumphant, we may consider that that Almighty Being, who Perpetually
Interesseth himself in the Affairs of mankind, will at last settle
Righteousness, and Truth in it is Just Throne, and Government of the World; and
thereby redress, and heal all the Evils Humane Nature is obnoxious unto; which
are for the most part made so to us by our unjust Apprehensions, and
Estimations of them: For what are Fetters, and Imprisonment, but clogs of the
Corporeal Life, while the Mind may Converse with God, and the Whole Creation,
and be as Free, as the Air we breath in? what is Death it self, but only the
Awakening of our nobler Faculties to the Participation of a freer, and more
enlarged life? All which put together do not only depreciate the most Glorious
satisfactions of the Animal life, but convert our Minds to their own Genuine
Happiness; that is, to an Union, and Conjunction with the Blessed Author of All
things which is the Grand Design of this Treatise. Dear Sir if by this (which I
think is the sum, and scope of Boetius's Book) I may gratify you, I shall
please my self, in being

Your most Affectionate Friend and Servant HENRY HALLYWEL.
From I field in Sussex. June 3. 1672.

DA, Pater, Augustam Menti conscendere Sedem, Da Fontem lustrare BONI, da luce
repert^ In Te conspicuos Animi defigere visus.

O RIGHTEOUS FATHER, Shine upon Us in the Face of JESUS CHRIST, the Brightness
of thy Glory! Shed abroad thy Love in our Hearts By the HOLY GHOST, that we may
Meditate Day, and Night on the INFINITE GOODNESS of Our CREATOR, REDEEMER, And
SANCTIFIER, In whose Presence is Fullness of Joy, at whose Right Hand there are
Pleasures Forevermore.

To the Reader.
ABused mortals! you who think you have All,
When you have that which some men Riches call;
And you vain youths, who think that All is yours
When you 'ave your sports your Hawks your Hounds and --
You Gallants too, Brave boys, and sons of fame
Who think you have All when you have got a Name
Read here and know, that all your fancied Joys
Your Wealth and Honors are mere childish toys.
And you blessed Beggars, brothers of the Cross,
Whose very Life seems Death, and Gain seems Loss,
Who breathe out Naught, but Love, and Honesty,
Aspire to Naught, but pure Simplicity,
Possessing Naught, but what kind Nature gave,
And loosing Naught, but Flesh when laid in grave,
Read here and know, that you have All, and more,
Infinite All, is your Eternal store.
P. G.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Consolation of Philosophy.
THE FIRST VERSE.
Wherein Boethius bewaileth his estate.
I, Who was wont to make such cheerful Verse,
Must now (Alas!) Sad Notes rehearse.
The wronged Muses teach Me what to write:
My Tears True Elegies enaite.
No Terror could them keep from following Me;
They fear not my Calamity:
They of my Sprightly Youth the Glory were,
Of my Sad Age the Comfort are.
Old Age comes on Me hastened by my Cares,
An Hoary Head suits with my Tears.
Grief makes White Hairs spread over mine Head, and Chin;
On my Dry Flesh hangs Shriv'led Skin.
O Happy Death, which takes not men away
In Joyful Times! nor, Called, does stay
When they are sunk in woe! Alas, she Flies.
And will not Close our Weeping Eyes!
Whilst Fortune did her flattring Goods bestow,
I hardly 'scap'd a Fatal Blow:
Now that her great Inconstancy she shows,
Life unregarded sticks more close.
Friends, why did ye so often Me Happy call?
He stood not Firm, who could not 'scape this Fall.
The FIRST PROSE.
Containing the description of Philosophy.
WHilst I revolved these Thoughts in my mind and began to Pen my Complaint,
there seemed a Woman of an Because she makes her possessors reverend
awful countenance to stand over my head, her eyes were very Piercing and
speculating the hidden nature of things.
sparkling, and lively beyond the common strength of Men, her Color exceeding
fresh, and vigorous, though there was somewhat that discovered her to be of so
great Age, that it could not be thought but that she was in being long before
our Times. 'Twas impossible to discern what Stature she was of: for sometimes
she shrunk her self into the common Nalural and Moral Philosophy are not above
man's common capacity: Astronomy touches the heavens, Metaphysics or the
knowledge of God and Angels, etc. Cannot be exactly comprehended.
Stature of Men; sometimes she seemed to touch the skies with her head: and
when she lifted it up somewhat higher, she thrust it into Heaven, so that it
was in vain to look any farther after her. Her Her aisputations or discourses.
Garment was curiously wrought with the Subtle Propositions.
finest threads, the Cloth was so Everlasting truth.
strong that it could never be worn out; which Garment, as I understood
afterward by her own discourse, she made with her Because none without
Philosophy can weave these discourses.
own hands. Time had somewhat sullyed the color of it with such a kind of
Learning neglected in the time of Boethius, and written obscurely by ancient
Philosophers.
duskiness, as we may observe in Pictures that have been hung in some smoaky
room. In the nethermost hem of this Garment was woven P [that signifies the
Life Practical, or Active] in the uppermost TH [that signifies the Life
Theoreticall, or Contemplative] And betwixt these two Letters was a kind of All
sciences are to be obtained with Method.
Ladder, by which a man might ascend from the lower to the higher Letter. This
Garment the hands of some violent men had cut, and carried away such Some
sentences ill applied to the defense of false opinions;
pieces of it, as every one could get. And she had certain Books in her She
chiefly delighted in study and contemplation.
right hand, and a Scepter in her Next she was occupied in governing the Common
wealth.
left. When she saw these Poetical Muses standing about my Bed, and dictating
words agreeable to my Tears, she was somewhat moved, and with an Angry
countenance, who, says she, has permitted these Wenches, that belong to the
Stage to have to do with this sick man? they are so far from applying any
Remedy suitable to his Distemper, that they very much increase it with their
delicious Venom. For these are they, who with the unfruitful thorns of diverse
Passions, destroy the good ground that abounds with the fruits of Reason; and
they do not free the minds of men from their Disease, but rather make it by
custom to become Pleasing unto them. But if your flatteries should take from
me any inconsiderable Person, as your common Practice is, I should bear it with
less Indignation. For my main design would suffer no damage in the loss of
such a one. But this Man, who had so long addicted himself to the Logic from
Elea, the City where Zeno was born called therefore Eleates, and Aristotle
studied, whose books of Logic Boethius translated.
Eleatick, and Such as Plato taught, whose school was called Academia.
Academick Studies! But be gone ye Sirens, that Please men to their Destruction,
and leave him to my Muses to be Cured, and reduced to his perfect Health: This
Company, being checked after this manner, cast their eyes on the ground, and
confessing their shame by their Blushes, they depart very mournfully out of the
room. But I, who had made my self almost blind with weeping, so that I could
not discern who the Woman was, that exercised such Authority, was quite
Astonished, and looking steadfastly on the ground, speaking not a word, I began
to expect what she would do next. Then she came near, and sat down on my Beds
side, and observing the Sadness of my Countenance, she complains of the
Perturbation of my mind in these words:

The SECOND VERSE.
Philosophy bewayleth the perturbation of Boethius his mind.
AH, how the Mind sunk in deep woe
Grows blind, and leaving her own light
Out to Darkness she bends her might,
When the Winds of Earthly cares do blow;
And the Waves of Grief roll to, and fro!
This Man sometime did freely Tread
The high Paths of the Aetherial Plains;
He saw unspotted Phaebus's Head,
And could discern the Moons dark Stains:
He held fast in sare Reckoning
Those Stars, which often change their Course;
He searched those Causes deep, that bring
Such storms to the Ocean: And what Force
Makes that bright Star go down in the West
Which rises in the Ruddy East.
He studied to find out what 'twas
That made the Spring bring Flowers, and Grass:
Whence it is that in Autumn we see
Grapes come to their Maturitie.
Those Causes which Nature did hide
From others, His Quick Thought espie'd.
This Man now wants the Minds clear Light,
His Neck's pressed down with Chains: the Weight
That He lies under, and the Pain
Makes Him look down to the Earth again.
The SECOND PROSE.
Philosophy enquireth of Boethius his disease.
BUT, says she, this is a time to apply Medicines, and not to make Complaints.
Then looking very earnestly on me, thus she speaks. Art Thou He, who being
nourisht with my Milk, and brought up with my stronger Meats, did arrive to
the strength of a Manlike Understanding? But we bestowed such The intellectual
and moral virtues.
Arms on thee which if thou had not wilfully thrown away, would have served
for thy Defense against any Opposition whatsoever. Do thou know me? why
hold thou thy peace? is it Shame, or Stupidity that has seized on thee? I
had rather it were Shame; but, as I perceive, Stupidity has made thee Silent.
And when she observed that I was not only silent, but in a manner quite Dumb,
she laid her hand softly on my breast, and, There Is no Danger, says she; he is in
a Forgetfulness.
Lethargy, the common Disease of deluded minds. He has forgot himself a
little; he will easily come to himself again, if he shall once understand, who I
am. Which that he may do, let us clear his sight a little, that has been
dark'ned by the thick Dust that arises from his Intention on Earthly things.
When she had spoken these words, with a Some sentences which he could not
altogether forget.
part of her Garment, folding it in her hand, she wiped the Tears from mine
eyes.

THE THIRD VERSE.
How Boethius began to recover his knowledge and memory.
THen did that Darkness from Me fly: at length
Mine Eyes regain their wonted Strength:
Just so, as when the Boystrous winds arise
And stormy showers disturb the skies,
The Sun's obscured, and whilst no Stars appear,
Night's spread over all the Hemisphear;
If Boreas sent from the Thracian Cave display
His speedy Force and Free the day
From Darksome Clouds, Sol's Beams straight pierce the Skies,
And strike with wonder our glad Eyes.
The THIRD PROSE.
How the persecution of Wise men is no new or strange thing.
EVen so the Clouds of my excessive Melancholy being dissolved I recovered the
sight of Heaven, and came to my right mind again, so that I saw plainly who she
was that had begun to work such a Cure upon me. When I had fixed mine eyes on
her, I perceived that she was my Nurse PHILOSOPHY, in whose House I was brought
up from my youth: And what, quoth I, art Thou, the Mistress of all Virtues,
come from on Philosophy the gift of God.
high to the uncomfortable Place of mine Exile? have thou a mind to undergo
such false Accusations, as have been brought against me? What, quoth she,
should I forsake thee my Son, and not bear a part of the Burden, that is laid
on thee for my sake? But it cannot be that Philosophy should deny her Company
to an Innocent man, wheresoever he goes. Should I be afraid of any false
Accusation, and Startle at it, as if some strange thing had happened unto me?
For, is this the first time that Wisdom has been brought into Danger amongst
Wicked, and Pervers Manners? Even in Ancient Times, before the Days of our
Plato, have we not Fought a great Fight against the Rashness of Folly, and
Ignorance? And whilst He lived, did not His Master He was put to death at
Athens for acknowledging one God and the immortality of the Soul.
Socrates obtain a glorious Victory, over an Unjust Death, by my Assistance?
Whose Inheritance whilst the Epicureans, and Stoics Endeavored to seize on,
every one for his own party, and laid hold on Me, as a part of their Prey,
though I cried out, and strove against them, they cut this Garment, which I had
woven with mine own hands; and having thus taken some pieces of it, they went
their way, each of them conceiting that he had gotten the whole to himself.
Some of them, because they seemed to go in my False opinions allege some
sentences of Philosophy in a wrong sense.
Habit, were Overborn through the error of the profane Multitude, being judged
to be of my Family. If so be that thou art ignorant of the Banishment of
Anaxagoras, the Poison of Socrates, and the Torments of He was wract by the
Tyrant Nearchus, into whose face he spit out his tongue.
Zeno, because they were not of thine own Country; yet thou could not but
have heard very much of A Poet put to death by Caius the Emperor.
Canius, of Neroes Schoolmasters, who caused him to bleed to death.
Seneca, of A famous Poet acknowledging God, was crucified by some wicked men.
Soranus, and other such like Excellent Men, whose Memory is very fresh to this
Day, and full of Renown: Whom no other thing brought to their Destruction, but
that through a punctual Observance of my Discipline, they always showed an
Aversion from the Designs of Wicked People. Therefore there is no reason it
should seem strange unto thee, if we are Tossed with a continual Tempest in the
Sea of this World, whose Principal Aim is, to do those things, which are most
Displeasing to the Worst of Men: Whose Army, though it be exceeding Numerous,
yet is it very Despicable; because it has no Because they follow not reason.
Leader; but they run to, and fro according to the motions of their own
foolish, and erroneous conceits. If at any time this Army come against us with
all their Strength, our Right reason.
Leader draws all Her The powers of the Soul.
Forces into her Of Virtue and contemplation.
Castle; They in the mean time are wholly intent upon their Temporal things.
Plunder, loading themselves with things of an inconsiderable value. But we
look down from on high and laugh at them, whilst they carry away those
contemptible things, being out of all Danger of their rage, and fury, in that
Place of Defense, which Folly, and Ignorance can never Approach unto.

THE FOURTH VERSE.
How we may resist the persecution of the wicked.
Whosoever his Life from Passions storms keeps free,
And over Fate has got the Victory,
Holds fast to that which he does Rightly choose,
And with an Unchanged Look Both Fortunes views:
This man the Rage of the Tempestuous Seas,
When from the bottom they their waters raise,
Can never dismay; nor yet Vesuvius's Ire,
Which tosses up to the Skies it is smoke, and Fire;
Nor Burning Thunderbolts that strike high Towers.
Why are stern Tyrants, who soon lose their Powers
Admired by Mortals? Cast off Hopes, and Fears,
And thou breakst all the bloody Tyrants Spears.
But be that Wishes ought, or Dreads his Foes,
Since he is not fixed, and in his own Dispose,
Has thrown away his Shield, has lost his Ground,
And made the Chain wherewith himself is Bound.
The FOURTH PROSE.
Boethius discovers the causes of his grief.
Have thou any perceivance of these things, says She, and do they make any
impression upon thy mind? What, art thou Proverbially spoken of those who are
dull of apprehension, and no more moved with a discourse than an Ass with
Music.
Asinus ad Lyram? Why weepest thou? why do thou flow with Tears? (...), Speak
out, disclose thy mind. If thou expect any good from the Physician, thou
ought to lay open thy wound. Then I took courage to my self, and spoke
thus: And have thou need yet to be told what aileth me, is it not apparent how
cruelly Fortune deals with me? Art thou not moved at the sight of this The
first cause of Boethius his grief was his banishment and misery.
Place? Is this the Library, which thou did choose for thy constant Seat in
my House? where thou did so often sit, and discourse with me, touching the
Knowledge of things both Divine, and Humane? was mine Habit, and my Countenance
such, as now thou see, when with thee I searched into the Secrets of Nature,
when thou did show me the Course of the Stars, and did form my Life, and
Conversation according to that Order which is in the Heavens? And is this the
The second cause, because he had not deserved them, having a good intention in
admitting promotion.
Reward I must have for being so Observant of thy Instructions? But thou did
confirm this Sentence by the mouth of Plato: That Commonwealths are Happy,
where Philosophers have the Government, or where the present Governors begin at
length seriously to Apply themselves to Philosophy. Thou by the mouth of the
same Plato have taught me that this is a Necessary Cause why Wise men should
undertake the Administration of Public Affairs, That the Government being left
to men of crooked, and pervers dispositions, they would be a perpetual Plague
to all Persons of true Honor, and Integrity. Therefore in submission to this
Authority, what I learnt from thee in my Private Contemplations, I desired to
bring into Practice, in the due Management of Public Affairs. GOD, who has
fixed thee in the minds of the Wise, is my Witness, that no other Inclination
brought me into any Public Office, but to be Serviceable to all Good Men.
Hence it was that I had so many Thirdly, he deserved the contrary.
Occasions of grievous, and irreconcilable Discord with wicked, injurious
People; and, such is the Liberty of a pure Conscience, in the prosecution of
Justice, I ever despised the Displeasure of Great Men. How often did I oppose
One of king Theodoricus his chiefest favorites.
Conigastus, when he would have seized the Fortunes of all Persons incapable of
Defending themselves! how often did I disappoint Triguilla, the Controuler of
the Kings Household, in his Injurious Designs! how often did I Protect by my
Authority those distressed People, whom the Avarice of the The Goths.
Barbarians, that went always unpunisht, did vex with infinite Calumnies, and
False Accusations! I was never drawn aside from Right to Injustice by Any man
whatsoever. When I saw the Fortunes of those that lived in the Provinces so
rackt and torn, both by Private Rapines, and Public Taxes, I Grieved no less
than those very men, who suffered such great Oppressions. When in a time of
extreme Scarcity of Corn there was a most grievous Coemption established, which
in all likelihood would have impoverisht the Province of Campania, I strove
against Him, who was Next in Authority under the King, for the Common Good, and
Disputed the business with him touching the Coemption, the King himself
hearing the Debate and I prevailed, so that it was not exacted. Paulinus, a
Worthy Person, that had been Consul, whose Estate those Palatine Dogs had
already devoured in their Hope, and Ambition, I drew from their Jaws, whilst
they Gaped on him. That Albinus, who also had been Consul, might not Suffer by
an Accusation, to which he was never called to make his Answer, I exposed my
self to the Hatred of Cyprianus, his Accuser. Do I not seem to have heaped up
matter enough of Strife, and Contention against my self? but I ought to have
found the greater Regards amongst other men, having so Acted upon the
Principles of Justice, and Integrity, that I deserved nothing for my self
among the Courtiers, whereupon I might repose the least Confidence in any of
them. The fourth cause of his grief, the baseness of his accusers and the open
injustice of his accusation.
But by whose Accusations are we Ruined? One of them, Basilius, being turned
out of the Kings Service was compelled by the Debts he had contracted to forge
an Accusation against Me. But when the King had Decreed that Opilio and
Gaudentius should suffer Banishment for their innumerable, and manifold
Deceitful-dealings, and when they refusing to obey the Decree took Sanctuary,
and the King had notice of it, he gave Commandment that if they did not go
from Ravenna within a certain Day, they should be Marked in their Foreheads
with an Hot Iron, and driven out of the City: How could there be a greater Act
of Severity? Yet that same Day the Accusations of those same Persons were taken
against Me. What then? Did our Studies deserve this? or could my Condemnation
Fore determined Qualify Those men to be my accusers? Was not Fortune in the
least ashamed of Innocence Accused, or of the Baseness of the Accusers? But
would thou know the Fifthly, His chief offense was virtue.
matter that is laid to my charge? It is Affirmed that I would have saved the
Senate from great Danger. Will thou hear the Manner of it? My Crime is to have
hind'red an Informer from Impeaching the Senate of High Treason. O Mistress,
what think thou? shall I Deny what I am Accused of, that I be not a shame to
thee? But indeed I did wish well to the Senate, and shall never cease to Desire
their Safety. Shall I Confess it? but so that Endeavor to hinder the Informer
will become ineffectual. Shall I call that an Offense to have Desired the
Safety of that Order? They have indeed made it an Offense by their Decrees
against Me. But Ignorance that is always False to it self, cannot change the
Merit of things; neither do I think it Lawful, being of Socrates's Judgment,
to conceal the Truth, or give way to a Lie. But be it how it will, I leave it
to the Judgment of Wise Men. The Truth of this Affair that Posterity may not
be Ignorant thereof, I have endeavored by Writing to keep in Remembrance. For
as touching those Forged Sixthly He was falsely accused and not permitted to use
the testimony of his very accusers.
Letters, whereby I am Accused to have hoped the Roman Freedom, to what
purpose should I speak? Their Fraud should have been laid open to all men, if
it had been granted me, but to use the Confession of mine Accusers, which of
all matters of this nature is of the greatest Importance.

In which Affair Sorrow has not so dulled my Senses, as that I should complain
that Wicked men Attempt such horrid things against Virtue: but I am quite
Astonished to see that they bring their Designs to such Effect. For to Will
unrighteous things were perhaps but a part of Humane Frailty; but that every
Villain should be Able to accomplish the Mischief he has conceived against a
Person never so Innocent, 7. He grieveth that wicked men are able to prevail
against the good.
GOD Looking on, seems Monstrous unto me. Whence one of thy Family thought he
had just cause to raise these Questions: If there be a GOD, whence come Evil
things? but whence come the Good, if there be none? But be it so, that those
Ungodly fellows, who thirst for the Blood of all good men, and of the whole
Senate, should have the Will to Destroy Me, whom they saw so earnestly
endeavoring to Defend Good men, and all the Senate. 8. The Senators themselves
of whom he had deserved so well, were his enemies.
But what, did I deserve the same hard measure even from the Senators also?
Thou do Remember, I believe, that when ever I was about to Say, or Do any
thing, thou wast always present to Direct Me. This, I say, thou do well
Remember: At Verona, when the King intending a Common Destruction, would fain
have transferred the Accusation of Treason brought against Albinus, upon the
whole Order of the Senate, with how great a Disregard of mine own particular
Safety I Defended their Innocence. Thou know that what I say, is True: and
that I was never wont to Praise mine own Actions. For it does in a manner
lessen the Secret Approbation that Conscience gives unto itself, when any man
by declaring what good he has done, receives Fame for his Reward. But thou
see to what my Innocence has brought Me. Instead of the Rewards of True
Virtue, I undergo the Punishment of such Wickedness, of which I am Falsely
Accused. Ninthly, all conspired against him, no man had Compassion of him.
And what horrid Villainy, so evident that it could not but be Confessed, did ever
engage the Judges in such Unanimous Severity, that neither the sense of Humane
nature, so inclined to Error, nor of the Condition of Fortune so Uncertain to
all Mortals, should soften the Hearts of any of them. If I had been Accused to
have designed the Burning of Temples, the Murdering of the Priests, to have
Plotted the Destruction of all Good men, yet Sentence should have been given
against me being Present, either upon mine own Confession, or the Conviction of
mine Accusers. 10. He was condemned being abseat.
Now being removed from Rome almost five hundred Miles, and having no Liberty
granted me to make my Defense, I am Condemned to Death and Proscription, for
Studying the Safety of the Senate. O Excellent Men, that well Deserve that none
should ever be Convicted of the like Crime! The Dignity of which Offense, even
they who Impeach me of it knew full well: that they might darken the luster of
it with the mixture of some real wickedness, they faign'd that I had defiled my
Conscience with the guilt of 11. He was falsely accused of Sacrilege.
Sacrilege, whilst, did Aspire to Places of Honor. But Thou who Dwell in Me
did drive out of my Mind all Desires of perishing things, and Sacrilege
could never have leave to be in thy Presence. For thou did daily Instill into
mine Ears, and into my Thoughts that saying of Pythagoras (...), (FOLLOW GOD).
Neither did it become Me to seek the Assistance of the Vilest Spirits, whom
thou did make capable of such an Excellency, that I should be Like GOD: And
besides by the unstained Reputation of mine House, the Company of my worthy
Friends, and also my Father-in-law, a Person of the greatest Integrity
imaginable, and Venerable like thy self, I am defended from all suspicion of
any such Crime. But, oh Malice, and Ignorance! they take occasion from Thee to
make men believe that I am guilty of so great Wickedness, and for this very
cause shall I seem to be skilled in the most prodigious Impiety, that I have
been Instructed in thy Discipline, that I have been endued with thy Manners.
Thus it is not enough that the Reverence due unto Thee has profited me nothing,
but thou also do suffer 12. Philosophy and Learning dishonored for his sake.
Reproach through the Hatred they have conceived against Me But this is a great
Addition to my Calamities that the Judgment of most men does not respect the
Honor, and Virtue of our Undertaking, but the Success of our Actions; and they
conceive that Foresight, and True Wisdom are only in those things which are
commended by a Prosperous Event. Thus it comes to pass that a 13. The loss of
estimation with the greatest part.
Good Esteem in the first place leaves the Unfortunate. It Is irksome to me to
think of the various Reports of the People, how many Absurd, and disagreeing
opinions men declare concerning Me. I shall only say this that it is the
heaviest Load that Fortune lays on the Oppressed, that when Calamitous Persons
are charged with any Crime, they are thought to Deserve what they Suffer. And I
being removed from the Conversation of all Good men, being deprived of my
Dignities, wronged in my Reputation, have suffered most grievous Punishment for
Well-doing. And now methinks I see the 14. The wicked encouraged and the good
dismayed by his fall.
Companies of the Wicked flowing in Mirth, and Jollity: every lewd fellow
thinking how he may frame the most pernicious False-Accusations: Good men cast
down by the Terror that falls on them at the sight of My Ruin: every
flagitious fellow being excited to Attempt the most horrid Injuries by
Impunity, to Finish them by Rewards: Innocent men being not only deprived of
Security from Accusation, but also of all capacity of making their Defense.
Therefore I cannot but Cry out.

THE FIFTH VERSE.
Boethius complains, that all things are governed by Gods providence, beside
the actions and affairs of men.
O Thou, through All the World Renowned,
Father of Lights, who Sitting Still
On thy Throne Turn'st the Hea'vns around,
And makst the Stars Obey thy Will:
Now Thou Command'st the Moon to Shine
Meeting with all her Brothers Beams,
Making the lesser Stars repine
That she does so obstruct their Streams:
Now she is deprived of that great Light,
Looks Pale as through such Loss Forlorn,
And that The same Star, is the Morning and Evening Star too, at several times
of the year.
same Star that brings the Night
Attends bright Phoebus in the Morn.
In that Cold Time when Trees are bare,
Thou do cut short the unpleasant Day:
When Days are Warm, and fields look Fair,
Thou makst the Nights to fly away.
The Course of Times thy Power does guide,
So that the leaves which were all torn,
And thrown away by Boreas's Pride
Mild Zephyrus makes to return.
The Dod-star burns the Corn full grown,
Which cool The name of a Star.
Arcturus would have sown.
There Is nothing free from the Ancient Law;
Thee All things in their Stations serve:
Thou keepst them in such constant Awe,
That from thy Rule they never swerve:
Why do Thou men alone Neglect
As if they were not worth thy Care?
Why do Thou not their Works respect,
So that Just men no Harms may Fear?
Why should we thus see Justice rent,
And Broken on wild Fortunes Wheel,
So that such grievous Punishment,
As Felons Merit, Good men Feel?
But Wicked Manners sit on High,
And splendid Thrones: they Tread on those,
Who hold fast their Integrity,
And all Base ways will still Oppose.
Black Fates obscure Bright Virtues Face:
The Upright man bears that Disgrace,
Which his Vile Foes deserve.
No Perjury, or base Deceit
Brings them to Ruin: when they please
To use their strength, with Armies Great,
They Conquer Kingdoms, Lands, and Seas.
Whoever Thou art who Rul'st the Wind,
Do All things in their Stations hold,
Look down at length, and see Mankind
In Troubles, and Confusion rolled.
Of thy Great Work a Part are we
That may not be Neglected. Lo,
How we are Tossed in Fortunes Sea,
Upon the Waves of Various Woe!
O MASTER, let this Tempest cease;
And as Thou makst the Heavens Above
To follow thy Commands in Peace,
so bind the Earth with the Bonds of Love.
The FIFTH PROSE.
Philosophy shows that Boethius is the cause of his own misery.
WHen I had breathed forth these Complaints in the Anguish of my Soul She with
an undisturbed Look not at all moved with those expressions of my Sorrow,
delivers these words: When I saw thee Sad, and pouring forth Tears, presently I
understood that thou wast Miserable, and Removed from Thine The Possession of
thy self, and Right reason*
own Country, but at what Distance I could not judge till I found it out by
thine own Discourse. But the truth is, thou art not Removed from thine own
Country, but have Wandered from it. But if thou would rather have it said that
thou art Violently Removed, or Expelled, Thou thy self art the Author of Thy
Expulsion. For truly no other man could ever have had that Power over Thee. For
if thou do Remember the Country from whence thou Came, It is not Governed,
as the Athenians sometime were, by a Multitude: but (...): There One Commands
Alone, there is One King; who Rejoices in the Great Company, and not in the
Exile of His Citizens: To be Restrained by Him, and Kept in Subjection to His
Righteous Will, is the Greatest Freedom. Art thou Ignorant that it is a Law of
Thy Country, that none shall be Banished, who Would rather Abide in It? For he
that loves to Dwell There can have no fear least he should Deserve to be an
Exile. But he that cease to be Willing to have an Habitation There, cease
also to be Worthy of it. Therefore I am not so much Moved at the Looks of this
Place, as I am at Thine: neither do I find the want of a Library adorned with
Ivory, and with Glass; but of the Seat of thy Mind. In which sometime I put not
Books, but that which makes Books to be of any Value, to wit, the Sense of my
Books. And indeed the things that thou have spoken touching the Merit of thine
Endeavors to Advance the Common Good, are very True: yet it is but little that
thou have said, in respect of those many Actions, thou have performed upon this
Account. As concerning the Truth, or Falsehood of the Objections that have been
made against thee, thou have spoken things known to all men. Thou have done
well in that thou have but lightly touched the many-fold Frauds, and Wickedness
of thine Accusers, since the same things are better, and more copiously
discourst of by the mouths of the common People, who well remember all these
things. Thou have also Reflected with great Severity on that Fact of the Unjust
Senate: And thou have expressed thy Sorrow for the Blame that has been laid upon
Me, and thou have with Tears lamented the loss of the good Opinion that men had
of Thee: At length thy Grief brake forth into Indignation against Fortune, and
thou did complain that she does not Deal with men according to their Deserts:
In the Conclusion thy Raging Muse expressed her Desires that the same Peace,
which Governs Heaven would Govern the Earth also: But because so great a Tumult
of disorderly Affections has seized on thee, and Grief, and Anger so Vex, and
Distract thee, whilst thy Mind is so distempered thou art not fit to receive
the stronger sort of Remedies: Therefore let us use Lenitives a little while,
that what has been hardn'd into a Tumor by a Flux of Sharp Humors, may be
fitted by the softer kind of Applications for the most quick, and searching
Medicines.

The SIXTH VERSE.
Philosophy proves that order is necessary in all things.
WHen Cancer with Sols Rays does burn,
Then whosoever trusts his Ground with Seed,
Of which it makes him no return;
Deceived, He may on Akorns feed.
If Purple Violets thou will find,
Go not to the Wood when Snow, and Frost
Are thither brought by the North-East Wind,
And the Fields have all their Beauty lost.
Press not the Branches of the Vine
In Springtime with a greedy Hand,
If thou desire to have good Wine,
Or pleasant Grapes at thy command.
Till Autumn Bacchus never brings
His Gifts to Peasants, or to Kings.
To several Times our God Above
Their several Duties has Assigned:
Courses Distinct he will not approve
Should ever be together Joined.
Even so what is done in such have
That Order due we cannot forecast,
It will not come to good at last.
The SIXTH PROSE.
Philosophy discovers the inward causes of Boethius his grief.
WILL thou permit me to try the state of thy Mind by proposing a few Questions,
that I may understand what course to take for the Cure of thy Distemper. I
shall Answer, quoth I, to whatsoever thou shall be pleased to Ask of me. Then
she spoke thus: Do thou think that this World is hurried on in it is course by
the Agitations of Chance, or mere Casualty, Or that it is Governed by REASON?
But, quoth I, never could I entertain such a thought, as this, that such
Certain and Orderly Motions can proceed from Chance and Uncertainty. I know
that GOD, the Maker of the Universe Sits on High, and Overlooks his own Work;
neither shall that Day ever come that may enforce me to forsake this Truth.
Thou say well, quoth she; for what thou did Sing a little while since suits
well with thy present speech: and thou did deplore Mankind, as Neglected by
GOD, whilst All things else are under his Providence. Thou did not seem in
the least to doubt of those things; but that they are Governed by REASON. But
truly I cannot but wonder very much that thou should still labor under such
a Distemper having attained to so great a measure of the most Wholesome
Doctrine. But let us search deeper; I conceive that something, I know not what,
thou lackest yet. Tell me, since thou do not doubt but that the World is
Governed by GOD, do thou consider also by what Rule He Governs it? I hardly
understand, quoth I, the meaning of this Question, much less am I able to give
an Answer thereunto. Was I mistaken, says she, in that I thought there was
something Wanting, through which Defect, as through an Hole these Perturbations
have Crept into thy Mind? But tell me, do thou Remember what is the END of
things? or what it is that the Whole Course of Nature Tends unto? I have heard
what it is, quoth I, but Sadness has much weakened my Memory. But how know
thou from what All things derive their Being? I know from what, said I: from
GOD. And how can it be that since thou know what is the BEGINNING of things,
thou should be Ignorant of their END? But this is the custom of these
Perturbations, and Distractions of mind, such is their strength, that they
unsettle, and discompose a man's Thoughts, but cannot alienate him from the
proper Sentiments of a Rational Nature. I would have thee give an Answer to
this Question; do thou Remember that thou art a Man? how is it possible,
quoth I, that I should ever Forget this? Art thou able then to tell me what Man
is? Is this the Sense of thy Question, whether I know my self to be a Living-
Creature Rational, and Mortal? I know, and confess that I am. And do thou not
know, quoth she, that thou art somewhat besides that? No. Now, quoth she, I
come to understand another, and that the greatest cause of thy Distemper, thou
failest of the Knowledge of Thy Self. Wherefore I have plainly found out the
grounds of thy Disease, or rather the way to recover thy Health. For because
thou art in such Confusion of mind, by reason that thou Forgettest Who thou
art, thou fallest into this extreme Anguish, as if thou wast Exiled, and
Deprived of thy Proper Goods. Forasmuch as thou art Ignorant what is the END of
things thou judge that Lawless, and Ungodly men are in great Power, and
Felicity. And forasmuch as thou have Forgotten by what Rule the World is
Governed, thou art so apt to conceit that the manifold Changes of Humane
Affairs are not within the compass of any Government. Great causes indeed not
only of Sickness, but of Death itself. But Thanks be to the Author of Health
that Reason has not as yet wholly forsaken thee. We have very good grounds to
undertake thy Recovery, in that thou retainest this Truth touching the
Governance of the World, that it is not subject to the temerity of Chance, but
to the Divine Wisdom. Therefore set thy heart at rest. We perceive there is
Vital Heat in thee by this little Spark. But because it is not yet a fit time
for stronger Remedies, and such is the nature of our Minds that as often as
they cast away the Truth they Habituate, themselves to False Opinions, from
which there arise such Fumes of disorderly Affections, which Darken the Eyes of
our Understanding: These Fumes I shall endeavor to extenuate with the most
soft, and gentle Remedies, that the Darkeness of the Deceitful Love of Earthly
things being done away, thou may be able to apprehend the Brightness of the
True Light.

THE SEVENTH VERSE.
Philosophy declares how the perturbations of our minds do hinder us from the
knowledge of truth.
THe Stars cannot yield their Light,
When Clouds keep them from sight.
If stormy winds do blow,
And make Seas Ebb, and Flow,
That Water which looked Fair
As Brightest Days, and Clear
As Crystal, Foul'd with Mud,
Raised by the boystrous Flood,
Obstructs our Sight. And so
The River that does flow
From the Hills is often made stay
By Rocks that lie in the way.
And if thou Verity
With a clear Eye would see;
If thou would find the Right Way,
And from it never stray,
Cast off fond Joys, and Fears,
And Hopes: wipe off thy Tears.
The Mind's with Clouds over cast,
And with a Curb held fast,
Where These our Powers do wast.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE Consolation of Philosophy.
The FIRST PROSE.
Of the deceits and inconstancy of Fortune.
AFTER this, She held her peace for some time; and when she had gathered in my
Attention by a sober, and grave Silence, thus she began: If I thoroughly
understand the causes of thy Distemper, and the Condition thou art in, thou
do languish, and pine away for want of thy former Fortune: it is Her Change,
as thou make thy self to believe, that has overthrown the high State of thy
Mind. I understand the manifold Deceits of that Prodigy, and that she is wont
to show the greatest Dearness, and Familiarity to those, whom she has a mind
to Delude, 'till she confounds them with intolerable Anguish, whom beside all
expectation she has forsaken, and left destitute. If thou will call to mind
her nature, manners, and diserts, thou shall understand that thou did neither
Enjoy, nor Lose any Excellent thing in Her Presence, or Departure. But, as I
judge, I shall have no hard task to bring these things to thy* Remembrance.
For whilst she remained with thee, and flattered thee continually, thou wast
wont to speak Manfully unto her, and to persecute Her with sentences brought
from the Profound wisdom and knowledge.
Secret Place of my Temple. But a sudden Change of Things happens not without
some Wavering of Minds. So it comes to pass that thou art gone a little from
thy wonted Peace, and Tranquillity. But it is now time that thou should drink
some Pleasant, and Delicious thing, which being received will Prepare thee for
Stronger Potions. Therefore let us have the Perswasives of Sweet Rhetoric,
which then only proceeds in the Right way, when she forsakes not our
Instructions: and with Her let Music, who is one of our Household Servants
Sing Notes sometimes Light, and sometimes Grave. What is it then, o Man, that
has cast thee into so deep Sadness, and Discontent? I believe thou have seen
something new, and unusual. Do thou think that Fortune is Changed in her
Disposition toward Thee? thou art mistaken. These are Her Manners: this is Her
Nature. She has rather kept her own Constancy in the Mutability she has shown
toward Thee. She was no other than now thou see Her to be, when she
flattered, and Deceived thee with the Enticements of False Felicity. Thou have
found out the Deceitful Pretenses of this Blind Goddess. She that covers Her
self with a Veil from the sight of other men has suffered thee to take a full
View of Her: and to be fully acquainted with her Disposition. If thou Likest
Her, use her Manners, do not complain. If thou dreadest her Perfidiousness,
Scorn, and reject Her, that sports her self thus in doing mischief. For she
that has brought thee into so great Sorrows should have been the cause of thy
Tranquillity. For she has left Thee, of whom no man can be Secure, but that
she will leave him also. But do thou think in good earnest that that
Felicity, which thus passes away, is any thing worth? and can any Present
Fortune be Dear unto thee, which gives thee no Assurance of her Stay, and when
she shall Depart, will certainly involve thee in great Anguish, and Vexation?
If we cannot keep Her with us as long as we please; and if when she flies from
us she makes us miserable, what is she else, being so ready to take her flight,
but a Sign of future Calamity? For it is not sufficient to Consider that which
is laid before our Eyes. Prudence measures the End of things; whose
Mutability in either State, should make us neither to Fear the Threat'nings of
Fortune, nor Regard her Pretenses of Friendship. Finally thou ought to bear
with a patient mind, whatsoever is done within the Jurisdiction of Fortune, now
thou have submitted thy Neck to her Yoke. If thou would impose a Law on her,
whom thou have freely chosen to be thy Mistress, to stay, or be gone at thy
pleasure, would thou not be Injurious, and by thine Impatience increase the
Bitterness of that Condition, which thou art not able to Change? If thou
should commit thy Sails to the Winds, thou should not be carried whither
thou Would Arrive, but whither they will Drive thee. If thou will sow thy
ground, thou must make account that some years are barren, and some fruitful.
Thou have submitted thy self to the Government of Fortune, it is but requisite
thou should comply with the Humors of thy Mistress. But do thou endeavor
to put a stop to the Turning of her Wheel? but, O Foolish man, if she begins
to be Constant, she cease to be Fortune.

THE FIRST VERSE.
Philosophy discribeth the conditions of fortune.
WHen mighty things she turns about
An arm of the Sea betwixt Phocides in Baeotia, and the I Will Eubaea, which ^bs
and flows so swiftly 7 times in a day, that it carries ships against the wind,
yea the very wind it self Plin. lib. 2.
Euripus Like she swiftly flows;
She does most dreadful Armies rout,
And Potent Monarchs overthrowes:
And Heads cast down she lifts on high:
She hearkens not to sighs, and groans
Of men plunged deep in Misery,
She tortures them, and scorns their Moans.
These are Her sports, thus does she try
Her strength; and it is a wondrous feat,
If in that Hour a man shall lie
In The Dust, in which his Power was Great.
The SECOND PROSE.
Fortune shows, that she has taken nothing from Boethius, that was his.
BUT I would discourse with thee a little in the words of Fortune. Observe if
she speaks not right. O man, why do thou thus complain of my carriage toward
thee? In what have I Injured thee? what Goods, that thou might justly call
Thine own, have we taken from thee? Let any man be Judge betwixt us, whilst
thou contendest with me touching the Possession of Riches, and Dignities: And
if thou shall prove that any of them do properly belong to any Mortal
whatsoever, I will readily grant that those things, which thou desire should
be restored unto thee were Thine indeed. When Nature brought thee out of thy
Mothers womb, I took thee being Naked, and destitute of all things, I
cherisht thee with my Riches, and, which makes thee now so Impatient against
me, I gave thee the most tender, and delicate Education, and encompast thee
with the Abundance, and splendor of all things, which are in my power. Now I
think fit to withdraw my hand; be Thankful as one that has had the use of
things that are not Thy proper Goods. Thou have no just cause to complain, as
if thou had lost that which was Thine own. Why then do thou sigh, and
groan? Riches, Honors, and all such like things are in my power: they
acknowledge that I am their Mistress: they come, and go with me. I boldly
affirm, that if those things had been Thine, which thou complainest that thou
have lost, thou had not lost them. Shall I only be hind'red from the exercise
of my power? it is lawful for the Heavens to bring forth clear Days, and to
shut up those Days in Dark Nights. It Is lawful for the Year now to adorn the
Face of the Earth with Flowers, and Fruit; now to cover it with Frost, and
Snow. It Is the right of the Sea, now to look mild, and calm; now to grow rough
with waves, and storms. And shall the unsatiable Desires of men oblige Me to
constancy, which is so contrary to my Manners? This is the Part I am to Act:
this is the play I play continually. I turn round a Wheel, and make the
lowest, and uppermost things to change their places. Go up, if thou think
fit, but on that condition that thou do not take it for an Injury, if thou be
made to go down again, when the Play requires it. Have thou never been made
acquainted with my Manners? have thou not heard how Craesus King of the
Lydians, but a little before very formidable to King of Persia*
Cyrus, being brought to the Fire, a most doleful Spectacle, was saved by
Water, poured down from Heaven, from the devouring Flames? do thou not
remember that Paulus Aemilius, Consul of Rome.
Paulus wept at the Calamity of King Or Perses King of Macedonia.
Perseus, whom he had taken Captive? what is the loud complaint of Tragedies,
but that Fortune disregards, and overturns the happiest Kingdoms? did thou
not learn when thou wast a Boy, that in This is taken out of Homer. Iliad. Vlt.
Jupiters Entry there are Two large Vessels, one holding Evil things, and the
other Good things? what if I have not wholly withdrawn my self from thee? what
if this very Inconstancy of mine be a just cause why thou should hope for
Better things? However do not repine at thy condition, and being seated in a
Kingdom, which is governed by Laws Common to all, do not entertain any vain
desires of living by a Right Peculiar to thy self.

The SECOND VERSE.
Fortune complains of the unsatiable desire of men.
IF so much Wealth, as the Ocean casts up Sand,
Men could at length obtain:
Or had so many Gemms at their command
As Heaven does Stars contain;
All this would not suffice, but they would still
Complain, and Covet more.
And if it were Our Great Creators Will
To add unto their Store,
And make their Names with Glorious Titles shine,
Yet they would seem to Want,
Through their voracious Lusts they would Repine,
Their Thirsty Souls would Pant,
And Gape for more, and more. What Curb can now
Their Appetite restrain,
Since whilst they in so great abundance flow,
Of Want they still complain:
He is not Rich, who does himself Deplore,
And thinks that He is Poor.
The THIRD PROSE.
Philosophy proves, that fortune had been more favorable, than contrary to
Boethius.
IF Fortune should speak to thee after this manner, certainly thou would
hardly find a word to say for thy self. Or if there be any thing, whereby thou
may defend the complaint thou makst against her, thou ought to produce it;
thou have liberty to declare thy mind. Then said I: Truly the things that thou
have spoken have a fair show, and carry with them the Honey of Sweet Rhetoric,
and Music; they delight us only so long, as we Attend to their Sound. But men
in Misery have a deeper sense of the Evils that oppress them. Therefore when
such things cease to Affect the Ear, that Anguish which is settled in the Mind
becomes more grievous. And says she, It Is so indeed. For we do not as yet
administer the Remedies of thy Distemper, but these things are to assuage the
violence of the Pain, which will not admit our chiefest Medicines. For we shall
apply such things, which will pierce into the root of thy Disease, as soon as
it shall be seasonable. But that thou may not reckon thy self in the number
of Wretched men, what, have thou forgotten the measure of thy Felicity? To say
nothing of this, that Persons of the Highest Quality took care for thee in thy
Fatherless condition; and that thou being chosen into the Affinity of the
Principal men of the City did first begin to be Dear, and then to be Near of
Kin unto them, which is the most excellent kind of Alliance. Who has not
Applauded thee, as a most Happy man, upon account of the Splendour, and
Nobleness of thy Father-in-law, the Chastity of thy Wife, and the Towardly
Disposition of thy Sons? I pass by this (for I like not to speak of common
things) that thou did receive in thy Youth those Dignities which few Old men
can attein unto: it delights me to come to the singular hight of thy
Felicity. If there be any true, and solid Happiness in the most pleasant Fruit
of Humane Affairs, can the Memory of that Day be blotted out, with never so
great an inundation of overflowing Evils? when thou saw thy sons being made
Consuls, to be brought from thy House with so great a company of Senators, the
People discoveing so much joy, and gladness; when those thy Sons sitting in the
Senate House on their Ivory-Chairs, thou did make an Oration in Praise of the
King, and deservedst the Glory of Wit, and Eloquence: when thou sitting between
thy Two Sons being Consuls in the Place called Circus, did satisfy the
expectation of the Multitude, crowding about thee, with a Triumphal Largess.
Thou did flatter, and deceive Fortune, I believe whilst she fawned on thee,
and cherisht thee, as her Darling. Thou did get from her such a Gift, as she
never bestowed on any Private man. Will thou therefore come to a reckoning with
Fortune? This is the first time that she ever cast a froward Look on thee. If
thou considerest the number, and the measure of things Sad, and things Joyful,
thou can not deny but that thou art Happy still. If therefore thou judge
that thou art not Fortunate, because those things which seemed to be Joyful are
past, and gone; there is no cause why thou should think thy self Miserable,
since those things also, which thou apprehendest to be so Sad, and grievous are
passing away. What, did thou come forth but lately upon the Stage of this
Life? do thou think there is any constancy in Humane Affairs, whereas it is
often seen that an Hours time makes an Healthy man return to the Durst? For
though the Goods of Fortune should remain with us, which seldom comes to pass,
yet the Last Day of our Life would be as it were the Death of such constant
Prosperity. What matter is it therefore, whether thou go from it, or it from
thee?

THE THIRD VERSE.
Philosophy declares, how all worldly things decay and fade away.
WHen Phoebus, vanquishing the Night,
Over the Skies his Luster spreads:
The Stars, Abasht at such great Light,
Grow Pale, and hide their Heads.
Now Zephyrus with his soft Breath
The Roses has full blown:
The cloudy South Wind blustereth,
And straight their Beauty's gone.
Sometimes the Sea's Still, like the Shore,
And Radiant, like the Skies:
Sometimes the stormy Winds do roar,
And Boystrous Waves arise.
Since all this World is like the Dust,
That Is Driven with the Wind,
Why will thou to Man's Fortunes trust,
Which none shall Constant find?
This is a Constant Law, cannot Altered be,
That nothing here shall have True Constancy.
The FOURTH PROSE.
Philosophy proves, that Boethius is still fortunate, and that no man has
complete happiness in this life.
THEN said I, thou speakst the truth, O Nurce of all Virtues, neither can I ^y
the swift course of my Happy Days. But this does most vehemently torment my
soul, when I reflect on it, For in all Adversity whatsoever it is the most
Unhappy kind of Misfortune, To have been Happy. But, quoth she, what thou
suffer by thy False Opinion, thou may not impute to the Nature of things.
And if thou art moved with the empty name of that Felicity, which is in the
Power of Fortune, thou may account with me how much thou do still retein of
it. Therefore if that, which thou did ever esteem as most precious in the
whole Treasury of thy Fortune, be still by the Divine Providence kept safe, and
free from all harm, can thou have any cause to say that Fortune deals
hardly with thee, whilst thou reteinest the more valuable Enjoyments? But that
most precious Ornament of Mankind, thy Father-in-law Symmachus is still Alive,
and in good health; and (which thou would readily purchase with the price of
thine own Life) He, being a Man wholly made up of Wisdom, and Virtue,
regardless of the wrongs that are done unto himself, bestows his complaints
on those, he sees thee to suffer. Thy Wife is still Living, a Woman Modestly
Ingenious, Excelling in all the Perfections of Chastity, and, that I may
briefly comprehend all her Endowments, she is Like her Father. She Lives, I say,
and keeps her Breath only for thee, being weary of this Life; and, which, I
confess, is a lessening of thy Felicity, she pines away with Tears, and sorrow
for want of thy Company. What should I say of thy Sons, that have been Consuls,
in whom, as in Youths of their Age, there shines the Resemblance of the Wit of
their Father, and of their Grandfather? Since therefore it is our chiefest care
to preserve our Lives, O Happy man that thou art, if thou did but know how to
value thy Condition, who to this very day have so great abundance of those
things, which no man doubts but that they are more Precious than Life it self!
wherefore wipe off these Tears from thine Eyes. Fortune has not as yet shown
her utmost spite against thee; neither has an over-violent Tempest falled on
thee, whilst thine Anchors hold fast, which do not permit thee to want
Consolation for the present, nor Hopes to see Better Times. And I pray, quoth
I, they may hold fast; for whilst they are Fixed, however the matter goes, I
shall have hopes to overcome the Storm. But thou see how my Honors, and
Dignities are diminisht. And says she, we have Advanced somewhat in our design
if there be any thing in thy Condition, with which thou art not displeased. But
I cannot away with this that thou art so nice, and tender, who make such
grievous complaints that there is some thing wanting, which thou would have
to complete thy Happiness. For where is the man that has attein'd to such a
state of Ease, and satisfaction, that he is not in any regard Discontented with
the quality of his present Fortune? For the condition of the Goods of this
World is full of Anxiety, and vexation, and such that it never comes whole, and
entire, and never can be made stable, and permanent. One man abounds in Wealth,
but is Ashamed of his Ignoble Birth. Another being Nobly Born is well Known
throughout all the Country, but wanting an Estate Answearable to the Greatness
of his Name, he would rather be hid in Obscurity with persons of the meanest
Rank. This man is both Rich, and Noble, and bemoans himself for want of a
Wife. That man has a Good Wife, but has no Children, and afflicts himself
with the thoughts that he must leave his Wealth to a Stranger. Another
rejoicing in his Issue turns his joy into mourning for the ill carriage of his
Son, or of his Daughter. So that no man can easily suit his Mind with his own
Condition. And let us moreover consider this, that the sense of every man that
has been most used to Prosperity is exceeding soft, and delicate, and unless he
can have all things at his beck, being unaccustomed to any Adversity, is cast
down with every little thing, that goes across to him: of such small moment are
such matters, which detract from the perfection of the Happiness of those men,
on whom Fortune has bestowd her choicest Favors. How many are there think
thou who would conceit themselves to be Advanced almost as high, as Heaven, if
they could have but a part of the remains of thy Prosperity? This very Place
that thou call Exile is the Country of the Inhabitants. Thus nothing is a
Misfortune, but when thou deemest it so to be: And on the contrary Every
Condition turns into Prosperity to those, who know how to Dispose themselves in
it. What man is there so Happy, but he would be desirous to change his Estate,
if he should once give way to Impatience? what bitterness is the sweetness of
Humane Felicity sprinkled with! which if it seem joyful to him that possesteth
it, yet it cannot be secured to him for a moment. It Is evident therefore how
Wretched that Happiness is which consists in the Enjoyment of perishing things,
which neither remains with those that are contented, nor is wholly delightsome
to persons of anxious, and disturbed minds. Therefore, O ye sons of Men, why do
ye seek for True Happiness Without, which is placed Within Your selves? You
are confounded with Ignorance, and Wrong Opinions. I shall in a few words show
thee what is the Sovereign, and only True Happiness. Is there any thing more
Dear, and Precious to Thee, than Thy Self? Nothing, thou will say. Therefore
if thou can have the full Dominion of Thy Self, thou shall Possess that
which thou would never part with, and which Fortune shall never be able to
take from thee. And that thou may clearly perceive that True Happiness
consists not in those things that are in the Power of Fortune, consider this
Argument: If Bliss, or True Happiness be the Sovereign Good of Intellectual
Nature, neither is that Sovereign Good which can by any means be taken from us;
because that Excells it, which we cannot be deprived of: it is manifest that the
Instability of Fortune can never bring us into the ways of True Happiness.
Moreover he that is puffed up with this unconstant Felicity either knows, or
does not know, how Changeable it is. If he knows it not, what Happiness can
there be in Ignorance, the Blindness of the Soul? If he knows it, he must
needs be in Fear of losing, what he doubts not but may easily be lost.
Wherefore the Dread he is in continually suffers him not to be Happy. Or else
he cares not if it be lost: Thus also it appears to be a matter of small
moment, whose loss can be so easily born. And because thou art one of those who
know, and are assured by many Demonstrations that the Souls of Men are
Immortal; and since it is so clear, and unquestionable, that such Happiness, or
Prosperity, which is in the Power of Fortune has it is Period by the Death of
the Body; it cannot be doubted, but if Death be able to deprive us of our
Bliss, All Mankind must at length become Miserable. And since we know that many
a man has earnestly pursued, and endeavored after Bliss, or True Happiness,
not only by Death, but also by great Pains, and Torments; how can it be that
this present Life should be able to make men Happy, the End whereof makes them
not Miserable?

THE FOURTH VERSE.
Philosophy commends a mean estate.
Who so intends to get
A firm, and lasting Seat,
That he may Safety find
From Roaring Angry Wind,
And scorn proud Neptunes Threats
When all the Shores he Beats;
Let him not Build on High,
From loose Sands let him fly.
When stormy Winds do blow,
High Houses they overthrow;
An House can never stand
Upon the sliding Sand.
If thou will fly the great
Dangers of a brave Seat,
Build thy House very Low,
And on a Rock: Although
The Winds their Forces raise,
And trouble Lands, and Seas,
Thou may their Noise endure
In thy Low Seat Secure,
Thy Looks will still be Clear
Though Storms disturb the Air.
The FIFTH PROSE.
How riches are neither precious, nor our own.
BUT because these soft, and gentle Reasonings, or Fomentations of the Mind
begin to sink into thee, I think it would now be seasonable to use some
stronger Medicines. Well then: Though the Gifts of Fortune were not so frail,
and transitory, what is there in them that can ever be truly, and properly Your
own, and which being thoroughly discovered what it is in it self, would not
appear to be most vile, and despicable? Are Riches to be Prized in regard of
Your Nature, or of Their own? what is the best kind of Riches? is it not Gold,
or great Heaps of Money? But these things make men to be sincerely Esteemed when
they are given away, rather than when they are kept in store: for Covetousness
makes men Odious, Bounty Glorious. If that cannot remain with any man, which
passes from him to another: then is Money Precious, when, being conferred on
another, by the exercise of Bounty, it cease to be in our own Possession. But
if one man had All the Wealth in the World, it would leave others in the
greatest Poverty. And indeed a Voice comes Whole, and Undivided to the Ears of
a Multitude of People at the same time; but Your Riches, unless divided into
many small Parts, cannot be communicated to diverse Persons. And hence it is,
that of necessity they expose such men to Poverty, from whom they come into the
Possession of others. O then, how Narrow, and Contracted, how Beggarly are
those Riches, which it is impossible that Many men should have Whole, and
Entire; and which cannot come into the Hands of any one, without the
Impoverishing of others! Art thou taken with the Splendour of Gemms, or Precious
stones? But if there be any Worth, or Excellency in their Brightness, that is
the Light of those Stones themselves, not of Men: which Gemms I cannot but
wonder exceedingly that Men should have in such Admiration. For what is there
that wants a Soul, and a fit composure of Members, and Features, which should
seem Beauteous and Amiable to a Rational Nature? Which, although, as they are
the Work of our Creator, and in their own Rank they carry with them some of
the lowest kind of Beauty, yet since their Quality is so beneath Your
Excellency, do in no wise deserve Your Admiration. Are you Delighted with the
Beauty of Fair, and Fruitful Fields? why not? For it is a Fair Part of the Fair
Work of the Creation. Thus we delight also to see how pleasantly the Sea
Looks in a Calm, and Clear Day: thus we Admire the Heavens, the Stars, the
Sun, and the Moon. What, does any of these Peculiarly appertain to the? dare
thou to Boast thy self in the Brightness of the Heavens? Art thou Adorned with
the Various Colors, of the Flowers, that come forth in the Spring, and the
Beginning of Summer? Or are those Fruits Thine that come forth so plenteously in
their Seasons? why art thou ravished with vain Joys? why do thou embrace
External things, as if they were Thine own? Fortune can never make that to be
Thine, which the Nature of Things has Alienated from thee. The Fruits of the
Earth indeed are without all doubt for the Nourishment of Living Creatures But
if thou will Satisfy thy Need, which is all that Nature requires, there is no
reason why thou should desire that Fortune should make thee to Abound. For
Nature is contented with a Few, and with very small things: whose Fullness if
thou will oppress with Superfluity, that which thou do Force upon her, will
become either Unpleasant, or Hurtful. And do thou think it a Brave thing to
Shine in Rich Apparel? which if it be pleasant to Look on, I shall commend the
Matter of which it is Made, or the Wit of him, that Made it. Art thou Happy in
that thou have a long Train of Servants to wait on thee? who, if they be
Vicious, are a Burden to the House, and a Plague to their Master: But suppose
them to be Virtuous, how can it be that the Goodness, and Virtue of other men
should be reckoned amongst Thy Goods? By all that we have spoken it is clearly
proved that not one of those things which thou accountest to be Thy Goods is
Thy Good indeed. In which things if there be not any Beauty to make them so
Desirable, what reason is there that thou should either be Grieved for the
Loss, or Delighted with the Possession of them? If they are Fair, and Beauteous
in their own Nature, what is that to Thee? For upon this account they might be
as Pleasing, though thou could not pretend to have any particular Interest
in them. For they do not therefore become Precious, or Valuable, because they
are a part of thy Riches; but because they seemed to be Precious thou did
desire to get them into thy Possession. But, what would ye have, that ye make
so much ado about the things that are in the power of Fortune? I suppose ye
would have such Plenty, that ye might not stand in Need of any thing. But the
case is quite contrary with you: For you have Need of more helps to keep the
Riches, you have gotten: And True it is, that they stand in Need of Many
things, who have Many things in their Possession; and on the contrary they Want
very little, who measure their Abundance by the Necessity of Nature, not by the
Superfluity of Ambition. But are you so void of any Proper, and Internal Good,
that you should seek Your Goods Without, in things remote from Your own
Nature? Is the course of things so monstrously changed, that a Living-Creature
deserving to be esteemed as Divine upon the account of Reason, should not seem
unto himself to be shining, and Illustrious, but by the Possession of things
without Life? And indeed other things are satisfied with what they have in
themselves: but you, Creatures Made after the Image of GOD, would fain Adorn
Your selves being of so Excellent a Nature, with the Basest, and Lowest things;
not considering how great an Injury ye do to Your Creator. For He would have
Mankind to Excel All Earthly things, but ye Advance the very Lowest of them
Above Your own Dignity. For if it be a truth unquestionable that what ever is
the Good of another thing, is more Precious than that thing, whose Good it is;
since ye conceit that such contemptible, and unworthy things are Your Goods, ye
make your selves by your own Judgment to become Inferior to them: and indeed
ye deserve that so it should be. For such is the Nature of Man, that then only
he Excells all other Creatures, when he Knows Himself: but He becomes more
Vile than the Beasts that Perish, when he cease to retein this Knowledge. For
it is but the Nature of other Creatures here upon Earth, Not to Know Themselves:
but in Men it is Vice, or the Corruption of their Nature. But how great is your
Error, who conceit that any thing can be Adorned with Ornaments that are not
It Is own. That cannot be. For if any thing look Bright, and Glorious with that
which is put on it, that which is put on, is Praised: but that which is covered
therewith nevertheless remains in it is own Filth, and vileness. I deny that any
thing is Good, which may become Hurtful to him that Possesses it. Am I out in
this? No surely, thou will say. But Riches have often been Hurtful to those
that have had them, since every one that is extremely Wicked, and so the more
Desirous of External things, as Gold, or Precious Stones, thinks him only, who
has such things, to be a most Worthy Person. Thou then who art now so
sollicitous, and fearful of the Spear, and of the Sword, if thou had entered
into the Path of this Life with an Empty Purse thou might Sing in the
presence of a Robber. O Blessedness of perishing Riches, which when thou have
obtein'd thou ceasest to live in Safety!

THE FIFTH VERSE.
Philosophy commends the former age, which was free from covetousness.
" O the' too happy fathers of old,
"Whose wealth was the plough, and the fold!
"Base Luxury never could destroy 'um,
"Whose fare couldne're surfeit, nor cloy 'um.
"An Akorn, or Chestnut at best
"With them was an excellent feast.
"Sack, and Sugar their throats ne'ver knew,
"Nor their backs the Tyrian hue.
"On the grass they found Innocent dreams,
"And Nectar in sweet sliding streams.
"Then the Pine served only for shade,
"And not for the Mariners trade.
"The Chinoise had no traffic with Spain
"For their trifles as strange, and as vain.
"Then men might sleep whole in their skins
"Not affrighted with warlike Dins:
"And America thought not upon
"The greedy, and merciless Don:
"For who could have thought 'em worth killing,
"When they had not one poor shilling
"To pay for the wounds should be made?
"Then War was a pityful trade.
"Would God that our Saints, and Wise men,
"Would be but so Holy as Then!
"But a Fire more Cruel than Hell,
"Love of Wealth, is mixed with our Zele;
"Oh, what was their bloody Zele, who
"Sought out the long hidden Peru,
"And brought home that dangerous Ore
"By the Murder of so many score,
"To make Pay for the Murthring of more?
P. G.

The SIXTH PROSE.
Of dignity and power.
BUT what shall I say of Dignities, and Power, which you, being Ignorant of the
True Dignity, and Power, do so highly Extol? If they fall to the lot of Wicked
men, what A burning hill in Sicily.
Aetna with all the Flames, it belcheth forth; what Deluge that rages never so
horribly, did ever make so great Desolation! Verily, as I suppose thou do
remember, the Government of Consuls, which was the beginning of the Roman
Liberty, for the Pride of Consuls, your Ancestors had a desire to Abolish: who
for the same Pride had formerly Banished the Name of King out of the City. But
if at any time, which is very seldom, Good men are invested with Power, and
Dignities, what is there in them, that may give any Satisfaction, but the
Virtue, and Integrity of those that use them? Thus it is that Honor does not
accrue to Virtue from Dignities, but to Dignities from Virtue. But what kind of
Power is that which you so Praise, and Desire? Do you not consider, O ye
Earthly Creatures, What Your selves are, and What they are, whom You are Set
over? For if amongst the Mise thou should see one to assume to himself a
Power over the rest; would thou not break forth into Laughter? But if thou
considerest the Body, what can thou conceive to be more Weak than Man, whom a
Little Fly may have strength enough to Destroy? And in what respect can one Man
be said to exercise his Force on another, but only in respect of the Body, and
that which is beneath the Body, I mean, Fortune? what can thou Enforce upon a
Soul that has Attein'd to it is proper Freedom? can thou remove a Mind
settled upon the Firm Principles of Truth, and Virtue, from the State of Peace,
and Tranquillity? When a Nearchus or Diomedon.
Tyrant thought by Torments to constrain a Zeno Eleata. S^e Eusebius. lib. 10 de
praepar. Evang. and Suidas.
Courageous Man, to discover those who were Privy to a Conspiracy made against
him, he bitt off his Tongue, and Spit it in the Face of that Cruel Tyrant. Thus
did that Wise man make those Pains the Opportunity of exercising his Fortitude,
whereby the Tyrant exercised his Cruelty. But what is there, which any one can
do against another, which he may not suffer from another? We have heard how
King of Egypt.
Busiris who was wont to Kill Strangers, was Slain by Hercules, a Stranger.
Many Carthaginians had Regulus laid in Chains: but not long after He Is Bound
himself by those very men, whom he had formerly Conquered. And do thou think
that such a Man has any true Power, who is not Able so to Defend himself,
that none shall Prevail against him, as he does against others? Moreover if
there were any Natural, and Proper Good in Dignities, and Powers, they could
never be the Portion of Wicked men. For things so Repugnant will not be Brought
together. Nature forbids that Contraries should be in one, and the same
Subject. Thus, since it is unquestionable that very often lewd, and Ungodly men
have the management of Dignities, it is also manifest Marcus Attilius Regulus a
Consul of Rome.
that these things are not Good in their own Nature, which Adhere to Persons so
void of Goodness. Which indeed we may Judge of all the Gifts of Fortune, of
which the most Wicked men in the World have the greatest share. Here let us
also consider that no man doubts but that he is Valiant, in whom he sees any
Valor, or Fortitude: and it is manifest that he is Swift and Active, in whom
there is Swiftness, and Activity. Thus Music makes Musicians, Physic
Physicians, Rhetoric Rhetoricians. For the Nature of Every thing Acts
according to it is Property, nor does it Mix it self with the Operations of
Contrary things, and it Drives away whatsoever is Repugnant thereunto. But
neither can Riches extinguish the Desires of the Covetous man; neither can
Power make a man Able to Overcome Himself, who is Bound, with the Chains of
his lusts. And Dignity conferred on Persons of Base Inclinations does not only
not make them Worthy men, but discovers them rather, and shows them to the
World, as such who deserve the greatest Scorn, and Indignity. You take Pleasure
to call Things by False, and Improper Names, which are easily confuted by the
Effect of the Things themselves: Therefore neither can those Riches, nor that
Power, and Dignity be Truly so Called. And we may conclude the same of all that
comes from Fortune, in which it is manifest there is nothing that we should
Absolutely Desire, nothing of Native Goodness, since it neither Joins it self
always to Good men, nor does it make those Good, to whose lot it falls.

THE SIXTH VERSE.
Philosophy declares by the example of Nero, that dignities or power, do not
make men better.
HOw did Nero caused Rome to burn for a week that he might conceive the
overthrow of Troy.
He wast with Fire, and Sword
The City, and the Senators,
Who to his Britannicus, to reign alone.
Brother could Afford
No Safety from his Bloody Force!
Who likewise his own Agrippina.
Mother Slew,
And in that Horrid Slaughter Joy'd;
He did Her Naked Body View,
And Praised the Beauty He Destroyed!
Yet This man did All Nations Sway:
They trembled at his Dreadful Name.
Could NERO'S Power make him Obey
His Reason, and his Fury Tame?
O Grievous Fate! Abiss of woe!
What Poison cannot, the Sword must do!
The SEVENTH PROSE.
Of glory.
THEN quoth I, Thou know that I have never been Enslaved to the Desires of
perishing things: but I was Desirous to have some Matter for my Virtue to work
on in Public Affairs, that it might be made Known to the World. This indeed,
says she, is one thing, which some Generous Minds, but such as have not yet
attein'd to the highest pitch of Virtue, may be much taken withal, to wit, the
Glory or Fame that appertains to Persons that have Deserved well of the
Commonwealth: which Fame, or Glory, how small a thing it is, and of no
Importance at all, thou may Understand thus: Thou have learnt by Astronomical
Demonstrations that All the Compass of the Earth is but as it were a Point, or
the Least thing Imaginable in comparison of the large Space of the Heavens:
that is to say, if it be compared to the greatness of the Celestial Globe, it
would be judged to have no Space at all. And of this so small a Region of the
World it is about the Fourth Part as thou have learnt from Ptolemy, which is
Inhabited by such Creatures, which are known to us. If thou shall substract
from this Fourth Part what the Seas* and Marrises take up, and the utmost
Extent of the Dry Sands, and Deserts, there will be left but a very Narrow
Space for the Habitations of Men. Being then Encompast, and Shut up within the
least Part of this Extreme Little Part of the Universe, do you Think of
Enlarging your Fame, and making your Name Great? But what has that Glory of
Amplitude, and Magnificence that is straightened with such Narrow Limits? Moreover
I would have thee to consider that in the Habitable Part of the World most
Nations Differ very much one from another in their Language, and in their
Dispositions, and their whole Kind of Life: so that by reason of the Difficulty
of such Journeyes, or Voiages, and the Diversity of Languages, and the want of
all Traffic, or Commerce, not only the Fame of Particular Men, but even of
Great Cities may never come to some Nations. In the Days of Marcus Tullius, as
he himself In somnio Scipi^nis.
somewhere shows, the Fame of the Roman Commonwealth had not yet past beyond
the Mountain A mountain betwixt Scythia and India.
Caucasus, and at that time Rome was so Great, as to be a Terror even to the
People of Asia mayor.
Parthians, and the other Nations therabout. And do thou not see then how
Narrow, and Strait that Glory is, which you labor to spread, and dilate? Shall
the Glory of a Roman go thither where the Name of ROME could never arrive? The
Manners, and Institutions of Diverse Countries do not Agree; so that what with
some men deserves Praise, with others is accounted worthy of the greatest
Punishment. Hence it comes to pass that if any one delight to be Well spoken
of, it is in no wise convenient for him that his Name should be carried to Many
People. Therefore Every man must be contented with the Glory that is propagated
amongst those, who are Governed by the same Laws with himself: and that Fame,
and Lasting Renown, which they call Immortality, shall be confined within the
Limits of one Country. But how many Persons of great Eminency in their Time had
their Names Omitted by the Historians of that Age! And what does it profit a
man to be mentioned in Histories, which at length together with their Authors
fall into Oblivion! But you seem to your selves to have gotten a kind of
Immortality, when you think that your Fame shall endure in the Generations to
come. If thou do but compare that Duration to Eternity, thou will find that
thou have no cause to rejoice in the Long Continuance of thy Name. For if we
make comparison of One Moment with Ten Thousand Years, because both Spaces have
their Bounds, it carries though but a little yet some Proportion thereunto. But
this Number of Years be it Multiplied never so much, can in no wise be compared
to that Duration, which shall never End. For between things Finite there is
some Proportion, but Infinite, and Finite can never have any. Thus it comes to
pass that the Fame which endures for never so long a Time, in comparison of
Eternity, will not only appear to be very little, but as nothing at all. But
you care not to Do well, unless for the Praise of People, and the empty noice
of Vulgar Applause, and disregarding the Excellency of your own Conscience, and
Virtue, you expect your Reward from the Talk of others. Observe how Ingeniously
a certain man reproves this kind of Folly. For when he saw a conceited Person,
that had through vain Glory assumed to himself the False Name of a
Philosopher, to be assaulted with many sharp Contumelies, and Revilings, and
he had told him that now he should know him to be a Philosopher indeed, if he
would bear those Injuries with Meekness, and Patience; For a little while he
took on him a kind of Patience, and Boasting as it were in the Contumelies he
had received; Do thou not understand at length, says he, that I am a
Philosopher? Then replies the other very Bitingly, I had understood it indeed,
if thou had held thy peace. But what is Fame to Excellent Men (for of such is
our discourse) who seek for Glory in the way of Virtue; what, I say, is Fame,
or the Glory of this present World to them, when their Bodies return to the
Dust? For if Death seize on the Whole Man, which my Doctrine will not suffer
you to believe, there is no such thing, as Glory: since he who is said to be the
Owner of it, is deprived of his Being. But if the Soul that is cleansed from
all Impurity, being delivered from this Earthly Prison, Ascends into Heaven;
will she not despise all that is done here upon Earth, whilst she, being an
Inhabitant of Heaven, rejoices that she is Exempted from all Earthly Concerns?

The SEVENTH VERSE.
Of the smalness and shortness of fame.
WHoever thinks that Earthly Glory is
The thing that brings true Bliss:
Let him Comtemplate the Large Sky, and see
Earths small Capacity:
Since that such Narrow Space Exceeds his Fame,
He Will Blush at his Great name.
Why do Proud Men in vain Desire to be
Freed from Mortality?
Though their Fame pass through People far, and near
And make Whole Nations hear;
And though their House toth' Highest Titles rises,
This Glory Death despises;
It spares not Humble Heads, the Lofty neither;
Lays High, and Low together.
Where lie the Bones now of A Consal of Rome, who made war with Pirrhus King
of the Epirotes, by whom he could not be corrupted by bribes, and io whom he
sent one that offered to, kill him.
Fabricius?
Where Is A noble Roman, whom nothing could corrupt.
Cato, or The first consul of Rome, who revenged Lucretias rape.
Brutus?
Some Letters after Death preserve their Fame,
That is, Their Empty Name.
But may we Know Men long since Dead, and gone
Because those Words are Known?
You surely (turned to Dust) we cannot Know,
Fame cannot your Persons show.
If you conceit that it is a Life to be
Mentioned in History,
When Time deprives you of the Peoples Breath,
That is a Second Death.
The EIGHTH PROSE.
Adversity more profitable than prosperity.
BUT that thou may not think me to be an Irreconcilable Enemy to Fortune,
There Is a Time when she deserves well of men, though she be so Deceitful. To
wit, Then, when she shows Her self, and discovers what Disposition she is of.
Perhaps thou do not yet understand what I mean. That which I vehemently
desire to tell thee is a Wonderful thing, so that I have much ado to fit Words
to the Thoughts I have of it. For I Judge that Adverse Fortune is more
Profitable for Men, than Prosperity. For the one always cheats us with the
empty show of Felicity, whilst she seems to be very Kind: the other is always
True to us, whilst by her Change she demonstrates her Instability. The one
Deceives, the other Teaches, and Instructs us: the one Fetters the Minds of
those that Enjoy it with the Allurements of False Goods; the other sets them at
Liberty, by making them to understand the Vanity of all Earthly Happiness.
Therefore thou may observe that the one is Windy, Loose, and always void of
the Knowledge of her self: the other is Sober, Strict, and increasing in
Prudence, by the most profound Exercise of Wisdom, in the Conquest of All
Perturbations. Lastly Prosperity enticeth men, and draws them away from the
True Good: Adversity draws them back to it, as it were, with an Hook. And
do thou think this but a small thing that this Sharp, this Horrible Fortune
makes thee Know who are thy Faithful Friends: she has Distinguished the
Certain, and Doubtful Countenances of thy Companions: At her Departure she
carried Her own Friends away with her, Thine she has left with Thee. At how
high a rate would thou have purchac'd this, when thou seemedst to thy self
to be a Fortunate Man? Cease now to look any longer after the Riches, thou
have Lost: thou have found the most Precious Kind of Wealth, viz. True Friends.

THE EIGHTH VERSE.
Philosophy praises true love and friendship.
THat the World so Constant is
In Alternate Variety,
That so many Contraries
Observe their League so Faithfully,
That the Sweet Day, Queen of Light,
Sol in his Golden Chariot Draws,
And that The Evening star.
Hesperus brings Night,
That Night is Ruled by The Moon.
Phaebes Laws,
That the greedy Sea's restrained
Least it is proud Waves should seiz the Land:
Things thus to each other Chained
Are held by LOVES Almighty Hand
Who Rules the Heavens, Earth, and Seas.
If He let go the Reins, they run
Straight from the safe way of Peace,
And Perish by Dissension.
He keeps Men in Unity,
He Joins in League far Distant Lands:
He confirms by Chastity
The Sacred Force of Nuptial Bands:
He shows True Friends how to prove
That To Love is the Greatest Gain.
Happy Men, if that same LOVE
Which Raigns in Heaven did in You Reign!
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE Consolation of Philosophy.
The FIRST PROSE.
Philosophy promises to explicate true felicity.
SHE had now ended her Song, when the Sweetness of the Verse had fixed me in
the deepest Attention. Therefore after a short pause thus I spoke: O Sovereign
Consolation of wearied Minds, how much have thou refreshed me both with the
weight, and importance of the Sense of this Excellent Song, and the
pleasantness of it is Air! so that for the future I shall not look on my
self, as one that wants strength to grapple with any kind of Fortune.
Therefore I am not only not afraid of those Remedies, which thou said were
somewhat more Sharp, and piercing, but I vehemently desire that thou would
impart them unto me. Then quoth she, I Thought so, when thou did so greedily
receive my words in such profound Silence, and with such earnest Attention; and
I expected that thou should have this Temper, and Disposition of Mind, or
(which indeed is rather the very truth) I wrought it in thee. Such are the
things, that remain to be spoken of, that when first we do but touch them with
our Tongue, they are very Tart, and Biting, but being received, and swallowed
down, they become exceeding Sweet, and Delightsome. But since thou say thou
art so desirous to hear what I have to say, how would thou be Enflamed if
thou did understand whither I design to Conduct thee? Whither quoth I? To
True Felicity, said she, which thy Mind apprehends as it were in a Dream; but
it is Sight being employed about Images, and Phantasms, it cannot have any clear
Prospect thereof. Then quoth I: Do, I pray thee, as thou have said, and show
without delay what is that True Felicity. I will do it, quoth she, most
willingly: but first I will lay down in plain words that State, and Condition
with which thou art most acquainted, that casting thine Eye the other way, thou
may clearly Discern the Nature of True Happiness.

THE FIRST VERSE.
False felicity must be forsaken, that true happiness may be embraced.
Whosoever will sow his ground first he (free,
That ground from Stons, and Thorns must
That Ceres may
Find a plain way.
Most sweet's the Honey, that comes next
When Tastes unpleasant have us vexed.
We Joy to see the Stars Appear
When Wind, and Rain have left the Air.
How Lovely is the Youthful Day,
When Lucifer has chased away
The dismal Shades! Thou, whose dull Eye
Could never yet True Good descry,
Lift up thine Head: thine Eyesight shall be clear,
And thou shall see
That Instantly,
To him that Seeks for Truth, Truth shall Appear.
The SECOND PROSE.
How all men desire happiness, but many mistake it.
THEN with a steadfast Look, recollecting all her Thoughts into the depth of
her Mind thus she began: All the Care of Mortals, which is exercised in the
labor of various Studies, and Designs, Proceeds in Diverse ways; but yet it
Tends to One, and the same End, viz. to True Happiness. And that is such a
GOOD, which when any man, has Attein'd unto, his Desires can go no further.
Which indeed is the Chief, and Sovereign of All Good things, and contains in
itself All the Good that is, or ever can be. To which if any thing were
wanting, It could not be the Sovereign Good, because some thing would be left
our of it, which migh be Wished or Desired. It Is manifest therefore that Bliss,
or True Happiness is a Perfect State consisting in the Collection of All Good
things into One. This State, as we have said, All men desire to Attein unto by
Diverse ways or Means: For there is Naturally in the Minds of Men a Desire of
the True Good, but Error draws them aside to things that have but the mere
Show, or Appearance of Good. Some there are who believing that it is the
Sovereign Good, to want nothing* endeavor with all their strength to Heap up
Riches: but others, judging that to be the Sovereign Good, which is most worthy
of Veneration, endeavor by the getting of Honors, or Illustrious Titles, to
render themselves Venerable to their own Countrymen. Others there are that
hold the Sovereign Good to consist in the Greatest Power, or Dominion. These
men would either Reign themselves, or they endeavor to be Next to Him that
holds the Scepter. And it seems to others that Glory, or Renown is the
Sovereign Good. These make all possible speed to get a Glorious Name by the
Arts of War, or Peace. But the greatest Number of men measure the Fruit of Good
by Joy, and Mirth. These think it the most Happy State to overflow with
Pleasure. And some there are that exchange the Ends, and Causes of these Goods
(viz. why they Desire them) one for another: as they, who desire Riches that
they may attein to Power, and Dignities, and have all the Means of enjoying
such Carnal Pleasures, to which they are most inclined: or they, who would fain
be in Power that they may get Money, or a Great Name. To these, and such like
things is the Bent, or Intention of Humane Actions and Desires: Nobility, and
the Favor of the People seem to procure an Illustrious Name: A Wife and
Children are desired for the Pleasure, and Delight men hope to receive from
them. But as for Friends, which are the most Sacred kind of Goods we do not
judge of them as apperteining to Fortune, but to Virtue. But now it is easy to
apprehend how the Goods of the Body are referred to the things above mentioned.
For Strength, and Greatness of Body seem to make us capable of the most Manlike
Exercise; Beauty, and Activity bring large Praises; Health fits a man for the
Pleasures of the Body. By All these things it is manifest that True Happiness is
that which men Chiefly, and Principally Aim at. For that which every man
desires before all other things he judges to be the Sovereign Good. But we
have concluded the Sovereign Good to be Bliss, or True Happiness. Wherefore
that State, or Condition which every man desires before all other things, he
judges to be his Bliss. Therefore thou have now laid before thine Eyes
almost the whole Form, or Model of Humane Felicity, Riches, Honors, Power,
Glory, Pleasure. Which things Epicurus considering severally, and apart one
from another, he judged the Sovereign Good to be Pleasure, because all those
other things seem to bring Pleasure, and Delight to the Mind. But I return to
the Studies, and Endeavors of men: whose Mind notwithstanding, though their
Memory be so weak, and dull, strives to regain the Possession of the Sovereign
Good, but it is like a Drunken man, who Mistakes the Path that leads to his
House. For what, do they seem to be in an Error, who would fain Arrive to such
a State, that they may no longer stand in need of any thing? But there is
nothing that so much perfects True Happiness, as the Abundance of All Good
things, which wants not any thing foraign, and Extrinsecal to it is own Nature,
and is in itself All-Sufficient. Are they mistaken who judge that the Chief
Good is that, which is most Worthy of Veneration? In no wise. For that is not
vile, or contemptible, to obtein which, is the Aim, and Intention of All
Mankind. Is not Power to be reckoned in the number of Good things? what? is
that feeble and without strength, which is unquestionably to be preferred before
All things whatsoever? Is Glory, or Renown nothing-worth? But it cannot be but
that whatsoever is most Excellent should be also most Glorious. To what purpose
should I say that True Happiness cannot be Anxious, or Sad, or Subject to any
kind of Sorrows, and Perplexities; since in the least things That is Desired,
the Having and Enjoying whereof is Delightsome. For this reason do men Desire
Riches, Dignities, Kingdoms, Glory, and Pleasures, because they believe that
by them they shall Attein a State Sufficient, Venerable, Powerful, Illustrious,
and full of Pleasure, and Delight. It Is GOOD therefore which men Aim at in
their various Studies, and Designs: the Force of Nature we may perceive in
this, that although the Opinions of men are so various, and Disagreeing, yet
they all Consent in Choosing GOOD, as the End of their Actions.

THE SECOND VERSE.
How nature cannot be wholly changed.
"HOw the strict Reins, of all things guided are
"By powerful Nature, as the chiefest cause,
"And how she keeps with a foreseeing care
"The spacious World in order by her laws,
"And to sure knots, which nothing can unty,
"By her strong hand all Earthly motions draws:
"To show all this we purpose now to try
"Our pleasing Verses, and our Musick's sound.
"Although the Lybian Lions often lie
"Gentle, and tame in willing fetters bound,
"And fearing their incensed masters wrath
"With patient looks endure each blow, and wound:
"Yet if their jaws they once in blood do bathe,
"They gaining courage with fierce noise awake
"The force, which Nature in them seated has
"And from their necks the broken chains do shake;
"Then he who once thought he had made them tame
"Falls the first prey unto their raging flame.
"The Bird shut up in an unpleasing cage
"Which on the lofty Trees did lately sing,
"Though men her want of freedom to assuage,
"Should unto her with careful labor bring
"The sweetest meats, which they can best devise:
"Yet when on tops of houses fluttering
"The pleasing shadows of the groves she spies,
"Her hated food she scatters with her feet,
"And discontented to the woods she flies,
"And there delights to tune her accents sweet.
"When some strong hand does tender plant constrain
"With his debased top the ground to meet,
"If it let go, the crooked twigg again
"Up toward Heaven ti self it straight does raise.
" Phoebus does fall into the Western main,
"Yet does he back return by secret ways
"And to the East does guide his Chariots race.
"Each thing a certain course, and Laws obeyes,
"Striving to turn back to his proper place;
"Nor any settled order can be found,
"But that which does within itself embrace
"The birthes, and ends of all things in around.
The THIRD PROSE.
That true happiness consists not in riches.
O Earthly Creatures, ye have some kind of Perceivance of THAT from which you
derived your Being, and of the END for which you were Made, though it be very
dull, and confused as it were in a Dream; and therefore the Aim, or Intention
of your Nature leads you to the True Good, and many Errors carry you out of
the way to It. For consider whether those things, by which men think they shall
Attein to True Happiness, will ever bring them to the End they design, and
propose to themselves. For if Money, or Honors, and those other things before
mentioned could put us into a Condition, to which no Good thing could seem to
be Wanting, we would grant that a man might be Happy by the obteining of those
things. If they cannot Perform that which they promise, Wanting many Good
things, is it not manifest that they have but the False Show of Felicity? In
the first place therefore I ask. Thee, who not long since did abound with
Riches: In the midst of that Abundance did thou never feel any Anguish, or
Disturbance of mind arising from a sense of the Injuries thou did suffer? I
cannot remember, quoth I, that I was ever in so comfortable a Condition, but
that I had always some Trouble, or other. And was it not either because
somewhat was Wanting, which thou would not should be Wanting; or that
somewhat was Present, which thou would not should be Present? This is the
case, quoth I. Therefore thou did Desire to Have the one, and to be Freed
from the other. It Is confessed, quoth I. But every man Lacks that which he
Desires. He does so, quoth I. But whosoever Lacks any thing, has he Attein'd to
a State of Sufficiency? In no wise, quoth I. Therefore whilst thou did most
Abound with Riches, did thou sustein this Insufficiency? what else, quoth I?
Riches therefore cannot bring a man to such a State that he shall not stand in
Need of any thing; and it was this, which they seemed to Promise. But I think
that this is most worthy of Consideration; That Money has nothing in it is
Nature of such Power, and Efficacy, that it may not be taken away from those
that Possess it. I confess it, quoth I. How should thou not confess it, since
we see it so frequently that the Possessors are deprived of their Wealth? For
what is the ground of so many complaints that are made before the Judges, but
that men endeavor to regain the Money that has been taken from them by Force,
or by Fraud? It Is so, quoth I. Every man therefore, said she, will stand in
Need of some Aid from without, by which he may Possess his Money in Safety. That
cannot be denied, quoth I. But he would have no Need of any such Aid, or
Assistance, if he had no Money that might be taken from him. That is
unquestionable, quoth I. The matter then falls out quite contrary to what vain
men expect: for those Riches, which were thought to make a man Sufficient,
render him the more Necessitous, making him to stand in Need of such External
Aid, or Assistance, which otherwise he might well be without. But how can
Riches drive away Indigence? Do not Rich men suffer Hunger, and Thirst? Do not
the Limbs of Mony'd men feel Cold in the Winter? But Rich men thou will say
have wherewith they may Satisfy their Hunger, wherewith they may Ease
themselves of Thirst, and Cold. But thus they may have some Consolation in
their Indigence, but they cannot be wholly freed from it. Wherefore if Wealth
cannot remove Indigence, and does in many respects increase it, can there be
any reason that you should believe that all the Riches in the World can produce
Sufficiency?

THE THIRD VERSE.
How riches afflict their possessours in life, and forsake them in death.
THough he that Loves the World's vain Wealth had All
The Gold that A river whose sands are said to be gold.
Tagus yields,
And had an Hundred Oxen in his Stall
To Plow his ample Fields:
Yet whilst he lives Care would Bow down his Head:
Nor would his Wealth Avail him when he is Dead.
The FOURTH PROSE.
That true happiness consists not in dignities.
BUT Dignities render a man Venerable. Is there that Power, and Efficacy in
Magistracy, or Civil Authority, that it may engraft Virtue in the Minds of
those that use it, and drive away Vice? But it is wont not to drive away
Wickedness, but rather to make it more conspicuous. Hence it comes to pass,
that our Indignation is so often stirred, to see the most Wicked men invested
with Power, and Dignities. For which cause A famous Poet of Verona.
Catullus calls A wicked Roman his fir name was Struma which the Poet wittyly
played upon. Plin. lib. 37. not. Hist.
Nonius though sitting in the Consuls Chair (STRVMA) an Impostume. See thou
not how great disgrace Dignities bring upon Persons of Base, and Unworthy
Dispositions? But their Unworthiness would less appear, if they had no Honors
to make them Eminent. Could thou be so wrought on by so many Dangers, as to
be willing to bear Office with Decoratus, when thou did discover in him the
Mind of a Base Fellow, and an Accuser of Honest men? But if thou should see a
man endued with Wisdom, is it possible thou should not think him Worthy
either of Reverence, or of the Wisdom with which he is endued? It Is not
possible. For Virtue has Dignity of it is own, which it cannot but transfuse
into those, which Join themselves unto it. Which because Popular Honors cannot
perform it is manifest they have not in them the Beauty of True Dignity. This
ought to be very much thought on: for if every man be More Abject, and
Despicable for being Contemned by a Greater Number of Persons, since Dignity
makes not Wicked men Reverend, it is manifest that Showing them to More People;
it makes them to be More Despised. But Wicked men are revenged on Dignities, by
Defiling them with their own Impurities, by which they are so exposed to
Disgrace. And that thou may acknowledge that True Reverence cannot be
obtein'd by these Shadows of Dignity; If any man that has been never so often
Consul should come amongst Foreign Nations, would his Honor render him
Venerable to those Strange People? But if it did appertain to the Nature of
Dignities to make men Reverend or Venerable, they would not cease to perform
this Office in any Nation whatsoever. As Fire throughout the whole World never
desists from it is Heat. But because this does not appertain to their Nature,
but is fastened on them by the False Opinion of men, they vanish presently, when
they come amongst those, who do not esteem them to be Dignities. But this
amongst Foreign Nations. But amongst those, with whom they have their
Beginning, do they always Endure? The Office of a Praetor was in Times past a
Great Power, but now it is but an empty Name. In Times past he that was to
Provide Corn for the People was esteemed to be a Great Man. Now what is more
contemptible than such an Office? For, as I said a little before, that which
has not any Beauty in it self, has sometimes a kind of Luster, sometimes
none, according to the Opinion of those that use it. If therefore Dignities
cannot make men Venerable, if when Wicked men are Invested with them, they
become Sordid, and Odious; if by the change of Times, they lose their Splendour;
if by the estimation of People, they become vile, and nothing-worth; what
Beauty is in them that they should be Desired? much less have they any to
bestow on others.

THE FOURTH VERSE.
How Nero being most wicked, was in greatest dignity.
THough Nero vaunt his Royalty
With Scarlet, and with Pearls Adorned,
Yet in his Pompous Luxury
Is He of all men loathed, and scorned.
The Consuls Chairs (hereby Disgras'd) This man
So full of Vice had in his own Dispose:
Who then will ever think that Honor can
Make Happy, which so Vile a Wretch Bestows?
The FIFTH PROSE.
Of Kings and their favorites.
BUT may Kingdoms, and the Favor of Kings make a man Powerful? How not, when
their Felicity endures for ever? But Antiquity is full of Examples, and so is
our present Age, how the Felicity of Kings has been turned into Calamity. O
glorious Power, which proves so Unable to preserve itself! If the Power of
Kingdoms be the Cause of Happiness, does it not lessen Felicity, or bring in
Misery, if in any part it be Defective? But although Humane Empires be stretched
never so wide, Every King must acknowledge that there are many Nations without
the compass of His Dominions. But where that Power can reach no further that
makes men Happy, there enters that Want of Power which makes them Miserable.
Thus Kings of necessity have a larger portion of Misery, than of Felicity. A
certain Tyrant, that had experienced the Danger of his Estate, set forth the
Fears that are incident to Crowns, and Scepters by the Terror of a Sword
hanging over a man's Head. What kind of Power then shall we account this, which
cannot drive away the most Biting Care, and Solicitude, which cannot avoid the
continual Prickings of Dread and Horror? They would fain live Securely, but
Cannot, and yet they Boast of their Power. Do thou judge that man to be
Powerful, whom thou see so Unable to do what he would? Do thou judge him to
be Powerful, who is encompast with a Guard? who is continually in fear of
those, whom he keeps in Awe? who depends upon his Servants to make him seem to
be Mighty? For what shall I say of the Favorites of Kings, since I show that
the State of Kingdoms is so weak, and tottering? who sometimes Fall by the
Displeasure of their Kings, sometimes their Kings, and themselves are involved
in the same Ruin. Nero enforced his Favorite Seneca from whom he had received
so many good Instructions, to make choice of his own Death. Papinianus who had
borne great sway a long time amongst the Courtiers Antoninus caused to be slain
with the Swords of his Soldiers. But both these men would have relinquisht
their Power: Seneca endeavored to deliver up all his Riches to Nero, and to
betake himself to a Retired Life. But whilst their Fall is hastened by their
own Weight, neither of them could accomplish his design. What shall we say then
of such Power, as this, of which they are Afraid that have it, and when thou
would retein it, thou art not Safe, when thou would lay it aside, thou
know not how to be rid of it? Can thou expect Safety from such Friends,
whom Fortune not Virtue has given thee? But that man whom Prosperity has made a
Friend, Adversity will make an Enemy. And what more pernicious plague can there
be, than an Enemy that has gotten into an Intimacy with us?

The FIFTH VERSE.
True power consists in conquering our own passions.
HE that will Great, and Powerful be
Let him obtein the Victory
Over the Fierce Motions of his Mind,
To Peace, and Generous Love Inclined:
And let him Manfully Disdaign
To yield his Neck to Cupids Chain.
For though both the Indies were His own,
And All the world Admired His Throne,
Yet it is not Power, that Cannot Free
The Mind from Black Anxiety
Enlarging it from all Restraints,
And put an end to all Complaints.
The SIXTH PROSE.
That true happiness consists not in glory.
BUT Glory, many times how Deceitful, and Base is it? so that the Tragedian had
just cause to cry out (...)! O Glory, Glory, thou art such a Cheat
That thousands, who are Naught by thee seem Great.
For it often comes to pass that Many men get a Great Name only by the False
Opinions of the People, than which what can we ever conceive to be more Base,
and Despicable? For they who are Praised without their Desert must needs Blush
at their own Praises. And if their Applause proceed from their Merits, yet what
can it Add to the Conscience of a Wise man, who measures not his Good by the
Rumor of the People, but by the soundness, and Integrity of his own
Conscience? If it seem a Brave thing to Spread, and Enlarge a man's Name; it
follows that it must be judged a Base thing not to Enlarge it. But since, as I
said a little before, there must needs be Many Nations, which the Fame of one
man can never Extend unto, it comes to pass that he whom thou esteemest to be
Glorious, in regard of the greatest part of the Earth, is Obscure, and
Inglorious. Amongst these things I do not think the Favor of the People worthy
to be mentioned, which neither proceeds from Judgment, nor ever becomes Firm,
and unalterable. And now who does not see that the Name of Nobility is vain,
and insignificant? which if ye refer to Glory, or Renown, it must be considered
that it is not Thine own. For Nobility seems to be nothing else but the Praise
of Ancestors procured by their Merits. If it be Praise that makes Renown, or an
Illustrious Name, they must needs have the Renown, who are the Persons Praised.
Wherefore the Renown of Others make Thee not Illustrious, if thou shinest not
with the Brightness of any Merit of Thine own. If there be any Good in
Nobility, I judge it to be only this, that it seems There is a Necessity
imposed upon those that are Nobly Born not to Degenerate from the Virtue of
their Ancestors.

The SIXTH VERSE.
How all, but wicked men, are noble.
ALl Sorts of Men from the same Stock arise,
All things have One Original:
The Lord of Lords, who Dwells Above the Skies,
Did make them, and Preserves them All.
Those Beams, wherewith the Sun has ever Shined,
He gave, and on the Moon confers
Those splendid Horns: and to the Earth Mankind
He gave, to the Firmament the Stars.
He did shut up within these Clods of Earth
The Souls, which He brought from on High.
We see then that All Men derive their Birth
From the Only True NOBILITY.
Why do you Boast of your Large Pedigree?
If men consider whence they came,
That their Descent is from the Deity,
None ought to suffer the least shame,
As if he were Ignobly Born, since All
May boldly Call
GOD Father, but those, who Deny
That He is so By their Impiety.
The SEVENTH PROSE.
That true happiness consists not in pleasure.
BUT what shall I say of the Pleasures of the Body, the Desire whereof is full
of Anxiety, the Full-filling of such Desire brings the greatest Anguish, and
Remorse? what Grievous Diseases, what intolerable Pains do those Pleasures
bring to the Bodies of those that enjoy them, as the Fruit of their Iniquity!
What Joy may be had in such Motions, as they call Pleasures, I know not. But
whosoever will remember Luxurious, and Dissolute Practices, shall understand
that the Issues, and Events of such impure Delectations are very Sad, and
deplorable. If such Motions of the Body could be the cause of Happiness, there
is no reason, why Beasts also might not be said to be Happy; since their main
Bent, and Intention is to satisfy the Appetite of the Body. The Delight that
arises from the Enjoyment of Wife and Children is indeed a most Honest, and
commendable thing: but it has been said that a certain man, I know not who,
found it was Natural to his Sons to Vide * Aristotelis Eth. c. L. 8. C. 6.
Beat their Father. How Biting, and vexatious the condition of Children is for
the most part, thou have need to be Admonisht, since thou have not had
Experience thereof, neither art thou at this time in any Anxiety upon that
account. I approve the Judgment of my Euripides, who said that he who has no
Children is Happy in his Misfortune.

THE SEVENTH VERSE.
That there is no pleasure without pain.
THis it is, that Sensual Pleasures do
They make men Joy in their own Woe,
And like the Be, that soon takes wing,
Whoever sucks their Sweets, they Sting,
And fill the Heart with Pains, that last,
When all those foolish Joys are past.
The EIGTH PROSE.
How all temporal goods are mixed with evil, and are small in themselves.
IT cannot be doubted then, but that These are not the right ways to True
Happiness, neither can they bring any man thither, whither they promise to
bring him at last. But with what Mischiefs they abound I shall show thee in a
few words. For what! will thou endeavor to gather Riches? thou must take them
from him that has them. Art thou Desirous of Dignities? thou must make
Supplication to such a one, who can Bestow them; and thou who strivest to go
before others in Honor, wilt become Vile, and contemptible by showing thy self
to be a Person of so Low a Spirit as to Beg for it. Is it Power, that thou
would have? By the Treacheries of those whom thou keepst in Awe thou shall
be exposed to many Dangers. Is it Glory that thou Aimest at? thou shall be
hurried through all manner of Hardships, and never be in Safety* would thou
lead a Voluptuous life? but who does not scorn, and despise one, that is a
Slave to that most vile, and frail thing, the Body? they that boast of the
Goods of the Body, how small, how weak a Possession do they rely on? Can ye
ever be Greater, than Elephants, Stronger than Bulls? Swifter than Tigers?
Behold the large Space, the Firmness, or Durability, the Swiftness of the
Heavens, and cease at length to Admire things so vile, and contemptible. Which
Heavens are not rather to be Admired for those qualities, than for the Rule,
and Method by which they are Governed. As for Beauty how vain and transitory is
it, how swiftly does it pass away, more Fading than Flowers in the Spring! If,
as Aristotle says, Men could see with Eyes of a The beast Lynx has the
quickest sight of any beast. Plin. lib. 32. Hist. not. cap. ^.
Lynx, and their Sight could pierce through all Obstacles, would not that Body
of A noble Captain of Athens.
Alcibiades, whose Outside appears so Beautiful, it is Bowels being looked into,
be found to be no other, than a most Filthy thing? It Is not therefore thy
Nature, but the Infirmity of the Eyes of those that look on thee, which render
thee so Beautiful in the Sight of men. But esteem the Goods of the Body, as
highly, as ye list, so that ye consider that whatsoever ye Admire may by a
Fiery Fever within a Day, or two, be dissolved, and turned into Ashes. From
all that has been said we may collect thus much: That those Goods, which can
neither perform what they Promise, nor are Perfect by the gathering-together
of All that is Good, do neither make a man Truly Happy, nor any way Conduce to
True Happiness.

THE EIGTH VERSE.
How men are wise in seeking for things of little value, and foolish in finding
out their sovereign good.
AH, wretched Blindness! which thus makes Mankind
The Right way to decline!
Gold, or Rich Gemms, you do not hope to find
On Trees, or on the Vine:
On Mountains high you do not lay your Snares
That you may Fishes take:
Nor when you would pursue the Roes, and Hares,
Go you to the Tyrrhene Lake.
They Know the Crekes, and Windings of the Sea,
Where Purple does abound,
Or Pearls: they Know what of Kind Fishes may
On every Coast be found.
But whilst they See not what would Feed their Souls
This Blindness they endure,
And that which is Beyond the Starry Poles
From Earth they would procure.
What shall I wish to such Deluded Men?
Rich, Honored let them be,
And when False Goods they have Heaped up, even then
The True Good let them See.
The NINTH PROSE.
Why true felicity cannot consist in temporal things.
HItherto I have been giving thee a Description of False Happiness: it follows
that I should now declare unto thee wherein the Nature of True Happiness
properly consists. I see plainly, quoth I, that Sufficiency may not be gotten
by Riches, nor Power by Kingdoms, nor Reverence by Dignities, nor True Renown
by Glory, or Popular Applause, nor True Joy by Transitory Pleasures. And have
thou found out the Cause, quoth she, why it is so? Indeed, quoth I, I have a
Glimpse of it, but I would fain that thou should give me a clear sight of
it. The Reason is very easy to be known. For that which in it is own Nature is
Simple, and Undivided, the Error of Men has Divided into sundry Parts, and
withdrawes their Mind from that which is True, and Perfect to that which is
False, and Imperfect. Can that, think thou, which has Need of nothing, Want
Power? No surely, quoth I. Right, quoth she: for if there be any thing, which
in any respect fails in it is Ability, in that respect it has Need of the
Assistance of some other thing. It Is so, said I. Therefore the Nature of Power,
and of Sufficiency is One, and the Same. But do thou think that what includes
Sufficiency, and Power in it is own Nature may be Despised? or that on the
contrary it deserves the greatest Veneration? This, quoth I, cannot be doubted.
Let us Add therefore Reverence, or Veneration to Sufficiency and Power, that we
may judge these Three things to be One. We must do so, if we confess the very
truth. What then? quoth she: do thou suppose that It is Obscure, and Ignoble,
or that It shines with the Brightness of the greatest Glory? Consider whether
to that which has Need of nothing, which is most Powerful, which is most
Worthy of Honor, as has been proved, Glory can be Wanting, which it not being
able to give unto it self, it may seem in some respect to be poor, and
despicable? I cannot but confess, quoth I, that it is most Glorious. It
follows then that True Glory, or Renown does not Differ from the things above
mentioned. It follows indeed, quoth I. This then, quoth she, which has Need
of nothing, which Can do All things by it is own Strength, which is Venerable,
and Renowned, ye must grant also to be full of Joy, and Durable Pleasure. I
cannot imagine, quoth I, how any Sadness, or Discomfort should ever get
entrance into It. Wherefore if the former Positions remain firm, we must of
necessity confess that it cannot but Abound with all manner of Joy. And this
also necessarily follows from what has been said, that the Names of
Sufficiency, Power, Veneration, Glory, Joy, are indeed Diverse, but they do not
Differ in their Substance, or Nature. Right, quoth I. This therefore which in
it is own Nature is One, Simple, and Undivided, the Perverseness of Men Divides
into sundry Parts, (as has been said) and whilst they endeavor to get a Part
of That, which has no Parts, they neither obtein any Portion thereof, for
there is no such thing, nor That One, Simple, and Indivisible it self, which
they do not in any wise Affect, or Endeavor after. How is that, quoth I? Whosoever
desires Riches through an Aversness to Want, or Penury, takes no care how to
become Powerful: he chooses to be Vile, and Obscure, and deprives himself of
many Natural Pleasures, that he may not lose the Money he has gotten. But thus
he fails of the Sufficiency he Aims at, being void of all Power, encompast
with many Troubles, Obscure, and Inglorious. But he that desires Power above
al things scatters his Riches, despises Pleasures, and accounts that
Honor, and Glory, that is not accompanied with Power to be nothing-worth. Thou
can not but see that many things are wanting to this man. For sometimes it
comes to pass that he wants Necessaries, that he suffers much Anxiety, and
disturbance of mind: and whilst he is not able to put off his troubles, and
vexations, it is manifest that he has not the Power, which he so much esteems.
We may Reason in like manner concerning Honors, Glory, Pleasures. For since
Every one of These is the Same with the other, whosoever endeavors to get one
of Them, without the other, misseth even that, which he desires. But what,
quoth I, If any man should desire to have All of Them together? Such a man
indeed would fain have That wherein the True Felicity does consist: but shall he
ever find it in those things, which we have demonstrated to be unable to
perform what they promise? No surely, quoth I. Then, quoth she, True Felicity
is not to be sought in those things, which men believe to contribute Severally
to the satisfaction of our various Desires. I grant it, quoth I, and a greater
truth could never have been spoken. Thou have then the Description of False
Happiness, and the Causes of it. Look now on the other side; for there thou
shall see the only True Happiness, as I have promised thee. Verily quoth I, it
may easily be seen, and thou did show it a little before, whilst thou did
open the Causes of that, which men Falsely call Happiness. For, if I am not
mistaken, that is the True, and Perfect Happiness which makes a man Perfectly
Sufficient, Powerful, Venerable, Renowned, Joyful. And that thou may
understand that I have a deep Apprehension of the Truth, thou have delivered,
what One of These, since they are All One, and the Same, has the Power verily,
and indeed to give unto us, I certainly know to be this Full, and Perfect
Happiness. O my Dear Child, quoth she, Happy art thou in thy Judgment, if thou
add this there unto! what, quoth I? Do thou think that any of these frail,
and perishing things can bring a man to this Estate? No surely, quoth I, and as
for that matter what we are to think thou have so demonstrated, that there
needs no more to be said. These things therefore seem to be but Shadows of the
True Good, or to give certain Imperfect Goods to men in this Mortal Life: but
they cannot bestow the True, and Perfect Good. I heartily Assent, quoth I, to
what thou say. Since then thou art come to the Knowledge of True Happiness,
and of such things which Deceive the World with the empty show of it, now it
remains that thou should Understand How thou may Attein to this True
Happiness. That is the thing, quoth I, which I most earnesly expect to hear
from thee. But, says she, as our Plato has declared in his Book entitled
Timoeus, Even in things of the least Importance the Divine Assistance ought to
be Implored, what do thou think should be done now, that we may become Fit to
find the Seat of the Sovereign Good? We must Invoke the Father of All things,
quoth I; unless we make our Addresses unto Him, no Undertaking can Begin well.
Right, quoth she, and forthwith thus she Sings:

The NINTH VERSE.
Philosophy craveth Gods assistance for the discovery of true happiness.
O Thou, who do with Boundless Wisdom hold
The World in Order, did the Foundation lay
Of Heaven, and Earth, at whose Command Time Rolled
In Circles from One Everlasting Day,
And who, Vnmov'd do cause All things to Move;
Whom no External Cause could urge to Frame
These Various Shapes of Changing things, but LOVE
And Boundless GOOD, Fit for this Boundless FLAME.
From that Fair Model in thy Mind thou drawst
The Forms of All things Made. --
O Father, Grant our Thoughts may reach thy Throne,
Grant we the Fountain of All Good may See,
Grant that, this Blisful Light to us once shown,
We may For ever Fix our Eyes on Thee.
Scatter this Darkness, and these Clogs remove,
And let thy Beams Appear. For Thou art LIGHT,
Thou art True Rest to those that do Thee Love,
Beginning, End, both Way, and Guide: the Sight
Of Thee is All thy Creatures can Desire:
It Is This Alone, to which our Souls Aspire.
The TENTH PROSE.
That there is some true happiness, and where it is to be found.
SINCE therefore thou have had a Description of Imperfect and also of Perfect
Good: it is fit that I should now demonstrate where the Perfection of Felicity
is Seated. And here we must first make Inquiry, if there Be any such Good, as
that which thou did even now Define, least we should be Deceived with a vain
Imagination, there Being indeed no such thing, as that which we make the
Subject of our Discourse. But that it does Exist, or is Actually in Being, and
that it is the Fountain, from whence All good things do flow, this is certain,
and unquestionable. For whatsoever is said to be Imperfect, by Diminution of
that which is Perfect it is called Imperfect. So it comes to pass that if there
be any thing Imperfect in it is Kind, in the same Kind there must needs be
something Perfect. For if ye take away Perfection, it cannot be conceived from
whence that which we call Imperfect should have Derived it is Being. For the
Nature of things took not it is Beginning from that which is in any respect
Faulty, or Defective, but proceeding from that which is Sound, and Free from
all Imperfection, it descends at length to these Low, and Weak things. If there
be a certain Imperfect Happiness, as we have already shown, it cannot be
doubted but that there is an Happiness Entire, and Perfect. This Conclusion,
quoth I, is Firm, and Irrefragable. But where It Is Abode is, Think with thy
self thus. That GOD, who has the Governance of All things is Good, this is
Natural to the Minds of Men to conceive. For it is impossible that our Thoughts
should fix upon any thing Better than GOD: and who can doubt but such a Being
is Good, which nothing can surpass in Goodness? but so does Reason demonstrate
GOD to be Good, that it does also evince the Perfection of Goodness to be in
Him. For unless He were Such a one He could never have the Governance of All
things. For some thing, that has the Perfection of Goodness, would be more
Excellent, than He, in as much as it would be found to have the Priority of
Being. For it is manifest that All Perfect things have their Being Before those
things, which are Unsound, and Imperfect. Wherefore that we may not be endless
in our Reasoning, it must be Granted that the Most High GOD is Full of the
Highest, and Perfect Good. But we have Concluded that Perfect Good is Bliss, or
True Happiness. Therefore it must needs follow that True Happiness is no where
to be found but in the Most High GOD. I heartily Assent, quoth I, to what thou
say, neither is it capable of any Contradiction. But, I pray thee, quoth she,
see how thou may prove soundly, and Irrefragably that the Most High GOD is
Full of the Highest, or Sovereign Good. How, quoth I? Thou may not suppose
that this Father of All things has Received that Sovereign Good, of which he
is said to be Full, from without, or that he has It by Nature in such a manner,
that thou may think that the Substance, or Essence of GOD Having, and of the
Sovereign Good Had, is not the Same. For if thou do conceit that It is
Received from without, thou may judge That which has given, to be more
Excellent than He which has Received It. But we most worthily Confess Him to
be the Most Excellent of All things. And if this Sovereign Good be in Him by
Nature, but may be conceived to be not altogether the Same with Him, since we
speak of Him, who is Acknowledged to have the Governance of All things, let any
man Imagine, who it was that Joined together these Diverse things? Lastly that
which Differs from any thing Is not That thing, from which it Differs.
Wherefore That which Differs in Substance, or Essence from Sovereign Good Is
not Sovereign Good: And it is the greatest Impiety to have such a Thought of
GOD, than Whom there can be nothing more Excellent. For it is impossible that
the Nature of any thing should be Better than That from which it Received its
Being. Wherefore That from which All things Received their Being I may firmly
Conclude to be in its own Nature the Sovereign Good. It Is most certainly so,
quoth I, as thou say. But it has been Granted that the Sovereign Good is True
Happiness. Very right, quoth I. Therefore, quoth she, it must needs follow that
GOD is True Happiness. There can be no Reason, quoth I, to Deny the Premises,
and I clearly perceive that this is their true, and proper Consequence. See,
quoth she, if the same thing may not be more firmly proved by this Argument,
that there cannot be Two Sovereign Goods, Differing one from the other. For
it is manifest that One of those Goods, which are Different from each other,
cannot be That, which the Other is: for which cause Neither of them can be
Perfect, since One is Wanting to the Other. But that which is not Perfect cannot
be Highest or Sovereign. The things then that are Soveraignly Good cannot be
Different from each other. But we have proved that both True Happiness, and GOD
are the Sovereign Good: wherefore it must needs follow that Sovereign
Happiness, and Sovereign Divinity is One, and the same Thing. Nothing, said I,
could ever be concluded more True, as to the Matter; more Firm, as to the way
of Proving it; or more becoming the Divine Majesty. Upon these things then,
quoth she, as Geometricians having Demonstrated their Propositions, are wont to
infer certain (...), or Corollaries, as they call them, so shall I give thee a
Corollarie. For since Men become Happy by the acquiring of True Happiness, and
True Happiness is Divinity it self, it is manifest that they become Happy by
the acquiring of Divinity. But as Men become Just by the acquiring of Justice,
Wise by the acquiring Wisdom, so it must needs be that having gotten, or
acquired Divinity, they become Gods. Every one then that is Truly Happy is a
God: but indeed by Nature there is but One God, yet nothing hinders but that
there may be very Many by the Participation of Divinity. And this, quoth I, is
a Fair, and Precious Corollarie indeed. But there is nothing more Fair than
That which Reason persuades should be Annexed to the things that have been
spoken. What is that, quoth I? Since True Happiness, said she, conteins Many
things, whether All these things make up One Body with a certain variety of
Parts, or whether there be any one of them, which compleats the Substance, or
Nature of True Happiness, the rest being referred Thereunto? I would thou
stouldst explain what thou say by rehearsing those several things. Do we not
judge True Happiness, quoth she, to be Good? yea, said I, the Soverain Good.
Add this, said she, to All the rest of the things aforementioned. For the same
Bliss or True Happiness is judged to be Sovereign Sufficiency, Sovereign Power,
and also Veneration, Renown, and Pleasure, or Delight Sovereign. What then? Are
All these things as so many Limbs, or Parts of True Happiness, or are they
referred to Good, as That, wherein the Nature of them All is contained? I
understand now, quoth I, what thou do propose, as the subject of our Inquiry,
but I would fain know how thou do Determine the Question. Thus. If All these
things were as so many Parts of True Happiness, they would Differ one from the
other. For this is the Nature of Parts, that being Diverse they make up One, and
the Same Body. But it has been already proved that they are All but One thing.
There Is no doubt of that, quoth I, But I expect what thou will say next. This is
manifest quoth she, that All those other things are referred to Good. For
therefore is Sufficiency Desired, because it is judged to be Good, for the same
Cause is Power Desired, and so Veneration, Renown, Delight. It Is Good then,
which is the Cause, For which any thing is Desired: since that which retains not
any thing in it self either Really, or Apparently Good, can in no wise be
Desired. And on the contrary those things, which are not Good in their own
Nature, yet if they Seem to be so, are Desired, as if they were Truly Good.
Whence it comes to pass that Goodness is rightly judged to be the Cause, why
any thing should be Desired. But that For which any thing is Desired is the
Chief Object of the Desire. As if a man have a Will to Ride For his Health,
it is not so much the Riding, as Health that he Desires. Since therefore that All
things are Desired For the obteining of Good, Good is the Chief, or Principal
Object of all Desires whatsoever. But it has been granted that True Happiness
is That, For which any thing is Wished, or Desired: wherefore it is evident that
True Happiness is the Only thing Required, or Sought after. And thus it cannot
be Denied, that the Substance, or Nature of Good, and of True Happiness is One,
and the Same. I see not how it is possible for any man to Dissent from this.
But we have proved that GOD, and True Happiness is One, and the Same thing.
Right, quoth I. Therefore we may Safely Conclude that the Nature of GOD
consists in GOODNESS, and in Nothing else.

THE TENTH VERSE.
Philosophy exhorts men to embrace true happiness.
COme hither All, ye wearied Souls,
Whose high Aspires base Lust controules,
And holds you fast in her dire Chains.
Here is a Cure for All your Pains,
Here does the Safest Harbor lie,
A Refuge from All Misery.
Not Tagus, which abounds with Gold,
Nor All that A river in Lydia.
Hermus's Banks do hold
Of that Bright Metal, nor Rich Inde,
Where men such Precious Stones may find,
Can Clear our Sight: yea they add more
Darkness to Souls made Blind before.
That, wherewith Men are Ravished
Earth in her lowest Caverns bred.
The Brightness that is Above the Sky,
From Darksome, Ruined Souls does fly.
Whoever perceives this Light, He says,
" Phoebus looks Dull with all his Rays.
The ELEVENTH PROSE.
That goodness is the end of all things.
I Assent, quoth I. For All these things hang one to another by a chain of the
strongest Reasons, that were ever produced. Then said She, At how great a rate
would thou value it, if thou could know what Goodness is? At an Infinite
rate, said I: for thereby I shall know GOD also, who is Goodness it self, or
Sovereign Good. But this I shall show thee with the greatest evidence, only let
those things remain as Granted, which have been Concluded already. They shall
so remain, said I. Have we not proved, said she, that those things, which are
Desired by the Generality of men, are not Truly, and Perfectly Good, because
they Differ one from the other, and since eace of them is Wanting to the other,
that they cannot produce Full, and Absolute Good? But that then they become
True Good, when they are collected as it were into One Form, and Efficiency, so
that what Sufficiency is, the Same is Power, Veneration, Renown, Delight; and
unless they are One, and the Same thing, that they have nothing in them, for
which they may be numbered amongst things that are to be Desired? It has been
plainly Demonstrated, quoth I, neither can it be Doubted in the least. Is it
not by the acquiring of Unity that those things become Good which are in no
wise Good, whilst they Differ, but become Good, when they are United? So it
seems, quoth I. But do thou grant that whatsoever is Good, is Good by the
Participation of the Sovereign Good? I grant it. Thou ought therefore to
grant likewise that ONE, and GOOD is the Same. For the Nature of those things
is the Same, whose Natural Effect is not Diverse. I cannot Deny it, quoth I. And
do thou know, said she, that whatsoever is, does remain, and Subsist, so
long, as it is One; but that it Perishes, and is dissolved, as soon as it
cease to be One? How is that? As in Animals, or Sensitive Creatures, whilst
the Soul, and the Body remain together, we call it a Sensitive Creature. But
when this Unity is dissolved by the separation of one from the other, it is
manifest that it loses the Being of a Sensitive Creature. And our very Body,
whilst it remains in One Shape by the Conjunction of it is Limbs reteins the
Resemblance of a Man. But if the Parts of the Body be Disunited it cease to
be what it was before. And in like manner Every other thing will be found to
Subsist, or remain in Being so long, as it is One: but when it cease to be
One, it Perishes. I cannot think but that it must needs be so. And is there
any thing, quoth she, which so far as it Acts according to Nature, can cease
from all Inclination to retein it is Being, and become Desirous of it is own
Destruction? If, quoth I, I consider Animals, or Sensitive Creatures either
Rational or merely Sensitive, which in some sort may be said to Will, or to be
Unwilling, I find not any thing, which (unless it be constrained from without)
leaves the Desire to continue it is Being, and of it is own Accord Hastens to
Destruction. For Every Sensitive Creature labors to keep it self in Safety,
and does all that it can to avoid Destruction. But I know not what I shall
think of Herbs, and Trees, and of things neither Sensitive, nor Vegetative.
But, quoth she, neither is there any reason why thou should doubt of this,
since thou may behold Herbs, and Trees to grow first in Places most convenient
for them, where they may not dye away, as long, as their Nature is capable of
any further Subsistence. For some spring up in Fields, some on Mountains, some
the Marshes bring fourth, some grow on Rocks, some are produced by the Barren
Sands, which if any man endeavor to transplant in other Places, they will
wither, and dye away. But Nature gives to All things that which is convenient
for them, and takes care that they may not Perish, whilst they have any
Possibility to Subsist. Do not all Herbs and Trees thrusting their Mouths as
it were into the Earth draw Nourishment by their Roots, and diffuse their
Strength, and Rind through their Pith, or Marrow? Does not every such Part,
which is most soft, and tender, as the Pith, lie hid in the inmost seat, but
without it is covered with that which is firm, and solid; but the outmost Part
of all is the Rind, which is seated there to be a defense against the Violence
both of the Sun, and of the Wind? And thou see how careful, and diligent
Nature is that All things may be propagated by the Multiplication of Seed.
Which things have these Engines, as we may call them, not only to preserve
their Being for a time, but to make their Duration, as to their several Kinds,
Perpetual. And do not those things likewise which are thought to be neither
Sensitive, nor Vegetative, Desire that, which Properly belongs to them? For why
does Lightness carry up the Flames, and the Earth is pressed down by it is Weight,
but that these Places, and Motions Properly belong to each of them? That which
is Agreeable to any thing preserves it is Being, as those things, which are
Contrary thereunto, destroy, and Corrupt it. Those things, which are Hard, as
Stones, cleave fast to their Parts, so that it is very Difficult to Divide
them. But Liquid things as Air, and Water, yield presently to the Impressions
of that which would Divide them, but (that which kept them asunder being
removed) they instantly return into those things, from which they are
Separated. We treat not now of the Voluntary Motions of a Knowing Soul, but of
the Natural Intention. Thus we Digest the Food, we receive, though we think not
of it; thus we draw our Breath, whilst we Sleep, though we Know it not. For
even in Living-Creatures the Love they have to their own Being does not proceed
from the Animal Inclinations of their Souls, but from the Principles of
Nature. For it is often seen (great causes constraining thereunto) that a man's
Will, or Rational Appetite Embraces Death it self which Nature Abhors: And on
the contrary That by which alone the Kinds of Mortal things are Perpetuated, to
wit, the Work of Generation, which Nature always Desires, the Will very
often most earnestly Refrains from. Thus the Love which things have to
Themselves does not proceed from their Animal Motion, but their Natural
Intention. For Providence has given this even the greatest cause of preserving
their Being, that they Naturally Desire to Subsist, as long, as it is Possible.
Wherefore there is no reason thou should doubt in the least, that All things
that are, do Naturally Desire to retain their Being, to avoid Destruction, I
confess, quoth I, that I do now most clearly perceive those things, which
awhile since seemed very Uncertain. But that, said she, which Desires to
Subsist, and continue in Being, it Desires to be One. For if this (Being One)
were taken away, no Essense could remain to any thing whatsoever. It Is true,
quoth I. All things therefore Desire ONE. I consent. But we have Demonstrated
that ONE, and GOOD is the Same. You have so. All things therefore have a Natual
Propensity to GOOD: which indeed thou may thus Describe: Good is That, which
All things Desire. A greater Truth, quoth I, could never be conceived. For
either All things are referred to Nothing, and being destitute of One Head they
waver to, and fro without a Ruler to keep them in their due Course, or if there
be any thing, which the Universe, and every Part thereof has a Natural
Propinsity unto, that must needs be the Chiefest, or Sovereign of all things,
which are rightly termed Good. O my Child, quoth she, how do I Rejoice to hear
these words! for by them I clearly perceive that thy Mind has Received a full
Impression of the very Truth: but in what thou have now said that is most
evidently implied, which but a little before thou did tell me thou wast
Ignorant of. What quoth I? What is the END of All things. For certainly it is
That, which All things Desire: which because we have found to be GOOD, we must
of necessity confess that GOOD is the END of All things.

THE ELEVENTH VERSE.
How we may attein to the knowledge of truth.
HE that would Search out Truth with Care Profound,
And fain would Fix Always upon Sure Ground,
The Rays of's Inmost Sight let him Turn in
Upon Himself: let him Revolve, and Spin
His Thoughts to the Utmost Length: And let his Mind
Know this, that she Within Herself may Find
Whatever she Seeks Without: That which did lie
In a Thick Cloud of Error shall outvye
The Sun in Brightness: For the Minds clear Light
The Darksome Flesh has not Extinguished quite.
There Is sure some Seed of Truth lies deep within
Which soon-springs up by Solid Discipline:
For how could you such speedy Answears give.
But that tke Truth, though Hid, does in you Live.
If it be so, as Plato's Muse Defined,
Whatever we Learn we do but Call to Mind.
The TWELFTH PROSE.
How the world is governed by God.
THEN said I, I do most heartily Assent to Plato in this matter: for this is
the Second time that thou have called me to the Remembrance of these things.
First when I lost my Memory by the Conragion of the Body, and then by the
Dullness, and Stupidity which my Mind had contracted being oppressed with such a
weight of Immoderate Sorrow. Then she spoke thus: If thou look back to the
things that have been already Granted, it will not be long before thou shall
come to the Remembrance of that, which awhile since thou saydst that thou had
no Knowledge of. What quoth I? By what Rule, said she, is the World Governed? I
remember, quoth I, that I did confess my Ignorance of this: but though I do in
a manner foresee what thou art about to say, yet I desire to hear it for my
further Instruction. Thou did diliver thine Opinion, said she, but a little
before, that it could not be doubted in the least but that the World is
Governed by GOD. Yea, quoth I, and I am of the same mind now, and ever shall be
that this is most certain, and unquestionable: and by what Reasons I am induced
to this Judgment, I shall declare in a few words. This World consisting of so
Diverse, and Contrary Parts could never have been brought into One Form, if
there were not ONE who did Join together such Diverse things. And the Diversity
of their Natures, which are so Repugnant to one another, would Separate, and
Disunite them being Joined together, if there were not ONE, who did Hold
together the things, which He has United. For the Course of Nature could not
proceed in such certain, and never failing Order, neither could it make such a
show of well-disposed Motions, by Places, Times, Efficiency, or Operation,
Spaces, Qualities, if there were not ONE, who Being Himself Immutable did
Order, and Dispose this Variety of Changes. This (ONE) whatever it is, on which
All things Depend both as to their Being, and Motion, I Call GOD, which is a
Word used by All People. Then spoke she thus: Since thou have so deep a Sense of
these things, I suppose the remaining Part of my Labor is not great, to bring
thee Safe into Thine own Country, where thou shall Enjoy the only True, and
Perfect Happiness. But let us Reflect on those things, which we have already
Discust. Have we not Agreed upon this that Sufficiency is included in the
Nature of True Happiness: And that GOD is True Happiness it self. And
therefore, quoth she, He will not Need any Helps, or Instruments from Without
to Govern the World; for if He had Need of any thing He could not have Full,
and Perfect Happiness. It must be so, quoth I, as thou say. Therefore By
Himself Alone He Governs, and Disposes All things. It cannot be denied, quoth
I. But it has been proved that GOD is the Sovereign Good. I know it has, quoth
I. By the Sovereign Good then He Disposes, and Governs All things, since He
Governs All things By Himself, whom we have Acknowledged to be the Sovereign
Good, and He is as it were a certain Rule, and Method of Government, whereby
the Whole World is kept in Order. I most heartily Assent, quoth I: and a little
before I did foresee what thou wast about to say, though somewhat darkly. I
believe it, quoth she; for now, as I conceive, Thine Eyes are more Open to
discern the Truth. But what I shall now say is no less perspicuous. What, quoth
I? Since GOD, said she, is rightly believed to Govern All things By the Rule of
GOODNESS, and All things, as I have taught, have a Natural Bent, or Intention
to GOOD, can it be doubted but that they are Governed, as they Would
themselves, and being Made to Comply with their Governor, All the Motions they
have according to the Propensity of their Nature are no other, than the Results
of that Compliance. So it must needs be, quoth I: neither could it be thought
an Happy Government, if it were the Yoke of things Refractory, not the Safety
of things Tractable, and Obedient. There is Nothing then, which, following the
Course of Nature, can Endeavor to go Contrary to GOD. Nothing, said I. If any
thing should Endeavor it, quoth she, would it ever Prevail against Him, whom
we have granted by the Right of True Happiness to be Almighty? Nothing, quoth
I, could ever in the least Prevail against Him. Then, quoth she, there is not
any thing in Nature, which has either the Will, or the Power to Resist the
Sovereign Good. No surely, as I conceive. Then, said she, That is the Sovereign
Good, which Powerfully Governs, and Sweetly Disposes All things. Then said
I: How am I Delighted not only with the main Scope, and Drift of thine
Arguments, but even with the very words that thou usest, that at length Prating
Folly may be Abasht, and put to Silence. Thou have heard, quoth she, in Ovid
Lib. 2. Metamor. and Macrob. Lib. I. Saturnal.
Old Stories how the Giants endeavored to Invade Heaven, but even they, as it
was most meet, were thrown down by Benign Fortitude. But will thou that we
strike Arguments one against another, perhaps out of such a Conflict some
bright Spark of Truth will spring forth. Do as thou think fit, said I. No
man, said she, can ever doubt but that GOD is Almighty. No man, said I, that is
in his right wits. But there is Nothing, which He that is Almighty has not a
Power to Do. Nothing, said I. What has GOD a Power then to Do EVIL? No surely,
EVIL then, quoth she, is Nothing, viz. Has not any Proper Being or Nature,
since He who Can Do All things, Cannot Do EVIL. Do thou sport with me, said I,
making an Inextricable Labyrinth with the subtle ways of Thine Argumentation,
Entering now, where thou did Go forth, and then Going forth, where thou did
Enter; or do thou by these Intricate Reasonings show that there is a
Wonderful Circle in the Divine Simplicity? For a little before beginning with
True Happiness, thou did affirm it to be the Highest, or Sovereign Good,
which thou saydst was placed in the Most High GOD: And thou did Prove that
GOD is this Sovereign Good, and the only True, and Perfect Happiness: then
thou gave me this, as a Token of thy Bounty, That no man is Truly Happy, but
therewith he must be a GOD. Again thou did assert that the very Form of Good
is the Nature of GOD, and of True Happiness: and thou did show that ONE is
the very GOOD, which All things Naturally Desire: thou did also Demonstrate
that GOD Governs the Universe By the Rule of GOODNESS, and that All things
are Willingly Subject unto Him, and that EVIL has not any Nature Properly so
called: And these things thou did evince by such Arguments, whereof there were
none Extrinsecal to the Matter in hand, but one drawing Assent by the Connection
it has with another, all of them being founded in the Subject of our
Discourse. Then spoke she thus: We do not Sport, but we have performed a Task
of the greatest Importance, by the Gracious Assistance of GOD, whose Name we
did Invoke. For such is the Form of the Divine Substance, that It neither falls
into the Condition of things Without, nor does It admit any thing Without to
come into the same State with It self; but, as Parmenides says, (...), It
wheeles-about the Movable Circle of things, whilst It preserves It self in a
State Immovable. And if we have used such Arguments which were not fetched from
without, but lie within the compass of the Matter, of which we did Treat, there
is no cause that thou should Admire, since thou have received it from the
Testimony of Plato, that Words should be Akin to the Things, of which we
Discourse.

THE TWELFTH VERSE.
Philosophy exhorts to perseverance in contemplation and virtue.
O ever Blessed is He
Who once has learnt to See
The Fountain of All Good:
Blessed He, who has withstood
The Earth, and now obteins
True Freedom from her Chains.
When A Thracian Poet.
Orpheus's Wife was gone
To the Shades how did he Groan!
When he had made the Trees
To Dance in Companies
Whilst Doleful Notes he Played;
When he had Rivers made
To stand still: and the Hind
His side to the Lion Joined,
And Feared no Harm: the Hare
Did also cease to Fear
The Dog, by Music Tamed:
When His Breast was Enflamed
With all the Fires of Love;
Nor could those Soft Notes Move
Their Lord, and Mitigate
The Sense of his Hard Fate,
Which all things else or'ecame,
And did their Fierceness Tame,
He says Gods are Cruel,
And down he goes to Hell.
There fits he words to sounding Strings,
Whatever his Mother Taught he Sings.
He Sings in Doleful Strains
His own Hearts constant Pains,
And Grief-encreasing Love:
Thus Orpheus Hell does Move,
And does sweet Prayers repeat,
And those Dark Powers entreat.
Now A three-headed Dog, Porter of Hell.
Cerberus does gaze,
New Songs do Him amaze:
The Furies now shed Tears:
The With which he is tormented in hell for attempting to commit adultery with
June.
Wheel Ixion spares:
And Who killed his own son to entertain the Gods, and therefore is tormented
with hunger and thirst.
Tantalus the Stream
Forgets, and minds the Theme
Of Orpheus's Mournful Song:
That Ravenous Bird that hung
On wretched Who would have committed adultery with Latona.
Tityus, draws
The Liver with his Claws
No longer now, whilst he
Feeds on sweet Melody.
At length Hells cruel Lord
Some Pity does afford,
We Vanquished are, quoth He,
Let this Man's Wife go free,
From us he has Her won
With his Melodious Song:
But only let Her go
On this Condition, so
That he never turn his Eye
Till he see the Bright Sky.
"But Lovers never were kept in Awe:
"Love to Himselfe's the greatest Law.
Alas, when he had past
Hells deepest ways, at last
Orpheus cannot choose but See
His Dear Orpheus's Wife.
Euridice:
But that one Look did cost
Her Life: she is ever lost:
Well may he now Deplore,
He never shall see Her more.
To you belongs this Tale,
Who fain would leave the Vale
Of Constant Night, and find
The Daylight of the Mind.
For he that will Look back
To Hell, and his Pace slack,
Whatever Good he chose
This sight does make him Lose.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE Consolation of Philosophy.
The FIRST PROSE.
Boethius merveileth at the impunity and prosperity of evil men.
WHEN Philosophy had most sweetly warbled out this Song, reteining all the
while a Grave, and Venerable Countenance, then I, laboring still under a great
Distemper of mind, interrupted her, as she was about to say somewhat else. And,
O, said I, those things, which thy Speech bringing in the True Light, has
hitherto poured forth, appear to be no other than Divine, being Seen as they
are in themselves; and Irrefragable, as Demonstrated by Thine Arguments: and
such are those things, which thou have told me that though my Anxious
resentments of the Injuries I have received did lately put them out of my
Remembrance, yet I was not wholly Ignorant of them. But this is the greatest
cause of the Perplexity I am in, that whereas the Governor of All things is
Good, Evils should either be at all or that they should pass without their due
Punishment. How much Admiration this one thing deserves, I am Sure thou do
well consider. But there is a greater matter than this, that is joined with it;
for whilst Wickedness flourishes, and bears the sway, Virtue does not only
want it is Reward, but is trodden under foot by Base, and ungodly men, and in
the place of Villainy suffers the most grievous Punishment. That such
Transactions should be in His Kingdom who Knows All things, who Can Do All
things, and Wills nothing but what is Just, and Good, no man can sufficiently
either Admire, or Complain. Then said she: And indeed this would be a matter of
infinite Astonishment, and more horrible than all Monsters, if, as thou do
conceit, in the well-ordered House of so great a Master, Vessels of no worth
should be most carefully looked after, and the Precious be neglected, and
suffered to lie in the Dirt: but it is not so. For if those things, which were
concluded a little before be Fixed in thy Mind, thou shall Understand by His
Instructions, whose Kingdom we speak of, That Good men are always Powerful,
and Evil men are always Weak, and Contemptible; and that Vices are always
Punished, Virtues are always Rewarded; that All things that happen to Good
men, are Good for them, but that Mischiefs always betide the Wicked; and many
things of this nature, which will allay all thy Complaints, and establish thy
Mind in the most firm, and solid Apprehensions of Truth, and Goodness. And since
I have already shown thee, wherein True Happiness does consist, and thou have
learnt in Whom it is to be found, all things being run over, which I think
necessary to promise, I shall show thee the way that leads to Thine House.
And I shall fasten Wings to thy Soul, by which she may raise her self on
high, that all Perturbations, and Disorderly Thoughts being done away, with
these Wings, by my Conduct, in my Path, thou may be Carried Safe into Thine
own Country.

THE FIRST VERSE.
How Philosophy brings men to the contemplation of God.
FOr I have nimble Wings that soar
Above the Starry Skies,
Which when the Mind puts on, no more
Will she Earth's Treasures prize.
Beyond the Clouds she does Aspire,
Above the Air she bends Her Force,
And so transcends the Lofty Fire
Stirred by the Heavens Swift Course.
Then she Ascends the Starry Plain,
And runs with Phoebus bright:
Or follows the Tract of the Old Swain, Saturn.

And to His joins Her Light.
And wheresoever the Night looks Clear,
She runs among the Stars,
And when her fill she' has taken here,
She goes beyond Heavens Bars,
And on the Top of Ether Treads,
The Fields of Awful Light.
Here Sits He over Imperial Heads,
Who guides the World aright,
Who Vnmov'd Rules the nimble Sun;
Whose Power does All things sway:
If hither thou will come anon,
Recov'ring thy Lost Way,
I well remember't thou will say,
This is my Country Dear,
Hence I came, I Will stay Here.
And if thou shall be pleased to see
This Darkened World again,
Thou will find that stern Tyrants be
Themselves but Banished Men.
The SECOND PROSE.
That good men are powerful, and evil men weak.
THEN said I, O, how Great things do thou Promise! which I doubt not but thou
art Able to Perform. But see thou do not slacken and cool him, whom thou have
excited, and enflamed. In the first place then thou may easily understand
that Good men are always Powerful, that the Wicked are void of all Power: of
which Assertions one is proved by the other. For since Good, and Evil are
Contraries, if it be manifest that Good is Powerful, it is no less evident that
Evil is Feeble, and Impotent: but if the Frailty of Evil be made to appear,
the Strength and Firmness of Good cannot but be known likewise. That the Truth
of that I say may be most clearly and abundantly demonstrated, I shall go
sometimes this way, and sometimes that, in the pursuit of the Matter, I have
undertaken to treat of. There are Two things, wherein all the Effect of Humane
Actions does consist, to wit, Will, and Power, of which if one be wanting
nothing can be Done. For if the Will fail, no man Attempteth any thing: but if
Power be wanting, it is in vain to will any thing. So that if thou see any man
Willing to Get that, which he does not Get, thou can not doubt, but that he
wants the Ability to Obtein what he would have. It Is as clear, as the Sun,
quoth I. But can thou doubt but that he had Power, whom thou see to have
Effected what he Willed, and Designed? No. But what any man is Able to do, in
that he is Powerful: but what he is not Able to do, in that he is judged to be
Feeble, and Impotent. I confess it, quoth I. Do thou not Remember, quoth she,
that it has been already Proved, that All the Bent, or Intention of the Will of
Man, which is exercised in Diverse Studies, and Endeavors, tends unto True
Happiness? I well Remember, quoth I, that This has been Demonstrated. Do thou
Remember that True Happiness is the Sovereign Good, so that since True Happiness
is sought for by All men, Good must needs be Desired by them? I cannot be said
to Remember it, quoth I, because it is never out of my Mind. Have All men
therefore Good, and Bad one Intention, viz. To Attein to the Possession of
GOOD? It must needs follow, quoth I. But it is most certain that by getting of
GOOD, Men become Good. It Is certain. Do Good men therefore get that, which they
Desire? So it seems. But Evil men, if they could get the Good, that they
Desire would cease to be Evil. It Is true. Since therefore Both sorts of Men
Desire Good, but some Attein thereunto, others come short of it, it cannot be
doubted but that Good men are Powerful; but they that are Wicked are Feeble,
and Impotent. Whoever doubts of this, said she, is neither capable of
considering the Nature of Things, nor the Consequence of Reasons. Moreover said
she: If there be Two persons, who have one Purpose, or Design to Perform that
which their Nature requires: and one of them Performs his Intention; but the
other is not Able to execute that Natural Office, but takes some such course,
which is not Agreeable to Nature, whereby he does not Accomplish his Purpose,
but Imitates one that does Accomplish it: whether of these Two do thou judge
to be the more Able man? Though I conjecture, said I, what thou would be at,
yet I desire thou would speak it out more plainly. Will thou deny, said she,
that to Go is a Motion Natural to men? No, said I. And do thou doubt that
it is Natural to the Feet to perform that Office? Neither can I deny that. If
any one then should Go on his Feet, and another, who wants this Natural Office
of Feet, should endeavor to Go on his Hands, who of these might be rightly
judged to be the more Able man? Proceed, said I, for it is unquestionable, that
he who has a Power to perform those Actions, which Nature requires, has more
Strength than he, who is not Able so to do. But the Sovereign Good, which All
men Aim at, Good, and Bad, Good men Attein unto by the Natural Office of
Virtues: but the Wicked earnestly endeavor after this very Good by gratifying
their various Lusts, and unruly Affections, which is not the Office that Nature
requires us to perform, that we may Attein to the True Good. Do thou think
otherwise? No surely, said I: the Consequence also is very clear. For from what
I have granted, it must of necessity follow that Good men are Powerful, that
Wicked men are altogether Feeble, and Impotent. Thou do well, quoth she, thus
to run before me; and this, as Physicians are wont to hope, is a sign that
Nature gathers Strength, and begins to resist the Disease. But because I
perceive thee to be so Quick of Apprehension, I shall be sure to ply thee with
Arguments. See how Weak are all Vicious Persons, who cannot so much as Attein
to That, to which their Natural Intention leads, and in a manner compels them.
And what? if they were left destitute of this great, and almost irresistible
Assistance of Nature encouraging, and directing them? but consider, I say, how
great Impotency lend, wicked men labor under. For the things they seek for,
but are not able to obtein are of no small moment: but indeed they fail in
that matter, which is the Chiefest of All their Concerns, they miss the fruits
of all the Toil, and hard labor they undergo night, and day: in which the
Strength of Good men may easily be seen. For as thou would judge Him to be a
Most Able Footman, who Going on his Feet, should be Able to come at length to
that Place, Beyond which it is impossible that any one should Go: so thou must
of necessity judge Him, who has Attein'd to that GOOD, Beyond which it is
impossible that any one should extend his Desires, to be a Person Absolutely
Accomplished with the Greatest Strength, or Ability. From whence it is most
evident that whosoever are Wicked, the same are destitute of all manner of
Strength. For why do they leave Virtue, and follow Vice? is it because they are
Ignorant of the True Good? but what is more Feeble than Ignorance, or Spiritual
Blindness? Do they Know what they should follow, and endeavor after, but their
Lusts draw them aside some other way? thus they appear to be most Feeble
Creatures, who are so Unable to Resist their Vicious Inclinations. Do they
Knowingly, and Wilfully forsake that which is Good, and turn to the way of
Vice? But if so, they do not only cease to be Powerful, but they wholly
relinquish their True, and Proper Being. For they who thus forsake the common
End of All things that are, cease also to have their Being. Which perhaps will
seem to some to be very strange, that we should say that Evil, or Wicked men,
which are by far the greatest Number, should cease to Be. But so it is for
certain. For those, who are Evil men, I do not deny to be Evil men: but I
deny that they may Purely, and Simply be said be be Men. For as thou may say
that a Carcass is a Dead Man, but thou may not call it Simply, and Absolutely
a Man: so I shall grant that those, who are Addicted to Vice, are Evil men,
but I cannot acknowledge Absolutely that they are Men. For that Is, or has
it is True, and Proper Being, which reteins Order, and preserves it is Nature:
from which whatsoever does revolt, it relinquisheth it is Proper Being, which
lies in it is Nature. But Evil men thou will say have some kind of Power:
neither shall I deny it; but this their Power does not proceed from Strength,
but Imbecility: For they have the Power to Do Evil, which they would not
have, if they had the Effectual Power of Doing Good. Which Possibility does
plainly show that they have not any Power, Truly, and Properly so called. For
if Evil have not any Proper Being, or Nature, as we proved a little before,
since Wicked men have only the Power to Do Evil, it is manifest that they have
no True Power. It cannot be denied. And that thou may better understand what
kind of Power this is, we have determined a little before that there is nothing
more Powerful than the Sovereign Good. I know thou have, said I. But the Same (
Sovereign Good) Cannot Do that which is Evil. No surely. Will any one conceit,
said she, that Men Can Do All things? None, but such a one, who is out of his
wits. But they Can Do Evil. Would to God, said I, they had no such Power. Since
therefore He that Can Do nothing, but that which is Good, Can do All things;
but they Cannot Do All things, who Can Do Evil, it is manifest that their Power
is the less in as much as they are Able to Do Evil. Add hereunto that All True
Power is in the number of things that are to be Desired, and we have proved
that All things to be Desired are referred to Good, as to that wherein their
Perfection does consist. But the Possibility of Performing a Wicked Action
Cannot be referred to Good: therefore it is not to be Desired. But all True
Power is to be Desired. It Is manifest therefore that the Possibility of Doing
Evil is no True Power. Hence it appears that Good men are always Powerful,
that Wicked men are most Feeble, and Impotent. And the Truth of that Saying of
Plato cannot be doubted. That Wise men only Do what they Desire, but that the
Wicked Exercise their Lusts, but are never Able to Accomplish their Desires.
For they Do whatsoever their Lusts prompt them unto, whilst by those Courses,
whereby they gratify their Sensual Inclinations, they hope to Attein to that
Good which they Desire; but they never Attein thereunto, for it is impossible
that Villainy should Approach to True Happiness.

The SECOND VERSE.
Kings are not potent, if they be passionate.
THose Tyrants, which thou see on High
Thrones, Clothed with Robes of Majesty,
Their Guards Encompassing their Seats,
Whilst all their Looks are Silent Threats,
Their Proud Hearts swollen with causless Ire;
If they were stripped of their Attire,
Of their False Shows of Majesty,
These Sovereign Lords a man might see
To be themselves fast Bound with Chains,
That vex them with incessant Pains.
Dire Lechery (that Smiles, and Kills)
Their Cups with Sweet Wine Poisoned fills:
Wrath makes a Tempest in the Soul,
Unruly Thoughts, like Billows, roll:
Sometimes they sink in deep Despair,
Sometimes Hope throws them here, and there.
Thou see how such Fierce Tyrants be
Enslaved unto the Tyranny
Of Many Lords: what they would, they cannot do:
But where those Lords command, there must they go.
The THIRD PROSE.
That good men are not without reward, nor evil without punishments.
SEE thou then what Filth all Villainy walloweth in, and how great a Splendour
there is in True Virtue, and Integrity? In this it plainly appears that Good
men are always Rewarded, Evil men are always Tormented. For that, for
which any Action is Performed, seems to be the Reward of that same
Performance: as a Crown, or Garland, for which a man Runs, is proposed as a
Reward to him that Runs a Race. But we have proved Happiness is that very GOOD
for which All Actions are Performed: That GOOD therefore is the common Reward
that is proposed to All Humane Actions. But This cannot be kept from Good men.
For he may not any longer be called a Good man, who is not Partaker of this
Sovereign Good. Let the Wicked then Rage, a Wise, and Virtuous man keeps on his
Crown, and it Fades not away. For the Iniquity of Other men can never deprive
a Pious Soul of it is Proper Ornament. If he did Rejoice in what he has
Received from Without, this any other man, even he, who conferred it on him,
might deprive him of. But since it is conferred on him by that Goodness, which is
Within himself, he will never want his Reward, as long, as he continues to be
Good. Lastly since every Reward is therefore Desired because it is believed to
be Good, who will ever judge that he who Possesses the True Good can miss his
Reward? But what is this Reward? certainly the Fairest, and Greatest of All
Rewards. Remember the Corollary which I gave thee but a little before, and
gather in the full Proof of what I have said thus: Since the Sovereign Good is
True Happiness, it is manifest that All Good men even in this that they are Good
do become Truly Happy. But it has been concluded that those, who are Truly
Happy are Gods. Such therefore is the Reward of Good men, which shall not be
worn out by the longest Time, nor diminisht by any man's Power, nor defiled by
any man's Iniquity, viz. To become Gods. And since these things are so, what Wise
man can ever doubt of the Pains, and Anxieties that are employed in the nature
of All Wicked Actions. For since Good, and Evil, Punishment, and Reward are
Opposite, it must needs be that whatsoever we see in the Reward of Good, that
which is directly Contrary thereunto may be seen in the Punishment of Evil. As
Virtue therefore is the Reward of the Virtuous, so Vice and Impurity is the
Torment of the Wicked. But now whosoever suffers Punishment doubts not but that
he is oppressed with Evil. If therefore they would rightly Judge of themselves,
could it seem to them that they are free from Trouble, and Vexation, whom
Wickedness the greatest of all Evils does not only oppress, but Pierce through,
seizing, and Perverting all their Faculties? But Observe what Pains, and
Anxieties attend the Wicked, in opposition to what we have said of the True
Pleasure, and Satisfaction of those that are sincerely, and firmly Possessed of
True Goodness, and Virtue. For thou have been taught a little before, that
whatsoever Is, or has any Proper Being, is One, and that ONE is GOOD. The
Consequence of which is this, whatsoever has any Proper Being, that also is
Good. And thus whatsoever fails to be Good, cease to Be: whence it is
manifest that Evil men cease to Be, what they Were. But that they were Men is
shown by the Shape of an Humane Body, which still remains. Wherefore the Temper
of their Minds being Changed into such Evil Dispositions they have lost the
True Nature of Man. But since Goodness, and Piety only can Advance any one
beyond the Condition of Men, it must needs be that those whom Wickedness has
Degraded from their Humanity, should fall beneath the Merit, or Dignity of a
Rational Creature. Therefore whomsoever thou see Transformed by Vice, thou
may not any longer Esteem him, as a Man. Do thou see any one to commit
Rapine, being Enflamed with the Love of Riches? thou may say that he is a
Wolf. Is any one Fierce, and Unquiet, exercising his Tongue perpetually in
Brauls, and Contentious speeches? thou may compare him to a Dog. If he
delight in subtle Cheats, and Wiles, thou may compare him to a Fox. Is he
unable to suppress his Anger, breaking forth into the greatest Fury upon the
least provocation? let him be Judged to have the Soul of a Lion. Is he
exceeding Timorous, and ready to Fly, where there is not the least cause of
any Fear? let him be liken'd to the Heart. Is he Dull, and Slothful? he leads
the Life of an Ass. Is he light, and Inconstant, always changing his
Resolutions? he is like the Fowls of the Air. Does he Wallow in the Mire of
Filthy Lusts? he is taken with the Pleasure of a Dirty Sow. Thus it comes to
pass that whosoever having deserted all True Goodness, and Piety cease to be
a Man, since he cannot Attein to the Divine Condition, he is turned into a Beast.

The THIRD VERSE.
That vices are of greater force, than enchantments.
ULysses with his Friends Arrives
Unto the Isle, where Circe Dwelt:
With Cups Enchanted she receives
Her Guests, whose Power they quickly felt.
This Man is changed into a Bore:
A Lions Shape another takes:
A third, when he would fain Deplore
These Changes, his own Shape forsakes.
And now he does not Weep, but Howl:
One's Changed into a Tygress mild,
Such, as the Indians do Control,
As though 'twere not by nature Wild.
But Mercury commiserates
Ulysses, and him saves from harm:
Though for him also Circe waits
To plague him with her direful Charm.
Yet those that Sailed with Him sup
The Dregs of Her Enchanted Cup.
The New-Made Swine their Akorns Eat,
Estranged now from Their own Kind,
In Voice, in Body, and in Meat,
In all things else, except the Mind,
Which for this Monstrous Change does Grieve:
O feeble Charm, which though it can
Make Humane Shape the Shape receive
Of Beast, it cannot Change the Man.
The Life, and Vigor of Mankind
Is Inward in the Heaven-born Mind.
This Poison (Vice) is stronger far,
Man of Himself It quite deprives;
Although the Outward Man It spare
Men lose by It Their proper Lives.
The FOURTH PROSE.
Of the misery of wicked men.
BUT the Vulgar regards not these things. What then? shall we be like them,
whom we have demonstrated to be no other than a sort of Irrational Creatures?
What if any one having wholly lost his Sight, should forget that he had ever
seen any thing, and conceit that there was nothing wanting to him of Humane
Perfection, should we therefore judge those that retein their Sight to be Blind
likewise? For the Vulgar refuse their Assent to this also, which depends upon
as firm, and solid grounds, as any thing we have formerly demonstrated, viz.
That those Persons are more Miserable that Do an Injury, than those that Suffer
it. I would fain hear, said I, what grounds thou can show for this. Do thou
deny, quoth she, that every Wicked man is worthy of Punishment? No surely. But
it appears by many Reasons that they are Miserable, who are Wicked. It Is true,
said I. Whosoever then are worthy of Punishment, thou doubtest not but they are
Miserable. It cannot be denied, quoth I. If therefore thou did sit, as a
Judge, on whom would thou conceive that Punishment should be inflicted, on
him, who has Done, or on him who has Suffered an Injury? I doubt not, said I,
but that I should satisfy the Person Injured by the Grief of him, that has
done the Injury. The Injurious therefore would seem to be more Miserable, than
he, who has received the Injury. It follows indeed, said I. By this Reason
therefore and others of the like Importance, viz. that Vice and Impurity does
by it is own Nature make men Miserable, it is most evident that he who offers an
Injury, not he, who receives it, does thereby become Miserable. But now, quoth
she, our Advocates Act quite contrary to this. For they endeavor to move the
Pity, or Commiseration of the Judges toward those, who have Suffered some
Great Injury, whereas indeed they should be rather Pityed, who have contracted
the Guilt of being so Injurious: whom their Accusers should not be moved to
bring before the Judge by Wrath, and Indignation, but by a Generous Pity, and
Desire of their Welfare, as Sick folk are brought to the Physician, that by the
Infliction of External Punishment they may be Cured of their Inward Distempers.
And thus the Employment of those that Plead for Offenders would either totally
cease, or if it should be continued for the Good of Mankind, it would be turned
into the Form of an Accusation. The Wicked themselves if they could have but a
Glimpse of Virtue, which they have Forsaken, and could perceive that they
should be in some capacity of cleansing themselves from the Filth of their
Vices by receiving their due Punishment, their Pains being recompensed with the
obteining of True Goodness, and Piety, they would not esteem them to be the
Object of their Horror, and Aversation, and they would refuse the Assistance of
those men, that make Apologies for such who Deserve Punishment, and yield
themseles to be Disposed of according to the Pleasure of their Accusers, and of
the Judges. Whence it comes to pass that among Wise men there is no Place left
for Hatred. For who but an egregious Fool will Hate Good men? And it is also
against all Reason to Hate Wicked men. For if a Vicious, and Depraved Temper be
the Sickness of the Soul; since we judge those that are Sick in Body in no wise
to deserve our Hatred, but rather our Pity, much rather are they not to be
Hated, but Pityed, whose Minds are oppressed with Vice, and Impurity, a more
Cruel Distemper than any that can afflict the Body.

The FOURTH VERSE.
No man is to be hated, the good are to be loved, and the evil to be pityed.
WHy do you, Mortals, labor so
To Get your Deaths with your own Hands?
Although you would, you cannot go
From Fate: It Is Course no Power withstands.
Those, whom the Wild Beasts would Annoy,
And Tear both with their Teeth, and Claws,
Each other would with Swords Destroy.
Is It that they Differ in their Laws,
And Manners that they so Pursue
Each other? This we cannot Approve.
If thou will yield to All their Due:
The Wicked Pity, Good men Love.
The FIFTH PROSE.
Boethius complains, that prosperity and adversity are common both to good and
badd.
THEN said I. I see what Felicity is employed in the Nature of Good, and what
Misery in the Nature of Evil Actions. But in this Outward Estate about which
the Generality of men are so much concerned, it seems to me that there is
somewhat of Good, and somewhat of Evil. For no Wise man would choose rather to
be Banished, Poor, Disgraced, than to remain Safe in his own Country, Rich,
Honored, Powerful. For by such means Wisdom Acts her Part with greater
Renown, and with more Advantage to the World, the Happiness of those that are
in Authority being in a manner transfused into the People that are under them:
especially since Prisons, Laws, and all Legal Penalties, are Ordained for
those, that are Injurious. Therefore I am Astonished to see things thus turned
upside down, Good men lying under such Punishments, as are due to the Wicked,
the Rewards of Virtue being snatched away by those that have immerst themselves
in the deepest Vices. But I should less wonder if I did believe All things to
be huddled in Confusion by Chance, or Casualty. Now it increases my
Astonishment that GOD is the Governor of All things: since He often distributes
Ease, and Contentment to Good men, and Trouble, and Vexation to Wicked men; and
on the contrary much Hardship, and Affliction to Good men, and the greatest
Prosperity to the Wicked, unless there may be a Reason given for these things,
how does his Government differ any whit from Chance, or mere Casualtie? It Is no
wonder, said she, if any thing seem to be Disordered, and Confused, the Order
thereof being not discovered. But although thou do not understand the Cause of
this Management of the Universe, yet since it is Governed By Almighty GOODNESS,
thou may not doubt but that All things are Done for the Best.

The FIFTH VERSE.
Admiration cease, when the causes of things are known.
WHo knows not how Stars near the Poles do slide,
And how Boots his slow waine does guide,
Why he sets late, and does so early rise,
May wonder at the courses of the skies.
If the full Moon bereaved is of light
Infested with a darkness like to night,
An error straight through Vulgar minds does pass,
To ease her labou'ring light they beat on Braess:
But no one wonders why the Winds do blow,
Nor why hot Phoebus beams dissolve the snow,
These are well known, the other hidden lie,
And therefore more our hearts they terrify.
Those strange Events, which Time but seldom brings,
And the vain people count as sudden things,
If we our mind; from ignorance could free,
No longer would by us admired be.
The SIXTH PROSE.
Of providence and Fate, and why prosperity and adversity are common both to
good and bad.
IT IS right, said I. But since it is thy Task to unfold the hidden Causes of
things, and to Clear the Obscurest Truths; I pray thee Determine this matter:
and because this Strange thing is that, by which I am most disturbed, and
perplexed, Discourse thereof at large. Then Smiling a little she spoke thus: This
Inquiry is the most difficult of all, which will hardly be satisfied with any
thing that can be said in Answer thereunto. For the Matter is such that one
doubt being Cut of, many others Grow up like the Heads of the Snake Hydra:
neither will there be any end of these Doubts, and Scruples, unless they are
Burnt up with the most Lively Fire of an Ardent Mind. For here Questions are
wont to be made of the Simplicity of Providence, of the Series of Fate, of
sudden, and unexpected Accidents, of the Divine Knowledge, and Predestination,
of the Liberty of the Will: And of how great Weight such Questions are, Thou
thy self art not unsensible. But because the Knowing of these things is a part
of the Medicine which thy Distemper requires, although I am much straightened
with the shortness of Time, yet I shall endeavor to say somewhat in Answer to
the Deep Question thou have proposed. But though thou art much taken with the
sweet Harmony of our Verses, thou must defer this Pleasure a little while,
'till I shall have made a due, and orderly Contexture of such Reasons, as tend
to the Solution of thy Doubts. Do as thou think fit, said I. Then as if she
past to another Subject, thus she Discourst. The Generation of All things, and
All the Progress of Changeable Natures, and whatsoever has any kind of Motion,
receives it is Causes, Order, Forms from the Stability of the Divine Mind.
Which remaining Steadfast, and Immovable in the Hight of it is own Simplicity
does Assign a Manifold, and Variable Manner of Proceeding to the Affairs here
below. Which Manner of Proceeding, whilst it is Beheld in the Purity of the
Divine Intelligence, is called PROVIDENCE: but when it is referred to the things
that it Moves, and Disposes, the Ancients gave it the name of FATE. That
these Two do differ thus from one another, it will easily appear, if any man
shall consider the Importance of each of them. For Providence is that Divine
Reason seated in the SOVEREIGN LORD of the Whole Creation, which Disposes All
things: but Fate is that Disposition inhaerent in things Movable, by which
Providence Embraces them All at once, though they are Diverse, though they are
Infinite: But Fate puts them into their several Ranks, according to Motion,
Places, Forms, and Times: so that the Unfolding of the Order of things in
Time, being Simple, and Undivided in the Prospect of the Divine Mind, is called
Providence: but the same Unity, or Simplicity, being as it were Severed, and
Unfolded in the Successions of Time, is called Fate. Though these Two are
Diverse, yet one depends on the other. For the Order of Fate proceeds from the
Simplicity of Providence. For the Artificer perceiving in his Mind the Form, or
Fashion of the thing, he is about to Make, begins to Effect what he has
Contrived; and what he Saw all at once in his Mind, he Works out at Diverse
Times with his Hands: So GOD by Providence Disposes All things at once firmly,
and Unalterably: but by Fate these same things, which He has Disposed, He
Manageth in a Manifold, and Variable Manner. Whether therefore Fate be
exercised by certain Divine Spirits, Attending upon Providence, or by the whole
Course of Nature, or by the Motions of the Stars etc. Certainly it is manifest
that Providence is the Immovable, and Simple Form of things to be Done: but
that Fate is the Movable Connection, and Temporal Order of those things, which
Divine Simplicity has Ordained. Whence it comes to pass, that All things,
which are under Fate, are subject also to Providence; which Fate it self is
subject unto. But some that are under Providence are beyond the Compass of
Fate. Such are those things, which being Fixed, and Immovable by their Neerness
to the FIRST DIVINITY Transcend the Order of Fatal Alterations. For as of Orbs,
or Circles which turn themselves about the same Center, that which is Inmost
comes near to the Simplicity of the Center, or Middle-Point, and is as it were
the Center to the other Orbs, about which they are turned: but the Outmost, by
how much the farther it is from the Center, with so much the Larger Compass it
is Wheeled about; And if any Join it self to that Middle-point, it cease
from it is former Revolution: In like manner that which goes farther from the
FIRST MIND is more Entangled in the Cords of Fate; and by so much any thing is
at Liberty from Fate, by how much Nearer it Approaches to that Center of All
things. If so be that it constantly Adhere to the Firmness, and Stability of
the Supreme Mind, since it Moves not to, and fro, it keeps above the Necessity
of Fate. Therefore as Reasoning or Discourse is to the Intellect; as that which
is Produced to that which has Being of it self; Time to Aeternity; a Circle
to the Center: so is the Movable Series of Fate to the Stable Simplicity of
Providence. This Series of Fate Moves Heaven, and the Stars, Orders, and
Disposes the Elements in their Commixtures and Transmutations. The same
renews things that spring up, and dye away, by the wonted Courses of Seed,
and that which it Brings forth. This His meaning is not this, that men are
Fatally, and Irresistibly Inclined to their Actions, but that those Fortunes,
or Outward Events that befall them (as we use to speak) are Inevitably
Assigned to them by the Divine Providence, In the ways of Justice, and Mercy
Answerable to the Moral Goodness, or Pravity of their several Actions; (...).
Hierocles de Providentia, and Fato.
Binds together the Actions, and Fortunes of men with an Indissoluble Connection
of Causes: which, since they proceed from those Immovable Causes, must needs be
themselves also Immovable. For so are things Governed in the Best Manner, that
can be, if Simplicity remaining in the Divine Mind, gives out a Necessary, and
Unalterable Order of Causes; but this Order by it is own Incommutability keeps
all things Mutable within their several Ranks, and Conditions, which otherwise
would run into Confusion. Whence it comes to pass, that although to you, who
come short of the right Apprehension of Order, All things may seem to be turned
upside down, never the less this Manner of Proceeding Assigned to them by
Providence Directs them to the True Good. For even Wicked men themselves never
propose Evil, as the End of any of their Actions: who, as has been shown at
large, are turned out of the way by their own Wicked Error, but ORDER
Proceeding from the Center of the Sovereign Good makes not any man to Decline
from It Is own ORIGINAL. But, thou will say, what worse Confusion can there be
than this, that sometimes Adversity, and sometimes Prosperity should happen to
the Righteous, and also that the Wicked should sometimes Attein to that, which
they Desire, and be sometimes Oppressed with that which they would Avoid? what
then, do men show such perfect Strength of Judgment, and Integrity of Heart in
their Lives and Conversation, that those whom they Judge to be Righteous, or to
be Wicked must needs be such, as they esteem them to be? But we see the
Judgments of men Differ in nothing more than in this: and those who are
esteemed by some to deserve a Reward, are by others esteemed worthy of the
severest Punishment. But let us grant that any one could clearly Determine who
are Righteous, and who are Wicked: what then, would he be able to Discern the
Inmost Temper, and Constitution of Souls, as we use to express it, when we
speak of Bodies? For to one that understands it not, it is no less wonder; why
to some Healthy Bodies Sweet things are Agreeable, to others Bitter things: Why
some Diseases are Cured with soft, and gentle Medicines, others with those,
which are most sharp, and piercing: But it is no whit strange to the Physician
who searches into the state, and Condition of Bodies both in Health, and in
Sickness. And what is the Health of Souls but Virtue, or True Goodness? what
is their Sickness, but Vice? But who is there, that can either give that which
is Good for us, or drive away that which is Evil, but GOD, the Governor, and
Physician of Souls? who looking from the High Tower of his Providence Sees
what the Inward Condition of Every man does require, and Applies that which He
Sees to be Requisite, and Suitable to his Condition. Hence it is that the Order
of Fate is such Matter of wonder, and Astonishment to the World, viz. that
Ignorant Men cannot but be Amused at that which is Done by the Infinitely Wise
GOD. For that I may lightly touch at a few things, which Humane Reason is
somewhat capable of being exercised about, concerning the Divine DEPTH: As for
this man whom thou think to be most Observant of Law, and Equity, the
contrary is most Evident to Providence that Knows All things. And My Lucan
says that The Cause of the Conqueror was Pleasing to the GODS, but of the
Conquered to Cato. Whatsoever then thou may see at any time to be Done here
upon Earth, there is certainly a Right Order in the Things themselves; but
thine Opinion concerning them is Perverse, and Confused: But suppose there be
any one so syncerely Virtuous that he is both Acceptable to GOD, and Approved
of Men: yet, it may be, he wants a Courageous, and undanted Spirit: to whom if
any Adversity should happen, perhaps he will no longer take care to preserve
his Innocence, by which he could not retein his Fortune. Therefore the Wisdom
of the Divine Dispensation deals Gently with him, whom Adversity might incline
to Wickedness, that he may not be Affiicted, who is not Qualifyed to Endure
Affiiction. Another has Attein'd to the Perfection of All Virtue, an Holy
Person, Fully Partaking of the Divine Nature, the All-wise GOD Judges that it
would be contrary to the Rules of Justice, that this man should be touched with
any Adversity, so that He does not suffer such a man to be Affiicted even with
any Bodily Distempers. For as one, more Excellent than I, Says '(...). But
many times it comes to pass that the chief Management of things is by
Providence put into the Hands of Good men, that Abounding Wickedness may be
represt. To others the Supreme Wisdom, and Goodness distributeth a Medley of
Pleasing, and Bitter things According to the Temper and Disposition of their
Souls: some He Curbs, and Restrains least they grow Wanton by long Prosperity:
others He makes to suffer Hardship, that by the Use, and Exercise of Patience
they may be confirmed in All Virtue, and strength of Mind. Others are too
Fearful of that, which they are Able to Endure: others are too apt to make
light of that, which they are not Able to Endure. These men that they may Know
themselves He brings into Adversity. Some have purchac'd a Venerable Name in
this World at the Price of a Glorious Death. Some being Undanted in the
greatest Torments have given to others an Example of this Truth, that Virtue is
Invincible in any Calamity whatsoever: which how rightly, and Orderly it comes,
and how it tends to the Good of those, whom we see to labor under it, may not
be doubted. This also, that sometimes Sad things befall the Wicked, sometimes
they have the things that they Wish for, does proceed from the same Causes. No
man wonders at this, that Sad things should befall them, whom every one Judges
to deserve so Ill. Whose Punishments are a Terror to others that they may not
be guilty of the like Offenses, and they conduce to the Amendment of those,
upon whom they are Inflicted: But the Prosperity of the Wicked is a clear
Demonstration to those that Delight in Virtue, what they are to Judge of that
kind of Happiness which they see to Attend upon the Worst of men. And here I
conceive this also to be the Tendency of the Divine Dispensation, that some men
are Naturally so Headstrong, and Violent in their ways, that the want of Money
would excite them to commit the greatest Wickedness: Providence by distributing
Riches to such kind of Persons applies a Remedy to their Distemper. This man
observing his Conscience Defiled with all manner of Impurities, and comparing
Himself with His Fortune, is perhaps struck with a Fear least the Loss of that
should be extreme Grievous, the Enjoyment whereof is so Delightsome unto him:
therefore he will betake himself to a New Course of Life, and whilst he Fears
that his Fortune shall be Taken from him, he makes speed to Depart from his
Iniquity. Others are suddenly brought to their Deserved Ruin by the Prosperity
they have Abused. Some are permitted to have the Power of Inflicting Punishment
for the Exercise of Good men, and the Vexation of the Wicked. For as there is
no League between the Lovers of Virtue, and the Slaves of Vice; so these Slaves
of Vice can never Agree amongst themselves. How should it be otherwise? their
Consciences being torn in pieces by the Fury of their vile Affections, they
Dissent from Their own Minds, and often Do those things, which when they have
Done, they Determine that they ought not in any Case to have Done such things.
Whence it is that the Divine Providence has often produced this great Miracle,
that even Wicked men make other Wicked men to become Virtuous. For whilst some
Unrighteous Persons seem to themselves to suffer most Unjustly by those that
are as Bad as themselves, or Worse; Burning with Indignation against those, who
have dealt so Injuriouslly with them, they return to the ways of Virtue,
whilst they endeavor to render themselves Unlike to those, against whom they
have conceived such Hatred. For it is only the Power of the ALMIGHTY to which
Evils become Good, whilst by the use He makes of them He draws forth some
Good Effect. For a certain Order Embraces All things, so that whatsoever has
swerved from that Course, which by Providence was Primarily or Antecedently
Assigned unto it, it falls still within the Compass of Order, least any Chance,
or Temerity should have any thing to do in the Kingdom of Providence. (...).
The Wit of Man can never comprehend, nor his Eloquence Express all the
Contrivances of the Divine Work. Let it suffice that so much has been made
Known unto thee, that GOD, the Author of All Natures, so Orders, and
Disposes All things, as to Direct them to the True Good: whilst He makes those
things, which He has Produced to retein some Resemblance of Himself, by the
Series of Fatal Necessity He Banisheth All Evil out of His Dominions. Whence
it comes to pass that though Evil seems to Abound here upon Earth, if thou
do consider how All Events are Ordered, and Disposed by Providence, thou will
not find any thing that deserves the name of Evil. But I see thou art
over-burthen'd with the Weight of the Question, and wearied with the Prolixity
of the Reasons I have produced for the Solution of it, and that thou do
expect to be Refresht with the Sweetness of Verse. Take a Draught then to
strengthen thine Attention to that Part of my Discourse, which is yet behind.

THE SIXTH VERSE.
Philosophy praises Gods providence.
IF with Pure Thought thou will Descry
Jehovah's Jura.
Power, and Equity
Look up to Heaven Above.
There Natures League is kept: no Wars
Were ever heard of there: the Stars
Never broke the Bonds of Love.
Sols Fiery Chariot keeps it is Course,
Nor does it with ungoverned Force
Phaebes Cool Wain overthrow.
The Bear on High does never Desire
In the Deep Sea to plunge his Fire,
Though other Stars do so.
Vesper never fails to come at Night,
And Lucifer still brings Daylight,
In which All things Rejoice.
Thus Love keeps them in their Right Way:
Thus they all Discord drive away,
And all Tumultuous Noise.
This Peace the Elements does guide:
By This do Contraries abide
In their Alternate Force.
Drought yields to Moisture, Cold to Heat,
Fire strives the highest Place to get,
Earth downwards bends it is Course.
And by those Causes does the Spring
New Leaves, and Flowers most fragrant bring:
Hot Summer brings Ripe Corn:
Autumn's the Time for Apples: then
Black Winter brings the Cold again,
And makes large Showers return.
Both Nourishment this Temper gives,
And Birth, to every thing that Lives
In The Waters, or the Earth:
And it is the Same that Takes away
What was Brought forth: All things Decay,
That ever had their Birth.
Whilst the Creator Sits on High,
And Orders things both in the Sky,
And in this World below,
Almighty Lord, Eternal King,
The LAW, and JVDGE, the Boundless Spring,
From whence All Beings flow.
He stops those Motions, which He gave:
And settles things that fleet, and wave.
For if Right Motions He
Did not to Circlings turn again,
Their Being things would not retain,
But Vanish Instantly.
All things Partake of this Great Love,
That they may Rest in Good, they Move.
For nothing could them save
From Perishing, but Love that draws
Them back again to the First Cause
Which Being to them gave.
The SEVENTH PROSE.
All fortune is good.
DO thou not see now what is the Consequence of all that I have said. What,
quoth I? That Every Fortune, or Outward Condition [as it comes from GOD] is
Good. How is that, said I? observe what I say, quoth she, since Every Condition
being either Pleasing, or Grievous, comes for the Rewarding, or Exercising of
Good men; or else for the Punishing, or Reforming of the Wicked; whatsoever it
is, it must needs be Good, which, it is manifest, is the Instrument either of
the Divine Justice, or Mercy. The Reason thou give, said I, is most true: And
if I consider Providence, and Fate, which thou did show me a little while
since, this Conclusion is most Firm, and Irrefragable. But if thou will, let us
put it into the number of those Positions, which, as thou saydst a little
before are contrary to the Common Opinion. How so, quoth she? Because quoth I,
this speech is often in the Mouths of men, that some have Ill Fortune. Will thou therefore, said she, that we yield a little to the speeches of the Vulgar,
least we seem to go too far from the Use and Custom of Mankind. As thou
think fit, said I. Do thou not then judge that to be Good, which is
Profitable? yea surely, said I. But that Fortune, which either Exercises, or
Corrects is Profitable. True, said I. Therefore it is Good. Who can deny
that? But this belongs to them who being either Established in Virtue make War
with Affliction; or being Convinced of the Misery that comes on them by their
Vices Break forth into the way of Virtue. I cannot but Acknowledge this, said
I. But what, a Pleasing Condition, which is given as a Reward to Good men, do
the Vulgar esteem it to be Evil? In no wise: but, as it is, they judge it to
be Exceeding Good. What of the other Condition, which, since it is Sharp, and
Grievous, is for the Restraining of the Wicked by Just Punishment, do they
suppose it to be Good? Nay, quoth she, they judge it to be most Miserable. See
then, if following even the Opinion of the Vulgar we have not Proved somewhat
very contrary to the Common Opinion? what, said I? For from those things, said
she, which have been granted, it must of necessity be inferred that to Those who
have Attein'd to the Full Possession of Virtue, or have made some Progress
toward it, or are Really Inclined thereunto, Every Condition is Good; but to
Those, who remain in their Wickedness Every Condition is Exceeding Evil. This
is true, said I, though there is hardly any one, that dares Acknowledge it.
Wherefore, said she, A Wise man ought not to be Troubled, when he is to Fight
with Fortune, as it becomes not a Stout Soldier to be any way disturbed when
the Trumpet sounds an Alarm. For Hardship, and Difficulty is to the one an
Occasion of enlarging his Renown, to the other of improving his Wisdom. And
hence it is that True Goodness in the Hearts of Men is called VIRTUE, because
it is Virtue, Power, and Efficacy is such, that it can never be Overcome by any
Adversity. For being Placed on the Borders of Virtue, you are not come hither
to indulge to your vain Desires, and to lose your strength in the Enjoyment of
Sensual Pleasures; but here you must prepare your selves for a Fierce Encounter
with Both Fortunes, that you may not be Cast down by Adversity, nor Corrupted
by Prosperity. Stick to the Mean with all your Force. Whatsoever is beneath it,
or goes beyond it, implies a Contempt of True Happiness, gives you not any
Recompense for all your Labors. It Is put to your Choice, what kind of Fortune
you would rather have. For whatsoever seems to be Grievous, if it do not
Exercise, or Reform, it Punishes.

The SEVENTH VERSE.
Philosophy exhorts to labors.
HArd Labors made Hercules.
Alcides Great:
He did the Boasting Half men and half horses.
Centaurs Beat,
He Skinned the Lion strong, and Feirce
With his own (...). Theocrit. Idyll: 25.
Claws: His Arrows pierce
The Huge birds in the fen called Stymphalas in Arcadia.
Harpyes: He those Apples took,
And scorned the Furious Dragons Look:
He Chained Black The Dog Cerberus who had 3. heads.
Cerbe'rus: and it is said
That He Cursed Diomedes King of Thracia, who fedd his horses with man's flesh.
Diomedes made
Food for's own Horses; which he fed
With Men, whose guiltless Blood he shed.
He made Who had turned himself into the form of a Bull.
Achelous loath to show
His Head: His strong Arm A Serpent with 50. heads, which as fast as one was
cut off had two grew up in the place.
Hydra Slew:
The sone of Ne^tune, who by touching the earth recovered strength, and
therefore Hercules held him up, and so slew him.
Antaeus on the Sands He cast:
And made stout Vulcans son, who did cast out of his mouth fire and smoke.
Cacus breath his last.
He Killed the Wild Bore: and at length
High Atlas craved his Helpful Strength:
To bear up Heaven He labored hard,
And Heaven it self was His Reward.
Go, Valiant Men, where you are Led
By Great Examples: let no Dread
Or Sloth oppress your noble Breast:
Endure these Pains, you will come to Rest.
Over the Earth extend your Victorys,
And Heaven above shall be your Prize.
FINIS.
SYIA.
There Is no disturbance in the Heavens Above,
And Heavenly Souls Do nothing else, but Love:
No Anger, no Remorse, no Discontent
Can seize a Soul, that is Truly Innocent,
And Aims at naught, but that she may Combine
With All she finds, Like to Herself, Divine:
And, Seeing things in such Confusion hurled,
Does not Contend with, but Despise the World.
DIVINE SOLITUDE.
1.
Blessed Solitude! In Thee I found
The only Way to Cure the Wound
Of My Perplexed Heart.
Here I Escaped the Worlds loud Noise
That Drowns Our Blessed SAVIOVRS Voice
And makes Him to Depart.
2.
Whilst thus Retired I do Attend
To the Words of MY Eternal FRIEND,
How My Heart Leaps for Joy!
Love, and Rejoice says He, but Know
There Is no such thing, as Joy Below,
The Pleasures There Destroy.
3.
If Thou will Creatures Love, Be Sure
Thou Keep Thy Heart In Me Secure:
Know that I Am ALL IN ALL.
Then Whatsoever those Creatures prove,
Thou never shall Repent Thy Love,
Thy Hopes shall never Fall.
4.
Thou shall still have Thy Hearts Desire,
And Sit down by the ETHEREAL FIRE,
When e're Thy Heart grows Cold.
"But when I see a Friends Deep Grief,
"I Am Grieved, methinks, Beyond Relief,
"This Grief no words unfold.
5.
If Thy Grieved Friend will Love, says He,
In Dark Affliction He shall See
The Nearest Way to Bliss.
But If He Mind the Worlds fond Toys,
And take the Sport of Apes for Joys,
He Is not Thine, Thou 'rt not His.
6.
And thus we Talk, My LORD, and I:
So do I Live Above the Sky
Though Here I Move, and Breath.
And when this Vapor's gone, I shall
Enjoy to the Full My ALL IN ALL,
Not Dye, but Conquer Death.
HALLELUIA.

