AN ALARM BEAT UP IN SION, TO WAR AGAINST BABYLON. OR: THE SVMME OF A Sermon
upon Revelation 18. and the 6. Preached at Knowle, before the Honorable the
Committee of the County of Kent, on the 13. of June, Anno 1644. and by the said
Honorable Committee required to be published.

By Joseph Boden, Minister of Gods word, and Pastor of the Church at Ashford in
KENT.

Judges 20. Verse. 8. And all the people arose as one man saying, we will not
any of us go to his tent, neither will any of us turn into his house. Verse.
9. But now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah, we will go up
by lot against it. Verse. 10. And we will take ten men of an hundred throughout
all the tribes of Israel, and an hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out of
ten thousand, to fetch victual for the people, that they may do when they
come to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the folly that they have wrought
in Israel. Verse. 11. So all the men of Israel were gathered together against
the city, knit together as one man. LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Christopher
Meredith, at the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE HONORABLE THE Committee of the County of Kent, Joseph Boden wishes
wisdom from above to discern the frauds, and Christian resolution to resist
the undertakings of the Babylonish brood; together with a full recompense of
all your labors for the truth, both with an increase of grace and peace in
this world, and eternal glory in the world to come.
Honorable and Beloved;
AS this Sermon came from you into the world, so now it returns from the world
to you again: your approbation, and request (which is command enough)
encouraged me to, and in the publication; and your Patronage shall be all the
shelter I will seek, in case of detraction. I know the matter will displease
many, because here the Church of God is put upon acting against the
Antichristian Synagogue, and party: but I matter not these men's displeasure:
for I professedly seek, and press a disappointment of their design, and a
dissipation of them, so far as they drive it on wittingly, and willingly
against the Lord and his Christ. There is a generation of men who pretend daily
to pray (as they are taught) Thy kingdom come, and yet their plots and
endeavors, are against nothing more, then the coming of Christ his kingdom:
ihe enlightening of these men's eyes, or the binding of their hands is chiefly
aimed at, in the ensuing Discourse: for the present therefore I am resolved not
to weigh what they censure, because I look upon them either as blinded, or
wrong byased, and so neither a considerable party, nor indifferent Judges. If
the plainness of the style be either questioned, or blamed, my answer is
ready, it was chosen on purpose, that if any good do issue, upon either, the
preaching, or publishing of this piece, the praise may be of, and to God, not
the weak and unworthy Instrument. These notions found acceptance with you, in
the delivery, and therefore, though now they may want that life and vigor
which then they seemed to have, yet I hope (for Gods not man's sake) they will
find a proportionable acceptance with your eyes, to that of your ears: some
enlargements of particulars which you heard in the Pulpit are here possibly
omitted, for memory may fail me to gather up these fragments. All the
materials are faithfully laid together, only one use in the close, (as proper
to the point, and necessary for these times) is briefly added. If singularity
in point of offensive Arms be laid to my charge, I reply, that now men
generally call for, and enquire after news, and though this may seem to suit
these wanton wits in the publication, yet the Text cleares it, to be an old
truth; novell only in case of discovery. And the truth is, this best suits my
genius, for I wholly desire to be the disciple of old truths, and have no heart
to tamper or be taken with them, who affect to be masters of new heresies: as
there are too many (who through fair shows, but without doubt, for base ends)
do trouble the Church with their fond fancies, and new fangle toys, in these
turbulent times: but I leave them to their justly deserved censure, with the
Apostles wish, Gal. 5. 12.
would to God they were even cut off that trouble us, and to the Church of God
with the same Apostle I write thus. Romans 16. 17.
Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them that cause divisions, and offenses
contrary to the Doctrine which you have received; and avoid them. Oh! that
whilst we hunt the Psalm. ^0. 13.
Boares which out of the wood do waste the Lords vineyard, we would also have
an eye to endeavor the catching of those Cant. 2. 15
Foxes, those little Foxes, that spoil the vines. For though they come to us
in sheeps clothing, yet inwardly they are ravening wolves. Shortly thus, I see
not but malignants of the new garb in the Church, may do as much hurt as those
of the old one, in the State. Let me not for this be thought, an enemy to the
endeavored Reformation, it is the desire of my soul to see it up, in its full
beauty, and strength, only I would have old Babylon broken down, and all new
Babels kept down, that whiles we have voted, and vowed out bypast
superstition, we may not be obstructed, or burdened in the work of the Lord,
with new Iesuitic all plots of faction and schism, lest whiles men plead for
liberty, they turn Libertines: and after we have covenanted; sincerely,
really, and constantly, (through the grace of God) to endeavor, that the Lord
may be one, and his name one in three kingdoms, we be not found by every man's
seeking, and setting up himself, to neglect the keeping of the union of the
spirit in the bond of peace, and instead of advancing the Lord Jesus, to be the
beginners and fomentors of confusion, in all the Churches of Christ. But from
this occasional digression Ireturne. And if the needlesnesse, or tardinesse of
my pains in this subject, be laid in the way of that profit which might
otherwise be reaped hereby, I would remove this obstacle thus, although this be
but to write Iliads after Homer, yet all men either have not seen, or will not
make use of, or cannot understand the Labors of the more Learned: these
therefore may be useful to some, and I have my aim, if either for condiction,
or confirmation, I can benefit any, though they be the meanest of the people
for parts, or place. And I might have been sooner in print, if I durst have
thought any thing the Lord had imparted unto me, worth public view, or any
ways able to stand up against a general censure: but since you worthy
Patriots may not be nonsuited by him who is unexpressibly engaged to your, and
the Countries service, and that I must out and abroad, among the crowd of other
scriblers, these Lines through Gods mercy may prove in good time for kent,
(where they were bred, and for which, they are chiefly published,) although
otherwise they be too late for Christendom. I will not any longer stand or
stay to answer for my self, by a larger Apology, I must leave my defense in
other things to you most industrious Gentlemen; And I shall think my Lot very
strange, if you (who under God) have been the Saviors of the County, cannot
shelter me among so many, especially since (for desires to do good) I fear
not Tongue, if I can escape Gunshot. It will be happiness enough to me, most
faithful Patriots, if upon the review of these my unworthy Labors, your
spirits be heightened into action against the enemies of the truth; It is an
honorable service, for you to spend and to be spend in. And by quickening you
hereunto, my hope is to see you every way successful, under Boaz his
blessing, of doing worthily in Ephratah, and being famous in Bethlehem. In
confidence whereof I make bold to subscribe my self,

Your servant in all offices for Christ, against Antichrist. Joseph Boden.

AN ALARM BEAT UP IN SION TO WAR AGAINST BABYLON.
REVEL 18. 6. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double
according to her works: in the Cup which she has filled, fill to her double.
GODS work must not be done to the halves, it is not enough to the discharge
of duty, to do part of his will, and leave the rest unfulfilled: God has
most glory, and man the greatest comfort, when we observe not only part of,
but all his Commands: ye are my friends, if ye do not something, but
whatsoever I command you, Ioh. 15. 14. It will not be sufficient plea for us in
the last day, that we endeavored to secure our own souls, by hearkening to
Gods call, and coming out of Babylon our selves, that we be not partakers of
her sins, and that we receive not of her plagues, as it is given in charge to
the Church, verse. 4. of this Chap. but we must also (for our brethren, and
posterities sake) reward her even as she has rewarded us, and double unto her
according to her works, in the cup which she has filled we must fill to her
double; as it is in the words of my Text. It will not suffice that we come out
of Babylon, and be safe, but we must also drive Babylon out of the world, both
in name, and being, that others be not endangered, or defiled. To spend time in
clearing, that by Babylon (of whom this whole Chapter and Text treats) is meant
Rome in her state Papal, and Antichristian Apostasy, is altogether needless;
being abundantly affirmed, and proved in the labors of the godly learned; and
at this day scarce either questioned, or denied by any, but either Atheists, or
Papists, or both; in heart at least, if not in profession: I shall therefore
wave all discourse that way de industria, and take it pro confess^. The words
then in the general, contain in them a strict Iniunction, or Charge,
concerning the pouring out of fury, and indignation upon spiritual Babylon,
or Rome collapsed, and become Antichristian. The Objects of which Charge, or
the Instruments of this fury, we may see noted, verse. 4 as they are there
styled the people of God, and called upon to come out of her. And these (I say)
must power upon her fury and destruction. For by this treble precept of
rewarding her as she has rewarded you, of doubling unto her according unto her
works, in the Cup which she has filled, of filling to her double, none of any
reasonable capacity will once imagine, that she must berewarded with
Idolatry, for Idolatry, that she must be double unto in superstition, as she
has been superstitious, that in the Cup of error she must be filled too
double, as she has been erroneous. No, certainly the words do clearly
respect and enforce the ruin and utter overthrow of the Antichristian state of
Rome, whereunto the people of God must put their hands, and be helpful, for
the accomplishment of that Prophecy of the Angel, Babylon the great is fallen,
is fallen, as we have it verse. Quest.
2. Where (for clearing of my way) it will first be demanded, Why the holy
Ghost both in this Chapter, and all along the Prophecy points out the state of
Rome lapsed and Antichristian, by the name and title of Babylon, and not rather
by its own name Rome; that since this is a Revelation, we might have had it
plainly, and clearly revealed, who and what is meant?

To omit all other answers for the present, Answ.
I pitch upon this, as most satisfactorie. That the reason hereof is, because
God in this title or name, Babylon, had an especial aim, to hold out unto his
Church, all the enemies of his people, and opposers of his truth. For as
Babylon of old, was a great and grand Adversary to the Church and people of
God: so here, under that name, the holy Ghost sets forth unto us, the condition
and end of all spiritual Babylonians, they are bloody persecutors in their
times, and their end is to be destroyed. And that this is the reason, will
appear. For if the Lord had only said. Rome the great is fallen, is fallen;
and, reward Rome as she has rewarded you, it had been of too narrow a
compass for expression of the mind, and meaning of the holy Ghost, and the
instruction of the Church, what to think of, or how to deal with her enemies.
For if Rome in the letter had been once destroyed (which the Church might
possibly have attempted, and soon achieved) then all her other persecutors
would, and might have boasted themselves as out of the verge, and list of them
who by this Prophecy are noted, and voted to destruction. But here it is
apparent that they are all Babylonians, where ever they inhabit, and drink of
Romes poisoned and cruel Cup, of error and blood. And this is it the Church
must do to them, Reward them as they have rewarded her. She must double unto
them according to their works, in the Cup that they have filled, she must fill
to them double; pointing out rather what the Church must do against Romanists
then Rome, aiming equally at men of Romish spirits, as well as Romes Denisons
and Inhabitants: for not to dwell in Rome, but to have Rome dwell in us is a
sin, and the highway to destruction.

It is all one in this case, whether they be English or Italian Babylonians. So
that (as I conceive) the purpose of God in the Text, is the impartial cutting
down of Church enemies, as well those of the Romish party, and faction, as
Synagogue and profession. And hereupon, if these words be compared with those
of verse. 4. (as of necessity they must be referred thereto for the supply of
the sense) then without all further either scruple or curiosity, the
Doctrinall conclusion from the words as a Basis of that which ensues, will be
this.

It is the duty of all those who have escaped Romish corruption, The sum of
the Text in one general doctrine.
to be isntrumental for Babylons complete fall and ruin.

The witnesses I shall produce to prove, The first proof of the point in a
discovery of command from Jer. 50. 8 14, 15.
and make this good, are of unquestionable verity, and authority: as first,
you may see it cleared in a discovery of Command parallel to this in the Text,
Ier. 50. at the 8. verse. compared with the 14. and 15. For first in way of
escape the Lord enjoynes his people to remove out of the midst of Babylon, and
to go forth out of the Land of the Chaldeans, and be as the he-goats before
the flocks: and this certainly has an eye to the escaping from spiritual
filth, and pollution as well as the slaverie, and bondage of that captivity;
for it is one of the punishments which the Lord threatens the Church in the
wilderness withal, that if they do sin and commit wickedness against the
Lord, then the Lord will bring them and their King which they shall set over
them, unto a nation which neither they nor their fathers have known, and that
there they should serve other gods, wood and stone, Deuteronomy. 28. 36. and this we
see urged upon some as their most bitter portion in that land of Chaldea to
fall down and worship the golden Image which Nebuchadnezzar had set up, Dan.
3. 15. And to say truth, what is all corporal restraint, if compared with
temptations and provocations to spiritual uncleanness, which the people of
God shall certainly meet with, whiles they remain in the hands, and under the
power of Babylonians? so that (as I take it) the Lord chiefly aims at
Sionsridding, and acquitting her self from the sins of, and in Babylon: for
to what purpose is it, to be Jews in habitation, and Babylonians in opinion
and conversation? And we see clearly, that it cost the godly among the Jews a
great deal of care, and pains, to get the Congregations purged from those
sins the people brought back from Babylon, at their return out of that
captivity: as it is upon record, Nehem. 5. 6. 13. and 9. 38. and 13. 15. Well
then, suppose we the people of God ready, and prompt, both in respect of sin
and sorrow, to come up to God at his word, and make removes from* Babylon as he
here commands, is this all they have to do, may they rest content with this
their local and spiritual separation? No sure, there yet remains somewhat
more for them to do, they must look back upon Babylon: but not (as many times
they did upon Egypt) with hearkening after returns to her carnal
contentments. No, it must be to execute, and take vengeance, for all the sins
wherewith she has offended against the Lord, and all the sufferings she has
formerly laid upon his people: for so it is given in charge, Put your selves in
array against Babylon round about: all ye that bend the bow shoot at her, spare
no arrows, for she has sinned against the Lord: shoot against her round
about, she has given her hand: her foundations are fallen, her walls are
thrown down: for it is the vengeance of the Lord; take vengeance upon her, as
she has done, do unto her, as thus it follows in the before quoted 14, and
15. verse. of the 50. of Ier. Whiles the Church forsakes her in heart, she must
strenuously, and sedulously act against her with her hands: and thus of the
discovery or proof of the point from command.

But it will be said, The second proof of the point in a discovery of promise.
Icel 3. 7, 8.
this place of Jeremiah puts others upon acting against, and taking vengeance
upon Babylon as much, if not rather more, then Judah and the people of God, that
have been captives there, and now are delivered. For answer hereto, see the
point further confirmed, in a discovery of promise to the Church in special
for this purpose; Behold, I will raise them out of the place whither ye have
sold them, and will return your recompense upon your own head, and I will sell
your sons and your daughters into the hands of the children of Judah, and
they shall sell them to the Sabeant, to a people far off; for the Lord has
spoken it. Joel 3. 7, 8.

And yet if any stick at, The third proof of the point, in a discovery of
blessedness.
or question the truth of the point, see it once more, in a discovery of
blessings, or happiness, that shall fall upon those, who are isntrumental to
complete Babylons fall and mine. O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed:
Psalm. 137. 8, 9.
Happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have served us; Happy shall he
be, that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. Psalm. 137. 8,
9. And who are so fit to do this work, and share in this blessedness, as
they upon whom God has done his work, and blessed them with a discovery of,
and an escape from Babylons filth and pollutions?

But perhaps, 1. Reason to confirm the point, from Gods devoting of her to
ruin.
these testimonies are not convincing enough, some men must have reason to
confirm, and settle them, in the belief of such a doctrine as this; To
condescend to them therefore; see the point established and bottomed upon such
arguments as these. First, God has devoted Babylon to utter ruin and
destruction; it is that which the Lord has decreed and determined, yea he has
recorded it in the Courtrolls of heaven, that Babylon shall fall, and come down
to utter shame and confusion. And not only so, but he has made known, and
discovered his will and pleasure to the Church. For so he looks upon it, as a
known truth, and received principle of old; O daughter of Babylon which art to
be destroyed, Psalm. 137. 8. the Church makes no question, but it shall be, and
the truth is, we need not doubt it. For the motions and counsels of Gods mind
continue still, and are stable without change, or variation; and this is his
will concerning Babylon, both literal and spiritual, (so far as can be
known by his word) that it shall utterly perish and come to naught. Isaiah 13.
19, 20, 21, 22. And great Babylon came in remembrance before God to give unto
her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath, Revel. 16. 19. And a
mighty Angel took up a stone, like a great millstone; and cast it into the
sea, saying, Thus, with violence, shall that great city Babylon be thrown
down, and shall be found no more at all. Revel. 18. 21.

I would draw up this into form of an Argument thus. That which God has
determined and made known to his Church in his word concerning the ruin of
Babylon, it behooves all those who have escaped Romish corruption to be
isntrumental for the accomplishing and bringing to pass.

But God has determined, and in his word made it known to his Church, that
Babylon shall fall and come to utter ruin, and that by the Church. Ergo.

The minor proposition is clear, from that which is above said, and the major
cannot be denied, except men will conceive and plead it lawful for them,
either to go against, or come short of Gods will revealed to them in his word.
I shall end this reason in this proposition.

That as the unbeleeving Jews, through ignorance and unbelief, did perform
Gods determinate counsel and will, in putting to death the Lord Jesus Christ,
the Lord of life and glory; so it behooves the believing Gentiles, through faith
and knowledge, to perform Gods determinate counsel, and will, in the utter
overthrowing of Antichrist, that man of sin and son of perdition, with all
his glory and pomp, that they may descend with shame and sorrow into
everlasting infamy and oblivion.

Secondly, 2. Reason from Gods precedence or going before us in the work.
we have not only Gods vote, but his work to argue from, in this case; for he
goes before us, and begins to his people in this business of Babylons fall and
ruin; so that it is no shame for us to follow; nay, it is a sin, if we do
not, when we have such a leader. Now the Lord professes of himself, with a
note of observation and remembrance; Behold, I am against thee, oh thou most
proud, says the Lord of hosts, for the day is come, and the time that I will
visit thee, Ier. 50. 31. And what will be the conclusion or upshot of this
visitation? A very bitter and intolerable end to Babylon, for so it follows,
verse. 32. And the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him
up: and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all round
about him. The Lord will make an end of all, he will leave her neither name nor
srup. Yea, the Lord is yet more full and clear in this particular, for if the
Church (in remembrance of the wrong Babylon has done her) complain to God,
and tell him, Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon has devoured me, he has
crushed me, he has made me an empty vessel: he has swallowed me up like a
Dragon, he has filled his belly with my delicates, he has cast me out; The
violence done to me and to my flesh, be upon Babylon, shall the Inhabitant of
Sion say, and my blood upon the Inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.
The answer then of the Lord is this, for the comfort and refreshment of his
people; Therefore thus says the Lord; Behold, I will plead thy cause, and take
vengeance for thee, and I will dry up her sea, and make her springs dry, non of
her defenses shall be a security for her, when the Lord on Sions behalf comes
against her. And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwelling place for Dragons, an
astonishment, and an hissing without an inhabitant. Here is the Lord doing, and
doing to purpose, in way of avenging Sion upon Babylon, good reason therefore
it is, that Sion should be up and acting, seeing the Lord is not only with
her, but before her in the work, even to the making of Babylons fall complete
and full. For as we have heard before, Ier. 51. 34, 35, 36, 37. So the Lord
goes on, further to note what he will do, verse. 57. I will make drunk her
princes, and wise men, her captains, and her rulers, and her mighty men, and
they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the King, whose name
is the Lord of hosts. It is no good sign of a good soldier to shrink back
and take to his heels when his captain is valiant in the battle. It were a
most reproachful thing to the people of God, if they should faint, be cowardly
and give out in acting for Babylons complete fall and ruin, when they have a
King to lead them, a king who wants neither counsel, strength, or means to
defeat and conquer his enemies. For his name is the Lord of hosts.

But thirdly, 3. Reason from the end of escaping Romish pollutions.
this is the end why the people of God are fetched out of, and delivered from
corruptions; that there may be some meetly qualified, disposed and fitted to
work her fall and ruin? we cannot think that God has caused light to arise
out of obscurity, that there should be no acting against the children of the
night and darkness. If he have discovered unto us the filthiness of the
whore, it is that we may hate her, and burn her flesh with fire, and give her
blood to drink. It is no wonder, that our forefathers hands were bound, and
that they did little, or nothing against the Beast and the Babylonians: for
their eyes were blinded, they were in the dark, and could not see to work,
much less to fight. But that we having clear visions, and full discoveries
made of the Beast and her abominations, should sit still, be careless, and
suffer her for ever to play her beastly prancks, it is a most notorious shame
and stain unto us; true fire has its heat, as well as its light, and true
grace does not only enlighten, but also ennoble our spirits: it does not only
make us to know, but to do the will of God. It puts us upon action, it cannot
be otherwise, but that where the love and life of God is, there will be working
and endeavoring, to ruin and bring under all the enemies, and opposers
thereof, as well those open, and in the view of the world, as those more
secret, and shut up in the heart of a Christian. We have the true and saving
knowledge of Christ, that we may be the more quickened, and encouraged to act
against, and to bring down Antichrist. It is a shame not to do Gods work that
he has designed us unto; especially, when he affords us daylight to accomplish
it in. Our light is lent us, that the king and kingdom of darkness may be
trodden down, not only amongst our selves, but where ever he has subjected the
souls of men to Babylonish thraldom and slavery. For though we cannot give
others light, yet we may, we must endeavor their liberty.

But fourthly, 4. Reason form the prayers of Gods people.
I shall press the point, by an argument taken from the prayers of Gods
people; It is the duty of all them who have escaped Romish pollution, to be
isntrumental for Babylons complete fall and ruin; that so (as far as in
them lies) they may speed, and hasten an answer to their own prayers,
concerning her fall and ruin, when their spirits are stirred up, to act
toward the accomplishment of their own desires, and requests. The men of
Israel are beaten before the Inhabitants of Ai; the cursed Canaanites can both
repulse, and kill Israelites; the reason is (though not then known) because
there is an accursed thing in the camp; Joshua betakes himself to the old and
sure way; the soldiers fall before their enemies in battle, the Commander
falls down before his God in prayer, (Joshua 7. 5, 6.) he enquires after the
cause, and reasons out the case with his God; and this is good so far: but
this is not enough, there must be some what more then prayers, to set all right
again; Joshua must up, and act, he must find out, and put out of the Camp the
accursed Achan, the troubler of Israel: So we and our forefathers have prayed,
and do pray, again and again, for the ruin of Rome; have not we like those
souls under the Altar, flaine for the word of God, and for the testimony which
they hold, cried with a loud voice, saying, How long o Lord, holy and true,
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?
Revel. 6. 9, 10. But what can prayers do? it is confessed, they are of great
prevalencie with God, but for all our prayers, enemies are enemies still,
Babylonians are Babylonians still, Antichristians are Antichristians still, men
are implacable, inexorable in their evils still; especially, those they act
against the Church, and people of God. To our prayers therefore we must join,
and add our spirits, and let it appear, that our prayers have so had power
with God, as to encourage our hearts and hands to war against Babylon. We
make our prayers to God, that he would avenge us of our enemies, yea says the
Lord, I will, but you must help to avenge your selves, you would have Babylon
down, you shall, it shall be so; your desires and prayers are granted, only
you must venture and hazard a little blood, let us see, can you spare a life,
that Babylonians may die, I will do my part, but I will have my people to do
theirs also, put your hands to the work, and I will not pull back mine, reward
her as she has rewarded you, if you will have me to do your will in heaven,
do you my will on earth, my people and I are both of a mind, we would have
Babylon brought down, and totally routed, and ruined, only here is the
difference, they would have me to do all, and I will have them to do some.
Let them but up and act, and it shall soon be seen, that the Lord is their help.

Again lastly, 5. Reason from the engagements that lie upon the people of God
to this service.
I shall clearly confirm the point from the consideration of those
engagements, that lie upon the people of God to be active in rewarding Babylon
as she has rewarded them, in doubling to her according to her works, in the
cup that she has filled of filling her double: and the obligements are many,
but these shall serve at present.

An obligement of profession is upon them, 1. Engagement.
they publish to the world, that they are the servants and soldiers of the
Lamb, and therefore they must bestirre themselves, that their Lord may
overcome; they must not only enter and list themselves, take pay, we are their
colors, and live upon the provision of the camp, but they must play the men
and fight also. It is observable, Revel. 17. 14. that those who were with the
Lamb (when he makes war with the ten horns, that receive power as kings at
one hour with the Beast) were called, and chosen, and faithful* this is the
commendation of a soldier indeed, not only to be called, and chosen, but that
also, in all, and above all, he be found faithful. and our fidelity to Christ
cannot more be seen, or better exercised, then when not only as men, but
Christians also, we act valiantly and constantly against the Antichristian
brood in the world, who wage war against our King and General Christ.

They have assurance that in the blood of the Lamb they shall overcome, 2.
Engagement.
Revel. 12. 11. My brethren, who dares or can be a coward, that has it
ascertained unto him, upon unquestionable warrantie, that without doubt, he
shall get the better and overcome in the battle? that whether he kill or be
killed, he shall be looked upon and honored as a conqueror? yea, certainly he
shall triumph and see his captivity led captive. And this is the condition of
all the faithful soldiers in the Lambs war against the Beast and his
party. For there is that blood already shed, that has overcome them all for
us. Suppose those we are to encounter be kings, their strength is broken,
crushed, and made weak, we have our feet upon their necks, whiles we go forth
to the war.

Our Joshua has conquered, and we go after him only to take the spoil, and
triumph. For he is king of kings, and Lord of lords, Rev. 17. 14. the field is
fought, and won, we only go forth to fetch in the trophies of victory.

We have comfortable and abundant experience of and from the people of God, 3.
Engagement.
who in this business of rewarding Babylon as she has rewarded them, have out
of small beginnings come up to great and honorable achievements: Time would
fail me to relate many instance of former days, do but read over Gods
dealings, with his Church in these seven last years within the compass and
confines of Great BRITAIN, and tell me whether there be not experience upon
experience herein, even to no less then wonders and miracles. Scotland weak,
and poor, animated into a Covenant to stand out in this work, against all
thwarts, plots, armies, men, and devils I had wel-nigh said. In England God
using means that his banished be not expelled from him; the righteous brought
out of trouble; and the wicked coming in their stead. Courts full of vexation,
if not injustice, tumbled down into their first principles of non entitie. In
wars for the most part the Parliament successful, or not utterly destroyed,
able still to do something for God and his cause, even to the envy of the
adversary. And in the beginnings of reformation, more successful and
blessed, then in formerly expected periods. We would heretofore have thought
our selves happy, to have ended where we now think there is scarce a
beginning. But to come to Kent, for whom, and with whom I have to do in this
service, how were we (unworthy) prospered in subduing (not over a twelve-moneth
since) a desperate insurrection, without either skill, or help almost in any,
but our God? who till a considerable number of faithful ones were gathered,
Great rain at the time of the rising in Kent.
and till the heart and strength of the wicked, was wel-neare broken and
scattered, continued his rain, of love to his people, but of wrath and
confusion to his enemies: and has twice since then, defended us from the
invasions of cruel and bloud-thirstie men. Oh that we could never forget these
mercies, to serve God, according to the engagements they lay upon us, and that
here we could (as David from remembrance of the Lion, and the Bear) gather
heart to act further and further against the brood of babylonians, because we
have cause to believe, that he who delivered us from so great deaths, and does
deliver us, will also in Christ Jesus deliver us to and in the end.

The continued darings, 4. Engagement.
challengings, and provocations of the Antichristian party. For besides their
wondering after, and worshipping of the beast, saying, Who is like unto the
beast, who is able to make war with him? Revel. 13. 4. have they not gathered
together in Arms, and Armies against the Lord and against his Christ? Nay, are
they not daily more and more mad, and desperate in their mischief conceived
against the Church? Do they not hourly beat up their Alarmes, and bid
defiance to the people of the most High? Do they not rob, spoil, and plunder
all where ever they come? and are these things, with many more of the like
nature, any other, then so many callings out of the godly, and well-affected,
to take up their Arms, draw and use their swords in the Lambs cause against
the Babylonian beasts, and beastly Babylonians? Not that I would encourage any
man to Duel it, in his own avengement, or for his private honor, (for that
argues baseness of spirit, and begets a blot with all truly noble and
generous ones) I would hese have every Christian to stand upon his reputation,
and after and amidst so many and so proud challengings, not to discover
pusillanimous and ignoble spirits. What has Antichrist done for them they dare
be so bold? and what has not Christ done for us, that we should now in these
days of darings be dastardly, hen-hearted and effeminate?

But enough for confirmation, 1. Use.
the point would be applied, and may first inform us who and what manner of
men they are, whom we must look upon, and expect to be most active, and
isntrumental against the Antichristian party, viz. Those that either have not
drunk of, or else have vomited up, the wine of Romes fornications: whether we
respect her Cup of, first, Idolatry, or secondly, Liberty: to hamper men in
the bonds of Idolatrous and superstitious worship, and to enlarge them in the
way of licentious profaneness: it is enough, if Satan can make men zealous
according to his principles of religion and devotion, although they be most
remiss and careless in the things of Gods commandments: these men are so
ensnared and fettered, as that it is their very death, to part with their
bands, the gyves are so fastened upon their hearts, and hands, that there is no
expecting any thing in way of Sious, enlargement from them.

Wonder not to see men of this world slow to a war against 2. Use.
For this were to act against, first, their own interest, for here they have
their portion, Psalm. 17. 14. the creature is the total stay and support of
their hearts: it is not possible that these shall do any thing in a war
against Antichrist, but thoughts presently arise, of the givings out, and
emptyings of their God: their good, is in the enjoyment of earthly supports;
let these be called for and taken away, and their heart is down, they give up
all as lost, because their goods are called for, they instantly conclude their
God is gone; they know no other, and therefore they can do no better.

Revel. 18. 19. Alas, alas, that great City, wherein were made rich all that
had ships in the sea, by reason of her costlinesse; for in one hour she is
made desolate. Let it not trouble us that great Doctors, and profane Proctors
with etc. do not act against, but for Antichrist: their interest engages
them, and they must be all true and faithful to their base and carnal ends.
Their ships are forth in a voyage for lust, and lucre, and they would not for a
world they should miss of their freight, or perish in their adventure for
trading and commerce with Babylon: the truth is, selfe-seekers are no fit men
to act against Babylonians.

Hence we have a discovery of the reason, 3. Use.
why the Antichristian state stands so long, and strong in the world. And that
is because the people of God generally, and for the most part have done but one
half of their duty, if so much, against Babylon. We should have used the
sword, and the spear, as well as the pen, and the pulpit, in seeking her
demolishment and fall; we should have had battles fought, as well as books
written; she should have been disheartened, as well as discovered; we should
have dashed in pieces her carnal, as well as her spiritual props. We should
have overthrown her towers, as well as her tenets. We ought to have discharged
our ca^nons, as well as our consciences against her. We should have used our
arms as much, nay more, then our arguments against her. For these would have
overcome, when those could not persuade. We should have dispatched, and not
disputed her out of the world: we have not done all our work, and why should
we expect all our wages in the fall of Babylon?

But is not this a piece of strange, and harsh, if not false doctrine? may some
men say. Shall we from the pulpit persuade men to use their arms, and that to
the utter destruction and ruin of others? I know it will be thus objected, but
what of that? I matter not the murmurings, or mutterings of men, so long as I
have a warrant from the word to back me and bear me out. And therefore here,

Fourthly, the people of God have a commission not only for a defensive, 4.
Use.
but an offensive Militia, and posture of War. I know many have taken great
pains, and to good purpose, to prove it lawful, in the present cause of God,
the kingdom, and Parliament to take up and make use of Arms, in the defense
of Religion, the Church, and the truths of God therein: but by the light of my
Text and Doctrine, I shall make bold to go one step further, and not only to
preach, but press the Saints to put on, keep on, and use manfully weapons of
offense against the brats of Babylon. And I shall hence and here boldly
affirm, that he who now startles and staggereth, delayeth, and refuses, with
the Parliament and their party, to bear and use Arms, against the Prelates,
Papists, and Atheists, with all the fry of Antichristian factors and panders,
is no other then a rebel and traitor against God. For let these men cry up as
much as they can, and with as wide and loud a mouth as they are able, the
Protestant, I am sure they have never known or been acquainted with the
Christian Religion. For to forbear, or be merciful to these Babylonians, is
both injustice and cruelty, to the Church, our selves, and posterity.

Deuteronomy. 13. per totum.

But you will say, Object.
we are referred to the doctrine of Moses and the Old Testament for proof in
this case; and that concerns not our times, and the state of the Church under
the Gospel.

But first: Answ.
I am glad that it is acknowledged for a piece







in their prevailings has been too cruel to the Church, and the Church on
the contrary has been too favorable and merciful unto them; as experience
teaches both to our sorrow and sufferings.

Lenity and mercy moves not, they are not one jot the

By sparing these, men are most cruel to themselves: for Ahab, spare Benhadad
under notions of brotherhood, the reward shall be, that our lives shall go for
those we spare, and their charge (in the day of advantage) shall be like the
Assyrian Kings; Fight neither with small nor great, but with the King of
Israel. With none but the godly party, that now scruples and boggles at the
destroying of those, that cannot, shall not, avoid determined indignation.

And as for posterity, they may have cause to sit down

But must we put men to death for their religion only, Object.
because they are Papists?

The objection in these times is most frivolous. Answ.
For thou art not hereby put upon killing them for what they profess, but for
what they practice; not for their opinions, but for their persecutions; not for
what they think, but for that they act: for so says the Text, reward her, as
she has rewarded you; and truly my sentence is, that God arms them with
courage, strength, and weapons against his people, because heretofore, and now
also, they have and do find too much favor at our hands. For if we will not
do Gods will upon his enemies, he can give them strength, and heart to execute
his will upon us and ours, for this our present enmity. For we are no other
then Gods enemies, whiles by a base neutralitie and parcimonie, we declare our
selves Malignants friends.

Hence we may learn, 5. Use.
how little good to expect from treaties of peace, accommodations, and
overtures for pacification, with the enemies of our Church and State, the
Babylonish brood that now is gone forth in battle against the godly party
throughout these Kingdoms. Surely nothing that is worth calling good, nothing
that we can rightly name a child of desires and delight. I speak not this to
be wise above measure; or to preoccupate the results of their counsels, who sit
at the Stern, and know best, which way to steare the Ship: yet if I were in
another Auditory (as one that I hope has obtained mercy to be faithful) I
should in this case be very large; only, for the present I give these reasons
why the people of God must look for no good this way.



sake, Isa. 54. 15. Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me:
Whosoever shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake.
Certainly God has not suffered them thus to combine into a beesome, to sweep
and purge the Church, that afterward they may make conditions of peace, and
sit down safely, to enjoy the good of that land, they have thus barbarously
robbed and spoiled.

It is cross to their deserts, they have merited a Cup of blood, and why
should they not have their due? in point of Revel. 16. 6. they have not merited
peace to themselves, that have broken out in a time of peace, into war
against the Lord and his Christ's.

Pacifications are cross to our duties: for I pray God it be

It is no small discourtesie to after ages, to neglect the occasion Psalm. 120.
7. I am for peace, but when I speak they are for war.

Their Treaties are not for us, but themselves, either to get but war was in
his heart; his words were softer then oil, yet were they drawn swords, Psalm.
55. 21.

Hence then, 6. Use.
since the people of God do know their Masters will, let them be persuaded to
do it, that they may be blessed in so doing.

But how must we in this business do our Masters will, Quest.
in what measure, and with what proportion?

My Text is your guide and standard, Answ.
here is the model and line of your work. Suspension for suspension,
degradation for degradation, deprivation for deprivation, imprisonment for
imprisonment, banishment for banishment, sequestration for sequestration,
spoiling for spoiling, blood for blood; nay double unto her according to her
works, faith my Text. If they have illegally troubled the people of God, before
a Prelaticall high Commission, (high only in the committing of iniquity) let
them have legal censures for all their mischiefs before the Parliament or
other Courts of Justice. If they have cut off Gods peoples ears, I see no
reason, but by this rule, we may warrantably cut off their heads. And sure I
am, if this law of like for like, be firm and good, (as it must needs be, if
divine authority be sufficient to back and make it so) then there is no
reason, why ere a Prelaticall priest of them all, should be a Pastor to Gods
people. For they did what they could that none of the Ministers of the Lord
should feed or lead his redeemed ones, why then should they lead any of the
flock that drove away the Shepherds? But because men are generally backward
to act fully and to purpose, in this business of bringing Babylon to a
complete fall and ruin; I shall yet prosecute this exhortation with hinting.





And first for Hindrances, take these, as in serious observation, they have
been presented to my thoughts, and may possibly serve to character, and set out
to thine own view, the inward state, and temper of thy heart.

heart, and that under a double notion or consideration.

First, want of pity and compassion to our brethren. We do not remember those
that are in bonds as bound with them, and them that are in adversity as being
our selves also in the body. Heb. 13. 3. we think not upon mangled Christians;
in their members and estates, upon wives defiled, maids ravished, husbandlesse
windows, fatherless infants, whole towns both Northward, and Westward
plundered and dispoyled, Congregations deprived of godly Ministers, whole
prisons filled with precious Saints, and there reproached and abused; but why
should I here proceed? for if we would but let our hearts look upon decay of
trade, disappointment of our hopes, and the general exhausting of the
treasure, and lessoning of the strength and honor of the Nation, and all this
occasioned by the plots, and practice of the Babylonians, how could we as men,
as Christians, as Protestants, as English men, as men of Kent, sitstill with
our hands bound? but here is the answer and reason, our hearts are bound
through want of commiseration, and how then can our hands be loose to the
Churches help? an imprisoned heart, cannot have an enlarged hand.

Secondly, in sensual security, or rather senseless stupiditie. We cannot,
we will not be persuaded, that the cup of trembling, and blood shall pass over
unto us: the hearts of many men have said and do say, with those sinners of
old, Isa. 28. 15. We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at
an agreement, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not
come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid
our selves. When men can bless themselves under the sentence, and execution of
the curse, there is little hope that they will up and act for the Church
against Babylon. Because for the presens they are safe, they conceive and
conclude they shall be so for ever, and therefore they matter not how low the
Church sinks, nor how high her enemies mount and get above her^ men safe in
their own sense, have no sense of other men's dangers and distress.

An overporing upon the means already used, 2. Hindrance.
to bring down the enemies of the Church; and so shifting off the work to
others. There has been (say some careless ones) so much money brought in, so
many men have gone forth, and we have so many armies for present in the field,
and so many soldiers in pay, that if these will not do the work, let all
sink and perish: if this and that, and the other, had been well husbanded, the
work might have been at an end before this; and for their parts, they see as
little hopes now as when the business began, and therefore are now resolved to
give out, and help no more: not considering that God may in justice empty us
to the last drop of blood in our bodies, and the last penny in our purses,
because we have too much Idolized our men, and moneys, as though these could
help, when the Lord stands aloof from our troubles.

An overvaluing of that which we our selves have been forcibly constrained to
do for the public Service of God, 3. Hindrance.
against his and our enemies. We have been good Arithmeticians in our own
particular, it is the common plea of the vulgar, None of my neighbors has
born so sore a burden as I, none have been so deep sessed as I, if every man
were but proportionable to me, I know how it would be, and then I could be more
willing to come to the work again; thus men magnify their bypast actings,
though there was nothing at all of free will in them to the work then, and
this is but to shift it off for the future; while we think on, and prize that
highly, that (by compulsion) we have done against Babylon, we are resolved to
do no more: what would these men do if God should meet them and answer them
thus in their prayers, You have constrained me to do much for you, but now
henceforth, I will withhold my hand, I will relieve you. I will protect you, I
will be merciful unto you no more.

A conceit that those who are risen up against God and his Church, 4.
Hindrance.
are, or will be friends to us, that they will protect our houses, that have
none of their own; that our goods shall be safe in their hands, that have
banished all goodness from their hearts; that they will be a defense and
safeguard to us, our wives, and children, who are versed in blood, to the
spoiling and butchering of whole kingdoms. Edom thinks she is safe, if she can
help the Chaldeans against Israel, but she perishes for her labor. Obadiah
verse. 15.

A desperate hatred of the power of godliness: 5. Hindrance.
the purity of Religion is the only thing, they set themselves most bitterly
against: to be bound up, and hampered with the rules and laws of Jesus Christ
his Kingdom, is that which they cannot endure. In this they conclude, let
their bonds be broke, and as for these yokes we will cast them from us. If we
act against the Babylonians, it will produce our own ensnarement, let these
Belialists be once brought down, and the hand of authority will be turned upon
us, our liberties to sin, will then be straightened, the occasions and
opportunities of nourishing our lusts will quite be taken away, we shall be
hampered with the strictness of a reformation: one cannot keep his whore at
pleasure, nor another be drunk without punishment, nor a third profane Sabbaths
without control, nor a fourth blaspheme God and his truth, without observation
and correction. Ministers cannot be non-residents and pluralists, to heap up
mammon and murder souls without censure, and people cannot live as they list,
and do what is right in their own eyes; but all must be under the curb, and
reign of Reformation: and this is one grand reason, why men are so unwilling
and backward to a war against Babylon; because they are enemies to Gods great
work of making all things new. Let the devil and Antichrist bring in as many
new things as they will or can devise in way of superstition, idolatry, and
profaneness, they are then up and acting: but if the Lord begin to create new
heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, then they startle, and
draw back, and if there be any need of their hands and help in this business,
all they will do, shall be to retard and obstruct it, not to prosecute and
promote it. Shortly thus, men wallowing in sins defilements, will have no
mind or care of Sions victory and triumphings in and for the truth: if they
can enjoy themselves in their lust, they matter not though the Church and her
glory be utterly lost, and put to the worse by the blood-thirsty Babylonians.

A base and slavish fear of humane frowns, 6. Hindrance.
in case we set our selves to do Gods work, and help him aginst the mighty.
Carnal friends and malignant allies, are strange and strong gyves, not only
upon the hands, but hearts of many men in the work of God now in hand, Oh
says the wretched spirit of some convinced ones, if we shall act in this cause
(which we know to be of and for God) then we shall be losers by it, at the
death of a father, and our name will clean be blotted out in such and such a
rich friends will: yea possibly for all this, the King may yet get up, says
another, and overtop the Parliament, and then I shall be called to an account
for all the money I have lent, for all the horses, and men I have sent forth,
and for my own appearings in the cause; and therefore in respect had to after
times, it is good for me to be quiet, if I can possibly slide through the
world, unobserved and undiscovered in my neutralitie, Let them talk of the
Cause, and the Cause, I shall think my self happy, to sit still and do
nothing. This is the result of these men's thoughts, though the whole kingdom
be on fire, if they can but slide up and down, and neither be signed not burnt,
all is well, their cares are for none but themselves.

A pretending and pleading conscience, 7. Hindrance.
to keep them from doing good: a strange world that we are now fallen into, in
point and case of conscience. Oh the pureness, and tenderness of conscience
now adays! what a happy time do we live in, that men who never made
conscience of burthening, and breaking the kingdom with all manner of (...)
and ungodliness; are now so conscientious, that they dare not take Covenants
and make Vows to serve God, and save kingdoms? oh the brasen-faced hypocrisy
of these men's hearts, who dare christen the base malignancie of their spirits
with the name of conscience? will not these men know, that conscience truly
called so, is universal, and carries an adequate and equal respect to all
Gods commandments? conscience does not startle at the doing of good, but
evil: and if yet they question, whether it be go^d or no to make war against
Babylon; I refer them to my Text (part of the new Testament as they call it)
a Scripture now much in request with them, and there I leave them: and yet not
leave them, for though this conscience of theirs, in not taking Covenants
through obstinacy, be stark naught, and indeed not conscience, but wilful
pertinacy: yet (if any comparison here may be made) it is far better with
them, then those who rashly bind themselves in Covenants to do for Sion
against Babylon, and instantly enquire after and resolve upon ways of breaking
and falsifying their Covenants. Oh the wretchedness of these men! God sees the
one obstinate, and the other perfidious.

Horrible ignorance of the true Religion, 8. Hindrance.
while men profess themselves Protestants, they know not what it is to be a
Protestant. All of most men's religion, has been bound up in a Book of Common
Prayer, begun and ended with a morning and evening service, as they call it; as
for the Doctrines and Principles of Religion they know them not. Men have
thought themselves excellently religious, if in public they could pray that
the rest of their life hereafter might be pure and holy, and as soon as they
have departed the Assembly, both spoken and acted against both puride and and
the pure ones Now, that we have hopes to part with those forms (the nurses of
ignorance and profaneness) men have no spirit or heart for God: it were an
excellent way to fetch in men and moneys to the Parliaments aid and defense, to
assure them, they should have a Mass book instead of Common Prayer and Bibles,
and that every fat bellied, covetous, wanton priest of Baal, should have three
Livings in place of two? oh, how men would vent and spend both persons and
purses, were they nourished with hopes of such wretched days and things as
these? but if every man in his place shall be required to know God, and serve
him in sincerity and truth, their hearts rise, their milts swell, and their
spirits are so big, that their hands can do nothing: they are so
distempered, distracted, and discontented in their inwards, that they cannot
compose themselves to help the Lord and his people in and to their right.
Papists, and most of our common sort of people, are so allied to one another in
point of Religion, that ours by no means will be persuaded to act against the
cement of their kindred, Popery.

Base and unworthy love of the things of this world, 9. Hindrance.
gold is men's God, and therefore not to be parted with, the heart and eyes of
many men are down-wards upon the earth, and therefore they cannot, they will
not lift up their hands and draw their swords to evenge Sion upon Babylon:
their only trouble in these times is, that trading is obstructed, and that
their incomes are so few, and disproportionable to their imbounded greedings
and gripings after perishing substances: here it sticks, they cannot act for
heaven, because their minds are only set upon shings earthly and below.

An obstinate shutting of men's eyes, 10. Hindrance.
against the plain and clear discoveries of the truth: most men speak
themselves wilfully obstinate, and that they will not hear with both ears,
they cannot be persuaded to read on both sides; God has in justice blinded
their eyes, that they should believe alye, because they receive neither the
knowledge nor love of the truth: many have only looked upon Declarations and
Protestations from Oxford, though possibly penned with the cheating spirit of
some dissembling Priest or Prelate, with a purpose only to deceive some poor
and unstable souls: that by giving them fair words (as the proverb has it)
they may make fools feign, until they have drawn them into some bloody acts
of desperate mischief and villainy; but as for those Remonstrances and
Declaration of Parliament; holding forth the right of things to the view of
heaven and earth, these men have lived in an other world, they have never heard
of them, but the truth is, though they have heard of them, yet they would not
read them, and so by obstinacy and stiffenesse have preoccupated their own
enlightening, and conversion: yea, their hearts tell them they have been afraid
of conviction and coming over to the truth; and if this be not a trick of
Popery, and the grand policy of the panders for the Babylonish strumpet, to
keep men doting upon her painted deformities, while they can keep them
hoodwineked from beholding true and real beauties, let the world judge. Oh how
are we here also striking in with Rome and Romanisme, who would be thought the
only Protestants of the world? No marvel if he will not act for the truth
that is resolved, and has determined with himself, not to know it.

Personal guilt that lies upon the soul unexpiated. 11. Hinderance.
When sin rests upon the heart unpardoned, oh how it makes the knees to
smite, the joints to tremble, and the hands to be feeble in such service as
this, of rewarding Babylon as she has rewardedus! Oh says one, I would go
forth in these wars, and fight too, but sin within fights against me. Oh if
I should be killed in the battle, I should everlastingly perish; I have my
wherecome, drunkenness, Sabbath breaking, blasphemies, scoffings at the power
of godliness, and a numberless number of other transgressions upon my
conscience; they are unpardoned; I have not got them washed away in the blood
of Christ: and if I should go forth and be slain, all these would follow me
to hell; and therefore I conclude it is best to stay at home, and make up the
measure of my sins in this wickedness: also, that I dare not act in Gods
cause, because I am wicked. I deny not but some, yea too many sinners are too
desperate, and do least fear hell, though they have most cause to dread it
yet this also I am confident of, that guilt and the terror that attends it, is
a great obstacle in the way of many: for how shall be dare to fight for God,
who considers that there is no reason that God should right with him and for
him, but against him? if soldiers were less guilty, our wars would be more
successful; it is not how many men, but how many good men we send forth to
the war: that we (...) say of our warriors, as David of Ahimaaz, he is a
good man and comes with good, 2 Samuel 18. 27. guilty men will never be godly
soldiers: but such as these godly ones we look for, and require in this
warfare against Babylon. He will fight best against Baal abroad, who has
overcome Belial at home; subdue thy lust, and thy enemies) cannot be unsbdued
Deuteronomy. 28. 7. The Lord shall cause thine enemies, that rise up against thoe, to
be smitten before thy face; They shall come out against thee one way, and flee
before thee seven ways.

A pretense of the cause of the King, 12. Hinderance.
when the truth is, men are false hearted to the cause of God. And here I shall
make bold (since I am fallen upon this rock, not in any way of disloyalty,
but (if it be possible) for satisfaction of those who want, or will not use
more learned helps) to deal with oru staggerers and stumblers, in way of
querie: and that which I shall now propose to them, you may call it (if you
please) the Malignants Catechism. First therefore I demand and require them
upon their consciences as they will answer before God, and his elect Angels, to
give in replies, according to the truth of the light that is in them.

Is not our King, 1. Querie.
or at least wise should he not be sworn, and bound, to govern according to
the Law of the Land?

Did not all good people generally before the sitting of this Parliament
groan, 2. Querie.
and grieve for want of that Government?

Wherein has the Parliament denied the King the benefit of any old established
Law? 3. Querie.


In making, or proposing new Laws, 4. Querie.
wherein have they gone contrary to the Kings will, but (according to the Vote
of both Houses) for his, and the Kingdoms good, both spiritual and corporal?

It is reasonable in our State, 5. Querie.
that the will of the King should be preferred before the Vote of the Kingdom?

In all overtures, 6. Querie.
has not the Parliament faithfully counseled, and humbly petitioned?

Have not Parliament and people most grievously groaned under breach of
p(...)edges and promises, 7. Querie.
during this Session of Parliament?

It is not reason, 8. Querie.
that all other Counsels should cease, and give place to the Votes, Results,
and Bills of Parliament?

Were ever public offenders against the State, 9. Querie.
so protected by force, from the justice of a Parliament?

Might not the Parliament (if they should deal as treacherously with us, 10.
Querie.
as many have dealt with them) undo us, and all ours for after times; both in
point of Religion and Liberty, in Vote, and by one Law, even in a moment,
without either the care, cost, or fear, that they are daily put unto?

What good thing can the faithful members of Parliament expect to themselves
and their posterity, 11. Querie.
if the Parliament were dissolved or destroyed: since to the sin and shame of
the English Nation, they have been deserted and abused during their Session?
Is it possible they should have any plot or design but for the maintenance of
true Religion, and Liberty?

Is it utterly impossible that our King should be one of those ten, 12.
Querie.
of whom we read, Revel. 17. 13. that have one mind, and shall give their power
and strength unto the beast?

Have we not seen the same design driven forwards under diversity of Agents
and means? 13. Querie.
Was not the Duke stabbed? Is not Strafford beheaded? Is not Finch fled? Is not
Fanlkland dead? is not the Archb and plotter, (as we conceived) immured? and
for all this are our miseries or fears ended?

Has not this Parliament of all that ever sat at Westminster or elsewhere,
14. Querie.
skill enough to discern the truth, power, and authority enough to command us
(as some man) to rise up and defend the truth (pardon the homeliness of the
expression, for men's carriages seem to speak their hearts herein) are these
the only knaves, or fools, that ever had the sword put into their hands? are
these the only men that want heads or hearts to weild and manage the trust
committed to them for its proper ends; Gods glory, and the Kingdoms safety and
good?

Can thou in strictness of speech look upon deserters of, 15. Querie.
and run-awayes from Parliament in these times, under any other notion then a
company of desperate, ungodly, perjured, and forsworn wretches? But I have
done with my Queries, and so pass from the first thing promised, lets, or
impediments in the way of duty, and come to the second, motives.

The certain ruin of the Kingdom, 1. Motive.
under the non-expiation of public guilt. We lie under the guilt which the
Babylonians formerly, and of late have brought upon us, we had before these
days a guilt of Idolatrous superstitious Altarworship, of gross and horrible
profaneness, of strange and almost invincible ignorance, of contempt and
opposition of the power of godliness; with many other crying and notorious
transgressions; and now we have a new guilt of murders, rapines, robberies,
rebellions, blasphemies of the highest nature, and blood of the deepest die and
cry, (Jesus Christ excepted) for it is the blood of the most sincere Christians,
and will it not move and melt our hearts, that this ancient and most
flourishing Kingdom, should now sink and be pressed down into oblivion and
reproach, through our neglect, and forbearance to act against her subverters?
If thou art true borne, and love the life of thy Country, at this time
bestirre thy self; down with Babylonians, and establish ENGLAND in its glory
to the Ages of many generations.

We do but heighten the enemies rage and malignitie, 2. Motive.
under our forbearing to bring upon them the desert of their sin: we spare
them, but they do not pity us; the less we appear in Gods cause against
them, the more do they take heart, and encourage themselves, in their
mischievous ungodliness: how shall we dare to take rest to our bodies, when
the restless Babylonians are desperately bent to ruin all, and to make us
slaves either for bodies or souls, or both?

The present danger of losing the Christian Religion throughout all the Churches
of the world, 3. Motive.
if we now be careless, and let slip the opportunity put into our hands. The
Lord has set up this as a prize, but we must run for it; this is proposed as a
crown to the Saints, but they must fight for it: it is a jewel very worthy to
be ventured for, though in a field of blood. Let us invert the Babylonians
word, there is good use of it, to Christians. Now or never: Now and ever. Let
us learn wisdom, though of serpents.

The abundance of real joys that we shall reap if once we see the days of
fear and blood past and over: 4. Motive.
our harvest will recompense all the care, labor, and cost of the seedtime: we
may fight as well as plough in hope: he that has said, A cup of cold water
given unto a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, shall not go
unrewariled; will surely make it manifest that he is not unfaithful to forget
our labor, love, and to suffer us lose a recompense of every drop of warm
blood, that has been offered to, or shed for a righteous God in his own
righteous cause, and for the safety of his Ordinances and people.

God spared not his own son, 5. Motive.
but gave him to die for us, that the might overcome our enemies; let not us
then think it much, to hazard our lives, that we may overcome his adversaries.

The impossibility of ending the quarrel between, Sion and Babylon any other
way, 6. Motive.
but by the sword. For hitherto all other means have proved ineffectuall, and
let us now beat the bush and go round about to work; and we shall ever have
Antichristians to tugge withal: for it is a Statute Law of Heavens Court; He
that leads into captivity, must go into captivity: he that kills with
the sword, must be killed by the sword, Revel. 13. 10.

We may be isntrumental to entaile Gospel mercies, 7. Motive.
and glory to posterity: and it is a most horrible shame, if we should take
all the care for our childrens bodies, and have no thoughts what shall be come
of, no endeavors for the good of their souls, in this nick and opportunity of
time.

I grant all this: Object.
But, I may die in the war, and that is it which greatly troubles me.

Thou do not certainly know that thou shall die there; Answ. 1.
and thou may die in thy couch as soon as in the Camp.

Others as good and as great as thou, have already sacrificed Brook, our
Hamden, and others.

Thy blood shed thus, shall be precious in the sight of the

We may possibly kill Gods enemies, 4.
and it is a mercy to the righteous wash their feet in the blood of the wicked,
Psalm. 58. 10. and 68. 23.

It is better for us to die aborad with honor like men, 5.
then be murdered at home with our hands bound like fools.

Let all those who are in Authority hence learn, Last Use.
to do justice and execute vengeance upon those Babylonians, which God has
put into their hands: do it speedily; do it thoroughly: the doing of justice
upon the wicked, is the way to safeguard the righteous. Without question the
hand of God is upon us, and we lose many in the field, because we are too
merciful to those in the sold. Let us do Gods will upon his enemies; and if
we can but live by faith, we shall see, that he will either secure our friends;
or if the enemies have power and heart, to send them hence, he stands ready to
receive them into heaven: and what loss is it to them, to be translated from
eathly prisons, to heavenly enlargements? Amen.

FINIS.

