REFLECTIONS ON A PAMPHLET, STYLED A Just and Modest Vindication of the
Proceedings of the Two last PARLIAMENTS:

OR, A Defense of His Majesty's Late Declaration.

BY The Author of the Address to the Freemen and Freeholders of the Nation.

Ut imperium evertant, libertatem praeferunt: Si perverterint, libertatem ipsam
aggredientur. Tacitus Ann. lib. 4. Rumoribus atque auditionibus permoti de
summis saepe rebus consilia ineunt: quorum eos e vestigio poenitere necesse
est, quum incertis rumoribus serviant; and plerique ad voluntatem eorum ficta
respondeant. Caesar de Bello Gal. lib. 4. LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, for
George Wells at the Sun in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

The Author to the Reader.
THE Pamphlet on which these Reflections are written, has so long since
received its doom (for it was designed to put a stop to the many Loyal
Addresses which then came in every day: And so every one that succeeded it,
gave it a moral wound, by declaring to the World its weakness and folly) that
it may seem a piece of impertinence in me to drag it into the light again, tho
with an intent to expose it the more to the just Recentments of all good
Subjects; wherefore for my own justification I think my self bound to assign
the Causes, why so late, and why at all?

Know then Reader, that this same Libel, entitled, A just and modest
Vindication, etc. was Printed near Six months before ever I heard there was any
such thing in the World: and it was near Six more before I could get a sight of
it, tho I used all the interest I could make, to borrow or buy it.

When I had it, and had read it over once or twice, I then resolved to make
some short Reflections upon it, and put them as a Preface to the third Part of
the Address to the Freemen and Freeholders of the Nation, which was then going
to the Press; but being pressed at the same time with an earnest desire to
leave no material passage in the Libel unexamined, and wanting still to bring a
just Answer to it within the compass of a Preface to that Book, it swelled to
such a bulk, that it was totally unfit for that purpose; so I thought it was
better either to Print it alone, or to suppress it.

To which purpose I sent it up about Michaelmas last to London, to a Person of
great worth and judgment to peruse it, and pass a final Sentence on it, but his
greater business prevented him from so doing till almost six months after.

And by that time I cannot deny but that (notwithstanding the favorable
opinion my worthy Friend was pleased to pass upon it) it seemed to me almost
Antiquated, and upon that account I would certainly have hushed it up in
everlasting silence, if I had not at the same time considered, that the ill
Principles this Libel has sown in the minds of men, are like Seeds which lie
buried in the Earth during the Winter, but if the Soil happen to be stirred
again, and then the Rain and Sun give their assistance, they will certainly
spring up, and produce a plentiful Crop of pernicious Weeds to annoy and
disquiet the Nation: And I am not without all hopes that these Reflections may
by Gods blessing prevent some part of this mischief; and although I should be
mistaken in the Event, yet I am satisfied the Design is good.

How well or ill I have performed what I undertook belongs not to me of all men
to determine; for we are (...) to be too fond of the Children of our Brains, as
well (...) of our Bodies; but they who have no such relation to (...) will
easily observe their defects and faults, and to (...) I leave it to pass what
judgment they please upon it (...).

I have ordered his Majesty's Speech at the opening of the Parliament at Oxon,
and his Gracious Declaration, etc. to be Printed with it, because there are
such frequent occasions to have recourse to them, that the Reader will have too
much trouble, if he have them not in the same Piece, and it is probable many of
them may not have them neither.

I shall add no more but my earnest Prayers that God would so bless the Work
that it may bring forth the blessed fruits of Peace, Righteousness, and Loyalty
in the minds of all those that peruse it: and that he would deliver me, and all
his Majesty's Loyal Subjects out of the hands of unreasonable and factious men;
and if the Reader please to put his AMEN to this, he shall infinitely oblige me.

March 10. 1682-3.
REFLECTIONS ON A PAMPHLET, STYLED A Just and Modest Vindication of the
Proceedings of the Two last PARLIAMENTS: BEING A defense of his Majesty's
Declaration.
THis Author, who by his style and the manner in which he treats all those that
have the misfortune to fall under his Censure, appears to be no mean person;
seems every where throughout the whole Discourse to be transported with so much
Anger and Rage; that he was neither master of his own Reason, nor able to use
that Learning he had to any good purpose: From whence we may suppose it happened,
that putting the Title of his Book in the first lines of it, he never more
thought of the Justice or Modesty pretended, but a Vindicative Spirit took such
possession of him, as he never became his own man after. My Reader therefore, I
hope, will pardon me, if his Passion happens to move one in me, in any part of
these Reflections; because is is difficult to converse patiently with a man of
this temper.

He begins thus: The Amazement which seized every good man, upon the
unlooked-for dissolution of two Parliaments within three Months, was not
greater than at the sight of a Declaration pretending to justify and give
Reasons for such extraordinary proceedings.

Thus my Author comes staring upon the Stage, as one newly recovered out of one
Amazement, and just then taken with another, he fancies all the good men of the
Nation under the same distraction of mind. And what was it that wrought so
powerfully on him, that every man that was not so affected deserved not the
Title of a Good Man? Nothing in the world but the Dissolution of the two last
Parliaments, and the sight of the beforementioned Declaration. A frightful
ominous sight! He tells us afterward there never appeared such a Prodigy
before, Page 3.
but in 1628. and that was one of the first sad Causes (though he does not
prove it to be so much as an Occasion) of the ensuing unhappy War; a soft name
for a Rebellion, which as good men never had Cause, so ill men never wanted a
Pretense to stir up.

I can assure him that there were many good men who observed all this as well
as he, who did not instantly fall into fits upon it. Good men can trust God and
their King, and rest quietly and free from Amazement in greater Accidents than
these.

Having a little recovered himself out of the Muse he was in, thus he proceeds.
It is not to be denied but that our Kings have in a great measure been
entrusted with the power of Calling, and Declaring the Dissolutions of
Parliaments. Have they so? Whose Trustees are they? When did they first obtain
this favor?

I protest now I was so dull as to think that this right of Calling and
Dissolving Parliaments was a Natural Right, inherent in the Crown, Pro. Dom.
Rege dicit, quod cum placeat ei, Parliament suum tenere pro utilitate Regni
sui, de Regali potestate sua facit summoneri ubi and quando, etc pro voluntate
sua. Cok. Jurisdict. p. 16.
and as old as the British Monarchy, and that at the granting of the great
Charter, and at all other times before or since, when the Kings of England
granted any new Privileges to their Subjects they still reserved to the Crown
the power of calling Parliaments when and where they pleased, and to continue
them as long as they thought fit, and then to Dissolve or Prorogue them. Well,
but if I was therein mistaken, yet he allows our Kings a great measure of that
trust, and who claims the Remainder of it? Not the Petitioners, I hope. No, the
Privy Council, he tells us, are to be advised with. Now that is matter of
Expedience only, not of Right; for whatever His Majesty can lawfully do with,
doubtless he may as lawfully (though not in all cases and circumstances so
prudently) do without, the Advice of his Privy Council, who never claimed, that
I have heard of, any coordinate right of managing affairs with our Kings; and
matter of The Three Estates do but Advise as the Privy Council does, which if
the King embrace, it becomes the Kings own Act in the one; and the Kings Law in
the other; for without the Kings Acceptance both the public and private
Advices be but as empty Egg-shells. Sir Walter Ralcighs Prerogative of
Parliaments, page 57. -- Vide and Grotium de imp. sum. potest. circa Sacra.
Cap. 6.
Advice in its own nature supposes a liberty in the Person to whom it is given
either to adhere to, or to reject it.

Well, Page 3.
but whoever has the rest of that Trust, care has been anciently taken, both
for the Holding of Parliaments Annually; and that they should not be Prorogued
or Dissolved till all the Petitions and Bills before them were Answered and
Redressed. And for this my Author quotes two Acts of Parliament, which because
they are short I will insert here. The first is this: 4. Ed. 3. c. 14.
Item it is accorded that a Parliament shall be holden every year once, and
more often if need be. Here is every word in that Statute. The second follows:
36 Ed. 3. c. 10.
Item, for maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and redress of diverse
mischiefs and grievances which daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every
year, as another time was ordained by a Statute, which is the very same that I
have recited before. 2 R. 2 Number. 28.
The Record which he (...) I can say nothing to. So I agree with him that there
are two Statutes provided for the holding of Parliaments Annually, and more
often if need be, of which the Kings of England have ever since thought
themselves the Judges. But where are the Statutes to be found that these
Parliaments should not be prorogued nor dissolved till ALL the Petitions and
Bills before them were answered and redressed? Here is not one tittle of this
in either of these he quotes, yet that is the main thing in controversy, and
which only needed proving. But he goes on. The Constitution had been equally
imperfect and destructive of it self, had it been left to the choice of the
Prince whether he would ever Summon a Parliament; or put into his power to
dismiss them Arbitrarily at his pleasure. Then sure it had been worth the while
to have proved for what time they were to sit, as well as how often. And if
this can be made out that it is an Arbitrary, that is, in the sense he would be
understood in, an Illegal Act, for the King to prorogue or dissolve a
Parliament, till all the Petitions and Bills be answered and redressed, then
will it be possible for a Parliament to perpetuate it self for ever by an
endless succession of Petitions and Bills mixed with other great affairs, which
as it is contrary to the practice of all our Kings since these Statutes, so if
it were true, the Menarchy wuld not then be what it now is; but be much nearer
a Commonwealth. So that be the Consequence what it will, this learned Gentleman
must yield, that it is at the choice of our Princes to summon Parliaments when
they think it needful; and to dismiss them when they please. As for the word
Arbitrarily, which he here uses, it is needless; and was suggested to him by
his Spleen, and and not by his Reason.

That Parliaments should thus meet (Annually) and thus sit, Page 2.
(till all the Petitions and Bills before them are answered and redressed) is
secured to us by the same sacred tie by which the King at his Coronation does
oblige himself, to let his Judges sit to distribute Justice every Term, and to
preserve inviclably all other Rights and Liberties of his Subjects. I thought
the Law had been altered a little in the first particular, by a Statute made in
the Seventeenth year of his now Majesty's Reign. Cap. 1. the words of which are
as follows. And, because by the Ancient Laws and Statutes of this Realm, made
in the Reign of King Edward the Third, Parliaments are to be held very often,
Your Majesty's humble and loyal Subjects the Lords Spititual and Temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, most humbly do beseech your
most Excellent Majesty, etc. that hereafter the sitting and holding of
Parliaments shall not be intermitted or discontinued above three years at most,
but that within three years from and after the Determination of this present
Parliament, and so from time to time within three years after the determination
of any other Parliament or Parliaments; or if there be occasion more or
oftener, your Majesty your Heirs and Successors do issue out your Writs for
calling, assembling, and holding of another Parliament, to the end there may be
a frequent calling, assembling, and holding of Parliaments once in three years
at least. So that surely his Majesty may without breach of his Coronation Oath
delay the calling of a Parliament three years, if there be no occasion for one
sooner. Page 2.
of which he is the Judge. Therefore (as he goes on) abruptly to dissolve
Parliaments at such a time, when nothing but the Legislative Power, and the
United Wisdom of the Kingdom could relieve us from our just fears, or secure us
from our certain dangers, is very unsuitable to the great Trust reposed in the
Prince, and seems to express but little of that affection which we will always
hope his Majesty bears toward his People and the Protestant Religion. That
there was then too much need of the Legislative Power and the Wisdom of the
Nation united in Parliament, is not to be denied, and that his Majesty was very
sensible of it appears, by his calling three Parliaments in twenty six Months,
as my Author computes it, page 46. and we shall have occasion hereafter to
enquire by whose fault it came to pass that they were all so abruptly
dissolved, and that will lead us to a probable conjecture why none has been
since called; notwithstanding his Majesty's Affection to his People and the
Protestant Religion is such, that we have great reason to bless God for it, and
to acknowledge it thankfully to him.

My Author goes on thus: Page 2.
But it is not only of the Dissolution it self that we complain; the manner of
doing it is unwarranted by the precedents of former times, and full of
dangerous Consequents. We are taught by the Writ of Summons, that Parliaments
are never called without the advice of the Council, and the usage of all Ages
has been never to send them away without the same advice. To forsake this safe
method is to expose the King personally to the reflections and Censures of the
whole Nation for so ungrateful an Action. We may grant it the most usual, and
the best and safest way to consult the Council in both these Cases. But yet
that will not presently make the Act Arbitrary or Illegal, if it be omitted,
and in this Case if it were otherwise it may possibly in the end appear to have
been matter of necessity rather than choice. Colleges Trial, p. 37, 57, 73.
We may very well remember that a great number of the Gentlemen of the Lower
House went to Oxford with armed men to guard them from the Papists, and some of
them told the people at parting; They did never expect to see them again. The
meaning of which is possible to be understood. And besides these there were
some other zealous men went; so that if his Majesty did not think it fit, or
safe to consult his Council, and spend time in deliberating in the midst of
such dangers, they must bear the blame who gave the occasion, and made it
necessary. So that these are the men, next such as my Author, who are to be
charged, tho not with advising, yet with necessitating the last dissolution to
be made, in the manner it was, Colleges Trial, p. 27, 30.
for the security of his Majesty's Life and Liberty, which yet I would never
have said but to justify his Majesty.

But yet we must know all this Concern for the Council is not out of kindness
or respect to them, Page 2.
he says, They are punishable for such Orders as are irregular; nor can the
Ministers justify any unlawful Action under color of the Kings Commands,
since all his Commands that are contrary to law, are void; (which is the true
reason of that well known Maxim, that the King can do no wrong) a Maxim just in
it self, and alike safe for the Prince, and for the Subject; there being
nothing more absurd than that a Favorite should excuse his enormous Actings by
a pretended Command, which we may reasonably suppose he first procured to be
laid upon himself. But we know not whom to charge with advising this last
Dissolution: it was a work of darkness, and if we are not misinformed, the
Privy Council was as much surprised at it as the Nation. The sorrow was; that
in the next Parliament this great Patriot would be at a loss in his hunting for
some body to blame for an Action so ungrateful, as he represents it, to the
whole Nation; which in my judgment is a pretty way of spending his Reflections
and Censures on the King.

And this is not all his vexation neither; for in the next Paragraph he tells
us, Page 3.
Nor will a future Parliament be able to charge any body as the Author or
Adviser of the late Printed Paper, which bears the Title of his Majesty's
Declaration, tho every good Subject ought to be careful how he calls it so: for
his Majesty never speaks to his People as a King, but either personally in his
Parliament, or at other times under his Seal, for which the Chancellor or
other Officers are responsible, if what passes them be not warranted by Law.
Nor can the direction of the Privy Council enforce any thing upon the People
unless that Royal and legal Stamp give it an Authority: but this Declaration
comes abroad without any such Sanction, and there is no other ground to ascribe
it to his Majesty than the uncertain credit of the Printer, whom we will easily
suspect of an imposture, rather than think the King would deviate from the
approved course of his Illustrious Ancestors, to pursue a new and unsuccessful
method.

So here is all the Credit of the Declaration gone, and the poor Printer left
in the lurch to answer it to the next Parliament for putting this imposture on
the Nation. But what comfort is there in such small game? A Lord Chancellor,
or other great Officer, is a Royal Game, and worth the pursuit of a House of
Commons to pull him down; but a pitiful Printer, who can find in his heart to
employ his Oratory against such mean Mechanics? and as for the Privy Council
they can enforce nothing upon the People without the Seal, so that for time to
come all Proclamations, and other public Papers, may be securely slighted
except they come Sealed with the great Seal, or some body be sent with them to
assure us he saw it to the Original. Thus far the Historian went, but then the
Prophet comes forth, and assures us, as this Method is new, so it will be
unsuccessful. How truly the World is not now to be told.

From the Effect of the first Declaration of this kind, which he says was
published in 1628. and filled the whole Kingdom with Jealousies, and was one of
the first Causes of the ensuing unhappy War; Page 3.
he proceeds to tell us, That Declarations to justify what Princes do, must
always be either needless or ineffectual: their Actions ought to be such as may
recommend themselves to the World, and carry their own Evidence along with them
of their usefulness to the public; and then no Arts to justify them will be
necessary. Were all Mankind wise and honest, this Argument would be
unanswerable, but as long as some men out of Dullness, and others out of
Obstinacy and Interest shut their Eyes to the plainest and most evident
demonstrations of Reason, it must of necessity be sometimes necessary and fit
for Princes to Inform their Subjects of the reasonableness of their Actions;
and accordingly the same course has ever been taken, and though it might fail
of that end in 1628. yet it has often heretofore, and doubtless will often
again succeed, and the Jealousies which then arose were not the effect of the
Declaration, but of those ill Arts by which such a sort of men as we have now
to deal with, wheedled the Populace into an ill opinion of the best of Princes
for Ends, that are now too well known to be again embraced.

When a Prince descends so low as to give his Subjects Reasons for what he has
done, Page 3.
he not only makes them Judges whether there be any weight in those reasons,
but by so unusual a submission gives cause to suspect, that he is conscious to
himself, that his Actions want an Apology. I never thought before that the
French Kings Logic was the only Argument that became a Prince, Car tell est
nostre plaisir, For so our will and pleasure is. And those Subjects must be
very ill natured that grow jealous upon the Condescentions of a Prince, and
judge the Reasons of a King to have the less weight because he graciously
offers them to the Judgment of his People; Sure I am sometimes God Almighty is
pleased to do it, who only has a right to command our absolute submission,
upon the account of his infinite both Wisdom and Sovereignty. So that to
suspect the want of of an Apology on no other grounds than a man's willingness
to satisfy the World of the justice of a man's Cause, and the reasonableness of
his Actions, is a perverseness to which common Knaves do seldom arrive; the
Heroes of Villainy do not often rise to that pitch of Brutality without the help
of Malmsbury Philosophy. And I am persuaded that our Author would have spared
this Cavil against his Majesty's Declaration if he had beforehand considered
that in natural consequence he charges not only the King, but also the Three
Estates with so many deliberate Acts of folly and injustice as there are Acts
of Parliament containing the reasons of Enacting so or so.

If a Princes Actions are indeed unjustifiable, Page 3.
if they are opposite to the Inclinations, and apparently destructive of the
Interests of his Subjects, it will be very difficult for the most eloquent or
insinuating Declaration to make them in love with such things.

And if they be none of all these, if a Crafty man may but comment upon them,
and by Ifs and Ands insinuate into the heads of the Common People that he takes
them for such, it is possible all the Eloquence in the World may not be
powerful enough to bring them into their right wits again, but yet this may
fail too sometimes. Page 3.


And therefore they did certainly undertake no easy task in pretending to
persuade men who see themselves exposed to the restless malice of their
Enemies; who observe the languishing condition of the Nation, and that nothing
but a Parliament can provide remedies for the great Evils which they feel and
fear; that two several Parliaments, upon whom they had placed all their hopes,
were so suddenly broken out of kindness to them, or with any regard to their
advantage.

No, I suppose no body was so silly as to undertake such an impossible task:
but there was another sort of men, who had looked better into things, and care
was to be taken of them to confirm them, and a third sort that were not yet
well resolved what to think of things, and they were to be directed and
assisted, and it was not impossible the Declaration might have a good effect
upon them, as indeed it had; as for those that had placed all their hopes upon
the two last Parliaments, and were pleased with all they did; there was neither
hopes nor design of working that Miracle upon them, but they were to be left to
time to be cured. And in the interim I would advise them to study Colemans
Declaration, of which my Author says fine things, which I care not to
transcribe.

But should this Declaration be suffered to go abroad any longer under the
Royal Name; Page 4.
yet it will never be thought to have proceeded from his Majesty's Inclination
or Judgment, but to be gained from him by the Artifices of the same ill men,
who not being content to have prevailed with him to dissolve two Paliaments,
only to protect them from Public Justice, do now hope to excuse themselves
from being thought the Authors of that Counsel by making him openly to avow it.
But they have discovered themselves to the Kingdom, and have told their Names
when they number amongst the great Crimes of the House of Commons, their having
declared diverse Eminent Persons to be Ememies to the King and Kingdom.

So his Majesty's Inclination and Judgment being kindly absolved from the guilt
of this Declaration of purpose to abate the Esteem it ought to have. And seeing
it is not possible to keep it within doors, and that some may think the worse
of it because there was a sham Declaration found among Colemans Papers, as you
know there was a sham Plot in the Meal-Tub, and yet there may be others that
are real. The next Inquiry, or rather Hue and Cry, is after the Authors, and
those he thinks he has found by the passage he cites out of the Declaration,
those Eminent Persons, or some of them, must needs out of Revenge and Fear be
the Authors of this Pestilent Declaration. His Reason is this: Page 4.
None could be offended at the Proceedings of the Parliaments but they who were
obnoxious, none could be concerned to vindicate the Dissolution but they who
advised it. But is my Author sure of that, that never a man in the Nation was
offended at their proceedings but such as were obnoxious to them? I am of
another mind, and so is all the world now. Is it impossible for any man to be
concerned to vindicate the Actions of a Prince but they that advise him? What
pitiful Sophistry this is. But were no men obnoxious to the proceedings of
these Parliaments but these eminent men? Declaration.
May not it be some of those Subjects who were by Arbitrary Orders taken into
Custody for matters that had no relation to Privileges of Parliament? They are
mentioned before the Eminent Persons tho of a Meaner degree. If I be not
mistaken, some Members too were very disgracefully Expelled the House. Might
not some of them have a hand in it? Page 5.
We are assured a little lower, that the Writer was of another Nation from this
Gallicism, It was a matter extremely sensible to us. So that this Gentleman is
suspicious it is but a Translation of a French Copy, and the rather because
Monsieur Barillon, the French Ambassador, read it to a Gentleman three days
before it was communicated to the Privy Council, if his intelligence did not
deceive him. So here is fair Scope left to find, or suspect at least, other
Authors besides the Eminent Persons, other Advisers besides those that were
obnoxious. For I suppose Monsieur Barillon does not fear a House of Commons.
And as for this and other Gallicisms that may occur they are not to be wondered
at in an Age that generally understands the French Tongue, in a Court where
almost all the Great men speak it; in a Prince who has lived in France, and is
descended of a French Mother. And the wonder is not so prodigious neither that
the French Ambassador should get a transcript of a Paper, intended to be
published to the whole Nation, two or three days before it was read in Council.
These things make a great noise to ignorant people, whilst I am persuaded this
Gentleman smiled to think how finely he was deluding them. But be these things
as they will, the Eminent Persons must expect to answer it. Page 4.
And our Author thinks they cannot blame him or his Party for hoping one day to
see justice done upon such Counselors. Page 5.
And that the Commons had reason for their Vote, when they declared those
Eminent Persons, who manage things at this rate, Enemies to the King and
Kingdom, and Promoters of the French Interest. Page 6.


It is not strange at all (that the Parliament at Oxford should anger the Court
more than that at Westminster) for the Court did never yet dissolve a
Parliament abruptly, and in heat, but they found the next Parliament more
averse, and to insist upon the same things with greater eagerness than the
former. English Spirits resent no affronts so highly as those that are done to
their Representatives; and the Court will be sure to find the effects of that
resentment in the next Election.

The truth of this as matter of History is very apparent, for so it came to
pass in the Reign of his Majesty's Father, upon every Dissolution, the Commons
made choice of the same, or worse, Members; till in 1640. they had fitted
themselves with a Parliament to their hearts desire, who resented, not the
Affronts done to themselves as the Peoples Representatives, but the several
Stops and Rubs that had been laid in their way, so highly, that the Court, i,
e. the King, soon felt the effects of it. But did the Nation escape? No, but
Blood and Violence, Anarchy and Consusion took possession of them to that
height that the pious Martyr called it, (...). Cap. 15.
A Hell of Misery, and Chaos of Confusion.

The Author in the next line acquaints us, That a Parliament does ever
participate of the present temper of the People. Never were Parliaments of more
different Complexions than that of 1640. and that of 1661. yet they both
exactly answered the humors which were predominant in the Nation, ^^lledge
averred, that the (...) of 40. did (...) what they had just (...) for, and the
Parliament (...) last at Westminster (...) of the same opinon. (...) 83. And to
this (...) a great while (...) had excused the (...) from (...) War, and (...)
King, which he (...) Papists did.
when they were respectively chosen. It does not become me to say whether that
of 1680. were liker that of 1640. or 1661. but I must needs say, I wonder my
Author could reflect so sensibly on the difference, and yet at the same time
heighten the Popular Heats with inculcating the fears of France and Popery, and
not rather endeavor to allay them by telling his Countrymen, that twenty
years Misery followed the 1640 Parliament, and twenty years Peace the latter,
which I cannot but esteem a more Loyal and a more Prudent reflection than that
he has made; and much more necessary both for the Representatives and
Electors. Let them however now consider seriously of it, and the next time send
up men zealous to bring the real Incendiaries of the Nation to Justice, and
then it is not to be doubted but some that are Country Favorites, will be
found to promote the French and Popish Interest, as well as the Republic. And
I dare then become their Sponsor (if it might not look too presumptuously in so
mean a person as I am) that by Gods mercy we should enjoy another Score of
Halsion years, to the confusion of Popery, and the extreme damage of France. ^.
du Moulin's Vindication of the sincerity of P. etc. p. 58. London. 1679.
Both which do as certainly promote our present distempers as they did those in
Charles the First his times; as have been made so apparent, that the
Dissenters, who were the Principals then as they are now, would fain persuade
the world that the Accessaries, Colleges Trial, ^. 81, 82, 83.
the French Emisaries and Jesuits, did all that mischief that was then done.
But as this is ridiculous and impossible, so, if duly considered, it might
prevent a relapse into the same misery and confusion, which is more to be
desired by all good Christians than the most delightful revenge upon the
Favorites.

But it is but reasonable to expect all that I can say will signify but little
to this sort of men, if the modest Gentleman I am examining may be presumed
better acquainted with their tempers than I am. Page 6.
For surely (says he) this DECLARATION (what great things soever may be
expected from it) will make but very few Converts, not only because it
represents things as high Crimes, which the whole Kingdom (the contrary of
which is now too apparent to be proved on one hand, or denied on the other) has
been celebrating as meritorious Actions: but because the People have been so
often deceived by former Declarations, that whatsoever carries that Name will
have no credit with them for the Future. This, I confess, is one good way to
prevent the making too many Converts to Loyalty; for if a People can once be
effectually persuaded their Governors are faithless perfidious men, that seek
nothing but an opportunity to delude and abuse them by false pretenses, there
will be no great danger they will pay them too much respect and obedience. But
surely the man that talks thus is some French Emisary or Jesuit, such thoughts
as these never arose from a Church of England Gentleman's heart, for the worst
enemy of England could not have breathed a worse insinuation into the hearts of
his Majesty's Subjects.

They have not yet forgot the Declaration from Breda, Page 7.
tho others forgot it too soon, and do not spare to say; that if the same
diligence, the same earnest solicitations had been made use of in that affair
which have been since exercised directly contrary to the design of it, there is
no doubt but every (...) of it would have had its desired effect, and all his
Majest^^^ Subjects* would have enjoyed the fruits of it, and (...) extolling a
Prince so careful to keep his Sacred Promise^ (...) People.

Before this unworthy Insinuation can be (...) ^^swered, I must transcribe so
much of that Declaration (...) here supposed to have sailed of its (...)
follows:

And because the Passion and uncharitableness of the times have produced
several opinions in Religion, Declaration from Breda. April 4. 1660.
by which men are engaged in Parties and Animosities against each other, which,
when they shall hereafter unite in a freedom of Conversation, will be better
understood, we do declare a liberty to tender Consciences, and that no man
shall be disquieted, or called in question, for differences of Opinion in
matter of Religion,
which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, and that we shall be ready to
consent to such an Act of Parliament, as upon mature deliberation shall be
offered to us for the full granting that Indulgence.

Here is his Majesty, Royal Promise, wherein ought to be observed, that his
Majesty promised nothing to any Party that should disturb the peace of the
Kingdom. Nor to them that did not, further than that he would consent to such
an Act of Parliament when it should be offered to him. So that he was not
obliged to procure such an Act, nor yet to do it without an Act. And now let us
see how they behaved themselves toward him.

Whilst (says his Majesty) we continued in this temper of mind and resolution,
Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, October. 25. 1660.
and have so far complied with the persuasion of particular persons, and the
distemper of the times, as to be contented with the exercise of our Religion in
our own Chapel according to the constant practice and Laws established,
without enjoying that practice, and the observation of those Laws in the
Churches of the Kingdom, in which we have undergone the Censure of many, as if
we were without that zeal for the Church which we ought to have, and which by
Gods Grace we shall always retain; we have found our selves not so Heartily
dealt with as we have deserved, and that there are unquiet and restless
spirits, who without abating any of their own distemper in recompense of the
Moderation they find in us continue their bitterness against the Church, and
endeavor to raise Jealousies of us, and to lessen our reputation by their
reproaches,
as if we were not true to the Professions we have made, and in order thereunto
they have very unseasonably caused to be printed, published, and dispersed
throughout the Kingdom a Declaration heretofore printed in our Name during the
time of our being in Scotland, of which we shall say no more than that the
Circumstances by which we were enforced to sign that Declaration, are enough
known to the World; and that the worthiest and greatest part of that Nation did
even then detest and abhor the ill usage of us in that particular, when the
same Tyranny was exercised there by the power of a few ill men, which at that
time had spread it self over this Kingdom, and therefore we had no reason to
expect that we should at this Season,
when we are doing all we can to wipe out the memory of all that has been done
amiss by other men, and we thank God, have wiped it out of our own remembrance,
have been our self assaulted with these Reproaches, which we will likewise
forget.

Since the Printing that Declaration several
seditious Pamphlets and Queries have been published and scattered abroad,
There are some seditious Preachers who cannot be content to be dispensed with
for their full Obedience to some Laws Established without reproaching and
inveighing against those Laws* how Established soever, who tell their Auditors,
that the Apostle meant when he bid them stand to their Liberties, that they
should stand to their Arms, etc. Lord Chancellors Speech, May 8. 1661.
to infuse dislike and Jealousies into the hearts of the People, and of the
ARMY, and some who ought rather to have repented the former mischief they have
wrought, than to have endeavored to improve it, have had the hardiness to
publish that the Doctrine of the Church, against which no man with whom we have
conferred has excepted, ought to be reformed as well as the Discipline.

This over-passionate and turbulent way of proceeding, and the impatience we
find in many for some speedy determination in these matters, whereby the minds
of men may be composed, and the peace of the Church established, has prevailed
with us to invert the Method we had proposed to our Self, and even in order to
the better calling and composing of a Synod (which the present Jealousies will
hardly agree upon) by the Assistance of Gods blessed Spirit, which we daily
invoke and supplicate, to give some determination Our self to the matters in
difference, until such a Synod may be called, as may without prejudice or
passion give us such further assistance toward a perfect union of Affections,
as well as submission to Authority, as is necessary: And we are the rather
induced to take this upon us by finding upon the full Conferences we have had
with Learned men of several Persuasions, that the mischiefs, under which both
Church and State do at present suffer, do not result from any formed Doctrine
or Conclusion which either Party maintains or avows, but from the Passion, and
Appetite, and Interest of particular persons, who contract greater prejudices
to each other from those Affections, than would naturally rise from their
Opinions; and those distempers must be in some degree allayed before the
meeting in a Synod can be attended with better success than their meeting in
other places, and their discourses in Pulpits have hitherto been; and till all
thoughts of victory, are laid aside, the humble and necessary thoughts for the
vindication of Truth cannot be enough entertained.

We must for the honor of all those of either persuasion, with whom we have
conferred, declare, that the profession and desires of all for the advancement
of Piety and true Godliness, are the same; their professions of zeal for the
peace of the Church, the same: of affection and duty for us, the same; They all
approve Episcopacy; they all approve a set Form of Liturgy; they all disapprove
and dislike the sin of Sacrilege, and the Alienation of the Revenue of the
Church; and if upon these excellent foundations, in submission to which there
is such a harmony of affections, any superstructures should be raised, to the
shaking those foundations, and to the contracting and lessening the blessed
gift of Charity, which is a vital part of Religion; we shall think Our Self
very unfortunate, and even suspect that we are defective in that Administration
of Government with which God has entrusted us.

Page 18. of this Declaration, His Majesty did again renew what he had formerly
said in his Declaration from Breda for the liberty of tender Consciences, etc.
and declared, if any have been disturbed in that kind since Our Arrival here,
it has not proceeded from any Direon of ours.

His Majecty says in the fifth page of this Declaration* The Presbyterians did
only desire modestly such alterations in Episcopacy and the Liturgy, as without
shaking foundations, might best allay the present distempers which the
indisposition of the time, and the tenderness of some men's Consciences had
contracted, for the better doing whereof we did intend upon our first Arrival
in this Kingdom to call a Synod of Divines, as the most proper Expedient to
provide a proper Remedy for all those differences, and dissatisfactions which
had or should arise, etc.

In the next Spring a Commission was Issued out under the Great Seal to several
Episcopal and dissenting Divines to review and correct, Address to the Freemen
and Freeholders of the Nation, Part. 1.
if they should see cause, the Book of Prayer, and to make such alterations in
it as should be thought fit; instead of which the Dissenting Divines rejected
the whole Book, and published a new one: So that this meeting, which was
designed chiefly in favor of the Dissenters, discovered the falsehood of all
their Oily pretenses, and showed they were neither for Liturgies or Episcopacy.

They had also made a strong Party in the Army, of which an account has been
given already.

So that the Parliament seeing there was no peace to be had as long as these
men might do what they listed; and pervert the People, and incence them against
the Government, passed the Act of Uniformity to Commence from St. Bartholomew,
1662.

During all this time his Majesty, notwithstanding their ill usage of him,
mentioned in the last Declaration I cited, continued so courteous to these fiery
men as to excuse it to the Parliament, March 1. 1661. in these words:

Gentlemen, I hear you are very zealous for the Church, and very solicitous,
and even jealous that there is not Expedition enough used in that Affair; and I
thank you for it, since I presume it proceeds from a good root of Piety and
Devotion, but I must tell you, I have the worst luck in the world, if, after
all the reproaches of being a Papist, whilst I was abroad, I am suspected of
being a Presbyterian now I am come home: I know you will not take it unkindly,
if I tell you I am as zealous for the Church of England as any of you can be,
and am enough acquainted with the Enemies of it, on all sides; that I am as
much in love with the Book of Common Prayer, as you can wish, and have
prejudice enough to those who do not love it; who I hope in time will be better
informed, and change their minds; and you may be confident, I do as much desire
to see a Uniformity settled as any amongst you. I pray trust me in that Affair,
I promise you to hasten the dispatch of it with all convenient speed, you may
rely upon me in it.

I have transmitted the Book of Common Prayer, with those Alterations and
Additions, which have been presented to me by the House of Convocation, to the
House of Peers with my Approbation, that the Act of Uniformity may relate to
it, so that I presume it will shortly be dispatched there: And when all is done
we can, the well settling that Affair will require great Prudence and
discretion, and the Absence of all Passion and Precipitation.

The Act of Uniformity being settled and passed his Majesty did not give over
all his thoughts for the Dissenters, By a Declaration published December 26.
1662. in which are these words:
but in the year 1662. was again laboring to revive his Declaration from Breda
for Liberty of Conscience; We shall make it our special care, so far forth as
in us lies, without invading the freedom of Parliament, to incline them to make
such an Act, etc.
which the House of Commons opposed, and drew up their reasons against it, in
the form of an Address, wherein they particularly answer the pretenses from the
Declaration from Breda. Which tho the whole Address is in the third part of the
Address to the Freemen and Freeholders of the Nation I will here transcribe,
because this Book may possibly fall into some hands which have not that.

We have considered the nature of your Majesty's Declaration from Breda, Friday
Feb. 27. 1663 Collection of Messages, Addresses, etc. Page 6.
and are humbly of opinion, that your Majesty ought not to be pressed with it
any further.

BECAUSE it is not a Promise in it self, but only a Gracious Declaration of
your Majesty's Intentions to do what in you lay, and what a Parliament should
advise your Majesty to do; And no such advise was ever given, or thought fit to
be offered, nor could it be otherwise understood, because there were Laws of
Uniformity then in being,
which could not be dispensed with but by Act of Parliament. They who do
pretend a right to that supposed Promise, put their Right into the hands of
their Representatives, whom they chose to serve in this Parliament for them,
who have passed, and your Majesty consented to the Act of Uniformity; if any
shall presume to say, that a right to the benefit of this Declaration does
still remain after this Act passed; it tends to dissolve the very bonds of
Government, and to suppose a disability in your Majesty, and your two Houses of
Parliament, to make a Law contrary to any part of your Majesty's Declaration,
though both Houses should advise your Majesty to it.

Yet still his Majesty was so tender of these men, that the tenth of February
1667. the Commons addressed to the King for a Proclamation to enforce obedience
to the Laws in force, concerning Religion and Church Government as it is now
established, according to the Act of Uniformity. And the fourth of March
following, the House taking into consideration the Information of the Insolent
carriages and abuses committed by persons in several places, in disturbing of
Ministers in their Churches, and holding Meetings of their own, contrary to the
Laws of this Realm; Addressed again, for a Proclamation against Conventicles,
and that there may be care taken for the preservation of the Peace of the
Kingdom against unlawful Assemblies of Papists and Nonconformists; which was
promised the next day. The third of November 1669. the House of Commons gave
his Majesty thanks for issuing a Proclamation for putting the Laws in execution
against Nonconformists, and for suppressing Conventicles with the humble desire
of this House for his Majesty's continuance of the same care for suppressing of
the same for the future.

The Eighth of March 1669. the House having received information of a dangerous
and unlawful Conventicle lately met in the West of this Kingdom, and of
Treasonable words there spoken, and that his Majesty had upon information,
given order for the Prosecution of the Offenders. The House returned him their
Thanks, and desired that his Majesty would be pleased to consider the danger of
Conventicles in and near London and Westminster, from the nature of those
further off, and to give order for the speedy suppressing of them: and that his
Majesty would give order to put the Laws against Popish Recusants in execution.

Yet after all this, the Fifteenth of March 1671-2. his Majesty published a
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience by the Advice of his Privy Council; which
he was hardly persuaded to depart from by the Commons in Feb. See the first
part of the Address to the Freemen, etc.
1672. The mischiefs of which Toleration or Indulgence have been so great to
his Majesty in particular, and the whole Nation in general, that no man can
well express them.

And now who can enough admire the Insolence of this discontented Gentleman,
who dare say as he does, That if the same diligence, the same earnest
solicitations had been made use of in that affair, which have since been
exercised directly contrary to the design of it, there is no doubt but every
part of it would have had the desired success, and all his Majesty's Subjects
would have enjoyed the fruits of it, and have now been extolling a Prince so
careful to keep sacred his Promises to his People.

I say on the contrary, could his Majesty have been prevailed on by the
unanswerable reasons of that most Excellent and most Loyal House of Commons, to
have enforced the execution of the Laws against Dissenters, he had never seen
his Affairs reduced to that ill condition they were not long since in. And tho
I question not but by Gods blessing his Majesty will in a short time resettle
things, yet I will hope for time to come it shall be a Maxim in England, That
the Strength of the Dissenters is the Weakness of the Throne.

As for our Authors jeering reflection on his Majesty's other Declaration of
April 20. 1679. concerning the Privy Council, and some persons then taken into
it, his Majesty has had but too much reason not to stick to the same when he
see there were some men whom nothing could oblige to be faithful to him; but if
his Majesty has not advised with them; he has with some others, at least as
wise, and much honester than some of those who were laid aside, so that that
Declaration has been effectually made good to the Nation. And therefore we
have no reason to question his Majesty's Candor in this.

As for the Declaration read in our Churches the other day, Page 7.
there needs no other Argument to make us doubt of the reality of the Promises
which it makes, than to consider how partially, and with how little sincerity
the things which it pretends to relate are therein represented, it begins with
telling us in his Majesty's Name, That it was with exceeding great trouble that
he was brought to dissolve the two last Parliaments without more benefit to the
People by the calling of them. We should question his Majesty's Wisdom, did we
not believe him to have understood that never Parliament had greater
Opportunites of doing good to Himself and his People. He could not but be
sensible of the dangers, and of the necessities of his Kingdom, and therefore
could not without exceeding great trouble be prevailed upon for the sake of a
few desperate men (whom he thought himself concerned to love now, only because
he had loved them too well, and trusted them too much before;) not only to
disappoint the Hopes and Expectations of his own People, but of almost all
Europe. His Majesty did indeed do his part, so far, in giving opportunities of
proving for our good, as the calling of Parliaments do amount to, and it is to
be imputed to the Ministers only that the success of them did not answer his
and our Expectations.

Thus far my Author is recited verbatim, that it may appear I do him no wrong.
By which discourse of his (taking for the present no notice of his reflection
on his Majesty for a person whose Promises were not real) it is agreed that the
two last Parliaments had great opportunities of doing good to his Majesty and
his People, and my Author goes further, and adds the Hopes and Expectation of
almost all Europe to them. That his Majesty called these Parliaments he owns.
That one of them sat a competent time for that purpose cannot be denied, viz.
from Thursday October 21. 1680. till Monday the tenth day of January following,
which deducting the time spent in the Trial of Viscount Stafford, was in some
men's opinions sufficient to have dispatched much more business than was then
done. And yet it does not appear that his Majesty was inclined to have
prorogued them then if he had not been highly provoked by them.

What my Author means by those few desperate men that prevailed upon his
Majesty so much against his Will to part with that Parliament, I cannot guess,
except they be the Eminent Persons which were declared Enemies to the King and
Kingdom: which if they were, they are neither so few, nor such desperate men as
to be laid aside barely upon a Vote of the House of Commons, without any Order
or Process of Law, The Declaration.
any hearing of their Defense, or any proof so much as offered against them.
And I believe the meanest of them is equal to this Gentleman, as scornfully as
he speaks of them.

But then in the last place, whether or no the dissolution be to be imputed to
the Ministers, or to the Parliament, i. e. the House of Commons will appear
best in the examination of his discourse, and of the Declaration.

It is certain (says my Author) it cannot be imputed to any of the proceedings
of either of those Parliaments; Page 7.
which were composed of men of as good sense and quality as any in the Nation,
and proceeded with as great moderation, and managed their debates with as much
temper, as ever was known in any Parliament. If all this is as certainly true
as it is confidently asserted, then is it but a folly to dispute any further
about it. But because his Majesty in his Declaration has said some things that
seem to look another way, my Reader may, if he please, suspend his belief of
this particular too; till his Majesty's Allegations and this Gentleman's defense
are examined, and then he will be better able to pass his Judgment.

If they seemed to go too far in any thing, his Majesty's Speeches or
Declarations had misled them, by some of which they had been invited to enter
into every one of those debates to which so much exception has been since
taken. Did he not frequently recommend the prosecution of the Plot to them,
with a strict and impartial inquiry? Did he not tell them, That he neither
thought himself nor them safe, Speech. October. 21. 1680.
till that matter was gone through with? Yes doubtless his Majesty did all
this; but then where is any exception taken against any thing of this Nature
they have done?

Did he not in his Speech April 30, Page 8.
1679. assure them that it was his constant care to secure our Religion for the
future in all events; and that in all things which concerned the Public
Security, He would not follow their Zeal, but lead it. But, Address to the
Freemen and Freeholders, Part II. page 22.
Sir, did not his Majesty then also let you know that he excepted one thing, in
which he would neither lead, nor follow their Zeal, which was the altering the
descent of the Crown in the right Line, or defeating the Succession, which his
Majesty commanded to be further explained by the Lord Chancellor, in such
manner that it appeared to the whole Nation that his Majesty was resolved to do
any thing for the freeing his People from their fears of Popery but what might
tend to the disinheriting the Duke of York, or any other Lawful Successor? Now
Though his Majesty could not do that without acting contrary to his own
judgment, strengthened with the Opinion and Advice given by his Royal
Grandfather, King James of blessed memory, to his Eldest Son Price Henry, in
these words: But if God give you not Succession, defraud never the nearest by
right, whatsoever conceit ye have of the person. For Kingdoms are ever at Gods
disposition, and in that case we are but live-rentars, lying no more in the
Kings, nor Peoples hand to dispossess the righteous Heir. Basil. Doron. 62.
ult. Ed.
you, Sir, may remember that nothing but this would satisfy the Commons in
either of the two last Parliaments, in which they were not misled by any of his
Majesty's Speeches or declarations, much less by this which was made of purpose
to prevent the Bill before it was moved in the House of Commons.

Has he not often wished that he might be enabled to exercise a power of
Dispensation in reference to those Protestants, Page 8.
who through tenderness of misguided Conscience did not conform to the
Ceremonies, Speech, October. 26. 1662.
Discipline, and Government of the Church: Speech, Dece^. 26. 1662.
and promised that he would make it his special care to incline the wisdom of
the Parliament to concur with him in making an Act to that purpose? And did not
that very Parliament draw up a long Address to his Majesty, containing the
reasons why they could not concur with him in that point? And is not this one
good proof that his Majesty was not unmindful of his Declaration at Breda, but
was kept from doing what he was otherwise inclined enough to, not by a few
desperate men, but by the Parliament?

And least the malice of ill men, Page 8.
(i. e. the Dissenters) might object, that these gracious inclinations of his
continued no longer than while there was a possibility of giving the Papists
equal benefit of a Toleration. Has not his Majesty, since the discovery of the
Plot, since there was no hopes of getting so much as a connivance for them in
his Speech of March 6. 1678-9. expressed his zeal not only for the Protestant
Religion in general, but for an Union amongst all sorts of Protestants. His
Majesty's words here are not truly recited, but are these: I meet you here with
the most earnest desire that man can have to unite the minds of all my Subjects
both to me and to one another, and I resolve it shall be your faults if the
success be not suitable to my desires, etc. And a little after; Besides that
end of Union which I aim at (and which I wish could be extended to Protestants
abroad as well as at home) I propose by this last great step I have made (the
sending away his Royal Highness the Duke of York) to discern whether Protestant
Religion and the peace of the Kingdom be as truly aimed at by others as they
are really intended by me, etc. By which it appears the Union his Majesty here
meant was not that Union that was afterward set on foot in Parliament, and I
cannot but suspect these words were misrecited of purpose.

And did not he command my Lord Chancellor to tell them, Page 8.
That it was necessary to distinguish between Popish and other Recusants,
between them that would destroy the whole flock, and them that only wander from
it. These words are indeed in the Lord Chancellors Speech but with this
Preface, Neither is there, nor has been these fifteen hundred years, a purer
Church than ours, Speech. Mar. 6 1678-9.
so it is for the sake of this poor Church alone that the State has been so
much disturbed. It is her Truth and Peace, her Decency and Order which they
(the Plotters and Papists) labor to undermine, and pursue with so restless a
malice; and since they do so, it will be necessary for us to distinguish
between Popish and other Recusants, between them that would destroy the whole
Flock, and them that only wander from it. So that whatever distinction his
Majesty intended to allow between the Popish and Protestant Recusants, it must
be such as was consistent with the Truth, Peace, Decency, and Order of the
Religion by Law established, which I suspect the Project of Union set on foot
was not, much less the Vote of the tenth of January for the suspending the
execution of all Penal Laws made against them, as a weakening of the Protestant
Interest, an encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.

These things considered, Page 8.
we should not think the Parliament went too far, but rather that they did not
follow his Majesty's Zeal with an equal pace. At this rate of concluding a man
may draw any Conclusion from any premises if he has a mind to it. His Majesty
would join with them in any course that might tend to the security of the
Protestant Religion for the future, Lord Chancellors Speech, March 6. 167^-^.
so as the same extend not to the diminution of his own Prerogative, nor to
alter the descent of the Crown in the right Line, nor to defeat the Succession.
Therefore when they brought in a Bill to disinherit his Majesty's Brother
against his expressly declared resolution, they did not go too far, but rather
they did not follow his Majesty's Zeal with an equal pace. When his Majesty
thought it necessary to distinguish betwixt Popish Recusants, and Protestant
Dissenters; that is, to favor the latter more than the former, they were for
taking away all those Laws at once that have distinguished betwixt the
Dissenters and the Religion established, and giving up this Pure Church into
the hands of her bitter Enemies, that had but just before bid fair for her
ruin; as if the only care had been, that the Papists might not have had the
honor of destroying her, and yet we are not to believe they went too far in
this neither.

The truth is, Page 9.
if we observe the daily provocations of the Popish Faction, whose rage and
insolence were only increased by the discovery of the Plot, (so that they
seemed to defy Parliaments, as well as inferior Courts of Justice, under the
Protection of the Duke, their Publicly Avowed Head;) who still carried on
their designs by new and more detestable methods than ever, and were
continually busy by Perjuries and Subornations, to charge the best and most
considerable Protestants in the Kingdom with Treasons as black as those of
which themselves were guilty. If we observe what vile Arts were used to hinder
the further discovery, what liberty was given to reproach the Discoverers, what
means used to destroy or corrupt them; how the very Criminals were encouraged
and allowed to be good Witnesses against their Accusers: We should easily
excuse an English Parliament thus beset, if they had been carried to some
little Excesses not justifiable by the Laws of Parliament, or unbecoming the
wisdom and gravity of an English Senate.

Now other men may possibly be of another mind, and think that if the state of
things had been but half so deplorable as they are here described, the least
Excess had been then inexcusable, for there is never more need of gravity than
in great and eminent dangers; but what I shall say will, it is like, not be
much regarded, hear then what the Chancellor of England said: Speech Mar. 6.
1678-9.
The Considerations which are now to be laid before you are as Urgent and as
Weighty as were ever yet offered to any Parliament, or indeed ever can be, so
great and so surprising have been our Dangers at home, so formidable are the
appearances of danger from abroad, that the most United Counsels, the most
Sedate and the calmest Temper, together with the most dutiful and zealous
affections that a Parliament can show, are all become absolutely and
indispensably necessary for our preservation. So that little excesses are great
crimes; when men are beset with dangers tho they may be excused in times of
Peace and Security, if I rightly understand this wise and honorable person.

But if we come to search into the particulars here enumerated, there may
possibly arise better Arguments to excuse their Excesses. The Popish Faction
about that time having tried all other ways to clear themselves of the Plot,
without any good success, fell at last upon another Project, which was to start
a New Plot. They knew there were in London some Clubbs, and Coffee-house-Sets,
of Presbyterians, Old Army Officers, discontented Gentlemen, and Republicans,
which had close Cabals, and private Meetings, and that the Court had a jealous
eye upon them, as indeed there was good cause for it, and out of these
materials they thought they might easily raise the structure of a Presbyterian
Plot against the State, but all the chief men of the Popish Faction being fled,
imprisoned, or executed, this grand Design fell into the hands of people of no
great either parts or reputation, to carry on so difficult an Undertaking, and
it was not likely neither to be easily believed if it had no other Witnesses
but Papists to attest it. And it was not possible for them to bring over any
other, of any reputation, in the low estate their affairs then were, so that
the Contrivance miscarried, and only tended to make the Papists more hated than
they were before, and this is called the Meal-Tub Plot; which I should rather
have ascribed to the rage and desperation of the Papists, than to their
Insolence, which was then very well abated by the Execution of Coleman, Staley,
the Murderers of Sir Edmundbury Godfry, and the Jesuits, which had reduced
them to too low a condition to defy the meanest Courts of Justice in the
Nation, and put them upon those mean and base thoughts of Perjuries and
Subornations, to avoid that ruin which they saw ready to overwhelm and destroy
them.

But that which they were never able to effect themselves the Dissenters did
for them, for from the moment the Popish Plot was discovered they entered into
a project to make use of it another way against the King and Court on one hand,
and against the Church and the Loyal Gentry on the other.

In order to this they had these close Cabals, and private Meetings, (I last
mentioned) where they invented and spread abroad a thousand idle Stories to
fright the Common People out of their little Wits; and also raised Money, which
they liberally bestowed amongst the Informers to render them more obsequious to
them, so that in a short time Informing became a very thriving trade, if it
would have held; and this great familiarity betwixt the discoverers of the Plot
and the Whigs was the best color afterward for the Meal-Tub Presbyterian Plot.

By this means the People were easily deluded into a conceit that these
Gentlemen who took such care of the Discoverers, and their Party, who were
always haranguing against Popery, were the only Protestants in the Nation that
could save them out of the hands of the Papists. And on the other side, the
Court and all the Loyal Gentry and Clergy became suspected of want of zeal
against Popery; and this was heightened by the Discoverers themselves, who were
for the most part men of no very great or good qualities, and were so puffed up
by the flatteries and Liberalities of the Whigs, and their own high conceits of
the Service they had done the Nation, that they thought no recompense, no
respect which was bestowed upon them was great enough, and so became insolent
both in their carriage and discourses, by which means they became less
respected rhan before, till at last they were forced to give themselves up
intrirely to the Whigs.

This had two very different effects upon several sorts of men, some believed
that there was no Popish Plot, after they saw the Dissenters reap all the
advantage by it. And others thought that all but the Dissenters were more or
less concerned in the guilt of it as well as the Papists, or at least were
favorers of the Papists and Popery.

Things being in this state, especially after the dissolution of the Long Loyal
Parliament, the Discoverers lost much of their reputation, but that ever any
vile Arts were used to hinder any further discovery of the Plot by any but the
Papists, or that liberty was given to reproach, or any means used to corrupt or
destroy them that were the Witnesses, except it were by Papists, does not
appear, and in all those cases, all the care in the world was taken of the
Witnesses too, by the King and his Council. And as to that which my Author
mentions in the last place, How the very Criminals were encouraged and allowed
to be good Witnesses against their Accusers, I cannot imagine what he means by
it; or when, or where it should be done, tho I have read over all the Printed
Trials, and therefore it is enough to deny this, and put him upon the proof of
it.

But how did all these things tend to the advantage of the Popish Plotters in
the end?

First, As the Zeal of these people fired the Rabble, so it put the Long Loyal
Parliament too into so great a fret, that it proved mortal; and then going
downward, it put the Country into such disorder, that tho his Majesty has
given us the opportunities of choosing three Parliaments one after another, we
have not been able to send up one, that has not fallen into those little
Excesses which have occasioned their dissolution before they had done us any
considerable good. And at length his Majesty is forced for some time to keep us
without one; to try if Fasting will bring us into our senses again, and in the
mean time the noise of the Popish Plot is drowned, by new and more surprising
attempts of the Whigs, and that Popish Party, which whilst it had none but real
Papists in its List, was the abomination of all Protestants, now the Whigs have
joined all the Church of England men to them by their lies and slanders, even
that very Popish Party begin to be better thought of for their sakes who are
falsely joined with them, and by these and many other ways the prosecution of
the Popish Plot any further is thought by most men impossible. Whereas had not
the Dissenters been thus serviceable to them, there is reason to believe they
would have suffered much more than they have done, and there would have been
much sharper Laws made against them, than they need fear now.

If all this be considered, it will easily appear, it was not the Protection of
the Duke, whom this Gentleman can never prove the Publicly avowed Head of the
Papists, but the over-doing of the business, that has delivered the Popish
Faction out of that fear and danger which the discovery of the Plot had cast
them into.

We must own (says my Author) that his Majesty has opened all his Parliaments
at Westminster with very Gracious Expressions, Page 9.
nor have we wanted that Evidence of his readiness to satisfy the desires of
his Subjects, but that sort of Evidence will soon lose its force if it be never
followed by Actions correspondent; by which only the World can judge of the
sincerity of Expressions or Intentions.

Had the two short Parliaments at Westminster been the only Parliaments his
Majesty had ever called since his return, there might have been some color for
this undutiful reflection, but all the World knows there were two there before
them, and that his Majesty complied with them in almost all they asked in a
regular way, and when at any time he was necessitated to deny them any request,
he gave them such reason for it, as they seemed to be well pleased with his
denial.

It will appear to any man that his Majesty has passed more Acts in twenty
years than any one of his Ancestors have done in twice the time, that he has
abated more of his just and real Prerogative than any Prince we ever yet had
could be brought to part with. The Court of Wards, and the Right of Purveyance,
were great advantages to the Crown, and as troublesome to the Subjects till his
Majesty generously gave them up, and these two Prerogatives were never
Contested, and I might instance in some other if I did not think it sit to be
as short as I can.

In almost twenty years that the Long Loyal Parliament sat, I never heard of
above one Bill that had passed both Houses, which was denied his Royal Assent,
and that was, The Bill for preserving the peace of the Kingdom by raising the
Militia, and continuing them in duty for two and forty days; which Bill was
refused November 30. 1678. and then also his Majesty gave this reason for it:
That he did not refuse to pass it for the dislike of the matter, but the
manner, because it put the Militia for so many days out of his power, and if it
had been but for half an hour he would not have consented to it, because of the
ill consequences it might have hereafter, the Militia being wholly in the
Crown, etc. Now I believe it would be difficult for my Author to make and prove
the like instance, in any of our former Princes.

And in the first of the short Westminster Parliaments his Majesty passed the
Act for the better securing of the Liberty of the Subject, and for preventing
imprisonment beyond Seas, A seasonable Address to both Houses of Parliament,
page 4.
to which an honorable Person adds, The Act against quartering of Soldiers
upon the Subject, and says, his Majesty might have had many Millions for these
Acts if he had insisted on a bargain, or known how to distinguish between his
own private Interest and that of the Subject, or the truckling way of Bartering
when the good of his People was concerned.

And in the last short-lived Westminster Parliament his Majesty passed the Act
against Importation of Irish Cattle, for no other visible cause, but because
both Houses had passed it, tho it tended to the Diminution of his Revenue. And
now let us see how gratefully our Author treats him for all these Royal and
Prince-like Favors.

Therefore the Favorites did little consult his Majesty's Honor when they
bring him in solemnly declaring to his Subjects, Page 9.
that his intentions were as far as would have consisted with the very Being of
the Government, to have complied with any thing that could have been proposed
to him to accomplish those Ends he had mentioned, which were the satisfying the
desires of his Subjects, and securing them against all their just fears, when
they are not able to produce an instance wherein they suffered him to comply in
any one thing. Whatever the House of Commons Addressed for, was certainly
denied, tho it was only for that reason; and there was no surer way of
Intituling ones self to the favor of the Court, than to receive a Censure from
the representative body of the People.

As to the Addresses made by the House of Commons alone, they were many of them
such as his Majesty could not comply with without great mischief to himself or
them that had expressed the greatest Zeal for his Service, and when for that case
only they seemed to be persecuted, it would have been very impolitick in his
Majesty, tho he had been his own man, and not under the dominion of the
Favorites (as it seems he was) to have yielded to the Commons against them.

But cannot the Favorites instance wherein they suffered his Majesty to comply
in any one thing with the House of Commons? Did not his Majesty at their single
request Pardon a great many Informers against the Plotters? Did he not pardon
B. Harris too, his 500 l. Fine and Imprisonment which he had incurred by
Printing disloyal and seditious Pamphlets? Did not his Majesty upon their
Address discharge all the Protestant Dissenters who were then under prosecution
upon several Penal Statutes, without paying Fees, as far as it could be done
according to Law, and promise also to recommend them to the Judges? There might
many other instances be given, of moneys issued out, of persons taken care for,
and the like upon the single request of the Commons, so that I cannot but
wonder where my Authors modesty was when he pressed the Favorites to give one
instance of his Majesty's compliance with the House of Commons.

But his Majesty and the Court were kind to all that received any Censure from
the representative body of the People. They might thank themselves for that who
bestowed their Censures so freely on men that had deserved very well of his
Majesty and the Government, and yet I believe there may be some instances given
of men whom they Censured or imprisoned, that have not been mightily advanced
since by the Court, but let us examine those few particular Examples my Author
has marked out.

Let it for the present be admitted (says my Author) that some of the things
desired by that Parliament were exorbitant, Page 10.
and (because we will put the objection as strong as is possible) inconsistent
with the very being of the Government, yet at least some of their Petitions
were more reasonable.

Doubtless there was some such, which therefore were freely granted by his
Majesty, as I have proved.

The Government might have subsisted though the Gentlemen put out of the
Commission of the Peace for their zealous acting against the Papists had been
restored. Page 10.


And so might the Protestant Religion by Law established be preserved without
the assistance of these zealous Gentlemen, and therefore his Majesty was not to
be instructed by these Representatives, whom he should employ as Justices of
the Peace, especially after they had discovered so much kindness for the
Dissenters, who have something an odd Notion of Papists and Popery.

Nor would a final Dissolution of all things have ensued, Page 10.
tho Sir George Jefferies had been removed out of all Public Offices, or my
Lord Hallifax himself from his Majesty's Presence and Councils.

The first of these, Sir George Jefferies was then Recorder of London, Votes.
Nov. 13. 1680.
and was prosecuted by a part of the City, for that he by traducing and
obstructing Petitioning for the sitting of that Parliament, had betrayed the
Rights of the Subject. Now that Gentleman opposed them (as many others did) in
obedience to his Majesty's Proclamation, and the Laws of the Land; and it was a
little unreasonable that his Majesty should join with the Commons to ruin him,
though it could be made out that his Majesty's Proclamation was illegal, and
that there were a mistake also in the point of Law.

My Lord Hallifax was prosecuted only for opposing the Bill for disinheriting
the Duke of York in the House of Lords, and no fault whatsoever laid to his
charge. Now he being a Member of that House, it had been very unreasonable for
his Majesty to have punished him for using his own just and legal freedom, in a
case especially wherein his Majesty had declared his own resolution so very
often before.

Now, Sir, tho these two Persons are not essentially necessary to the
preservation of the Government, yet it is absolutely so, that his Majesty do
not give up those that have faithfully and legally served him in their proper
Stations, either to please the People or their Representatives, without a legal
trial, and a just defense. We may all remember what the Consequences of his
Majesty's Fathers giving up the Earl of Strafford in the beginning of the late
troubles were; and I hope I shall never live to see that sort of compliance
reacted again.

Had the Statute of 35. Page 10.
Eliz. (which had justly slept for Eighty years, and of late, unreasonably 16
Car. 2. etc. 4.
revived) been repealed, surely the Government might still have been safe. And
though the Fanatics perhaps had not deserved so well as that in favor to
them, his Majesty should have passed that Bill, yet since the Repeal might
hereafter be of great use to those of the Church of England, in case of a
Popish Successor, (which Blessing his Majesty seems resolved to bequeath to his
People) one would have thought he might have complied with the Parliament in
that Proposal.

It is very probable his Majesty would have complied with them in that
particular, tho it is past a perhaps the Fanatics had not, nor ever will as
long as they continue such, deserve that favor at his hands: But, modest Sir,
how does it appear that his Majesty is resolved to bequeath his People the
Blessing of a Popish Successor? Has he promised the Duke to die before him?
Has his Majesty obliged him to continue a Papist (if he be one) in spite of
his Interest to the contrary? Is this your Justice? Is this your Modesty?

But the Ministers thought they had not sufficiently triumphed over the
Parliament by getting the Bill rejected unless it were done in such a manner as
that the precedent might be more pernicious to Posterity, Page 10.
by introducing a new Negative in the making of Laws, than the losing the Bill,
how useful soever, could be to the present Age.

That this Bill was not tendered to his Majesty for his Assent appears by three
Votes of the Commons at Oxford.

The House then according to their order (the day before) took into
consideration the matter relating to the Bill which passed both Houses in tbe
last Parliament, Friday, March 25. 1681.
entitled, An Act for the repeal of a Statute made in the 35 year of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, but was not tendered to his Majesty for his Royal Assent.

Resolved, that a Message be sent to the Lords, desiring a Conference with
their Lordships in matters relating to the constitution of Parliaments, in
passing Bills.

Ordered that a Committee be appointed to consider of, and prepare the subject
matter to be offered at the said Conference.

Thus far that Parliament went in order to the discovery of the cause of the
not tendering that Bill, and I have heard the Lords also were upon an inquiry
what was become of it, but the dissolution preventing them, I never heard that
there was any discovery made then or since of the person or persons that took
it away.

Now where my Author had his intelligence that the Ministers took it away to
introduce a new Negative in the making of Laws, I shall not inquire.

This we may affirm, Page 10.
That if the success of this Parliament did not answer expectation, whoever was
guilty of it, the House of Commons did not fail in doing their part. Never did
men husband their time to more advantage. They opened the Eyes of the Nation,
they showed them their danger, with a freedom becoming English men.

It was a Caution given by Queen Elizabeth in the end of a Parliament held in
the 35th year of her Reign: Historical Collect. of the four last Parliaments of
Q. Eliz. p. 47.
That she would not have the People feared with reports of great dangers, but
rather encouraged witb boldness against the Enemies of the State, And what the
effect of our new Politics was once before we will remember.

They Asserted tbe Peoples right of Petitioning.

Yes, that they did too very effectually. Tho there was an Act of Parliament
then in force, with this Preface. Whereas it has been found by sad experience
that tumultuous and other disorderly soliciting, 13 Car. 2. ca. 5.
and procuring of Hands by private persons to Petitions, Complaints,
Remonstrances, and Declarations, and other Addresses to the King, or both or
either houses of Parliament, for alteration of Matters Established by Law,
redress of pretended Grievances in Church or State, OR OTHER PUBLIC
CONCERNMENTS, have been made use of, to serve the Ends of factious and
seditious persons gotten into power, to the violation of the Public Peace, and
have been great means of the late unhappy Wars, Confusions, and Calamities of
this Nation, etc.

They Proceeded vigorously against the Conspirators discovered, Page 10.
and heartily endeavored to take away the very By the Bill to disinherit his
Royal Highness.
Root of the Conspiracy. They had before them as many great and useful Bills as
had been seen in any Parliament, and it is not to be laid at their doors that
they proved abortive. This Age will never fail to give them their grateful
Acknowledgments, And Posterity will remember that House of Commons with honor.

Jamque opus exegit: quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignes
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetusas.
Nomenque erit indelebile vestrum.
And now the work is ended, which Jove's rage,
Nor fire, nor Sword shall raze, nor eating Age,
And their immortal name shall never die.
We come now to the particular enumeration of those gracious things which were
said to the Parliament at Westminster. Page 11.
His Majesty asked of them the supporting the Alliances he had made for the
preservation of the General Peace in Christendom. It is to be wished his
Majesty had added to his gracious asking of Money a gracious Communication of
those Alliances, that such blind obedience had not been exacted from them as to
contribute to the support of they knew not what themselves, nor before they had
considered whether those Alliances which were made, were truly designed for
that End which was Pretended (very dutifully said) or any way likely to prove
effectual to it, since no precedent can be shown, that ever a Parliament (not
even the late Long Parliament, tho filled with Danby his Pensioners) did give
money for maintaining any Leagues till they were first made acquainted with the
particulars of them.

That Leagues have been communicated to Parliaments heretofore is not to be
disputed, but that they were ever tendered before they were asked for, is not
so plain; Nor does it appear this was denied. And as to his Parenthesis I
desire only that it may be observed for my excuse, in case I happen to speak
any thing not respective enough of the renowned Parliament at Westminster.

But besides this, Page 11.
this Parliament had reason to consider well of the general Peace it self, and
the influence it might have, and had, upon our Affairs, before they came to any
resolution, or so much as a debate about preserving it; since so wise a
Minister as my Lord Chancellor (blessed be God we have one wise Minister, Lord
Chancellors Speech. May 23. 1678. The words are these: The influence such a
Peace will have upon our Affairs are fitter for Meditation than Discourse. --
Therefore it will import us to strengthen our selves at home and abroad, that
it may not be found a cheap or easy thing to put an Affront upon us.
they have all along hitherto in general terms been treated at such a rare as
if none of them had had either Wit or Honesty) had so lately told us, that it
was fitter for meditation than discourse. He informed us in the same Speech,
that the Peace then was but the effect of Despair in the Confederates, and we
have since learnt by whose means they were reduced to that Despair, and what
price was demanded of the French King for so great a Service.

It is an old Maxim, That men should neither deliberate nor debate about those
things that are not in their power. Now, whatever this General Peace was, and
whatever the effects of it might be, the right of Peace and War was in the
King, and the Commons could not alter one tittle of it: And a small degree of
experience in the World will tell any man, that England was not then in a
condition to break alone with that Monarch, which had tired out all Christendom
with a tedious expensive War, when they were united against him: And therefore
the best Expedient that could then have fallen into the Heads of the Commons
had been to have shown him, and all the Confederates, that we were resolved to
have stood by our King with our Lives and Fortunes, which would have heartned
them on to a stout resistance in case of his further encroachments upon them,
and in likelihood have kept him in some aw; whereas the course that was taken
had a quite contrary effect, and tended more a thousand times to the
discouragement of the Confederates than the fruitless attempt he hints at, made
by the Earl of Danby, who was then in the Tower for it. So that I believe all
Europe will bear me Witness, that all the great things the French King has
since done were in a great measure owing to the Dr. Nalson observes, that the
like disorders had the same effect in the time of His Majesty's Father, who (he
says by this means) lost the opportunity of being able to support his Friends
and Allies, as also that Honor and Terror among his Enemies Abroad, which the
Union and hearty Affections of his Parliament, would have rendered great and
dreadful, but now he became mean and contemptible; that Prince who has not
power o^^^ his own Subjects at home being in no probable capacity of doing any
great matters abroad. Preface to his impartial Collection. Page 61.
disorders of our English Parliaments, and their declared resolution of giving
the King no Supplies upon reasonable terms, which rendered the Alliance and
Enmity of our King abroad inconsiderable.

Amongst the great things the French King has done since the Peace, Page 11.
my Author tells us this: His Pensioners at our Court have grown insolent upon
it, and presumed that now He (the French King) may be at leisure to assist them
(the Pensioners) in ruining England, and the Protestant Religion together. (And
they) have shaken off all dread of Parliaments, and have prevailed with his
Majesty to use them with as little respect, and to disperse them with as great
contempt, as if they had been a Conventicle, and not the great Representative
of the Nation, whose Power and Wisdom only could save him and us in our present
Exigencies.

Surely the man that talks thus contemptuously of his Majesty and all the
Ministers, durst have told us, if he could, who were these French Pentioners,
but it was not his design to point out the men; but to cast out general
Accusations against the King, the Ministers, and the whole Government, thereby
to incense the People, and to make them ungovernable, that so his Majesty might
be the sooner necessitated to submit himself to that Power and Wisdom that
could only save him and us, but might also easily ruin both, if things were
once put into such a state, as his Majesty were no longer Master of that Power.

As to the Accusation, or rather Calumny, that the English Ministers are
Pensioners to the French King, it will easily appear false to any man that does
but reflect on Colemans Letters, in 1674: when the King was in a much better
condition to oppose and ruin the French designs and enterprises, and the
French King had all the Confederates United, and in an Actual War with him, and
there was nothing to fear or hope for but in England, yet he then refused three
hundred thousand Pounds, tho it was pretended it would have assured the
Dissolution of that long Loyal Parliament, which France feared more than
threescore such as have followed it; and when at last Coleman descended to
200000 l. and at one time begged shamefully but for 20000 l. Colemans long
Letter.
He was denied it, Monsieur Rouvigni, the French Ambassador, usually telling
him, That if he could be sure of succeeding in that design his Master would
give a much larger Sum; but that he was not in a condition to throw away money
upon uncertainties, Nor does it appear that ever Coleman got one farthing at
that time.

And after the discovery of the Plot, and the dissolution of the long Loyal
Parliament, the general Peace having delivered the French King from all
Apprehensions of good or hurt from England; His Majesty having such ill success
in the first short Westminster Parliament, and the Divisions of England
appearing more fully in the Election of the Second, and the year that passed
betwixt that and its sitting, (all which were as well known in Paris as in
London) it is not to be doubted but he very well understood that there was then
less reason to maintain Pensioners in England than before So that we may
conclude from that time there has come but little French Money over into
England for Pensions to any Party, England being thought in France so
inconsiderable by reason of her Domestic Feuds, Fears, and incurable
Jealousies; that there is nothing to be feared or hoped from it; whereas
Pensions are to be employed in Potent and United States.

I do not design by this to prove that no French Pensioners are now maintained
in England, but that they are few, and gain but little by it, and therefore it
is ridiculous to conceive that all our Ministers of State are such, and that
they should be such fools as to conspire with France to ruin England for
nothing, or that which is next to it. And it is as silly a supposition that the
Privy Council, and the rest of the Ministers of State, who are not Pensioners,
should not discover those that are, as soon as this discontented Gentleman.

There is a lewd and impossible conceit spread underhand about the Nation that
the King himself is a Pensioner to France: and all that is pretended to
justify it, is only his being able to subsist so long without Parliamentary
Supplies. Now, this I believe is not credited by any men of understanding, but
yet there are many such, who for ill ends speak it in some companies, and will
shake their heads, and shrug their shoulders, and look gravely in other
companies, that they may seem to fear what they durst not speak.

Now, if what I have said before be applied to this instance, it will appear
more ridiculous; for that Pension that may tempt a hungry Courtier, who is to
raise a Family, would be rejected with scorn if it were tendered to a meaner
Prince than ours is. And it is not to be thought that the French King, who is
observed to be as sparing of his Wealth, as prodigal of his Soldiers, would
ever be at such an Expense as to maintain our Court and his own; for fear the
King should unite with a Parliament that would be an Enemy to France; no, all
knowing men understand how little he cares for England if it were quiet at
home, but as now things stand he scorns it, as beneath his Consideration.

Well, but if neither the Ministers, nor his Majesty are to be suspected, who
are? I will tell you that in the words of a more knowing man than I dare
pretend to be.

Those that roar most against French Councils and Measures; A seasonable
Address to the Parliament.
Vnder-hand-bargains, and Agreements, between both the Kings, page 6, 7.
know they belie their own Consciences, and that the French have us in the last
degree of Contempt. This the Earl of Danby Printed in his own vindication,
perhaps not ignorant that some of their Ministers did in the year 1677, and 78.
before the breaking forth of the Plot, declare, That Monsieur L. had greater
interest, and more Friends in England than the Duke of York; that the King had
need be on his guard, for he was in great danger of running the same risque
with his Father, when it was likewise inquired what interest amongst the People
two great Peers had, who have since the Plot been great Pillars of the
Protestant Religion, tho neither was ever reputed to have any, were Ministers
and Advisers in 1670, and 71. very good Friends to France and Popery, Enemies
to the Triple Alliance, and to Holland, etc. It was also said, That 300000 l. a
year bestowed in Scotland and England, among the Factious and Discontented,
would better serve the Interest of France, than any Bargain they could drive
with the Ministers. Thus far that noble Pen has discovered who are the French
Pensioners, and Reason speaks the same thing: For if it be the Interest of
France to divide England, it is their Interest too, to do it as cheap as they
can, and there is no doubt to be made of it but 10000 l. a year, divided
amongst the London Holdersforth, and the Walling fordians, on no other
condition but that they should declaim stoutly against the King, the Court, the
Ministers, France, and Popery, (things which no money could make them forbear
speaking against) would more effectually engage them to go on in that course,
than all the treasures of France would the King and Ministers to procure the
Ruin of England, and the settlement of Popery; things which Nature and
Education have taught them to abhor. And by this means England (as they might
easily foresee) would be so divided, that if a Civil War did not follow, yet at
least there would be no fear of its being in a condition to look abroad and
succor its Neighbors.

To these men is owing all that Contempt that has fallen upon our English
Parliaments both at home and beyond the Seas, who by putting the House of
Commons upon those things that would disgust the King, and all the Gentry in
the Nation, have done as much as they could to make them first feared, and then
hated by almost one half of the Subjects, and tends as directly to the ruin of
that ancient and excellent Constitution as the disorders of the Tribunes of the
People, did to the ruin of the Liberty of the Romans.

But alas if we look into the Speech made at the opening of the Parliament,
Page 12.
we shall find no mention of any new Ally except the Spaniard, whose Affairs at
that time, through the defects of their own Government, and the Treachery of
our Ministers, were reduced to so desperate a state, that he might well be a
burden to us, but there was little to be hoped from a Friendship with him;
unless by the name of a League to recommend our Ministers to a New Parliament,
and cozen Country Gentlemen of their Money.

Before I can answer this, I ought to Transcribe so much of his Majesty's
Speech as concerns this business; which is as follows:

My Lords and Gentlemen,
The several Prorogations I have made, have been very advantageous to our
Neighbors, and very useful to me; for I have employed that time in making and
perfecting an Alliance with the Crown of Spain, suitable to that which I had
before with the States of the United Provinces, and they also had with Spain,
consisting of mutual obligations of Succor and Defense.

I have all the reason in the world to believe, that what was so much desired
by former Parliaments, must needs be very grateful to you now: For tho some
perhaps may wish these Measures had been taken sooner, yet no man can with
reason think it is now too late; for they who desire to make these Alliances,
and they who desire to break them, show themselves of another opinion.

And as these are the best Measures that could be taken for the safety of
England, and repose of Christendom, so they cannot fail to attain their End,
and to spread and improve themselves further, if our Divisions at home do not
render our Friendship less considerable abroad.

Now all the Gentleman's Craft lay in the word New, there is no mention of any
New Ally. No, but there is mention of an old one, double Confederated both with
Spain and England to the same purpose, and these three States being thus
United, as his Majesty truly tells them, would in a little time draw in more if
our Divisions did not prevent it. Our Divisions had that effect, and made the
King a true Prophet against his will, and now all the blame is to be thrown
upon the Ministers, that is in reality upon the King.

Nay, our Ministers (poor unfortunate men) must bear the reproach of Ruining
not only England, but Spain too by their Treachery: but yet our kind Author
does not lay all that burden upon their shoulders, but confesses that their
ill Governing had a part in it; but however it came to pass, Spain was in so
desperate a state then that it might be a burden to England, but no ways
beneficial. And yet before the end of this very Paragraph he is in a dreadful
fear that Spain should join with his Majesty's Successor, and for the
introduction of Popery make a War upon the People with all his Forces by Sea
and Land. At this rambling rate does our Gentleman talk.

It cannot be denied but that the Affairs of Spain were very ill managed at
that time, but then that was owing to the Minority of their King, the Factions
in their Court, the Contests betwixt Don John and the Queen Mother their
Regent, and their two Parties, and it is not improbable the French King might
have some few Pensioners in Spain as well as England; but yet that once most
potent Kingdom was not sunk to so low an Ebb of Fortune as to be only a burden
to its Allies, tho it had need of them, and ought by all the rules of Policy to
have been so much the more carefully secured and supported by them, especially
by England.

And therefore our Country Gentlemen, who were too wise to be cozened of their
money by the crafty Ministers, will, I hope, not lay it to their charge too,
that the Affairs of Spain have ever since visibly declined, and the French King
has taken near as much from his Neighbors during the Peace, upon pretense of
Dependencies by Process, as he got in all the War by his Sword and potent
Armies. For this seems in great part at least, not so much owing to the
Treachery of our Ministers, as to the Tenacity and thriftiness of these Country
Gentlemen, that were so shie of being cozened of their Money.

But upon the perusal of the League, Page 12.
it appears by the 3, 4, and 5. Articles, that it was like to create us
troubles enough, for it engages us indefinitely to enter into all the quarrels
of the Spaniards, tho they happened in the West Indies or the Philippine Islands,
or were drawn upon himself by his own injustice or causeless provocations.

Whether my Author have been any more faithful in his account of this League,
than he was of the Kings Speech I cannot say; because it is not in my power to
examine those Articles. But his mentioning our obligation to assist Spain in
the West Indies and Philippine Islands, where it is impossible, against the
Duke of Brandenburg, and the King of Portugal, where it would be unjust, and
against his Protestant Subjects oppressed by him, as they were by his Grandfather
Philip, are such things would make a man suspect his sincerity a little; and
the rather, because his Majesty tells us, The League was suitable to that which
he had before with the States of the United Provinces, and they also had with
Spain, consisting of mutual obligations of Succor and Defense.

Now, the account my Author gives of it is in part so impossible, and in the
rest so improbable, that no Mortal in his right Wits can believe that Spain
should desire, or England grant, any such things. And therefore if he had at
all expected to have been believed, he ought to have Transcribed those three
Articles for a proof of what he had said. Verbae strictius quam fere
proprietas, sumenda erunt, si id necessarium erit ad vitandam iniquitatem, vel
Absurdltatem, atsi non talis est necessitas, sed manifesta aequitas vel
utilitas in restrictione, subsistendum erit intra arctissimos terminos
proprietatus nisi Circumstantia aliud suadeant. Grot. de jure Belli and Pacis,
lib. 2. cap. 16. sect. 12.
And whereas he tells us, it engages us indefinitely to enter into all the
quarrels of the Spaniards. That, if true, will bear a fair Construction, and
will no more oblige us to those things he mentions (if they be not expressed,
(nay, I think I may say, if they be) in plain terms) than it will to help the
King of Spain to destroy our selves, in case he should happen to have a quarrel
with us hereafter. For no League can bind any further than as it is just and
possible.

But that which concerns us yet nearer (says my Author) in this League, Page
13.
is, that this obligation of Assistance was mutual, so that if a Disturbance
should happen hereafter in England upon any attempt to change our Religion, or
our Government, tho it was in the time of his Majesty's Successors. The most
Catholic King is obliged by this League, (which we are still to believe was
entered into, for the security of the Protestant Religion, and the good of the
Nation) to give aid to so pious a design, and to make War upon (their
Majesty's) the People with all his Forces both by Land and Sea. And therefore
it was no wonder that the Ministers were not forward in showing this League to
the Parliament, who would have soon observed all these inconveniences, and have
seen how little such a League could contribute to the preserving the General
Peace, or to the securing of Flanders, since the French King may within one
months time possess himself of it, and we by our League are not obliged to send
our Succors till three months after the Invasion, so that they would upon the
whole matter have been inclined to suspect, that the main end of this League
was only to serve for a handsome pretense to raise an Army in England, and if
the People here should grow discontented at it, and any little disorders should
ensue; The Spaniard is thereby obliged to send over Forces to suppress them.

This is fraught with such rare new Politics, and he has taken such care to
make Rebellion safe, whether it happens in his Majesty's time, or in his
Successors, especially if it were in order to the preservation of our Religion
and Government, (and woe be to the man that begins one on any other pretense)
that I thought sit to transcribe it entire.

But Sir, whatever the Spaniard has promised, or the Ministers intended
against the People must needs come to nothing; for you know that his Affairs
were lately, through the defects of his own Government, and the Treachery of
our Ministers, reduced to so desperate a state, that he might well be a Burden
to us, but there was little to be hoped for from a friendship with him; and
therefore as little in have to be feared from his Forces too, if he should be
so Popishly inclined as to think it a Pious design to help the King to bring in
Arbitrary Government, by the handsome pretense of an Army raised for his
assistance: or that and Popery too in the time of his Majesty's Successor, to
which this Gentleman knows (no man better) the People have no Maw, tho the
Ministers have a filthy inclination, and therefore cunningly took care by their
Treachery to reduce his Affairs (whose help they chiefly relied on) into that
desperate condition we lately see them in.

Well, but for all that he may recover some part of his ancient Power; yes, who
doubts that, to hurt us, but not to help us. And now, no man can blame the
Ministers that they were not forward in showing this League to the Parliament,
who would doubtless have forthwith Addressed to the King against them, and
ushered it in with a Vote, that they were all of them Promoters of Popery, and
Spanish Counsels, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

By this League in seems the King was not obliged to send over any Succors
till three months after an Invasion, (tho it is as plain as the Nose on a man's
face) that the French King may in one months time possess himself of Flanders.
He may however take longer time, if he please, for any care was taken here to
prevent it, so that if his Majesty had taken a little too long a time to send
in his Aids (which all things considered few men will think he did) yet they
that should have backed him in it have taken a longer time, and therefore ought
not to complain.

The next thing (says my Author) recommended to them was the further
Examination of the Plot, Page 13.
and every one who have observed what has passed for more than two years
together, cannot doubt but that this was sincerely desired by such as are most
in credit with his Majesty. And then surely the Parliament deserved not to be
censured upon this account, since the Examination of so many new Witnesses, the
Trial of the Lord Stafford, the great preparations for the trial of the rest of
the Lords, and their diligent inquiry into the Horrid Irish Treasons, show that
the Parliament wanted no diligence to pursue his Majesty's good intentions in
that affair.

Now Sir, If they had but suspended the Bill for disinheriting the Duke of
York, and their Votes that followed upon the throwing it out in the Lords
House, and could but have held their hands from sending for their
Fellow Subjects into Custody, till they had dispatched this great Affair, and
tried all the other Lords in the Tower; it is thought by wiser men than I, they
might have had time enough to have gone through with this business, but some
body tells us the Plot was to be kept on foot, Seasonable Address, p 3.
else they would be defeated. It was to be used like the Holy War, always a
doing, never done withal, till it made way for some other designs that would
not go merrily without the noise of a Plot to drive them.

When his Majesty desired from the Parliament their Advice and assistance
concerning the Preservation of Tangier, Page 13.
the Commons did not neglect to give it its due Consideration, as appears by
their Addresses of November 29. and December. 21. 1680. and they told him, no
better could be expected of a Town for the most part under Popish Governors;
and always filled with a Popish Garrison.

Now this Gentleman might have done the World a Kindness to have told us how
the Popery of the Governors or Garrison contributed any thing to the present
Exigencies of that place, into which it fell, not by any neglect or Treachery,
but by a Siege laid about it by a potent Army of Moors.

They promised to assist him in defense of it, Page 13.
as soon as ever they could be reasonably secured, that any Supply which they
gave for that purpose, should not be used to augment the strength of our Popish
Adversaries, and to increase our dangers at home.

All the rest is of the same kind with this. But Sir, can you tell what was
meant by a reasonable security? Or wherein the state of England would have been
mended if Tangier had been lost? Or can you give us any reason why this
Parliament seemed resolved to run the Risque of losing this Town, April 7, and
9. 1678.
when the former Parliament had Voted so stoutly for the Annexing it to the
Crown? I might perhaps go near to answer all these questions from the exact
Collection of Debates which are Printed, but the safer and shorter way is to
refer my Reader to them for his satisfaction.

My Author owns that his Majesty offered to concur in any Remedies that could
be proposed for the security of the Protestant Religion, Page 14.
but (says he) he was pleased to go no further, (how could he?) for those
Remedies the Commons offered were rejected, and those which they were preparing
were prevented by a dissolution.

What was rejected is well enough understood, viz. the Bill of Exclusion, and
if the Association was what was preparing, it is not great wonder it should be
prevented by a Dissolution. But for this we must be contented to remain in
ignorance.

His Majesty had complained of Addresses in the name of Remonstrances rather
than Answers. Page 14.
Now, here my Author cannot guess what the Ministers would have the word
Remonstrance sig^ifie; but he takes it to be a modest expressing the reasons of
their resolution. Now, if this be the meaning of the Word, we must own his
Majesty has in this particular charged the Commons wrongfully, for there was
seldom too much modesty joined with their Reasons, but they rather to us poor
Country Folk, seemed to have altogether lost that respect that was due to the
Crown, as any body else would think that should compare their Addresses with
those made in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Hist. Col. of the four last
Parliaments of Q Eliz.
particularly that made to thank her for taking away a part only of the
Monopolies that oppressed them in the 44. year of her Reign, when the Speaker
and the whole House of Commons sat a good while on their knees to her, but our
Gentlemen treated our King at quite another rate, and not much unlike those who
remonstrated to his Majesty's Father till they at last fairly brought him to
the Block.

My Author considers in the next place that part of the Declaration which
concerns the Arbitrary Orders for taking persons into custody, Page 15.
for matters that had no relation to Privileges of Parliament, etc. If (says
he) they (the Ministers) intended by these general words to reflect on the
Orders made to take those degenerate Wretches into Custody who published under
their hands Abhorrences of Parliaments, and of those who in humble and lawful
manner petitioned for their sitting, in a time of such extreme necessity.
Surely they are not in good earnest; they cannot believe themselves, when they
say, that these matters have no relation to Privileges of Parliament, if the
Privilege of Parliament be concerned when an injury is done to any particular
Member, how much more when men strike at Parliaments themselves, and endeavor
to wound the Constitution?

But, Sir, I hope it is no breach of Privilege of Parliament now to beg a
small favor at your Worships hands, and that is to produce but one instance of
one single man that ever published an Abhorrence of Parliaments in general, or
of that Parliament in particular before it sat. It seems mighty probable to
me, that these Wretches were a part of them, and the rather, because my Author
is fain to misrepresent the whole matter of Fact to make it seem just. Now,
Sir, all the question was, whether the manner of Petitioning, then taken up by
the Rabble, was lawful or humble? You say it was both, but, Sir, your Sentence
is neither Concluding, nor yet infallible; and therefore we appeal from it to
the next Loyal Parliament, which we hope some at least of those Degenerate
Wretches may live to see, and in the mean time there will ever be some ready to
abhor a Petition signed by 60000 Shopkeepers, Apprentices, etc. humbly
pretending to instruct the King and Council, in spite of a Proclamation to the
contrary, when its fit a Parliament should sit; which some are such fools as to
imagine may be done again without abhorring Parliaments; and consequently
without breach of Privilege of Parliament. And because this was all that was
done then, to the best of our remembrance, and as it is conceived may be made
appear by those very abhorrences still extant, therefore it is humbly conceived
the Imprisonments thereupon were Arbitrary and illegal.

As to those two Persons my Author names, of them that were taken into Custody
by Order of Parliament Sheridon, and Thompson, I will raise no Contest with
him, because their case will depend upon the general determination.

The King's Declaration lays down this as a Rule; that for the House of Commons
to take into Custody any Subject, for matters that have no relation to
privileges of Parliament is Arbitrary, i. e. Illegal.

This the Author quarrels at, and by a very few Precedents endeavors to prove,
That the House of Commons may order men to be taken into Custody for matters
not relating to privilege. These two are directly contrary each to other, and
I only desire the liberty to enquire which of these seem likeliest to be in the
right.

The Privileges of the House of Commons are indeed our own, and they enjoy and
ought to use them as our Trustees, and for our good, and therefore it is folly
in us to lessen them when they are such as are necessary: and it is a great
injury in them to extend them beyond what they anciently were to the damage of
the Crown; or of the Liberties of the Subjects, or on the other hand to abuse
those they really have, and ought to enjoy, to our damage, or to the Detriment
of the Kings Prerogative, which is as necessary for our preservation as the
Privileges of Parliament themselves are.

The Privileges of Parliament are many, and relate either to the whole Body,
the Three Estates taken Collectively, or to the Lords, or to the Commons.

Those relating to the Commons respect either the King, or the Lords, or the
rest of the Subjects which are not Members of their House, or the Members of
their own House.

Our Enquiry is only in this point concerning those that relate to those
Subjects that are not Members of either House, whether they may be imprisoned
by Vote of the Commons for matters that have no relation to Privilege of
Parliament.

In the latter end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth it was a question whether
the Commons could imprison those that were not Members of their own House for
matters that had a certain and apparent relation to the known Privileges of
Parliament, Proceedings of the four last Parliaments of Q. Eliz. p. 254. Anno
Regni 44. It seems probable to me that this question was then first resolved,
by the Arguments brought for it, which use not to be in plain cases; and one
Member opposed it, and another said many were sent for, but none appeared, none
were punished.
as for Arresting them or their Servants in time of Parliament, which has been
since gained, and is no longer Contested by any body, but is a strong Argument
that they had not then that power the Author claims, and for which he brings
the Precedents, which are indeed of a later date except one, and that was in
the Minority of Edward the Sixth.

Anciently if any man were impeached in Parliament, Cokes Instit. part. 4. of
the proceedings in Parliament against absents. p. 38.
there was a Writ directed to the Sheriff to summon him to appear and Answer,
as my Lord Coke acquaints us, and sets down the form of the Writ; and upon the
return of this Writ the Attachment it is likely went out of the House of Lords,
but of this Power of the Commons that great man speaks not one word, which is a
good Argument they had it not, and indeed the latter instances are all after
his time.

It is not consonant to reason that any Subject of England should be imprisoned
upon a bare suggestion without the Oath of the Accuser: Now the Commons have no
power to give an Oath in this case, and therefore it seems reasonable that they
should not imprison any man who is not a Member of their House, much less
whomsoever they please.

The House of Commons is not a Court of Judicature, (except in matters of
Privilege and Elections) but all persons accused in Parliament must be tried
by the Owned by this Author. p. 39.
Lords, therefore it is contrary to the Law of England that any man should be
imprisoned by the Commons, who * ( Cokes Instit. part. 4. p. 24.
as the Grand Jury of the Nation) are his Accusers.

It is said that a man taken into Custody by Order of the Commons is taken in
Execution, Debates of the House of Commons page 217. A Commitment of this House
is always in nature of a Judgment, and the Party not Bailable.
but it is contrary to the eternal Laws of Nature, and all Nations, that a man
should be taken in Execution before he have made his Defense, and a legal
Sentence be passed upon him by Legal Process and proof.

It is destructive of the Liberty of the Subject that any man should be so
taken by them into Custody, Address to the Freemen, etc. Part. 2. p 38.
because he is without all remedy, and if the thing happen to prove iujurious
and oppressive, as it did in the Case of John Wilson and Roger Beckwith
Esquires, two Torkshire Justices of the Peace, who were notoriously injured by
it.

For these reasons, which I submit to wiser men than my self, I am humbly of
opinion that no man ought to be taken into Custody by the Order or Vote of the
Commons, that is not a Member of their House; except it be for matters relating
to the Privileges of Parliament, and that such Privileges as are commonly
known; for if they may call what they please a Privilege of a Parliament, it
will in the Event be the same thing as an unlimited power.

As to all his Instances they do not deserve any consideration except the
first, 4 Edw. 6. 18 Jac. 20 Jac. 3 Car.
and that no man, as he relates it, can tell by whom the Commitment was made,
without the Record which I cannot come at, and the latter were the Acts of
Popular Parliaments which laid the foundations of our late troubles by such
proceedings.

My Author in the next place comes to justify the Votes against the Ministers,
and lays down this as his foundation. The Commons in Parliament have used* Page
16.
two ways of delivering their Country from pernicious and powerful Favorites,
The one is in a Parliamentary Course of Justice by impeaching them which is
used when they judge it needful to make them public examples, by Capital, or
other high punishments, for the terror of others: The other is by immediate
Address to the King to remove them as unfaithful or unprofitable Servants.
Their Lives, their Liberties, or Estates are never endangered, but when they
are proceeded against in the former of these ways: Then legal evidence of their
guilt is necessary, then there must be a proper time allowed for their defense.
In the other way the Parliament act as the Kings great Council, and when either
House observes that affairs are ill administered, that the Advice of Parliaments
is rejected or slighted, the Course of Justice perverted, our Councils
betrayed, Grievances multiplied, and the Government weakly and disorderly
managed, (of all which our Laws have made it impossible for the King to be
guilty,) they necessarily must, and always have charged those who had the
Administration of affairs, and the Kings Ears, as the Authors of these
mischiefs, and have from time to time applied themselves to him by Addresses
for their removal from his presence and Councils.

So here are all the Ministers of State that are, or ever shall be, exposed to
the mercy of the House of Commons, if proof can be brought against them, then
have at all, Life, Liberty, and Estate must go for it; but if none can be had,
then it is but voting them Enemies to the King and Kingdom, and Addressing to
have them removed from his Majesty's Presence and Councils for ever, and the
work is done without allowing the liberty to answer for themselves. And the
reason that he gives for it is a pleasant one; because the King cannot be
guilty, therefore they must. But may not a House of Commons be mistaken, and
punish a man for what he never did? may not one man give the Advice, and
another suffer for it at this rate of proceedings? But this is an old Custom;
What then, it is an unjust one.

There may be many things plain and evident beyond the testimony of any
Witness, Page 17.
which yet can never be proved in a legal way.

This is true; but I hope he will not infer from hence that any man shall be
punished for those things without testimony. I always thought all these cases
were reserved to the Tribunal of God Almighty. And I believe this Gentleman
would be loath to be tried by his own rule.

The Parliament may be busied in such great Affairs, Ibid.
as will not suffer them to parsue every Offender through a long process.

Then they may let him alone; or leave him to the Common Law, but to condemn
him unheard, for want of leisure, is such a piece of justice as no man would be
willing to submit to in his own Case.

There may be many reasons why a man should be turned out of Service, Page 17.
which perhaps would not extend to subject him to punishment.

That there may be reasons why a man should be turned out of Service is
undeniable, but then those reasons ought to be alleged and proved; for the
turning a man out of Service is certainly in many cases a great punishment, tho
not equal to hanging.

The People themselves are highly concerned in the great Ministers of State,
Ibid.
who are Servants to the Kingdom as well as to the King; and the Commons, whose
business it is to present all Grievances, as they are most likely to observe
soonest the folly and treachery of those public Servants, (the greatest of all
Grievances) so this representation ought to have no little weight with the
Prince.

Here is the true reason as long as the Ministers look upon themselves as the
Kings Servants they will adhere to the Crown, but if they be taught once that
they are Servants to the People too, then because it is difficult to serve two
Masters, they will be more distracted, and act more timorously, especially if
according to the modern distinction the Country-Party get the Ascendent of the
Court-Party in a Parliament.

Queen Elizabeth told the Commons by the Lord Keeper, Proceedings of the four
last Parl. p. 47.
that she misliked that such irreverence toward Privy-Counsellors, (who were
not to be accounted as Common Knights and Burgesses of the House, that are
Counselors but during the Parliament) whereas the other are standing
Counselors, and for their Wisdom and great Service are called to the Council
of State.

They were not then thought to be such public Servants as might be treated at
any rate, sent to the Tower, or to carry up a Bill to the Lords, against which
they had given their Vote, as if it were to triumph over them.

But Henry IV. Page 17.
(a wise and a brave Prince) in the Fifth year of his Reign turned out four of
his Servants, In hoc Parliamento concessa suit Regi taxa insolita and incolis
tricabilis, and valde gravis, Walls. nec servarentur ejus Evidentiae in
Thesauria Regia. Ibid.
only because the Commons desired they might be removed. But then this Prince
had no Title, and therefore was not in a capacity to dispute any thing with
them; Polid. Virgil. Sunorum crebris conjurationibus vexatus.
and in this very Parliament too; they gave him so extraordinary a Tax, and so
troublesome to the Subject, that they would not suffer any Record of it to be
left in the Treasury; and he was obliged to grant them this extraordinary
favor in recompense of it. He had but newly in Battle conquered one Rebellion,
wherein Mortimers Title was at the bottom, and was engaged then in a War with
France. And he had reason to fear a general Defection of the Nation; King
Richard being reported to be alive. And he was then in great want of Money, so
that for such a Prince so beset to grant any thing was far from a wonder, but
ought no more to be drawn into Example than that Tax they then gave him; and
least of all now, when things are in a very different posture.

But then all these Ministers are censured for doing that which was approved by
two of the three Estates. The Resolve was this.

That all persons who advised his Majesty in his last Message to this House,
Jan. 7. 1680.
to insist upon an opinion against the Bill for Excluding the Duke of York,
have given pernicious Counsel to his Majesty, and are promoters of Popery, and
Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

Now this Bill was before this thrown out by the House of Lords, and therefore
there was no reason to Vote the Ministers Enemies to the King and Kingdom for
doing that which was approved by two of the three Estates in Parliament.

But they ought not to have appealed to the People against their own
Representatives. Page 18.
(Why not?) The unfortunate Reigns of Henry III. Edward II. Richard II. and
Henry VI. ought to serve as Landmarks to warn succeeding Kings; from
preserring secret Councils to the wisdom of their Parliaments.

And so ought the Example of his Majesty's Father to warn both his Majesty and
the whole Nation how they suffer the Ministers of State to be trodden under
foot by Factious men; and the Prerogatives of the Crown to be swallowed up, by
pretended Privileges of Parliament. for all these things have once already
made way for the Ruin of the Monarchy; as that did for the enslaving of the
People.

The next thing my Author falls upon is the business of the Revenue, but here I
cannot imagine what he would have, he makes a long Harangue against Alienation
of the Revenues of the Crown, and about the reasonableness of Resumptions of
those that had been alienated. And tells us, Page 19.
No Country did ever believe the Prince, how absolute soever in other things,
had power to sell or give away the Revenue of the Kingdom, and leave his
Successor a Beggar. That the haughty French Monarch, as much power as he
pretends to, is not ashamed to own that he wanted power to make such
Alienations, and that Kings had that happy inability that they could do nothing
contrary to the Laws of their Country.

This and much more my Author has upon this occasion learnedly, but very
impertinently, written about these two Votes, believing his Reader could not
distinguish betwixt an Alienation and an Anticipation.

But the best way to have this clearly understood is to insert the Votes of the
Commons, which are as follows:

Resolved, There were two Votes of the same nature passed in 1626 concerning
Tonnage and Poundage. Nalsons Preface to his Collections. page 60.
That whosoever shall hereafter lend, or cause to be lent, by way of Advance,
any money upon the Branches of the Kings Revenue, arising by Customs, Excise,
or Hearth-money, shall be adjudged to hinder the sitting of Parliaments, and
shall be responsible for the same in Parliament.

Resolved, That whosoever shall accept or buy any Tally of Anticipation upon
any part of the Kings Revenue (or whoseever shall pay such Tally hereafter to
be struck, shall be adjudged to hinder the sitting of Parliaments, and shall be
responsible therefore in Parliament.

Now what Advancing money upon the Revenues, and accepting Tallys of
Anticipation have to do with Alienation of it I cannot devise. For certainly it
is one thing to advance a Fine, and take a Farm so much the cheaper for three,
four, or seven years, and another thing to purchase the same to a man and his
Heirs for ever. And it is one thing to receive an Order to take such a Sum of
Money of the Tenant out of the next half years Rent. and a quite other thing to
purchase the Feesimple of an Estate, which is an Alienation.

The Revenues of the Crown of England are in their own nature appropriated to
Public Service, Page 19.
and therefore cannot without injustice be diverted or Anticipated. May not an
Anticipation be as well employed upon the Public Service as a growing Revenue
when it is become due? Does Anticipation signify mispending or diverting from
a Public to a private use? Is it impossible the Public should at any time
need a greater Sum of money than the Revenue will afford, and may not a Prince
in such a case Anticipate, and afterward get it up again by his good Husbandry:
No, for

Either the Public Revenue is sufficient to answer the necessary occasions of
the Government, Page 19.
and then there is no color for Anticipations, or else by some extraordinary
Accident the King is reduced to want an extraordinary supply, and then he ought
to resort to his Parliament.

Well, but suppose (as it may happen) the necessity is so urgent, that it
cannot be put off till a Parliament can be called, and meet, and raise money.
Or if you please, suppose a Parliament dare not trust the King with money, or,
which is all one, will pretend so. Or will not supply him unless he will pass
an Act that they shall sit as long as they please; or unless he will let them
turn out what Ministers of State, Justices of the Peace, etc. they think sit,
and put in others as they please. May not a Prince relieve himself in these
cases by an Advance or Anticipation, but must submit absolutely to the Commons?
I hope he will not say these are impossible accidents.

Our Ancestors did wisely provide that the King and his People should have
frequent need of one another, Page 20.
and by having frequent opportunities of mutually relieving one another wants,
be sure ever to preserve a dutiful affection in the Subject, and a Fatherly
tenderness in the Prince. When the King had occasion for the liberality of his
People he would be well inclined to hear and redress their Grievances, and when
they wanted ease from oppressions, they would not fail with alacrity to supply
the occasions of the Crown.

All this is certainly true, and was the very reason why the two first
Parliaments of his Majesty's Reign, of whose Loyalty and hearty affections to
the Crown no man ever doubted, settled part of the Revenue on his Majesty for
his Life only, that his Successor might be obliged by a regrant of it. And the
whole which they gave to this King was but equal to the constant and regular
Expenses of the Government, as they designed it, tho it is said it falls short
of that too.

Now, might things be thus carried, as my Author tells us, they were designed
to be, England would certainly be the happiest Nation in the World. The King
would be as rich as his People could make him, and the People as happy as a
tender and good King could make them. But alas! there is sprung up a new
Generation of men who have taken such an Aversion for Monarchy, and the just
Prerogatives of the Crown, that till these Grievances (the greatest Grievances
that ever can betide a freeborn people) be totally taken away, they can find
no gust in the removal of all those other petty Grievances, of which our
Ancestors complained so often, and as often found redress.

There is also arisen a sort of sober Protestants (as the Dissenters will needs
be called) who can neither agree one with another, nor with the Religion that
is Established, and to them it is an intolerable Grievance to see Episcopacy, a
Liturgy, and a few innocent Ceremonies, which they call Popery, established in
the Church, and till these are extirpated Root and Branch, and every of their
pious Whimsies settled successively in the place of them, or tolerated at once,
they, good men! cannot be at ease neither.

These two have twisted their interests together with a third sort that have no
Religion at all, but have a damnable inclination to the Spoils of the Church,
and the Plunder of the Nation. And they by Popular Arts have wheedled and
deluded great numbers of the Freemen and Freeholders of the Nation into a
strong belief that Popery is by our Governors designed to be set up in the
Church, and Arbitrary Government in the State, things which these good men hate
mightily, as there is good reason for it, but are very much abused by the
Information, and much more by being persuaded, as they have been, that the
choosing discontented men to be their Representatives in the House of Commons
was the only way to prevent these two dreadful things from falling upon them.

These men however have sometimes got to be the major part of that House, and
the Consequence has ever been that the King could get no Supplies, be his
necessities what they could be, unless he would grant such things as tended
immediately to the ruin of the Church and Monarchy. And if he were a little
averse to it, then he was presently Libelled to the Nation as a favourer of
Popery, and a designer of Arbitrary Government; but if it were not safe to
attack him, then (according to the method of the late Rebels) the cry was
raised against the Evil Counselors, or the Corrupt Ministers, and nothing
would do, but the turning them out of their employments as treacherous Servants
to the Kingdom, for being too faithful to the King.

And because they can never effect these great things by other means, they have
always turned this excellent Constitution against it self, and that which was
intended to endear the King and his People each to others, their mutual want of
each others assistance, has been made a Steppal to mount the Throne, and pluck
down the Mitre. So that his Majesty, who knew how things went in his Father's
days, was not out when he told the Commons in his Speech, March 1. 1661. as
follows:

Gentlemen,
I need not put you in mind of the miserable effects which have attended the
wants and necessities of the Crown; I need not tell you that there is a
Republic Party still in the Kingdom, which have the courage to promise
themselves another Revolution; and methinks I should as little need to tell
you, that the only way with Gods blessing to disappoint their hopes and
desires, and indeed to reduce them from those extravagant hopes and desires is,
to let them see that you have so provided for the Crown, that it has
wherewithal to support it self, and to secure you, which I am sure is all I
desire, and desire only for you preservation. Therefore I do conjure you, by
all the professions of affection you have made to me, by all the kindness I
know you have for me, after all your deliberations, betake your selves to some
speedy resolutions, and settle such a real and substantial Revenue upon me,
as may hold some proportion with the necessary Expenses I am at for the Peace,
and Benefit, and Honor of the Kingdom, that they who look for troubles at home
may despair of their wishes, and that our Neighbors abroad, by seeing that all
is well at home, may have that esteem and value of Us as may secure the
Interest and Honor of the Nation, and make the happiness of this Kingdom, and
of this CITY, once more the Admiration and Envy of the World.

This Parliament understood things well, and provided accordingly, so that the
nineteenth of May following, the Lord Chancellor, in a Speech made at their
Prorogation, told them, They had wisely, very wisely provided such a constant
growing Revenue as may with Gods blessing preserve the Crown from those
scandalous wants and necessities as have heretofore exposed it and the Kingdom
to those dismal miseries,
from which they are but even now buoyed up; for whatsoever other humane causes
may be assigned,
according to the several fancies and imaginations of men, of our late
miserable distractions, they cannot be so reasonably imputed to any one cause,
as to the extreme poverty of the Crown: the want of power could never have
appeared, if it had not been for the want of money.

But since that, the rising greatness of our Neighbors have mounted the
Expenses of the Crown above that growing Revenue that was then settled, and the
Republical Party, as his Majesty styles them, promise themselves the happiness
of bringing about another Revolution, by the same means the last was, in his
Majesty's days, if it be possible, but however at his Death. And therefore if
the Crown thus beset shall at any time make use of Anticipations to relieve it
self; they only ought to be responsible for it, who have, or shall, make it
necessary: For surely no Prince would borrow, when he might have it freely
given upon reasonable terms, unless he took a pride in counting the number of
his Creditors.

And therefore (says my Author) it has ever been esteemed a Crime in
Counselors, Page 20.
who persuaded the King to Anticipate his Revenue, and a Crime in those who
furnished money upon such Anticipations in an extraordinary way, however
extraordinary, the occasion might be. For this cause it was that the Parliament
in the 35 of Henry VIII. did not only discharge all these Debts which the King
had contracted; but Enacted that those Lenders, who had been before paid again
by the King, should refund all those Sums into the Exchequer, as judging it
reasonable punishment to make them forfeit the Money they lent, since they have
gone about to introduce so dangerous a precedent.

It is bad Logic that raises general Conclusions from particular instances,
and it will appear so in this that we have in hand; which, because I cannot so
well and creditably do it my self, I will make appear by transcribing a passage
out of my Lord Coke, tho it be somewhat long.

Advice concerning new and plausible Projects and O^^ers in Parliament.

When any plausible project is made in Parliament to draw the Lords and Commons
to assent to any Act, Cokes Instit. part. 2. p. 44.
(especially in matters of weight and importance) if both Houses do give upon
the matter projected and promised their Consent, it shall be most necessary,
they being trusted for the Commonwealth, to have the matter projected and
promised (which moved the House to consent) to be established in the same Act
lest the benefit of the Act be taken, and the matter projected and promised
never performed,
and so the Houses of Parliament perform not the trust reposed in them, as it
fell out (taking one example from many) in the Reign of Henry VIII. On the
Kings behalf the Members of both Houses were informed in Parliament, that no
King or Kingdom was safe but where the King had three Abilities, First, To live
of his own, and be able to defend his Kingdom upon any sudden Invasion, or
Insurrection. Secondly, To aid his Confederates, otherwise they would never
assist him. Thirdly, To reward his well deserving Servants. Now the Proj^ct
was, that if the Parliament would give unto him all the Abbeys, Priories,
Friories, Nunneries, and other Monasteries, that for ever in time then to come,
he would take order that the same should not be converted to private use: but
first, That his Exchequer for the purposes aforesaid should be enriched.
Secondly,
the Kingdom strengthened by a continual maintenance of Forty thousand well
trained Soldiers with skilful Captains and Commanders.
Thirdly, For the benefit and ease of the Subject, who never afterward (as was
projected) in any time to come should be charged with Subsidies, Fifteenths,
Loans, or other common aids. Fourthly, Lest the Honor of the Realm should
receive any Diminution of Honor by the dissolution of the said Monasteries,
there being twenty nine Lords of Parliament of the Abbots and Priors (that held
of the King per Baroniam) that the King would create a number of Nobles, which
we omit. The said Monasteries were given to the King by authority of diverse
Acts of Parliament, 27 ^. 8. 31 ^. ^ c. 13. 32. H. 8. c. 14.
but no provision was therein made for the said Project, or any part thereof,
only ad faciendam populum, these Possessions were given to the King, his Heirs
and Successors to do and use therewith his and their own wills to the pleasure
of Almighty God, 27 H. 8. c 24.
and the honor and profit of Almighty God.

Now observe the Catastrophe in the same Parliament of 32 Henry VIII. when the
great and opulent Priory of St. John's of Jerusalem was given to the King, he
demanded and had a Subsidy both of the Clergy and Laity, and the like he had in
34 Henry VIII. and in 37 Henry VIII. he had another Subsidy. And since the
dissolution of the said Monasteries he exacted diverse Loans, and against Law
received the same.

Now let my Reader judge if it be reasonable to make what the Parliament did in
the 25 of Henry VIII. a standing Rule for all succeeding times, when it is
morally impossible that ever any King of England should have such a Treasure
and Revenue as they had given this King within less than seven years, and a
Subsidy but the very year before besides. If we had such Parliaments now, and
it were possible to give the King such Supplies as they did, I would freely
give my Vote to have the next Lender Hanged.

The true way to put the King out of a possibility of supporting the
Government, Page 20.
is to let him waste in one year that money which ought to bear the charge of
the Government for seven.

But, Sir, to put you out of pain for that, this would necessitate the sitting
of Parliaments, and the yielding to whatsoever they could desire. So this, tho
true, was not the reason of the Vote, but directly contrary to it; but the King
knows the Consequence of that too well to need any restraint in that
particular, for he knows as well as you; that this is the direct method to
destroy not only the Credit of the Crown at home and abroad, but the Monarchy
it self.

If the King resolves never to pay the money that he borrows, Ibid.
what faith will be given to the Royal Promises, and the honor of the Nation
will suffer in that of the Prince. And if it be put upon the People to repay
it, this would be a way to impose a necessity of giving Taxes without end
whether they would or no.

Omitting the undutifulness of these suppositions, it is very remarkable, that
the great Anticipations upon the Revenue were made in the time of the last
Dutch War, when they who now so much clamor against them were Ministers, and
they who now are such, and bear all the blame, were not in a capacity to hinder
it. Whether they had any such intentions as these in it, they best know, but I
am sure one of them made it out powerfully that there was all the reason in the
world that the Parliament should pay off this debt. But, says my Author, as
mercenary as they were, the Pensioners would never discharge the Revenue of
these Anticipations to the Bankers. Which is an Excellent and convincing
Argument that they (how much soever they are slandered) were not such mercenary
Pensioners, as the world is now told they were.

Now, as he tells us, the W. Commons made this Vote purely to keep people from
being again choused the same way, and in mere pity to the Cries of many Widows
and Orphans. And truly, if they had taken care to have had those that wanted
this Caution first paid off, the world might have possibly thought so. And then
a Declaration that such securities were void, and that no future Parliament
could without breach of Trust repay that Money which was at first borrowed only
to prevent the sitting of Parliaments, might have had a better reception in
this Kingdom than the two Votes they made without it. As for his quotation of 1
R. 3. Cap. 2. against Loans, that and all the after Statutes is against
involuntary and forcible taking of money.

But the Commons were very modest, Page 21.
and restrained their Votes to only three branches of the Revenue, all which
were by several Acts of Parliament given to his present Majesty.

Sir, I think the last Vote is general, and extends to the whole Revenue, tho
the first does not, but only to those three small Branches of Customs, Excise,
and Hearth money. A modest restraint indeed.

The Statute 12 Car. Page 21.
2. Cap. 4. says, That the Commons reposing Trust in his Majesty, for guarding
the Se^s against all persons intending the distarbance of Trade, and the
invading of the Realm to that intent do give him Toanage and Poundage, and this
is as direct an appropriation as word, can make, and therefore as it is a
manifest wrong to the Subject to divert any part thereof to other uses, so for
the King to Anticipate it, is plainly to disable himself to perform the trust
reposed in him.

Now here are several ill Consequences from an undoubted true Principle. For it
is no wrong to the Subject to divert a part of it to other uses if the Seas can
be guarded, and the Realm secured with less than the whole, ar they have been
very well all his Majesty's Reign hitherto. Secondly, An Anticipation may be
necessary to attain the ends of the trust if Parliaments shall still go on to
refuse the King extraordinary Supplies upon extraordinary occasions.

The Statute of 12 Car. Ibid.
2, Cap. 23. which did empower the King to dispose of the Excise did Enact,
that such Contracts shall be effectual in Law, so as they be not for longer
time than three years. So that here is care taken before their Vote that no
great Advance or Anticipation shall be taken upon that Branch.

The Statute of the 13. Page 22.
and 14. of Car. 2. Cap. 10. declares that the Hearth-money was given that the
public Revenue might be proportioned to the Public Charge, and it is
impossible that should ever be whilst it is liable to be preingaged and
Anticipated.

Is it so? Must a Prince act to the utmost of his power with less prudence and
discretion than other men? Must I needs Sell or Morgage my Estate for as much
as it is worth; because I may do it, and no man can hinder me?

The Parliament took another care in relation to this Branch, Page 22.
and made it penal for any one so much as to accept of any Pension or Grant for
years, or any other Estate, or any Sum of Money out of the Revenue arising by
(Hearth-money) by virtue of that Act, from the King, his Heirs or Successors,
as my Author takes notice: and now what reason was there for him to make such a
Splutter as he did about Alienations and leaving the Successor a beggar, when
one of these Branches, the Customs and half the Excise is given to his Majesty
only for life, and such care is taken to keep the third unchargeable by the
very Act that gave it? If these things tend to the vindication either of my
Author, or the Votes, I have lost my Reason.

My Author concludes with this smart reflection on the Declaration, Page 22.
This we are sure of, that if the inviolable observation of these Statutes (it
should have been Votes) will reduce his Majesty to a more helpless Condition
than the meanest of his Subjects, he will still be left in a better Condition
than the richest and greatest of his Ancestors, none of which were ever matters
of such a Revenue.

The King complains of the Votes, and the Statutes are craftily laid in the way
to bear the brunt; the intention of a thing may possibly never succeed, as I
hope it never will here: But yet the complaint is just, if it apparently tended
to such an end, tho it never follow. But how his Majesty can be in the most
helpless and most wealthy condition at one and the same time, in fact, my
Author must inform us. His Majesty's Expense as well as Revenue is above all
his Royal Ancestors, and whatever his Revenue is he was not beholden to these
Voters for it, who gave him nothing but paper and trouble. And of the first of
these his Majesty had such a quantity; that he is said to have chid his Tailor
for not making his Pockets big enough to receive it. His Cossers in the mean
time were not surcharged. nor like to surfeit.

The next thing my Author falls upon is the Vote for suspension of the
Execution of the Penal Laws against the Dissenters; which he first recites, and
then justisieth, and I will follow him.

The House of Commons are in the next place accused of a very high Crime, Page
22.
the assuming to themselves a power of suspending Acts of Parliament, because
they declared it was their Opinion. That the prosecutier of Protestant
Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the Subject, a
weakening of the Protestant Interest, an encouragement to Popery, and dangerous
to the Peace of the Nation. The Ministers remembered that not many years ago,
the whole Nation was justly Alarmed upon the assuming an Arbitrary power of
suspending Penal Laws, and therefore they thought it would be very popular to
accuse the Commons of such an Attempt.

Did the Ministers remember how the Nation was Alarmed, and had the Commons
forgot it? Well. let us follow the Gentleman, and see how he will clear his
Commons from the guilt of this high Crime which he acknowledges was so justly
blamed in the Ministers.

But how they (the Ministers) could possibly misinterpret a Vote at that rate,
Page 22.
how they could say the Commons pretended to a power of repealing Laws, when
they only declare their opinion of the inconveniency of them, will never be
understood till the Authors of this are pleased to show their Causes and
Reasons in a second Declaration.

The charge in the Declaration is that by this Vote, They assumed to themselves
a power of suspending Acts of Parliament, without any regard to the Laws
established. This the Author could not deny, nor defend; and therefore he
changes the terms into a power of Repealing Laws, with which the Commons were
never charged. Now, a power of Suspending and a power of Recpealing are vastly
different. Every Pardon is a suspension of the Execution of the Law in relation
to the Party pardoned, and so is every Dispensation; and when the King put
forth the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, there was no design of
repealing, but only of suspending the Execution of the Penal Laws pro tempore;
so that if the Commons designed this Vote or Declaration of theirs should have
any other effect than to show their good will to the Dissenters, it must extend
tho not to a Repeal, yet to a suspension of the Execution of the Penal Laws
against them, which is all the Declaration charged the Commons with; and so the
Dissenters understood it, and have since pleaded this Vote in Bar to the
Execution of those Laws against them, tho they acknowledge they are not
Repealed thereby.

Every impartial man will own that the Commons had reason for this opinion of
theirs. Page 22.


Suppose they had reason for it, this will not give them a legal Power. The
King has good reason to do many things which yet if he should offer at, they
would clamor against him as an Usurper of an Arbtrary Power; for reason gives
no man any Author; to act, except he has a lawful power to back his reason
with. There may be great reason to repeat an Act of Parliament, and yet in all
the Judges in Westminster should thereupon declare it to be either suspended or
repealed, I know what we should hear of it quickly. Well, but let us hear their
Reasons. Page 22.


They had with great anxiety observed that the present design of the Papists
was not against any one sort of Pretestants, but Universal, and (...)
extirpating the Reformed Religion.

That this might be the ultimate design of the Plot, is not much to be doubted,
but it was immediately bent only against the Religion established, and
accodingly therwere Successors appointed to all the Bishops and (...) Clergy,
but none to Mr. Baxter, Dr. Owen, and the rest of that Fry that ever I heard
of. So that this reason concludes not in favor of the Dissenters, but of the
Regular Clergy, who as they were in most danger ought to have been most taken
care of. But this Vote left them in the same danger it found them of being
destroyed by the Papists, and let loose the Dissenters upon them too, to
increase that danger.

2. Page 23.
They saw what advantages these Enemies made of our Divisions, and how
cunningly they diverted us from persecuting them by fomenting our Jealousies of
one another.

Did they not, Sir observe too how the Dissenters took the occasion of the
Plot, and of the general hatred against Popery to ruin the Loyal and
Conformable Clergy? How they presently engrossed the Title of Protestant, and
endeavored to make the Rabble believe that all but the Bobtail Holders forth
and their Followers were Papists in Masquerade, Tories, Tantivimen, etc. If
they did not observe these things, others did. And also that all of a sudden
all the Jesuits assumed the shapes of Nonconformists, and railed stoutly
against Bishops, Ceremonies, Humane Impositions, and Arbitrary Government. They
knew there was no Possibility of escaping the vengeance of the Church of
England men but by setting the Dissenters upon them, and they needed no Spur.
So this was a good Argument to have taught the Dissenters more modesty; but
since they had not that, it was a strong Argument to have suppressed them
vigorously as the only Auxiliaries of the Papists against the Church; and the
great hinderers of the prosecution of the Plot.

3. They saw the strength and nearness of the King of France, and judged of his
inclinations by his usage of his own Protestant Subjects.

4. They considered the number, and the bloody Principles of the Irish. And

5. That Scotland was already delivered into the hands of a Prince, the known
head of the Papists in these Kingdoms, and the occasion of their Plots and
Insolences, as more than one Parliament had declared. (It should have been
worded thus) as they had declared in more than one Parliament, for these were
the same men in several Parliaments, who made these several Declarations.

Now I cannot conceive wherein the force of these three Arguments lies, the
French King was powerful, and hated Protestants, therefore the Church of
England must be prepared for ruin by giving as many as pleased a free liberty
to separate from her, and procure her destruction. The Irish Papists had ill
designs just ripe for execution, therefore the English Nonconformists were to
be tolerated that they might get strength, and be able to rise at the same
time, to ascertain the destruction of the Church.

But the fifth Reason is much better; Scotland was in the hands of the Duke,
How came he by it? What, did he invade it by force and violence against his
Majesty's Will? If he did, then let us make a mighty Combination against him:
But if it were delivered to him by the proper Owner, who may govern it by whom
he please, what occasion is there for the Dissenters service here?

6. Page 23.
They could not but take notice into what hands the most considerable Trusts
both Civil and Military were put.

7. And that notwithstanding all Addresses, and all Proclamations, for a strict
execution of the Penal Laws against Papists, yet their Faction so far prevailed
that they were eluded, and only the Dissenting Protestants smarted under the
rage of them.

That they took very good notice who were employed in Civil and Military Trusts
appears by the Address of December 21. 1680. not many days before this Vote,
where they tell the King, That several Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the
Peace, fitly qualified for those employments, have been of late displaced, and
others put in their room, who are men of Arbitrary Principles, and
Countenancers of Papists and Popery. These they would have had turned out, and
others put in; who are men of Integrity and known affection to the Protestant
Religion; and may be moreover men of Ability, of Estates and Interest in their
Country. His Majesty knew what they meant, but did not think fit to change his
choice; and the truth is they gave him no great encouragement by their own
carriage to have any more to do with these able, wealthy, popular men.

And therefore it seems this was one reason that moved them to Vote the
Protestant Dissenters free from Penal Laws, either to keep them out of the
hands of these evil Trustees both Civil and Military; or else to make a Party
out of them not only against the Duke of York, but also against these
Countenancers of Papists and Popery; that is, against his Majesty's Officers
both Civil and Military. As if because the French King, notwithstanding his
great Power and Aversion to the Protestant Religion, could not hurt the Church
of England, therefore the Dissenters were to be caressed and cherished, that
they in a small time might be in a capacity to do it. And now if these were not
good reasons for the Vote, let any impartial man (that is, any but a Church of
England man) judge. Page 23.


In the midst of such Circumstances was there not cause to think an Union of
all Protestants necessary, and could they have any just grounds to believe that
the Dissenters, whilst they lay under the pressures of severe Laws, should with
such Alacrity and Courage as was requisite, undertake the defense of a Country
where they were so ill treated?

Whether this question relates to the French King and the Papists, or the Duke
and the Civil and Military Officers may be a question, and therefore it must be
so answered. As to the first, there was all the reason in the world that they
should join heartily with the Government against the Papists and French, for
they could not hope to mend their condition by falling into their hands, who
they knew would treat them with other manner of severities than those they met
with from the Laws; if they did not know this, any of the French Protestants
that fled over (...) England might have informed them sufficiently. N^w, of
evils the least is to be chosen, and tho their con^^tion had not been equal to
their desires, yet it had been a madness to have made it worse by delivering up
themselves and their Country into the hands of the French and Papists.

But if it relates to the Duke, and the Civil and Military Officers, then I
hope he will excuse me if I do not think it fit to have another Union of
Protestants of that sort again.

A long and sad Experience had showed, Page 23.
how vain the endeavors of former Parliaments had been to force us to be all
of one Suppose that the Church of England were disarmed of all those Laws by
which she is guarded; and would not this turn a National Church into nothing
else but a Tolerated Sect or Party? Would it not take away all appearance of
Establishment from it? Lord Chancellors Speech, April 13. 75. Would this Unite
us in one Affection?
Opinion, and therefore the House of Commons resolved to take a sure way to
make us all of one Affection.

This was the very reason of the Declaration of Liberty of Conscience: But how
unlike that course was to prevail, the Nation had sufficient experience in a
few years. And, Sir, I can assure you, it is above the power of a House of
Commons to unite those men in Affection, who differ not only in Opinion, but
Practice too, in matters of Religion.

For these reasons my Author says this Vote was made in order to a repeal of
them by a Bill to be brought in, and presently he grows Pettish, Page 24.
and tells us, None but a Frenchman could have the confidence to declaim
against a proceeding so regular and Parliamentary as this.

Your humble Servant Sir, I pray be a little pacified, you may possibly be
mistaken as well as another man, but would, I believe, take it a little
unkindly to be called Monsieur presently. They very first Vote they made that
day was this: Resolved, That whosoever advised his Majesty to Prorogue this
Parliament, to any other purpose than in order to the passing of a Bill for the
Exclusion of James Duke of York, is a betrayer of the King, the Protestant
Religion, and of the Kingdom of England; a promoter of the French interest, and
a Pensioner to France. So they knew they were to be Prorogued that very day,
and as the Story goes, made more than ordinary haste to pass these Votes. Now,
it was impossible that a Bill should be brought in, much less passed in that
Session which was to end before night, and therefore this was not, nor could
not be the cause of that Vote, and all your little Queries, founded upon this
supposition, are silly and impertinent. Page 24.


There was not the least direction or signification to the judges which might
give any occasion for the reflection which follows in the Declaration. The due
and impartial execution of the Laws, is the unquestionable duty of the Judges,
and we hope they will always remember that duty so well, as not to necessitate
a House of Commons to do theirs, by calling them to account for making private
instructions the Rule of their judgments, and acting as men who have more
regard to their Places than their Oaths.

So the Dissenters may see they are mistaken when they think the Judges or
Justices may forbear executing the Laws against them upon the score of this
Vote. Ibid.


But tho the Judges are sworn to execute all Laws, yet there is no obligation
upon any man to inform against another.

No Sir, Is not every Grand Jury man, every Constable, and Churchwarden sworn
to Present the breakers of our Laws as well as the Judges are to punish them?
And as for the next Conundrams of yours, the comparing a parcel of Laws made
within twenty years, to those Antiquated ones about Caps, and Bows and Arrows,
and killing of Lambs and Calves, and your business of Empson and Dudley, they
are such stuff as a man of half your understanding would have been ashamed to
have mensioned in a good cause.

In the next place my Author acquaints us what are the causes usually of
disusing Laws, Page 25.
alterations of the Circumstances whereupon a Law was made; or if it be against
the genious of a People, or have effects contrary to the intents of the Maker,
none of which can be said in this case. Nor is that true which follows, that
the quiet, safety, or trade of our Nation has been promoted by the not
executing of these Laws, as any man may know that can remember but ten years
backward. And therefore notwithstanding the Vote of the Commons, the Judges may
act wisely and honestly if they should encourage Informers, or quicken Juries
by strict and severe Charges. For the due and impartial execution of the Laws
is the unquestionable duty of the Judges, according to my Author, and therefore
I will hope they shall not be accounted Knaves or Fools for doing their
unquestionable duty.

But then my Author has another quarrel with the Ministers, and that was for
numbering this Vote amongst the causes of the Dissolution of that Parliament
when the Black Rod was at the door of the House, Page 25.
to require them to attend his Majesty at the very time when it was made.

Well, suppose we should grant that this was not one of those Votes that
occasioned the Prerogation, it not being then made when that was resolved on,
yet it might occasion their Dissolution, which happened some time after. And was
not this an excellent time to make Votes for the bringing in of Bills for the
Repeal of Laws when the Black Rod was at the door to call the House to a
Prorogation?

After a little anger against the Ministers for arraigning one of the Three
Estates, in the face of the World, for usurping power over the Laws,
imprisoning their fellow Subjects, Arbitrarily exposing the Kingdom to the
greatest dangers, and endeavoring to deprive the King of all possibility of
supporting the Government, Page 11, 20.
(the man has forgot how often he has arraigned the Long Loyal Parliament for
a parcel of Mercenary Pensioners) he in the next place falls foul upon the
Clergy for publishing this Declaration like an Excommunication in all Churches.
Page 26.


But if they (the Ministers) erred in the things they judged rightly in the
choice of the persons who were to publish it. Blind Obedience was requisite,
where such unjustifiable things were imposed, and that could be no where so
entire as amongst those Clergymen whose preferment depended upon it.

Yes, without doubt, ten thousand Clergymen did expect to be preferred
presently for this piece of blind Obedience. Yet he is at it again in the next
page, a Set of Presbyterian Clergy would not have been so tame. Well, but this
would not have done tho, If the Paper, which was to be read in the Desk, had
not been so suitable to the Doctrine which some of them had often declared in
the Pulpit. Then it did not go against their Consciences.

It did not become them to inquire whether they had sufficient Authority for
what they did, since the Printer calls it the Kings Declaration.

No; Where, or of whom should they have enquired? And it being Printed by the
Kings Printer, with his Majesty's Royal Arms before it, and sent them by their
Ordinaries the Bishops, they had no reason to question whether it were the
Kings or no. And there was as little reason that they should concern
themselves, Whether they might not one day be called to an account for
publishing it. They had reason to trust that his Majesty, who commanded them to
do it, would protect them in their blind Obedience. And as for his Law-Quirks,
whether what his Majesty singly Ordered when he sat in Council, and came forth
without the Stamp of the Great Seal, gave them a sufficient warrant to read in
publicly. These things never entered into their heads.

Well, but Sir, tho those same Clergymen, driven on by Ambition, might act in
this without fear or shame, and think as little of a Parliament, as the Court
Favorites, who took care to dissolve that at Oxford, before they durst tell us
the faults of that at Westminister. Tho it might be so as you say, yet the
Shoal of Addressors that came in to thank his Majesty for that Declaration,
they had more light; and, Sir, if you be resolved to call all these Ministers,
all these Clergymen, all these Addressors to an account in the next
Parliament, pray for cold weather, and long days, and another Parliament, that
may sit for ever if it please, or you may happen to want time to go through
with so pious and good a work.

But Sir, tho the Ministers durst not discover the faults of the Westminster
Parliament till they had taken care to dissolve that Oxford, his Majesty in his
Speech there, did. Which he began thus:

The unwarrantable proceedings of the last House of Commons were the occasion
of my parting with the last Parliament: The gracious Speech there made, and the
gracious Declaration that followed, are so much of a piece that we may justly
conclude the same persons to have been the Authors of both. Page 27. of this
Book.
For I, who will never use Arbitrary Government my self, am resolved not to
suffer it in others. I am unwilling to mention particulars, because I am
desirous to forget faults, etc.

So that you may see if you please that the Oxford Parliament was told in
general the faults of that which preceded in order to their avoiding them, if
they could have made that good use of his Majesty's Advice, which will render
them the less excusable to all the world.

So now we come to that Parliament at Oxford, Page 27.
which says the Declaration was assembled as soon as that was dissolved; and
(says my Author) might have added, Dissolved as soon as Assembled, the
Ministers having employed the People forty days in choosing Knights and
Burgesses to be sent home in Right, with a Declaration after them, as if they
had been called together only to be affronted.

As to the People, if their Knights and Burgesses came back sooner than they
expected, they had reason to thank themselves, Page 6.
who had twice before sent up the same men; and as you observed before, the
people do not change suddenly, so neither does the Court, but does as certainly
send back a Parliament, that will not be governed, as the People send them. And
the People were overjoyed too, to see them again, for when they went out they
had told them, they never expected to come back again. So that so speedy and
safe a return was as welcome to them that sent them, as could be imagined.

As for the Knights and Burgesses themselves they had fair warning given them
by his Majesty beforehand, and if they would affront either Him, or the Upper
House, they did it at their apperil; and it was well they escaped so well, as to
be sent home with a Declaration after them.

My Author acknowledges that his Majesty failed not to give good Advice unto
them, Page 27.
who were called together to Advise him. And so many; I might say, all our
former Princes have done before his Majesty; and commanded them too, not to
meddle with such and such things; yea, and punished private Members sometimes
for doing otherwise. The Lord Keeper in the 35 year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign
spoke thus to the Commons.

It is her Majesty's pleasure, Proceedings of the four last Parl.
the time be not spent in devising and enacting new Laws, the number of which
are so great already, Page 32.
that it rather burtheneth than eases the Subject, etc. And whereas heretofore
it has been used that many have delighted themselves in long Orations, Viide.
p. 178.
full of Verbosity and vain Ostentations, more than in speaking things of
substance, the time that is precious would not be thus spent. And in the same
Parliament, the Lord Keeper upon the usual demands by the New Speaker, said
thus:

To your three demands the Queen answers, Liberty of Speech is granted you,
etc. but you must know what privilege you have, not to speak every one what he
lists, or what comes in his brain to utter, but your privilege is to say
Yea, or No. Wherefore Mr. Speaker, her Majesty's pleasure is, that if you
perceive any Idle Heads, which will not stick to hazard their own Estates,
which will meddle with Reforming of the Church, and transforming of the
Commonwealth; and do exhibit any Bills to that purpose, that you receive them
not,
until they be viewed and considered of by those whom it is fitter should
consider of such things, and can better judge of them.

To your persons all privilege is granted, with this Caveat, that under color
of this Privilege, no man's ill doings, or not performing of Duties, be covered
and protected.

The last free Access, is also granted to her Majesty's Person, so that it be
upon urgent and weighty causes, and at times convenient, and when her Majesty
may be at leisure from other important causes of the Realm.

Now, let what his Majesty said at Oxford be compared with this, and let any
man tell me whether the Parliament deserved any commendation from my Author,
for their having so much respect to the King, Page 27.
as not particularly to complain of the great invasion that was made upon their
Liberty of Proposing and Debating Laws, by his telling them beforehand what
things they should meddle with, and what things no reason they could offer
should persuade him to consent unto.

In that very Parliament I have mentioned, Feb. 24. 1592. 35 Eliz.
Mr. Peter Wentworth and Sir Henry Bromley delivered a Petition unto the Lord
Keeper, therein desiring the Lords of the Upper House to be suppliants with
them of the Lower House unto her Majesty, for entailing the Succession to the
Crown; whereof a Bill was already drawn.

Her Majesty was highly displeased therewith, after she knew it, as a matter
contrary to her former straight Commandment, and charged the Council to call
the Parties before them. Sir Thomas Henage presently sent for them, and after
speech with them, commanded them to forbear coming to the Parliament, and not
to go out from their Lodgings,

The next day, Prerogative of Parliaments, Page 56.
being Sunday, Mr. Peter Wentworth was sent prisoner to the Tower; Sir Henry
Bromley, one Mr. Richard Stephens, and Mr. Welsh, the other Knight for
Worcestershire, were sent to the Fleet. And Sir Walter Rauleigh tells us,
Wentworth died in the Tower, tho this Motion was but supposed dangerous to the
Queens Estate.

Yet here was no express Command against it, but only a general Command which I
have recited; neither does it appear that any disherison of any right Heir to
the Crown was intended. And in this very Parliament one Mr. Morris. Attorney
of the Court of Wards, bringing in a Bill against the abuses of the Bishops, as
he pretended, in Lawless Inquisitions, injurious Subscriptions, and binding
Absolution; he was the next day sent for to Court, Feb. 28. 1592.
and committed unto Sir John Fortescues Keeping. And upon both these the Queen
sent this Message to the House by their Speaker.

It is in me, and my power, to call Parliaments, and it is in my power to end
and determine the same; it is in my power to Assent or Dissent to any thing
done in Parliament. The Calling of this Parliament was only that the Majesty of
God might be more religiously served, and those that neglected this Service
might be compelled by some sharper means to a more due Obedience, And
accordingly in this Session of Parliament was the sharp Statute made against
the Dissenters, which was designed to have been repealed, when the Bill of
Repeal was lost in the House of Lords.
and a more true service of God than there has been hitherto used. And
further, that the safety of her Majesty's Person and of this Realm might be by
all means provided for against our great Enemies, the Pope and the King of
Spain.

Her Majesty's most excellent pleasure being then delivered unto us by the Lord
Keeper, it was not meant we should meddle with Matters of State, or in Causes
Ecclesiastical; (for so her Majesty termed them) she wondered that any would be
of so high Commandment to attempt (I use her own words) a thing contrary to
that which she had so expressly forbidden, wherefore with this she was highly
displeased.

And in all her Reign after durst no man attempt to meddle with either of these
things. Now I have taken the pains to transcribe all this out of the
transactions of her Reign rather than of any other, because she was never
accused of affecting Arbitrary Government, or Popery, but was beloved of all
her Subjects whilst she lived, and her Memory is, and ever will be had in
honor by all English men, and she ought to be a pattern for all her Successors.

And now let us hear our modest Vindicator. Page 27.
But every man must be moved to hear it charged upon them as an unpardonable
disobedience, that they did not obsequiously sub mit to that irregular command
of not touching on the business of the Succession. Shall two or three unknown
Minions take upon them, like the Lords of the Articles of Scotland to prescribe
unto an English Parliament what things they shall treat of? Do they intend to
have Parliaments, inter instrumenta servitutis, as the Romans had Kings in our
Country? This would quickly be if what was then attempted had succeeded, and
should be so pursued hereafter, that Parliaments should be directed what they
are to meddle with, and threatened if they do any other thing: For the loss of
Liberty of freedom of Debate in Parliament, will soon and certainly be followed
by a general loss of Liberty.

This is the right temper and Spirit of a good Commonwealth man, thus did your
Fathers talk in the days of his Majesty's Father, till Privilege of Parliament
had eat up all the Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Liberties of the
Subjects, and delivered us over to slavery, poverty, and confusion, so that the
Tyrannical, Arbitrary, bloody Government of Oliver Cromwell was thought a
blessing to the Nation, in comparison of these Parliamentary Instruments of
slavery, and their Legions, which I hope this Generation will so well remember
as never to set it up, or suffer it to be set up more in my days.

My Author having told us in the next place, Page 28.
That the King ought to divest himself of all private inclinations, and force
his own affections to yield unto the Public Concernments, and therefore his
Parliaments ought to inform him impartially of that which tends to the good of
those they represent, without regard of personal passions, and might worthily
be blamed if they did not believe that he would forgo them all for the safety
of his People; Concludes, That therefore if in it self it was lawful to propose
a Bill for Excluding the Duke of York from the Crown, the doing it after such
an unwarrantable signification of his pleasure would not make it otherwise.

To which I reply, that Parliaments as Subjects are more bound to comply with
the natural and reasonable Affections and Passions of their Princes, than
Princes are in the same Circumstances with those of their Subjects. And that in
this case his Majesty's own Personal safety and interest was wrapped up in that
of his Brother; for if he might be Excluded, another might be Deposed on the
same pretense, as Coleman said truly enough. And tho it should be granted that
Parliaments ought to inform Princes, yet it is certain, they ought not to force
them; they had informed the King in the two former Parliaments what they
thought of this Affair, and his Majesty had rejected their Advice, and in the
beginning of this Parliament at Oxford had told them, That what he had
formerly, and so often declared touching the Succession he could not depart
from. And after all this for them to enter again upon it in the very first
place, looked like an intended force: And then tho the thing were lawful in it
self, it may be thought unreasonable thus to pursue it; and Queen Elizabeth
would have made them have felt the Effects of her resentment for presuming to
be of so high Commandment, if she had been in his Majesty's place.

In the next place we are told his Majesty's unusual stiffness upon this
occasion, Page 28.
begins to be suspected not to proceed from fondness to his Brother, much less
from any thoughts of danger to the English Monarchy, by such a Law, but from
the influence of some few ill men upon his Royal mind, etc.

Now let all the World judge betwixt the King and this Party; they grant the
King has been heretofore compliant enough to their desires; and then in the
rudest Language that spite and scorn could dictate, conclude, against sense
and reason, that it was not fondness to his Brother, nor kindness to the
Monarchy, but the ill influence of a few men that had thus disposed him. A
likely thing, that he which could give up a Brother, and be so unconcerned for
his Crown, should be so stupid rather than stiff as to venture all for a few
ill men. Ibid.
Creatures to the Duke, and Pensioners to France, wicked Wretches who have
infected him with the fatal Notion, that the Interests of his People are not
only distinct, but opposite to his. No words I can write are sharp enough to
reprove this Miscreant, that thus rails against his and my Sovereign the Lords
Anointed, and therefore to God Almighty I leave it.

He tells us in the next place, his Majesty does not seem to doubt of his Power
in Conjunction with his Parliament to Exclude his Brother. He very well knows
this Power has been often Exerted in the time of his Predecessors.

Yes, doubtless his Majesty has read the English Story, and observed at the
same time, that more Princes have been deposed by Pretended power of Parliament
than Excluded; and he very well knows that if he shall yield that an Argument
drawn from Example is valid, he will then stand upon slippery ground. He also
knows that the right Heir was never put by but a good plenty of Miseries, Wars,
and Calamities followed upon it; and he is able to foresee, that if the same
should happen again, the French King may easily possess himself of these
miserable Kingdoms, and therefore it is fairly probable love to his People as
well as his Brother has kept him from consenting.

The reasons he says that his Majesty has aliedged are because it concerned
him so near in Honor, Page 28.
Justice, and Conscience, not to do it.

And are not these three powerful Arguments? But my Author can ridicule them,
and turn them all against the King. It is not (says he) honorable for a
Prince to be true and faithful to his Word and Oath? To keep and maintain the
Religion and Laws Established? Yes, who does question it, but all this, and all
that he has said besides, may be done without Excluding his Brother, who would
have just as much right (supposing the King dies without lawful Issue) to the
Reversion, as his Majesty has to the present Possession. And can his Majesty
wrong him of that Right without a blemish to his Honor, Justice, and
Conscience? Who will ever after dare to rely upon his Majesty if they once see
him desert his own Brother?

But that which follows is amazing. Page 29.
All Obligations of Honor, Justice, and Conscience, are comprehended in a
grateful return of such benefits as have been received, can his Majesty believe
that he does duly repay unto his Protestant Subjects, the kindness they showed
him, when they recalled him from a miserable helpless Banishment, and with so
much dutiful affection placed him in the Throne, enlarged his Revenue above
what any of his Predecessors had enjoyed, and gave him vaster Sums of Money in
twenty years, than had been bestowed upon all the Kings since William the
First? Should he after all this deliver them up to be ruined by his Brother?

It should have been, Should he after all this deliver them up to be ruined by
the Dissenter: and the Faction that Murdered his Father, drew up an Oath of
Abjuration of the whole Family of the Stuarts, hanged, plundered, murdered,
sequestered, and destroyed so many of his Loyal Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy?
Sir. I am not so ill bred as to Catechize my Sovereign, but I thing I may
without offense ask the Whigs a few small questions. Have you the impudence
after all the Villainies you have done, to Usurp the Loyalty that you never were
guilty of: Was it not enough to banish your Sovereign, The Lord Chancellor told
the Parliament May 1^. 1662. that they had well provided for the Crown by the
Bill of the Mil^^^^, and the Act for the Additional Revenue, to their high
Commendation^. How ^^owa^d and indisposed soever many are at present, who (...)
such obstructions laid in their way to Mutiny and Sedition, use all the
Artifi^e they can to persuade the people that yo^ have not been soiretou enough
for their Liberty, nor (...) enough for their pro^^^, and (...) labor to (...)
their reverence toward you which sure was (...) more due to any Parliament.
and keep him twelve years in that miserable helpless condition, but you must
reproach him too with it? Did he not pardon you when you had sormited your
Lives and all you had to his Justice by all the Laws of God and man? Must he
once more put himself into your power that he may try whether you will use him
as you did his Father? Have you not repined at his Restitution, endeavored to
Banish him the second time by all the Arts imaginable? Have you not murmured at
all that has been given him? Slandered that Parliament that gave it whilst it
fate, and since it was dissolved, labored to represent it to the Nation as the
worst Parliament that ever sat? Have not you, Sir, called them Danby's
Pensioners, Mercenary Pensioners? etc. And can you show any vast, or indeed
competent Sums of Money given to the King since you know when? And after all
this, have you the insolence to call your selves Protestants, or own your
selves Subjects? And expect the King should, in pure gratitude for what you
never did, lay all at your feet again? As for those Protestant Subjects who,
besides all that you have falsely ascribed to your selves, fought for him and
his Father, they do not fear his Majesty's Brother would ruin them if he
could, and therefore have by thousands thanked his Majesty for his care in
preserving the Succession in its due and legal course of descent.

In the next Paragraph my Author is very Politic, and tells us, Page 30.
Our Ancestors have been always more careful to preserve the Government
inviolable, than to favor any personal pretenses, and have therein conformed
themselves to the practice of all other Nations, whose examples deseve to be
followed.

That is, they have been more careful to preserve the Mornarchy it self, and
the Liberties of the Subject, than the due and legal Descent in the Succession.
This is certainly true. And they have paid well for neglecting the other; as is
apparent to any body that has read the History of England. I will instance only
in the Wars betwixt the Houses of Lancaster and York. Richard II. being deposed
and murdered, Henry IV. who had no Title, but was a brave Prince, The
continuation of the History of England by John Trussel.
was set up. But mark the Consequence, before this Quarrel could be ended in B
sworth Field, there perished 80998 Private Soldiers, two Kings, one Prince,
ten Dukes, two Marquesses, twenty one Earls, twenty seven Lords, two Vicounts,
once Lord Prior, one Judge, one hundred thirty nine Knights, four hundred forty
one Esquires, and my Author knows not how many Gentlemen, in twelve Battles.
The total, says my Author, of all the persons that have been slain is, 85628.
Christians, and most of them of this Nation. Is it fit to run the Risque of
suffering all this over again?

As to his Examples of Princes that have been Excluded upon the account of
Religion, or for other smaller matters, they prove nothing, but that ill things
have been done, but ought they therefore to be reacted? As for his railing
Accusations brought against his Royal Highness, they deserve so much the less
consideration because he treats the King at that abominable rate he does; of
whose Clemency, Justice, and Compassion all Europe are Witnesses.

Having concluded there must be a War; Page 31.
he says, Let it be under the Authority of Law, let it be against a Banished
Excluded Pretender. There is no fear of the Consequence of such a War. No true
Englishman can join with him, or countenance his Usurpation; after this Act,
and for his Popish and Foreign Adherents, they will neither be more provoked,
nor more powerful by the passing of it.

This man all along supposes that neither the Duke nor the King have any
natural Hereditary Right to the Crown; but talks as if it were merely at the
pleasure of the People and their Representatives to make what man they please
King of England, supposing that a Son of an Emperor of Germany, or of a King
of Poland, were passed by or Excluded, and should enter a War for the gaining
of that Crown, to which for want of an Election he had never any legal right,
he might be styled a Pretender or an Usurper; but in an Hereditary Kingdom it
can never be so, if according to the before cited opinion of K. James, no Act
of Parliament can extinguish the Dukes Right, which God and Nature has given
him, in case the King should die before his Royal Highness without lawful
Issue, tho it may prevent his obtaining it. So that he can never be an Usurper
or Pretender till the Monarchy of England is declared to be Elective. And this
may be thought to be one reason why his Majesty should never yield the point.
And as for my Authors confidence in the success of such a War, it speaks
nothing but his earnest desire of one, rather than not to have his Will, and I
hope the Nation will have no occasion to prove him a false Prophet. Page 31.


Nor will his Exclusion make it at all necessary to maintain a standing Force,
for preserving the Government, and the peace of the Kingdom. The whole People
will be an Army for that purpose, and every heart and hand will be prepared to
maintain that so necessary, so much desired Law.

If all this were true, there would be no need of an Army indeed, but then
there would also be as little need of an Association too, for I never heard of
a Prince that was able to compel three whole Nations to submit to him against
all their Wills, and without Foreign Aids. But, Sir, the House of Commons
thought the latter necessary, or else they would never have desired that his
Majesty would be likewise Graciously pleased to Assent to an Act whereby his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects may be enabled to Associate themselves for the
defense of his Majesty's Person, Address of December. 21. 1680.
the Protestant Religion, and the security of your Kingdoms. This was thought
as necessary as the Bill of Exclusion, and what kind of Association some men
intended is well enough understood now by the whole Nation.

As to his Recrimination upon the Ministers for the two Armies and the Guards;
let him set his heart at rest, for the World is very well satisfied, the one
were never intended to be kept up, and it is hoped the other (the Guards) will
be ever formidable to such Gentlemen, as my Author, who in kindness to the
Queen of Scots Title, and the Bill of Exclusion, is, like a good Protestant,
contented to insinuate that Queen Elizabeth was a Bastard, though born in
Matrimony. For so she must be, if what the Papists say of her having no other
Right but only that of an Act of Parliament, by which Mary Queen of Scots was
Excluded, be true.

In the next Paragraph my Author endeavors to face his Majesty down, Page 32.
That nothing was intended by those other ways which were darkly and dubiously
intimated in his Majesty's Speech unto the Parliament at Oxford, and repeated
in the Declaration; and he says, that his Majesty in his wisdom could not but
know that they signified nothing.

Now this is a strange way of proceeding with Princes, and would anger a
private man. The Regency signified nothing, the distinction betwixt the Kings
Personal and Politic Capacity was unfeasible; the Pope might absolve him from
all Oaths, Page 33.
as he did King John, and Henry III. and it would be more fatal to us when
Religion is concerned, which was not then in question. His Confessor would
excite him against us, and he who has made use of all the Power he has been
entrusted with hitherto for our destruction, (witness his Naval Wars against
the Dutch) would certainly Elude all Methods but the Bill of Exclusion, and if
it were otherwise, there was no hopes of having any fruit of any Expedient
without a War; and to be obliged to swear Allegiance to a Popish Prince, to own
his Title, to acknowledge him supreme Head of the Church, and Defender of the
Faith, seems (says my Author) a strange way of entitling our selves to fight
with him.

It does so; and therefore all those that are resolved on a War will I suppose
never do it. But are all these Titles annexed to the Crown as Protestant, or as
imperial and subject to none but God? Did they belong to Henry VIII. or did
they not? And supposing no Expedient should be used, would not the Number,
Constancy, and Resolution of the English Nation, and Protestants in it,
preserve the Religion in one Prince's Reign, tho of a different Religion,
without a War?

The Expedient propounded by his Majesty. that if means could be found, That in
case of a Popish Success^r, the Administration of the Government might remain
in Protestant hands, whether it be feasible or no, shows an inclination in his
Majesty to submit to any thing but what will ruin both him and his Brother, as
the Bill of Exclusion, backed with such an Association, as was lately found,
certainly will. In short, this Case is beset with so many and great
difficulties that it baffles all humane wit and understanding to provide such
an Expedient for it, as may be secure and satisfy; and therefore when all is
done that can be done, it must be left to God Almighty, who only can, and will
determine it.

Having denied the charge in the Declaration, That there was reason to believe
that the Parliament would have passed further to attempt some other great and
important changes even at present, and according to his wont, schooled the
King; and told the Ministers, That they hate Parliaments, because their Crimes
are such that they have reason to fear them. He relents a little, and tells us,
if they (the Ministers) by that expression meant, Page 34.
That the Parliament would have besought the King that the Duke might no longer
have the Government in his hands. This is a little hard to be understood, the
Duke not being then in England. 2. That his Dependants (those that had voted
against the Bill) should no longer preside in His Councils, no longer possess
all the great Trusts and Offices in the Kingdom. 3. That our Ports, our
Garrisons, and our Fleets should be no longer governed by such as are at his
devotion. 4. That Characters of Honor and Favor should be no longer placed on
men that the Wisdom of the Nation (the House of Commons without the Lords, for
they have it seems lately got a Patent to Monopolize all the Wisdom of the
Nation) has judged to be favorers of Popery, or Pensioners of France. These
are great and important Changes, but such as it becomes Englishmen to believe
were designed by that Parliament, and such as will be designed and pressed by
every Parliament, and such as the People will ever pray may find success with
the King; without these Changes (and the Association forgotten by my Author)
the Bill of Exclusion would only provoke, not disarm our Enemies. Nay, the very
money which we must have paid for it, would have been made use of to secure and
hasten the Duke's return upon us.

Now this was all perhaps was meant by that passage in the Declaration, In
plain English there must be a Change, we must neither have Popish Wife, nor
Popish Favorite, nor Popish Mistress, nor Popish Counselor at Court, nor any
new Convert. We want a Government and a Prince that we may trust, etc. A Speech
of a Noble Peer of the Realm.
and the Consequences of these things are such that no beseeching will ever
obtain them, till his Majesty is weary of all he has, and therefore it well
becomes all English men, that do not design another Rebellion, for time to come
to design, and pray: and our Parliaments to press for some other things that
may be fitter for them to ask, and his Majesty to grant. I conclude with the
Wisemans Advice, My Son fear thou the Lord and the King: and meddle not with
them that are given to change. Especially to such important changes.

We are now come to the consideration of that only fault which was peculiar to
the Parliament at Oxford, Page 35.
and that was their behavior in relation to the business of Fitz-Harris, the
Declaration says, He was impeached of High Treason by the Commons, and they had
cause to think his Treasons to be of such an extraordinary nature, that they
well deserved an examination in Parliament.

We shall by and by come to examine the reasons that made them think so, and in
the interim it is worth the while to recite the very words of the Declaration
which are these:

The business of Fitz-Harris, who was impeached by the House of Commons of High
Treason, and by the House of Lords referred to the ordinary course of Law, was
on the sudden carried on to that extremity, by the Votes which the Commons
passed on March 26. last, that there was no possibility left of a
Reconciliation. The Votes are these:

Rosolved, That it is the undoubted Right of the Commons in Parliament
assembled, to impeach before the Lords in Parliament, any Peer or Commoner, for
Treason, or any other Crime or Misdemeanor: And that the refusal to proceed in
Parliament upon such impeachment, is a denial of Justice, and a Violation of
the Constitutions of Parliaments.

Resolved, That in the case of Edward Fitz-Harris, who by the Commons has been
impeached of High Treason before the Lords, with a Declaration, that in
convenient time they would bring up the Articles against him for the Lords to
Resolve, that the said Fitz-Harris should be proceeded with according to the
course of Common Law, and not by way of impeachment at this time, is a denial
of Justice, and a violation of the Constitutions of Parliaments, and an
Obstruction to the further discovery of the Popish Plot, and of great danger to
his Majesty's Person, and the Protestant Religion.

Resolved, That for any inferior Court to proceed against Edward Fitz-Harris,
or any other person lying under an impeachment in Parliament, for the same
Crimes he or they stand impeached, is a high breach of the Privilege of
Parliament.

And now let us follow my Authors account of Fitz-Harris his business, Page 35.
who, he says truly, was a known Irish Papist, and it appeared by the
Informations given in the House, he was made use of by some very great persons
to set up a Counterfeit Protestant Conspiracy, Oatos tells us, these were the
Protesting Lords, and the Leading men in the House of Commons. Trial, page 28.
and thereby not only to drown the noise of the Popish Plot, but to take off
the Heads of the most eminent of those who refused to bow their knees to Baal,
etc. That this might look as unlike a Popish Design (and be the better received
by the people) as was possible, they framed a libel full of the most bitter
invectives against Popery and the Duke of York, it carried as much seeming zeal
for the Protestant Religion as Colemans Declaration, and as much care and
concern for our Laws, as the penners of this Declaration would seem to have:
But it was also filled with the most subtle insinuations, and the sharpest
expressions against his Majesty that could be invented, and with direct and
passionate incitements to Rebellion.

This Paper, Trial, page 21.
as it appears by the account of it which was given at Fitz-Harris his Trial,
was penned in the style, and just like the Libels the sober Protestants daily
Print, and perhaps not much unlike our modest Vindicator, in the main, but had
some things in it which they whisper for the present, because it is dangerous
Printing of them. And some other things plainly spoken, which the other Party
have a way to insinuate craftily, so that it may be understood, and yet not
hazard their sweet lives.

This, Page 35.
says my Author, was to be conveyed by unknown Messengers (Oats says by the
Penny Post) to their hands who were to be betrayed, and then they were to be
seized upon, and those Libels sound about them, were to be a Confirmation of
the truth of a Rebellion, which they had provided Witnesses to swear was
designed by the Protestants, and had before prepared men to believe by Private
Whispers. And the credit of this Plot should no doubt have been soon confirmed
by speedy Justice done upon the pretended Criminals.

And now it is time to give a little better account of this Libel, than perhaps
the Author has given, it was penned by one Mr. Everard, by the direction of
Fitz-Harris, he fearing he might be shamm'd, and that it was designed so,
called in one Mr. Smith, and Sir William Waller into the business, that so he
might clear himself of it, and trappan Fitz-Harris. These two Gentlemen heard
Fitz-Harris dictate the heads of it to Everard. and one of them heard him
approve of it, when it was delivered to him. Mr. Everard was promised his
reward for all this by the French Ambassador, Page 24.
as Sir William Waller swears in the Trial he heard Fitz-Harris say; and upon
Sir William Wallers giving the King an account of it, Fitz-Harris was taken
with the Libel about him.

Being taken and committed to Newgate, Feb. 27.
he was examined the tenth day of March by Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir George
Treby, There he speaks not one word of the Author of the Libel. Said College,
If you do not join with Fitz-Harris, and charge the King home, you are the
basest fellow in the world, etc. College Trial. page 30.
But being thus imprisoned, he found there was no way to save his life, but to
curry favor with those eminent men that had never bowed the knee to Baal. So
that Story was set up, which he was not able to prove one Syllable of at his
Trial, but however it was easily enough believed by them, who love to make the
King and Court as odious as they can, as well as the Papists.

My Author goes on. The heinous nature of the Crime, and the greatness of the
Persons supposed to be concerned, Page 36.
deserved an extraordinary Examination, which a Jury, who were only to enquire
whether Fitz-Harris was guilty of framing that Libel, could never make; and the
Commons believed none but the Parliament was big enough to go through with it.

The Trial of this Person being extant, I must for brevity refer my Reader to
it; and I see not how it had been possible for the Parliament to have sifted
that business of Fitz-Harris his being put upon this by the Court, to ruin the
eminent men, more narrowly than it was at the Trial, and there was not one
syllable proved by any of the Witnesses he produced, which were many, and
persons of great worth, only Mr. Oats said, he heard Everard say some such
thing, which Everard again denied upon his Oath. And Sir William Waller owned
he had heard the King was discontented at his troubling him with this business;
but Sir William Waller, Mr. Smith, and Mr. Everard proved it positively upon
him that he had ordered the drawing of that Libel, had approved of it when it
was drawn, and amended some words in it with his own hands. And now after all
this to lay the Crime upon the Court, upon the suggestion of the Malefactor,
was such a piece of Justice as never was attempted.

Nor did they (the Commons) only fear the perversion of Justice, Page 36.
but the misapplication of Mercy too, etc. because when Fitz-Harris was
inclined to Repentance, and had begun a Confession, to the surprise of the
whole Nation, without any visible cause, he was taken out of the lawful custody
of the Sheriffs, and shut up a close prisoner in the Tower.

That he had not only begun, but gone through with a Confession appears by a
Printed Narrative, taken by two, which I think were both of the House of
Commons, one I am sure was. And when notwithstanding this, some eminent men
began to tamper with him to turn all this upon the Court; then, and not before,
was he taken out of the custody of the Sheriffs, and put into the Tower, that
they might not make an ill use of him to the Damage of the King and the
Government.

The Commons had therefore no other way to be secure that the prosecution
should be effectual, Ibid.
the Judgment indifferent, and the Criminal out of all hopes of Pardon, (unless
by an ingenuous Confession be could engage both Houses in a powerful mediation
to his Majesty in his behalf.) But by impeaching him they were sure no pardon
could stop their suit, tho the King might release his own Prosecution by his
Pardon.

What need there was here of any further or more ingenuous Confession that he
should make, than what he had made I cannot imagine; but we may guess it was
meant, that if Fitz-Harris should lay the blame of this Libel on the Court, and
say it was designed to Trappan the eminent men, then they would try to get him
pardoned, but if he did not do this, then he should have been hanged without
mercy.

Well, But what if the King would not have consented to the Pardon, which was
to have been purchased with his dishonor? Then the Commons would not have
proceeded with their impeachment, and the Consequence would have been (if the
Lords had not rejected the Impeachment) that then no inferior Court could have
tried him, and so he should never have been tried.

So that it is plain, that if the Lords had not rejected this Impeachment, it
would, as the King says in the Declaration, have been made use of to delay a
Trial that We had directed against a professed Papist charged with Treasons
against Us of an extraordinary nature: And certainly the House of Peers did
themselves Right in refusing to give countenance to such a proceeding.

Part of the 36, Page 36, 37, 38, 39.
and all the 37, 38, 39, Pages are spent by my Author to prove that a Commoner
may be tried by the Peers in Parliament upon an Impeachment of the Commons; in
which matter I will have no Controversy with him because he may be in the
right for ought I know. And I have as little to say to him, Page 40.
whether such Commoners as are tried there ought to have any Juries, or whether
the Lords rejecting the Impeachment was, or only looked, like a denial of
Justice. For it is plain, that as good justice might be had, and in this case
was had, in the Kings Bench as could have been had before the Lords, and if
Fitz-Harris had been acquitted there, then the Commons might afterward have
impeached him of any branch of Treason that was not; or could not have been
tried in the Kings Bench; so that the pretense he makes that part of his
Treasons were thought such as could only be adjudged in Parliament, is
impertinent, for the remainder were apparently such as he ought to be hanged
for, in an inferior Court, and he could suffer but once, and the taking notice
of the rest would have been impertinent.

I think I may modestly say this, that the impeachment of Commoners before the
Lords is so extraordinary a way, that it would be used as little as is
possible; but these Gentlemen were for nothing else, and Thompson, Sheridon,
Verdon, and the Lord knows how many more, were to have been thus proceeded
against, tho they were not persons of such extraordinary degree or quality, but
they might full as well have been tried in any other Court, and the Consequence
of this would have been, that neither the Lords nor Commons would have had any
leisure for any thing else but this.

Might it not be well retorted by the People, Page 41.
that it had been long a matter extremely sensible to them, that so many
Prorogations, so many Dissolutions, so many other Arts had been used to delay
the Trials, which his Majesty had often desired and the Parliament prepared
for, against the five professed Popish Lords charged with Treasons of an
extraordinary nature.

The King might if he had pleased have charged this upon the Commons too, that
notwithstanding the long time they had been imprisoned, yet the Commons would
not go on with their Trials, that they might legally and regularly be
discharged. The Impeachment of the Earl of Danby before they had tried these
five Lords occasioned the dissolution of the Long Loyal Parliament. A
Controversy betwixt the Lords and the Commons about the Trial of the said Earl
of Danby broke the next Parliament. Then comes the second short Westminster
Parliament, and having tried only one of them, the Earl of Stafford, when all
the World were in expectation they would have gone on, and have tried the other
four, they fell upon the Exclusion Bill, and that being rejected by the Lords,
they fell upon the Revenue, and seemingly Voted the King a (...) the Third's
time, they put down the Purveyor of the Meat for the maintenance (...) House,
as if the King had been a Bankrupt, and gave order that without ready Money he
sh^^^ not take up a Chicken. Prerogative of Parliaments, p. 15.
Bankrupt Jar. 7. by declaring that no man ought to trust him further than he
had ready money; nor lend him any, and Declared that several eminent men of the
Privy Counselors were favorers of Popery, and enemies to the King and
Kingdom, and for which and the other things they were dissolved; then comes
that at Oxford, with the Votes I have recited, for which, and for insisting
upon the Bill for Excluding the Duke of York they were dissolved. Could none of
these Parliaments have tried the Popish Lords without these things? Yes,
doubtless they might, but they would not, but kept these Lords in the Tower,
that whatever provocation they should give the King to Dissolve or Prorogue
them, still the clamor might be that it was to prevent their Trials. And I am
fully persuaded there are some men in England would almost choose to be hanged
themselves rather than be deprived of this glorious and popular pretense of
insensing the People against the King and the Court.

If there be no other Evidence of the Unparliamentary and mean Solicitations
used to promote this pretended Rejection of the Commons Accusation, Page 41.
than this scurvy Hint in my Author, which he acknowledges not fit to be
remembered, tho he cannot forbear Printing it, I suppose it is but a small part
of the Nation that will be extremely sensible of it.

But yet however if their Impeachment had not been rejected, Fitz-Harris had
long since been executed, or deserved mercy by a full discovery of these
malicious designs against the King and People, and the secret Authors of them.
And that he would certainly have done to have saved his own life, and then we
should have had an opportunity to have made the World believe, Trial, p 54.
that the King did hire Fitz-Harris to raise a Rebellion against himself, to
defame himself, and insense the minds of the People against him, for thus he
defamed the King at his Trial. This was all he could do to merit a Pardon by,
and this he did at his Trial, but was able to produce no testimony to back it.

But this Trial occasioned strange talk in Westminster Hall, and Questions were
raised of a strange nature that will never have a determination in any
inferior Court, but will assuredly at one time or other have a further
Examination. Page 41.
These questions were moved then by Fitz-Harris his Counsel, and need never be
determined.

By the Term in the Declaration of the Lords having done themselves right by
refusing to admit the Impeachment, Page 42.
he has discovered the Penman of the Declaration, and says, he has done
himself and the Nation Right, and discovered himself by using his ordinary
Phrase upon this occasion. Now I thought verily the next word would have been
his Name; no, but stay you there. The Person is well known without naming him,
who always tells men they have done themselves no right, when he is resolved to
do them none. Now cannot I tell any more whom he means, by this private token
than the man in the Moon, and if he had graciously vouchsafed to have whispered
his name in my Ear, and I had known that he had usually thus expressed himself,
yet I should still be a little jealous some Frenchman or other might be the
Author of it, because my Author has given full as good evidence, Page 5. to
prove it was so.

As for the Commons nothing (says my Author) was carried on to extremity by
them, Ibid.
nothing done but what was Parliamentary, they could not desire a Conference
till they had first stated their own Case, and asserted by Votes the matter
which they were to maintain at a Conference.

This was done effectually in the first part of the first and second Vote,
without adding, That the refusal of the Lords to proceed in Parliament upon
such Impeachment, is a denial of Justice, and a violation of the Constitution
of Parliaments, and in the second Vote, and an obstruction to the further
discovery of the Popish Plot, and of great danger to his Majesty's Person, and
the Protestant Religion.

Here the Declaration lays the stress of the business, and says, That when
either of the Houses are so far transported as to pass such Votes concerning
the proceedings of the other, without Conferences first had to examine upon
what grounds such proceedings are made, and how far they might be justified;
this puts the Two Houses out of a Capacity of Transacting business together,
and consequently is the greatest violation of the Constitution of Parliaments.
Now surely the House of Commons might have asserted their Right without these
Expressions, which must needs insense the Lords, especially when they were
Printed, and spread over the whole Nation.

But the House of Commons was so far from thinking themselves to be out of a
Capacity of Transacting with the Lords any further that they were preparing to
send a Message for a Conference to Accommodate this difference, Page 42.
at the very instant when the Black Rod called them to their dissolution.

But this it is very probable was not known to his Majesty, so that it came too
late to save them.

If every difference in Opinion and Vote should put the Two Houses out of a
Capacity of transacting business together, every Parliament must be dissolved
as soon as called.

Now, Sir, I could never have thought that it is so usual a thing for the Two
Houses to make such Votes as these against each other; I am persuaded the Lords
would never have treated with the Commons if a Conference had been demanded
till the Conclusions of the first and second Vote had been recanted.

But the Ministers promoted this difference between the Two Houses, (what, did
any of them dictate these Votes?) and then broke the Parliament lest it should
be composed. And for this my Author gives you his own honest word over again in
the next Page, and hopes no man will be so hardhearted as not to believe him.

But my Author has another quarrel against the Ministers, because they censure
these Votes of the Commons as the greatest violation of the Constitution of
Parliaments; They ought certainly (says my Author) to have excepted the power
which is here assumed of giving such a Judgment, Page 43.
and Publishing such a charge, as being not only the highest violation of the
Constitution, but directly tending to the destruction of it.

Well then, I for my part will never undertake to defend them in it. Aut I have
observed one thing in these debates, that the Privileges of the House of
Commons are not much unlike the Power claimed by the Pope, which is to judge
all men, and to be judged by no man. So that whatever they are pleased to call
Privilege of Parliament I am bound to believe is so, with an implicit faith:
For these Privileges of Parliament are known to none but those that sit in St.
Stephens Chapel, and if a man sit there twenty years, yet he shall be allowed
to know no more of them the day after he is turned out than I do.

The Declaration mentions one sort of men who are fond of their old beloved
Commonwealth Principles, Ibid.
and others are aangry at being disappointed in designs they had to accomplish
their own ambition and greatness. Surely (says my Author) if they know any such
persons, the only way to have prevented the mischiefs which they pretend to
fear from them, had been to have discovered them, and suffered the Parliament
to sit to provide against the evils they would bring upon the Nation, by
prosecuting them.

I cannot but fancy my Author smiled to himself when he made this pleasant
Proposition.

In the next place my Author gives us a description of men of Commonwealth
Principles; he tells us, Ibid.
They are men Passionately devoted to the public good, and to the common
service of their Country, who believe that Kings were instituted for the good
of the People, and Government ordained for the sake of those that are to be
governed, and therefore complain or grieve when it is used to contrary ends,
and that wise and honest men will be proud to be ranked in this number.

Now, as favorably as he has drawn it, I assure him, I for my part am none of
the number; for tho I know that if there were no People, there could hardly
have been Kings, and that one main end of Government was the good of those that
are to be governed; yet I believe that God Almighty had some respect for
Princes and Governors, and did not design only the good of the People, but
their good too; and tho I can grieve, yet I am not apt to complain when things
go amiss.

My Author in the next place spends a great deal of learning to prove, That the
word Commonwealth signifies the common good, in which sense it has been used
by all good Authors, etc. Now, this I will yield him, with all my hearts, that
till one thousand six hundred and forty all the World thought that a good
Commonwealth man and a good Subject were terms that might be promiscuously and
indifferently used; but the Author cannot be ignorant, that not long after the
word Commonwealth was so wholly appropriated to an odious Democracy by the
Rebels of the late times, whose usurped Seal and Coin bore the Image and
Superscription of the Beast, that it is no ways likely it should ever recover
its Primitive signification.

And I dare assure him, that many of the English Nation will never be pleased
to find in Parliament such men as have so great a kindness for the word, as
implies a hankering after the thing it has obtained to signify.

But if the Declaration (says my Vindicator) would intimate that there had been
any design of setting up a Democratical Government, Page 44.
in opposition to our Legal Monarchy, it is a Calumny just of a piece with the
other thing which the Penners of the Declaration have vented, in order to the
laying upon others the blame of a design to overthrow the Government, which
only belongs to themselves.

Now, There has not been a Week (since Venners rising) in which there have not
been Combinations and Conspiracies formed against his Majesty's Person, and
against the Peace of the Kingdom, etc. Lord Chancellors Speech, May 8. 1661.
Sir, This is not the first time that his Majesty has complained of a parcel
of men who had such a design; and if you please we will inquire a little into
the reason of it. That there was in the Nation a great number of men that had
imbibed a Notion, that all other kinds of Governments but what had something of
the Democratical form in them without a single Person, were Arbitrary and
Tyrannical, I suppose will not be denied, that these men did not all of them
expire when his Majesty landed from Breda is very probable, but his Majesty
being settled, and all things running quite contrary to their Interest, as you
have told us, may appear by comparing the Parliaments that were sent up in
1640. Page 6.
and 1660. these men were forced to seem more loyal than they were, that they
might one day appear what they were.

Now, Sir, it is not to be expected they should openly declare for the
Commonwealth of England, and desire Charles Stuart to march off, and give them
their right, when blessed be God they have neither Men nor Money to back such
an insolence with, but yet we may be allowed to guess at their Designs by their
Actions, and if that may be allowed, the Penners of the Declaration were not
the only men that thought there was then, and is now, some Democratical or
Commonwealth designs against the very Monarchy driving on, and you must excuse
me if I say the Calumny lies at your doors, get rid of it as well as you can.

It is strange how this word should so change its significacation with us in
twenty years. Page 44.
All Monarchies in the world that are not purely Barbarous and Tyrannical have
ever been called Commonwealths, etc. Sir, I will grant more than that, that all
without exception have by some men been so styled, and produced good Authors
for it. But yet we that had so lately like to have been ruined by the word, and
men that were fond of it, shall ever have reason to hate them and it, Tacitus
in the end of the Reign of Augustus says, Senes plerique inter Bella Civium
nati, quotusquisque reliqu^s qui Rempub. vidisset? igitur versus Civitatis
status, nihil usquam pris^i and integri moris: Omnis exuta aequalitate jussa
Principis aspectare. H. lib. 1. In which passage Monarchy is opposed to the
ancient Liberty or Commonwealth.
and a less space of years than twenty such as passed betwixt 40. and 60. might
be allowed to render a word hateful, which in strict propriety signifies the
Public Affairs of a People managed by many with equal Authority. I could
easily answer all you have brought to defend the word, but the case being
plain, I will not trouble my self or my Reader; and therefore if you have no
other Argument to prove men guilty of a fondness to Arbitrary Power than their
aversion for this word, I shall never go about to contend with you.

No man can have a greater Veneration for Parliaments than I have, but then who
are they that have disordered things to that height they lately were? You say
the Ministers are the men, whom you represent as you use to do, with bitter
reflections on his Majesty, and not the Parliament; others say, it was such men
as your self; and the case has been by both Parties referred to the People,
and they have by thousands given their Verdicts against those their
Representatives, which to me is a strong Argument the case is not so difficult
as you pretend, for I do not conceive it possible to delude (so great a part of
the) People into an abhorrence of their own Representatives, Page 45.
without their having given them just cause.

And if we look about us, we shall find these who design a change, on either
hand fomenting a misunderstanding between the King his Parliament and People,
whilst persons who love the Legal Monarchy both out of Choice and Conscience,
are they who desire the frequent and successful meetings of the great Council
of the Nation.

Sir, if you durst have spoken your mind plainly, I might possibly have thought
this the only honest passage in this whole Book; but as it now stands it is to
me apparent that you would not let your Conscience in this passage give your
Passion in all the rest the lie.

Now, if I might interpret your meaning I should guess it to be this, They that
on the one hand pretend to maintain the Legal Monarchy, but do really intend to
advance it into an absolute form, without any dependence upon Parliaments, and
they who pretend the same thing, but design to throw off the Monarchy, and put
the whole Power into the hands of the People, i. e. the Commonwealth Party, are
the men that have brought things into the disorder they are now in. Whilst they
who love the Legal Monarchy both out of Choice and Conscience, (amongst which
persons I will subscribe my name when occasion requires,) are they who desire
the frequent and successful meetings of the Great Coucil.

Now, Sir, here seems to be a little Justice in this, for as it were a high and
flagrant piece of injustice to say that all that made up the House of Commons
in the two last Parliaments designed to ruin the Monarchy, and set up another
Parliamentary Commonwealth of England: So it is the same notorious and base
injustice in you to traduce the Ministers in general, as you do throughout the
whole Pamphlet, when as it is apparent enough, first, That his Majesty never
did intend to set up one Dram of Arbitrary Government. Secondly, See the
Preface to the first part of the Addre^s to the Freemen, etc.
That it is not possible for the Ministers to do it without his consent.
Thirdly, That it is scarce possible for him and them to do it, if they had
designed to do it, till there has been another War. Fourthly, That never any
considerable person, or number of persons amongst the Ministers, did ever yet
make one step toward it. For all those Acts that have been so basely traduced
are fairly defensible. Those that look worst, the Transactions about 1671. and
72. not excepted, one of which you your self have excused, Page 19.
viz. the Postponing of all Payments to the Bankers out of the Exchequer: And
the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, though you style it an Arbitrary
Power assumed to suspend Penal Laws, Page 22.
and say the whole Nation was justly alarmed upon it; yet I believe should his
Majesty do the same thing over again, those that now make the greatest noise
against Arbitrary Power without cause, would willingly enough accept of it. And
yet there is no reason that the present Ministers should bear the blame of
these things, when they that promoted them are now, Sir, in your Interests.

And, Sir, that the meetings of the Great Council may be successful as well as
frequent, one of these things must be, that either the People change the
Members of the Lower House; or that those Members change their Methods of
Proceeding; and till this be done these meetings, how frequent soever, can
never be successful. For if things be carried in the next Convention as they
were in the late Parliaments, neither can the King, neither will the Nation
endure it; and for all our Threats you will find, when you come to bring it
into Act, such difficulties as I car not to foretell, tho I can foresee them.

As for the other sort of Peevish men, Page 45.
of whom the Declaration gives us warning, who are angry at the disappointment
of their Ambitious Designs. If these words are intended to reflect on those men
of Honor and Conscience, who being qualified for the highest employments of
State, have either left, or refused, or be removed from them because they would
not accept to retain them at the Price of selling their Country, and inslaving
Posterity: and who are content to sacrifice their Safety as well as their
Interest for the Public; and expose themselves to the malice of the men in
power, and to the daily Plots, Perjuries, and Subornations of the Papists. I
say, if these are the Ambitious Men spoken of, the People will have
consideration for what they say, and therefore it will be wisdom to give such
men as these no occasion to say they intend to lay aside the use of Parliaments.

This your Appeal to the People has spoiled all the fine things you had said
before, for supposing all the rest had been true (as it is notoriously false)
yet this making the People the Judges is a kind of attempt to separate them
from their Governors, and exasperate them against the Government, from whence
must spring as great inconveniences as those you pretend to avoid; and
therefore had I been one of these men, I would never have appealed to them; but
to God and my own Conscience, and have sat still till he had pronounced the
Sentence in this World, or that which is to come. You know, Sir, the People are
not able to examine any thing, but being once put into a rage by such specious
Harangues as these are, rush into disorder and confusion, and take all that
endeavor to quiet them for Enemies and Papists, and so the guilty escape, and
then innocent are cut in pieces. And besides all this, never was any disorder
in a Government rectified by the People, but by a greater and more fatal
disorder, as we had experience in the late times, and very often before.

But let the Event be what it will, you are resolved to stir up the People to
the utmost to revenge your case upon the Government; and to that purpose
insinuate there is a design to lay aside the use of Parliaments: as if you
should have said, Stand to your Arms, Gentlemen, against these Ministers, for
as they have laid us aside, men of Honor and Conscience, because we would not
sell our Country, and enslave Posterity; so the next thing to be done is the
laying aside Parliaments, and you are the men that must by your consideration
of us prevent this great mischief.

This was pretty well, Page 46.
but the next is excellent. In good earnest, the behavior of the Ministers of
late gives but too just occasions to say, that the use of Parliaments is
already laid aside; for tho the King has owned in so many of his Speeches and
Declarations the great Danger of the Kingdom, and the necessity of the aid and
counsel of Parliaments, he has nevertheless been prevailed upon to dissolve
four in the space of twenty six months without making provision by their Advice
suitable to our dangers or wants.

My Author was sensible that the People might think that the former hint
proceeded from Passion, or was not serious, or at least the danger was not
eminent; and he comes now nearer to them, and tells them in good earnest they
had but too just occasions to say that Parliaments were already laid aside as
to any use of them; and he proved it too: Four had been dissolved in twenty six
months; but three of them were called in that time. And this is an odd sort of
laying them aside to call as many in twenty six months as heretofore have been
called in so many years* Well, but there was no provision made by their Advice
suitable to our Dangers or Wants. The fault, says the Declaration, was in them,
Declaration.
The King was willing to have done any thing which would have consisted with
the very being of the Government. He passed every Bill that was tendered;
connived so long at the proceedings of the last Parliament of Westminster, that
many men wondered, and some (that were neither Papists, nor Malefactors)
murmured. And a grave man told the very Parliament, that he suspected they were
permitted to sit there, Debates, p. 19 1.
rather to destroy themselves than to save their Country. And now after all
this is his Majesty to bear the blame that no provision was made by their
Advice suitable to our wants and dangers. Well, but the People, to whom my
Gentleman is appealing, they will never undestand nor consider these things,
nor any thing else, and therefore my Gentleman did wisely to make them the
Judges, but for the honesty of it, or the truth of any of this I have nothing
to say.

Nor can we hope the Court will ever love any Parliament better than the first
of those four, Page 46.
wherein they had so dearly purchased such a number of fast friends, men who
having first sold themselves, would not stick to sell any thing after. And we
may well suspect they mean very ill at Court, when their designs shockt such a
Parliament.

The business of the Pensioners has been considered elsewhere, Address to the
Freemen, p 39. part. 2.
and need not here be repeated. Now, to me one of these things must be false,
viz. that there was such a number of men who had so sold themselves: Or that
the Court are such men as you, Sir, say they are. If these men had sold
themselves, why did they not go on with the bargain? If the Court had such an
interest in them, and such designs upon them and us, why did it part with them?
Especially when the Ministers knew they lost thereby a constant Revenue of
extraordinary Supplies, as you say they did, and I may say they have had little
enough since. Oh, the Reason was, they began in good earnest to examine what
was done, and what was doing. And therefore they were packed away. Well, the
matter was not great, they were a company of Pensioners, men that had sold
themselves, and would not stick to sell any thing after. And, Sir, if it were
so, the Nation has no reason to complain of the Court for that, and I hope I
too shall be excused if I have dropped a few less respective words of the three
Parliaments that have since followed; for they are not better, nor more sacred
than this, of which many of the Lord Chancellors have given high Encomiums, my
Lord of Speech to the Parliament. Feb. 5. 1672.
Shaftsbury not excepted.

Now let my Reader reflect on all this seriously, and tell me if any person,
even Fitz-Harris himself, could possibly write any thing worse than this; and
which tended more to heighten the resentments of the Nation, and put the People
into disorder and confusion. Page 35.
The most direct and passionate incitements to rebellion he used, are not more
likely to stir them, than our Authors warm and earnest applications on the
behalf of these Ambitious men, as I perceive the Declaration rightly styles
them, for none but such would ever desire to see their Country imbroyled, and
to that end appeal to the People. And supposing the People to be well disposed
that way, Page* 6.
it would be no wonder that the Ministers dare not suffer a Parliament now to
sit, till the People are in a better temper to choose one; but then, Sir, this
is owing to such men as you, and such Books as yours, and you must answer for
it.

But we have gained at least this one point by the Declaration, Ibid.
that it is owned to us, That Parliaments are the best Methods for healding the
distempers of the Kingdom, and the only means to preserve the Monarchy in
Credit both at home and abroad. Owned by these very men who have so maliciously
rendered many former Parliaments ineffectual, and by this Declaration have done
their utmost to make those which are to come as fruitless, and thereby have
confessed that they have no concern for healing the distempers of the Kingdom,
and preserving the credit of the Monarchy, which is in effect to acknowledge
themselves to be what the Commons called them, Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

Just before, Sir, you had been proving them designing to lay all use of
Parliaments aside, and now you bring them in owning what will certainly ruin
that design; not long before that you had been convicting them of a design of
making the Monarchy Arbitrary and absolute, and now they are unconcerned for
the very Credit of the Monarchy. Are you in your right Wits? Do you think thus
to prove them Enemies to the King and Kingdom? Why must those Parliaments that
are to come be as fruitless as those that are past? The Ministers may be
changed, or the People may change, or the very Parliament men may change; and
time may be Gods grace have strange effects. And in the mean time his Majesty
is not in (...) wants of a Parliament, but he (...) than a bad one, a Rending
instead of a Healing Parliament. And in the interim his Majesty's good Subjects
can rely as socurely upon his Royal Declaration that he intends not to lay
aside the use of Parliaments, as if there were one now actually sitting at
Westminister.

However we rejoice, Page 47.
that his Majesty seems resolved to have frequent Parliaments, and hope he will
be just to himself and us, by continuing constant to this Resolution. Yet we
cannot but doubt in some degree when we remember the Speech made January 26.
1679. to both Houses, wherein he told them, that he was unalterably of an
Opinion, that long intervals of Parliaments were absolutely necessary for
composing and quieting the minds of the People. Therefore which we ought rather
to believe the Speech or the Declaration, or which is likely to last longest, a
Resolution, or an unalterable Opinion, is a matter too nice for any but Court
Critics to decide. The effectual performance of the last part of the promise
will give us assurance of the first.

When, or where this Speech was spoken by his Majesty I cannot devise, for at
the time assigned there could be none. The first short Parliament was Prorogued
May 27. 1679. And the second met not till October 21. 1680. and was Prorogued
the tenth of January following. I have read over all his Majesty's Speeches too
about that time, and I find not one tittle in them to this purpose.

But if there ever were any such Speech spoken (for I will not be positive
there was not) it is fairly reconcilable with the very words of the
Declaration, for the Statute made in his Majesty's Reign calls Triennial
Parliaments, 17 Car. 2. C. 1.
A frequent calling, assembling and holding of Parliaments, which yet is a very
long Interval in comparison of the time his Majesty has hitherto interposed
betwixt the Dissolving or Proroguing of one Parliament and the sitting of
another; so that the matter was not so nice but it might have been ^een
determined by a meaner Critic than our Author, who has shown his great skill
in the French Tongue in his learned Remarques on the Phrase, Page 5.
it is a matter extremely sensible to us: And in the Latin upon the word
Republic or Commonwealth. Page 43, 44,
If he had not from hence sought an occasion to call his Majesty's Fidelity in
question, which tho it may become a Republican, is very indecent in a good
Subject.

When we see the real fruits of these utmost endeavors to extirpate Popery out
of Parliament; Page 47.
when we see the Duke of York no longer first Minister, or rather Protector of
these Kingdoms; and his Creatures no longer to have the whole direction of
Affairs; when we see that love to our Religion and Laws is no longer a Crime at
Court, no longer a forerunner of being disgraced and removed from all Offices
and Employments in their Power.

That is, when the Duke of York is ruined, and not only his Popish, but his
Church of England Creatures, who have shown themselves such by Voting against
the Bill of Exclusion be laid aside. When our Religion, (which no man knows
what it is) and that part of the Laws which we skulk behind now, to ruin all
the rest, and the King and Kingdom to boot, shall not hinder our Preferment
whatever we do or say.

When the word Loyal (which is faithful to the Law) shall be restored to its
own meaning, Ibid.
and no longer signify one who is for subverting the Laws.

That is, when men may safely pretend so much respect to the Laws, that they
may affront his Majesty who is the Fountain of all Laws, and the Protector of
them, and us by them; when the word Loyal shall have no other relation to his
Majesty, than the same word (if in use there) has in Venice, when spoken
concerning their Duke.

When we see the Commissions filled with hearty Protestants, (that is, with
Whigs and Republicans) and the Laws executed in good earnest against the
Papists, (and the Dissenters passed by unpunished.) The Discoverers of the Plot
countenanced, or at least heard, and suffered to give their Evidence, (except
when they make bold with our selves, and such a College, and Fitz-Harris, and
the Associationmen, in which cases they ought neither to be heard, nor
believed.) The Courts of Justice steady, and not avowing a jurisdiction one day
which they disown the next, (but just such as they were in the late times.)
When we see no more Grand-Juries discharged lest they should hear Witnesses;
nor Witnesses hurried away lest they should inform Grand-Juries, (tho it were
against his Majesty, and when all Grand-Juries are of the Family of Ignoramus
the Lawyer, and will find according to their Conscience, tho against both their
Oath and their Evidence, especially when a Precious man is in jeopardy to be
hanged for something done or said against the King) When we see no more
instruments from Court laboring to raise jealousies of (Associating
Petitioning) Protestants, (who have a Patent from heaven to retail all the
fears and jealousies that ever shall from henceforward be put off in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and in all other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries
whatsoever. And to that purpose have erected several Mints for the Coining of
them in London, and the parts adjacent, and do maintain several Presses, and a
great many Intelligencers to collect and disperse the same for the benefit of
his Majesty's discontented Subjects, who receive much comfort by the worst and
falsest of them, and hope to have just such another harvest in the end, as they
reaped from the same Seed in and about the years 1640, 41, 42, and so on till
1660.) When we see some regard had to Protestants abroad, (tho his Majesty
should be, by our defaults, brought into such straits as hardly to be able to
maintain the Government at home.) When we observe somewhat else to be meant by
Governing according to Law, than barely to put them in execution against
Dissenters, (in whom our strength against the Government does chiefly consist)
the Laws made against Papists. (In which number we desire the Church of England
men, that is, all that stick to the Religion by Law Established, Colleges
Trial, p. 18. 25.
may be included; and) then we shall promise our selves not only frequent
Parliaments, (but everlasting ones) and all the blessed effects of pursuing
Parliamentary Councils, the Extirpation of Popery, (and Prelacy,) the redress
of Grievances, the flourishing of Laws, and the perfect restoring the Monarchy
to the credit (which it had in 1658, and 59.) both at home and abroad. There
needs no time to open the Eyes of his Majesty's good Subjects (the Whigs,) and
their hearts are ready prepared to meet him in Parliament, in order to perfect
all these good Settlements and Peace (which are) now wanting in Church and
State.

But whilst there are so many little Emissaries employed to sow and increase
divisions in the Nation, Page 48.
as if the Ministers had a mind to make his Majesty head of a Faction, and join
himself to one Party in the Kingdom, who has a just right of Governing all,
(which Thuanus lib. 28. says was the notorious Folly, and occasioned the
destruction of his great-Grandmother Mary Queen of Scots) whilst we see the
same differences Promoted industriously by the Court, which gave the Rise and
Progress to the late troubles, and which were once thought fit to be buried in
an Act of Oblivion.

What is meant by the little Emissaries here I know not, nor will I guess. Nor
did I ever observe the Ministers had a mind to make his Majesty the Head of a
Faction, which your Author much blames in Henry III. of France too, when he
suffered the Holy League, the Prototype of the Association, to be set afoot,
and propagated so far before he took notice of it, that he was forced at last
to attempt to make himself the Head of it, which was properly a Faction
combined by an Oath against the Right Heir to the Crown, and a part of the
Natural Subjects of France; on pretense of Religion for the Exclusion of the
first, and destruction of the latter, without, and against the consent of the
King; which caused a Rebellion in France, the destruction of the King, a sooner
Succession of Henry IV. the right Heir, (upon changing his Religion) and if God
had not prevented it, had betrayed France into the hands of the Spaniards, or
Cantoned it into small Principalities. Now, this is properly to make a Prince
the head of a Faction without consideration of the Rise of our late Troubles;
which sprung from such another League, but to countenance a Loyal Party more
than a Rebellious one is not so, and whatever effect it had in the Reign of
Queen Mary, his Majesty's Grandmother, seems the only way now to save England,
and prevent the need of another Act of Oblivion and Indemnity for all those
Crimes that were pardoned by his Majesty, but never repented of by them that
acted them.

Whilst we see then the Popish Interest so plainly countenanced, Page 48.
which was then done with caution, when every pretense of Prerogative is
strained to the utmost height, when Parliaments are used with contempt and
indignity, and their Judicature, and all their highest Privileges brought in
question in inferious Courts, we have but too good reason to believe tho every
Loyal and good man does, yet the Ministers and Favorites do but little
consider the Rise and Progress of the late troubles, and have little desire or
care to preserve their Country from a relapse.

All this is Party-per-pale a justification of the last, and an Exhortation to
another Rebellion, upon the selfsame false pretenses only a little aggravated,
because the People are more slow to a new Rebellion than they were to the last.

And who (the Ministers) as they never yet showed regard to Religion, Ibid.
Liberty, or Property, so they would be little concerned to see the Monarchy
shaken off, if they might escape the Vengeance of Public Justice due to them
for so long a course of Pernicious Counsels, and for Crowning all the rest of
their faults by thus reflecting upon that High Court, before which we do not
doubt but we shall see them one day brought to Judgment.

Sir, I suppose my Reader is very well informed by this time that your Pen is
no slander, and I assure you there is some hopes of seeing your Party one day
brought in Judgment for all your ill Courses which have so much dishonored
Parliaments, and by these repeated Threats endeavored to make them Odious as
well as Dreadful to so many who are Loyal (not in your hide-bound Notion, Read
Reverentiam Praelato and Obedientiam quarum altera Cordis, altera Corporis est.
Nec enim sufficit exterius obtemperare majoribus nostris, nisi ex intimo Cordis
Affectu sublimiter sentiamus de it is. S. Bernard. Sermon. 3. de Advent. This
internal reverence due to the Sacred Majesty of our Kings, above all other
Superiors whatsoever is that which we express by the word Loyalty.
but) in the good old Christian acceptance of the word, in the affection of
their Souls, of which humane Laws can take no notice, and that not to the Law
which is nonsense, but to the King. But, Sir, how can you be so positive in
your Menaces, who in the Page before were in some degree of doubt there might
be a long interval of Parliaments, and so you may not see this One desirable
day; but may happen to be brought to Judgment in the interim before a higher
Court for all your slanders and defamations of your Sovereign the Lords
Anointed?

And now, Conclusion.
Sir, I have taken the same liberty in relation to you which you took with less
modesty and reason against all the Ministers; and if you please you may reply,
and for ought I know the Press is as open for you as me, and I had not taken
all this pains but to show the World, your sheets are as weak, and as full of
Errors; as of Malice against the Ministers in pretense, but against his Majesty
in good earnest. And if you had been pleased to have used the name* of Evil
Counselors instead of Ministers, it would have been more apparent what you
designed, and I do not in the least question but there are very many Persons in
his Majesty's Dominions who are not only of true English courage, but of
greater intellectuals than to be Cajoled by such a Pamphlet as yours into an
ill opinion of the King, his Ministers, or the Declaration, of which number in
every respect I do acknowledge my self to be one of the meanest.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe Vindicator Page 43. of his Book has concluded his Character of a
Commonwealth man and his Principles, with this Expression, that Every wise and
honest man will be proud to be ranked in that number, perhaps yet all of them
will not be of the same opinion when they have read that which follows* which I
dare presume to say is more truly drawn.

He is a great Admirer of the collective body of Protestants as ^^^onsists of a
hundred and fifty Sects, Religion.
for any one of which, distinctly considered, he has just as much veneration as
I have for the Musulmen. He divides himself so exactly betwixt the Church and a
Conventicle, that he does not know to which he belongs, and would gladly be
excused from the trouble of going to either, if it were possible to beguile the
People without a pretense to Religion and Devotion.

He treats his Prince as the Soldiers did our Savior, Loyalty.
first Crowns him with Thorns, and then kneels before him; and mixes his
submissions and reproaches so equally that no man can tell which is the
principal ingredient, and he intends to crucify him too when it is safe to
conclude the sport.

He is ever talking of the Laws, Laws.
and has listed a parcel of them to take his part against all the rest, The
Republicans are every day calling in the Aid of the Law that they may overthrow
the Law, which they know to be their irreconcilable enemy. Lord Chancellors
Speech, May 19. 1662.
and with these, and his other Auxiliaries, and Ignoramus Iuries he hopes to
prevail. And then the Book of Statutes shall again be reformed into a Packet of
Votes and Ordinances.

He hates nothing so heartily as he does Monarchy and Majesty; Monarchy.
and thinks that as Princes were instituted for the good of their People, so
they ought to be sacrificed to it too, and in order to it he Crowns them first
with Garlands; and then lays all the sins and follies of the People upon their
Heads, and is in great pain for a Knife or an Ax to finish the Atonement.

The next thing he hates is Popery, Popery.
of which he has no more true and determinate Notion than he had of the number
or the Hairs of his head, nor ever took more care to inform himself of the one
than the other; and the reason is because his Ignorance will excuse him if he
calls that Popery to morrow, which was good sound Protestantanism three days
agone.

He takes Oaths not to bind, Oaths.
but loose him ((...) men do Alloways and Rubarb,) for the Evacuation of
suspicion, and they have usually the same effect upon-him, only they operate
cross-ways, and purge out all his natural good humors too, and leave all the
bad ones behind them.

He pronounces of a Clergy man at first sight by his Habit, Clergy.
all that wear Cassocks are drunkards, and Popishly affected, the Cloak-men are
all sober Protestants.

He is something shie of a Stranger, Conversation.
and therefore first Pumps a man before he opens himself; if he finds him
Loyal, he is so too, but not without some dissatisfaction. If the Party be of
his own side, then he cherishes his malice and spite against the Government,
by communicating his own to him. If the Company happen to be mixed, then he has
a Set of Canting Language, which signifies quite different things to the
different parts of the Company, as for instance, Popery signifies the Church of
England to one Party, and Arbitrary Government, Monarchy to the other Party
quite another thing.

Next the (...) he hates most a Wise, Ministers.
Loyal, Statesman; C'est, a un Prine a regler le^ Courtisans, dautant qu'on
l^^ impute tous leurs disorders, and qu' on presume quand ^ls en (...) que
c'est luy mesme qui les commet, garc^ qu'il est oblige d^ les empescher.
and because he knows it is not yet safe to attack the Master, he takes care to
represent all his Servants as Knaves and Traitors, French Pensioners, and
Popishly affected, for he knows that if the People can once generally be
brought to think the Court a Den of Thieves, the Master of the Family, that
chooses and employeth them, must answer for their misdemeanors, as well as they
must for his.

Next the Ministers, Judges and Magistrates.
his great care is to instill into the People a great aversion for the Loyal
Judges and Magistrates, but if they warp a little, then he admires them for
men, and lovers of the Liberty of the People.

But that which, Gentry.
next Hanging, is most dreadful to him are the Loyal Gentry and their
dependents; These he knows can neither be wheedled nor frighted generally, and
therefore all the Forces he provideth are only against these Canaanites, who
keep the good People out of the Land of Promise; or make their lives uneasy in
it, by denying them liberty of Conscience to be of any Religion, or none, as
occasion serves; besides, they have great Estates, good meat and drink, and
some Authority, all which belong to the Godly.

After Liberty of Conscience he places a Lawless License to do what he list,
Liberty and Property.
and take what he please; which he calls Property; for he would fain have the
Hedge broken down, that all men's Estates, Wives, and Daughters might be common
to him, which is the most beloved Notion he has Reipublicae, of a Commonwealth.

His Study is well stuffed with seditious Pamphlets and intelligences, Books.
but his Staple Author is the Loviathan, which he has read ten times oftener
than the Bible, and Practices a thousand times more, yet he has a good Parcel
of other Commonwealth Authors too, and admires nothing in the Greeks and Romans
but their hatred to Monarchy, and love of Liberty and Popular Governments, and
were it not for this, would be contented all their Books were burnt.

When all things are well he frights the little Folk with Predictions of what
may be, Fears and Jealousies.
or is intended shall be, and the less probable the thing is, the more easily
it is sometimes believed. Only the wonder is, men should court Fear, and fall
in love with Jealousy: which are uneasy Passions to them, but profitable to
our Gentleman, who to create them in his Followers, pretends himself horribly
over run with them; when indeed his only fear is, he should not (after so many
Cheats put upon the People) be believed.

The Plot and the Duke are his two great Pretenses, Plot.
and he wishes they may never fail till he has overthrown the Monarchy, for
then he shall want his best handles to take the People by.

Privilege of Parliament is his last retreat, Privilege.
and if that fails, then he must take Achitophels course, and set his house in
Order, to provide for what follows.

FINIS.

