AN APOLOGY FOR THE Church of England, AGAINST THE CLAMOURS Of the MEN of
No-Conscience: Or the DUKE of Buckingham's Seconds.

By E. B. Esquire.

Stulta est clementia, cum tot Vbique
Vatibus occurras, periturae parcere Chartae.
LONDON, Printed for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE Church of England, Against the CLAMOURS Of the Men of
No-Conscience.
THAT the House of Commons now Elected, and within a very fews day to Sit, is
one of the most Loyal that this Nation has seen at any time since the Death of
Queen Elizabeth, is I suppose not doubted by any Man who has at all considered
either who has Chosen them, or who has been Chosen.

Whence then proceeds the insufferable Insolence and Impetuosity of the
Dissenters from the Church of England just at this time, and where may one
guess the Design to terminate?

Liberty of Conscience is no new Plea, it has fed the Press, yea and maintained
many of its Patrons too almost ever since the Year 1660. For before that time,
we had no great kindness for the Doctrine, but only in relation to those who
had imbroyl'd three Nations in Blood and Misery; and yet all they could not
find in their hearts to allow it to their own dear Brethren neither, for the
Presbyterians opposed, and both wrote and Preached what they could against it,
as has been proved beyond a possibility of Contradiction from their own Prints;
and when they were reduced to so low a Condition, that they could neither grant
nor deny it, Oliver Cromwell and the Independent Party would never grant this
Liberty, either to the Roman Catholics, or to the Members of the Church of
England; and which was more than Barbarous, they would not suffer CHARLES the
First of Blessed Memory, when under restraint by them, to have any one of his
own Chaplains with him, which Extorted this bitter Complaint from him. To deny
me the Ghostly Comfort (...) Chap. 24.
of my Chaplains, seems a greater Rigor and Barbarity than is ever used by
Christians to the meanest Prisoners and greatest Malefactors, whom though the
Justice of the Law deprived of worldly Comforts, yet the Mercy of Religion
allows them the Benefit of their Clergy, as not aiming at once to destroy their
Bodies and to damn their Souls. But my Agony must not be relieved with the
Presence of any one good Angel; for such I account a Learned, Godly, and
Discreet Divine. And a little before this, he has this Expression.

The Solitude they have confined me unto, adds the Wilderness to my
Temptations; for the Company they obtrude upon me, is more sad than any
Solitude can be.

When after this they had inhumanly Murdered him and the Duke of Richmond, the
Marquess of Hertford, and the Earls of Southampton and Lindsey, together with
the Bishop of London, had taken upon them the Care and Charge of Interring
their Murdered Master, and thereupon Petitioned with great Humility to have
Liberty to Read the Liturgy appointed for that Purpose; it was denied, and
they forced to Deposite him in Silence and Sorrow.

How the English Puritans treated the Son after the Death of the Father, is
very well known, but they of Scotland pretended to oblige him, Called him in,
and promised to Crown him. But did they allow him the Liberty of his
Conscience? No, he must take the Covenant first, and be converted. And one
Evening walking in the Garden, a couple of Dapper Covenant-Levites making up to
him, very severely chid him for Profaning Dr. Bates his History of the Rise and
Progress of the late Troubles, the 2d. Part, p. 96. in English.
the Lords Day by a Walk, though he had heard two Sermons, and been publicly at
Morning and Evening Prayers that day, besides other private Meditations he was
much given to. This was all the Liberty of Conscience they would allow their
Prince in Scotland; whereas in England they sought his Blood.

How they treated the Episcopal or Prelatical Party during the Rebellion is
well enough remembered, and after the King was restored, and the Laws thereby
returned to their former Force and Vigor, yet they pretended even then, to fear
they had sinned against the Lord, by suffering Popery (so they called the
Service of the Church of England) to be set up; and did what they could to
hinder it. Till an Act of Parliament brought them under. And ever since the Act
of Uniformity passed, they have been Bauling for Liberty of Conscience.

At length in the beginning of 1672, they by the assistance of the Roman
Catholics, obtained an Indulgence of the Late King, what use did they make of
it? Why, one of the furious Dissenters suspected the kindness, and made Queries
upon the Declaration, wherein he represented it as a Stratagem to introduce
Pope^y and Arbitrary Government. And though there were others which defended it
with that inconvenience annexed to it, till they were in a Capacity to do their
own business without them; yet after they had set a foot the Popish Plot, and
possessed themselves of the Affections of the Populace, then the Note was
altered, and the Papists (was Preface to the unreasonableness of Sepation, p.
25, 26.
declared) one whose Worship to us is Idolatry, and we cannot therefore allow
them the Liberty of Public Assembling, as others of the Separation. This very
passage but five years before was Worded thus. But as for the Common Papist,
who lives Innocently in his way, he is to us (the Dissenters) as other
Separatists, and so comes under the like Toleration. So in 1675 it was lawful
to tolerate the Popish Recusants, because they could not be Tolerated
themselves without their assistance: But in 1680. when they were in their Ruff,
and had as they thought, brought all under their Feet, then it was unlawful.
And now again in 1685. it is not only become Lawful, but absolutely necessary.
These are your Men of Conscience!

I pray what was the pretended Reason for Excluding His present Majesty?
Resolved, Nemine contradicente,

That the Duke of York 's being a Papist, and the hopes of his Novem. 1680.
coming such to the Crown, has given the greatest countenance and
encouragement to the present Designs and Conspiracies against the King and
Protestant Religion.

Resolved,

That a Bill be brought in to disable the Duke of York to inherit the Imperiul
Crown of this Realm.

Well, but one of them tells us, Now. Who knows not, that A Reply to the Answer
of the Man of No Name. The Pensilvanian, page 27.
they were such as hardly knew how to Pray, but out of our Liturgy, that
attempted to Exclude the Presumptive Heir to the Crown, upon the score of his
Religion. Another follows the cry thus, Let him (the Answerer) be just, and he
will find the Excluders almost every Sunday at their Parish Churches, and if
three quarters of them were to pray for their Lives, it may be they could
better read their Clergy, than say their Prayers without the Public Liturgy.
The other quarter though were gifted Brethren in this Gentleman's esteem, whereas
with the former they were all Church of England Men.

Why the Author of Julian the Apostate will tell you, the Addressers, with a
brave and warm Zeal for the Protestant Religion, Preface.
and a Protestant Prince, generously offered their Lives and Fortunes, and the
last drop of Blood in defense of his Majesty, and the Religion now Established
by Law, and by the same Lives and Fortunes and last drop of Blood, are promised
over again to a Popish Successor. What is this (says he) but clapping cold
Snow upon the head of all their Protestant Zeal? For he that offers his Service
to both these together, lists himself under two the most Adverse Parties in the
World, and is Guelph and Gibeline both at once. What Benefit a Popish
Successor can reap from Lives and Fortunes spent in defense of the Protestant
Religion, he may put in his Eyes: And what the Protestant Religion gets by
Lives and Fortunes spent in the Service of a Popish Successor, will be over the
left Shoulder.

The poor Levice was fain to rifle the Alcoran for a simile to represent this
Contradiction by. Now, Gentlemen, were these Addressers Church of England Men,
or Dissenters? Was this Book cried up by Whiggs or Tories? It is but five years
ago since the Vote passed, less since Julian was Printed; rub up your Memories,
and try if you can possibly recollect who was for the Exclusion, and who was
against it. Who addressed to the Oxford Members, and who to the King, after the
Dissolution of the Oxford Parliament, and then tell me, if your Foreheads be
not a little steeled to talk at this rate; and whereabouts a Dissenters
Conscience may be found, before we allow it Liberty.

Well, but Liberty of Conscience is the thing they want, and must have it if it
be possible; but all the Craft is in the catching; now they know that the Law
stands in the way, and how to get rid of that is the difficulty.

First, They accost the King, and impudently tell him, that they, good Men,
never attempted to Exclude him, and the consequence is, that he must grant them
Liberty of Conscience. Why, if they had never attempted it, this was but a
Negative Obligation and goes no further, than if I should accost a Great Man I
never saw before, and beg a Favor, because I never did him an Injury. But here
the King knows the contrary, that they did attempt to Exclude him, and had
certainly passed an Act to that purpose, if the late King had not, with the
assistance of the Lords, and Loyal true Church of England Men, opposed and
baffled them.

Well, but suppose he would help them to the thing they want, there are
established Laws in his way, and he cannot repeal them, but by other Laws, and
they must pass in Parliament, and by the Consent of the Lords and Commons, and
time enough it had been to have made their Application to him and them in
Parliament; but of what use are these numerous Pamphlets in the mean time, but
to fire the Rabble, make them ungovernable?

And suppose the King should, to gratify them, do it by his Prerogative,
without Act of Parliament, as the late King did, what Reason has he to expect
any other return than his Brother found, and that is to be represented
forthwith to the Nation, as one that designed to introduce Arbitrary Government
and Popery, and so to have his Throne undermined, and his Government made
unsafe and uneasy.

And in the mean time have they not gone as far as they could, or durst, since
his Establishment, to imbroyl his affairs, to choose those very Men into this
Parliament, that endeavored to Exclude him in three last. And is there not now
Arms bought, and Ships put to Sea, to the intent to invade his Dominions, by
those of this Party, that have fled for attempting to Murder him at the Rye,
with his Brother the late King? And have they not endeavored to recommend his
Rival to the People here, though there was no body to back them. And after all
this, is it reasonable that he should loose the Reins, and give Liberty to such
enraged, false, perfidious Men as these are, who have done what they could to
ruin him, in spite of all restraint? Believe me, they expect no such thing from
him, but make all the impudent applications to make him more odious to the
Party, by his denial.

Well, they seem to have little reason to expect any favor from the King, but
what Friends may they expect in the States in this Parliament.

As to the Church of England Lords and Commons, they have laid the Bill of
Exclusion at their Doors, turned over all the Excluders to them, and washed
their own hands of them, as Pilot did of our Savior's Blood, with a See you to
it, I am innocent: Now, as this is the most impudent falsehood that ever was
spoken by Men, so it is the basest Reproach, the basest dishonor, and, I doubt
not, but they will accordingly resent it, when time shall serve.

But many, I might say almost all the Commons, have been most basely traduced
by these Men, for sticking to the King against the Excluders; many of them were
excluded out of the Westminster and Oxford Parliament for Papists, Abhorrers,
and Favorers of Papists; or as the word was Adherents to the Papists; many of
them have been sent for up into Custody, Vox Patriae.
turned out of the House with Disgrace, imprisoned and put to great Charges for
their Loyalty, all of them have been designed for Slaughter and Ruin, as
MEN-WORTHY by the WORTHY-MEN. And after all this, can they expect they will
throw up the Laws, and put themselves into the power of these Furies? Is this
the way to bespeak their Pity, or obtain their Favor?

As to the Bishops, which make the other part of the upper House, what Injury
could the Wit of Man devise, which in the time of the late Popish Plot they did
not heap upon them, to make them odious to the King, and to the People? Did
they not dispute their Privileges in Parliament, endeavor to make them appear
guilty of the Plot, did they not traduce them as this Kings fast Friends, and
therefore Enemies to the Protestant Religion?

And in all the late Pamphlets have they not represented them, as the worst of
Men, together with the rest of the Loyal Clergy? Take off the thing that
pinches, take off Prosecution, The Defense of the D. of Buck page the 4th.
do but change the Saddles, and set them both aright, and see then whether the
Churchmen, or the Fanatics and Catholics will be most Governable. That is,
persecute the Churchmen, and bestow the Bishoppricks, and Church Revenues
amongst the Catholics and Phanaticks, and see which will be best qualited,
best pleased, most Humble, and most Dutiful Subjects. A rare expedient!

Well, but when all other helps fails, they expect some assistance from the
Roman Catholics. His Grace leads the Dance, and shows some kindness for
Transubstantiation, page the 7th. The Reply tells, One thing I must say, Roman
Catholics have been Loyal in England and Holland, and Presbyterians in France,
and the German Principalities, page 22. Well, but how have you and your Tribe
rewarded them for their Loyalty? Another thus, As a variety of Flowers may grow
on the same Bank, so may Protestants and Papists live in England, Union in
Affection is not inconsistent with disagreement of Opinion, etc. Considerations
moving to a Toleration and Liberty of Conscience, page the 3d, Consideration
the 6th. The Pensilvanian tells us, he cannot but admire His (the Answerer's)
Wisdom, Manners, or Justice, in his Reflections upon the Roman Catholics,
after the Assurances that so great an one of their Communion has given him and
his Friends of their Security and Protection, page the 26th. And now, are not
the Roman Catholics bound to give him thanks for his great Civility to them,
who have done worse, both by them, and the great Man of their Communion, than
barely to reflect on them, though they have done that sufficiently too.
Remember the Character of a Popish Successor, the Virulent Appeal to the City,
Julian the Apostate, the Fanatic Plot, the use these Good Men made of the late
Toleration, and tell me if these are not a sort of Trusty Friends for Roman
Catholics to rely on.

Doubtless it is as little their interest to procure a Toleration for the
Dissenters, as it is that of the Church Men, as things now stand, and they are
wise Men, and know it; and if the Liberty of Conscience-Men were not
Num-skulls, they would never have made these fulsome Applications at this time
of the day.

Well, but whatever the Dissenters have been, there are three or four small
Pamphleteers will give the King their worshipful words for their good behavior
for the Future, In good time. But suppose it proves otherwise, what then? Why
he is deceived, they good Men will cry, who could have thought it? But I will
answer this in the Words of the Noble Peer, the late Earl of Shaftsbury, a
special Friend of theirs. If a French Nobleman (says he) should come to dwell
in my House and Family, I should think it concerned me to a^k what he Address
to the Freemen. Part the 2d. page 52.
did in France, for if he were there a Felon, a Rogue, a Plunderer, I should
desire hem to live elsewhere, and I hope your Lordships will do the same thing
for the Nation, if you find the same cause. Now there is no need of an enquiry
here, we have tried them, and know by experience, what they are, and then his
Lordship will inform us what we are to do.

But we are told, all the ill things they have done, is because there are Laws
made against them, and they would be quiet, if they might have their minds. As
to the first of these, ex malis Moribus bonae oriuntur Leges, there was ill and
disloyol Practices against the State, by Seditious Sectaries, before there was
any Law made against them. Look into the preamble of the 35 of Eliz. c. 1.
which was the first Law that was made against them, and see if be not so; and
as for all the rest, we can remember upon what occasions they were made.

And now, if they were so turbulent before there was any Law, and have been so
unruly and ungovernable, notwithstanding the Laws have hung over their Heads,
and have some times been seasonably Executed upon them, what may we expect they
will be, when the Laws, and, with them, all Fear and Aw is removed?

Men of Wisdom will try as few Conclusions in point of Government as is
possible, because they weaken Authority and strengthen Factions. And I am fully
persuaded, these Gentlemen do no more hope to obtain a Toleration, than I fear
they will; they do neither Write nor Act as if they did: What then is the
Design? Why it is hard to dive into the Secrets of Men, but yet a Man may
conjecture at them with submission to wiser Heads.

First, upon his now Majesty's coming to the Crown, the whole Party were
Thunderstruck, they knew how they had used him, and therefore expected he
would treat them, though not as they deserved, yet otherwise than they desired,
and fearing at once his Valor, Justice, Activity and Constancy, they sat down
in Silence and Sorrow, expecting the Event, and who would be in an Insurrection.

Hereupon all the Trimmers and Halfway Men began to tack about, to take the
Sacrament, go to Church, Vote for Loyal Men, imagining the Game was lost, and
no hopes of another Revolution. No room for Seditious prate, Cogging nor
Flattery.

In this Melancholy Mood his Grace found them when he Published his Essay, and
it was a Work which no meaner Person durst have began. But we see there is
enough that will follow.

Secondly, the Parliament drawing on apace, they expect the Press will then be
restrained, so that what they do, they must do quickly; for their Affairs are
desperate and mere desperation, makes them Valiant, and if they cannot prevent
the fatal Blow, they will yet try if they cannot Revenge it, and render the
Church Party odious.

Lastly, it is very probable they have some encouragement from their Friends in
Holland, and whilst they are preparing for a descent in Scotland, this is a
Stratagem to Alarm the Party in England, and to let them see the Cause is not
quite lost yet; there are those that will stick to it, and appear for Liberty
of Conscience, Hector the Church, and plead for a forgetfulness of what ever is
past, that they may be in a Capacity to react all their old Crimes over again.

And if they meet with the least encouragement either at home or abroad, the
least countenance or belief, I can easily foretell what the Event will be.

But if they find neither to suite their desires, and that the next Parliament
prove what they fear it will, the People of the Whig Party must bear the smart,
and the Pamphleteers have only lost so much Paper and Time.

And if any of the Tribe fall into the Hands of Justice for it, they hope to
get more by the Compassion, than they shall lose by the Suffering.

The Conclusion.
Thus do Men of No-Conscience, no Honor nor Honesty, pretend to be the
Advocates for the Tender Consciences of other Men, who have not much more than
themselves.

If this Censure seems sharp, let any Man consider how False and Impudent a
thing it is to Sham the late Excluders upon the Church of England, an Honest
Turk would have scorned so base a Practice within five years after the Fact,
and in a Case wherein the whole Nation knows the contrary.

Now let no Man pretend to have a mighty Reverence for God, or any Form of
Religion, who has not a little Veneration for Morality, a Man of a Tender
Conscience will never dare to lie and dissemble with God and Man.

And whereas they pretend the Church of England Party, especially the Clergy,
Persecute them out of Worldly Interest and Carnal Policy, I desire they would
tell me how Christ can be the Head of opposite Bodies: And consider this Place
of Scripture, and bless the World with a Commentary on it.

Revelations II. 20. Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee, because
thou Suffer (or Toleratest) that Woman Jezebel, which calls her self a
Prophetess (a Godly Woman) to teach and to seduce my Servants to commit
Fornication, and to eat things Sacrificed to Idols. Now I would fain know how
long Toleration has been a Christian Virtue.
FINIS.

