AN EXAMINATION OF Dr. COMBER's SCHOLASTICAL HISTORY OF THE Primitive and
General Use OF LITURGIES IN THE Christian Church. By S. B.

(...) est quodcunque pietatis officium, etiamsi a privato praestetur. Is.
Casaub. exercit. in Baron. xvi. p. 383. Nemo autem versatus in Graecorum Patrum
lectione, ignorant, (...) persaepe illis dici quicquid fit ad Deum colendum. Id.
p. 384. LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens Head Ally in Pater noster
Row. MDCXC.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE following Papers were writ some months since, and if the Author had known
they would have been published at this time, I do not doubt but they would have
been accompanied with the like account of what Doctor Comber has produced for
Liturgies in the Fourth Century. The Author is not one who is wedded to a
Party; He has often said, he knows not any one Party of a particular
Denomination, but it has some things which either do, or by reason of an
alteration of circumstances, may deserve to be rectified. He thinks what is
really good and commendable in every Party should be approved: And he wishes
that what is not so, in every Party, might be universally understood, and laid
aside, or amended. He is a Conformist, upon Principles he thinks he can
justify, but which are more comprehensive than those which some appear to be
influenced by in their Conformity. He uses the Liturgy of the Church of
England in his Officiating in the Public Worship, as fully as the Law
requires. And he is so far from condemning the Public Worship of Pious and
Judicious Protestants who do not tie up themselves to Prescribed Forms, that he
joins with them in their Public Worship, as he has opportunity. He is
troubled to see so great an aversion to a General Union of Protestants in this
Land, and that old Animosities are awakened out of their late Slumber. He is of
opinion that the Church of England is much prejudiced by the Indiscretions of
many who pretend an extraordinary Zeal for Her. The matters we differ about are
very seldom rightly Stated. Arguments are not well adjusted to what is in
debate. What is offered for proof, is too ordinarily put upon the Rack, and by
overstraining it, it serves only for a Pompous Show, and is of no real use at
all. Though Doctor Comber has often expressed himself in such a manner, as
would justify some keen Reflections, yet this Author has forborne them,
because he would not willingly exasperate any man of Learning or Ingenuity. And
therefore he has mainly determined himself to a fair Representation of the
Doctor's Authorities, which he hopes can yield no offense to any man of a sober
and honest mind.

The Author of the following Papers does think, that to do. Liturgies right in
a full Discourse (especially History) of that matter, some notice should be
taken of the various use of the word Liturgy in the Christian Church, and of
the time when it was first used with that strictness of signification, Mr.
Clarkson has assigned it, in his stating the point. For he says, It was at
first of a very general importance, and was not limited to Public Offices.
That when it came to be used in a more appropriate sense, it was applied
particularly to every Public Office. And that after it was in a special manner
appropriated to Forms of Prayer, it had not for a long time, that strictness of
signification it has in Mr. Clarkson's stating the matter. And he further
conceives, that this is not the proper signification of a Liturgy as used and
enjoined in the Church of England. Therefore he thinks, that instead of
endeavoring to prove the Antiquity of Liturgies in that sense, we should
rather endeavor to rectify the mistake which has unhappily arisen concerning
a Liturgy, as enjoined and used in our Church.

Having given you this account of the Auth^r, and his design in the following
Papers, I leave you to peruse the Papers themselves, and to judge as you shall
see sit, whether the Doctor have produced substantial Proof, that Liturgies, or
Prescribed Forms of Prayer, were only, and unvariably used in the Christian
Church during the Three First Centuries.

ERRATA.
P 2. l. ult. r. prescribed. p. 4. l. 29. for truly, r. freely. p. 6. l. 22.
after out, r. of. p. 16. marg. r. (...). p. 18. l. 11. r. Lucian. p. 29. l. 9.
for truth, r. proof. p. 36. l. 6. dele as. p. 37. l. 29. after subject, r.
matter. p. 38. l. 11. after any, r. other. p. 40. l. 26. r. (...).

AN EXAMINATION OF Dr. COMBERS Testimonies FOR LITURGIES (During the three
First Centuries) etc.
SIR,
ABOUT the middle of the last month, I received, by your order, Dr. Combers
Scholastical History of the Primitive and General use of Liturgies in the
Christian Church, together with an Answer to Mr. David Clarkson's late
Discourse concerning Liturgies. I now return you my thanks for it; and I would
have done it sooner, but that some businesses called me from home immediately
after I received it, even before I had time to peruse it. I now certify you
that I have read it: And I do herewith send you what I take to be a true
account of the meaning of those Testimonies the Doctor does allege in the
three first Centurys, for Liturgies. I forbear many Reflections, which several
passages in the Doctor's Book would give abundant occasion for. My design is
little more than just to present you with the Doctor's quotations in their
plain and entire sense. Your opinion of the Doctor's performance, I persuade my
self, is not such, as will prejudice you against evidence. I therefore leave
you to judge, whether his Authorities be to his purpose, and whether his
Inferences be so rational as he pretends his History is Scholastical; and
whether his Book may properly be said to contain an Answer to Mr Clarkson's
Discourse of Liturgies.

You will make the easier and more just determination, if the matter be first a
little stated: for then you will perceive what the Doctor should prove; And
whether what he offers for proof, do reach the point he has undertaken to
discourse.

Therefore you must be sure to remember, that Mr. Clarkson is far enough from
asserting, that Forms of Prayer are intrinsically evil. P. 2.
He does not deny but there were some Forms of Prayer of old, viz. Arbitrary
and particular, such as this or that person composed himself, or made choice
of, composed by others, P. 3.
for his use in public. He owns the Lords Prayer was used anciently, tho far
otherwise than of late. P. 4.
He grants that diverse Churches had a certain order, wherein they agreed to
administer the several parts of worship, and particularly the severals in the
Sacraments, so as each had its known and fixed place. That this order was
settled in some Churches by custom, and in some there was in time a Rule for it.
He says there was also some kind of uniformity in their Sacramental Prayers,
P. 5.
that is, a general agreement to pray for the same things, Idem.
tho not in the same words.

He expressly relates what it is, which is the point in dispute. P. 2.
And declares That by prescribing Forms are meant, such as are imposed upon the
Administrator, so as those must be used, and no other, nor otherwise, without
adding, detracting, or transposing. This (says Mr. Clarkson) is it which is
denied. P. 6.
That in the Ancient Church, for many ages after Christ, such Liturgies and
Forms of Prayer were commonly imposed on those who administered the Sacraments,
as are before described.

Thus you see what was denied, as well as what was granted by Mr Clarkson, and
therefore what the Doctor was to prove. If the Doctor's quotations be not home
to this point, they do not reach that for which he does pretend to produce
them. And whether for the first three Centuries his Authorities do amount to a
proof of what is in dispute; yea or so much as of Forms of Prayer, you may
conclude as you shall see fit, when you have considered the following account
of them.

Before I enquire into the passages the Doctor does quote for the proof of
Liturgies in the particular Centuries, as they come in their order, I will take
notice of a few passages which occur in his Discourse concerning the Grounds
for Liturgies in Holy Scripture, which takes up some Pages, before he makes his
entrance on the First Century.

The Doctor says the Holy Bible makes it appear, P. 2.
that the People of God, from the beginning, did generally use Forms of Prayer
and Praises in their Public worship. Now supposing this to be true, to make it
reach the present purpose, he should prove they did not, nor might not use any
Prayers or Praises, but those very Forms; Idem.
Yea (says the Doctor) God prescribes a Form of Prayer for the penitent Jews,
and charges them to take words with them, and turn to the Lord and say, Take
away all Iniquity, etc. Hos. 14.2, 3, 4. It Is true, God does command them to
use words in their Prayers, and directs them what sort of words to use; but let
the Doctor answer when he thinks fit, whether God does bind them to use no
words but what are there mentioned? But further, Forms of Prayer and Praise
were indicted by the Spirit of God for the public service of the Temple, and
commanded by the Lord to be used there. Is the inference from hence plain and
just; Therefore men may devise Prayers of their own, and oblige the Church to
use these, and none but these.

The Doctor refers to Doctor Hammond and Doctor Lightfoot, for proof that the
Jews had a fixed Liturgy; whether their proof be solid touching that matter,
would be too great a diversion to inquire. But if occasion required, I should
not be afraid to undertake to produce the Authorities those two Learned Doctors
build their proof, upon, for some things, the Learned will not allow we must
acquiesce in upon their testimony.

I will not insist on the difference betwixt the Jewish and Christian
Church State. For we may suppose, Forms might be of general use among the Jews,
and yet there be no necessity of an express abrogation of that way, to warrant
peoples addressing themselves publicly to God in another way than by stinted
Forms. For Prayer being commanded, and there being two ways wherein this duty
might be performed, viz. by stinted Forms, and by expressing themselves truly,
according to general Occasions, and particular Emergencies. There appears not
any necessity that the use of Forms, as to the Lawfulness thereof, must of
necessity be abrogated, in order to it is being Lawful to use the other way. P.
5, 6.
But if we would prosecute the Doctors way of Arguing on this occasion, aright,
something else will follow than what the Doctor does conclude, even what the
Doctor, I am persuaded, would not be very willing to stand to. For seeing the
Jews did worship God acceptably, etc. by set Forms, and Christ and his Apostles
did join in these Forms, and never reprove the Jews for using them. The most
obvious inference will be, That Christians must now use those very Forms, and
none but them, unless those Forms be abrogated, and a positive institution of
other Forms be left upon Record, either in the Gospels, or Epistles. For by the
Doctors discourse, the Disciples had Forms of Prayers, which must certainly be
Jewish Forms, and Christ only taught them another Form, which they were to add
to those they had before; yea, according to what the Doctor relates, the Lord
Jesus, when he provided his Disciples a New Form to be added to the rest, was
not only so far from discharging people, and setting his Disciples free from
the stinted way of Liturgies, but from their obligation to the Jewish Forms,
That he would consine himself in the very Prayer he made them (whereby they
were to be known from all others, to be his Disciples) to the Jewish Liturgy;
so that there should not be one sentence in his Prayer, but what he took out of
the Jewish Prayers then in use.

Now those who devote themselves to such notions as these, may do well to
consider, whether if it be so (as the Doctor reports) that Christ took every
sentence of his Prayer out of the Jewish Prayers, and taught it his Disciples,
that they might add it to their other Forms (which were Jewish) the obligation
to use this as a Form of Prayer, and to use those other Forms, to which they
were to add it, be not of equal duration? But alas! whether will some men's
pretenses to reading hurry them? What work will be made of Christianity, if the
forced conceptions of some men who would be thought to have read much must be
entertained? Some do represent matters in such a manner, as if they had a mind
to persuade people, that the Lord Jesus was anointed with the Spirit, only to
supply the meanness of his education, not to enable him to form and compose a
Prayer himself, but only to collect and cull sentences out of other peoples
Prayers, and then put them together into one form. Not many years ago other
matters were represented at such a rate, by another hand, as if the Spirit had
been given to the Apostles to furnish them immediately (because they had not
been bred to such matters) with Philosophical notions, and some critical
niceties, and particularly was given to St. John to enable him to write his
Epistle in a Platonic strain. How far this sort of dealing may serve a
particular interest for a while, I will not inquire. But it has no probable
tendency to promote the main design of Christianity.

The Doctor says that Christ in giving his Disciples a new Form (when they
desired him to teach them to pray) and Coppying the several Petitions out the
Jewish Liturgy, P. 6.
instead of intimating that he intended to reform the old method of praying by
Forms, did show his approbation of praying to God in a prescribed Form. But he
might with as much clearness have pusht his inference from those premises
further, viz. That he did show his approbation (at least) of his Followers
composing Forms of Prayer (if they are to compose any for constant public use)
only out of the Jewish Liturgies. I may further mind you that the Doctor does
ordinarily discourse too loosely concerning Forms of Prayer, as not being
mindful of what he has undertaken to discourse of. For if he find any words
used in Prayer, which were to be met with any where else before, those words he
alleges for proof that the whole Prayer was a Form. Thus Christ used a Form of
Prayer on the Cross (says the Doctor) extracted out of the 22d. P. 7.
Psalm, which begins, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But pray who
did extract the Petitions, and put them into a Form for him, and oblige him
even on that occasion to use no other words, but what were ready provided to
his hand.

In the next Paragraph the Doctor freely grants, P. 9.
that the Lords Prayer is not only a Form, but also a direction to draw other
Forms by; so that we are not confined to the use of this Prayer, but have
Liturgies which are drawn up by the Lords Prayer. But if we are not limited to
the Lords Prayer, but may use Liturgies which are no other words, but such as
are agreeable to it, both as to the Form and Matter of them (which is but an
odd sort of expression to fall from a Learned Doctor) why may not Ministers,
keeping to the direction of the Lords Prayer, use other words than those which
are in the Liturgy, as well as those who are for Liturgies may use other words
then those which are in the Lords Prayer? This Concession we have from the
Doctor upon his taking notice that Mr. Clarkson had said, that the Lords Prayer
was anciently used, but not out of any apprehension that Christ did, P. 3, 4.
in Mat. 6. enjoin his Disciples to use it. Mr. Clarkson shows that some
eminent persons, both ancient and more late Writers, were of this opinion;
whether his quoting so many for that particular, was to the purpose, I leave
the indifferent Reader to determine. But because the Doctor says, Maldonat
only tells us, P. 11.
we are not always bound to use those very words. I would desire you to take
notice, that Maldonat's words are, Non his necessario verbis, etc. Which I
conceive do rather signify, we are not absolutely bound to use those very
words at any time. But take the words if you please, according to the Doctors
interpretation, if he think Maldonat in the right, provided such a construction
may be borrowed for his words, that is, That we are not always bound to use our
Lords very words; I would gladly know then, how we came to be bound to use
always other people's words.

The Doctor next speaks of a Gift of Prayer, which he represents, as if we were
to understand by it, an extraordinary assistance of the Spirit to teach men new
words and phrases in ordinary cases, and for their daily prayers. Whereas by
the gift of Prayer, no more is meant, than an Ability to represent the
sentiments of a Soul duly affected with the general and particular subject
matters of Prayer, in proper and suitable expressions, and such as are proper
to beget, and excite, and improve such Resentments, and Affections in those who
shall hear and join in the use of them, for that purpose. The gift of Prayer,
soberly considered, does not imply any necessity (as the Doctor hints)
constantly to vary, and use all new words. Indeed the exercise of this gift
cannot very well consist with an obligation constantly to use the very same
words. Nor is it usually pretended, that this is an extraordinary gift of the
Spirit; but as by the blessing of the Spirit, the Heart or Soul comes to have a
lively apprehension, and affectionate sense of what is to be subject matter of
prayer; so the person, who is thus inwardly disposed, has ordinarily a
readiness to express himself in words, which bear some proportions to the
disposition of his Soul and Spirit, and which are very proper to kindle and
excite the like affections, dispositions, and inclinations in others who do
seriously attend unto them. Tho there are some particular words very pertinent
to be used in prayer for general or particular mercies, yet there may be other
words every jot as pertinent, which being used as occasion offers, may be more
serviceable, and contribute more, to further the common or more appropriate end
of Public Prayer, than the constant use of the other words. The Lords Prayer
does comprehend the whole of Prayer. But yet those who are most for Liturgies,
are for having other Forms framed, wherein the same things are asked in other
words. Now those judicious persons who pray for the same things which are
prayed for in prescribed Forms, without tying themselves up strictly to the
words used in those Forms, do differ no more from the Forms which have not
their words in them, than those Forms do from the Lords Prayer. And if the
variation of Forms from the Lords Prayer may be truly beneficial and
advantageous unto the people, why may not the like variations from Humane Forms
be equally advantageous? I will propound one thing the more to explain this
matter, which more nearly relates to the Doctor. He has paraphrased the
several Prayers in our Common Prayer Book, so that the particular Prayers in
that Book, are by his labor, and industry, and gift, made larger, and
expressed in other words. The same things are requested, etc. in his larger
Prayers, which are requested in the shorter Prayers in our Common Book. Now let
him consider whether he had not such apprehensions, and affections in his mind
and soul, relating to the particulars petitioned, and confessed, etc. in the
Prayers contained in our Common Book, at that time, as he thought might be more
commodiously and advantagiously expressed and represented, than they were by
the words used in the Book? Or whether such expressions did not occur to him,
as he thought would, if duly attended to, help peoples devotions more, than the
very words of the Common Prayers would by themselves? He certainly had some
design in varying and altering the words; and I am willing to believe he had an
honest design. Now if his using other expressions about the same matter, and
altering Forms of Prayer, so as to make of short Prayers long ones, is of real
use to promote devotion, why may not others variations be in their measure
useful too? If it should be said, that his variations are not to be used
publicly, I ask whether they be ever the better for that? Or whether his
variations are the more useful, because only for private use? What hinders, but
if those variations are proper to answer the ends for which they were devised,
viz. the helping of people to perform the duty of Prayer with more
understanding, and better affections, other variations in public may be
equally useful?

If, P. 16.
as the Doctor does grant, every good man may by the ordinary assistance of the
spirit be moved to pray with Devotion and Fervency: That is (as I conceive) may
have his soul enlightened, and possessed with a true apprehension and knowledge
of his spiritual concernments, and vigorously affected with them, and carried
out toward God in fervent desires, inclinations, and affections suitably to
his present occasions; What reason can be rendered why he may not by the
ordinary assistance of the spirit be enabled to express his inward resentments
in proper expressions? The gift of utterance being the gift of the spirit, as
well as other gifts. Men's discourses are usually answerable to their
apprehensions and affections. What we darkly apprehend, we express obscurely:
and what we understand distinctly and clearly, we discourse of plainly.

The principal thing, indeed, in Prayer is the frame and actings of our Souls;
the inward exercise of Faith, Repentance, Love, and other Graces. But, says
the Doctor, any good man may act these in the use of a Form. And therefore may
pray in, or by the Spirit in the use of a Form. But I say it must still be
noted, that if a man be to pray with others, (and that which we are now
discoursing, is concerning one that by way of Office is to perform this duty in
the hearing of others) so as to have them join with him in this performance, he
must use words, and if he restrain himself to the words devised and put
together by others, and these words do not so well express and represent the
sense he has, and which others should have of what is the matter of Prayer, as
others which do occur unto him, and which he could very pertinently make use of
for that purpose; he cannot be truly said to pray in or by the Spirit,
according to the full import of that phrase. But, says the Doctor, then no man
in the Public Assemblies, does pray in the Spirit, but the Minister, for the
Minister alone conceives the Prayer, and it is a Form to the whole
Congregation, who must pray in his words. To which I answer, That the matter in
dispute at present, is only concerning him that officiates. Besides, it is not
a Form to the Congregation, taking a Form in the sense we are now discoursing
of. But the Congregation may join in the Spiritual Performance of this Duty,
acting graces suitably to the occasions which are administered, and improving
for this purpose; the Abilities God has bestowed upon others, in order to the
furthering and promoting of their devotion. This is the work which pertains
unto the Congregation at that time; they not being called to express vocally
their inward resentments, (during the Ministers officiating in this
performance) in the fittest expressions they are able.

The Doctor seems to be of the opinion, that in the Apostles days, there was an
extraordinary gift of Prayer which some did partake of, and that their Prayers
were Divine Revelations. They being immediately furnished by the Spirit, both
with the Matter and Words of their Prayers; and that these Prayers were written
down, and after that gift failed, they were preserved and used by the Church,
and were transmitted down to us by their Successors. So that by this sort of
discoursing, our Liturgies are Divine Revelations. But the Doctor has none of
the Ancients but St. Chrysostom to vouch for an Extraordinary Gift of Prayer in
the Primitive Times. This is certain, before the Liturgies now extant, or any
part of them which is not expressly contained in the Books of the Old and New
Testament, will be owned by good Christians and sound Protestants for Divine
Revelations, very substantial particular proof must be made of their being
such. To father Liturgies in such an arrogant presumptuous manner, on the Holy
Spirit, is not the way to bring them into credit with judicious and serious
people. It may effectually provoke God to pour forth in a little time so much
contempt upon them, they shall never get into repute any more. This is further
certain, that our latest Liturgies have some prayers in them, which by the very
make of them, any ordinary person may perceive they were not composed by Divine
Inspiration. And if the other could be proved to be of such an original, surely
these will not deserve to be thought the more venerable, merely because they
have been added unto them. Having said thus much concerning some passages in
the Doctors Introduction, before he enters upon the First Century: I will now
briefly consider the Testimonies he does allege for Liturgies

In the First Century.
And he labors first of all to prove what he has undertaken, P. 28, etc.
by asserting that the Essenes (who have been believed by diverse learned men to
be Christians) had Forms of Prayer, for Josephus says they used Prayers which
they received from their Forefathers, which must be Forms; and Philo says they
did sing alternately; and Eusebius calls these, the Hymns sung amongst us
Christians. And that excellent Historian labors to prove these Essenes were
Christians by this Argument amongst some others, Because they prayed and sung
Hymns in set Forms, as the Christians use to do. Euscb Hist. lib. 2. c. 17.
Thus far the Doctor. And I do readily acknowledge that Fusebius does endeavor
from what he sinds in Philo, to prove the Essenes to be Christians: And
particularly from their way of singing Psalms, and Hymns. But he does not say
one word of their having set Forms of Prayers: That they prayed in set Forms,
as the Christians use to do, is the Doctor's own saying, for Fusebius does
neither say the Essenes had Forms of Prayers, nor that the Christians did use
any. And yet Eusebius does say, That Philo's Book does comprehend in it the
Rules of the Church. (...). Valefius thinks this does import, that that Book
did contain in it all the Rules or Canons which were observed by the Christian
Church in Eusebius's time. Further, Eusebius does gather out of that Book what
he thought was proper to show how exactly these Essenes, and the Christians did
agree in their Ecclesiastical Affairs, as he himself assures us in the Chapter
before referred unto; And yet says not one word of praying by set Forms; which
rather intimates there were no set Forms of Prayer used by the Christians in
his time, seeing he omits the mention of the Forms the Essenes used, if as
Josephus reports the Essenes had Forms of Prayer.

In the next place the Doctor thinks he has a proof of Liturgies in Clemens
Romanus. But whoever considers Clemens, will soon perceive that the passages
the Doctor has been pleased to quote, are nothing at all to the present
purpose. For Clemens had been persuading the Corinthians to lead a godly life,
and to abstain from all kinds of vices, and to behave themselves with such
respect and kindness one toward another, as did become them: And particularly
he presses them all to observe the Offices and Duties which did pertain to them
according to their particular stations, capacities, conditions, places, gifts,
endowments and acquirements, certifying them, that whatever state and condition
any man was in, whether he were rich or poor, strong or weak, he had some
special business to mind; or whatever his endowments and acquirements were,
whether he were wise, humble, chaste, etc. these were received from the Lord,
and he must give God thanks for them. He says that there is some business and
work God has obliged every man unto, answerable to the state and circumstances
he is in; and this appearing to be so, by the Holy Scriptures, we all ought to
do the Offices God has enjoined us, according as our circumstances are, in the
order and manner he has appointed them to be done. In short, he tells them
that people have a dependence one upon another, and God has provided every
man, whatever his condition is, a business, office and work, (which Clemens
names (...)) which he is to attend unto, doing every part of his Work, or
Liturgy, in the manner God has prescribed, and in the season he has
appointed, and what ever good he does enjoy, or excellent qualification he is
endued with, he is wholly beholden to God for it, and must therefore be careful
to give thanks unto him for it. This he confirms, and illustrates by showing
that among the Jews, the High Priest had his business, and the Priests had
theirs, and the Levites theirs, and the People had their works, which they were
all in their several stations to attend unto and perform; from whence he
inforces his exhortation to the Corinthians, that they would all mind their own
business, do the work which God had appointed them in their places, be content
with their own station, give God thanks for what they had, keeping a good
conscience, ordering themselves modestly, decently, not transgressing the bound
God had fixed for every persons Work, Office, or Liturgy; Epist. ad Corinth.
edit. Helmest. page 53.
(...).

What the Doctor alleges from Pliny, refers only to singing of Psalms, or
Hymns. Indeed he would fain draw in Prayers along with them, though his Author
say never a word concerning their Prayers, much less that they prayed
constantly in the use of Forms, which were imposed upon them. The Doctor says
that Plinies Account agrees exactly with that of the Essenes, and they having
Forms of Prayer, we must conclude the Christians had also. I inquire not what
necessity there is to conclude thus. Concerning the Essenes, and their
agreement with the Christians, I have spoken already. Nor is Plinies Account
exact, if we believe the Account Eusebius does give of the Essenes.

The Doctor has but one Author more to quote in this Century for Liturgies,
and that is Ignatius. And because Ignatius has these words, (...), etc.
(...): He concludes he has a solid proof of a fixed Liturgy. But if you
consult Ignatius his Epist. ad Magnes. You will find that the Doctor has not
given the plain sense of the place. He is persuading them of Magnesia, not to
be offended with, or contemn their Bishop, because of his youth, but to
reverence him, and adhere firmly to his Communion, and come all together (...)
(translate it how you please) to Prayer, Ignat. ad Magnes. (...) etc. Id.
that so their Prayer and Supplication might be one. Ignatius does not call
their Prayer and Supplication one, because they used one Form of Prayer, but on
the account of their joining together in the performance of that Duty. His next
quotation out of Ignatius ad Smirn. is no more to his purpose than the former.
Such expressions there are in the Epistle as the Doctor does mention; but I
think, if you consider the Epistle you will readily perceive that they do
import no more than his declaration, that their Bishops Communion was Orthodox
and Sound, Divine Ordinances being celebrated in his Church as they ought to
be; therefore he would have them adhere firmly to his Communion, who will not
perform himself, or allow others to perform the Celebration of the Eucharist or
Baptism, otherwise than the Scripture does warrant, And all that he says of
this kind, is only to secure the people from partaking in any administrations
which might be corrupted by those who were infected, according to the account
he gave in the former part of the Epistle. But there is not a word of
prescribed Forms that I can find in the whole Epistle. P. 27.
It seems a little strange to me, the Doctor should be so concerned to have
Ignatius (according to Socrates his Relation) owned to be the first that
brought the usage of singing by way of Antiphone into the Church of Antioch;
And that he should pretend that Theodoret's silence, concerning this matter,
might proceed from his taking it for granted, and supposing it was general
owned and known For the report of this matter, as it is in Socrates is
generally, by Learned men, passed over as Fabulous and Chimerical; and
Theodoret is as positive, and express that Flavianus and Diodorus were the
first that brought that way of Singing into that Church, as an Historian can
well be. His words are these (speaking of Flavianus and Diodorus) (...).
Theodor. Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 24.
And Valesius certifies that Theodorus M^psuestenus who lived at the same time
with Flavianus and Diodorus, Annot. in lib. 6. Hist. Eccles. Socrat. p. 78.
does testify the very same thing, declaring that they had it from the
Syrians. Having given you this account of the Doctors Quotations out of the
Writers in the first Century, I will consider what Evidence he has for
Liturgies

In the Second Century.
The first passage he alleges in this Century is out of Lucian (as he truly
says) a jearing Pagan The Doctor is of opinion that the Religious Assembly he
describes, was a Christian Church. I think he had a design to ridicule all
Religious Worship, and the better to effect his design, he jumbles some things
in the Christian Worship, and some things in the Pagan Worship together, adding
also what did occur to him, which he thought would contribute to the rendering
of a Religious Assembly thoroughly diverting, and grateful to a profane
Gentus. Lucian Philopat.
The passage the Doctor quotes out of this Author is this; (...). That Prayer
which began with the Father, and ended with the Hymn of many Names. Now Lucian
does not say, that he heard this Prayer in that Assembly which has been
described in that Dialogue. But acquaints him, he had brought in relating what
passed there, that he had not patience to hear any more of that sort of stuff,
and that a further discourse about such matters, would have the same effect on
him, as a story would, concerning a Prayer beginning and ending as is before
mentioned. Which though Julian might design as a reflection on the Christians
way of Praying, yet for ought I know, it imports no more, than if you should
tell me a Story of peoples beginning their Prayer, as if they worshipped but
one person, and yet should conclude their Prayer in such a manner, as if they
had been Praying all the while to a great many persons. The Doctor thinks that
Lucian does by this Prayer mean the whole Communion Office. But this is only
conjecture. I will say no more of that, but only mind you, that when the Doctor
suspected his evidence for Liturgies in this Century would not be very clear,
P. 29.
he assigned this for his Reason; We have no Authors, who had occasion to Write
particularly of the Church Service, which they cared not to publish, lest the
Pagans under whom they lived, should deride or blaspheme their Sacred
Mysteries. And yet in the next Page, to serve a turn we must have the most
jearing Pagan that Age did afford admitted to take a view of their
Administration during their whole Communion Office. But suppose Lucian was
really at a Christian Assembly, and did hear there a Prayer which began with
the Father, and ended with an acknowledgement of, and an ascription of Glory
and Honor, in variety of expressions, to every Person in the Trinity (as is
very usual with those who do not bind themselves in all their Prayers, to a
precise number of words) might not he give that description of that Prayer,
which is before related, and yet there be no prescribed Liturgy imposed on that
Assembly?

The next Author, the Doctor has recourse unto, is Justin Martyr. Whether
Justin Martyr, undertaking to write an Apology for the Christians, and in
particular for their Church Service, had not occasion to write particularly of
their Church Service, I leave the indisserent and unprejudiced Reader to judge.
P. 31.
The Doctor does acknowledge that he does often speak of the Christian
Assemblies, and of the several Duties there performed, etc. Now if they were
tied up to the constant use of a precise number of Words in their Prayers, tho
he might not think it convenient to report their words, yet what can be
imagined to obstruct his declaring they did celebrate their Offices in stinted
Forms? Ibid.
But (says the Doctor) when Justin Martyr mentions Baptism, he only faith,
They are taught to Fast and Pray, and ask of God the forgiveness of their
former Sins, and being brought where water is, they are Regenerated in the same
manner as we were Regenerated; from whence the Doctor infers, that even in his
time they began to conceal the particular manner of Celebrating these
Mysteries. Now I conceive the Doctor is under some mistake, as to this Passage:
for Justin Martyr does immediately relate in what manner they were Regenerated.
Just. Mar. Apol. 2.
They are Regenerated in the same manner as we were Regenerated; for (says
Justin Martyr) they are then washed in Water, in the Name of the Father of all
things, and Lord God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit.
And then he proceeds to some extent, in explaining and showing the reason of
all this; so that here appears not any intent that he had, to conceal any thing
that was in use amongst them. But notwithstanding Justin Martyr's reservedness,
in the Doctor's opinion, the Doctor meets with some general expressions which
incline him to believe they had Forms in his time. He will not insist upon his
saying they prayed for the Conversion of the Jews, and the Deliverance of the
Gentiles from their errors, and for all men, though these are pieces of Ancient
Litany. I only ask whether these things cannot be prayed for, unless people be
bound up to the constant use of particular prescribed words? And whether there
be any evidence that Justin Martyr borrowed this account from any Litany?

The Doctor next observes that when Justin Martyr speaks of the bringing the
newly Baptized person to the place where the Faithful Worshipped God, P. 32.
he says they there made Common Prayers for themselves, for the person
Baptized, Just. Mar. Apol. 2.
and for all other men every where with great fervency. Now (says the Doctor)
Common Prayers do signify Forms that are known to all, and in which all may
join. But I answer, the question is not, what Common Prayers do signify now;
but whether Justin Martyr by (...) did mean set prescribed Forms, which they
must constantly use, and from which they must not on any account vary? Here
does not appear any thing to incline us to think he meant prescribed Forms. But
his very next words intimate the Reason why he called them Common Prayers [They
made Common Prayers for themselves, for the person Baptized, and for all other
men every where] viz. because they did all hold Communion in offering up
Prayers to God, and their Prayers were not limited to themselves, but did
extend to the whole Community of Mankind. What the Doctor does here allege out
of Ignatius, has been considered already; what he produces out of St. Cyprian
shall be considered when I come to his quotations out of that Author, where you
will meet again with this same passage.

In the next place the Doctor reports a passage which Mr. Clarkson cites out of
Justin Martyr, P. 33.
about which they do both make some stir. The passage is this; (...). The
President in like manner offers up Prayers and Thanksgivings, as well as he is
able. Mr. Clarkson urges this as a proof, that he who did officiate in the
Public Worship, was not tied up to the use of Prescribed Forms, but did pray
and give thanks according to his ability. And he produces many testimonies to
prove that (...) here used does import so much. The Doctor undertakes to prove
that that phrase does signify otherwise in this place. For (says the Doctor)
(...) answers to (...) in the place before cited, and that declares the Prayers
at Baptism (He should have said after Baptism) were made servently, or with all
their might. He endeavors to confirm this interpretation by producing some
other passages, where the phrase seems to be of this importance. And then
determines. that When we desire the several things prayed for in a Form, with
all the earnestness and vigor we can, we may properly be said to pray (...), as
well as we are able, or to the utmost of our power. So that the power here
spoken of, refers to the affections, and not to the phrases and expressions of
him that prays.

To all this I have these things to say; 1. Justin Martyr does not refer us to
the passage the Doctor has recourse to, for the explaining of this phrase by
(...), but does expressly refer us to what he had related a little before, where
he says the President offers up Prayers and Praises to God, etc. and gives
thanks for the benefits and gifts he vouchsafes in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, (...) which, for any thing I do yet understand to the contrary, may
signify largely, distinctly, and with variety of expressions. So that if we
must interpret (...) by what goes before in Justin Martyr, we must explain it
by this: For this is what Justin Martyr does expressly refer us unto in this
place. 2. Tho this phrase does signify fervently, and so refers to the
affections, I do not understand any reason that can pertinently be alleged,
why this should exclude him who officiates, from using his utmost ability to
express his inward devotion, in the best manner and fittest words he can, to
help the devotion of those persons who join with him in the Service. Put the
Case, a Minister does in Public use a Prescribed Form of Prayer, and desires
the several things prayed for in that Form, with all the earnestness and vigor
he can; but yet perceives the words of that Form do not represent and express
his inward resentments and devout affections in so vivid and proper a manner,
for the helping and assisting of his hearers devotion, as he is able to
represent them by his own expressions; I dare refer it to the Doctor, whether
he may properly be said to pray in the use of that Form, as well as he is able,
and to the utmost of his power. I will allow he does pray fervently and
devoutly; but I think it will be hard to persuade any man of sense, that he
does pray as well as he is able; unless we must be forced to grant, that a man
may properly be said to pray as well as he is able, tho at the same time he is
able to pray better than he does. 3. As for all the quotations the Doctor
alleges to prove that (...) does note fervency and vigorous affections: I
leave the Doctor to look them over again, and consider whether his Authors do
mean no more than vigorous affections, and had any design to exclude peoples
using their best abilities, for the most advantageous outward performance of
their Work and Duty.

The Doctor further observes, P. 35.
with reference to this passage, That this phrase does only relate to the Hymns
used in the Eucharist, and these Hymns were known Forms. To which I answer? 1.
I think it equally relates to the Prayers and Thanksgivings which were
celebrated on that occasion; and I leave any indifferent person, who
understands the passage, to conclude (when he looks upon it as it lies in the
Author) as lie shall see reason, whether it does relate more to the one, than
to the other. 2. Tho Hymns may be, and often are used for celebrating the
praises of God, yet that is not the only way whereby we may offer up our
Praises and Thanksgivings to God. 3. Justin Martyr speaks here expressly of the
Presidents offering up particular thanks for the benefits exhibited and
vouchsafed in the Eucharist; and speaks of his performing the Offices of Prayer
and Praise himself, without any audible concurrence of the people during the
whole Service. Yea, he further acquaints us, that when the President has
finished these Offices, then it is the people do speak, testifying their joyful
approbation by saying Amen. This is the account he gives us himself of this
matter but a very little before the passage now insisted on, and whither he
refers us in this very place, for the more distinct apprehending of his meaning
here.

But, says the Doctor, P. 36.
all Christians are said to worship God and his Son, according to their
ability, with Prayer and Praise; and private Christians we may be sure were not
allowed to make their own Prayers and Praises in Public Worship extempore. To
this I answer, That the matter in dispute at present, is concerning him that
Officiates. And all the stir which is made about this phrase, in the present
case, amounts (I think) to no more than this, whether a Minister may properly
be said to pray to the utmost of his ability, when he does not pray to the
utmost of his ability: Which in my apprehension is a very plain case, if people
were free from prejudice. Well, but it may be enquired how the people can be
said in the Public Worship to pray according to the utmost of their abilities?
I answer their circumstances are not the same with his, who is to officiate;
And therefore this phrase has not the same importance when applied to the one,
and when extended to the other. The people are said to pray to God, and to
praise him according to the utmost of their ability in the Public Worship,
when they do make the best improvement they can, of the use he who does
officiate, does make of the abilities he is endued with for the celebrating of
these Offices, to the furthering of their own devotion.

There is one thing more the Doctor does take notice of, with reference to the
phrase we have been discoursing of. P. 38.
And that is this; He says, We are only to consider this phrase here, as it is
applied to praying and praising God. And there it never signifies doing these
things extempore (he should have said according to the best of those abilities
with which God has endued them, who are to celebrate these Offices) but doing
them very devoutly. Now whether inward devotion in these Services be all this
phrase does import, with reference to them who are to Officiate, I refer to
what I have already said about that matter. I will further only mind you, that
tho the Doctor has taken notice of some of the quotations Mr. Clarkson has
produced for the signification of this phrase in other cases, yet he has not
said one word here by way of reply to those instances Mr. Clarkson has given,
expressly relating to the cases wherein he does acknowledge the phrase is at
present to be considered. The instances Mr. Clarkson has produced, relating to
Prayer and Praise, you may find in the 118, 119, 120 pages of his Discourse
concerning Liturgies.

The Doctor having done with Justin Martyr, proceeds to Ireneus, out of whom he
alleges only one passage, which is, P. 39.
that Ireneus relates that the Heretics, to prove their phancies, did allege
that we (that is, the Orthodox) in our Thanksgivings, do say world without end.
From hence the Doctor concludes, that these words being the very conclusion of
the Gloria Patri, the Christians praised God in public by this very Form which
we now use; Glory be to the Father, etc. Now, allowing the Christians did
usually in his time use this Doxology, how will this prove they were stinted in
their Public Worship to a prescribed Liturgy? But according to my
apprehension, this is no proof, that this Doxology was then in use; unless it
can be made appear, that (...), cannot conclude any Praise and Thanksgiving but
this Doxology. The business in short is thus; Ireneus is showing how absurdly
those Heretics did endeavor to prove their conceit of their Aeones, which was
by urging every sentence where they found the word (...), or (...), as a proof
of what they asserted. Amongst other things they pleaded that the Orthodox did
usually conclude their Praises with saying, for ever and ever, or as the Doctor
will have it, world without end. Iren. adv. H^s. lib. 1. c. 1.
(...). Now all that can fairly be inferred from hence, I think, is this, that
the Christians did usually conclude their Praises with these words, for ever
and ever. And if no Prayers or Praises but prescribed Forms can conclude with
these words, I am contented that this should pass for a proof of stinted Forms
in Ireneus his time. But if Prayers and Praises, which are not Prescribed
Forms, may conclude, and ordinarily are concluded with these words, I leave the
Doctor to consider whether his alleging this for a proof of a fixed Liturgy,
be not a way of arguing very like that which was used by those Ireneus did
write against? Tertullian shall be considered when he comes in order, and then
you may judge of the Doctors Inference.

The next Author the Doctors makes use of, P. 40.
is Clemens of Alexandria: Out of whom a passage is quoted, concerning which he
and Mr. Clarkson do differ, touching the meaning of it. Clem. Alex. Strom. 7.
The passage is this; The Church is not only the name of the place for Public
Worship, but the Congregation prostrating themselves in Prayers, having all, as
it were, one common voice, and one mind. The dispute is concerning the meaning
of (...). Mr. Clarkson thought the Congregation had one voice in respect of the
Ministers speaking in their stead, one for all. The Doctor thinks it signifies
the performing the Offices of Prayer and Praise in a responsory way, which must
be in known Forms, because the people not only joined in heart with the
Minister, but vocally answered in their turns, they and the Priest often making
up the sentence between them; and therefore they are said to have, as it were.
one common voice. I leave the Learned to determine which of them is in the
right, as to the sense of this phrase: And will only acquaint you, that I
think, if the way of Responsory Prayers, and Praises, had been antecedently
proved to be the ordinary way of the Christian Church in the Primitive Ages,
there would have been something to countenance the Doctors interpretation. But
to interpret this place thus, can be no proof for Liturgies, because the
interpretation is built upon a supposition, and takes that for granted, which
it is alleged to prove. Besides, if the people did vocally answer in their
turns, and they and the Priest did often make up the sentence between them, as
the Doctor affirms; I think in thus doing, they could hardly be said to have,
as it were, one common voice, for they would evidently have two common voices.
The Priest having one common voice for himself and them, in his part of the
sentence, and the People another common voice, for themselves and the Priest,
in their part of the sentence. It does indeed exceed my reach to comprehend a
Reason why the Congregation may not be said to have one common voice in Prayer
and Praise, when they have appointed or chosen a Priest to officiate in their
name, and do concur and join with him in those Offices. No nor why they may not
be said to have, as it were, one common voice, in the Doctors notion of that
phrase, when they do testify their approbation of what he has said (as Justin
Martyr assures us they did) by saying Amen. But, says the Doctor If the
Minister had said all the Prayers, he, (i. e. Clemens) must have said plainly,
they had one common mouth, or voice, but his words are, having, as it were, one
common voice. I leave you to consider, whether their answering Amen is not
enough to remove this scruple. Only you may take notice that the Doctor is of
opinion that Clemens does allude here to those words of St. Paul, Romans 15.6.
And St. Paul speaks there of glorifying God with one mouth, not, as it were
with one mouth. The Doctor further observes from Clemens, that the Christians
allotted several hours for Prayer, in imitation of Daniel and the Jews, and
hence concludes it likely, that because the Jews had Forms of Prayer, they did
imitate them in these too. I think it needless to make any Reply to this,
because it is a forced way of reasoning, and is at best, all over mere
conjecture. But, says the Doctor, would those who prayed so often, vary the
phrase every time? Now this is not at all to the point, for that which the
Doctor should prove, is, that they were obliged constantly to use the very same
words. The Doctor further tells us, That Clemens does not relate what were the
words of their Forms. There the Doctor speaks very right, but withal I must
add, he never relates that they had any Forms. But Clemens tells us what were
their main Petitions. And the Doctor says, These matters they asked, were
such, it was most fit to ask them in a set Form of words. That is one Doctors
opinion. But if the Christians of that Age were of another opinion, what
becomes of the Doctors argument? And he must give some evidence they were of
his opinion, before what he asserts will pass for proof in the present case.
But, says the Doctor, If they had prayed for these things extempore, Clemens
could not be so positive in the method as he seems to be. To which I make this
reply, viz. Clemens reports the methods of Christians private devotions every
jot as particularly, as that quotation he insists on, with relation to Public
Prayers, does relate their method: Whether that I speak of be the very same the
Doctor refers unto, I will not affirm, but it seems to have some affinity, and
I am sure it is in the same Book his Margin refers to. If it should be the same
the Doctor means, you will easily perceive how little it is to his purpose. And
why should the Doctor think it strange. Clemens could be so positive (as naming
three general heads of Prayer does amount to) in the method of their Public
Prayers: tho they did not use a fixed prescribed Liturgy? Seeing he is every
jot as positive in the method of their Private Prayers, unless they all used
the same Forms in private too? The truth of which I am persuaded the Doctor
has no inclination to undertake. Strom. lib. 6. p. 665.
Now Clemens tells us that the true Christian, [or as he terms him, (...)] does
pray every hour. And that he does first ask remission of sin; then that he may
not sin again; then, that he may do well, and understand both Creation and
Providence; and that his Heart being made clean by the Knowledge which he has
by the Son of God, he may attain to see God face to face. Such a passage as
this relating to Public Prayers out of one of the Ancients, would be looked on
by some men, as a swinging proof of a prescribed Liturgy. I leave you to divert
your self with the Doctor's dextrous device, to furnish people with an
Expedient to enable them to Pray by Book, with their Eyes and Hands lift up to
Heaven.

The Doctor has one Author more, whom he quotes in this Century, P. 43.
and that is Tertullian In whose works (he says) we have sufficient evidence
that they used Forms of Prayer and Praise. The passages he is concerned with
out of this Author, are of two sorts. 1. Such as he alleges to prove the use
of a Liturgy at that time. 2. Such as Mr. Clarkson produces to prove the
contrary, which the Doctor endeavors to make appear, do not answer the end
for which that Author brings them. I will first consider the passages the
Doctor alleges as sufficient evidence that the Christians used Public Forms
of Prayer and Praise in his time. His first proof is this; That Tertullian
declares, That Christ has fixed a new Form of Prayer for us, who are his
Disciples, viz. The Lords Prayer, which he expounds in a peculiar Tract, and in
diverse places calls it The Lawful and the Ordinary Prayer. I do acknowledge
Tertullian near the beginning of his Book, De Oratione, Tertul. de Orat. p. 788.
has this passage; -- Jesus Christus Deminus Noster, nobis Discipulis Novi
Testamenti, Novam Orationis Formam determinavit. The Great Question is, What
Tertullian did mean by Novam Orationis Formam? The Doctor says it was the
Lords Prayer, which he expounds in a peculiar Tract. I think his meaning was
otherwise; And that he did intend no more by that Phrase, than a new
Instruction or Direction how to perform the Duty of Prayer, which he says was
necessary to the Gospel State or Administration: Oportebat enim in hac quoque
specie Novum Vinum novis utribus recondi. And though Tertullian does expound
the Lords Prayer in that Tract, yet he does consider it in his explaining of
it, not as the whole he understands by his Nova Forma, but as an instance and
example of one of the General Instructions our Savior had laid down for the
guiding of us in the performance of this Duty. He does in a little time, even
before he begins his explanation of the Lords Prayer, alter his phrase, and
calls it Orandi Disciplina. And then tells us this New Way or Instruction for
Prayer, did consist of several parts. The third he mentions is Brevity: Which
he explains by our not laying any stress on the use of a confused heap of
words, but our using such words as are proper and very comprehensive. And then
he certifies us, that our Lord has given us an admirable example of this
Brevity, which is the third part of his Nova Orationis Forma, or the Third
Precept Christ injoined to be observed in the performance of this Duty. Et
tamen Brevitas ista, quod ad tertium Sophiae Gradum faciat, magnae ac beatae
interpretationis substantia sulta est. And his principal business in his
expounding the Lord's Prayer, (which he immediately subjoins) is to show how
comprehensive our Savior was in this Prayer, tho it was so short, or consisted
of so few words. But notwithstanding Tertullian does expound every part of the
Lords Prayer, yet he does not strictly tie himself to the method observed in
the Lord's Prayer. As for Tertullians Legitima and, Ordinaria Oration, Id. p.
791.
it seems to be just the same with his Ordinata Religio Orationis. Which I
conceive is another phrase of the same import with his Nova Orationis Forma,
and his Orandi Disciplina. Which (I think) do only signify the General
Instructions Christ gave for the directing of his Disciples, or the directing
of Christians, in their performing of this Duty of Prayer.

The Doctors next quotation out of Tertullian is of no use to the present
purpose, till it be proved that people cannot join in prayer with him who
officiates, unless they do use their voices, during that performance, as
audibly, as he does his, or at least till the pretended implication of their
joining voices be better cleared, than by bare aslertion. But, says the
Doctor, Tertullian describes some of the things, P 44.
which they desired of God to bestow on the Emperors, viz. that they might have
a long Life, a quiet Empire, etc. To which I answer, that this may pass for a
proof of a fixed Litany, when it shall be made evident, that the particulars
mentioned by Tertullian cannot be prayed for, but in prescribed words, or that
an account cannot be given of the things which are constantly prayed for,
unless those matters be constantly prayed for in the same precise words. But
you may take notice that Tertullian, when he relates what the Christians prayed
for, does not always use the same words, nor make the same enumeration of
particulars. For a proof of this I refer you to Tertullian himself, in the
places of his Apology. The Doctor refers to, p. 44. But if you consult
Tertullian, according to the worser Edition, which is that I am necessitated to
use, you must look p. 876, and 867. As for the Doctors quotation out of
Tertullian, De Anima. P. 142.
I need not say any thing concerning it, because Mr. Clarkson has expressly
answered the Plea made from that place, and the Doctor has not thought fit to
say one word to his vindication of that place. The Doctor's next quotation is
out of Tertullian De Baptismo. Concerning which I shall only tell you, that
Tertullian is replying to those who pretended that Baptism is not necessary,
because Faith is sufficient. Now amongst other things Tertullian does urge the
necessity of Baptism from Christ's instituting of it. Lex enim tingendi imposita
est, and forma praescripta, says he. And this he proves by producing what is
said touching this matter in the last Chapters of St. Matthew and St. Mark.
What he says amounts to this; Baptism is necessary, now under the Gospel,
because the Lord Jesus has commanded it, and told us in what manner it is to
be administered. You may try your own faculty, and see whether from these
premises, Christ has instituted Baptism, and has shown in what manner it must
be celebrated, you can draw such a conclusion as this, Therefore Prayer and
Praises are to be performed in the Church by prescribed Forms, or that
Tertullian did think so, or that in his days, the Church did worship God in the
use of such prescribed Liturgies, as is the Subject of our present discourse.
What the Dr. refers us to in Tertul ad uxor. it only concerns singing, which is
not to our present purpose. Besides, if I mistake not, it only relates to
singing in the Family. The words in Tertullian are these; Sonant inter duos
Psalmi and Hymni, P. 534.
and mutuo provocant quis melius Deo suo canet. Tertullian is representing some
of the advantages which accrue from Christians Marrying with Christians, and
this is one of them. P 35.
But says the Doctor, One of these Forms was the Gloria Patri, which he
describes as Ireneus did by the last words, World without end. Now you must
take notice that Tertullian in this last quotation is quite upon another
Subject. And the quotation is out of another Book, his Discourse de
Spectaculis. I will not stay to consider Tertullians sense exactly in this
place. He is dissuading the Christians from frequenting the Heathenish Games,
Exercises, and Shows, and represents to them how unbecoming them it must needs
be, yea how sinful to concur with them in what did ordinarily pass on those
occasions. Tertul. de Spect. p. 700.
Avertat Deus a suis tantam voluptatis exiti^sae cupiditatem. Quale est enim,
de Ecclesia Dei in diaboli eccl siam terd^re? de coelo (quod aiunt) in coenum?
illas manus quas ad Dominum extuleris, p^stm^dum laudando histrionem fatigare,
ex ore quo Amen in sanctum pretuleris, gladiatori testimonium reddere, (...)
alii omnino dicere nisi Deo Christo? Now how come these words of Tertullian to
be a proof of Liturgies in the Christian Church? Why the Doctor tells us we
here find (...); therefore there must needs be a Form, and this Form must be
the Gloria Patri, because (...) is in the end of that Doxology. the Doctor had
told us before that Irenius had reference to the Gloria Patri, because he found
in him (...); and here Tertullian must needs refer to the same, because in him
we have nothing but (...). Can (...) be never used but in the Gloria Patri? I
think Tertullian is not minding them that this was an expression the Christians
did constantly use in their public Worship, though it might be constantly used
in their public Worship, and their Worship not be performed in prescribed
Forms; but he rather intimates that this was an expression which was ordinarily
used at those sights and exercises he is dissuading them from, and that it is
not an expression fit for them to use with reference unto any but God and
Christ. But because the Doctor does lay such stress on this Phrase, he may
consider whether the Latin Church did use the Gloria Patri in Greek in
Tertullians days?

These are the passages the Doctor thought fit to allege out of Tertullian for
what he propounds. The other sort of passages he is concerned with, are such as
Mr. Clarkson alleged for what he had asserted. There are two of these the
Doctor does take notice of, but says so little concerning them, I will pass
them over without saying any thing of them one way or another; for any one who
considers what Mr. Clarkson says with reference to them, and what the Doctor
says of them here, may easily determine whether the passages do make more for
the one or for the other. But there is one passage Mr. Clarkson does quote from
this Author, about which the Doctor takes a great deal of pains, P. 47, etc.
to show it is capable of an interpretation which will not serve Mr. Clarkson's
purpose. I will relate the passage, and without reflecting on the labored
constructions the Doctor has heaped together, to render it useless to Mr.
Clarksons design, I will plainly acquaint you with what I conceive to be the
surest way to find out Tertullians meaning. The passage is this; Manibus
expansis, Tertul Apol.
quia innocuis, capite undo, quia non erubescimus, denique; sine monitore, quia
de pectore oramus. Tertullian, I apprehend, does here give an account of the
Christians Prayers, that they were not such as the Heathens were, but such as
did suit and agree with the advice and direction the Apostle had given
concerning this business. His words seem to give an account, of what he
understood to be the Apostles meaning, 1 Timothy 2.8. where he wills men to Pray
every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. But the Doctor
thinks the passage is obscure. If so, then certainly Tertullian is sit to
give an account of his own meaning; and I think he does so, in a very few lines
after: For having showed why he, and so all Christians could not pray to any
but God, he seems very plainly to explain in other words, the several branches
of the forementioned account concerning the Christians Prayers. -- Ei offero
opimam and majorem hostiam, quam ipse mandavit, orationem de carne pudica, de
anima innocenti, de spiritu sancto profectam. This I take to be the true
account of this controverted passage; whether I am in the right or not
concerning it, I leave you to judge, as also whether this passage so
understood, do make more for or against prescribed Forms of Prayer. These being
the passages made use of from the Authors in the second Century about
Liturgies, I proceed to the

Third Century.
In which the first Author the Doctor does quote is Hippolytus. P. 54.
The passage is this; Liturgy shall be extinguished, singing of Psalms shall
cease, and reading of Scripture shall not be heard. What Hippolytus his meaning
here is, I will not undertake to affirm positively, because I never read that
Author. But as seeing the Doctor does argue from the word (...), I am willing
to mind you that the Doctor does acknowledge it is but probable, that this
Father meant a common Form of Prayer generally used. And I do acknowledge it
would be more probable that that Father understood the word in the Doctors
sense, if he had produced any proof that (...) did either before, or in the
days of this Father ever signify a common Form of Prayer generally used in the
Christian Church. Indeed I am not aware that any thing more can be warrantably
concluded from this expression, than that Antichrist would suppress the public
pure Worship of God. And why Antichrist may not as well suppress the public
exercise of Ministers gifts and abilities in the Worship of God, as the use of
prescribed Forms of Prayer, does not yet occur unto me. But if Antichrist have
already made any attempts against the public Worship of God, I must needs say,
I do not remember any evidence he has given of his extraordinary dislike of
Forms of Prayer, merely as Forms. Nor do I mind any proof that has been
produced that (...) did about the Year 220. signify public prescribed Forms.

Our next Author (says the Doctor) is the Famous Origin, P. 55.
in whose eleventh Homily on Jer. we have so express a Form of Prayer, which
was wont to be used in his days, the learned Centuriators were convinced by it,
that set Forms of Prayer were used in his time. The matter in debate is not
whether those learned men were convinced from that passage, that set Forms of
Prayer were used in his time; But whether that passage is a substantial proof,
that the Christian Church did in Origens time worship God only by a prescribed
Liturgy. Now the Argument from this Homily to prove a stated Liturgy, depends
(as Mr Clarkson says) on the Mode or Form of expression here used; P. 141.
and what Origens way of expressing himself in this place was, we have not any
certainty, because we have not his own words here, but his Translator's, who
have certified us they did not tie themselves to an exact and strict
translation. This argument therefore cannot be convincing in the present case,
because we have no assurance of the truth and certainty of that, on which the
Argument depends, and from which it must derive its whole strength. The Doctor
does not take notice of this, but suggests it is pretended that Russinus might
add this Prayer himself. But the doubt is not so much whether he added the
Prayer, as whether he did not alter the Mode of expression, and in his
Translation put that into the Form of a Prayer, which Origin propounded in
another Form? For tho Origin might only relate, as St. Paul does, Ephesians. 1.16,
17. what was the ordinary subject of their Petitions on such occasions,
Ruffinus might in his Translation deliver it in the Form of a Prayer. And till
we have some assurance that Origin is here faithfully translated, and did
express himself exactly in the same Mode the Translator reports this matter,
the Argument cannot be convincing to the purpose for which it is brought. Mr.
Clarkson further adds, That allow all that can be pretended fairly from this
place, no more can be concluded from it, than what is common with those who do
pray extempore, viz that they often in Prayer preferred one or two Petitions in
the same words. To which the Doctor has not thought fit to make any reply. If
those who do officiate, do frequently use the same words in Prayer concerning
the same matter, is the inference thence just, that therefore they may not use
any words, or that they are bound up to a prescribed Liturgy in their whole
worship? But having said thus much concerning the Dispute betwixt the Doctor
and Mr. Clarkson touching this passage, I will relate the matter it self more
distinctly. Origin having taken notice in the forementioned Homily, that the
Prophets having suffered many hardships from the People, on the account of the
messages they did bring them, and the threatenings they denounced against them
from the Lord, it was expedient that those who hear the word should be briefly
admonished what manner of lives the Prophets did lead, and what benefits did
appertain unto them, and what their own duty is, viz that if they would partake
of the happiness the Prophets have arrived at, they must diligently endeavor
to do the works they did. And in short, he adds, his meaning is thus; Orig. Hom
XI. in Jer.
Frequenter in Oratione dicimus. Da Omnipotens, Da nobis partem cum Prophetis,
etc. O Almighty, grant, grant unto us a part with the Prophets, grant us a part
with the Apostles of thy Christ, grant that we may be found at the footsteps of
thy only begotten. But (says he) when we speak these things, we do not
understand, or we have not a due sense of what these Petitions do import. For
in reality, when we speak thus, we do ask that God would make us to be hated as
they were hated, etc. Now the matter seems very plain, viz. That Origin
expounding the Scripture popularly, took occasion to mind the people how
careful they should be, if they desired to be happy as the Prophets are, to
live such lives as they did, and not content themselves with saying (as was
very usual for them when they heard affectionate discourses concerning the
Prophets and Apostles, etc.) Lord give us a part with them, etc. For, says he,
these Petitions or Prayers we are so prone to use when our affections are moved
at the reports which are made to us concerning the Prophets, do properly
signify what we do not at all think of, or really intend, when we use those
expressions. For these Prayers do really signify our desiring of God, that we
may be hated as the Prophets were, and fall into the same calamities they did
endure. Re enim hoc dicimus, fac nos sic odio haberi, ut edio habiti sunt
Prophetae; -- Da in istas incidere calamitates quas Apostoli sustinuerunt. Is
it any proof that he who administers Divine Ordinances is tied up to a fixed
Liturgy, because in his popular discourses on particular occasions, in his
pressing people to a good life, he tells them, we do ordinarily pray, O
Almighty, grant us this, or that, or the other thing, and that these Petitions
are of such importance as to engage our endeavors to lead such lives as we are
persuaded unto? Yea, it may be, if the matter be well inquired into, it will be
found that Origen's explication of this Prayer, is a more just reproof of the
Prayer it self, than his relating it, is a proof of the Administrators being
tied up to the use of Forms in his time. For it may be very well questioned,
whether Christians may pray for what he says those Petitions do properly
import.

The next passage the Doctor does quote out of Origin, P. 58.
is in his sixth Book against Celsus; And he places the force of this quotation
on the Participle [(...)] which he finds in it, and of which he gives this
account, that it signifies not only a thing injoined or commanded in general,
but so injoined that the very order and manner of doing it, is set down and
particularly appointed. And I may truly say that all this may be with reference
unto Prayers, and yet the very words to be used, not be set down, and
particularly appointed, without which there is no Liturgy in our present
acceptance of that word. But, says the Doctor, Origin is speaking of the
Prayers themselves, and gives them this Character, that they were ordered or
prescribed, and therefore must be in Forms. To which I answer, that all he
says (except his inference) does amount to no more than an order for the
method of the performance, but does not reach to the prescribing of the words.
And if God have not only commanded us to pray, but has also given Rules for
the manner of performing this Duty, when we perform this Service according to
the Rules he has appointed, we may properly be said to use (...). But if we
consider the passage entirely as Origin has it (for the Doctor has left
something out) it will clear it self. We do affirm for a certain truth (says
Origin) that they who do worship God, Orig. in Celf. lib 6.
the Lord of all things through Jesus in the Christian manner or way, and he
according to the Gospel, using frequently, as they ought night and day [(...)]
such Prayers as are appointed or commanded, are not vanquishable, or cannot
beovercome either by Magicians or Devils. These last words the Doctor thought
fit to leave out. Now let any one judge, whether by using appointed Prayers,
Origin meant offering up to God Prayers in such way as he had appointed, or
using such prayers as were composed by Men, and saying them over in such order
as they had prescribed; which of these do you imagine Origin thought to be the
Christian's effectual security from Magicians and Devils? Can it enter into any
Man's head, who knows any thing of Origin, that he was for Christians to use
Prayers, as others did Spells? How came the use of prescribed Forms to be
better security from Magicians and Devils, than any other way of praying?

There is further a Dispute betwixt the Doctor and Mr. Clarkson, whether
Origin, P. 61.
quoting some passages which are in the Psalms, did, by saying, we find them
(...), or (...), mean the public Liturgy, or the Psalter? To which I shall
only say, That I do not perceive that there is any Antecedent proof, that they
had a public Liturgy, but it is certain they had the Book of Psalms amongst
them. I leave you to determine whether it is most probable that Origin, being
to quote Passages which were in the Book of Psalms, would rather refer his
Reader to another Book, than unto that which was acknowledged to be divinely
inspired?

St. Cyprian is next brought by the Doctor as a Witness for Liturgies. And I
might suppose, P. 65.
That he did allow the Lord's Prayer to be used as a Form of Prayer, and that
he would have us repeat the very words of it: And yet this will not amount to
any resemblance of a proof for Liturgies, as they are here to be understood.
But the Passages in St. Cyprian the Doctor alleges, do not (I think) import
what he pretends they do. St. Cyprian, in his Sermon concerning the Lord's
Prayer, seems to have the very same Notions about it, his Master Tertullian had
expressed in his Tract concerning the same matter, of which I have spoken:
before. There are indeed some Passages in St. Cyprian's Sermon, from which the
Doctor does draw his own inferences. The enquiry must be, whether St. Cyprian's
meaning in those passages was what the Doctor pretends?

St. Cyprian has this Passage: Cypr. Sermon. de Orat. Dom.
Orandi ipse formam dedit, ipse quid precaremur monuit and instruxit. I
conceive he means no more than this, That the Lord Jesus has taught People in
what manner they should pray, and what things they should pray for. I think if
we consider St. Cyprian's Discourse, we cannot warrantably understand any thing
else by his Orandi forma, than those Instructions our Savior gave for our
Direction in performing of this duty of Prayer. St. Cyprian does also certify,
that the surest way to obtain acceptance and audience with the Father, is to
govern our selves in the performance of this Duty by the directions the Son
has given for this purpose: Vt dum prece and oratione quam filius docuit, Id.
apud patrem facilius audiamur. If we strictly consider this Father's sense and
meaning, there does not appear any ground to conclude that he laid any stress
on our using the very words of which the Lord's Prayer does consist. And
besides several passages which might be instanced in, which do strongly
intimate that what I have already mentioned, is the substance of this Father's
meaning here, there is one short Passage, at a little distance from these
already mentioned, which, to me, seems to put the matter out of all doubt: Vt
aliter orare quam docuit, Id.
non ignorantia sola sit, sed and culpa. Now let any man, who knows any thing
at all of St. Cyprian, judge whether he thought that it was a sin to use any
other words in Prayer, than just those which were expressed in the Lord's
Prayer; and whether his meaning was not, that it is a sin or fault to govern
our selves in the performing of this duty, by other Instructions, than those
the Son had given for our guidance in this Duty? This I take to be the meaning
of that other Passage, Agnoscat pater filii sui verba, cum precem facimus. By
cerba filii sui, I conceive is not meant the words of the Lord's Prayer, but
the Instructions and Directions the Son gave for the right performing of this
duty. Here I may mind you, that the Doctor in his Discourse on one of his
Quotations out of Origin, has this Passage: Note also Origin does not say, P.
60.
the Christian made these enjoined Prayers, but used them; which supposes they
were made into a prescribed Form before. Now what does the Doctor think might
be noted here (according to his way of making notes) upon precem facimus? But
for my part I think the Ancients, by making Prayers, and by using Prayers,
meant much what the same thing, viz performing the duty of Prayer. Moreover,
St. Cyprian has this Expression, Si petamus ipsius oratione; And this he
immediately interprets (I think) by our governing our selves in this Duty by
the Directions he had laid down about it. And his account of these Directions
is very like that Tertullian had given of them before him: Id.
Sit autem orantibus sermo and precatio cum disciplina, quietem continens, and
pudorem. There are two Passages more relating to this matter, which the Doctor
quotes out of this Author, in which he considers the words the Author uses,
but neglects the sense and meaning the Author had, in his using of those words.
The first is this, Publica est nobis and communis oration. Now St. Cyprian's
meaning is neither more nor less than this; That Christians must not be so
confined and narrow-spirited, in their Prayers, as to pray only for themselves,
but they must extend their Prayers to others, and pray for all People. He does
not call the Christians Prayer public and common, because he speaks of the
Lord's Prayer, as the Doctor pretends, nor as intimating that there was one
fixed prescribed form, which all were to use, but because their prayers were
not to be confined to themselves, but to be general or universal extending to
all Men. That this is the plain and obvious sense of this place, I appeal to
any one, who will consider what goes a little before, and what immediately
follows these words, Ante omnia pacis doctor, atque unitatis magister
singulatim noluit and privatim precem fieri, ut quis cum precatur, pro se
tantum precetur -- publica est nobis, and communis oration, and quum oramus, non
pro uno, sed pro populo toto oramus. This is also the plain meaning of his next
Quotation, as you will easily perceive when you see the sentence entire which
is thus; Cypr. Ep. ad Cler. etc.
Vnusquisque oret dominum non pro se tantum, sed and pro omnibus fratribus,
sicut Dominus Jesus orare nos docuit, ubi non singulis privatam precem
mandavit, sed communi and concordi prece orare pro omnibus jussit.

The Doctor says there are still more evident Proofs in this Author, not only
of Forms, P. 66.
but of a Liturgy. And his first Instance is out of the forementioned Sermon
concerning the Lord's Prayer. I forbear a great many Reflections I might easily
make on what the Doctor says concerning this Passage; I will only mind you,
that a Common Prayer in the present sense of that Phrase, must be proved to be
in St. Cyprian's time, before it can be owned that he cited Sursum Corda, out
of that Common Prayer. And notwithstanding this Phrase is to be found in
Liturgies framed long after St. Cyprian's time, it does not appear there was
any such Liturgy then; nor does St. Cyprian say a word here of this Phrase
being used in the Eucharist, though Liturgies since framed, have inserted it in
that Office. Now the whole St. Cyprian says about this matter amounts but to
this; He having exhorted the People to keep their minds and hearts very intent
upon what should be their business when they are offering up their Prayers unto
God; he explains to them the design of an Exhortation the Priest did usually
give them, before he began his prayer. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.
Ideo and sacerdos ante orationem praefatione praemissa, parat fratrum mentes
dicendo, Sursum corda, ut dum respondet plebs, Habemus ad Dominum, admoneatur
nihil aliud se quam Dominum cogitare debere. And from hence he inforces on them
his former Instruction or Exhortation. Now if a Minister cannot pray but in a
prescribed Form, after that he has desired the People to lift up their hearts
to God, and they have declared their readiness to concur with him therein, this
may pass for a proof of prescribed Liturgies. The present business is not to
enquire what inferences others have made from this Passage, but whether a
prescribed Liturgy be deduceable from a Ministers desiring the People before he
begins to pray, to lift up their hearts to God, and attend to what should be
the main business of Prayer, or from their answering that they are ready and
willing to concur with him in what he desires of them?

Here appearing so little evidence for Liturgies in this Passage, I proceed to
the Doctor's next more evident proof for a Liturgy out of this Author. P. 67.
We may observe (says the Doctor) not only by this Preface, but also by
another Passage that the African Church and the Eastern did hugely agree in
these Liturgick Forms, because, as the Greeks say, Give holy things to those
that are Holy. So it seems they did at Carthage, where (as St Cyprian notes)
they were daily charged to keep that which was Holy in a pure Conscience,
according to our Lord's Command, not to cast that which is Holy to Dogs, that
is, in the Eucharist (which they then daily celebrated) they used that Phrase,
Give Holy things to Holy Persons. Now the truth, with reference to this
passage, is this; St. Cyprian, in the beginning of his Discourse against
Demetrian, acquaints him why he had so long chosen rather to keep silence, than
to make a formal answer to his Calumnies and Railery; And for his warrant in
doing thus, he quotes some places of Scripture, and immediately inserts these
words; Cypr. ad Demet.
Et Sanctum quoque jubeamur intra censcientiam nostram tenere, nec conculcandum
porcis and canibus exponere: For the proof of which command or charge, he
refers, not to their Communion Service, or their Office at the Eucharist, (as
the Doctor hints) but to a Passage of our Savior's, as it is laid down
expressly in the Gospel: Loquente Domino, and dicente, ne dederitis sanctum
canibus, neque miseritis margaritas vestras ante porcos, etc. In this same
Tract the Doctor pretends to find a Christian Litany; P. 68.
he refers to the same page he had quoted for the former Passage, but you will
find the Passage he speaks of, toward the latter end of this Tract. Here St.
Cyprian says, That notwithstanding Christians can rejoice in every Condition,
and patiently bear the most adverse occurrences, because of the respect they
have unto the happy and blessed Estate which is to come; yet they do as
occasion requires offer up their Prayers to God for temporal blessings, and the
removing or moderating of Adversities, etc. Et tamen pro arcendis hostibus, and
imbribus impetrandis, Cypr. Cont. Demet.
and vel auferendis vel temperandis adversis rogamus semper, and preces
fundimus, etc. Now because St. Cyprian and Tertullian do give an account of
some things which were the subject matter of the Christians constant or
occasional Petitions, (for I suppose the Doctor does hardly think the
Christians did every day pray for the procuring of Rain) therefore the Doctor
concludes they had a Liturgy; And because the particulars mentioned, were
prayed for in the Ancient Litanies, (though much younger than either of these
two Authors) therefore in the times of these Authors, they had a certain Form,
though they concealed the phrases of it from unbelievers. If any Man can see
any strength in this way of arguing, before it be proved that these things
cannot be prayed for but in prescribed words, I must acknowledge he can see
farther than I can.

The Doctor having produced these Testimonies from St. Cyprian, P. 69.
to evidence a Liturgy in his days, applies himself to answer some Passages Mr.
Clarkson had offered from this Author, to prove that in his days, those who did
officiate were at liberty to express themselves in their Prayers as they
thought most convenient. The first Quotation for this purpose is out of St.
Cyprian's Epistle to Pope Lucius, where he gives him an account of their
praying to God for him suitably to the present occasion which was offered them.
This occasion of offering up their prayers for him was particular, and such as
was not incident every day. The Question now is this, Whether seeing they did
pray for him with a particular regard to what is related in that Epistle, the
Petitions they offered up were prescribed, or whether they were expressed freely
according as the occasion required? I shall leave the indifferent Reader, when
he peruseth what the Doctor has said about this matter, to conclude as he
shall see fit, whether the Doctor has cleared this Passage to his
satisfaction. For I think the Question is not, whether those words he relates
there, were the very words they constantly used on that occasion; but whether
there was a Prayer ready prescribed for that occasion? If there were not, and
they did ordinarily pray for the things mentioned without being confined to use
the same words every time, do you judge whether this Passage do make more for
the Doctor or Mr. Clarkson. It is in my judgment, but a poor answer for the
Doctor to insinuate, P. 70.
that a Primate may occasionally pray without a prescribed Form, but inferior
Priests may not, unless Ministerial abilities are not to be exercised
proportionably to the measure in which God has conferred the same, but
accordingly as those who have them can climb up toward the top of
Ecclesiastical Dignity and Preferment.

His second Allegation (says the Doctor) out of St. Cyprian for such
occasional Prayers is, P. 71.
that there are also mention of such occasional Prayers in the Epistle to Moses
and Maximus; but he durst not (says the Doctor) cite the place at large, which
only speaks of private Prayers made by these Confessors in prison, etc. Now
because the Doctor has such a mind to have the place cited at large, I will do
it, and then leave you to judge whether it only speaks of private Prayers, or
whether the Passage do speak at all of the Prayers of these Confessors? Mr.
Clarkson refers to the particular Epistle, and the words are these, Et nos
quidem vestri, diebus ac noctibus, Cypr. epist. ad Mos. and Maxim.
me mores, and quando in sacrificiis precem cum pluribus facimus, and cum in
secessu privatis precibus oramus, coronis ac laudibus vestris plenam domini
faventiam postulamus.

There is one instance more, P. 71.
the Doctor takes notice of, and seems to be in some passion with Mr. Clarkson
about it. Now the matter stands thus; Mr. Clarkson in one part of his Book is
showing that the Ancients were not so wedded to particular words and phrases,
as some have been in latter years. And to give some proof of this, he does show
amongst other instances, that they did not conceive Christ had so tied them up
in the Administration of Baptism, that they must necessarily use just those
very words he had set down relating to this matter in the Gospel; but that they
had leave to vary their expressions, and change those words related in the
Gospel for others, provided they did not change the sense. He shows they did
ordinarily vary in several particulars, and amongst the rest he says some
thought themselves not obliged to Baptize expressly, in the name of the Sacred
Trinity, so as to name every person, as they are mentioned Mat. 28.19. but in
the name of Christ, or of the Lord Jesus, or of the Lord. He farther adds, and
this supposed to be the practice of the best times, has great Advocates. He
names several, who are, and were far enough from being looked upon as Heretics.
Afterward he quotes this very Passage in St. Cyprian, which creates the Doctor
so much disturbance. The Doctor seems to be displeased because Mr. Clarkson did
not quote the Passage entire, P. 72.
without leaving out any words; and then tells us St. Cyprians words are these:
How then do some say, who are cut of the Church, yea against the Church, that
if a Pagan be any where, or any way Baptized in the name of Christ Jesus, he
may obtain the Remission of Sins? And hereupon the Doctor falls into a warm
sort of short talk about Heretics and Schismatics. Now St. Cyprians words are
these; Quomodo ergo quidam dicunt, Cypr. ad. Jubai.
foris extra ecclesiam, modo in nomine Jesu Christi ubicunque and quemodocunque
gentilem Baptizatum Remissionem peccatorum consequi posse? I will not dispute
whether the Doctor has translated this Passage as it ought to be translated,
though I do not know any necessity that there is, that foris extra ecclesiam,
must be used as explanatory of quidam. But all that Mr. Clarkson brought this
Passage for, was to prove that some in St. Cyprians days were of the above
mentioned opinion And I think the quotation is full to that point. He did not
produce this place to prove they were Orthodox in St. Cyprians Judgment, but
he does expressly declare St Cyprian did not allow it; yet I am not sensible
that it does follow they were either Heretics or Schismatics, because foris
extra ecclesiam, is in this sentence.

The Doctors next proof for Liturgies is from the account St. Basil gives
concerning Gregory Thaumaturgus, P. 72.
who was so much for a Liturgy that we have the testimony of St. Basil (says
the Doctor) concerning him, that he appointed a Form of Prayer for that Church
of Noeocesarea, from which they would not vary in one Ceremony, or in a Word;
nor would they add one mystical Form to those which he had left them. Now the
Case was thus. St. Basil was proving the Divinity of the Holy Spirit, Basil. de
Spir. sancto. cap. 29.
from the Ancients Ascribing Glory and Power to the Father, and the Son, with
the Holy Spirit. And having named several of the Ancients who had taught that
Glory and Power were to be Ascribed to the Spirit, as well as to the Father,
and the Son, he at last mentions Gregory the Great, and proves that he was of
the same mind, from the present practice of that Church. And to make it appear
they had not varied from the Doctrine of that great man, he reports the
profound respect the people of that Country still had for him. P. 73.
So that [(...), etc. as the Doctor relates in his Margin] they would not add
any Practice, any Word, or any mystical Form in the Church to what he had left
with them. By which I conceive he means, that they did strictly observe that
way and method for their ordinary Worship, and kept strictly to those
Doctrines, and that way of Administering the Sacrament which were in use in
Gregory's time. But he does not say one word of Gregorie's appointing a Form of
Prayer for that Church. Nor does it follow that because they Worshipped God in
the same manner, a great many years after Gregory, wherein they worshipped him
in his time, that therefore they used the very words he used. Whereas, it is
said they did not add a word to what he left with them, that does not relate to
their Prayers, but to the Doctrine he taught; for here St. Basil is speaking of
the Divinity of the Holy Spirit, and proving that Doctrine. And in other places
St. Basil takes notice how tenacious they were of the Words in which Gregory
did deliver the Doctrines of Christianity unto them, particularly to prove his
own Doctrine to be the same with what Gregory did teach, Epist. 75.
he alleged his having learned from Macrina the Doctrines of Faith in the very
words wherein Gregory had delivered them. If it shall be said he is here
proving the Divinity of the Holy Spirit by a part of their Worship, viz. their
ascribing Glory and Power to God, what can be inferred from thence is but this;
That Gregory had taught them when they did ascribe, Glory and Power to the
Father and Son, to add also, With the Holy Spirit. St. Basil farther adds, They
were so tenacious of what Gregory had taught and practiced amongst them, they
would not depart from that simplicity in the Celebrating of the Worship of God,
which he observed, though a more Pompous and Ceremonious way did prevail in
other Churches, and which some thought did better suit with the alteration of
their circumstances. But here you may take notice that St. Basil does not
allege any Liturgy, Gregory had composed for them, but only pleads the present
usage of that Church, and argues it was the same in Gregory's days, not because
they had a Liturgy of his Composing, but because their respect to him all along
to the present time was such, they would not suffer any addition to be made, to
the method or order he observed, or to the Doctrines he had taught. To me it
appears plain, that there was not any Liturgy of Gregory's Composing, St. Basil
could produce for his present purpose; but finding something in the use of that
Church which was pertinent to his business, he alleges that, and the better to
enforce that allegation, he urges the great probability there was that they
received it from him; and to put the more color upon this, he breaks forth
into a Rhetorical Encomium on that Father, and the great respect the people of
that Country had for him. So that the sentence the Doctor quotes, only
entertains us with an Hyperbolical account of the respect the people had for
Gregory. For St, Basil himself does speak much otherwise of this matter when it
comes in his way upon a disserent occasion. And particularly in that very
Epistle the Doctor refers us to, in the next place, for a proof that this
Gregory had appointed that Church a particular way of singing the Psalms, P. 73.
of which the Noeocesarean Clergy were so extremely tenacious, that when St.
Basil would have brought in a better way, they opposed him in it, and objected
that it was not so in the days of Gregory the Great. It Is true, it was objected
against that way of singing St. Basil would have introduced, that it was not in
use there, in the time of Gregory, But if you consider the Answer St. Basil
makes to this Objection, you will find him giving an account of the
Noeocesareans very different from that we have in his Book de Spiritu Sancto.
Amongst other things which he says, Basil Epist. 63. ad Cler. Noeoces.
he peremptorily enquires By what Testimonies will they make it evident, that
those things; which he recommends to them, were not in use in the time of
Gregory? Now assuredly this was a very strange sort of question, if he knew
they had a Liturgy of Gregory's Composing, which they constantly made use of.
Or if they had but an Order of his framing, which they were strictly to observe
in the several parts of their Worship. Yea, he tells them to whom he Writes,
that they had not preserved any of those instances then used pure and incorrupt
unto that time. moreover he very plainly intimates, that there was no way to
make a true judgment of what Gregory did, but by consulting the Holy
Scriptures. When he mentions several particulars, which he affirms concerning
Gregory, he does not quote his Liturgy, his Rubric, etc. but express words of
Scripture: particularly he says, That Gregory Prayed with his Head uncovered.
Now how does he prove this? Not from any order Gregory had made concerning this
matter, but because the Apostle had said, Every man Praying or Prophesying,
with his Head covered, dishonors his Head; And Gregory (says he) was a
genuine Disciple of the Apostles. Thus you have an account of those two
Passages the Doctor does quote out of St. Basil. And you may now judge whether
it be possible to have a clearer proof in the World for Prescribed Forms than
this; And whether the Doctor had any occasion given him from these Allegations,
to break forth into such a Vaunting Discourse as he entertains his Reader with,
upon his having produced these quotations?

As for what the Doctor quotes out of Eusebius concerning Paulus Samosatenus;
It only concerns Hymns; and I am not sensible that the way of arguing is
cogent, That because people do sing Hymns composed to their hands, therefore
they do or must necessarily pray by prescribed Forms. One might think the
Precentor of York should understand the difference there is, betwixt praying,
and singing, if any knowledge of the nature, and use of singing, of framing the
voice into a regular, melodious, tunable sound, in order to the raising of the
affections, be at all necessary to that Character. And a due consideration of
that, might have prevented a great many tautologies which are to be found in
his Scholastical History, and would have made his Discourse much shorter than
it is, though it must have deprived the Reader of many of those flights (which
it may be) the Doctor conceits are very graceful. But if you have a mind to
peruse the Passage (the Doctor speaks of) in Eusebius, if you consult Valesius
his Edition, you must not look for it where the Doctor's Margin directs, but in
lib. 7. cap. 30.

I shall add no more (says the Doctor) in this Century, P. 76.
but to observe, that in the Epistle of Dionysius of Alexandria, recorded by
Eusebius, it appears to have been the general usage of the Church, for every
one of the People to Say Amen, when they heard the Priest offer them the
Sacrament, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 35. p. 180.
and say, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. which was a Form so
universally used in all Churches of the world, that we may conclude it was
enjoined by all Liturgies. What Edition of Eusebius the Doctor made use of, I
do not know. But his Margin gives me no assistance for the finding of the place
he speaks of. The Form, the Doctor says, was so universally used, I suppose is
these words, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Now I do not remember that
Eusebius does any where in his Sixth Book report, either from Dionysius, or any
other, that those words were universally used on the occasion the Doctor
mentions. But there is a passage in his Sixth Book which has something of what
the Doctor mentions; whether that be the place the Doctor means, I know not. I
will give you the English of it, and refer you to the Author, to see whether
you can find any thing there for the Doctor's purpose. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
lib. 6. cap. 43 p. 245.
Eusebius says that Cornelius relates to Fabius the worst of all the
wickednesses which Novatus was guilty of, which was this. When he has
consecrated the Elements, dividing unto every one a Portion, and giving it unto
him, he compels those wretched persons to swear instead of giving thanks, for
catching the hands of him who receives, within both his hands, he does not
loose them till he has sworn in this manner (for I will report his words)
Swear to me by the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will
never forsake me, and turn to Cornelius. And the miserable man does not taste
of the Elements, till he has first pronounced a Curse upon himself; and when
he receives that Bread, instead of saying, Amen, He says I will not return to
Cornelius. If this be the passage the Doctor means, here is nothing said of the
peoples hearing the Priest say these particular words, The Body of our Lord
Jesus, etc. Besides, this passage is not in Dionysius his Epistle, but in
Cornelius his Epistle to Fabius. But yet there is in Eusebius's Seventh Book an
Epistle of Dionysius, which has something in it that has some resemblance to
some part of that the Doctor relates; I will give you an account of that, and
then I have done with the Doctors quotations for this Century. Dionysius in his
Epistle to Xystus, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 9. p. 255.
Bishop of Rome, relates how one who had been esteemed, or reckoned a great
while for one of the Faithful, upon his observing how Baptism was celebrated
amongst the Orthodox, was in very great trouble, because having been Baptized
amongst the Heretics, his Baptism was not the same, nor had not any thing
common with the Baptism of the Orthodox; And therefore he was very desirous to
be Baptized again. Dionysius durst not do it, but told him, that his long
continued Communion with the Church was sufficient. For I may not Baptize him
again, who has often heard the Praises which are offered unto God, and has
answered with the rest, Amen; who has stood at the Table, and has stretched
forth his hands to take the Sacred Food, and has received the same, and has
for a convenient time been partaker of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ. If this be the passage the Doctor means, you will easily perceive, that
he gives not a fair account of it, and that it is not at all for his purpose. I
do not see how a prescribed Liturgy can be inferred from either of these
passages related out of Eusebius, no nor (supposing good evidence that the
Priest did constantly use these words, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
in distributing and giving the Bread unto the people) how we can justly
conclude there was a prescribed Liturgy, from the words of which, the Priest
must never vary in any of his Prayers and Praises in Public?

Sir, I think I have now given you a true account of all those passages the
Doctor has produced out of the Ancients, for Liturgies, in the three First
Centuries. It is easy for any man, who lays aside prejudice, and will form a
judgment of matters only in proportion to the evidence which is offered for
them, to determine whether His Quotations be a solid proof of that for which he
produces them.

I have consined my self to what the Doctor alleges for Liturgies in the
three First Centuries, because I think this pretended Antiquity of Liturgies is
designed, not to justify their lawfulness (and would we content our selves
with that, and effectually prove their expediency, the breach betwixt us, and
the greatest part of our Fellow-Protestants relating to this matter, would soon
be made up) but to introduce, or support an Opinion of their Necessity in the
Christian Church. And I conceive the three First Centuries, is a period of
sufficient extent for an enquiry, concerning a matter so circumstanced. The
lawfulness of Liturgies may be argued from more Rational Topics, than Humane
Authority. Their Expediency must be judged of, upon a just weighing of
circumstances; Their Necessity cannot be proved by any Topic.

Those who attempt to advance the Necessity of Liturgies, do not only oppose
them, who were wont to be called Dissenters, but are apparently managing a
Design against the most Learned, Judicious, and Moderate, who are in the
Communion of the Church of England: And therefore it may be proper enough, for
one of the Church of England to mind such Persons, That to catch up some words
and Phrases, which are to be found in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers in
the Christian Church, leaving their sense behind, and then tacking them
together in Discourses about Liturgies, will no more prove Liturgies to be as
Ancient as they pretend, than the Artificial Fastening of a Long Gray-Beard to a
Youth's Chin, will prove him to be a very Old Man.

Sir, With reference to the following Part of the Doctor's Book, I shall only
tell you at present, That I take it to be of a Piece with that Part I have
already considered. And if you are desirous to have a more distinct account of
the Greatest Part of his more Numerous Quotations in the Fourth Century, you
need not give your self any further trouble, than to signify your pleasure to

Your Most Affectionate Friend, and Faithful Servant, etc.

THE END.

