The Third Book of the Author being The High and Deep Searching out of The
Threefold Life of Man through [or according to] The Three Principles by JACOB
BEHMEN, alias Teutonicus Philosophus.

Written in the Germane Language, Anno 1620.

Englished by J. SPARROVV, Barrester, of the Inner Temple, London.

LONDON Printed by M. S. For H. Blunden at the Castle in Cornhill. 1650.

A SHORT CONTENTS of this BOOK.
BEing a High and Deep Searching out, of the Threefold Life of Man, through
the Three Principles.

Wherein is clearly shown, that which is Eternal; and also that which is
Mortal.

And wherefore God (who is the Highest Good) has brought all things to light.

Also wherefore one thing is contrary to another, and destroys it: and then
what is right [or true, and what is evill] or false, and how the one Or,
distinguishes.
severeth it self from the other.

Wherein especially the Three Principles are founded, which art the only
original or fountain whence all things flow and are generated.

Whereby the multitude of Meanings and Opinions about Faith and Religion may
be known: and what is the cause of the multitudes of Opinions among Men,
concerning the Essence and Will of God; also what is best for Man to do, that
he may attain the highest and Eternal Good.

And then concerning the End and issue of All things: wherefore all things have
appeared in such a property and Essence as they have had, for the comfort of
the poor wounded sick soul of Man, and for the Rebuilding or Edification of
the true Christian Religion, wherein the Antichrist stands quite naked and
revealed.

Set down for a Remembrance to our self, and for a stay to uphold us in these
distracted miserable Times.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE AUTHOR. Being a High and Deep Search Concerning The
Threefold Life of Man.
The First Chapter.
1. WHen we consider the beginning of our Life, and compare the same with the
Eternal Life, which we have in the promise; we cannot say nor find that we
are at home in this life. For we see the beginning and the end of the outward
life, as also the total decay and final corruption of our bodies: and besides
we see or know of no returning into this [outward] life, neither have we any
promise of it from the high and eternal Good.

2. Seeing then there is a Life in us which is Eternal and Incorruptible,
wherewith we strive after the highest Good; and a life (from this world) which
is finite and corruptible, and also a life in which the source and original
cause of Life stands, wherein the highest danger of Eternal Perdition,
misery, and calamity does consist; therefore it is of necessity that we
consider the beginning of Life, from whence all these things proceed and have
their original.

3. So now when we consider the life, what it is; then we find that it is a
burning Fire, which consumes, and when it has no more [fuell] to feed upon,
it goes out: as may be seen in all Fires. For the life has its nourishment
from the body, and the body from the food, for when the body has no more food,
then it is consumed by the fire of the life, so that it fades and perishes,
as a fair flower when it has no water, withers.

4. But seeing there is in Man a life which is Eternal and Incorruptible,
which is the soul, which is also a Fire, and has need of nutriment as well as
the Elementary life has therefore we ought to consider the property and food
of that life, what that is which continually feeds it, so that it never goes
out in Eternity.

5. And thirdly we find in the life of our souls, that there is in it a
greater hunger after another higher and better life, viz. after the highest
Good, which is called the Divine Life: insomuch that the soul is not contented
with its own food, but it desires with great longing and panting, the highest
and best Good, not only for a pleasant habitation, but in a hunger for a food.

6. And so now we perceive in our very great and true knowledge, that every
life desires its [own] Mother (out of which the life is generated) for a food;
as the Wood which is the Mother of the Fire, that the Fire desires to have,
and if it be severed from its Mother it goes out. In like manner, the Earth is
the Mother of all Trees and herbs, and they desire it; and the water (with the
other Elements) is the Mother of the Earth, or else it would be dead [or
barren], and there would grow neither metalls, trees, herbs, nor grass out of
it.

7. We see especially, that the Elementary life consists in a boiling, and is
a [kinde of] seething, and when it leaves boiling it goes out: also we know
that the Constellations kindle the Elements, and the Stars are the Fire of
the Elements, and the Sun kindles the Stars, so that there is a boiling
and seething amongst them: but the Elementary life is finite and corruptible,
and the life of the soul is Eternal.

8. Now seeing it is Eternal, therefore it must also be from the Eternal: as
the dear Moses has written very rightly of it; That God breathed into Man the
living breath, and so Man is become a living soul.

9. Yet we cannot say, though indeed Man stands in a Threefold Life, that
each life is apart in a several form: but we find that they are in one
another, and yet each life has its own working in its Dominion; viz. in its
Mother: For as God the Father is all, because all comes from him, and he is
present every where, and is the fulness of every thing, and the thing does
not comprehend him, also the thing is not God, nor his Spirit, nor the true
Divine Essence; so that it cannot be said of any comprehensible thing, that it
is God, or that God is here present, more then in other places, and yet he is
really present, he contains the thing, and the thing contains not him, he
comprehends the thing; and the thing comprehends not him; for he dwells
not in the thing; but in himself, in another Principle.

10. So also is the soul of Man breathed in from God, it dwells in the body,
and is environed with the Spirit of the Stars and Elements, not only as a
Garment covers the body, but it is infected with the Spirit of the Stars
and Elements, as the Pestilence or other [infectious] disease infecteth the
Elementary Spirit, so that it poysoneth its body, and so it decays and dies,
and then the source [or property] of the Stars also breaks it self off
from the soul, and consumes it self: whrereby the Elementary Mother breaks
off, and so the Spirit of the Stars has no more food, and therefore
consumes it self, but the soul remains Or, Crude, empty, or feeble, or
faint.
naked, because it lives by another food.

11. Understand us here in this manner; though the soul be thus captivated
with the Spirit of the Stars and Elements; so that the source [or property]
thereof dwells in the soul, yet the soul has another food, and lives in
another Principle, and is another [thing or] Being or substance.
being.

12. For its Essences [or the faculties or powers of its substance] are not
from the Constellation, but have their beginning, and corporeal union out of
the Eternal Band, out of the Eternal Nature, which is Gods, the Fathers,
before the light of his Love, wherein he enters into himself, and makes to
himself the second Principle in his Love; out of which he continually
generateth his Eternal Word and Heart, from Eternity to Eternity: where the
holy name of God continually arises [or discovers it selfe] and holds its
Divine Nature, as a Spirit in the second Principle, in it self, and dwells
in nothing else, but merely in it self.

13. For although the band of the Eternal Nature is in it, yet the Divine
Spirit is not subjected under that Band; for the Spirit kindles that Band, so
that it becomes enlightened and Or, Sprouting.
springing with the virtue of the Light in the Love, in the life of the Word
and Heart of God, so that it is a holy habitation and Paradise of that Spirit,
which is called God.

14. So also the soul of Man is out of the band of the Eternal Original,
Eternally standing therein, and desires in it self, in the second Principle,
to press into God, and to satiate it self in the Power of God: but because it
cannot with its whole being (with its own Essences) enter into the light and
power of God; as little as the Eternal Nature can press into the Light of
God, so that it may have the light for its own in its own power, but the Light
shines out of the Love in its own Principle in the Eternal Nature, so that
the Light remains Lord in the Eternal Nature, because the Eternal Nature
does not comprehend it, but rejoices in the Light, and brings forth its
wonders in the power and understanding of the Light, where then they are
revealed. Thus also the soul cannot in its Essences press into the Light of
God, and over-master it, but must in it self, in another Principle press into
God, into his Love.

15. For you must here understand another new Birth in the soul: for it must
not only press forth out of the Life of the Stars and Elements, but also
out of its own source [or property] of life, and incline its will into the Life
of God, endeavoring to be therein: this [inclined or] created will is received
of God, and God dwells in that will, and so comes the Divine Life and Light
into the soul, and so it is a child of God: for it stands in its source [or
property] and life, as God the Father himself [doth] in the source [or
property] of the Eternal Nature.

16. And here we understand, that Or, beyond.
without the Divine Light (which is the second Principle) in the Eternal
Nature there is an anguishing source [or property]: for the band of life stands
in the Fire; but when that fire is Inficiret, is infected or filled.
inspired and captivated by the Divine Love, then the life in it self goes
forwards forth into another source [or property]: for another Principle is
broken open for it, wherein it lives, and that Life is in God; even as God
dwells in himself, and yet is really all himself, all is come from his
Nature: yet you must understand, not as from the Eternal Nature, only the
souls and the Angelical Spirits [are so;] but from his Or, Creaturely.
created will, which has a beginning, viz. from the External; and therefore
every thing of this [outward] world is Transitory. And herein we find the
great and terrible Fall of our soul in our first Parents, that it is entered
into the Spirit of this world, into a strange lodging, and has forsaken the
Divine Light, wherein it was an Angel and Child of God: therefore it must go
forth again out of the Spirit of the Stars and Elements, and [passe] in a
New Birth, into the Life of God.

17. But because that was not possible for the soul to do, therefore the Life
of God came to us out of Love and Grace into the Flesh, and took our humane
soul again in it into the Divine Life in the power of the Light, that we
might here be able to press into the same life to God in a New Birth. For as
we went wholly with the soul of Adam out from the life of God; (for the
children of Adam have inherited [all] from their Parents soul, being sprung
wholly [from them] as from a Tree) so also has the life of God in Christ
regenerated us again, so that we can enter again in the life of Christ into
the life of God. And thus now, our soul stands in the Band of the Eternal
Original, infected with the Spirit of this world, and captivated by the wrath
of the original, in the life of the eternal fire, viz. in the Eternal
Nature; therefore we must every one of us by our selves, press with our soul
in the l fe of Christ, to God, into the New Regeneration in the Life and Spirit
of Christ: and here no hypocrisy, appearing holiness, or any meritorious
works will avail any thing, for the poor soul can no other way be helped,
except it enter into it self (in a new created will) with steadfast earnest
purpose and resolution, into the Life of Christ: and then it will be received
with very great Or, honor.
Glory by God and his children, in the second Principle; and the noble precious
Treasure ( viz. the Light of the Eternal Life) will be given to it, which
enlighteneth the source, [or property) of the soul in the first Principle,
wherein it stands substantially with its Essences for ever, and turns the
anguish into love, and the rising and burning own property, into an humble
lovely mirth in meek joy.

18. And thus the soul is a joyful habitation in the Divine Life, as if I
should liken it to a kindled Light, when the wicke of the Candle burns, and
casts a pleasant light, [or shines bright] and has no pain in the shining,
but a lightsome pleasantness, and yet the wicke continues burning: yet you
must understand, that there is in the burning wicke no pain or woe, but that
there is only a cause of the glance of life; for no fire is comparable to the
Divine [fire].

19. For, the Divine Nature, out of which the Divine fire of life burns, is
Inspired or infected.
filled with the Love of God, so that the light of God makes another Principle
in it self, wherein Nature is not Or, perceived.
felt, for it is the end of Nature: therefore the soul cannot comprehend in
its own Essences, the light of God to possess it. For the soul is a fire in
the Eternal Nature, and does not reach the end of Nature: for it continues in
Nature, as a creature created out of the Eternal Nature, which yet has no
comprehensibility: but is a Spirit in a seaven-fold form: Whereas yet in the
Originality there is not seven, but only four forms known, which uphold
the Eternal Band, and those [foure] are the source [or property] in the
Anguish, wherein That which is Eternal.
the Eternal consists: and thereout the other forms are wholly generated,
wherein God and the Kingdom of Heaven consists, and in the four forms the
Anguish and Torment consists, if they are fingly alone, and therein we
understand Hellfire [to consist,] and the Eternal wrath of God: and although
we do not know the Originality of the Essence of God, yet we know the Eternal
Geniture.
Birth which never had any beginning. And seeing it had no beginning, therefore
it is the same this day, that ever it was from Eternity: and therefore we may
well comprehend what we see and know this day, in the Light of God.

20. None ought to account us ignorant, because God has given us to know his
own Being or substance.
Essence, which we cannot nor must not deny, upon pain of the loss of the
Divine Light, and of our eternal salvation, for it is impossible for any man
to have it, except it be given him out of Grace in the Love of God: and when
that is given to a Man, then that soul stands in the knowledge in the
Wonders of God; which [soule] then speaks not of things strange and afar
of, but of the things wherein it stands, and of it self: for it becomes
seeing in the Light of God, so that it can know it self.

21. Now that this can be, consider, that the Essences of the soul stand in
the Original in the first Principle, and that the Divine Light shines in it
self, and makes the second Principle, and so there are two of them; and the
soul sees into the high knowledge of the light of the Second Principle, which
shines in it: why then should it not speak of its native Country wherein it
lives: and how will thou mad world (in the third Principle in the Spirit [or
wisdome] of the Stars and Elements) forbid that to it, whereas thou art
blind as to God, and lie captivated in the Eternal Wrath, in the source [or
property] of the Original.

22. Now seeing it is so: we will therefore set down the Ground of the
Eternal Band, to be a looking Glass for him that desires to see: though it
be true indeed, that he cannot learn it of us, unless he himself enter into
the New Birth into the life of Christ, that the Divine Light it self may shine
in him, or else That which is here written will be but as a History without
understanding of the mysterious Wisdom couched under it.
we are but as a History to him, and shall not be understood by him.

23. But when we speak of the source [or Originall] of the fire, and of its
kindling (we mean, concerning the Fire of Life) we know for certain, that
in its Original before the kindling of the fire, it consists only in two
forms, and has but one Mother, which is Astringent or attractive.
harsh and draws to her, and yet there is nothing in her self, but a willing
of the Eternal Father in the Eternal Nature which he has appointed in
himself to reveal, and to declare his wonders.

24. Now that Will is Eternal, and is not stirred up by any thing but by it
self: and if that were not, all were nothing; neither darkness nor light:
therefore seeing there is somewhat, it must needs be the Eternal Will; and
that is astringent and desirous Or, to Create the Wonders.
of the Wonders of the Creation. Therefore seeing there is a Desire, the Desire
attracteth to it self, and that which is attracted in the Desire makes the
Will full, so that the Desire is fulfilled: for the Will is as thin [or
empty] as Or, a vacuum.
a Nothing, and that which is attracted into the Will makes the Will thick [or
gross and full] and that is its Darkness: and the Eternal Desire stands in
the Darkness.

25. Now when the Will in the Desire does attract, that attracting is a sting [
Pricking or spurring to Motion.
puncture or Goade] of the stirring; for the Will is thin as a Nothing, and
is quiet and still, as [if it were] Nothing: but the Will being an Eternal
Desiring, therefore it attracteth to it self Eternally: and having nothing to
attract, it attracteth it self, and impregnateth [or filleth] it self, and so
the Nothing comes to be a Darkness, and the attracting Is the spur to the
beginning of the being of a thing.
makes the sting of the first Essences, so that there is a stirring and
original of Mobilitie.

26. Now the Will cannot endure the attracting and impregnation, for it would
be free, and yet cannot, because it is Desirous; and seeing it cannot be free,
it enters with the attracting into it self, and takes [or conceiveth] in it
self another Will, which is, to go out from the Darkness into it self, and
that other conceived Will is the Eternal Mind, and enters into it self as a
sudden flash [of lightning] and dissipateth the Darkness, and goes forth into
it self, and dwells in it self, and makes to it self another [or second)
Principle of another Quality [source or condition], for the sting of the
stirring remains in the Darkness.

27. Therefore now we should speak of the forms of the sour [or astringent]
dark Nature. For we understand that the Darkness has a longing after the
Light, which eternally Or, is presented to it.
stands before it, but in another Principle.

28. For, the two Forms, the sour and the bitter stinging, are the Original
of All things, and the Eternal Will is the Mother [or Matrix] wherein they are
Generated: and We are to know that the Astringency or attracting.
soreness always attracteth with the conception of the Will, and that
attracting is the stinging of the stirring, which the Or, harshness.
soreness cannot well endure: for the attracting soreness desires the
sour strong shutting up in Death, and the stinging bitterness is the Opener,
and yet it were a nothing in it self without the Will.

29. Now when the soreness attracteth so strongly, it cannot endure the
stinging, viz. the sourenesses own attracting; but stirs much more, and the
sourenesses may not endure the stirring neither, for it desires the still
Death. And thus it is a Chain and Band, which ever makes it self, and has
no [other] Maker.

30. Now these entering into one another, so swiftly, like a sudden thought, the
sting would feign get out from the soreness but cannot; for the soreness
generateth and maintains it: and not being able to get the upper hand, [or
get loose] it turns round like a wheel, and so breaks asunder the
attracted soreness, and makes a continual Or, stirring up and down.
hurliburly and mixture, in which the Corrupting.
breaking or woe does consist, yet there is no feeling here, but [they are]
only Forms of Nature: for it is no Materia.
Material, but [it is] the Original of the Spirit or Eternal Nature, in the
Eternal Will.

31. For the sour desiring, attracteth and makes penetration, and the
bitterness breaks it asunder in the turning wheel, and so there arises
multiplicity of Essences, and it is as it were a furiousness, or as I may say
in a similitude, a Confusion of the Eternal Mobility, a cause of the Essences:
and this the Eternal Will must suffer [to be] in it self, and therefore it
conceives or takes to it self another Will, to fly out from this wheel,
and yet cannot do it, for it is its own substance; and seeing it cannot, and
yet cannot leave its eternal desire and longing, it holds and attracteth to
it self; so that the Essences are continually generated, and yet (without the
desiring) they are nothing; and thus the whole form stands in the Or, sound.
noise, and is called MAR: and seeing the Will cannot be free, it falls into
a great anguish, to speak according to Man's understanding, that the Reader may
comprehend the sense and depth of it.

32. For the Will is the conception, and that which is conceived in the Will is
its Darkness, and the desiring is the Essence, and the contrary will is the
wheel of the multiplicity of Essences, so that they are numberless, but the
multitude is according to the Mobility These two forms are the Eternal
Essences, and the Eternal Band, which makes it self, and cannot do
otherwise.

33. For the vast infinite space, desires narrowness and enclosure [or
comprehension] wherein it may manifest it self, for else in the wide
stillnesse, there would be no manifestation: therefore there must be an
attraction and enclosing, out of which the manifestation appears: and
therefore also, there must be a contrary Will; for a transparent and quiet
will, is as nothing, and generateth nothing: but if a Will must Generate, then
it must be in somewhat, wherein it may form, and may generate in that thing:
for nothing, is nothing but a stillnesse without any stirring; where there is
neither darkness nor light, neither life nor death.

34. Now since we clearly perceive, that there is both light and darkness,
and moreover an eternal stirring and forming, which is not only in the place
of this world as far as our senses reach, but without end and number, where
the Angelical world shines clearly, and yet not in the enclosure of the
Darkness; therefore we should raise our Or, senses.
thoughts toward the Angelical world, which yet is not without this place [of
this world]: but it is in another Property, and in the Eternal Lights, and yet
there could be no Light except there were a Genetrix [or Matrix to bring it
forth].

35. Now if it shine out of the Genetrix [or Matrix], then it must come forth
out of the Genetrix. For the Genetrix is a Darkness, and yet that were nothing
neither, if the Eternal Word (which Attract, frame or Create.
makes the Eternal Will) were not there. And in the making or creating, is
the Birth of the Eternal Being. Of which John says; In the beginning was the
Word, which was in the beginning with God, all things were made by it, and
without it was nothing made that was made.

36. Consider here my beloved Mind, whence Light and Darkness comes, also
joy and heaviness: love and hate: as also the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Kingdom of Hell, good and evil, life, and the shutting up in death.

37. Thou say, God has created it; very well: but why art thou blind, and
do not acknowledge it, whereas thou art ind d the similitude of God? Why
speak thou more of God then thou know and is revealed or manifested to
thee? Wherefore do thou make Cannons and Ordinances.
Laws concerning the will of God, of which thou know nothing seeing thou
do not know Him? Or why do thou shut up thy life in death, whereas thou
might well live, and know God who dwells in thee? for thou hear it also
from St. John, that all things are made by the Word.

38. Seeing then, God is the Word which has made all things, he must therefore
be in all things: for a Spirit is not a made thing but a generated thing in it
self, which has the Center of its Birth in it self, or else it would be
corruptible: therefore now the Center must stand in the Eternal Maker, or else
it were transitory: for there is nothing from Eternity but the Word, and the
Word was God: and therefore it must needs be its own Eternal Maker of it
self; and it self must express it self as a Word out of it self, as out of
its own Maker.

39. For where there is a Word, there also is a speaker to speak it. Now since
it is the Father that speaks it, and the Word which is spoken out of the
Center of the Father is the Son thereof: and seeing the Father in his Center
calls himself a Consuming Fire, and yet the Son (the Word) is a Light of
Love, humility, meekness, purity, and holiness, and that the Father of the
Word is so also called and acknowledged throughout the holy Scripture,
therefore we should consider the Quality, or property.
source of the Fire in the Center of the Father, seeing the Father and the Word
is one, and yet in two [distinct] forms: and that also the Wrath and the
Anger, together with the Abyss of Hell stands in the Center of the Father.

40. For St. John says; Of and through it are all things, and without it was
nothing made: for when the Word desired to make [or create], and the Father
through the Word: then there was no Matter for him to make it of: for All was
[as it were] nothing, neither Good nor Evil, neither Light nor Darkness, but
the Center stood there: for the Will is his Heart, Son, and Word, which only
is the Eternal Being, and the Band which makes it self, and yet the Deity
may not thus be comprehended, because a Being affords a [distinct difference
or] divisibility, and appears in two Principles.

41. Therefore we will lay before you the Ground, as we certainly know it:
and our purpose in writing is to the end, that you might see, how blind you
are, and how without knowledge you meddle, when you make such huge Comments,
Sermons, or Glosses upon the Scriptures.
Expositions of the Writings of the Saints, about the Essence and Will of God,
and yet know him not.

42. You persecute, despise, and disgrace one another, you raise wars,
uproares and Tumults, and make desolate Countries and Nations, about [what is]
the true knowledge of God and his will, and yet you are as blind as a stone
concerning God: you do not know your own selves, and yet you are so furiously
mad that you contend about [your knowing of] God, who is the maker, preserver,
and upholder of all things; who is the Center in all things: so also you strive
about his Light, which yet did never appear in wrath and malice or
wickedness: but in friendly meek humility and in love, his Center springs
up: and you are so furious and mad, and yet suppose that you have it upon your
Tongue in your Wicked.
malicious contention: you have it not: but you have merely the history of the
Saints, who have had the light shining forth out of their Center: and therefore
they have spoken from the Holy Ghost, which proceeds out of the Light. But
you take their words, and the Center of your Heart is fast shut, you run
galloping in the four Forms of wickedness or malice, [ viz. in Pride,
Covetousness, Envy, and Anger].

43. Therefore I will show you the Ground, of the two Eternal Principles [that
spring] out of one Center, that you might yet see, how you run on in the
Kingdom of the Devil; to try whether you will yet turn and leave off your
pride, and enter into your self, and so you might attain the Highest Eternal
Good.

44. Therefore I will show you, what we are in soul and body, also what God,
Heaven and Hell are; do not take it to be a Or, a Fancy.
fiction, [opinion or conceit], for it demonstrates it self in all things,
there is nothing so small, but it stands manifest therein, and do not
blindfold your selves in your base pride, in your conceitednesse, but search
the Ground of Nature, and then you shall Learn or find all things
experimentally.
understand all things: and do not run on so furiously upon the bare letter of
the History, do not make Laws according to your own conceits and opinions so
blindly, by which you persecute [vex and prosecute] one another, in this you
are blinder then the Heathens.

45. Search after the Heart, and after the Spirit of the Scriptures, that it
might be borne in you, and that you might open the Center of the Love of God;
and so you might know God, and rightly speak of him. For from the History none
should take upon him to be a Master, or call himself a knower of the Essence
of God, but from the Holy Ghost, which appears in another Principle (in the
Center of Man's life) unto those that seek it in true earnestness, as we are
commanded by Christ to knock and seek for it of his Father ( viz. in the
Center of the life) with true earnest desirous humility, and we shall find it.

46. For none can know or rightly seek or find God his Lord, without the Holy
Ghost, which springs forth from the Heart of the humble seeker, and
enlighteneth the Mind, so that the Inward senses or thoughts.
senses are enlightened, and the desire is turned to God, that person only
finds the dear Virgin the wisdom of God, which leads in the right way,
and brings to the fresh waters of Eternal life, and quickneth the soul, and
so the New Body grows on the soul, in Christ; of which we will hereafter
following, write according to its high and precious worth.

47. We advise the seeking Reader that loves God, to consider concerning God:
and that he do not collect in his mind and thoughts, and seek for the pure
Deity only aloft above the Stars dwelling there only in Heaven, thinking
that he does rule and govern only by his Spirit and power in this world, as
the Sun stands aloft in the Deep, and works by his beams all over the
whole world: no.

48. The pure Deity is in all places, and all corners, and present every where
all over: the Birth of the holy Trinity in one Essence is every where: and the
Angelical world reaches to every part, where ever you can think, even in the
midst of the Earth, Stones, and Rocks: as also Hell and the Kingdom of Gods
wrath, is every where all over.

49. For the severe Kingdom in the Anger of the Darkness, is in the Center,
and keeps its Source and Dominion in the Darkness: and the Deity goes forth
(in the Center,) in it self, and makes a habitation [of joy] in it self, but
unsearchably or incomprehensibly to the Darkness, because it opens another
Principle: for the Eternal Word is the Eternail Will, and a cause of the
Eternal Nature: and the Eternal Nature is the Eternal Father, wherein all
things are created by the Word, you must understand, in the Eternal Nature.
And if the Eternal Will, did not create in it self [another or] a second
Will, to go forth, (as a shining light flameth forth from a Candle, and
departerh not away from the Candle) the Father would be alone, and be only an
austere Darkness: also this world ( viz. the Third Principle) could not have
been created.

50. But the Father contains in him the Eternal Nature in his own Essence,
and is the Eternal Will it self, and generateth out of himself [another or]
a second Will, which, in the first Eternal Will (which is the Father) opens
the Principle of the Light, in which, the Father (with the Eternal Essences,
in his Eternal Original Will) becomes amiable, friendly, mild, pure and
Gentle: and so the Father is not in the source [or quality] of Darkness: for
the recomprehended Will (which goes forth out of the Center, and dispelleth
the Darkness) is his Heart, and dwells in it self, and enlighteneth the
Father, [or is the glance and light or luster of the Father], and that will is
the Word of the Eternal Father, which is generated out of the Eternal
Essences: and is rightly another Person: for he dwells in the Fathers
Essences [or Essential powers] in himself, and is the Light of the Father,
and this Word (or Will) has created all things, (understand, out of the
Essences of the Father) for it [the Word] is the Eternal Omnipotency, because
it cannot be comprehended by the Eternal Essences, for it breaks asunder the
Eternal Essences, and dwells in it self, and shines out of the Essences,
and yet it cannot depart from the Essences, as little as the glance or light
departs from the fire.

The Second Chapter.
1. SEEing we have mentioned such a ground to you, we will show you further
the ground of the Begettresse, pregnant Mother or womb of the Conception of the
Birth.
Genetrix [or Matrix] for we see it clearly in this world, in the Dominion of
the Elements: (and yet much more in our selves, in our Minds, whence the senses
[or thoughts] arise, whereby they walk, converse, and direct all their
Actions:) that there is a Genetrix, which does afford so much: and if there be
a Genetrix, then there must be a Center or Circle of life, wherein the Genetrix
has its Dominion: for the nothing does not move nor stir, but if there be a
stirring, that moves every life, that must not be a strange, [or Heterogene]
thing, because it is in every thing that things own spirit and life; as well in
the vegetive and insensitive as in the sensitive living [things].

2. And let not the dissemblers and hypocrites mis-leade you, who are mere
Book-learned in the History, and boast and vapor with strange Languages, and
would be respected for it, whereas they understand them not in the least: they
understand not their Mother Tongue, if they understood that right (together
with the Spirits of the Letters) then they would know Nature therein.

3. It is mere Pride, that forbids you to search or seek, that you should
not find, and that (the Pride) with her crowned [or cornered] Cap may
domineere (like a proud woman), over the Wonders of God: for so the Devil
would have it; that he might not be known: they are more blind then the
simple Laity.

4. If you desire to seek, then knock, that the right door may be opened for
you, and seek in the fear and the love of God, and you shall find well
enough, let not the calumnies of the proud divert you: For if the right door
be opened to you, then you shall see how very blind Those that call themselves
the Clergy, or Divines.
they are: their pride has blinded the whole world, so that every one looks
merely at their eloquency, brave Language, or good expressions] and upon their
[severall] strange Languages, and think they understand very well. Thus they
domineere over Men's souls, whereas their knowing is altogether doubtful, as
may be seen by their Disputations and Contentions.

5. Therefore I say still, none should trust their soul with such hypocrites
and dissembling men: for the soul stands not in this world, but in the
Original of the Essence of all Essences, and it is in the Center of the
Eternal Band, wherein God, and the Kingdom of Heaven and Hell stands, and
if it [the soule] attaineth the love of God in the Light, (which dwells in
the Ground of the soul) it may well see the Eternal Nature, as also, God, and
the Kingdom of Heaven, and of Hell: if it do not suffer it self to be
blinded: it is not hard or difficult: it is but to go about the new Birth, or
Regeneration out of the Darkness into the Light; without which you cannot
reach the Depth in the Center.

6. And now if we will speak of the Center, or the Circle of the Life, we must
consider the Genetrix [or Matrix], which is the Center, and the Essence of all
Essences. All things are Generated out of the Center, and out of that which is
Generated all things are created which are in Being. And we have cleared to
you the Ground, how the Eternal Word was in the beginning (as in the Center)
and the Word is Gods, and the Eternal Will is that Word. For the Eternal God
has that will in him, and that is his heart, and in that recomprehended will
(in the Eternal Father of all things) the Eternal Deity has its Name GOD.

7. For we cannot say, that God has a Maker, as also the Will has no Maker,
for he makes himself from Eternity to Eternity continually, whereas it is not
a making neither, but an Eternal Or, Birth.
Generation. The Word in the Father, and the Spirit which goes forth from the
Power, is the Life of the Deity.

8. But now we see that the Mark stands in the Center: for God is also an
Angry Zealous or Jealous God, and a consuming Fire; and in that source [or
quality] stands the Abyss of Hell, the anger and malice, of all the Devils,
as also the Venom or the corruption.
Poison of all Creatures: and it is found that without poison and Fierceness
or stinging sharpness.
eagarnesse there is no Life: and from thence arises all contrariety and
strife: and it is found, that the strongest and most eager, is the most useful
and profitable: for it makes all things, and is the only cause of all
mobility and life.

9 For as is mentioned before; The Eternal Word ( viz. the Eternal Will of
the Father) is the Creator of all things, and the Eternal Father, is the
Being of the Will, out of which the Word has created all things. Now the
Essences are the being which causes the Will: for here you must understand,
that there are two Wills in one Being, and they cause two Principles: One is
the Love and the other is the Anger or the Source [or property] of Wrath. The
first Will is not called God, but Nature: the second Will is called A and O,
the beginning and the End from Eternity to Eternity: and in the first Will,
Nature could not be manifest, the second Will [it is, that] makes Nature
manifest, for the second Will is the virtue in the strength, and the one would
be nothing without the other.

10. Seeing then, that the Will of the Father in the Eternity, is the first,
therefore also he is the first Person in the Ternary, viz. the Center it self.
So now the Will or the Center is, to desire to Generate the Word or Heart: for
it is nothing else, and it can be called nothing else, but the desiring in the
Will.

11. Thus we search in a deep sense in the Mind: and do find, that the
desiring is eagar and attractive: for it is the strong might: not in one point
only, but every where all over, contracting the wideness into narrowness, to
manifest it self [therein]. For else there would be nothing in the whole
Deep, and there would appear nothing, but all would be still and quiet.

12. But now the desiring attracteth, and yet it has nothing there but it
self: and that which is attracted is the impregnation of the desiring, and
makes the desire full, and yet is nothing but a darkness, for that which is
attracted is thicker then the will, and therefore it is the darkness of the
thin Will.

13. For the will is as thin [or empty] as [if it were] nothing, and very still
and quiet: but the desiring makes it full, and the going forth in the desiring
is the Essences, viz. a sting of sensibility, (which is against the
sensibility) which the desiring also cannot endure, but attracteth the more
vehemently to it, and so the sting or puncture is the greater, and rages
against the attracting, and yet cannot get out of it, for the desiring
generateth it, and yet cannot endure it, for it is such an Enmity as [is
between] heat and cold.

14. And so the desiring, which in it self is an earnest longing, by its
longing does awaken such a raging (which does so sting in that will) that the
longing becomes very sour and strongly attracting, that it might hold the
sting fast, whereby the sting as a stirring life, affords mobility, in which
the longing attaineth the first crack [or shreek] of trembling, from whence
arises a contrarious Anguish: for in the Anguish of the longing (in the hard
attracting) is caused a sharp coldness: and the attraction is eager, bitter
and stinging, so that it affords a terrible strong Power, which the sting
cannot endure, but would feign break away, and yet it cannot: For its own
Mother that generateth it, holds it, and so being it cannot get away upwards,
it runs round like a wheel, and breaks asunder the contraction, from
whence the Essences of multiplicity do arise.

15. And this is the right Center: for in the wheel does exist the nature of
Mobility and of the Essences: and it is a Band of the Spirit, though without
Or, perception.
feeling or understanding: but in this Form it is only called, the Center:
for it is the Circle of life, which the desiring has shut up, out of the still
wideness, into narrowness: although it is not comprehensible, but every where
merely spirit and form of Nature.

16. Seeing then that the Raver makes such a stinging bitter wheel (in the
sharp cold) therefore the Center is so terrible like a great Anguish, where the
life is continually broken, [or destroyed] and by the Essences is also built
[againe] in such a manner, and is like to Life and Death.

17. The Philosophers and high Naturalists.
knowers of Nature, write, that Nature consists in three things, viz. in
{sulphur} {salt}
Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, which is very right: but the simple will
understand nothing therein: and although the apprehension of it was open to the
wise [so that they understood it] yet at this present time, very few understand
the Center, but they have it in the History, as also [they have] the Divinity
or Theology from the mouth of the Apostles, which at present is also no other
then a History, without the power and the living Spirit, (which was among the
Apostles) as is clearly testified by their contentious disputations, lip-labor
and dead Letter [in their Teachings].

18. Now seeing we have through the Divine Grace attained the Light, and are
able to know the Center, which is the Birth of our life: we have power to
demonstrate it, and show what is comprised and understood in the three words,
Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt: not that we thereby despise the ignorant
blindness: but as a Christian we would willingly afford and show them the
Light. And although our speech seems simple, yet out knowledge, meaning, and
apprehension is very Deep: none should be offended at the simple speech: as if
we had not the deep apprehension. Let him but read it with a true
earnestness, and consider seriously of it, in the fear of God, and he shall
find well enough what Spirits child we are, in this writing, but we would
have him faithfully warned, concerning the scorners and hypocrites.

19. As is mentioned concerning the Sulphur, the Center is and may very well be
called PHVR: but if the Light be generated, the light that shines out of the
PHVR is called SVL, for it is the soul thereof. And as I say of the dark
Center, wherein the Divine Light is generated, the same I say also of Nature:
though indeed they are one: but we must so speak: that we might bring it
into the thoughts of the Reader, that he might incline his mind to the Light,
and so attain it.

20. For the two Forms: viz. sharp cold: and bitter stinging, which are
generated by the longing in the Eternal Will; they hold the Center, and make
the wheel of the Essences, whence the Or, Thoughts.
senses, as also perception and mobility continually arise Eternally.

21. Now these two forms are in very great and terrible angu sh, in
themselves, without the other forms that are generated out of them. For the
attracting sharp soreness is like to hard stones, and the sting of the
attracting is the breaker of the astringency: and so it is like a wheel, and
may well be called PHVR: the Language of Nature in that syllable does declare.

22. Therefore though the two forms enter so terribly in themselves into the
Will, and hold the Will in the darkness, yet the will cannot be captivated,
for its own propriety is to be meek and quiet, and that propriety it cannot
loose in the two Forms, for it is incomprehensible; and yet it must be in the
two Forms, and dwells in the sting, and is the flash thereof: for the two
Forms are dark in themselves, but the Will is not [so], for it is free in it
self: but the two Forms take it into their property: for it is their Father,
and it sharpeneth it self in their properties, so that it shines as a flash
[of lightning].

23. For the sour astringency makes dark; and the bitter sting (in the
wheel) dissipateth the Darkness: and so the liberty of the still will shines
in the wheel in the whirring as a flash [of lightening]: for the will so
sharpeneth it self from the sour astringency, that it becomes very strong,
for it is as when steel and a stone are knocked one against another to strike
fire.

24. For there is understood to be in the Fire, two things; viz. the liberty
Extra naturam.
without Nature, and the sour strongnesse of Nature; as you have an Example in
a stone, out of which you strike Fire. For when you strike upon the sharp of
the stone, the bitter sting of Nature sharpeneth it self, and is Vexed or
angered.
stirred in the highest Degree. For Nature is dissipated or Shivered to pieces.
broken asunder in the sharpness, so that the liberty shines as a flash [of
lightning]: and that you may here see to be true: for as soon as the liberty
shines, it consumes the Darkness, and thence it comes, that the sharpness
of God the Father is a consuming Fire. For as soon as the flash in the
sharpness seizes on any thing that is essential, it consumes it instantly,
so that there is no nature more left.

25. And the cause of the flash going out so suddenly, is that the sharpness
cannot retain it: for the flash is free from Nature, and is only seen in the
breaking.

26. And we give you to understand, that this liberty without the Nature, is
God the Father: and the Nature is thus generated in him, so that he is
Omnipotent over Nature, even as the mind of Man is above the senses; for it
has all one Original, as we will show you hereafter following.

27. Further concerning the Birth of Nature, we give you to understand this by
way of similitude: When the flash shines thus in the sour anguish, then there
is a very great crack, which the soreness captivateth, and terrifieth much
more, for its dark propriety in the sour Death is killed in a moment, so that
it loses its sour propriety and sinketh back, and can no more attract so
strongly; and then the flash goes directly through the sting of the raging of
the whirring wheel: where the sting must spread forth on each side, and the
flash goes through the midst; and so the wheel comes to be a Cross, and can
no more whirle about, but stands shivering in the sharp Might of the Will of
the Eternal Liberty, which is God the Father.

28. And now when the strong soreness has captivated the flash of the
Liberty, that it loses its propriety; then the fourth form ( viz. the
Salt-Spirit) is generated: for the stern harshnesse, becomes pliant from the
fire and the crack; and yet retains the sharpness: and so this form is like
a sharp Water-Spirit: and the flash ( viz. the crack) is the third form, and
makes in it self in the sour killed-anguish, a Brimstone-Spirit.

29. For if the stern soreness loses its first dry propriety, it must be
soft, and yet it cannot, for it is terribly sharp: and here is the Mark, Butt,
Goal, or limit.
Mark of the Eternal Death: for the desire out of the free will, cannot
attract so any more: for it stands in the anguish of the Crack, and yet
retains its propriety in the attracting.

30. For every anguish has a desire to go forth from the source [or paine]:
and it is the natural right of the anguish to expel from it self, and yet it
cannot, but the pain is thereby more stirred and greater: as may be understood
in a raging swelling sore, where the Member in the Or, humors.
Essences labors to be rid of the pain, and by the laboring of the
Essences the sore becomes bigger, and the source (in the Brimstone-Spirit) is
swelled up: and the more the Or, humors.
Essences strive, the greater is the wheel of the Anguish.

31. Thus I propose Nature to you, to be considered of, which if you consider
it well, cannot be spoken against: for it appears in all things, and it has
its Birth just so. And Nature stands thus in four Forms.

32. First, in a sour and strong attracting, which is called Or, soreness,
tartness, or astringency.
Harshnesse, and makes in it self sharp coldness.

33. And then secondly, the attracting is its Or, spur.
sting, which rages in the soreness, and breaks the hardness, and makes
the wheel of the innumerable Essences, wherein the Wonders are generated.

34. But the flash of the Liberty of the Eternal Will, which sharpeneth it
self in the soreness, and turns to consuming Fire, breaks its wheel,
wherein as a flash it penetrateth through in a moment, and terrifieth its
Mother, the soreness, which loses her hard propriety, and is changed into a
sharp nature like Salt; and in this sharpness, the sting also loses its own
right and becomes bitter: for it has in it two Forms, viz. the raging, and
also the flash of the Fire, which are like Brimstone, and it is the might of
the kindling of the Fire, for the source [or property] of the Fire stands
therein.

35. Understand us right thus: the flash of fire out of the sharpness makes
the third form in Nature: for it makes in the soreness, and out of the
Rager (the bitter sting in the tart anguish) a Brimstone Spirit, wherein the
flash stands, and is the soul (or the Eternal Life) of the four Forms.
For the anguish makes in it self again a desire to fly out from the
anguish, and yet there is nothing that can fly away, but so it is in the
Center, and is called the Center no more.

36. The fourth Form is the changing of the hard soreness, viz. the Crack of
the flash: The dark hardness perceiving that it is feeble, and as [it were]
dead and overcome, and is then turned into SAL: and yet retains the propriety
of the sour attracting.

37. Thus the four Forms of Nature, are no more called the Center, though
indeed they have the Center in them, and in their Original, but [are called]
Sulphur, Mercurius, and Sal. For the Brimstone-Spirit is the Soul of the four
Forms: for it has the fire in it, and the anguish in it makes another Will
so that the four Forms have an Eternal will in them which is their own: for
that will is to fly aloft out of the four Forms, above Nature, and to Kindle
the Fire in Nature.
kindle Nature in the Fire, and so to be in a horrible might, as may be
[discerned and] considered in the Devils, who live in such a Will as this, as
we shall show afterward.

38. Thus understand us rightly, what the Or, Philosophers.
Wisemen of old have understood by the three words, Sulphur, Mercurius, and
Sal: though they all could not apprehend the high Light; yet they understood it
well enough in the light of this world, viz in the third Principle, all which
ha h one and the same understanding and meaning; only they understood not the
three Principles: or else they had known God; and so they remained in the light
of this world as Heathens with their understanding. For they have found the
soul of the four Forms in the light of the virtue of the Sun [only], and the
second Principle was no further revealed to them.

39. There the soul stands in the Eternal Band, and there, in the Cross of
Nature, out of the Original Eternal Will, is the Eternal Word Generated,
which is the Maker and Creator in Nature, and this has been hidden to them,
even to this very day: but the Time discovers it, where it stands as a To
be seen.
Banner: of which [shall be spoken] in its place.

40. And deep considerate Reason has very clearly in our description, what
Sulphur, Mercurius, and Sal are: for SVL is the soul, and is a
Brimstone-Spirit, which has the flash of fire with all Forms in it: but if
the power and light of the Sun do operate therein (seeing the soul stands
in flesh and blood) the Sun with its friendly beams, makes out of the sour
Salt-Spirit, an Oil, and kindles the Fire: and so the Brimstone-Spirit
burns, and is a Light in the Essences: and out of the anxious Will comes the
Mind: and out of the wheel of the Essences come the thoughts: for the virtue
of the Sun has also the Mind, so that it does not stand in the Anguish, but
rejoices in the virtue of the Light.

41. Thus SVL is the soul: in an herb it is the Oil, and in Man also,
according to the Spirit of this world in the third Principle, which is
continually generated out of the anguish of the Will in the Mind, and the
Brimstone-Worme is the Spirit, which has the Fire and burns: PHVR is the
sour wheel in it self which causes that.

42. Mercurius comprehends all the four Forms, even as the life springs
up, and yet has not its beginning in the Center as the PHVR has, but after
the flash of fire, when the sour dark form is terrified, where the hardness
is turned into pliant sharpness, and where the second will ( viz. the will of
Nature, which is called the Anguish) arises, there Mercurius has its
Original. For MER is the shivering wheel, very horrible, sharp, venomous, and
hostile; which assimulate it thus in the soreness in the flash of fire, where
the sour wrathful life arises. The syllable CV is the pressing out, of the
Anxious will of the Mind, from Nature: which is climing up, and wills to be
out aloft. R I, is the comprehension of the flash of Fire, which in MER gives
a clear Sound and Tune. For the flash makes the tune, and it is the
Salt-Spirit which Or, knocks.
sounds, and its form [or quality] is gritty like sand, and herein arise
noises, sounds, and voices, and thus CV comprehends the flash, and so the
pressure is as a Wind that thrusts upwards, and gives a Spirit to the
flash, so that it lives and burns. Thus the syllable US is called the
burning Fire, which with the Spirit continually drives it self forth: and the
syllable CV presses continually upon the flash.

43. And the third word SAL is the Salt-Spirit; because the ancient
Philosophers.
Wisemen saw, how Nature is thus divided into many parts, and that every Form
of Nature has a parricular Matter in this world, may be seen in the Earth:
and that the Salt-Spirit especially is the greatest in corporeal Or,
substances.
things, (for it preserves the Body that it does not decay) therefore they
have rightly set down this Gate only; which is the Mother of Nature. For out
of this form, in the Creation, Earth, stones, water, and all sorts of
Mineralls, were made, yet With the mixture of the other Forms; as you shall
see hereafter: My beloved Reader, understand us thus according to our own
sense, meaning, and apprehension.

44. The four Forms in themselves are the Anger and the Wrath of God in the
Eternal Nature: and they are in themselves nothing else but such a source [or
property] as stands in the Darkness, and is not material, but an
Originality of the Spirit, without which there would be nothing.

45. For, the four Forms are the cause of all things, as you may perceive,
that every life has poison, yea the poison it self is the life: and therefore
many creatures are so venomous, because they proceed from a poisonous
Original. And you must know, (though these be the chief causes of Nature)
that Nature consists in very many more other Forms: for this makes the
wheel of the Essences, which makes innumerable Essences: where every Essence
is again a Center: so that a whole Birth of clean another Form may appear.

46. Therefore the Power of God is unsearchable: and our writing is not to that
end, that we should search out the ground of the Deity in the Eternal Nature
[and lay it before any]: no, that cannot be: but we will direct the blind the
way that himself must go: we cannot go with his feet, but (as a Christian)
we would feign lead him, and impart to him what we have; not out of boasting in
our selves, but that we might help to plant the great body [consisting] of
the Members in Christ; of which we will make mention hereafter: to which end
these very high things are mentioned, that we might show you the right mark
in the Original: that your self might see, and learn to understand the
course of the world, and how blind all are concerning God, and what the cause
and end of The blindness of the world.
it is.

47. We tell you this, that you might rightly consider it; for, these four
Forms are in all things: yet in this world (as in the third Principle) they
are not understood [to be] in their Or, their utmost effect.
very eager Essences. For the virtue of the Sun, in the Elements tempereth
all things, so that the Essences stand not in such a wrathful source [or
property]; but are as a pleasant friendly life: as the Light out of the second
Principle, (which is the Light out of the Word and Heart of God the Father)
does enlighten the four Forms in the Center of the Angelical Spirits, so
that they are in their own Center, friendly, lovely, and very pleasant.

48. And you should well consider the Fall of the Devils, who have lost the
Light of the Heart of God, and must now stand in the four Forms of the
Original, in such an anxious source [or condition] as was above mentioned.

49. Thus is the soul of Man also together out of this Eternal Band breathed
into Man, and enlightened from the light of God: but in the fall of Adam it is
gone out from the Eternal Light of the Heart of God, into the light of this
world: and it has now to expect (if it have not entered again into the light
of God, when the light of this world does break off from it) that it must then
remain in the four Forms (without the light) in the first Birth of the life,
with the Devils.

50. For the four Forms (without the Eternal Light) are the Abyss, the
Anger of God, the Hell, and the horrible flash of fire in the wheel of Or,
breaking.
Corruption in the flying up of Mercury [or the terrible cracking noyse].
Their light is in the Brimstone-Spirit, which they must awaken in themselves:
or else their Spirit stands in Eternal Darkness, and its living Form of
the Abyss is a Dominion of a severe [eager property or] source, which climeth
up in the flash of Fire [willing to be] above God and the Kingdom of Heaven,
and yet cannot reach, nor feel nor see them: for The Eternal Darkness.
it is a Principle, which comprehends neither this world nor the Angelical
world: and yet is not severed, [but is] in [one and the same] Place.

51. For we offer to your consideration: that as we Men with our [Earthly]
eyes which we have from this world, cannot see God and the Angels: which yet
are every moment present to us, yes the Deity it self is in us, and yet we
are not able to comprehend it, except we Set all our thoughts and resolutions
upon God and Goodness.
put our imagination and earnest will into God, and then God appears to us in
the Will, and fills the Mind; where we feel God and see him with our eyes,
[ viz. the eyes of our Mind.]

52. So also if we put our imagination and will into evil [and wickedness
Set all our thoughts and resolutions upon God and Goodness.
, then we receive the source of Hell in the Wrath: and the Devil lays fast
hold on our very Heart in the Anger of God, yet we see him not with these
eyes, only the Mind and poor soul in the Eternal source of the Original,
understand it and tremble at the Wrath: so that many a soul despaireth, and
casts it self into the source of the Original, and drives the body to
death, by sword, the rope, or the water, that it may thereby suddenly be rid
of the torment, or source, in this life, which is from the Third Principle. For
that soul stands between the Kingdom of Heaven and the Kingdom of this
world, in scorn, and therefore makes have to the Abyss.

53. Also we give you very earnestly to consider: that God did not create a
peculiar Hell and place of Torment, on purpose to plague the Creatures, viz.
Angels and Men; because he is a God that wills not Evil, and does himself
forbid it: and has therefore suffered his Heart to become Man, that he might
redeem Man out of the Eternal anguishing source [or torment] of the Abyss,
which endures for ever.

54. And therefore as soon as the Devils went away from the light of God, and
would domineere in the Might of the Fire, over the Meekness of the Heart of
God, they were immediately in the same hour and moment in the Abyss of Hell,
and were held by it: for there was no peculiar source [or place of Torment]
made for them: but they remained without God, in the four Forms of the
Eternal Nature.

55. So also it is with the souls of Men, if they do not attain the Light of
God; which yet with great longing stands before the soul, and it is hidden
in the very ground of the soul. And the soul is to do no more, but put its
will, (as a sprout out of the four Forms) again into the Light of God, where
then it is regenerated anew in the Will, and in the Life of God.

56. We give the Courteous Reader to understand: that the [Hellish] creatures,
which are the Devils and the damned souls, have not only four Forms in the
Band of their life; but their Forms are infinite, like the thoughts of Men:
and they can turn themselves into the Forms of all Creatures: but there are
only four Forms manifest to them, as also in the Abyss of Hell: but they
may bring forth every form out of the Matrix, except the light, the Fire is
their right life, and the sour astringency of the Darkness, is their right
food.

57. For one Essence nourishes the other, so that it is an Eternal Band: and
so the Devils and damned souls are only living Spirits in the Or, essential
powers.
Essences of the Eternal Original: out of which they are also created: for
the Matrix is the original Genetrix, which continually generateth it self out
of the Eternal Will.

58. And in that respect, [or according to this form or property] God calls
himself a Zealous [or Jealous] Angry God, and a Consuming Fire; for the fire
of this Original is consuming, for it is the Center of the Eternal Band.
Therefore if it be kindled in the sour sharpness, it consumes all whatsoever
appears Essentially in the four Forms, (you must understand, all that which
is not generated out of their source [or property,] for the Devils are from
the same source or property, it cannot consume them, for they are crude [that
is] without a body) as may be seen by the sacrifices of Moses and the Children
of Israel, which the fire devoured, as also by Eliah and the two Captains over
fifties, in that the fire of God twice devoured fifty, when Israel was led in
the source of the Father by the Word: [that is, when Israel was disobedient to
the light and Word, and thereby were given up to the Wrath of God.]

59. And now I will further show you the form of the Deity, that you may
search through the Ground of the Eternal Life, and learn to understand what
the Eternal Good, and what the Eternal Evil is; as also that which is Or,
Transitory.
Mortal in this world: and that you may learn to search and know the Will of
the highest Good: as also what God, Heaven, Hell, the Devil, and this world
is, and what is to be done therein.

60. John the Evangelist writes very well, also deeply and clearly, that in
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was God, and all things were made by
it: for the Word reveals the Deity, and generateth the Angelical World
[which is] a Principle in it self: which is to be understood as follows.

61. The first Eternal Will is God the Father, and it is, to generate his
Son, viz. his Word; not out of any thing else but out of himself: and we
have already informed you about the Essences, which are generated in the Will,
and also how the will in the Essences is set in Darkness, and how the
Darkness (in the wheel of the Anxiety) is broken asunder by the flash of
fire, and how the will comes to be in four forms, whereas in the Original
all four are but one, but in the flash of fire appear in four forms: as
also how the flash of fire does exist, in that the first will does sharpen it
self in the eager hardness, so that the liberty of the will shines in the
flash. Whereby we have given you to understand, that the first will shines in
the flash of the fire, and is consuming by reason of the anxious sharpness,
where the will continues in the sharpness, and comprehends the other Will
in it self; (understand in the Center of the sharpness,) Which other or
second Will.
which is, to go out from the sharpness, and to dwell in it self in the
Eternal Liberty without pain or source.

62. Therefore we now also give you to understand; that the oth^^
i^-comprehended Will, to go out from the sharpness, is free from Nature, viz.
from its wrathfulnesse: for it stands in the Center, in it self, and retains
all the virtue and form of the [first] Center, out of all Essences in it
self: for it is the virtue and power of the first will, and is generated in
the first will, and makes (in the Liberty of the first will) a Center of an
Out-birth [or procreation], incomprehensible by the four forms in the first
will. And this other generated will in the first will, is the Heart of the
first will, and is in the first will as a Word, which moves in it self, and
remains Eternally in the Birth of the first will; for it is his Son or
Heart: and is severed [or distinct:] from the first will in that it has a
several Center in it self.

63. Now the Father, viz. the first will, expresses all things, by this word
(as out of the Center of the Liberty); and that which proceeds from the
Father by the Word ( viz. the Spirit and power of the Father in the Word)
forms that which is expressed, after a spiritual manner, so that it
appears as a Spirit.

64. For, in the sour Matrix (viz. in the Fiat) all is comprehended, and the
Spirit of the Word forms it in the Center of that Essence, wherein the Father
moves and expresses by the Word, so that it is and remains to be an
Essence. For whatsoever is formed out of the Eternal, is Spirit, and is
Eternal, as the Angels and souls of Men are.

65. But because it may happen that we should be as one that is dumb to you,
and hard to be understood, in this description, (for the understanding and
apprehension of it is not in the subtle spirit of this outward world;) we
will therefore show how the other Three Heavenly Forms are Generated [being
together with the sour forementioned forms, the seven forms or Spirits of
Nature] in which [three formes] especially, God, the Kingdom of Heaven,
Paradise, and the Angelical world is understood; to try whether it might be
brought into the mind of the Reader.

66. You must not understand it, as if the Deity had a beginning, or were
subject to any alteration, no; but I write in what manner it may be learnt and
understood, what the Divine Essence is: for we can bring no Angelical words:
and though we could use them, yet they would appear in this world no other
then Creaturely, and Earthly to the earthly Mind. For we are but a part of
the whole, and cannot speak That which is perfect.
the total, but in part, which the Reader ought to consider.

67. For the Divine Mind in the Heart of God, that is only total [or
perfect] but else there is nothing total, for without that, all stand in the
Essences, and God only is Free, and nothing else: and therefore we speak but
in part, and comprehend the total in the Mind: for we have no tongue to
express it: we only bring the Reader to a Which reaches to heaven.
Ladder, [he must go up himself.]

68. If we will rightly speak or write of God, we must speak of the Light,
and of the flame of Love: for therein is God rightly understood.

69. We cannot say, that the source of the fire is Light, we see it only
shine out of the Fire. Thus now we have informed you concerning the Original
of the Fire, how it is generated in the wheel of the Essences, in the hard
anxious sharpness, and receives its shining out of the Eternal Liberty,
where the liberty is driven on in Nature, so that the liberty becomes a
source [or propettie], which is Fire.

70. So also we have mentioned, how the flash instantly presses through the
wheel of the Essences, and makes a Cross, and then the wheel of the
Essences turns round no more; but stands wavering in the sound [of the
crack], and all Essences receive their virtue and strength in the flash of the
Cross: for the flash presses right through, and divides the Essences of the
wheel: and the Essences press through Squarely, Crossewise on each side.
flatly upon the flash: for the flash is their Spirit, which in the sour
astringency makes a Brimstony Form.

71. Thus the birth stands square like a Cross, and has beneath, the Center
of the Birth, which drives up the flash aloft, and so the whole Birth is as a
sprout, where the fire drives up, and the Essences hasten after the
fire-Spirit, as their own spirit, which attracteth and desires them, for they
are its food and nourishment, and it is their life, and one is not without the
other.

72. Now understand us concerning the Crack of the Fire, for it is horrible and
consuming, and overcomes all the Forms of all the Essences: for as soon as
the twinkling begins, all the forms of the Darkness are consumed, and the
dark sour astringency ( viz. the stern Death) trembles at the life, and
falls back as dead and overcome, and of hard becomes feeble and weak; and
so becomes heavy, as being impotent and not Not able to subsist.
fix in it self; and thence comes weight in Nature. For the sour astringent
Matrix becomes thin and light; and a Water-Spirit, from whence the Water is
Generated.

73. And now this Crack of the sour astringency in the Dark Death, is a Crack
of Great Joy, for of dark it becomes light: and or when the flash twinckleth
in the sour astringency of the sting, the sting is terrified much more then
its mother the sour astringency, and yet it is no hostile crack or terrifying;
but a very joyful crack or terror of exulting, that its mother is so thin,
pliant, and soft, whereby the sting loses its fiery propriety, and in the
Liberty of the Eternal Will (in the Center) becomes white, clear, light,
amiable, and joyful; and herewith springs up the fifth form of Nature, viz.
the friendly Love.

74. For there the flash desires with great longing to have its mother for its
food, and here is the true original of Life; for it is the kindling of the
Light in the sour astringent Matrix, where the severe tartness is turned into
meekness: and you should rightly understand it here, that it is not so, wholly
in the Center of its being; but (as I may say in a similitude) it is as if Oil
were generated in the Meekness, out of which the Light shines constantly and
remains for ever, in which the flash loses its propriety, and so out of its
form a shining and light is produced, wherein there is a Or, Several.
distinct Center, out of which the Great Joy springs up; and yet the first
four forms keep their own Center to themselves: For the Darkness remains
as an enclosed thing: and the Light shines in the Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehends it not.

75. Thus there are two Principles; which are therefore two, because the
Meekness existeth out of the first Eternal Will, which [Will] is free from
the Matrix [or Nature] and is as thin as if it were nothing and is still and
quiet. Now that which is still and without a being in it self, that has no
darkness in it; but is merely a still clear light Joy, without Essence, and
that is the Eternity which is without any thing, and is called God, above all
other things: for there is nothing Evil in it, and it is without a Being.

76. Understand us thus; God the Father is so in himself, but without a Name:
for he is in himself the light clear bright Eternity without a Being, if we
speak merely of the Light of God.

77. But since he will not be without a Being, therefore we consider his
will, which he conceives in himself, out of nothing, but merely out of and in
himself; and we understand the desire [is] in his will, and [that] in the
desire [there is] the Center of the Genetrix, wherein the Being is Generated.

78. Now the Eternal Genetrix desires nothing but the Word, which does create
in the Genetrix: for the Eternal still and light Joy, creates nothing, but is
merely still and light; for where there is no darkness, there is mere light
without alteration; but the Genetrix in the desire makes the attraction; so
that there is a Darkness, which is Eternal; wherein Nature is Generated: as
is mentioned before.

79. And now the Eternal Genetrix, in the first longing, desires the Liberty,
( viz. God) and not the Darkness, in it self: for he wills not her, but the
Word, which creates in the longing of the Genetrix: and yet there can be no
Genetrix without the attracting, which impregnateth it self in the will, in
which impregnation the Center of the Nature does consist: and there would be no
Word, if there were no Nature.

80. For the Word takes its original in Nature: and we here give you highly
and dearly to understand, that two words are Generated in Nature: one is the
first Center of the Genetrix, in the stern Wrath, to express the strong might
of the Mother of the first sour wrathfulnesse in the Fire: which is here
called the Nature of God the Father, which he thus generateth in his still Joy,
in the conception of his will, without touching the Liberty of the Light.

81. And the other Word, [is that] which God the Father.
he generateth out of Nature out of the Meekness, understand [that] wherein
the Eternal Liberty of the Light is, which is called God, which is Or, arises
out of Nature.
out of Nature, and so the dark nature disappeareth, [which is] still in the
fire of the sharpness, as is mentioned before, and yet the sour astringency
(in its own dark propriety) is terrified, and loses its eagar propriety.

82. For the flash makes the dark stern Might thin again, and so a sprout
springs up therein out of the innumerable Essences, and this is the virtue or
power of the second Center: for in this springing up there is a Love-desire,
and the Eternal Light catches hold of the Liberty Extra Naturam.
without Nature, so that the Liberty Extra Naturam.
without Nature kindles in this Love, and becomes a burning Light, wherein
the Glance or brightness arises.

83. For there is no Glance Extra Naturam.
without Nature, though indeed there is a light pleasant habitation: but the
Glance arises first from the sharpness: and yet in the springing up of Love
there is no sharpness that is perceptible, though indeed it is really; and so
it is a Birth of Joy, and a right fulfilling of the first Will, which is Gods,
which he puts into desiring, and so Generateth Nature, and out of Nature [he
generateth] the sprout [or word] of Love.

84. Thus the second Sprout (or Word) of Love dwells in the First Will, and
is its right fulfilling which it Or, wherein it is well pleased.
desires: for The Love.
it is meek pleasant and friendly, and is the virtue and heart of the first
Will, from whence the Eternal Desire continually Or, Expresses its Essential
Word.
is sprouting and subsisting.

85. And thus the Light breaks open the Gates of Darkness, and the loving
Sprout [or second Word which is the heart of God] springs up out of the Dark
Nature, and dwells in the Eternal Stillnesse of the Father, and is called
his Son: for the Father Generateth him out of his Eternal Will, and herein
is the Glance [Lustre, Glory, or Majesty] of the Father manifested, which
otherwise (in the first Will in the Dark Nature) appears only in Fire; but in
the second Center, [it appeareth] in the Love in the Light; and here Love and
Enmity ought to be considered, and how they oppose one another.

86. For Love is Death to Wrathfulnesse, and by its shining takes away the
Power of the Wrathfulnesse. And here the Power of God in Love and Anger, is
rightly to be considered.

87. But that the Love may thus be Generated, is caused by the first Will from
the still habitation; for the still and clear habitation, which is without a
source, desires no fierceness, and yet causes fierceness: and if the
fierceness were not, there would be no sharpness; and so the second Center
(of Love) would not be generated neither, out of which the supernatural light
shines, where then the Name of God the Father and of God the Son existeth.

88. For if the Eternal Liberty did not Generate the Being of Nature, there
would be no Father, but a mere nothing: but since it does generate the Being
of Nature, therefore the Generator whence it is Generated is called Father.

89. Thus the Light shines in the Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends
it not, as John says, and thus Light and Darkness are opposite one to
another, and so the Light is Lord over the Darkness: and it is an Eternal
Band, where one would not be without the other: and here we are rightly to
consider the Enmity against the virtue of the Light of God, how each of them
takes its original.

90. For, the Darkness holds in its Center, sour fierceness; stinging
Anguish in the Brimstone-Spirit; woe in the flash of fire; great fire in the
Breaking Wheel; ascending of the Essences in the flash of the Might of the
fire: and yet there is no flying out, but it causes such a will [of flying
out, or flying away,] and that is a Spirit, and it is the Band of Nature, which
God the Father Generateth in his Will, wherewith he manifests himself in the
Eternal Stillnesse: whereas otherwise there would be nothing: and herein is
God the Father (with his Might and fiery sharpness,) an angry Zealous Jealous
God, and a Consuming Fire.

91. Let this be shown you, O ye Philosophers; which (from the Counsel of
God) is opened to you in the Seventh Seal: in The seventh Seal is the Holy
Ternary.
Ternario sancto.

92. Thus the fountain of Love is a clasping and keeping in of the fierce
wrathfullnesse, yea an overcom^ng of the fierce Might: for the Meekness takes
away the property of the fierce sour hard Might of the Fire; and the Light of
the Meekness holds the Darkness captive, and dwells in the Darkness,
[without being comprehended by the Darkness.]

93. And thus the fierce might wills nothing else but the fierceness, and
the Or, to shut up in Death.
shutting in, of Death; for the fierce soreness is the shutter up in Death:
and the Meekness presses forth as a sprout, and grows our of Death, and
overcomes it: and makes the Eternal Life, and turns Enmity into Love.

94. Let this be a Light unto you, O ye Theologists [or Divines]: and consider
the writings of the Saints better, and behold the Wonders of God with other
Eyes. Consider what God is, in Love and Anger: and observe how two Principles
stand open, where each is desiring; desist from the Natural Wisdom of this
world, and consider the Eternal Nature, and so you shall find God and the
Kingdom of Heaven. Your Cannons and Ordinances.
Laws, will not do it: if you would know God, another manner of Earnest [or
Zeale] must be used [then to make Conclusions in Counsels and Synods] you must
go out from From wrangling contentious disputation.
Babell, that you may attain the Center of the Son of God: and so you shall
be borne [or Generated] in Meekness and in Love: and then you may feed the
sheep of Christ: otherwise you are Thieves and Murderers, and step into the
Center of the fierce Wrath, where you do nothing else, but devour the sheep
of Christ, with your blowing up of hellish Fire. O how falsely do you deal
against Love: how will you appear: when the Sun rises, and when you shall
stand in the Light; it shall hereafter be set before your eyes.

The Third chapter.
1. AND now if we will dive into the blessed Birth of Love, and search how it
is Generated, and where it has its Original; we must search the Center
inwardly: and set the Sixth form of Nature before us, viz. Mercury, wherein
the sound [sound or noise is Generated: and so we shall find, (in the
Generating of the Love,) the tune, sound, and song, as also the five Senses,
Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting and Feeling; wherein the Life is understood;
as also Pain and Torment, Joy and Love; desire to Good and desire to Evil;
though in it self in nature nothing is to be rejected, [or is in vaine], both
must be, else God would not be manifested, and all would be as a still nothing:
and the whole Being is together in the Eternal God; none has made or
Generated any thing for him: he alone, in his Eternal Will (which is himself)
makes the Pregnat mother or womb that Generateth all things.
Genetrix; he only is the Eternal beginning, and compriseth the Center to the
Genetrix which makes the Eternal Mother of the Genetrix of the Being of all
Beeings. Ens Entium.
Essence of all Essences.

2. For God has no beginning and there is nothing sooner then he [or before
him], but is Word has an Groundless, or bottomless.
unsearchable end: which yet is not called End rightly, but Person, viz. the
Heart of the Father: for it is Generated in the Eternal Center, not as a Form
of the Center (which belongs to the Center) but as a sprout of another Center
out of the first Eternal [Centre].

3. Therefore he is the Son of the First; and is rightly the flame of Love
and the Glance of the Father in the Eternal Will, and the second Mother [or
Matrix] of the Genetrix, viz. the Angelical World out of himself, is a
Principle, which is called the Barmhertzigkeit, Mercifulness.
Mercy of God: out of which Center goes forth the Virgin of the Eternal
Wisdom of God, by which God has created this World, viz. the Third Principle,
(with all Creatures and things) out of the First [Principle].

4. And we would have the Reader faithfully warned, that he should not seek
our meaning in the Wisdom of this world; but in the Light of the Eternal
Nature, whither we would have him directed also, ( viz. into the new
Regeneration in the life of Christ), else we are but dumb to him, and not to
be understood: and without that [New Birth] he should leave these writings
uncensured; or else he eats the food of the first Center; and his scorn will
gnaw him in the Center of his own life.

5. We will readily vouchsafe him the Light; and for that end this hand has
set down the Deep Arcana.
Mysteries, not for any advantage that can be expected, but for the The
children of wisdom.
Lillies sake, and for the sake of the Angelical world.

6. Here mark exactly: you will see that which you have not seen since the
heavy fall of Adam: and thereby consider what it signifies, and what appears
with it; and tread not in the footsteps of the proud Pharisees, who Crucified
Christ, and remained blind in the Daylight, or else the same will happen unto
you.

7. And look not upon the Hand of this Pen, it can do nothing; but upon the
Ground or Foundation.
Center, out of which the light shines, it shines not only out of this Hand,
but in the whole world, as an opened Seal in the Eternal Center: every one
may apprehend it, it is not only without him, but in him: and there is no more
to be said, but to fly open, and spring with Jesus Christ, and put forth a
flower out of this world into the Angelical world: of which we will here
speak, and show you the Eternal Being.

8. We have showed you above, the Birth of the four forms of the Eternal
Nature, and thereby have signified how they are Generated out of the Eternal
unchangeable Will of the Liberty of God: where we have declared to you also how
the Eternal Liberty without Nature is a still light habitation, yet without
Glance [or Lustre]; also how the Eternal Light Liberty, is sharpened in the
sour hard fierceness, so that it appears as a flash of Fire, where then it
dissipateth the Darkness, and takes away the power of the fierceness, and so
gets a consuming Glance, or fiery splendor, by reason of the terrible
sharpness; where then the sour Matrix: becomes an anxious Genetrix: and
being feeble, (by the flashes taking away its power,) it becomes Essential:
and the flash catches hold of its Essential Form in the Anguish, (that is,
the Brimstone-Spirit,) which is the body of the Flash, out of which it burns
and shines.

9. And then [wee have shown also] how the Wheel of the Essences, with the
flash of the sour overcomming is Or, preserved.
upheld: and how the Center is like that of a A wheel with four spokes a
Cross.
Crosse-wheele, and how all stands in the sounding of the Essences, like a
Sprout: where then the wheel drives only upwards: and therefore it is that
the source of the Fire flies upwards, for all the forms of Nature fly after
the Fire; and the fire flies from them; for it wills to be free, being it is
originally proceeded out of the Eternal Liberty, but yet it cannot [be free,]
because Nature withholdeth it, by the sharpness, which subsisteth in Nature.

10. And then also we have shown you, how the Crack of the fire kills the
fierce property of the sour Matrix, whereby it is overcome, and falls back,
from whence comes Or, Ponderesity.
weight in Nature, and the matter of every thing. And then, how the flash in
the overcoming twinckleth [or loses its strength] where then (in the
Meekness) it is so terrified that it loses its fiery property, and becomes
clear or bright, which is the shining of its light, where the Glance takes
its Original. And how the Eternal still Liberty takes the Glance as its own;
and how the first Will is herein satisfied (according to its desire) with that
which it would have in the Original in its desire.

11. And so when the first desire, (together with the Generated Essences,) is
filled with the Glance of the Light, then all the Essences (which have laid
hold on the Light) stand in the first desiring will, and the will thereby
becomes triumphant, and full of joy, that the child of Light is generated in
it: And here the second Center ^^eth open in the Joy, where the Love is the
Its Centrall Fire.
fire of the Center, and the Love desire of the first will, attracteth the Joy,
and the Light shines out of the Joy: And so this precious Holy Birth remains
upon the
Crosse-wheele, where the Wheel of the Essences moves Or, in the Center of
the Cross.
in the Cross; and the Joy ( viz. the source of the Fire) flies upward, and
the Center retains it.

12. And so there the Newborn Will goes forth with power and Or, Miracles.
Wonders; and establishes the first will of the Liberty of the Father, with
the Center of the Love-Birth of the Son: for this Birth is the word of the
Heart of the Father, which he speaks out of his The flowing Essential powers
or faculties.
Essences: and that which goes forth out of the Love, is the Holy Spirit of
the Word, which forms the The flowing Essential powers or faculties.
Essences; and this is together the Ternary in one Essence [or Trinity in
Unity.]

13 And so now, when the Center in the Word flies open in the virtue of the
Light out of the Love; then one form embraces the other with very friendly
desire: for the first will is desiring, and makes the Center, as is declared
before concerning the Wrath, so also it is here with the Love It makes its
own Center too.
; and in stead of the striving contrary will, there is nothing herein but an
embracing and acceptable relish: For when the Wheel of the Essences is
sounding, the sixth form is Generated.

14. For the soreness retains its fierce might well enough in the
sharpness of the Love; but indeed it is very soft; and in the sixth form
makes voices, tunes and sounds, so that in the sounding, the Essences hear
one another: and with the Essences of the wheel in the assimulation [infection
or mixture] they taste one another; and in the desirous Love they smell one
another: and with the breaking through of the source, they feel one another:
and in the Light, they see one another: and so there is a living form of the
Spirit, which goes forth as a life, in all forms, and it [the Spirit] is the
stirring of the voices in the Essences, which make the Thoughts or
Constellations.
senses, or stars.

15. Thus the true Or, inexpressible.
insuperable Love-desire, springs up in the first will which is called
Father; for in the Center of the Son, out of the Fathers sharpness, the
Glance is Generated, which is a very friendly desire, to turn the Wrath of the
Father into Love: For when the Essences of the Father taste the meekness in
the Or, Love.
Light, then they are all stirred, and it is a mere lovely desire, pleasing
relish, and friendly well doing; and the form Mercurius is indeed the Word:
which in the dark Center, is a poisonous woe and anguish; but in the virtue of
the Light it is the source of Joy: and affords voices, tunes, and sounds, but
not like the Or, Noise.
sound in the Fire in the First Center.

16. Thus my dear Mind that read this, understand, and take our meaning
right, and consider, what we mean in this Description. We mean not two
Gods, that are one against another, but one only God in Ternary, or Trinity of
Subsistence, in his Eternal Birth, or Geniture.

17. In the word Ternarius, is to be understood in the Language of Nature
rightly the Divine Birth in the six forms in Nature, which are the six seals
of God.

18. But when I say Ternarius Sanctus, then I have therein the number Three in
Seven Forms, wherein the Angelical world is comprehended, which stands in
the seventh Birth. Not according to the [pronunciation of] the Latin Tongue,
but according to the [pronunciation of] the Language of Nature, from whence all
things have taken their Names, which our Philosophers in the Schools of the
Third Principle of this world, do not understand; [but the Theosophers of the
School of Pentecost understand it well].

19. For when I speak of the Wrath and of the Anger of God, I mean not any
thing that is without God; neither do I mean thereby the pure Deity, which is
unchangeable, and in Eternity is nothing else but Good; and is not Nature; but
the Word is generated out of the Nature of the Father, as another or second
sprout, which is not comprehended in Nature; and therefore it is even another
Person, and yet is Generated out of the First.

20. Understand, that the first will which is without Nature, is free from
Nature, but Nature is Generated in its desire: and now therefore the second
will (which goes forth out of the first, out of Nature as a proper Center of
its own,) is also free from Nature: for it dwells in the first Will, which is
called Father, in the light Eternity, and it is the Glance [or brightnesse]
power, strength, and being of the light Eternity; or else there would be
therein, no being, but a light still habitation, without being or Wandel,
communion, or conversation.
operation.

21. But since it would be manifested, it must needs create a will which is
desirous, and yet there was nothing to be desired but the powerful Word: and
yet that was not in the still Eternity neither: and therefore the seven Forms
of the Eternal Nature must be Generated; which are the seven seals of the
Son of God, as the The Revelation of John.
Apocalypse witnesses, and thence from Eternity the powerful Word is
Generated; which is the power and virtue, the heart, the life, and being of
the still Eternity.

22. And since it is generated out of the seven seals or Forms of Nature,
therefore it is the Maker and Creator of all things out of the being of
Nature: for there is nothing else that can overpower the Nature, but only the
effectual powerful Word in the Light, that only can overcome the Wrath. (
He only has the Key that can open and break the seven Seals of the
wrathful Nature of the Father, and open the Book of life, of him, that
sits upon the Eternal Throne. Read Apocalypse 1. it is just so) For as
soon as the wrath twinckleth, that is a dissiparing of the Darkness; and
takes away the power of the fierce wrathful anguish; and is rightly called
the mercy [the Mercifulness, warm-heartednesse.
Barmhertzigkeit] of God.

23. For Barm, is the light twinkling in the Center, out of the light
Eternity; where the Glimps captivateth the stern hard sour or harsh bitter
anguish, and terrifieth it with the Glimps, and takes away the power of the
fierceness, and turns it into meekness: Hertz is the flash, that has
captivated the four forms, where the Glimps of the Eternity is sharpened, and
thence forward has the four forms in it, which [Glimps] moves upon the
Cross in the Center, and makes another Center in it self: ig, is the
converting of the flash into the light of the Glance or Brightness, wherein
the fifth and sixth form are Generated, viz. the Love, and the Joy, wherein the
Ability, or Possibility.
Potency of whole Nature does consist: and without these two forms, Nature
would be a wrathful, harsh, and cruel Death: but the light makes the Love,
and also the desire of the sixth Form; wherein consists, the life, with the
understanding: Keit, is the Eternal Entrance, and the ascending over the
Nature of the four Forms; and an Eternal inhabiting of the still Eternity;
and a satiating or fulfilling of the first will, which is called, Father.

24. Thus the second Birth is called the Son of God, the Word of God, the
Power of God, the Love of God, the Life of God, the Wonder of God: and is it
self the Essence that manifests every Essence [or thing].

25. My beloved seeking Mind, I would willingly write it in thy Heart if I
could. Behold! all is but one only God; But you ask then, whence comes
Evil; therefore you have an information concerning that, in this high
description: for you see in all Creatures, evil, poison, and bitterness, as
also Love, and Or, Delight.
Desire: therefore consider now how Nature is such an earnest [or eager] thing.

26. But as the Heart of God allayeth the fierceness of the Father in his
Nature, and makes it kind and friendly; so also does the Light of the Sun
to all things in this world, which all has its original out of the Eternal
Nature.

27. For if the fierceness were not Generated in the Eternal Will, there
would be no Nature, also there would not in the Eternity, be generated any
heart and power of God, but it would be an Eternal Stillnesse: But since the
Eternity does desire the Life, it cannot be generated any other way: and being
it is thus generated, it is therefore most beloved, Eternally: and therefore
the earnest strong Birth may not, nor cannot cease in all Eternity, in respect
of the life, which is the Spirit of God.

28. Therefore behold thy self and all Creatures, and consider thy self,
consider also Heaven and Hell in the anger and wrath of God: and thou shall
find it thus, and no otherwise. Though indeed here we need an Angelical.
Tongue, and thou an Angelical Light in the Mind, and then we should well
understand one another; this world apprehends it not.

Concerning the seventh Form of the Eternal Nature.
The Revealed Gate of the Essence of all Essences.
29. MY beloved Reader, If you would understand the High Mysteries, you need
not first put on an Or, University.
Academie upon your Nose, nor use any [such] Spectacles, nor read the Books of
many Artists and Scholars: for the High Mysteries are not to be sought after,
searched out, and found, only in the High Schools or Universities: whatsoever
Reason seeks in the Art of this world, without the divine understanding; is
vain and fictitious, it finds nothing but this world, and not half of that
neither; it always goes round about in seeking; and finds in the end only
Pride and hypocrisy in finding, the Wisdom of the World.

30. Seek you nothing else but the Word and Heart of God, (which is Incarnate,
or become Man,) in the Gribbe amongst the Oxen in the Stable, in the dark
Night: if you find it, you find Christ (viz. the Word in the Father) together
with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Moreover, the Eternal Nature, also the
Angelical World and Paradise: and then you will find your Reason (which has
so long led you reeling, as a drunken Man,) to be very blind. You need not
break your Mind with high thoughts, for with such high phansies and conceits
you will not find the Ground: do but only incline your Mind and Thoughts,
with your whole Reason into the Love and Mercy [the Barmhertzigkeit] of God, so
that you be borne out of the Word and Heart of God in the Center of your life,
so that his light shine in the light of your life, that you be one with him:

31. For Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Eternal Word in the Father (who is
the Glance; or Brightness, and the power of the Light Eternity) must become
Man, and be borne in you, if you will know God: otherwise you are in the dark
Stable, and go about groaping and feeling, and look always for Christ at the
right hand of God, supposing that he is a great way off, you cast your Mind
aloft above the Stars, and seek God, as the Sophisters teach you, who
represent God, as one a far off, in Heaven.

32. But as the Devil would (in his fiery source [or property]) fly up above
the Heart of God, and yet remains still in the four forms in the Eternal
Nature in the Darkness, so it is also with blind Reason, which sits in the
dark, and seeks God in the Darkness.

33. If you would find him, seek him in his source or property, which is
every where; all is full of God, and he shines in the Darkness; God is in
your dark Heart, though in another Principle: knock and it shall he opened unto
you, the Holy Spirit of God is the Key in the Center: go out from the desire
of the Flesh, in a true earnest Repentance, and put all your will, reason, and
thoughts into the Mercy [the Barmhertzigkeit] of God; and so the Word of God (
viz. his beloved Heart) will get a form in you: and then you stand before the
Cribbe where Jesus is borne: and then incline your self toward the Child,
and offer him your heart, and Christ will be borne in you.

34. And then you must first into Jordan: and the Holy Ghost will baptize you:
and there the Heaven stands open to you, and the Holy Ghost hovereth over
you: but you must into the Wilderness, and be Tempted of the Devil
(understand it right: the Devil will make attempts upon you, and will often
lead you into the Wilderness of the world, and pass before thy soul into
thy fleshly Heart, and bar it up.) And then great Earnestness is required,
to break asunder the Center of the Devil: you shall many times not see
Christ, the Devil will deny him to you, [insinuating] that he is not become
Man in you: for you stand thus, as a Light in the Center, begirt with
Darkness, and you are a Sprout in the Light of God, [sprung] out of the dark
stern Nature.

35. Therefore consider; look to it; and stand fast; as Christ did: Do not as
Adam did, who suffered himself to be brought into lust, by the spirit of this
world, and brought us into the fleshly Darkness.

36. You must with Christ, be persecuted, scorned, and contemned, if you will
Or, Do Miracles.
move in the Wonders of God: and if you continue in him, he continues in you:
and then you may seek what you will, you will find whatsoever you desire:
else you seek in the Deity in vain; and when you have brought things to the
highest, you find only that which is in this world. Take this, that is set
down for awarning, and so you will seek, find and know, that which is
hereafter written, concerning the seven Seals of God and of the Lamb.

37. But because we may be hardly understood by the Reader (though very easily
understood, by those that are Borne of God) and our intention being no other
then to show the way to the blind: Note.
therefore we will show you the Revelation of John (which is the Revelation of
Jesus Christ) with the Seven Spirits, and seven Seals of God: wherein the
whole Deity (in the Humanity) has revealed it self; and together with the
Person of the Wisdom, has shown the Essence of the Number Three in Ternario
Sancto: whereby the Deity is seen not only in Ternario, but also in the
Angelical world.

38. And those that be borne of God, will here have their eyes rightly opened:
therefore let none be wilfully blind: for the time comes, and is already,
wherein the seven Seals are broken open, and the Book of him that sits
upon the Throne is opened, which the Lamb of the House of Israel has broken
open, which was slain, and lives Eternally.

39. And although hitherto the Revelation has continued sealed, and has not
been understood in the ground, by any Man; yet none should conceive and think,
that such a thing has been in the power of Man; for it is the Revelation of
God, and it has Seven Seals, which were sealed up, till the anger of God was
accomplished: and they are the seven Spirits of God the Father; as is
mentioned before, concerning the forms of the Birth of the Eternal Nature
which is Gods.

40. And now this world with all that belong to it, as well as Man, is created
as an Out-birth, out of the Eternal Nature; understand, out of the seven
Seals of the Eternal Nature: and God has created this world for no other
cause, but that he would in his Eternal Wisdom, manifest the Wonders, which
are in the Eternal Nature; for they must come to Essence, and appear in the
light, to his joy, honor, and glory: not only in this time of Secrecy, [or
hidden mysteriousnesse,] but after this Time also.

41. For this Time [from the beginning of the world to the end] is as the
soil, [or ground,] and is the Seventh Seal of the Eternal Nature, wherein
the six Seals, with their Powers and Wonders disclose themselves, and power
forth their wrath: from whence were Generated and found out, in this world, the
Natural Wisdom, voices, thunders, and strife: wherein men have always sought
the Heart of God, and yet found the Wonders, out of which have arisen, strife
and Or, force and wars.
compulsion [of conscience], where one Seal has been opened after another:
but humane Reason has not uderstood the powers of the Seals.

42. For when, after the Times of the Apostles, men departed from the true Love
and Humility toward God, and Went a whoring after their own Inventions.
sought after Wisdom for their own Ends; and made of the Kingdom of Christ, a
Kingdom of Pomp, Might, and the Glory of this world; then the Candlesticks
withdrew from these men, that is, went (in the Fathers Nature) into the Seven
Seals of God, and forsook the seven Golden Candlesticks, the seven Seals
of the Heart of God, which are the seven Seides of the Lamb, which shine
bright out of the Fathers Nature; for The seven Seals.
they were in the hand of the Son of God, who was become Man: as may be
discerned by the Image in the Revelation, that the Man Jesus Christ, has
seven Stars in his hand, and stands between the seven Golden Candlesticks.

43. The seven Stars are the seven Spirits of God the Father, which are
hidden seals; as I have shown you before, how one form is continually
generated from another; and that one form would not be without the other; and
yet one Seal opens it self after another, and they have the seven
Thunders, whose That which the Thunders declare.
speech is sealed up, for they are in the Center of the Spirit, but the seven
Seals are in the Essence: [or in the Center of the Corporiety:] for they are
manifested through the humanity of Christ, therefore the Spirit of God
demonstrateth them in the form of Seven Golden Candlesticks, and they give
light in the Father out of the Center of the Son.

44. For you see, that there is a Glass Sea before the Throne of the Ancient
[of Dayes] who is God the Father, and the Sea is the seventh seal, but opened
and not sealed; for therein stands the Angelical World: but the six seals
are the Birth of the Eternal Nature, which are Generated in the first Will of
the Father, out of which the Heart or Word of God is from Eternity continually
generated, as a peculiar Center of its own; in the Center of the seven Spirits
of God; and although the seventh seal also, is in the Father, and belongs
to the Center; yet it is brought to Being or substance.
Essence, by the Word, for therein consists the Angelical world.

45. Therefore my beloved Reader, thou art to know, that whatsoever is written
or spoken of God is Spirit; for God is Spirit; but in himself should not be
manifest, except the seven Forms make him manifest: and therein the Creation
of the Angelical world, is brought to pass; and is called Ternarius Sanctus:
for the number Three [or Trinity] is incomprehensible; but the Word, makes the
Glass Sea, wherein the comprehensibility is understood: and it is clearly
represented to you, in the figure of the Image, in the Revelations.

46. For you see, that the Image stands in the midst of the seven
Candlesticks, which are the seven Spirits of the Deity; and it has seven
Stars in its right hand, which are also the seven Spirits of the Deity in
the Center of the Father, and the Word has them in his power, in that it
changes the fierceness and consumingnesse, into a meek habitation in the
Glassie Sea, wherein Gods Light of the Word, shines out of the Word: and then
the seven Spirits of God, stand in the Center of the Word, in form like unto
seven burning Torches: and hereby the Deity is pourtrayed unto you, in the
Image in thee Revelations.

47. And we give you also to understand further, (as is mentioned above,) that
the Word, (or Heart of the Father, in its seven shining Spirits, is in the
Father, (in the Center of the Father) as his Heart; and has the seven Stars
( viz. the seven Forms of the Eternal Nature) under its power, and therefore
the Image has them in its Hand.

48. But since all things (that should come to have an Essence) must come forth
out of the Fathers Nature, and we know also that Moses witnesses as much,
that God the Father made all things by the Verbum Fiat.
Word Fiat, as by the Word spoken, and the speaking stood in the Fiat; and the
Fiat is the sour Matrix in the first will of the Father, which comprehends
and holds the Nature, which the Spirit (that is Generated ex Mercurio)
forms, which is the Spirit of God. And since all Creatures stand in the
Father, and that he is therefore called Father, being a father of every thing;
as also we Men are his Children; and yet we with Adam, being departed from
the virtue of the Alias seven Spirits.
seventh Spirit of the Word, and with our Imagination are gone into the
Out-birth of the Father, viz. into the Spirit of this world, which cloatheth us
with corruptible flesh and blood, and holds us captive; therefore we are now
in the virtue or power of the seven Stars, or seven Spirits, of the Fathers
Nature, which bring their Wonders in us, to the Light.

49. For we are the Express Image, Similitude, Resemblance, Pourtraiture or
Type.
Representation of the Deity, in which the Spirit of God opens his Wonders:
and be you rightly informed, God the Father, has begotten us again in Christ,
that we should with our Imaginations, enter again into the Word, viz. into
the Center of the light flaming Heart, that the Holy Ghost might proceed from
us again with power and Miracles.
works of Wonder, as may be seen by the Apostles of Christ.

50. But since we have suffered our selves to be held, by the seven fierce
Spirits of the Fathers Nature, out of his Center; and are not with our
Immanuel, gone forth from our own reason and knowledge, and pressed in to the
life of Christ, that the Word in us might Be incarnate.
become Man; therefore also all the six Spirits of the wrathful Nature, have
shown their Might and Wonders in us, and have let us gpe astray in Babel, so
that we have not walked in the Love of the Word, in the Life of Christ; but
after our own Inventions in a forged hypocritical seeming holy conceit, about
the Will of God: and have not walked in the Spirit of Christ, but in Pride.

51. And because the Seekers (in the Fathers Nature) have found out Arts,
therefore they have trodden simple Humility under-foote: and because, in their
own Inventions, they have departed from the Heart of God, and so have erected
an Earthly Kingdom for their voluptuousness: therefore all the six Spirits of
Wrath, have justly produced their effect upon them.

52. For though the Heart of God, has sounded a Trumpet with a Spirit out of
its Center, and called upon people to Repent, yet they had always rather take
delight in their tender flesh [and delicate life] and had rather follow the
Devil, who has always from the Anger of God sounded a Trumpet contrary to
it, [ viz. contray to Repentance] and has stirred up Wars and bloudshedding,
of which the Revelation testifies in a Figure: And the Spirit of God has
therefore declared the Revelation, as a clear Glass.

53. And mark what the Angel said; Seal what the Seven Thunders have spoken.
The voices of the seven Thunders out of the stern Essences, would be well
enough hidden from us, if we did not Or, employ our thoughts, purposes, and
endeavors in the same things.
put our Imagination into them and open them in us: for in the Center of the
Son (in the Meek Love) they are not manifested or revealed.

54. But being the Word, or Heart of God, is Or, Incarnate.
become Man, and that in him it has assumed a humane soul, to bring us again
out of the wrathful Nature, into the Glassie Sea, viz. into the Angelical
world, to the wonders of the seven Golden Candlesticks; and because we yet
lay hidden in the seven Seals of the Father; therefore the Verbum Dei.
Word of God, with its assumed humanity, must enter again into the stern
Matrix, into the sharpness of Death and of the Anger: And there the Man Christ
has broken the seven Seals in the soul of Man.

55. For the Verbum Dei.
Word of God, or the Heart of God, which became Man, and the humane soul,
which out of the seven Spirits of God was breathed into Man, from the Spirit
Mercurius, (that is, the Spirit of the seven Seals, which in the Word, is
called the Holy Ghost, and yet from the Center of the Father, [is called] the
Spirit Mercurius, viz. out of the sharp Essences, out of the fiery wheel, as
is mentioned before; but in the Out-birth of the Father, through the Meekness
of the Love in the Word; in this world, viz. in the third Center is called
Air;) has broken the fierce might in the Center of the soul.

56. For, when the soul of Adam went forth out of the Word, and entered into
the Third Center, (viz. into the Spirit of this world) then the Center of the
soul was Eternally Sealed up in the Matrix of the Wrath, in the seven Forms
of the wrathful Nature of the Father: and there was none in heaven, in the
Glass Sea nor in this world, that was able to break open these seven Seals:
there was nothing else in the soul but the Eternal Death in the horrible
Anguish, and in the Darkness.

57. And there the Mercy [or Barmhertzigkeit] brake forth out of the Heart of
the Father, and entered into the humane soul, and brake the seven Seals of
the fierce wrath, and kindled the Light which over-cometh the Death and the
Anger) in the soul.

58. Not that the soul was rent out from the Fathers Essences, as if it were
no more in the seven Spirits of Nature; no, that cannot be; all stands, in
the seven Spirits of the Fathers Nature, yea even the Heart of God, it self
[standeth therein]; only, the seals of Death in the fierce wrath, are broke
open, by the Light of the Heart of God, in the Center of the humane soul.

59. For which, we thank God the Father in Christ Jesus, who became Man, and
Regenerated us in him to the Light, and Redeemed us from the fierce wrathful
source [or torment] in the zeal of the Anger, in Eternity.

60. But because we Men did not Accept or embrace.
acknowledge such great grace and light, neither did esteem it, but were
pleased with the flesh of Adam and the best of this world, (and though indeed
we saw, that God, in the Man Christ, as also in his Disciples, and in all
those that earnestly clave to him, in the New Regeneration did great Wonders
and Miracles; yet we our selves put away our Candlestick, and lived in
hypocrisy, and in our own seeming holiness, and in tyranny, and persecuted
Christ) therefore he left us also sealed up, so that we knew his Light no
more, but we sought out for our selves, ways to God, and would by our own
contrived opinions, come to God. The Kingdom of this world was Pleased us
better.
more acceptable to us, then the Kingdom of God: we practiced before him
nothing bnt hypocrisy, and our heart was far from him: Therefore we must also
in the Nature of the Father, remain under the seals, till the Spirit
Mercurius [that is, the wrachfull spirit in the Anger of God, according to
which God calls himself a Consuming Fire] has manifested all its Wonders in
us.

61. And the Revelation shows very clearly, how the Spirit Mercurius has
opened one Seal after another, and has powered forth all plagues and
abominations Upon or amongst us.
in us, and has brought forth mere contention, wars and malice, mere
cunning crafty subtilty, deceit, and falsehood, with wonders and powers in us;
as indeed he very finely pourtrayeth us, as an abominable Beast, like a Dragon
with seven Heads and ten Horns, and upon his Horns ten Crowns, and our
formal demure Clergy, Ministry, or such as have received Ordination: and are
therefore called Divines, and Preachers.
Spirituality, sits aloft upon the Dragon, finely and stately trimmed and
adorned with a Crown.

62. And there you may behold your self, you fair Bride upon the Dragon, do
but see what you ride upon: is that Christ's Ass in lowliness, or is it the
Devil from the Abyss? your own authority and the eliming up of your
Tyrannical Power, (which you your self have erected) is your Beast; in that
you have set up a wicked compulsion, forcing and oppressing of poor people;
and have lived only in Pomp, State and Pride: your spiritual Heart is the
beautiful glistring Bride upon the Beast.

63. Behold, I must tell it you! behold your self you dainty Bride, full of
abominations and desolations; since you account your self so fair: behold,
what have you built? Great glistering Houses of Stone, into which you enter,
and there practice whoredom, hypocrisy and dissimulation: you give God fine
words, and your heart hangs to the Dragon: you devour the fat of the Earth,
and your Hypocrites must fall down before your Beast and Dragon, viz. your
tyrannical Power, and worship you, or else your Dragon will devour them:
whatsoever you Ordain, Preach, Teach, or Direct.
set up must be accounted Divine.

64. O how finely are you deciphered: do but behold your self, it is high
time: do you not see, how the Angel throws you, together with the Dragon
into the Abyss, into the Lake of [Fire and] Brimstone; or do you not know
your self yet?

65. Do you not know, that we must be borne of God, in Christ, and live in the
conversation of Jesus Christ? Do you not know that the Word is become Man? We
must be newborn in Christ, that so the soul may be a Member of Christ: we
must all be generated put of one body, which is Christ; or else we cannot
behold the seven Candlesticks [or Lights] of God in us.

66. To what purpose do you so much play the Hypocrites with your seeming
holiness; why do you usurp Jus Divinum.
Divine power in your seeming holiness; you have it not, you have nothing else
but the power of the Dragon, your Antichristian Idol: if you desire to have Jus
Divinum.
Divine Power, you must be (in the life of Christ) in God, and so you receive
Divine Power, to work in those who lift up their heart to Christ in God; there
you have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven in the Angelical world.

67. Your Laws, Counsels, Decrees, Cannons, and your singular Articles or
Opinions are but mere deceit: the Spirit of Christ in God, will not be bound
to any Laws. Whatsoever you teach concerning your own Power in Heaven, which
you appropriate and usurp to your selves (without the New Birth in Christ) is
all false and lies, and the power thereof belongs to the Dragon [or your own
power consists in the Tyranny of Rulers].

68. None have any Power in God, except he be borne of God in Christ Jesus, and
such a one can open the seven seals to the inclined heart (which inclines it
self to God in Christ Jesus,) by his voice and word (which sounds from God,)
and can sound the Trumpet into the desiring Mind.

69. Therefore behold your self in the Revelation, in that Representation or
Image of your riding upon the Dragon. How bravely ride you on Earth, as the
Dragon, the old Devil does in the seven Seals, (which would always ride
over the heart of God in the might of the Fire, and yet remains sealed up in
the seven Seals, hi the dark Abyss of the Eternity in the original of
Nature, in the wrathful Matrix,) and so you ride also.

70. And though the seals in the soul of Man, are broken in the Death of
Christ; yet the Anger of God, with the Spirit of this world has sealed you up,
and drives you on, that it may accomplish all its wonders in you.

71. Behold you proud Whore upon the Beast! what have you sought after, since
the Times of the Apostles, who walked in the life of Christ, and not according
to the lust of the fierce Spirit in the original of Nature, as you do; behold
your brave Kingdom that you have erected in the world, in which you go about
to compel men to turn away from God, and to reverence and Or, prayed to.
worship your Laws.

72. Christ Or, prayed to.
worshipped his Father; his soul pressed in verbum Domini, into the Word of
the Lord, in the seven Golden Candlesticks, which are the burning Love-Spirit
of the Heart of God, in the Father, in the still Eternity; there in the source
of the Father, Christ wrought great Miracles.
Wonders: for he opened the seals of the hidden Mystery, and did drive the
unclean Spirits out of the wrathful source of the souls, and sounded with
his Word in the Center of the poor captive souls, so that they stirred all
Seals, and in the life of Christ pressed in to God: and there the Devil could
not dwell, for he is a Spirit of Darkness, and we will hereafter show him to
be.

73. But you take and usurp the Kingdom and power of Christ, with fair
hypocrisy and deceit: where are your Wonders, while you make Divine Laws,
only for your worldly honor and deceit, only that you might rule, over
silver and gold, and the souls of Men?

74. O you Babylonish Whore! you are she of whom the Prophets have spoken, who
have prophesied (in the hidden seals) of the Wonders, which were hidden in the
Eternal Nature, in you the Wonders are brought to Light: But you spoil the
Tree of Life, therefore you must go into the Lake which burns with
Brimstone: and therefore the Spirit says in Revelation; Go out of her my
People, that you be not partakers of her source [plagues or Torment].

75. Now since you are grown forth of your self, in the fierce Might of the
Anger of God, and are a devourer, and have Or, used.
set up the Wonders of God, in pride, for the honor of your Beast; therefore
the seals in you are Or, hidden to you.
sealed up, till the time that the Anger has shown its Might upon you, and
that you devour your self.

76. For you have despised the Angels sounding of the Trumpet, and persecuted
those that were sent from God: you esteem your belly God, and glory most of
all, and love flattery.

77. The Bride of the Beast says: I am your God, set me upon you, ride on how
you will: I will cry aloud and say; the fatness of the Earth is yours, and men
shall worship you in me; fear and horror be upon all those that disesteeme
us; Thus I ride over the bended knees, and over the souls of Men, where can
there be such a Kingdom as we have? [for we are exalted more then Princes
and Kings, and we are honored and reverenced by them, and placed above them].

78. But the Spirit Mercurius, which goes forth, out of the burning Torches
(which is the Spirit of Gods Bride) declares in the Apocalypse: that when the
seventh seal shall be opened, then shall the hidden Mystery of the Kingdom
of God be accomplished.

79. For, the Lamb which was slain, did (at the time of the seven Seals)
take the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the Throne, and
opened the Seals thereof: and the four and twenty Elders fell down before
the Lamb, and said, Thou have opened the book, and broken open the Seals:
Praise and Honor and Glory to God and the Lamb, which was worthy to take the
Book, and to break open the Seals thereof: and the Whore together with the
Dragon was cast into the Lake of Fire. If you understand not this, you are
under the Seals.

80. Behold! when the seventh seal shall be opened, then the Arch-Shepheard
will feed his sheep himself, in his green Pasture: he leads them to the
springing Waters, and refreshes their souls, and brings them into his right
Path, and is a good Shepherd, and the sheep follow him, and he gives them
Eternal Life.

81. Note.
At that time, Babel that Great City on Earth breaks in the Wonders; and all
the souls of those that are written in the Book of Life, in the Glassie Sea
[or Angelical world]: all those that are borne of God, do go out from her:
and that is the Or, habitation.
Tabernacle of God with Men: for he that seduced them is sealed up, the Light
drives him away.

82. Therefore hearken, you that are drowsy and awake, the Day breaks, it is
high time; that you may not be captivated by the Anger in Babel: there is great
earnestness [or severity] at hand: leave off your contention about the Cup of
Christ, else you will be found to be but fools in the presence of God: your
Decrees avail nothing, when you assemble together, and make results, and
conclusions, saying, thus we will have it, this Confession of Faith, thus we
will believe, and then the Church of God will be upheld; and another party
gainsayeth, and they call one another Heretics, and so you lead the blind
Layity, captive in your Devilish Contention, in your Pride.

83. You bind the true meaning [of the Scriptures] to your Art: he that has
not been a Student, or Scholar, in that, can have no understanding in the
hidden Mysteries of God, you say. O you proud blind Men, how you suffer your
selves to be seduced, by Or, your own Inventions and Conceits.
humane Traditions, without the Spirit of God; how will you stand in the Day of
the Judgment of God, with your confounded Sheep, which you have thus led
along in blindness. You have filled them full of reproach, and blasphemies;
and have ridden up and down upon the Dragon, in mere hypocrisy,
covetousness, high-mindednesse, and false Teaching: outwardly you have made a
fair show, and inwardly you have been full of the Devil.

84. Where is your Apostolical Heart? Have you Christ [in you]? Wherefore then
do you dispute and contend about him? and make the common Lay people contend
also, who know not what they do; they play upon your Music, [and dance after
your Pipe], and would rather loose their lives, then leave your follies, and
enter into the Life of Christ.

85. O simple Or, Holiness.
Devotion! Wherefore do you not take Christ (your true Shepherd) to be your
Shepherd, and let the Wolves go? you need not to be contentious about the
Kingdom of Christ: neither have the Wolves any power to give it you, or take
it away from you: you need not ask where is Christ? is he in the Baptism, or
is he in the Supper? is he in the Hearing of the Preacher, or Ministry, as is
so hard pressed upon people now adays?

86. Do but mark, and incline your heart, mind, and thoughts unto Christ,
that Christ may be borne in you; and then you have Christ, the Baptism, Supper
of the Lord.
Sacrament, and the Holy Ghost in all Places, you have him in the hearing of
the Divine That Word is near that is in thy heart.
Word.

87. The Covenant and Baptism and the Lords Supper.
Testaments of Christ, have indeed been long used, without faith, and therefore
are but hidden seals: but if you be once borne in Christ, then they become
opened seals in your heart, in your soul, all is yours; Christ is in the
Father; and you in Christ are also in the Father; and the Holy Ghost goes
forth from the Father in Christ, and also in you: the word of Life is always
in you, what do you then seek after for salvation? When you hear teaching of
God, then the Spirit also teaches from your heart, and there is one Love, one
Christ, one salvation in all places, wheresoever you are, there is the Gate of
Heaven; it is not only in the Churches of stone, where men glister in Pride;
but where there are penitent people together, in true sorrow, who with earnest
desire, long after Gods Mercy [Barmhertzigkeit], who willingly speak of Love,
and of the Wonders of God, [there is the Gate of Heaven].

88. Hear O thou blind Babel! should the Holy Ghost work powerfully in your
words? When you stand before the Congregation, and despise your forefathers or
Predecessors for their blindness, in their opened seal, whereas you your
self are a false malicious Adder? and teach nothing but sedition,
contention, and scorn? you do not power the Holy Ghost into your Hearers, as
you boast, but you drive into them the spirit of contention: you teach scorn,
and not love. What does the Lay Man know of those that were dead a thousand
years ago? are not The Dead.
they in the power of the Judgment of God, and not in your power? you judge
and condemn many that are in the Angelical world, should then the Holy Ghost
in your false judging, be preached into the hearts of Men [by you]? you preach
not the Spirit of Christ, but the Spirit of the Devil into their hearts,
insomuch that they rely and depend upon your fables, and let go the highly
precious word of Christ.

89. Look Or, upon the doings of the Apostles.
into the Acts of the Apostles, when they were together very unanimously, with
great desire of the Kingdom of God, and spoke of the Works and Wonders of God,
and of his Love toward Men, how the Earth moved under them, and the Holy Ghost
also moved the Earthly Center for great Joy. But had they sat together to
deride the Pharisees, and scorned and made a play-game of them, the Holy Ghost
would not have been so powerful among them.

90. Therefore open your Eyes (ye children of God) and go into the Temple of
Christ; and hang no more to the Temple of dissimulation, to the Hypocrites and
Murderers. Yet I do not hereby prohibit the Stone Churches, but I teach
[that] the Temple of Christ [is] in all places: indeed the greatest Pomp is
exercised in the Churches.

91. But if you desire to go into the Temple of Christ, you must bring an
humble contrite and broken heart with you, which earnestly longs after the
Kingdom of God; it must not consist in hypocrisy, where they show themselves
in a holy and devout Posture, but the poor soul is left without the Temple of
Christ, in the seven Spirits of Darkness, where only the mouth is a
Christian, and the heart is in doubt, or else in mere voluptuousness of the
Flesh.

92. O you blind Sophisters! what have I to do with you? that I must thus
write of your Or, Doings.
Wonders? I have not sought your ways, but [I have sought] the Heart of God,
that I might hide my self in Christ. I desired only with the Virgin in the
Revelation, (which stands upon the Moon), to fly into the Wilderness from
the Dragon; and yet I my self must now show the Dragon. LORD! thou do
whatsoever thou will, thy ways are mere Wonders.

The Fourth Chapter.
1. WHen thus show you the way of the Light, the Spirit is pleased, not to
speak barely as in a History, but to set forth the Light in its highest Depth
in its Wellspring or Fountain, that you might look as through an opened
Seal, in Ternarium Sanctum, into the holy Ternary, [or the Eternal
Essentiality.]

2. For seeing the hidden Mystery of the Kingdom of God, shall be revealed in
the seventh Seal, and the Lamb himself shall be Shepherd over the sheep,
therefore it must not be sealed up: for we have known the voice of the
Trumpet of the seventh Seal in Ternario Sancto, in the holy Ternary, and
therefore we may well speak of our native Country, to which our Labor [or
Journey] tends.

3. None should suppose us to be ignorant, in that we write so very deeply;
for if we did not see and know it, we must be silent; it is a common saying,
What the heart is full of, that the mouth speaks. This [which we have
written] was not sought by this Hand: but it is written; I am found of them
that sought me not, neither did they enquire after me.

4. I was as simple concerning the hidden Mysteries, as the meanest of all; but
my Virgin of the Wonders of God, taught me, so that I must write of his
wonders: though indeed my purpose is to write this for a Memorandum to my
self, and yet I shall speak as for many, which is known to God.

5. And now being to speak of the seventh form of Nature, we see that the
Corporeity especially subsisteth therein, for a Spirit is void [or crude]
without a body: whereas there is no understanding without a body; and moreover
the Spirit it self, does not subsist without a body. For a form in the
Spirit, is a hunger, and a longing desire, of one form after another.

6 For all things stand in the will, and are driven on in the will; for if I
have [or Or, purpose not.
conceive] no will to go, my body stands still; Therefore my will carries
me, and if I have no desire toward a place, then there is also no will in
me: but if I desire any thing, then that is the will of the The work or Deeds.
Essences.

7. And yet the Essences desire nothing but preservation and sustenance of the
body, for the body is food: and the whole Essence of all Essences, is a
continual hunger and satiating [or fulfilling], and a regeneration or
propagation from its fulness: as may be seen, that each form of the Spirit
desires the other in its hunger, and when that is attained, another or second
form arises out of it, and yet the first does not vanish, but the other or
second forms it self in the first, into another source or property, and yet
both keep one in another, each in its own property: as we have written
concerning Nature, in six forms; how one proceeds from the other, and how
one causes the other, that it be generated, and yet each keeps its property
in the other; and there now they stand in six forms one in another.

8. And so there is no place of rest, but there is a constant desire of all the
six forms, as a hunger out of which the will is continually Generated: and yet
there is nothing wherein rest can be, but the still Eternity: and yet also this
cannot be apprehended or found in the Wheel of the fiery Essences: and
therefore the hungry Nature seeks in its Mother, ( viz. in the desire of the
soreness), and the soreness catches hold of the desire of the Essences,
and holds it fast: and thus all Essences of the hunger are held in the sour
Mother, for she is their only rest, which they fill again with that which is
in them, that is, with themselves.

9. And herein consists the Dominion of a Spirit: for Nature does consist not
only in seven forms, but there may (out of every desire,) again a will be
generated, wherein the Essences subsist again, but alterably, according to the
desire of that will, where there is no number found, as you may see in the
Creation of the World.

10. But seeing the Eternal Essence does desire a certain Mark, or pitch of
circumscription.
bound or limit, further and more then which, or to go higher, or to be other,
it desires not; therefore the heart generateth it self, which is the end of
Nature, and the heart is the fulfilling of the Eternal [Beeing, Essence, or
Substance.]

11. And the heart is not comprehensible by Nature, but Nature remains in the
darkness in it self, and the heart remains in it self in the light: and
neither would be manifest without the other; and yet there is a continual
hunger in them both, for both have wrought from Eternity, viz. Light and
Darkness.

12. Now thus we see, in the Angelical world, as also in this world, that the
seventh Form of Nature, is a Or, Essential.
substantial Form, out of which is proceeded the Being of Corporeity, per
verbum Fiat, by the word Fiat; and we have searched the ground and find, that
the The Corporeity.
same stands also in two forms, one in the Darkness, the other in the
Light, and yet they belong not to the Birth of the Darkness and of the Light,
but they are the Body, or Comprehensibility.

The most Mighty Gate in the Center, highly to be Considered.
13. THis we demonstrate to you, in Light and Darkness; for we cannot say
that the Darkness is the source [or Property], but the Darkness Begirteth.
encompasseth the source [or property], and causes that a source of Anguish of
the longing and desiring, is [generated] in it, for the Darkness has no
desiring, but the desiring is generated in it, and the Darkness causes the
desiring; viz. that there is conceived a desire to be free from the Darkness;
and therefore the desiring labors so eagerly after the liberty, till the
Anguish in the sharp desiring, Espieth, or attaineth.
discovers the liberty in it self, and yet there it is not [rightly called]
the Liberty, though it be the Liberty, but it stands in the sharpness of the
Anguish, and is called Fire, where the desiring then can go no higher; but
must be stifled in it self, and must sink down into the source.

14. And the sharpness of the flash of the fire, in the Liberty of the
sharpness, holds its right, like a still source [or property] standing in
the sharpness of the Liberty: and the sinking of the Anguish is as it were a
Death, out of which the Life is generated: which Death, affords Ponderosity.
weight: for it is (being compared with the fire of the Liberty) like a sinking
down in it self: and in its sinking, the Anguish becomes material, so that,
in that Death, the whole form of the source [or property] may be found, as I
may say, palpably, or Or, feelingly.
sensibly: and the sensibility, is the Corporiety of the Darkness; and the
fire of the Liberty in the fierce flash, is its Spirit and Life.

15. And hereby you are advised, to enter into your selves, and [you may see,
that the fire causes the feeling [or sensibility] in the sharpness of the
dead Corporeity: for without fire there is no body, that has any sensibility
[or feeling], as you may see by the Earth and Stones.

16. Now therefore it is here further declared to you, that the body or
substantiality, is not so dead a thing, that it is altogether useless, and fit
for nothing: for the stifling drives its property or source downwards, and
affords weight, and the fire drives upwards, and gives Spirit, Life, and
Mobility. And now between these two in the midst, is the Center of the desiring
Anguish, which is a cause of that which is uppermost, that is, the fire, and
also of that which is nethermost, that is, the substantiality; and if the
Center cannot get upwards nor downwards, and yet drives with its desiring;
then it drives forth sidewayes, and the whole form or figure of it is as a
Growing Tree; for it appears in the Center like a
Cross, out of which the Essences of the desiring spring forth, like a Tree or
Sprout (as I may so say) and yet is not a Sprout, but like a driving forth in
it self: like a kindling in the dead Or, Substantiality.
Essentialitie.

17. And hereby we give you earnestly to understand, that the source or
property in the Center, (out of which the fire goes forth upwards in the
Essentiality, and where the Death sinketh downwards, and the Essences
sidewayes) generateth another Will, which has a desire, to put the Death, as
also the fire in the sharpness, with the Essences of the Will, into the
Liberty: and the Will attaineth the Liberty, in the fire; and makes the fire
shine bright, and makes the Joy, and this second or re-comprehended Will is
called the Tincture.

18. For it is a glance or splendor in the darkness, and has the power of
life, and sprouteth through the Death of the Essentiality; and quieteth the
Anguish: yet it has no Essences in it self, but it is the Ornament and virtue
of the Essences, it is the joy and habitation of the Life, it cannot depart
from the anxious or painful sharpness, and yet the sharpness retains it
not: for it is free and a blossom of L^fe, it is not soft nor sweet, but it is
like burning Brimstone, where the fire attaineth a Glance, which otherwise, in
the Center in the Anguish, is black and dark.

19. Thus we distinguish to you, the substance in the darkness, and though
we are very hard to be understood by you: and though also little belief may
be afforded to it: yet we have a very convincing proof of it: not only in
the created Gesternte, Constellation, or firmament, aliter Geisterne Spirits.
Heaven, but also in the Center of the Earth, as also in the whole Principle of
this world, which would be too long, to set down here, but we will discuss,
and set down a few things, to open the understanding of the Reader.

20. Consider the Center of the Earth, which God has created by his Word, even
out of the Center of the Deep Eternity, out of the Darkness, out of the
Center of the desirous Will: but not out of any several Place, but out of the
space and Depth, so far as the Word has yielded it self unto the Receptacle
or devourer.
Either, there has the Center been every where, and is so now, and remains so
in Eternity: for it has been so from Eternity.

21. And this is the beginning that the Word has created [or conceived] a Will
in the Darkness, to manifest the Darkness with all its forms, of the Wonders
of God the Father, in his Nature which he generateth in his Eternal Will: and
we demonstrate it to you thus: Behold the Earth, Stones, and Metalls, which
are all of them as it were dead and afford weight; and also they are dark,
[opaca], and yet have in them the light, viz. the Noble Tincture, which is
their light and life; wherein the Oar [or Minerall] stone does grow, in which
the Tincture is strong.

22. Thus you see also, how the Brimstony Fire is the Overcomer of Nature, in
which the Tincture does exist, and so through the Death of Nature springs up,
in Stones and Metalls; and in Nature brings forth the substantiality of the
shining and glance or brightness; which may be seen, in gold, silver, and all
glistering Metalls. Wherein also we Or, find.
see the poisonous anguish of the Darkness, as also the sour death of the
Darkness, and the strong matter of Mixture or Copulation.
Conjunction; as they understand, who work and deal therein.

23. Also we see how the Tincture can bring that which is lowest in the Death,
to its highest Ornament or Glory, (viz. an inferior Metal into Gold), and all
that, in respect of the great power of the Eternity. And therefore also the
Tincture is hidden from the Alchimists, because it is originally out of the
Eternity, and they seek only that which is Earthly; if they did rightly seek,
they should well find it, as we have found in the Spirit.

24. But we have yet a greater knowledge of this, in the many materials or
kinds of Earth: which we know, to be created out of the Eternal Essences, as
an Out birth, and so are in substance as an Image of the Essences; where we
may see the Or, changing.
altering of the Will in the Essences, and the Great Wonders of the Omnipotency
of God.

25. For all things, which are come to an Essence, proceeded out of the
Eternal Genetrix, not at several times, but all at once; yet stood [or were
manifested] in several times, in the forming of the Essence or Substance, (in
the wrestling of the Center) in the Figure, and were seen by the Heart of God
in the Light, which at length created it; where the Time took its beginning.

26. For the Deity has had a longing, to see the Wonders of the Eternal
Nature, and of the innumerable Essences, in substance, and in corporeal
things; and we give you to understand this highly and exactly: that God has
created all for the Light, and not the Darkness.

27. For, he has awakened the Tincture, to the Death in the Center ( viz. to
the Body or Corporeal substance of the Earth) and that is its Luster and
Light, wherein its life does consist. And, to the Deep above the Center, he
has given the Sun, which is a Tincture of the Fire, and reaches with its
virtue into the Liberty, beyond Nature, wherein also it retains its Glance or
Luster: and it [the Sun] is the Life of the whole wheel of the Stars, and an
Opener of Death, in the Chamber of Anguish, [or in the wrathful Nature]: For,
all the Stars are its Children, not that they have their Essences from it,
but it is their life, and in the beginning, they proceeded from its Center, it
is the Center of the uppermost in the Liberty of the Life, and the Earth is the
Center of the nethermost in the Death; and yet there is no dying in either of
them, but an altering of one Being, Essence, or Substance.
thing into another.

28. For this World dies not, but it shall be changed into such a substance,
as it was not before; (understand its Essences): but the shadow of all things
remain standing for ever as a figure, to the honor, joy and [manifestation
of] Gods works of wonder.

29. And further we give you to understand, that the Spirits also were all
created unto the Light; for they are the Essences [or proceeding powers] out of
the Life; not out of the Corporeity of the Death, but out of the Center of the
Essences in the Original of the Tincture, which reaches the Liberty of God
the Father, which is light, joy, or a habitation of Eternity, wherein the Word
with the Angelical world has its dominion. They all are created out of the
sharpness of the twinkling in the wheel of the Essences: and they stand in
the Liberty before the Heart of God, and they are the Wonders in the divine
delight, which are Beheld, or aspected.
discovered by the Heart, in the Wonders of the Power, and therefore it set the
Will in the Fiat, and created them.

30. And we understand by the word [ Schuffe, which signifieth] Created, [and
in the Language of Nature signifieth] a Separation of the Essences, in the
Center, in the sour Matrix: and therefore there is also such great diversity
in the Spirits, as there is great diversity in the Will of the Essences;
whereof we have an Example and similitude in the will [and purpose] of our
Mind, out of which, do spring so many various thoughts, where every thought
has again a Center to a Will: that so out of a Or, an Imagination.
conceived thought, a substance may be [produced]. [For Example, a Woman with
child, can with her thoughts, set a mark, or make some monstrous alteration,
in the fruit of her womb, which is a substantial thing.]

31. In such a manner, are all Spirits created out of the Eternal Mind, and
therefore they are also Eternal; for all whatsoever is generated out of the
Eternal Mind, is Eternal.

32. For before God had conceived the Fiat, the wheel of the Eternal
Essences, went forth without substance, into the Wonders: but when God set the
will in the Fiat, then the wheel of the Eternal Essences, went forth into a
substance, and there the Time, had its beginning, which was not from Eternity.

33. And we give you highly to understand, the heavy fall of Lucifer; which
[was that] he put his will back, again, into the Matrix of the Fire, in the
Center, and turned away from the will of the Eternal Mind, which tends
only to the Heart of God; and would domineere in the Tincture of the Root (
viz. in the Matrix of the Fire) over the Heart of God: for the fierce power of
the Fire, delighted him more then the Meekness in the still habitation: and
therefore he was thrust back also, (into the dark Matrix, into the anguishing
Mind) in the sinking down of Death.

34. But to satisfy the high enquiring mind, and to fill its apprehension,
concerning what moved Lucifer to this, we offer the Matrix of the Genetrix, to
be considered; and there you find all the Forms, which can be found in the
whole Nature.

35. For you find there the sour, bitter, dark, tart, stinging, envious
[property or forme] which stand all in the Center of the Genetrix, before the
kindling of the Light.

36. But when God set his will in the Fiat, and desired to create Spirits: it
was no other then as when God said to the Matrix [or womb] of the Third
Principle, of this world; Bring forth all sorts of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, and
Worms, every one after its kind, understand, that their body is according to
the kind or quality of their Essences, and so is the Substance or Essence in
the body, which is their spirit: and so also it is with the high Spirits: there
went forth out of the Eternal Matrix, Spirits, out of all Essences, which are
innumerable, to our account.

37. And as we have shown you already, concerning the seven forms of the
Center of the Eternal Nature, where every form is a several wellspring of
Nature; in like manner, out of every form, out of every wellspring, go forth
Spirits, according to the multiplicity of Essences and properties, every one
according to its kind.

38. And the uppermost Principal Dominion, proceeds from the Head-source,
which is the cause of the multiplicity therein, as the mind is a cause of the
senses or various thoughts;] and we entreat you to consider the Matrix
earnestly; wherein you shall quickly know, the Conceived Will of Lucifer, what
it is in its Original; how the Creature has imagined into the Matrix, and
suffered it self to be withheld there; and yet God created all Spirits To or
for.
in the Light.

39. For the Tincture of the friendly habitation, shined out of them all, and
the Heart of God shined to them, [like the Lamb in the New Jerusalem,] and they
should put their Imagination into it, and frame their will and power, in verbo
Domini, in the Word of the Lord.

40. But being they saw, that the Verbum Domini, the Word of the Lord, in the
Center, was as another [or second] birth out of the Center: and that they were
generated out of the Essences of the great fountain: which is, the Nature of
Eternity; they despised the humility, out of which the Love and Light is
generated, and would domineere (in the fierce power, in the source of the Fire)
over the Humility: for the Matrix of the Fire desired to have the Dominion.

41. For we cannot know any otherwise, then that Lucifer was created in the
fourth form of the Matrix: for there stand the Anger and Love in opposition,
and this is the strife and overcoming, where the Light overcomes and holds
the Darkness captive. [The Fourth form is in the midst of the seven forms,
and may turn it self to the Three in the Anger, or to the Three in the Love
of God: and is severally drawn and desired by each of the Three.]

42. Also the Wrath and Zeal of the Eternal Nature of God, desired to be
creaturely, and to show forth its wonders, and therefore The Spirits or fallen
Angels.
they were held in the fountain of their own Or, Original.
Nature; and they have kindled the Matrix of the fierceness of the Anger and
Envy, so that now it is their Eternal Habitation.

43. The Tincture (in their Conceived Will) is become false; because they would
domineere (out of their Pride) over the humility of the Heart of God: and
therefore they were cast out of the uppermost Center into the nethermost, viz.
into Death; where is nothing but mere Darkness, and they cannot reach the
Light of God.

44. For, to the Light of God, there belongs a Humble comprehension.
Comprehension of Humility, wherein the desire of Love is Generated, which
apprehends the Heart of God; And this, Lucifer has not, but mere anger,
envy, and high-mindednesse, and a continual desire to fly up above the Heart
of God, and to domineere in the stern Might: and therefore he is thrust out
from the Divine Principle, into the Center of Darkness, and that is his
Eternal Kingdom.

45. And here is clearly shown to the Theologues called Divines.
Theologists, who undertake to preach of the Will of God; that their devices,
about ways to God, are mere Fables: when they make Laws, and set down
things, as the means whereby the Light of God may be attained: For it only
consists in this, and it lies in our Purpose or fixed resolution.
Imagination, that we frame our will into Humility, wherein the Love is
generated, which penetrateth to the Heart of God, as into that which is its
own, where the humane soul is then, borne in God, so that it embraces the
will of God, to do that which is the will of God.

46. For, All men's doings, without the will of God, are nothing else but Or,
Foolery, humane Tradition, or Invention.
Graven Images of natural skill, which remain in the Anguish of the Center:
and it is a seeking, where nothing is to be found; like one, that makes a
costly piece of work, which himself takes pleasure in.

47. So also, such works stand before God, as a figure: which yet remain in
the figure Eternally; but, to the true Regeneration, to the attaining of the
Heart of God, there belongs only an earnest will, and submission, where
Reason lets go all that it has invented and contrived, and depends merely
on the Word of the Lord, viz. on the Heart of God, and so the Spirit is
conceived and borne in the Love of God.

48. And we have already clearly shown you, that every thing is generated out
of the Will, and every thing has its propagation again in the Will; for the
Will is the Master [Artificer] of every work: for it has its first Original
to Nature, from God the Father, and passes through Nature to his Heart, which
is the end of Nature, which dwells there in the still Eternal Liberty
without Nature, and is in Nature, as a peculiar Principle of its own in it
self.

49. Thus the Original of Nature has the second Principle, out of which
proceed those things or substances, that may be altered, but the Principle of
the Heart of God does not [alter or change].

50. Therefore I say still, and it is the very truth; that whatsoever is built,
invented, and taught, concerning the Way to God, (if it proceed not out of the
Humility of Love, and goes on to the comprehending [or purpose] of the Will,
to the Heart of God,) is only an Or, Graven Image, trifle, or foppery.
Invented work, in the Wonders of God: whereby the Wonders of God, which stand
in the hidden seals, are brought to light: and the builders [or contrivers],
are but laborers in the Wonders of God, in the great building, to the Glory of
God, which [building] shall appear, in the Wonders, at the change of Time,
when all things shall enter into the Receptacle, or devourer.
Either.

51. Yet we do not judge, nor condemn, the desirous seeker, who seeks in
blindness, and knows not what he does; seeing he labors in the building
of the Great Wonders of God, [with a blind Zeale]. For he shall find his
reward in the end, in as much as he has had a will, to press in to God, and
yet sticks in the building.

52. And when the building shall appear before God, at the end of Time, then
the Artificer or Workmaster shall also appear before God. But do we alone
say this? Does not the Scripture in the Revelation of Jesus Christ say; That
our works shall follow us, where every one shall reap what he has sown?

53. Therefore leave off your calumnies and blasphemies, and your fine
contrived ways to God; and forsake the covetousness and high-mindednesse of
the Devil, and enter into the way of Love, which consists in Humility
(toward the Heart of God,) in Christ Jesus, who has opened again the hidden
seals, wherewith we in Adam were sealed in the Eternal Death; and then you
are in Christ, borne in God, and attain the Divine Will.

54. We give you further to understand, according to our apprehension and
knowledge, in the Wonders of God; (because every thing that lives and moves,
is created for the honor, [the manifestation] of Gods works of Wonder:) that
there are many Spirits in shape and Or, shadowy.
figure, which have not their original out of the Eternal Wellspring, but out
of the Or, inceptive Will, aliter Anxious Will.
beginning will; such as are in the Water, the Air, the Earth, and the Fire,
especially under the Firmament, those Ascendents, of which there are multitudes
in great Hoasts, and have also their Government; yet they are mutable, but
their shadow remains; and there are several pure Spirits which do not
propagate out of themselves, but are generated at several Times, by the
working of Nature, by the Tincture of Heaven: understand, the superior
[Spirits].

55. But the Terrestrial have their Center from the Inferior Globe: and the
watery, out of the Matrix of the Water, and they have several Heavens for
their Government, yet they all Perish, or vanish.
pass away at their Time: and stand to the [manifestation of the] Wonders of
God.

56. And we give you to understand, that before the Time of the Angelical
world, from Eternity there has been such a Government; where the knowledge and
understanding, was only in God: But by the Angelical world, is also come into
the Creatures.

The Gate Into the holy Ternary or Trinity.
in Ternarium Sanctum.
57. NOw having shown this concerning the Corporeity, and the Spirits; (and
indeed the Spirits are creaturely and substantial, though incomprehensible to
us;) therefore we will further show you the Kingdom of Heaven, with its
Spirits and forms, and after that, the humane Kingdom: whereby the Great
Wonders of God shall he brought to Light: Let none be wilfully blind, it may
be demonstrated in every thing, in whatsoever you look upon; especially in Man,
for he is the Image and similitude of every thing; and therefore is called the
Similitude of God.

58. There is no Creature, either in Heaven, or in this world, wherein all the
Three Principles stand open, as in Man: and if his soul be borne in God, he
excels the Angels, in the Wonders; as I will show you hereafter.

59. But if this Text [or Matter] happen to be difficult for the Reader to
understand, we would have him admonished, too read it patiently and
diligently: and though he be not able to comprehend it, [presently] yet it will
be very useful to him hereafter, when the Theefold Life of Man shall be
written of; and then first rightly come into his understanding, so that he
himself will then esteem it for a Great Jewel.

60. For the Mind does not leave of searching, till it come to the Innermost
Ground, which is here shown. But if it reach not the Ground, it sinketh down
in the Ground, and cannot apprehend it, and then comes doubting, unbelief,
and contempt, into the Mind, [as if this writing were not worth the troubling
ones head about it,] therefore we would have the Reader admonished, not to
jest with the high hidden Mysteries; for thereby the Spirit of God is
blasphemed.

61. And it is with the Mind, as with Lucifer: when he saw the greatest hidden
Mysteries of the Deity stand in such humility, he took offense at it, and
entered into the fierce Might of the Fire, and would domineere with his own
self, wit, and reason, over [the Heart of] God, he would that God should be in
subjection under him, he would be the framer and Creator in Nature, and
therefore he became a Devil.

62. For in the meekness and lowliness, consists the Kingdom of Heaven,
with the Angelical world, and the virtue of the Heart of God.

63. For the Light consists in meekness: and though it has its Original
out of the Center of the Fire, viz. out of the sharpness of God, yet it
places its Center in very great Meekness: for the Liberty without Nature is
the End of Nature: and the Light dwells in the Liberty, as a Glance or
brightness of a still Habitation.
Joy: and the Word [proceeding] out of the powers of Nature, is the Fire of the
Light, out of which the shining goes forth, and enlighteneth the whole Deep
of the Father; so that it is one Essence together, but with three Distinctions,
where every Distinction has a Center, and may be called a Person.

64. For, the Father generateth the Nature out of the Eternal still Liberty,
which is himself, and yet in the stillnesse is not called Father: but in that
he is desiring [or Generating], and Conceives, frames, or purposes.
comprehends a Will in himself, to [have] the Genetrix of Nature [to be],
there he is known to be a Father, from whom all things proceed, as out of his
first Will, through all Wills.

65. Even as the Mind of Man, is but one only will, which is desiring, and
yet conceives in it, out of the Eternal Will, innumerable Wills, and one
always goes forth out of the other. Whereby we see and find, that the first
Will is Master, and the other recomprehended Wills lead to Light and
Darkness, to joy and sorrow, according as they conceive any thing good or
evil in them; as Reason can discern. So it is also in the Father, in Nature,
but not in the Liberty, for there, there is nothing in himself, but the Light
Eternity.

66. Being then a twofold comprehension thus proceeds out of one will, as,
to joy and sorrow, love and hate, therefore each has its birth to Or, to a
contrary will, out of one and the same point.
will again, out of one into many: Nature has its will to the sharpness of
its stern Generating: and the first will of the Father, (which arises out of
the Light Eternity,) to the still meekness: even as the still Eternity, is in
it self, a still soft joy, without substance.

67. Thus there is a twofold driving in one only substance, and therefore also
two Centres are generated, the one tends to meekness, and the other to
fierceness, and yet are not severed: for the fierceness in Nature is the
first, and out of the fierceness is the meekness generated, which is the
other, and one without the other, would be only a still Eternity.

68. Therefore now, the Meekness is the Son of God, which dwells in the
still Eternity, and Satiateth, quenches, or alayeth.
mitigateth the Wrath, and is therefore called the Son, because he is
Generated out of the Fathers Nature: and is called the Word of the Father,
because he is with the Glance of the Eternal Liberty, [proceeding] out of the
Eternal Liberty (out of the Wheel of the Essences, out of the Forms of
Nature, as the life of Nature) expressed in the Liberty of the Father; and is
called a Person, because he is a self subsisting Substance, being, or thing.
Essence, which does not belong to the Birth of Nature, but is the life and
understanding of Nature: and is called the Heart of the Father, because he is
the virtue and power in the Center of Nature, and he is in Nature, as the Heart
in the Body, which gives strength and understanding to its Members: and is
called the Light of God, because the Light is kindled in him, and takes its
original in him: and is called the Glance [or brightnesse], because, in the
Eternal still Liberty, he makes a Glance [or Lustre], which takes its
original out of the sharpness of the Eternal Nature, as is mentioned before.
And he is called the Love of the Father, because the first Will of the Father
to the Genetrix of Nature, desires only this his most beloved Heart, and this
(in the Will of the Father) is the best beloved above Nature, and yet is his
Essence. And is called Wonder, because he is the Creator of all things, by whom
all things out of the Center of the Essences of the Father, are brought to
light, and being; so that the Nature of the Father stands in Great Wonders.

69. And this is the diversity, [and the cause] that the Father and the Son
are called two Persons, and yet are but one God in one only Essence, that is,
the Father is the Generator of Nature, because it is Generated by his Will, out
of the desire; and because his Heart severeth it self from Nature, and is not
comprehended by Nature, and exercises a several Center, viz. the Love; and
the Father exercises the Center of Wrath: in the sharpness of the Father, is
the Fire, and in the sharpness of the Son, is the Light, and yet they are in
one another, as fire and Light.

70. But as the Fire will be free (or else it is smothered) and yet it burns
out of the dark sappy wood; so is the Divine Nature also free from the inward
wrathful darkness: and though the fire burn out of diversity of materials,
yet it affords but one kind of source or property, viz. heat and light; And
in the same manner also you must understand us, concerning the Deity.

71. The Son, is in Light Eternity of the Father, (and in his comprehended
will) in his Nature, but one only source, which burns in Love and Light, and
is the Glance of the Glory of the Father, and cannot be severed or disunited
from the Father; For there is but one will in him, which is called the desire
of Mercy [Barmhertzigkeit], and that is atrractive of whatsoever inclines
toward it

72. And the Holy Ghost is the Third Person; which I formerly called the Spirit
Mercurius, in the Divine Nature; in respect of its Property; For you see that
every Will in it self, is still, and every Light is still, and the noise
makes the Will manifest, which then stands before the Will, and makes
another Center. For the noise or sound is comprehended and carried forth, but
the Will is not so; which you may perceive by a word, how that is comprehended
and carried forth, which is generated in the noise. And you know also, how the
noise has its beginning in the Heart, and goes forth out of the Essences of
the Will, and is comprised in the Mouth, and yet presses forth out of the
Heart, and sounds out from the whole Person: and declares what is in the
Will.

73. And we find also, that the noise is the awakener of the life, also the
Or, Workmaster, Artificer.
framer of the senses, reason, and understanding, for it is the hearing, and
brings one Essence into another, from whence the smell and taste arise: also
it is the cause of the feeling, by bringing one Essence into another, where
then they feel one another: also it causes the senses: for the Essences [or
the out-flowing faculties] comprehend the noise, so that every Essence is a
will, and again in the will, is the introduced Center, to a Genetrix of many
wills.

74. And secondly, we perceive, that the Air which presses forth from the
Heart, comprehends the Or, Sound.
noise, and in the mouth, makes a Center, where the will forms the Word, and
the will which thrusts forth from the heart, brings the noise of the will,
in the conceived Center, which existeth in the mouth out from the Center of the
mouth: and that noise is sharp, and penetrateth through the heart, mind, and
senses: for it is gone forth out of the Center, into another [Thing or]
Essence, as into another mind, and brings with its sharpness that [minde or
Essence] into its will: and if that will [or the other minde] pleases it not,
it breaks that will, and destroys it, viz. punishes that mind, which is
not Or, agreeable.
one with its will.

75. Thus my beloved seeking and desiring Mind; Consider thy self, search thy
self, and find thy self; thou art the Similitude, Image, Essence, and proper
portion of God; and as thou art, so is the Eternal Birth in God For God is a
Spirit, and the Or, that which governs thy body.
government in thy body, is also a Spirit, and that is proceeded and created
out of Gods Government.

76. For God has manifested himself in the spirit of Man, both in Love and in
Anger, both the Centres are in it; and the Third [Centre] with the exist of the
Spirit is the omnipotency, and if the Spirit of this world, ( viz. the Third
Principle) had not set its bar in Adam, which is broken by the Birth of
Christ, and is made a Wonder: being borne as a Great Wonder, and shown in the
presence of God.

77. Thus in like manner we acknowledge a Third Person in the Deity, which
proceeds from the Father and the Son. For he is the Spirit of the mouth of
God, and has not his original in Nature, but is the spirit of the first will
to Nature, yet he gets his sharpness in Nature: and therefore he is the
former and framer in Nature, as most powetfull and omnipotent.

78. For he manageth the sword of Omnipotence, [as may be seen by the Image in
the Revelation] he is the bringer forth, the Conductor, and the Directer: also
the destroyer of malice and wickedness, and the opener of the hidden
Mysteries; he existeth in the Father from Eternity without beginning: for the
Father without him, would be only an Eternal stillnesse without Being, or
substance.
Essence.

79. He is the Essence of the Will, as is mentioned concerning the Fire, out of
which the Air arises, which goes forth from the Fire: and as you see that
the humane life and its understanding, consists in the Air, and that the
Air governs the life: so you must understand us concerning the Spirit of
God; which is the outgoing and flowing virtue out of the Heart and Word of God.

80. For the Heart is the Word: and the Spirit is the former of the Word: not
that he makes the Word, but he is the self subsisting Essence, when the
wheel of the Essences in the Center of the Father, go on in Triumph as a
Genetrix, then he is in the wheel, in the appearing [or shining] of the
Liberty, and opens the Genetrix in the Darkness, and causes the longing, of
the other [or second] Will, to the Center of the Word.

81. He is the Key, in the shining of the Will in the Essences, and opens the
Matrix of the Genetrix. He is not comprehended by the Essences, nor by the
Center of the Word: but he closes with the Word and Heart, and opens the
Heart to the Or, representation.
pressure; that so the will of the Father, may impresse in the Heart, and then
he is in that which is impressed, and forms in his own Center, in that which
is impressed, and goes forth with the virtue of the Word, out from the Heart,
and [expresseth or] brings forth the Thoughts of the Will.

82. For the Thoughts are the hidden seals in the seven Forms: and they open
the Spirit, that it may come to the Will, that so out of one form of the
Genetrix, many wills may come, and go forth, without number in^^^itly, but yet
in the opening and driving of the Spirit: and all Wonders without number stand
in the opening of the Spirit: he it is, that manifests the Deity in Nature:
he spreadetb forth the Glance of the Majesty, so that it is seen in the
Wonders of Nature. He himself is not the Glance, but the power of the Glance,
and leads the Glance of the Majesty of God in Triumph: he is the joy of the
Deity, and makes the Holy sport, with his opening, in the hidden seals of the
Essences.

83. I give you a similitude of this, in the spirit and life of Man: you see
the Body, which is in it self, a dark [or opake] thing, void of understanding:
it has indeed the Essences, but from the opening of the Spirit; which opens
the Essences, and brings them to the will, or else the body would be dead,
still, and senseless.

84. So you see also, that the Spirit is not the Body, but it has a Government
of its own: and when it departs from the body, the body perishes, for the
Essences [or the flowing faculties] remain in the dark Death, and there is no
understanding: for it is the Spirit which opens the thoughts, [and brings
them forth] out of the Essences.

85. And you see moreover, that the Spirit is not the light it self, for the
light has its original in the Tincture, which is the blossom of the Fire,
but the Spirit is the blower up the Fire, as you see by the Air, which blows
up the Humane Fire: and we may understand it well enough (...) our selves, if
we do but open and know our selves, by our spirit: which shall here-following
be showed us.

86. Understand us here rightly concerning the number Three [or Trinity] of
the Deity: we mean but one God in three Persons, of one Essence and Will But
we give you to understand concerning the Ternary, that there are Three Centres
therein, which are known in the Eternal Nature, but are not known without
[or beyond] Nature: for without the Nature, the Deity is called Majesty. But in
Nature, it is called, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: Wonder, Counsel, Power.

87. For whatsoever is without Nature, could not help me, I could not in
Eternity, either see, feel, or find it, because I am in Nature, and generated
from it.

88. But because the Majesty has generated the Nature, and so has manifested
it self therein in Three Persons, therefore I rejoice in that manifestation,
as being a Creature inhabiting therein, in Eternity.

89. And seeing then that I am generated out of the Nature of God, therefore is
it my Mother, and the food of my soul; and my soul is the food of God: for I
am his praise [and glory] which he receives from my spirit: for my soul
opens his wonders, through his working, and so is a joy In the Holy Ternary,
or Trinity.
in Ternario sancto.

90. I speak not only of my self, but of all men and Creatures, wherein his
wonders stand open: both in his love and anger. For the Devils themselves
stand in the Wonders of God: for they open the Seals of the Anger: and all
stands to the Joy and Glory of God.

The Fifth Chapter.
Of the precious and most Noble Virgin, the Wisdom of God: and of the
Angelical World.
The two Gates in Ternarium Sanctum, highly to be Considered.
1 THou Sophister, I know thou will accuse me of Pride, because, I (being a
mean simple man in this world) soar (...) high into the Deep. But it is said,
that you look only upon the wisdom of this world, I do not esteem or care
for it: For it affords me no joy at all but I rejoice at this, that my soul
moves in the Wonders, to the praise of God, so that I know his wondrous works,
in which my soul delights as in its Mother. Now every Spirit speaks of its
own Mother, whose food it eats, and in whose source [or property] it lives.

2. Now since I know the Wonders, shall I be silent? Am I not borne to it, as
also all the Creatures, that they should open the Wonders of God. Therefore now
I labor in my [employment] and another in his, and thou proud Sophister in
thine.

3. We stand all in Gods field, and we grow to Gods glory, and to his works
of wonder: as well the wicked as the Pious or godly.
virtuous; but every fruit grows in its own property: when the Mower shall
cut it down, then every fruit shall come into its own Barn, and every
property receives that which is its own; and then the field in its Essences
(out of which we are grown) shall be manifested: for there are two Centres in
the Eternity, and each Center shall bring in its own Crop.

4. Therefore consider O Man, what you judge, that you fall not upon the sword
of the Spirit of God, and that your work be not Or, Kindled.
blown up in the Fire of Wrath: for look upon the Image in the Revelation,
which bears the sword in its Mouth: surely it signifies the Spirit of God,
concerning which Christ said; When he comes, he shall reprove the world of
sins, of righteousness, and of judgment.

5. Of Sins, because they live in hypocrisy, and are not obedient to the
Spirit of God, nor believed in him; that he might manifest heavenly wonders in
them, but they continue under the wrath in the first Center, and will not be
regenerated, and do open [or manifest] no other wonders, but such as are in
the Wrath in mere hypocrisy.

6. And of Righteousness; Christ says; Because I go to the Father; He has
destroyed Death, and opened the heavenly Gate for the soul, and is gone again
to his Father, and has called us to him; but the dissembling hypocrite will
not come, he takes more delight in his pride: therefore the Spirit reproves
him, and rebukes him to his face, and lays all his false ways open to the
light, that he might see, and beware.

7. But he strikes down, the Wonders of the Reproof, to the Ground, till the
Spirit reprove him of Judgment, because the Prince of this world (who held men
captive) is judged; And thou Sophister runnest on wittingly (for thy own
profit, transitory voluptuousness, and honors sake) to the Devil, and can
not see the open Gate, which the Spirit shows thee, therefore he reproves
thee, and shows it to thy face.

8. And if you will not for all that, then it is as was said; We have piped
unto you, but you have not danced, we have called you, but you are not come to
us; I have been hungry after you, but you have not fed me: you are not grown
in my Garden of Roses, therefore you are none of my food: your heart has not
been found in my praise; ^^erefore you are not my food. And this Bridegroom
passes by, and then comes the other, and gathers, what he finds, into his
Barn; you should consider that.

[Further Information touching the holy Trinity.]
9. Now since we speak of the Holy Trinity, as of one only God, in one only
Essence; therefore we say, that the Holy Spirit goes forth from the Father
and the Son. And seeing God is every where, and himself fills all things
in the whole Deep: therefore the mind asks: Whither does the Spirit go
forth, seeing it is in the mouth of God, and also remains only in God, as a
spirit in a body.

10. Here see Apocalypse the fourth, there appears before the Throne of the
Ancient [of Dayes] a glassie Sea, wherein stands the seats of the
twenty-foure Elders, with the Lamb, which was slain and lives Eternally: and
the Ancient [of Dayes] sitting upon the Throne, has the Book with seven
seals, which the Lamb that was slain took out of his hand, and brake open
the seals.

11. There you see, the seventh Spirit of the Divine Nature, which is the joy
of the Majesty of God, wherein the Trinity manifests it self, and you see
the true Angelical world: For the Sea is the Water-Spirit, which in the
Original of Nature, is the fierce soreness, but it gets a skreeke [or
aspect] from the light of God; where this form departs; and the skreek in
the darkness, turns to be a sinking down into Death; where yet the
captivated skreeke in the light, (which is now called joy) is also a sinking
down, and is turned into Meekness, wherein the light shine^h: And it is like
unto a Glassie Sea.

12. But it is the Body or substance.
Corporeity of the Divine Nature; and herein the seven Spirits of God, viz.
the seven burning Torches, are revealed: which the Angel in the Revelation
bids to be written, but the seven Thunders in the dark Matrix in the fierce
Nature, he bids to be sealed and not written: for they would be opened one
after another; and power forth their wonders, which none should know, till they
are past, till the seventh seal in Ternario sancto is opened, and then shall
the hidden Mystery of the Kingdom of God be finished, when the seaveth Angel
sounds his Trumpet.

13. And here we give you to understand; what Moses says; God created the
Heaven out of the midst of the Waters. Behold thou seeking Mind! this Glassie
Sea (which is the Water-Spirit in the presence of God) is the Matrix, out of
which the word Fiat created the Element of Water: for the Element of water in
this world, is an Out-birth out of the Matrix of the Heaven

14. For they use to say, God dwells in Heaven, and it is true; and that
Heaven is the Comprehension of God, wherein God has manifested himself
through the Creatures, viz. the Angels and the souls of Men: for in this
seventh Form ( viz. in the Glassie Sea) the Nature of the Father stands
revealed in great Holiness; not hi the Fire, but the word is the Fire of this
source [or property,] and the Holy Spirit, here goes forth through the Word,
in the Angelical world, and forms every thing that grows and lives; for
he is the Spirit of life, in this source [or property].

15. Behold thou seeking Mind! I show it to you yet more deeply and clearly,
thus Nature is generated out of the Fathers first will, which is in it self
only a Spirit, and a Darkness, and yet is driven so far by the will, as into
seven Forms, and out of seven infinitely: But the cause of Nature consists
in the first four Forms; viz. in sour or harsh desiring, in the bitter
sting: in the flash of Fire, skreeke of Tincture, (as the fifth Form of fire,)
arises, noise [or sound] in the sixth Form; and the life of the Tincture,
penetrateth Meekness of the Tincture, which makes the sinking down
corporeal, which is the seventh Form: out of which corporeity in the
Comprehensibility, or palpability, as is in Earth and Stones, and it is the
body of the six Forms, wherein they perform their work, as a spirit, in the
body. And the upper Globe in the Deep above the Earth, has just such a
Regiment in seven Forms; where then the four Elements keep the upper
Center; and the Constellations, [keepe] the wheel of the Essences of the Will;
and the Sun the Tincture of Fire, wherein every life in this [outward] world
does consist.

16. And just so also is the inward Regiment in Ternario sancto: not severed
from this world, but this [world] is severed only by a Principle: for there is
no corner or place in this world, where the inward Regiment is not.

17. For this world is become corporeal out of the Fathers Nature, out of the
Wrath, out of the seventh Form, where the Tincture of the Sun makes it
lovely and pleasant again.

18. And therefore the Devil is called a Prince of this world, for he is the
Prince in the Wrath of the Fathers Nature: and the Angelical world is the
Sons Nature, in great love, joy, pleasantness, and Humility: for the Word
(or the Heart of God) is the Center therein.

19. And the Flash (where Light and Darkness sever) makes the Principle, and
severeth it into two Kingdoms: where one Center burns in the Fire [or
Anger], and the other in Love, out of which the clear Light shines. And you
must know, that the fierce Flash, is the mark or limit of separation: for that
is the skreek to Life and to Death, where Wrath and Love part; which I will
explain to you hereafter.

20. Thus we give you to understand concerning the Angelical world. The
Fathers property is no darkness, but the darkness is generated in the stern
desire; and the Fathers property is the Light, clear, free Eternity, which
has a will to Nature, and that light will, in the Nature, is the flash of the
Essences, and sharpeneth it self, in the stern hard wrath, and drives it
self on, to the fourth form, where the flash of the liberty in the
sharpness, shines like Fire: and there the flash of the liberty divides it
self into two Principles: one forward from it, with the strong might of the
Fire, the other in it self, in the free light Eternity, and it gives the Or,
Brightness.
Glance to the light Liberty.

21. And in this separation, the flash makes the
Cross, where it presses so terribly through the dark Wrath. And so the
fierceness with its Center, flies upwards, for the fire drives upwards: and
the Matrix of the soreness, sinketh (as a thing that is killed, by the skreeke)
down into Death; and the flash upon the Cross stands still Essentially: for
it has discovered the Matrix, and the Matrix has infected it, and holds it
captive: and the fierce flash in the Matrix turns to meekness: for the flash
in the terrified and overcome Matrix, gets a terror of crack also, as when
water is cast upon fire: where yet there is no water, but spirit [to be
understood].

22. Thus the fierceness of the fire, is quenched, upon the Cross: and the
blossom of the Noble Tincture springs up upon the Cross, as is mentioned
before; and the blossom of the life in the Tincture, (as a pleasing fire,)
springs up like a sprout: and the skreek sinketh down as a faintness and
weakness, thougn there is no parting asunder, but the forms of the Divine
Nature, are in such a manner, and that sinking down, is as a joy, and is not
the spirit in the six Forms, which are incomprehensible: for the sinking is
comprehensible by the spirit: and the Or, habitation.
Joy has all the forms of the Spirit, and is the food and satiating of the
Spirit; for it has its original out of the sour Matrix, and so every life
eats of its own Matrix [or Mother].

23. And although we have no tongue here, that can (according to our [outward]
Language) bring these hidden Mysteries to the understanding: yet we speak as
a Child of its Mother. For the Mother has taken up our mind, and our sense
sinketh down into her boosom: where then we see in the light, and know our
Mother: and speak thus of our Mothers house, and of her food [which we live
upon].

24. And though we cannot well speak the Language, yet we know it in the
sense very well: and the cause why we have not that Language; is, because
(according to the outward Man) we are altogether a stranger in our Mothers
house, for the outward man does not belong to that house, and therefore it has
not the Mothers Tongue [or Language], but speaks with the sense of the inward
Man, which reaches to the Mother

25. Therefore here we shall be as it were dumb, to those which are not borne
of God; for (according to the outward Man) we are in this world, and according
to the inward Man, we are in God: therefore the sense of the mind speaks of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the outward Spirit, (which is generated from the
Principle of this world) speaks Or, from.
of this world, and the inward [Spirit] (borne of God) speaks Or, from.
of the Inward World.

26. Since then we are generated out of both worlds, therefore we speak in
two Languages: and so we must be understood also by two Languages, one whereof
will despise this [work] and the other will highly believe and love it; for
every spirit takes its own [the Spider poison, the Be honey: the corrupt Adam
(in Ismaell) loves scorning; the true Man (in Christ) with Isaac, loves
obedience].

27. But seeing, we are with our soul (in this world,) in a strange lodging,
and yet we certainly know, that we must travail, either into Heaven to God,
or into Hell to the Devil: and since we like not the Devil; we should do
well to seek after the Kingdom of Heaven, and to cast our mind and thoughts
upon it, for thereby we gain the precious Crown of Pearls, instead of the
Crown of this world which the Devil has set upon us, through sin,
wherewith, we go about in this world, with brave shows, in hypocrisy, in
high-mindednesse, and in our own authority and power: and therefore we will
let them go, and speak of our Mothers Crown in our Native Country.

28. We have sufficient understanding of it, if we know our selves aright:
and we find it in our body and soul: as also in the form and shape of the
body; but especially in the Mind: but the Spirit of this world, knows not it
self, except another light shine in it, wherein the mind can see and know it
self.

29. For the Spirit borne of God, (which goes forth from God in the Divine
sense [or understanding]) opens to the mind, the understanding and
knowledge, so that man, sees himself in the Bands of this world; yet he sees
not his Glory, but he looks in Ternarium Sanctum [into the Holy Ternary] into
the Angelical world, which he labors for, with great longing, and there is
a continual restlesnesse in him.

30. For he is attracted by two: viz. by the Spirit of God, and by the Devil,
in whose bands also he is tied, according to the outward sinful Man: and his
Center stands directly upon the Cross, and he is in this world like a
Balance, whereof one part goes suddenly up, and then suddenly down again:
and we are here only in a valley of misery, anguish, and perplexity.

31. Now seeing God is so near us, yea in our selves; therefore let us seek
him: and if we would find him, we must turn away from this world, and become
like a little Infant, that is without understanding, which only hangs to the
breasts of its Mother: and we must be newborn in God, with our mind and
thoughts, or else we cannot see him: and Christ himself teaches us the same
[saying] that his light shines in us.

32. We must wholly reject our own Reason, and not regard the dissembling
flattering Art of this world, it is not availeable to help us, to that Light,
but it is a mere leading astray and keeping of us back.

33. This we intimate to the Reader, that he may know [what it is which] he
reads: [it is] not the writing, of a Man of understanding, but of a Child;
as a child [newly borne] from the Mother, is a stranger to this world, [and
has no understanding of it].

34. Therefore we speak of our Child-like Birth in God: for our beginning is
upon the Cross: we are created upon the Cross as to our soul, therefore the
Body also is a Cross: and the Center, ( viz. the Heart) is in the midst of the
Cross: and we are with Adam, gone forth from the Image of the Cross, into
the Image of the Serpent: But the Son of the Virgin, has regenerated us
again on the Cross to a Heavenly Image.

35. Therefore we will speak, what we see and know in the Ground, and not be
silent: for a Crosse-birth keeps its Center in Ternario sancto [in the Holy
Ternary] understand it right, in the holy number Three, but not in the Majesty,
which is without Essence; but in the distinction of the Trinity, where the
Deity is called Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, where the two Principles part,
the Holy and the Wrathful, and there it is that the flash makes a Cross, and
upon the Cross, the Heart of God is generated, [from Eternity to Eternity,]
and stands as a Heart in the body, or as God the Fathers word in his Center,
and so makes another Center in it self, [as the Light makes another Center
then the Fire, and yet they are not parted asunder]. For it enters into it
self, into the Light of the Liberty of the Father.

36. Therefore it is the Heart of God, for it is the power of the Majesty, and
affords the Glance or Brightness.
Luster, power, and glory of the Majesty.

37. Out of this Word, the Father speaks forth his Spirit, [as the fire
sends forth the Air through the Light], which Spirit goes forth from the
Word, into the meekness of the Word, and brings with him the Glance of the
Majesty; for the meekness takes its beginning with the Flash [of lightning]
which is the severing mark of the two Principles: where the Wrath goes
upwards, and the Meekness downwards: and are both the substance of the
Corporeity.

38. For although the wrath in the flash inclines upwards, and also
Crosse-wise, or square.
side ways, yet the sinking down of death is in it also: for the flash kills
the hard strong might; as is seen how it dissipateth the darkness, and yet
the sting of the wrathfulnesse remains in it, where no death is perceived,
but substantiality without understanding: as also in the sinking of the
captivated meekness in the Light, there is no understanding neither, but
substantiality, and yet it has the Tincture, which springs in the
substantiality, and is like a growing: and the understanding remains merely
in the Center on the Cross in the Or, Trinity.
Number Three.

39. Thus we say the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Father and the Son [as
the Air from the nre and the Light] but whither does he go? Into the
substantiality, with the Glance of the Majesty, wherein the Deity stands
revealed. This Gate is called by me in all my Writings; The Holy Ternary.
Ternarius Sanctus: for I mean the Number Three [or Trinity] in the
substantiality, ( viz. in the Angelical World,) where the Three Persons have
revealed themselves.

40. Now therefore we say very right: that the Son is the Word of the
Father, which the Father speaks. But now the Deep Mind asks, Whither does
he speak it? [or into what does he speak it forth]? Behold! the Word is the
Heart, and sounds in the Essences [or working powers] of the Father: and the
Heart speaks it in the mouth of the Father, and in the mouth, the Holy Spirit
of the Father comprehends it, in his Center, and so goes with it forth, from
the Father and the Son, into the substantiality, where it stands with the
Glance of the Majesty, as a Virgin of the Wisdom of God, in Ternario Sancto
[in the Holy Ternary].

41. This, which is spoken forth, is an Image of the Holy Trinity.
Number Three, and a Virgin but without substance, yet a similitude of God. In
this Virgin, the Holy Ghost opens the Great Wonders of God the Father, which
are in his hidden seals.

42. Alias, not that.
Moreover the Holy Ghost manifests the opened seals of the Heart of God in
the Glance of the Majesty, which stand in the light, and are called the seven
Spirits of God.

43. Thus the Image of the Wisdom of God stands in substance among the
seven burning Spirits, which burn in the Light of God, (for they are the
Divine Nature:] and it has the seven Stars (of the hidden seals, which
stand in the Anger of the Father in his Center) in its hand: for the Heart of
God is the might of the number Three, as the Apocalypse shows you in the first
Chapter.

The highly precious Gate for Man to Consider of.
44. This Wisdom of God, is an Eternal Virgin, not a Or, Wife.
Woman, but the Chastity and Purity without blemish, and is as an Image of God:
She is a representation of the number Three, which generateth nothing, but in
her stand the great Wonders, which the Holy Ghost discovers, and the Word of
the Father creates, through the sour Matrix, viz. the Fiat; and she is the
wonderful Wisdom without number, in her has the Holy Ghost discovered the
Image of Angels, as also the Image of Man, which the The Word which gives
being.
Verbum Fiat has created.

45. She is the Great secret Mystery in the Counsel of God, and goes Alias,
in the second Principle.
into the first Principle, viz. into the Anger of the Father, and opens the
Wond^rs in the hidden seals or forms of Nature in the wrath, and is
comprehended by nothing for she is an Image without substance of Generating:
the Holy Ghost has, through her, discovered the Third Principle, which the
word Fiat has made corporeal, out of both the Matrixes, (out of both the
Mothers,) of the substantiality: and he has discovered a limit to that
substance in the Center of the Seven Forms, where they shall go into their
Either with the corporeal substance: and yet both the Mothers [or Matrixes]
shall stand in the substantiality, (before the Virgin of the Wisdom, before
the number Three [or holy Trinity]) in the Eternal Figure, to Gods glory, and
The manifestation of his miraculous deeds.
his works of Wonder.

46. Therefore consider O ye Philosophers, how God created this world in Six
Days: for each Days work is a Creation [or Creature] of a Spirit in Ternario
sancto: and the Seventh Day is the Rest of the Sabbath of God, in the Seventh
Spirit of God, wherein the Virgin of the Wisdom of God stands; and therein
is no more any working of Anxiety, but the Eternal Perfection of Rest.

47. For the six Spirits must shed forth their operations of what is in their
seals: and are not known before, till they have powered forth the virtue [or
power] of their Vialls in the Principle of this world, which Men and [the
other] Creatures bring to substance and Work.
act [or effect] as a building to [the manifestation of] Gods Works of Wonder.

48. And when this shall be accomplished, then the hidden Spirits of God,
(under the seals) enter again into the Either, viz. into their Center: and
then the Time of the seventh Seal begins, in the substantiality, in the
presence of God, and the hidden Mystery of the Kingdom of God is accomplished,
as is mentioned in the Revelation of Jesus Christ: and as we have known in
Ternario sancto, in the Holy Ternary].

49. This Wisdom of God (which is the Virgin of Glory and Beauteous Ornament,
and an Image of the number Three) is (in her figure) an Image, like Angels and
Men, and she takes her Original in the Center on the Cross, like a blossom
of a branch, out of the Spirit of God.

50. For, she is the Or, Essentialitie.
Substantiality of the Spirit, which the Spirit of God puts on as a Garment,
whereby he manifests himself, or else his form would not be known: for
she is the Spirits Corporeity, and though she is not a corporeal palpable
substance, like us, Men, yet she is substantial and visible, but the Spirit
is not substantial.

51. For we, Men, can in Eternity, see no more of the Spirit of God, but only
the Glance of the Majesty: and his glorious power we feel in us, for it is
our life, and conducteth us.

52. But we know the Virgin in all her heavenly Similitudes or Images; whereas
she gives a body to all fruits, she is not the Corporeity of the fruit, but
the Ornament and Luster.

53. The Corporeity goes forth out of the Substantiality, which is not the
Spirit, but an impotency, in comparison of the Spirit, in which the number
Three dwells, and that Substantiality is the Element of God, for there is a
life therein, (but without understanding,) in which the Paradise of God
consists; for the seven Spirits of God work therein; and it is as a Or,
Vegetation.
growing; and herein consist the Great Wonders of God, according to all
Essences infinitely.

54. For every form of the Essences brings forth its fruit, which by the
wrestling of the Wheel, attaineth its highest Ornament and Power, and yet
passes away with being overcome, for all is herein as a wrestling, where one
is now uppermost and mighty, and then is overcome again, and another rises up
which has other Essences: and so it is a holy sport, a joy or fruit of
Angels, a fulfilling of the will of every life.

55. Here again we need an Angels Tongue; for the Mind ever asks; how
and where? for when the Deep is spoken of, which is without comprehension and
number [or measure,] the mind always understands some corporeal thing.

56. But when I speak of the Virgin of the Wisdom of God, I mean not a
thing, that is [confined, or circumscribed] in a place; as also when I speak
of the number Three; but I mean the whole Deep of the Deity without end and
number [or measure].

57. But every Divine Creature, (as are the Angels and souls of Men) have the
Virgin of the Wisdom of God, as an Image in the Light of Life, understand, in
the Substantiality of the Spirit, wherein is the number Three, dwelling in it
self.

58. For we comprehend (before us) the number Three in the Image, viz. in the
Virgin of the Wisdom of God, understand, Externally.
without our Person, we see only the Majesty of the Deity, for the Creature
comprehends not the number Three, in the appearance to the eye; but the
Spirit of the soul (which stands in the Divine Center) sees it, but not
perfectly.

59. For the Spirit of a soul, is out of one form of Nature, and yet can
bring forth in it self all forms of Nature. Seeing then there is nothing
Total.
whole and perfect, but only the number Three [or the Trinity,] therefore
other [things] are Various, distinct, and different.
several, [or divided] as there are various Of different qualities and
properties.
sorts of Angels.

60. And so the Essences of the Center in God, [as to or] with the Angelical
Spirits, stand all in the Wonder, and God is manifested in a Creaturely Form,
by the Angelical world; for they are all, out of the Being of God.

61. We speak thus only concerning the Distinction of the Great Wonders in
God. The spirits of Angels are not generated out of the substantiality which
is without understanding; but out of the Center of the seven forms (or
Spirits) of the Eternal Nature; out of each Form a Throne [Angel] and out of
the Throne [Angel] his Angels (or Ministers:) and therefore a whole Or,
Hierarchy.
Dominion is fallen with Lucifer.

62. And the Kingly and Princely Dominions [or Governments] of this world, have
their original here, for seeing Worldly Dominion.
it has a principle of its own, therefore it has all forms of the heavenly
Government.
: and though the flattering Hypocrites, the High Spiritualty, (as they call
themselves, who lift up themselves above Kings and Princes) will not believe
it, yet it is true.

63. For the fierce Might of the Principle [of this world] drives its
Ordinance of Government.
order according to the Heavenly Form. And although the fierce Spirits (of the
hidden seals) do power forth their Vialls of anger here, in [the Dominions
and Governments of the Principle of this world], and that the Devil gets
great Prey in it: what is that to the [heavenly] Ordinance [of Government]?
have not we Life and Death before us, and may choose and take which we will;
who can blame God then? Every one may go whither he will, To whom he gives
himself a servant in obedience, his servant he is: and in that Kingdom he
shall ever be, whether he be Prince or Servant.

64. And though one be a superior Leader and Ruler in this [worldly]
Principle; yet he has not [therefore] Jus Divinum.
Divine Authority, but in that Condition he is a Steward of the Principle, and
is under the seals, which under his Government bring their Wonders to light.

65. A Prince is as often a servant in obedience to the Devil; as a miserable
Heardsman is, and there is no difference between them, but in the Office they
bear, which he bears To.
for God, and not To.
for himself.

66. For in the Courts of Kings and Princes, the Vialls of wrath, of the hidden
Seals (or Spirits) are powered forth; from whence comes the Thundering,
Lightning, and Wars, Contention and Strife upon Earth: which the flattering
Hypocrites of the great Whore in Babel (which ride, as a God, upon the Beast
the might of Princes) do continually blow up, by their sounding of their
Trumpets: which Princes should take heed of, if they will prevent, their going
with the whore into the Lake of Brimstone, of the wrath of God; as may be seen
in the Apocalypse.

The Gate of the Distinction between the Substantiality and the The one pure
Element.
Element. Also between Paradise and The Eternal Heaven.
Heaven.
Every substance has its Form, which the Reader should understand to be one
of these four, and we will show him the Distinction.

67. The Heaven stands in the Matrix of the soreness, which in the
Meekness is called, the Water-Spirit; and is the outward Enclosure [or
Firmament] which parts the Principles.

68. The substantiality is in the Heaven, and is the virtue or Corporeity of
the seven Spirits of God, and is called the Body of God, which our hands are
not able to comprehend or feel, and yet it is in substance, and comprehensible
by the Spirit: for it is the body of the Spirit; also the body of our soul if
we be newborn in God: for it is Christ's body, which he gives us in the
Faith to eat, as is to be seen in his Testaments: and the [one] Element
leads the Principle therein, as a moveable Life, which indeed is not the
Spirit of God it self, but the Spirit of God has this life and substantiality
in him, as a body, and he is first the Spirit of understanding and of
omnipotency.

69. For Paradise is the springing up out of the Essences in the Divine Center:
which [Parad se] Or, Sprouteth.
goes through all Forms, it goes through the [one] Element, and through the
substantiality, and also through the Heaven, as a springing of a pleasant
Garden, therefore Adam, even in this world, was in Paradise.

70. O Dear Children, if ye understood this, how would you tread underfoote
the Contentions of the Sophisters. Much consists herein, which shall
hereafter be shown you, so far as we ought: let none be wilfully blinded, nor
be offended with the simplicity of this hand.

71. For if we will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, we must be children,
and not cunning, and wise, in the understanding of this world, we must depart
from our own Reason, and enter into obedience to our Eternall] first Mother,
and so we shall receive the spirit and life of our Mother, and then also we
shall know her habitation.

72. No wit of our own attaineth the Crown of the mystery of God, it is indeed
revealed in the Scriptures of the Saints, but the Spirit of this world
apprehends it not. Herein no Doctors (though they have studied never so much)
have any ability in their own wit, to attain the Crown of Gods secret
Mysteries.

73. There is none, can in his own power, apprehend any thing of the Depths of
God, and teach it to another; but they are all children, and Scholars in their
A. B. C. And though we write and speak highly thereof, yet the understanding
is not our own, but the Spirit's of the Mother, which speaks out of its
children, what it will; it reveals it self in Diverse ways and manners.
many forms, in one otherwise then in another, for its wondrous wisdom, a
Deep without number, and you ought not to marvel, that the children of God
have not one The same terms of Expression.
manner of speech and word, for every one speaks out of the wisdom of the
Mother, whose number is without ground and infinite.

74. But the limit, is the Heart of God, they all run thither, and that is
the Trial [or Touchstone] whereby you shall know, whether the Spirit speaks
from God, or from the Devil: for the Devil has also his Matrix, and his
children therein, who also speak out of the spirit of their Mother.

75. Here behold the flattering Hypocrites, the proud vain glorious Boasters,
who account themselves Masters, and sufficient able expounders of the
Scriptures of the Saints, who say, we have studied in the mysteries of the
Scriptures of the Saints, and we understand them sufficiently, and moreover
[wee have studied and taken our degrees in the University] and can make
conclusions, and determine thus we will believe, thus we will have the
Scripture to be understood, and Decree strict Laws, and severe punishment,
against those that will not stick to their Laws, which they execute under the
shelter and protection of a worldly power.

76. Is not this lifting of himself in his own lust and glory, above God; as
the Prophet Daniel speaks concerning the hypocritical Antichrist: Take heed
of those, ye Children of God; they speak from themselves, and not from the
Spirit of God, they have not the Childrens filial spirit of humility (in
obedience and love,) toward their Mother, much less toward her children;
They devour the Childrens Bread, and get the in living with deceit.

77. They are the true murderers and Wolves, who in their conceived Opinions
and proud Conceits, stir up Wars and bloud-shedding, and set up all manner
of wickedness and abominations: they are the great proud Whore of Babel, who
ride in the Hearts of Princes; through them is powered out the vialls of the
wrath of God; and yet they call themselves the Lambs and sheep of Christ.

78. O ye Wolves! where is your The Garment of our Mothers child.
childs Garment? if you have sufficiently learnt the hidden Mysteries of God,
you are no children and Scholars [that go to Schoole]: but [if you have] then
live in the Wonders of the Mother, in her humility and purity in Gods works of
wonder, and we will believe you; Put off your proud Robe and Gown, and
receive us poor A. B. C. Scholars into the Boosome of our Mother, and teach
us The Language of our Mother.
our Mother Tongue, and then we shall live together in unity as Brethren. But
what shall they say of you? The Spirit of the Mother declares concerning you,
that you are the proud Whore of Babel, riding upon the Dragon: in the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, there is your looking Glass.

The Gates of this World; [Also concerning the Language of Nature].
79. Reason always asks; out of what is the Earth and Stones, also the
Elements and Or, Constellations.
Stars, generated? we cannot know this in the Reason and Art of this world,
neither can the Books of the Doctors teach it, we know it only in our Dear
Mother, we see it in the Light of the Mother: but in this world we are blind
concerning it, neither can we learn it of any body.

80. The Writings of the Saints and the Children of God tell us: That God
created the World by his Wisdom, and by the Spirit of his Mouth; and it is so,
neither have we any other knowledge, then that God has revealed himself in
his wisdom.

81. But this world is not his wisdom: but it is a Figure [come] out of his
wisdom: it has not the wisdom of God palpably, but the Or, Works.
Wonders of the Wisdom: and this world is only a similitude of the Deity,
according to Love and Anger, in Nature and Extra Naturam.
without Nature

82. For behold the Starry Sphere.
Wheel of the Stars, and the seven Planets; and also the four Elements;
Fire, air
Air, {water}
Water, and earth
Earth; and then you shall find the ground, that it is all really an out-birth
out of the Eternal Nature, where the Deity has revealed it self
comprehensibly [or palpably].

83. For the Spirit of God has discovered the Image of God in the Virgin of
his wisdom, and the Verbum Fiat has created it; The Form of this world was
from Eternity in the Nature of God, but invisible and immateriall.

84. Note; Concerning the Language of Nature.
Then says Reason: What was Gods Creating? The word Schuff [which signifies,
Created] has it in its own meaning, according to the Language of Nature: and
if you would understand that Language, observe in your mind, how each word
from the heart is framed in the mouth, and what the Mouth and the Tongue do
with it, before the Spirit sends it forth.

85. If you did apprehend this, you should understand every thing in its Name,
why each thing is called as it is: it would be thus understood in the Language
of every Nation, every one in their own Mother Tongue. And in this place lies
the heavy Fall of Adam, in which we lost what we had in the [state of]
Innocence, but in the Regeneration of Jesus Christ (according to the Inward
Man) we have attained it again.

86. You must have the understanding of the Three Principles, for [the
attaining of] the Language of Nature: for there are Three of them, that Or,
Frame the Word, as in an Image.
form the Word, viz. Soul, Spirit, and Body. Behold! and observe whether it
be so or no, as I tell you, concerning the Language of Nature; Try and consider
of it, not only in the word Or, Syllable.
Schuff [which signifies, Created] but in all Words and Names that are in
every Language of every Nation, every one according to its own understanding
[and meaning].

87. (Indeed it is not good that man should have known it, but since he is
gone out of the Inward into the Outward, and stands now in the Seeking,
therefore he must enter again into the Inward, where, in this hidden Mystery,
he beholds the mystery of the Creation.)

88. When you say Schuff [which signifies, Created] the Or, Breath.
Spirit forms it self in the Mouth, and shuts the Teeth together, and
sisseth through the Teeth, as a kindled Fire that burns, but opens the
Lips, and keeps them open, and then goes the pressure from the Heart, and
the upper Teeth lean upon the under Lip, and the Tongue draws back and
leans upon the nether Gummes, and the spirit [or breath] thrusts the
syllable Schuff forth through the Teeth, and the word of distinction, which the
syllable Schuff thrusts forth, remains in its seat in the Heart, and does
not awaken the sour Mother in the strong Might, so that it kindles no Fire.
[The R is the Character of the fire-source, for every Letter is a Spirit, and
is a form of the Center, although by the transposing and turning of the word
they alter, yet every Letter has a meaning or understanding in the Center, but
it is wonderful, and yet is apprehended in the sense when the Light is shining
in the Centre].

89. Behold! Man is the similitude of God: for his soul is Or, from the Center
of the Cross.
out of the Center upon the Cross, where the Eternal Word is Generated,
comprehended by the Spirit of God, there the Spirit has comprehended all the
Three Principles, and brought them into a body; as we see, that the Spirit
lives from the inward and from the outward, viz. from the Spirit of the
Center, as also from the Spirit of this world, viz. from the Air.

90. Now as the Spirit of Eternity, has formed and framed all things, so also
the spirit of Man forms them in his Word, for all arises from Alias, one and
the same Center.
his Center: for the humane spirit is a form, figure, and similitude of the
Number-Three of the Deity; whatsoever God is in his Nature, that the spirit of
Man is in it self: and therefore he gives every thing its Name, according to
the spirit and form of every thing, for the inward speaks forth the outward.

91. And as this world, was from Eternity hidden in the Nature of God, and
stood in the Wisdom, and as may be said, has a beginning and end from the
Word of the Center, spoken forth from the outgoing spirit of the Center,
(understand, out of the Substantiality of Nature, into a comprehensible
substance, where this world appears as a Principle, having its own source and
Government). And so also the Name and similitude of God, viz. this world, is in
the spirit of Man, and it speaks them forth with its word in the same manner,
as they were spoken in the Nature of God, from the Spirit of God in the
Wisdom, where then they were seen in the Light of God.

92. Observe it rightly, accurately, and deedly: the humane spirit in its
Threefold Form has all the Three Principles in it: viz. the Kingdom of God,
the Kingdom of Hell, and the Kingdom of this world, and it speaks forth
from it self, from the source, form, and frame, of every Being, whether it
be Heavenly, Earthly, or Hellish, as it has been spoken forth [or expressed]
by the Spirit of God from Eternity, in the invisible substance of the Eternal
Nature, as a figure or spirit of the Word of God; and was without substance,
till the A and O, and in the A and O, in the beginning and end: so also the
spirit of Man speaks it forth in beginning and end without substance, for the
substance was once Created in the Creature.

93. And observe us thus further, concerning the Language of Nature, when we
say: Im Anfang Schuff Got Himmel und Erden [in the Beginning God Created
Heaven and Earth] then we name [or expresse] all that, out of which Heaven and
Earth was Created, and this the Mind Enlightened by God.
in the Light of God only understands.

94. For as the form of this world was seen in the Light of God, before the
substance [was], so also the Mind in the Light of God sees it in the
Creation, as it is brought into Essence or Substance; for Nature in the spirit
of Man, and Nature in the Spirit of God, according to the Three Principles, is
of one [and the same] Essence or Substance, the humane spirit is a perfect
Sparkle Or, of.
from it.

95. But you must know; that as the Eternal Nature has not the Glance and
Might of the Majesty in its own power, so that it can comprehend the
Number-Three in Ternario Sancto, (although indeed the Number-Three dwells in
Nature, and yet there is a difference between the Seven Forms of Nature and
the Number-Three:) so there is also a distinction between the soul's spirit of
Nature, and the Number-Three of God, so that the spirit of the soul, when it
imagines back into Nature, into the Center of the Wrath, loses the Majesty,
and in the Wrath flies out above the Majesty, and then may be called a
Reprobate Devil [or cast-away].

96. The Mind may understand the Word, and the forming of the Word, thus:
Observe, when the Threefold Spirit of Man says Schuff [which signifies
created], then the Mind may observe the form of the Generation of the Word;
first, the spirit [or breath] frames the Word in the Mouth, and not in the
Heart, and closes the Teeth together, and fisseth through the Teeth, like a
kindled fire: which denotes the Comprehension: for the Lips do open; and
the sissing is the fire from whence goes the Air: understand it thus.

97. Before Time [was], the world was in God, but without Substance: Now
Lucifer the Great Prince out of the Center of Nature awakened and kindled the
wrath and fire, which was not known in the Eternity: for he would Domineere in
the Might of the Fire, above God, and therefore the source of Fire became his
Habitation.

98. And we mean here the stern Fiat (viz. the Mother of Nature) the
soreness and hardness, which was kindled in its stern Might: and has in
the Center of Nature attracted together the substantiality of the stern Matrix
out of the Numberless Essences, whence Earth, Stones, and Metalls, have come
to be.

99. For the Center was {sulphur},, tartar
Sulphur, Mercurius, and Sal, and it, [the Center,] was but a Spirit, but in
the stern Fiat, (in the stern fierce attraction) it came to be such hard
Stones, Metalls, and Earth, all according to the Forms of the Essences: It is
all become material: that which (before the Time] in the Nature of the dark
wrathful substantiality Ein Gestieb. as dust of flower sifted or bolted as
small as Atoms.
, was only as a raised dust, became in the attraction wholly gross, dry, and
hard, and God would not have it so particularly before the Majesty, to speak
in a Creaturely manner; and therefore it was suddenly in that instant together
Or, concreted.
Created to a proper Center of its own.

100. And here arises the Distinction of the Three Principles, which before
was not known: for they were in one only Being, and were only known in the
Or, the Light.
Wisdom, before the Majesty, with their Distinction.

101. Observe the meaning right: as the Mouth forms the word Schuff [which
signifies Created] just so was the Creation formed: for the Lips do open, and
the upper Gummes with the Teeth touch the nether-Lip, and the spirit [or
breath] sisseth through the Teeth: and it is thus; As the Lips ( viz. the
outward enclosure) do open, so has the Matrix of the Genetrix opened it
self, viz. in the Kindling: The sissing is the Fire, and out of the Fire
[goeth] the Air, as a spirit of the Matrix, which was now awakened, and was
not before in the Center, but only in the Wisdom of the Number-Three.

102. The Air [winde or breath] is not the spirit of the Number-Three, but the
awakened spirit out of the Matrix, viz. out of the Center of Nature: for the
spirit of the Number-Three is a cause of Nature, and has in it the wisdom,
but this [Spirit of the Aire] is without understanding as the substantiality is.

103. And as the Fire has its original from the Eternal Liberty, wherein it
attaineth the sharpness of the wrathfulnesse; so also the Aire-spirit, from
the Holy Spirit, which gives life and mobility to Nature; so Nature again
sends forth the spirit, viz. the Air, out of its virtue, viz. out of the
Dumb or senseless.
inanimate substantiality, and has its original in the Fire.

104. And observe further; how in the word Schuff [which signifies Created]
the spirit [or breath] thrusts the impression or pressure from the Heart,
which overtaketh the kindled fire, and holds it captive: and so the
Water-source overtaketh the fire, and holds it captive.

105. For the Water arises from the substantiality, and from the being
overcome; and the
Fire, air
Air, {water}
Water, and earth
Earth, are all gone forth out of the Center of Nature, and before the kindling
were all in one being, but with the kindling were known in four forms,
which are called four Elements, and yet are in one another as one, and there
is no more but one; there are not four Elements in Heaven, but one: yet all
the four forms lie hidden therein, and with the kindling they become active,
and now they stand in the outward substance, comprehensible to the Creatures.

106. Observe also further; that as the nether-lip touches the upper Teeth,
and the Spirit stays in the Mouth, and thrusts the word Schuff through the
Teeth, where the Tongue draws back toward the nether-Gummes, and will not
frame the word Schuff, but lets the Spirit thrust it through the Teeth. So
observe, the Spirit of God has driven forth the four Elements, which are the
four forms, which appeared in the substance, ex Ternario sancto, out of the
Holy Ternary, into the outward, and made an enclosure therein [or a Firmament]
which is called Heaven: and the Holy Spirit stays in Heaven, and leaves the
four forms to their own Dominion, and then they appear as a Principle having
power of their own.

107. For the Tongue Or, Typifieth, denotes, or betokenth.
signifies the Spirit of God, and the four Elements [signifie] the Spirit of
the Center, together with the Center it self.

108. Thus we understand here in the Word, Three Principles; whereas in the
Original there is but one: for we understand by the kindling, the Center of
Nature, in the Center of the Globe of the Earth, and that in the Matrix of the
Genetrix, there is a very earnest stern Dominion, out of which Earth and
Stones are proceeded, and therein one Principle consists.

109. And then secondly, we understand, that there is a Dominion of Meekness,
which overcomes the Wrath and holds it captive, as we see in the source [or
property] of Water, that it captivateth the Fire, and yet the property of the
Fire remains therein, with its whole Dominion of all forms of the dry
hunger, wherein consists the Abyss of Hell in the Anger of God. Also we
understand, that there is the Or, closure.
Firmament (between these two Principles) which is called Heaven, by the shut
Mouth, both in the Word and in the outward Essence, Being, or Thing.
Substance. For the Spirit the Air, gives life to the outward meek water: as
it goes forth with the pressure from the Heart through the Teeth in the Word,
and so there is a Dominion and life Externally, which yet arises from the
Internal, and yet the outward captivateth the Inward.

110. And thus the Spirits of the Darkness lie in the Abyss, captivated in
the [property or] source of the Anger; and have no power of their own in this
world, and here the suttlety of the Devil in the Might of the fire is cast
down to the Ground, in the sinking.

111. Open the Eyes of your Minds ye Seekers, and seek here the Abyss,
wherein the Devils dwell in the Elements, and not afar off, as if they were
far absent, as ye have done hitherto; Mark this.

112. And we understand, that there is the Third Principle in the Word, and
also in the power of Creating: for the Tongue inclines to the nether Gummes,
and lets the two Dominions go away through the Teeth, and holds its
Dominion without any awakening of the Heart.

113. Thus observe the Scope, or meaning.
Ground: the second Principle, ( viz. the Kingdom of God,) is in the midst in
both the Principles, that is, is not awakened nor enkindled with the kindling:
for it remains as it was from Eternity, and is not altered therein, neither
increased nor diminished, in the Creation there is nothing added nor taken away
from it, and The second.
this Principle has the right spirit of wisdom and of understanding; which
has severed the fierce wrathful and the meek [Principle, asunder,] and each
of them has its life awakened in it.

114. And we give you to understand, that it is neither captivated nor shut up
by the inward or the outward: It sprouteth in both, for it is the Might of
both: In the Inward it sprouteth in angry Or, Jealousy.
Zeal, with great wonders and powers, where all forms are working, and
therefore in those Creatures stick all wit and cunning, craft and suttlety, as
in the Devils, who bring Or, to being.
to pass all Wonders in the wrathful Matrix: as the Histories in the world,
concerning the Children of Wrath, do Testify.

115. And in the Outward in Sprouteth through the Meekness with the power [and
vertue] of Life, which goes forth from the Heart of God, through the Spirit of
God; and that sprouting [or vegetation] is called Paradise, and is a sprout in
the Children of God, together with which, the soul also sprouteth: for in this
sprouting, the new body of the soul grows in the [one] Element in the
substantiality, before the Number-Three in Ternario sancto.

116. And here we give you to understand in a true Ground; as we certainly
know it, that the Paradise is in this world, and also without this world, and
that God dwells in this world, and yet is every where, and the source [or
property] only Or, is.
makes the difference.

117. For the Angelical world is manifested in the Paradise, but it is
apprehended only in the paradisicall source [or property], viz. in the [one]
Element, and not in the going forth, in the Dominion of the four Elements.

118. For the Four Elements are in another Principle of another property [or
source] also have another Light, viz. the Sun. But in the Pure Element, the
Substances or beeings.
things of this world, are only as a figure, which is not palpable, and there
the four distinctions are in one, and that makes no Darkness. And there the
Liberty of God without Nature shines in the Glance of the Majesty, but in the
four out-Births there is a Darkness, for the Substances or beeings.
Things [thereof] are gross and palpable.

119. For the Heaven, which is a distinction between the Kingdom of God, and
the Kingdom of this world, is a Firmament with all forms of Corporeity, and
is the veil in our Eyes, for we have Firmamentall Eyes, and therefore we
cannot see the Kingdom of God.

120. And that is the heavy Fall of Adam, that his Eyes and Spirit entered into
the Outward, into the four Elements, into the palpability, viz. into Death,
and there they were blind as to the Kingdom of God.

121. For the outward, in the four Out-births out of the [pure] Element, (
viz. the Substance of the four Elements,) has a beginning and end, and is
corruptible: and therefore all things that live in it must corrupt.

122. For the Principle of the Outward World, passes away again: for it has
a Limit, so that it goes into its Either again, and the four Elements into
One again, and then God is manifested, and the virtue and power of God
springs up as a Paradise again in the [One] Eternal.
only Element, and there the multiplicity or variety of things come into one
again, but the figure of every thing remains standing in the [one] only
Element.

123. For all things are come to a corporeal substance (to [the manifestation
of] Gods works of wonder) that they might be seen Eternally by the Creatures,
viz. Angels and Men: which before the time of the world, were manifested only
in the Wisdom of God, and now shall stand in substantiality in the presence of
God.

124. Ye dear children of God (in Christ Jesus) open the eyes of your Mind:
raise your mind up out of this world into the Element before God [that is,
into the Glassie sea, or Angelical world:] and the Creation shall be rightly
showed to you here, and let not the Sophisters and Jugglers befoole you, and
lead you astray.

125. For the Paradise, which the souls of the holy children of God go into,
(when the body deceaseth,) is in the very place where the body deceaseth: it is
also in the Earth, it is in all the four Elements; not divided but entirely
every where.

126. For, in the pure Element (out of which the four Elements proceed) is the
Paradise: it is a sprouting out from the substantiality before God: its life
and understanding, is the Holy Spirit of the Number-Three of God, its Light is
the Glance of the Majesty of the Number-Three, the Matter only is about the
Outward. When the four Elements in Man, break, then is the soul already in
the Paradise, or in the Abyss of the Center in the Dark Matrix, all according
to that wherein the soul was grown in this [life] time upon Earth.

127. If it have set its Resolution and purposes into God and Goodness.
Imagination upon God, then it is grown in Paradise, and the stuffed dark body
has but covered it, during this [life] time.

128. But if it be grown in the stern wrath, in falsehood and in pride, to
fly out above Paradise: then it flies in high-mindednesse in the stern
Matrix aloft over Paradise out, and cannot get inwards into the Meekness; and
there it is in Hell with the proud Devil.

129. For after this life, there is no regeneration more; for the four
Elements and the outward Principle (wherein the Genetrix stood in the working
and Creating) are gone; it has no more to expect after this Time, but only
(when, at the end of this Time, this Principle shall go into the Either, that
the substantiality which has been from Eternity, shall be free again) that it
shall get a body again out of the property [and source] of its own Mother,
where then all its works in its Mother, shall appear before it.

130. For the Last Day is only to awaken again that which slept, and to
break the Death which is in the four Elements: For the veil must be done
away, and all that which is generated out of the Eternal, must spring up
again and live.

131. But that which is Generated out of the Death, viz. out of the four
Elements, as the Beasts and every living thing of the four Elements, attain
no body any more; and if the spirit of it be generated only in the four
Elements, it breaks with the four Elements also, and the Figure only
remains of the Elementary Substance, viz. of the four Out-Births.

132. But that which is out of the Eternal (out of the Center of the Eternal
Life) is and remains for ever: even all words and works which are generated
out of the Eternal, remain in the Substance of the Figure: but they cannot
remain for ever in the Spirit, and power, for a word of a Breath.
Spirit does not proceed from the Eternity, but has its beginning in the
outward Principle.

133. And therefore every Spirit will have joy and sorrow in its works and
words in Eternity, all according as it is in its place and source, or property.
For, when the Spirit shall consider with it self, its source [or condition]
and why it is in the place where it is, then the source or property of its
words and works ascend in it; and gives it joy or sorrow, according to the
condition or source and place that it is in, every one in [that which is] its
own duly.

134. But you must know, that the sins, evil works and words of the new
Regenerate in Christ, sprout out from the Death of Christ (into which, the
Children of Christ are again entered from their sins) and shall receive
another source [or property]: and in the beholding and considering of them, the
Spirit shall make a Hymn of thanks, to the praise of Gods works of wonder, as
Esaias says: Though your sins were as red as blood (if you turn,) they
shall be as wool, white as snow And yet you must know, that in the life to
come, they shall appear in the Figure, but in another source [or property].
Mark this ye children of God, for much is herein contained.

135. From this Ground we know, that Adam in his Innocence before his sleep,
(which signifies Death, when he had imagined into the spirit of the four
Elements) was in this world in Paradise: and yet it might well be said, not in
this world; he was indeed in this world upon the face of the Earth, but in a
paradisicall source [or property] in the Dominion of the [one pure] Element,
and not in the four Elements.

136. But when he entered into the four Elements, he Entered into Death, and his
body became like a Beast; and the Earth was Cursed from the Lord, so that it
bare no more Paradisicall Fruit: For Adam was driven out, into the outward
Principle: and there he must eat Earthly Fruit, and open [or manifest] the
Wonders of the Outward Principle, and so he instantly became Earthly.

137. For his Body was from the Earth, and Created out of the Earth, but it was
not Earth [no more then Gold is Earth, though it grows in the Earth, and
proceeds from the Earth] for it was Ex Matrice, ex Massa; [from the Matrix,
out of a Mass;] understand; out of the substantiality, out of which the Earth
was originally generated and created. The Pure Element is also in the Earth: as
also Paradise: and it is only the source [or property,] that makes the
alteration, wherein the Light of God is detained.

138. Adam would be as God in all the Three Principles; and the Serpent also
persuaded Eve to it; that if she would Eat of the fruit of the Earth, she
should know good and evil: indeed evil enough; care, misery, and sorrows, in
the Death of the four Elements.

139. And therefore seeing the four Elements must break, thence it is, that
Transitorinesse, (...).
Corruption is in Man's Body; and the soul (which is taken out of the
Etetnall,) remains in the Eternal: therefore there must come a heavenly body
out of the pure Element again, out of the substantiality [which is] before
God, out of the Matrix of the Earth, like the first Body which was in Adam, and
must Or, Assume our humane soul.
receive our humane soul into it, and Or, suffer Death.
Enter into Death, and bring us out of Death on the Cross into the Element
again, into the substantiality in the presence of God, in Ternarium sanctum:
[into the Holy Ternary]: For Adams soul was taken on the Cross in the
Eternal Center, where the Heart of God arises from Eternity, and was breathed
into the Created Body of Adam from the Spirit of God: and therefore the Heart
of God must Or, be Incarnate.
become Man.

140. And as Adam was entered into the Earthly Cross, into the Death of the
four Elements; so must the New Adam (Christ) suffer himself to be Crucified.
Hanged on the Earthly Cross, and enter into the Earthly Elementary Death; for
Death sticks not only in the Earth, but also in the Air, and Adam desired
also with his Imagination, not [to enter] into the Earth, but into the Air: he
lusted after the Spirit of the Principle of this world, and it laid hold on
him: And so he fell also into the Earth.

141. For the four Elements are altogether in one another, and the Ground [or
Foundation] upon which they stand, is the Fire of the fierce Anger of God,
wherein the Devils dwell, as is above mentioned.

142. Note.
And so the New Adam (Christ) must enter into the Abyss of the four Elements,
viz. into the Hellish Fire of the Wrath, and Or, pass.
press through the Hell of the wrath, through Death; and bring the humane
soul again into the Paradise of God.

143. And therefore the New Adam (Christ) was [Tempted or] Tried forty days in
the Wilderness, whether he could stand in the Paradisicall source [or
property], and so eat only Paradisicall Fruit, which grows in the source
[or property] from the Essences of the Spirit of God; and there he did eat, ex
verbo Domini [of the Word of the Lord] and not at all, of the four Elements.

144. For he did bear also the Earthly Image, and there the New Heavenly must
overcome the Earthly, and the soul must enter again into the new heavenly
body, that the Earthly may but only hang to it: and thus also was Adam Created
in the beginning.

145. He was to eat of Paradise, whose property should rule over the Earthly,
and though he were in the four Elements, yet he was to live in the Pure
Element, and then he might have continued so Eternally, though the Outward
Principle should be broken, yet he should have remained.

146. For he was in Paradise, and not in the four Elements, but when he
entered into them, he entered into Death, and the Anger of God in the Abyss of
Hell, did captivate the soul, which Christ brought forth from thence again.

147. O ye Children of Men! Mark what is revealed to you, do not account it a
fiction and a History. It is known in Ternario Sancto, in the opened seal of
the Seventh Form, in the Center, therefore consider what it is.

148. Hereby is signified to you the final breaking of the outward Principle:
Trim your Lamps, the Bridegroom is ready, his Trumpet sounds, the Seventh
Angel from the Throne of Heaven sounds; The Mysteries of the Kingdom of God
shall be Or, finished.
accomplished at the time of his sounding, and then there is no time more in
the four Elements, but then the Eternal Time in the Element in the Life of
God, and the Time in the Abyss, goes on.

149. Go out from the From the Confusion of Tongues.
Languages in Babel: for we all speak but one only Language in Jerusalem.
Babel burns in the Fire [or confounded Christendom is kindled in Wars,
Contention, and Strife, in Famine, and Pestilence, in the Anger of God.] Amen.

The Sixth Chapter.
The Two Gates; Of the World, and also of Paradise; most highly to be
considered.
Note; more of the Language of Nature.
1. WE have showed you before, the Ground of the Language of Nature, how Adam
gave Names to Every thing, and out of what God spoke to Adam, viz. out of the
Life of the Birth, as we speak at this very Day: and if we consider our
selves therein, we find the whole Ground in Heaven and in this world: and we
see it well enough with Earthly Bodily Eyes, that it is true: we need no other
Testimone, then the Great Book, Heaven and Earth, the Stars and Elements,
together with the Sun, wherein we well know the similitude of the Deity.

2. And yet a thousand times better, in our selves, if we know and consider
our selves; for the Spirit gives every thing its Name, as it stands in the
Birth in it self, and as it formed them in the beginning, in the Creation, so
it also forms our Mouth, and as they are generated out of the Eternal
Being, and are come to a substance, so the humane Word goes also forth out
from the Center of the Spirit, in shape, property, and form, and it is no
other, then that the Spirit makes such a substance, as the Creation it self
is, when it expresses the form of the Creation.

3. For it forms the Word of the Name of a Thing, in the Mouth, as the Thing
was in the Creation: And thereby we know that we are Gods Children, and
Generated of God: for as God from Eternity has had the substance of this World
in his Word, which he has always spoken in his Wisdom; so we have That
substance, Essence, or thing.
it in our Word also, and we speak it forth in the Wonders of his Wisdom.

4. For God is himself the Eus Entium, Essentia Essentiarum. Substantia
Substantiarum.
Being of all Beeings, and we are as Gods in him, through whom he reveals
himself; we see that a Beast cannot express, [ viz. it cannot give any thing
its name according to its property] which is because it comes not out from the
Eternity as Man does, it bleateth and barketh, as the form of the Out-birth of
the four Elements is, and has no higher Spirit then the Elements are, though
their flitting senses [or perceptions] are from the Or, Stars.
Constellations, which yet are dumb [or in articulate] and without Or,
Expression.
comprehension of any substance.

5. Now therefore we will set before you the Ground of the Heavens, the
Stars and Elements, fundamentally: that you may yet see what is Heavenly, and
what is Earthly; what is Transitory and Mortal, and what is Eternal and
Permanent. To which end only we have purposed to our selves to write this
Book; not to boast, of our high knowledge, which is in God, and is no worldly
profit to us, but out of Love, in Christ, as a Servant, and Minister of Christ;
To seek the lost Sheep of the House of the Israel of God.

6. For the Lord, has both the willing and the doing in his hands; we are
able to do nothing; also our Earthly Reason understands nothing: we are
yielded into our Mothers Boosom, and do as the Mother shows us, we know not
of any body else, we are not borne with it, from the wisdom of this world,
neither do we understand it; but what is bestowed upon us, that we bestow
again; and we have no other purpose herein, neither do we know to what end
[wee must write these high things], but merely what the Spirit shows us, that
we set down.

7. And thus we labor in our Vineyard, into which the Or, Father.
Master of the House has put us, hoping also to eat of the pleasant sweet
Grapes, which indeed we have very often received out of the Paradise of God.
We will so speak as for [the use of] many, and yet we think we write it but
for our selves, all which, is hidden in God: for the fiery driving will have it
so, as if we did speak of and for Many; and yet I know nothing of it.

8. Therefore if it shall happen to be read, let none account it for a work of
outward Reason: for it has proceeded from the Inward hidden Man, according to
which this hand has written, without respect of any person.

9. And therefore we exhort the Reader, that he will enter into himself, and
behold himself in the Inward Man, and then we shall be very sweet and
acceptible to him, this we speak seriously and faithfully.

10. When we consider our selves rightly, in this Or, description.
knowledge, we see clearly, that hitherto we have been locked up and led as it
were blindfold, and it is even the Wise of this world, who have shut and barred
us up in their Art and Reason, so that we must [be tied to] see with their
Eyes, both in Philosophy and Divinity.
Theology.

11. And this Spirit, which has so long led us captive, may well be called the
Antichrist, I find no other Name in the Light of Nature, which I can call it
by, but the Antichrist in Babel.

12. Observe it well, and you shall see it riding, it shall rightly be showed
to you, you need no spectacles, or Or, University.
Academie [to see it withall]: It rides over the whole world, in all Corners,
Cities, Towns and Villages, over body and soul: and therefore the Angel in
the Revelation bids us, Go out from it.

13. It is so proud, that it rides aloft over Heaven and Earth, yea over the
Deity: it is [like] a Or, Queen.
King riding over the Principle of this World, and over Hell. But whither will thou ride thou proud Woman? when this Principle breaks, thou art then without
God with all Devils. Why do thou not stay here among the Children?

14. O Adam! if thou had not mounted upon the proud Beast, thou had
remained with the Children of God in Paradise: What does it avayle thee that
thou ridest in a strange Principle, over God? Were it not better for you to be
in God? What avayleth your Astrall wit, that you ride as your own God in Pride?
you ride merely in Death, who will bring you out from thence, if you light not
off from your Beast? There is none neither in Heaven nor in this world, that
can bring you out from thence, but only a lowly simple slain Lamb, who has
not the wisdom of this world. How will you get out, when you ride upon a
Dragon? The Lamb flees before thy Beast: it will not bring thee into its
Pasture.

15. If you Light off, and pull off your Dressing, and go in the form of a
Child, to the Lamb, then you may catch it, it goes willingly with you, if you
play like a child with it in simplicity; you must not ride upon it: But if you
[offer to] ride upon it, it flees from you, and you find not its Pasture,
neither can you light off your Beast, it will not let you, it holds you fast,
unless you hear the bleating [or voice] of the Lamb; at which the Beast
trembles, and falls to the Ground, and then you may flee [or go out from
Babell]. If you understand not this, you are held fast by the Beast, and you
ride in Babel in the Confusion.

16. My dear seeking and hungry Mind, if you would feign be released from the
Beast; Consider what we here shall show you, we wiil not push with horns,
and cast you with the Dragon into the Abyss, do but light off, and incline
your ear to the voice of the Lamb, go forth from your outward Man, into the
Inward Man, and so you shall come to your true Native Country, into Paradise.

17. The desirous Seekers have found out many difficult things, and brought
them to light, and always thought to find the Pearl of the Creation of this
world, and it had been much nearer found, but that the Time of the seventh
Seal or Angel was not yet come, the six Angels must first found their
Trumpets, and power forth their Vialls: therefore none should contemn The
former zealous Seekers.
another, for he knows not under what voice every one has been: only that
is Done.
come to pass, which should Be done.
come to pass.

Yet every one has been free [or at Liberty] to go out from the Seal: for
the Sun of Righteousness has shined, From the Rising to the Setting.
from the East to the West: If any have immersed himself in the Darkness, God
is not to be blamed for it.

19. The Law of God, and also the Way to Life, is written in our Hearts: It
lies in no man's Wit or skill.
supposition and knowing, nor in any Historical Opinion, but in a Good will
and Well-doing. The will leads us to God, or to the Devil, it avayleth not,
whether thou have the Name of a Christian, Salvation does not consist therein.

20. A Heathen and a Turk is as near to God, as thou, who art under the Name
of Christ: if thou Or, leadest a wicked life.
bring forth a false ungodly Will in thy Deeds, thou art as much without
God, as a Heathen that has no desire nor will to God.

21. And if a Turk seek God with Earnestness, though he walk in blindness,
yet he is of the Heap or Company.
Number of those that are children without understanding, and he reaches to
God, with the children, which do not yet know what they speak: for it lies
not in the knowing, but in the Or, purpose, and resolution
Will.

22. We are all blind concerning God; but if we put our earnest will into
God and Goodness.
God, and desire him, then we receive him into our will: so that we are borne
in him in our Will. For by the will, this world was made, also our life and all
our doing stands in the will.

23. Or do you suppose we speak without knowledge, and alone? [by our
selves?] No; the Book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ shows us, that the
innermost Chor.
Court of the Temple shall be cast out and given to the Heathen, who know not
the Name of Christ, but press with earnestness into God, and so they come to
him ignorantly.

24. And this is that which Esaiah says; I am found of them that sought me
not, neither did they enquire after me. For my Name, the JEHOVA.
LORD, was not revealed unto them: and thus they are children, not in Name, but
in Will: But when the Driver goes away to his own place, then we live
together as Children, with our Father Adam, (in Christ,) out of whose Loins,
life, and spirit, we are all propagated, and begotten to life through Christ.

25. Or do thou boast of thy Calling, that thou art a Christian, or a Jew?
Indeed let thy Conversation be accordingly, or else thou art but a Heathen in
the Will and in the Deed. He that knows his Masters Will and does it not,
must receive many stripes.

26. Or do thou not know what Christ said concerning the two Sons; when
the Father said to one of them, go and do such a thing, and he said he would,
and the other said no: and the first went away and did it not; but the other
that said no, went away and did it, and so performed the will of his Father;
and the the other that was under the Name of Obedience, [or who in word was
obedient, or had the name to be so]; did it not.

27. And we are all such, one and other, we bear the name of Christ, and are
called Christians, and are within his Covenant: we have said yes, we will do
it; but they that do it not, are unprofitable servants, and live without the
will of the Father.

28. But if the Turks (as also the Jews) do the Fathers will, who say to
Christ No, and know him not, who is now their Judge, to thrust them out from
the will of the Father? Is not the Son the Heart of the Father? and then if
they honor the Father, they lay hold also on his Heart: for without, or beyond
his Heart, there is no God.

29. Or do thou suppose, that I Or, encourage.
confirm them in their blindness, that they should go on as they do? No: I
show thee thy blindness, O thou that bear the name of Christ: and thou
judge others, and yet do the same thing which thou judge in others, and
so thou wilfully bring the judgment of God upon thy self.

30. HE that says, Love your enemies, do well to them that persecute you,
does not teach you to judge and despise, but he teaches you the way of
Meekness: you should be a Light to the world, that Heathens might see by your
works that you are the Children of God.

31. If we consider our selves according to the true man, who is a true
similitude and Image of God, then we find God in us, and our selves without
God. And the only remedy consists herein, that we enter again into our
selves, and enter into God, in our hidden Man. If we incline our wills in true
earnest singleness, to God, then we go with Christ out of this world, out
from the Stars and Elements, and enter into God; For in the will of Reason,
we are children of the Stars and Elements, and the Spirit of this world
rules over us.

32. But if we go out from the will of this world, and enter into God; then
the Spirit of God rules in us, and establishes us for his children; and then
also the Garland of Paradise is set upon the soul, and then it becomes a
child without understanding as to this world, for it loses the Master [or
Ruler] of this world, who formerly ruled it and led it in Reason.

33. O Man! Consider who leads and drives thee; for Eternally without end,
is very long: Temporal honor and Goods are but dross and dung in the sight
of God: It all falls into the Grave with thee, and comes to nothing: but to
be in the will of God, is Eternal Riches and honor: there, is no more care,
but our Mother cares for us, in whose Boosom we live as children.

34. Thy Temporal Honor is thy Pitfall, Trappe, or Ginne.
Snare, and thy Misery in Divine hope, [and confidence] is thy Garden of Roses:
Patience is a precious herb; O how gloriously will thou be crowned; what is
brighter then the Sun? and yet thou shall be far brighter; thou will obtein
a Garland in Ternario Sancto [viz. in the Angelical World, in the Eternal
Essentiality, before the Holy Trinity.]

35. Or do thou suppose again, that we speak historically? No, we
speak, the very life, in our own knowledge [or Experience] not in an Opinion,
from the mouth of another; but from our own Mouth: we see with our own Eyes;
which we boast not of, for the Power is the Mothers; but we exhort thee, to
enter into the Boosom of the Mother and learn also to see with thy own Eyes:
so long as you suffer your selves to be Or, lulled asleep.
rocked in a Cradle, and desire the Eyes of others [which are strange Eyes in
respect of your own,] you are blind. But if you rise up from the Cradle, and
go to the Mother, then you shall see the Mother and her children.

36. O how good it is to see with ones own Eyes. One that is blind, and sees
not the light of this world, is accounted as one that is asleep and dreameth:
for he hears of the Pomp of the World, but he knows it not: he apprehends
it by hearsay, and many times thinks it is better, or worse, then it is,
because he sees it not, and so imagines it by that which is said; but he that
sees the light, he speaks according to the Truth, for he apprehends the
Thing as it is.

37. So also say I, we are all asleep, in the outward Man, we lie in the
Cradle, and suffer our selves to be rocked asleep, by Reason; we see with the
Eyes of the dissimulation of our Hypocrites, who hang Bells and Babies about
our Ears and Cradles, that we may be lulld asleep, or at least play with
their Bables, that they may be Lords and Masters in the House.

38. O Blind Reason! Rise up from thy Cradle: art thou not a Child of the
Mother, and an heir to the Goods, and moreover a Child and Lord of the House:
why suffer thou thy servants thus to use thee? Christ says; I am the Light
of the World, he that follows me, shall have the Light of the Eternal Life.
He does not direct us to the flattering Hypocrites Murtherours and Contenders;
but only to himself: we should see (with the Inward Eyes) in his Light, and
so we should see him, for he is the Light: when we see him, then we walk in
the Light; He is the Morning Star, and is Generated in us, and rises in us,
and shines in our bodily Darkness.

39. O how great a Triumph is there in the soul, when he arises, then a Man
sees with his own Eyes, and knows that he is in a strange Lodging.
Concerning which we will here write, what we see and know in the Light

40. We are children of the Eternity: but this world is an out-birth out of
the Eternal: and its palpability takes its original in the Anger, the
Eternal Nature is its Root, but that which is an Out-birth is corruptible,
because it has not been from Eternity: and it must all return into the
Eternal Essence, [out of which it was borne.]

41. The Stars are out of the Center of Nature, they are the Essences of the
Seven Forms of Nature, and from each form there goes another [Forme], all
Or, caused by the wrestling Wheel.
from the wrestling Wheel of Nature, and therefore they are so various and
numberless in our account: Though indeed there is a certain number of them;
whereby we know that they must enter again into the Either.

42. For in the Eternal Center there is no Number, [or Measure] but it is the
Omnipotence in the springing up without number; for that which cannot be
numbered or comprehended, is not Eternal, it has a beginning and end; But we
know that the spirit and soul of Man has no beginning and end, nor can it be
numbered [or measured]: which we understand by the Constellations of the
mind, from whence so many thoughts arise, which are numberless, for out of
one Thought in a while, there may go forth many more, as many as the Stars
in the Firmament; wherein we highly knows our Eternity, and do most highly
rejoice, that we know it.

43. Or, observe us well, here.
Understand us aright: how this world is in the Ground and foundation of it.
The Eternal Center, and the Birth of Life, and the Substantiality is every
where. If you make a small Circle, as small as a little, As small as a Mite.
Punctum or Atome.
Grain, [or kernel of Seede], there is the whole Birth of the Eternal
Nature, and also the Number-Three in Ternario sancto, [conteined] therein: but
you include not, nor comprise the Eternal Nature, much less the Number-Three,
but you comprehend the Out-birth of the Center: the Eternal Nature is
incomprehensible as God also is.

44. when I take up any thing and carry it away, I do not carry away the
Eternity, much less God: and yet the Eternity is in that very thing, but the
thing is Exgeneratum.
out-borne, and stirs not the Eternity; and that which is out-borne
comprehends not the Eternity, but the Eternity comprehends that which is
out-borne thoroughly without stirring, for the Eternity, as also the Deity, is
in one place as well as in another, [every where]: for there is no place [in
the Eternity,] but the out-birth makes a place and room. Therefore God says;
I am A and O, the beginning and the End.

45. This world makes a beginning, and God in the Number-Three [not without
it] is the beginning, and it also makes an end, and that is the Eternity, and
also God; For before [the time of] this world there was nothing but God from
Eternity; and after this world, there will be nothing but God in Eternity: but
the cause why we comprehend not this, is because there is no comprehensibility
in God. For, where there is a Comprehensibility [as there is in the Trinity]
there is beginning and end. And therefore we are shut up in darkness, that
we might labor and manifest God; as we have mentioned to you, concerning the
Seven Forms of Nature, what an Eternal labor there is therein, so that one
form generateth another, till they are all brought to Light, and so the
Eternal is manifest in a Threefold Form, which otherwise would not be known.

46. And we declare unto you, that the Eternal Being, and also this world,
is like Man; the Eternity generateth nothing but that which is like it self,
for there is nothing in it, but is like it, and it is unchangeable, or else it
would Or, cease to be.
pass away, or it would come to be some other thing, and that cannot be.

47. And as you find Man to be, just so is the Eternity: consider Man, in body
and soul, in good and evil, in joy and sorrow, in light and darkness, in
power and weakness, in life and death: All is in Man, both Heaven and Earth,
Stars, and Elements: and also the Number-Three of the Deity, neither can
there be any thing named that is not in Man; all Creatures, (both in this
world, and in the Angelical world,) are in Man. All of us, together with the
whole Essence of all Essences, are but one body, having many members, each
member whereof is a Total: and each member has but one Peculiar, singular,
individual faculty or Office.
several work.

48. O Man! seek thy self, and thou shall find thy self. Behold! thy whole
Man [consisteth of] Three Principles, one whereof is not without the other, one
of them is not beside or above the other, but they are in one another as one,
and they are but one thing; but according to the Creation they are Three.

49. You will say, how can that be? Adams soul was out of the Eternal w ll,
out of the Center of Nature, upon the Cross of the Number-Three, where light
and darkness do part; understand, he was not a divided sparkle, as a piece of
the whole, for he is no piece, but totally all, as there is a Total in every
Point or A^^m.
Punctum.

50. Now the Eternal Center makes the Eternal substantiality, ( viz. the
sinking down and springing up, whence the stirring of the Elements does arise,
as also penetration and multiplication, whereas there is only such a kind of
Spirit) and the substantiality is the body, and a weakness, for its a sinking
down, and the Spirit is the springing up.

51. Now the Spirit created the Substantiality into an Image, like the Cross
of the Number-Three, and breathed in the spirit of the Number-Three, viz.
himself; and so the Image Wa^^ stood.
Existed: and then instantly out of the Substantiality of the Image sprung up
the blossom of the Essences, which is called Paradise: and thus stood the
Image in the Angelical World.

52. And so there is nothing less in the Image, then in the Center of Nature,
viz. the original of soreness, wrathfulnesse, and of fire, also all the
forms of Nature; whatsoever was seen from Eternity in the Wisdom, that was
all in this Image, also the power to light and darkness, and the Wisdom stood
in the light of the Image, wherein stand all the Eternal Wonders, even the
Image of every Creature, in the sinking down of Death, and in the source [or
property] of the Paradisicall Life.

53. This we understand to be the Matrix of the Genetrix in the darkness;
viz. that out of which Angels and Devils come to be, as is abovementioned.
This Or, property.
source was wholly in the Image, for it was a whole similitude of the Eternal
Being; as Moses writes concerning it, that God made Man According to, for, or
to be, his Image.
his Image: so that it may be said, (if one did see Man standing in Paradise,)
here is the whole Eternity manifested in an Image, to speak in a creaturely
manner of it, and yet it is so truly and rightly in the understanding.

54. Now as Lucifer by his flying out, in the source of the Fire, Imagined
beyond the still meek Number-Three above the Cross in the Majesty, and so
awakened to himself the Matrix of the Fire in himself, and kindled the Matrix
of Nature; which kindling became corporeal; and was instantly together created
by the Verbum Fiat: where also the second form of the Matrix, viz. the
Meekness of the substantiality was kindled together with it, out of which,
water came to be, which was Or, created.
made an Heaven, (by which the fire was captivated) out of which the Stars
were Generated; so you must understand also, that Man.
the Image of God thus Or, lusted.
Imagined after the awakened life, viz. after the awakened spirit of the Air,
(indeed the Air was together breathed into him) but the Man's spirit.
spirit of the Center should overruled it, as the Holy Spirit over [ruleth]
this world: for he should live in the Or, virtue.
power of God, and be a Lord over the four Elements, but in the fall they
became his Lord. And now if he would live in God, he must enter into himself
again, and likewise leave the Old Body to the four Elements, (and must in
himself, be borne in God.) And so he was instantly also captivated by the Air
of the Out-birth, and then the Stars, Elements, Heaven, Hell, Death, and
Life, wrought together in him.

55. But seeing there is a Firmament created, between God and the Dominion of
this world, by the Spirit of God; therefore man is composed of Three Parts,
(viz. Three Principles; one, is the hidden Deity, which stands in the
Firmament of Heaven in it self as a Principle of its own; the second is the
Dominion of this world, viz. the Stars and Elements; and the Third is the
Abyss of the Image, and also the Abyss of this world, viz. the Wrath, or the
Matrix of Nature, out of which All things are proceeded.

56. And now the Image, viz. Man, is in the Midst, viz. between the Kingdom
of God, and the Kingdom of Hell: between Love and Anger: and to which of these
two Spirits he yields, its [servant] he is.

57. And though Man cast himself into the Anger, yet the Deity loses
nothing; for the first Breathing in, viz. the Spirit of God it self, has its
principle to it self, and is not touched by the Anger; just as the
Number-Three, dwells in the midst of the Anger, and yet the Anger stirs
it not, nor knows it, therein is neither feeling nor seeing.

58. For the Image stirs the source of the Anger: and the first in-breathed
Spirit, springs up in the Image, in the fierceness of Pride; according as it
has built up it self in this [life] Time; and yet the first in-breathed Form
loses nothing. For that source [or property] is not in the Image; but it
goes back again into its Principle, with the Beauteous virgin of wisdom: and
the Image of Man, comes to be the Image of the Serpent.

59. For as the Spirit is, so is the Body; and in what will the Spirit flies,
in such a form and source [or property] it figureth the body also.

60. So we know now, that all comes out of one only fountain, and that the
palpable substance of this world has had a beginning, and therefore it is also
A Death, or a deadly thing.
Mortal; for whatsoever is not from Eternity is mortal.

61. But that the Image of Man might subsist, (which also has a beginn^ng as
to the body) therefore God is become Man, and dwells again in the soul, and
the soul attaineth again the first Image without this world, yet those only,
who, with the Spirit of the Soul incline themselves to God: and here it may be
said, We must be Borne a New, or be lost Eternally in Hell, and [thrust out]
from God.

62. Thus we say with [good] Ground: that the stairy Heaven, viz. the Third
Principle of this world, was created also a Total Or, Corpus.
Body, having a Or, Circumference.
Circumscription, and stands Or, upright.
just like the Center of Nature; whatsoever thou see in this Great
Circumference, the same is also in the smallest Or, Point.
Circle: and the whole Principle of this world outwardly, is only a
manifestation and discovery of the Eternity in God. It has its rising, Form
or subsistence.
station, and generating, like the Eternal Nature; and as the Eternal Nature
does always generate it self, and has its original from Eternity to
Eternity; just so is this visible Dominion of this world Generated and Created.

63. For it has a high round Circumference like a Circle, and there stand the
Or, fixed Stars.
Constellations: and after that, the Great Deep, which resembles the Eternal
Liberty of God: now the seven Planets are in the Deep, which resemble the
seven Spirits of Nature, and the Stars [resemble the Effects or] Essences
proceeding out of the Spirits of Nature: and the Sun is the middlemost of the
Planets, which makes the four quarters of the World, and it stands in the
Point, as in a
Cross, and resembles the Heart of God: Its Luster in the Deep resembles
the Majesty of God: where God dwells in himself, and is comprehended by
nothing: and there is nothing of him seen but the Majesty, where the Center of
Nature is known in all Heavenly Images out of the Eternal.

64. The Earth resembles the sincking down of the Eternal Death in the Dark
Matrix: and yet there is no Death therein, but a springing forth of the fierce
Essences: and thus it resembles a form in the Center, and a peculiar
selfe-Dominion, and is a figure [or Type] of Hell: as a hidden Dominion in the
Darkness.

65. And as the Earth in Comparison of the Upper Dominion, is counted as a
Death; so the fierce Matrix of the Anger, is as a Death in comparison of God:
and yet there is no Death in either, but an Eternal Life in a twofold source,
[or property; viz. the Life in Eternal Joy, and the Life in Eternal Torment].

66. And now we see that the Sun makes the Great Deep, above the Earth,
lovely, friendly, pleasant, and delightful; or else there would be no other
[Rule, influence, or] Dominion, in the Deep, then is in the Earth: for if the
Sun should As when a Candle goes out.
go out, there would be an Eternal Darkness, and the fierce sour
astringency would make all hard, rough, and harsh, and there would be an
Eternal Coldness. And although every thing did move together like a wheel,
yet there would be nothing seen but a flash of fire.

67. Thus we give you to understand concerning the Abyss of Hell, that it is
in this world: and the Sun only is the cause of the Waters, which are the
Heaven in the Deep Moreover by the Sun, the Heart of God may be understood,
out of which the Light of the Majesty shines: for the whole Center of the
Eternity would be dark, if the light from the Heart of God did not shine
therein.

68. But it is not so with the Heart of God, as with the Sun, that it should be
a Globe standing in one place only: no, it has no Circumscription
[Circumference] or Place; also it has no beginning, and yet it is like a round
Globe, yet not a round Circle, but it is as it were parted [divided] or Or,
Pertuse.
open; for it is as a Round round cross-wheel
Crosse-Wheele, like a whole Rainbow, which yet appears as it were parted.

69. For the whole Cross is its parting, and yet it is whole; but the Center
of Nature ( viz. the Word of the Lord, Verbum Domini, the Word of the Father,
is there the Center of the Cross. The Cross every where signifies the
Number-Three: where then beneath, blew appears, which signifies the
substantiality, in the middle appears Red, which signifies the Father in the
Glance of Fire, Text under.
next which appears Yellow, which signifies the Light and Luster of the
Majesty of God the Son; and the Or, Purple.
Dusky Brown, with the mixture of all Forms, signifies the other Kingdom,
of Darkness, in the Fire, in which Lucifer did Fly out.
soar aloft above God, and did not lay hold on the Majesty and Heart of God.

70. And upon such a Bow will Christ the Son of Man appear at the last
Jugement; for so he sits in the Majesty of the Number-Three in Ternario
sancto: understand the Angelical world [in the Eternal Substantiality] and
Paradise.

71. Thus know, that all this is not divided, nor is it thus in one place
alone, but this Form [or manner] appears in its Principle Every where. If
thou conceivest a small minute Circle, as small as a Grain of Mustard Seed,
yet the Heart of God is wholly and perfectly therein: and if thou art borne in
God, then there is, in thy self, (in the Circle of thy Life) the whole Heart
of God undivided: and the Son of Man (Christ) sits thus (in the Circle of
thy life, upon the Rainbow in Ternario Sancto) at the Right hand of God: and
thus thou art his child, whom he has regenerated in him [in Christ]: as also
Christ's Member and Body, wherein he dwells; his Brother, his Flesh and
Spirit; and a Child of God the Father in him; God in thee, and thou in God:
Power, Might, Majesty, Heaven, Paradise, Element, Stars, and Earth, all is
thine. Thou art (in Christ) Or, above.
over Hell and Devils.

72. But in this world, with thy Earthly Life, thou art under Heaven, Stars,
and Elements, also under Hell and Devils, all Rules in thee, and over thee.

73. Therefore consider thy self, and go forth [from thy selfe]: it is of
high concernment, we speak what we know, and what we must speak, for we
ought not to speak otherwise of the Eternity, unless we should speak as if
it had a beginning, whereas there is none in the Eternity.

74. Nor do not think that Mankind has such a beginning, as we must say of
our selves, according to the Creation: no, the Image has appeared in God from
Eternity in the virgin of wisdom; but not in substance [or distinction;] it
was no Woman nor Man, but it was Both; as Adam was both, before Eve was, which
[divided distinction] signifies the Earthly, and also the Beastiall Man; for
nothing subsisteth in Eternity, unless it have been from Eternity.

75. O ye children of God, open the eyes of your Inward Man, and see rightly;
If you be newborn in God, then you put on that very Eternal Image, and the
Man Christ is Or, Incarnate.
become Man in that very Image, viz. in the Eternal Virgin; for no mortal
virgin is pure, and he was conceived by the Holy Spirit in a pure virgin, and
in respect of our soul which he should assume, he is also [become Man] in the
mortal virgin: for Mary had all the Three Principles in her: and the Image of
the Eternal virgin consisted in the Divine and Eternal substantiality; it was
indeed without substance, but in the Man Christ, it came to be a substance.

76. We do not say concerning the Outward virgin Mary, that she was not the
Daughter of Joachim and Anna; as the Ancients have Erred, to whom the Light of
God has not so shined, because, they sought their own profit therein.

77. For Mary was begotten of the Seed of Joachim and Anna, like other Persons,
but she was the blessed among Women: in her, the Eternal virgin in Ternario
sancto, which was from Eternity, discovered it self: not that it entered into
her from without, no Sir, it is clean otherwise. Here God and Man became one
again: what Adam lost, was here revived again; understand it right; The Word
of the Lord, Verbum Domini, the Word of the Father on the Crose, came into
Mary, understand into the Earthly Mary.

78. Now, where the Word is, there is [also] the virgin [or Wisdom of God] for
the Word is in the Wisdom: and the one is not without the other, or else the
Eternity would be divided.

79. And now when the Word in Mary, in her flesh and blood, entered into her
Matrix, then the Fiat was in the Matrix, but it did not in one moment create a
complete Earthly Man, nor a Heavenly neither; but it began the Incarnation [or
becoming Man]: for the Divine Nature is neither augmented nor diminished, but
is always complete.

80. But know this, that the Eternal virgin that was without substance, gave
in it self together with the becoming Man [or Incarnation], and the true soul
of Christ was out of Maryes Essences, conceived in the Eternal virgin: and in
the Eternal virgin, God became Man, and so the Eternal virgin came into
substantiality, for it gat the humane soul into it. Thus the humane soul of
Christ stood in the Earthly Essences, as also, in the virgin of the Eternal
Wisdom in Ternario Sancto, in the Trinity of God: for the Word of the Lord was
in Or, her, the Virgin.
it, and God and Man became one Person.

81. In this Person [which was God and Man] were all the Three Principles open,
undivided; the virgin in Ternario Sancto gives the Heavenly Body, and Mary the
Earthly [Body]: and the Word was in the Center upon the Cross, in the
Number-Three; whereas we say that the Word is become Flesh, and it is so.

82. Behold! the virgin of Eternity has no Flesh, nor has had none from
Eternity, (except in Adam before the Fall, which afterward came to be Earthly)
but it took humane flesh upon it: understand [it thus,] the Word together with
the whole Deity was in the virgin: For without the Word there were no
understanding in the Eternal Virgin.

83. For the Spirit of God was in the Word, and he was the understanding, but
the Word was as a Heavenly Figure, a figure of the Number-Three; but not in the
working; as indeed the Flesh works not, but the Spirit in the Flesh [worketh.]

84. And the Living Word which dwells in the Eternal virgin, attracteth to
it the Flesh of Mary, understand it thus, the Word attracted the Flesh, ( viz.
the Essences [or faculties] out of the Body of Mary) into the Eternal Virgin:
and so in Nine Months, there was a complete Man, with soul, spirit, and
Flesh.

85. And thus the perished soul of Adam in the Body of Mary was again set in
the Eternal Humanity, for the Word dwelt in Christ's flesh, and assumed the
soul in him.

86. Not that the soul and the Word is one and the same Being or Thing.
Substance; No, the soul is out of the Center of Nature, generated out of the
Essences, and it belongs to the body: for it goes forth from the Essences of
the Body, and it attracteth Corporeity to it: But the Word is out of the Center
of the Majesty, and attracteth Majesty to it.

87. The Word is without substance, and the soul is out of the substance, it
is the Spirit of the substance, out of the Center of the Father; or else it
could not in Adam have gone forth from the Word; not that the Word and the
soul stand one by another, like two Persons; no, the Word penetrateth through
the soul: and out of the Word, the Majesty shines, viz. the Light of Life:
And the soul is free of it self, for it is a Creature.

88. I give you an Earthly similitude of this. Behold a bright flaming piece of
Iron, which of it self is dark and black, and the fire so penetrateth and
shines through the Iron that it gives Light. Now the Iron does not cease to
be; it is Iron still: and the source [or property] of the Fire retains its
own propriety: it does not take the Iron into it, but it penetrateth [and
shineth] through the Iron; and it is Iron then as well as before, free in it
self: and so also is the source [or property] of the Fire: in such a manner is
the soul set in the Deity: the Deity penetrateth through the soul, and
dwells in the soul, yet the soul does not comprehend the Deity, but the
Deity comprehends the soul, but does not alter it [from being a soule] but
only gives it the Divine source [or property] of the Majesty.

89. And so if the soul incline it self to the Divine source [or property]
then it stays in the Majesty of God, for the source [or property] betokens
the Word, and the Glance [betokeneth] the Majesty: and that which proceeds
from the source [or property] as heat out of the fire, that betokens the
Holy Spirit.

90. But now if the flaming Iron, be cast, or fall into the water, then the
property of the fire, the Glance and the heat which proceeds from it, is all
quenched together; thus it is also with Adam: he cast himself out from the
Majesty of God (with his will), into the Spirit of this world: and so he went
from God.

91. Not that God Or, was extinguished.
went out in him, like the flaming of the Iron: no, that cannot be; The Glance,
Luster, or Majesty.
It shines Eternally: God continues in his Principle, and Adam went out from
it: if Adams will had continued in God, he should have continued the child of
God, and God would have continued in his will, and so the Majesty would have
shined through the will.

92. But he went out from the will of God, into this world, and so was
captivated by the World, Death, Devils, and Hell, and they dwelt in Adam.

93. Adam was in this world: dwelling in the Elements, and God breathed the
Air also into his Nostrills: but he should not have put his will into it, to
eat of Earthly fruit, which makes earthly flesh. That was his Fall, that he
did Eat Earthly Fruit; and therefore his Essences also became Earthly: and the
soul became captivated by the Earthly Dominion.

94. And there the Word of the Lord said to the soul, Adam, where art thou?
and his body did hide it self; so very much ashamed was the poor soul: and
Adam said I am naked; the precious heavenly virgin (which he was clothed
withal) was lost, as also, the Light of the Majesty; and Adam was without the
Word.

95. O how terrible is it to those that understand it, the soul trembles at
it, and it may well be afraid of this captivity, when the poor soul must be
captivated by the Devil, and must swim in [the Lake of] Gods Anger. And this
is the cause why God became Man, that he might bring us again in Ternarium
Sanctum, into the Angelical world.

96. And as we are all with Adam, gone out from God; for we have all Adams
soul and flesh, so God has regenerated us all in Christ, and in Christ, the
divine Kingdom stands open, every one that will may enter in, whosoever
puts his will away from himself; and puts it into Christ, and lets
all worldly Reason go, though it have never so fair a Luster; shall be
regenerated in Christ: and his soul attaineth the Eternal Flesh again, in
which God became Man, an incomprehensible Flesh, of Eternal substantialitie.

97. The old Adamicall Or, Mortal Flesh.
flesh of Death, comes not to be heavenly flesh: no, it belongs to the
Earth, to Death; but the Eternal Flesh is hidden in the Old Earthly Man, and
it is in the Old Man, as the Fire in the Iron, or as the Gold in the [dark]
Stone.

98. This is the Noble Precious Stone, (Lapis Philosophorum) the Philosophers
Stone, which the Magi [or Wisemen] do find, which tinctureth Nature, and
Generateth a New son in the Old. He who finds that, esteems more highly
of it, then of this [Outward] World. For the Son is many thousand times
Greater then the Father.

99. O thou bright Crown of Pearl, art thou not brighter then the Son!
there is nothing like thee; thou art so very manifest, and yet so very secret,
that among many thousand in this world, thou art scarce rightly known of any
one; and yet thou art carried [about] in ^any that k^^w thee not.

100. Christ says; Seek and thou shall find. The Noble Stone.
It will be sought for, a lazy Person finds it not, and though he carries it
about with him, yet he knows it not. To whomsoever it reveals it self, he
has all joy therein; for there is no end of its virtue [or Glory]: he that
has it, does not give it away: and if he does impart it to any, yet it is not
profitable to him, that is lazy; for he diveth not into its virtue, to learn
that.

101. But the seeker, finds the Stone and its virtue and benefit together,
and when he finds it, and knows that he is certain of it: there is greater
joy in him then the world is able to apprehend, which no pen can describe, nor
no tongue express, in an Adamicall manner.

102. It is accounted the Meanest of all Stones in the Adamicall eyes, and is
trodden underfoot, for it affords no luster to the fight, if a man light upon
it, he casts it away as an unprofitable thing, none enquire after it, though
it be so very much sought for in this world. There is none on Earth but
desires it. All the Great ones and the Wise seek it: Indeed they find one,
and think it is the right: but they miss of it: they ascribe power and virtue
to it: and think they have it and will keep it: but it is not that: it needs
no virtue to be ascribed to it. All virtue lies hidden in it.

103. He who has it, and knows it, if he seek, he may find all things
whatsoever are in Heaven and in Earth. It is the Stone which is rejected of the
Builders, and is the Chief corner Stone; upon whatsoever it falls it
grindeth it to powder, and kindles a fire therein. All High Schools or
Academies.
Universities seek it, but find it not by their seeking; sometime it is found
by one that seeks it rightly. But others [that seek it in self, and for
their own Gain] despise it, and cast it away, and so it remains hidden still.

The Seventh Chapter.
1. IT does most of all concern us Men, in this world, to seek that which is
lost. And therefore if we would seek, we must not seek without our selves,
we need no flattering Hypocrites, nor such as tickle our ears, to comfort us,
and promise us many Golden Mountains, if we will but run after them, and
make much of them, and reverence them.

2. If I should sit and hear Sermon pr^^^hed all my (...) long, and did hear
them always preach of the Kingdom of Heaven and the New Birth, with their
singing and Repetitions, and stay there and go no further, I should be never
the near: If a stone be cast into the water, and then taken out again, it is
a hard stone as it was before, and retains its Form, Condition, or Nature.
quality: But if it be cast into the fire, then it gets another Form,
Condition, or Nature.
quality in it self; so also thou O Man, though thou runnest to Church, and
would seem to be a Minister of Christ, that is not enough; if you rest
there, you are never the better.

3. Also, it is not enough, that you learn all Books, to rehearse them
without Book, and did yearly and daily read all Writings, and could say the
whole Bible without book, yet you are not a hairs breadth the better in the
sight of God, then a keeper of swine, who all that while did nothing but feed
the swine: or then a poor Prisoner in a dark Dungeon, who all that while has
not seen the Daylight.

4. Talking avayleth nothing; nor that you know how to speak much of God, and
despisest the simple, as the flattering Hypocrites upon the Antichristian
Beast, do, who forbid the Light to them that see, as has been done to this
hand. But it is as Christ says; Except you turn, and become as one of these
Children, you shall not see the Kingdom of Heaven in Eternity: you must be
borne anew, if you would see the Kingdom of God: that is the right means.

5. There needs no Art or Eloquence about it, you need neither books nor
cunning: a Shepherd is as fit for it as a learned Doctor, and very much
fitter: for he goes forth from his own Reason into the Barmhertzigkeit the
Mercifulness.
Mercy of God, he has no great, wise [or deepe] Reason, therefore he does not
go to that for Counsel, but he goes simply with the Poor Publican, into the
Temple of Christ: whereas on the contrary, the high and learned, first set the
As a pair of Spectacles.
University before their eyes, and study first with what Opinion he will enter
into the Temple of Christ: he first sets Men's Opinions before him, and will
seek God in this or that Opinion: One in the Papists.
Popes Opinion, another in Lutherans.
Luthers, a third in Calvinists.
Calvin's, a fourth in Schwenkfeldians.
Schwenkfelds, etc. there is no end of Opinions.

6. And thus the poor soul stays without the Temple of Christ, standing in
doubt: it knocks and seeks, and continually doubts that it is not in the
right way.

7. O thou poor confounded soul in Babell, what do thou do? leave off all
Opinions, by what name soever they are called, in this world, they are all no
other then the contention of Reason: the New Birth and the Noble Stone is to be
found in no contention, neither in any Wisdom of Reason: you must forsake all
in this world (let it be as Glistering as it will) and enter into your self,
and only gather all your sins (which have captivated you) together on a
heap, and cast them into the Mercy of God, and fly to God, and pray to him
for forgiveness, and the Illumination of his Spirit: there needs no long
disputing, but earnestness, and then Heaven must break asunder, and Hell
tremble; it comes just so to pass; you must set aside all your sins, and
Reason, and whatsoever comes in the way, and resolve, that you will not let
him go, except he bless you, as Jacob wrestled with God the whole night:

8. Though thy Or, Mind.
Conscience should say, no, God will have none of thee; yet do thou say, I
will have him, I will not leave him, till I am carried to my Grave: Let my will
be as thy will O Lord, I will as thou will: and though all the Devils
encompassed thee round about, and should say; Hold, it is enough at once; thou
must say; no, my Thought and ^^^p^se^.
mind and will, shall not depart from God, they shall be Eternally in God: his
Love is Greater then all my sins: although thou Devil, and thou world, have
the Mortal Body in your Prison, yet I haven my Savior and Regenerator in my
soul; He will give me a heavenly Body, which will remain Eternally.

9. Try this, and thou shall find Wonders, thou shall soon get one in thee,
who will help thee wrestle, fight and pray: And though thou can not use many
words, it is no matter, though you can say no more then the Publicane: O God,
be merciful to me, a sinner; When thy Will and all thy Reason is once placed
upon God, with a Resolution not to leave him though body and soul should be
broken asunder, then thou hold God [fast] and breakest through Death, Hell,
and Heaven, and go into the Temple of JESUS CHRIST, in spite of all the
Opposition of the Devil: the Anger of God cannot withhold thee, how great and
powerful soever it is in thee; and though body and soul did burn in the
Anger, and stood in the midst of Hell, with all the Devils; yet thou would
break forth, and come into the Temple of Christ; and there thou would get
the Garland of Pearl, adorned with the Noble and highly Precious Stone, That
Lapis Sive, Philosophorum.
Philoch-Angularis, The Chief Corner Stone.

10. But you must know; that the Kingdom of Heaven is thus sown in thee, and
is small as a Grain of Mustard Seed, yet thou have great joy with this
Angelical Garland; but look to it, and set it not upon the Old Adam, else it
will go with thee as it did with Adam; keep what thou have; necessity or want
is an evil Guest.

11. At length a young Plant grows to be a Tree, if it stand in good Ground,
but many a rough and cold wind blows upon a young Plant, before it come to
be a Tree, it is unsteady: Thou must be brought before the Tree of Temptation,
and also into the Wilderness of Contempt and Scorn in this world, if thou
do not hold out, thou have nothing: if thou rootest up thy Plant, thou do
as Adam did, thou will more hardly set it again, then at first, and yet it
grows in the Or, The Paradisicall Essence.
valley of Roses, hidden to the Old Adam.

12. For it was a long time from Adam till the humanity of Christ, in which
[time] the Tree of Pearl grew hidden under the veil of Moses, and yet in its
time it came forth as a Tree with fair fruits.

13. Therefore, if thou have fallen, and have lost the fair Garland; do not
despair, seek, knock, and come again, do as thou did at first, and then
thou will find by Experience, from what Spirit this Pen and Hand has written:
thou will afterward get a Tree instead of thy Plant: and then thou will say, is
my Plant, during my sleep, become a Tree? Then you will begin to know the The
Stone of the Wise men.
Philosophers Stone; observe it.

The Gates of the Firmamentall Heaven, with the Stars and Elements.
Also of the Threefold Life of Man. The Noble Stone rightly brought forth into
the Light, Spiritually, for the Magi, [or those that are wise.]
14. If we will speak of the Noble Stone, and bring it forth into the Light
to be known; we must first show the Darkness and deformity of the Stone,
which hinders that it is not known. For since we know that the Noble Stone
lies hidden in this world, and may be had every where, and yet is not known,
we should therefore seek to know the cause why it is so hidden.

15. Reason says, if this [outward] world be so dangerous for Man, why has
God set him therein, or why has he created it? And thus he judges also
concerning the Devil: [saying] why has not God turned the Devil into Nothing
again since his fall?

16. Yes beloved Reason, thou have found the Stone, and with it thou buildest a
house of Stone to dwell in. The Noble Stone lies in the Eternity: that which
is eternal breaks not, but that which has a beginning breaks: The Devils
are Eternal, and therefore they break not; they were not in the Or, Condition.
form of a spirit from Eternity, but their Essences are Eternal.

17. And they have put their will into their Essences, and their will is
eternal: as the Center of Nature, [viz.] of the stern Matrix is Eternal,
into which their will is entered; so now they are Eternal Spirits therein [
viz. in the stern Matrix]: also they are as a Looking-glass for the other
Angels, and for the souls of Men.

18. But that God should cast away the Third Principle [that is, the Created
World] for Man's sake, and put it into its Either before the accomplishment of
its Time, that cannot be; for the Wonders that were foreseen from Eternity in
the Wisdom without Substance, they must come to have a substance, and so in
time must the forms of Nature also.

19. For God is Threefold in Persons, and would also move himself Three Times,
according to the property of each Person, and no more at all in Eternity.

20. First, the Center of the Fathers Nature, moved it self to the Creation of
Angels, and further of this World.

21. Secondly, The Sons Nature, moved it self; where the Heart of God became
Man, which shall never be done more in Eternity: and where it is now done, [
viz. where men become united with the Heart of God, as branches on their vine]
it is done by that only (Man) who is God, through many, and in many.

22. And Thirdly, The Holy Ghost's Nature will move it self at the End of the
World, when the World shall enter into its Either again, and the Dead shall
rise again: Where the Holy Ghost will be the Mover, and will set the Great
Wonders (which shall have been done in this world), all in the Eternal
Substantiality, to the glory and manifestation of Gods deeds of Wonder, and to
the Joy of the Creatures, [ viz. Angels and Men.] He will be the Eternal Mover
of the Creatures, ( viz. Angels and Men) for through him Paradise springs up
again, which we here have lost. Thus you must know, that the great Wonders
of this World which must have been done, and must pass away, lie in our way.

23. This world is a great Wonder: but it would not have been known in the
Wisdom of God by the Angels: and therefore the Fathers Nature moved it self
to the Creation of a Being, Essence, or Substance.
Being, that the Great Wonders might be manifested; and then [when they shall
all once be manifested and become substantiall] it will be known in Eternity,
by Angels and Men, what power and virtue every thing has had

24. Also the Image of the Number Three, [or Trinity] ( viz. the Eternal
Virgin, which stood in Ternario sancto, in the Eternal Wisdom, in the
Substantiality, as a Figure), Or, Could not.
should not have been known in Eternity by the Angels, if the Heart of God had
not become Man; there the Angels saw the Glance, Luster, or brightness.
Glory of the Majesty in a living Image, wherein the whole Trinity was included.

25. So also the Center of Nature should not in Eternity have been manifested
to the Angels, much less the Rule, or Dominion.
Government of the Holy Ghost, if this World, with the Stars and Elements had
not been Created; but so [by this meanes] the Angels (and we Men also) know
the Eternal Being, and all forms, Or, in.
by this [created] world; and therefore God has placed the Image of the Number
Three, (viz. Man) in this world, that he should open all Wonders, and know the
Eternal God.

26. But the Image doated on it, and put its Imagination into it, as Lucifer
did into the wrathful Matrix of Nature, and so it was also captivated: for
Adam was to he a Lord over the Stars and Elements, nothing should To stop or
hinder.
touch him, he had power over them all, he could have removed Mountains with a
word, he was Lord over
Fire, air
Air, {water}
Water, and
Earth.

27. For there was no death in him, the light shone in him; he was in Paradise,
Paradisicall fruit grew for him, he was one [single] Man, and not two, he was
the Man, and also the Woman, and he should have propagated an Angelical
Kingdom out of himself, and that was possible. For he had no such flesh and
blood as after the Fall, whereof he was ashamed before the Majesty of God: he
had flesh and blood, that was heavenly, his Essences [or faculties] were holy:
he could bring forth out of himself (without rending of his body) an Image
like himself.

28. For he was a Virgin, without the feminine form, after the Form of the
Eternal [Sophia] with a pure modest mind, and chaste, without the least desire
of lust: his desire was only to have his like out of himself; he placed his
will upon himself, and in him was God: so his will and God, and God in him,
and he in Paradise.

29. But he saw in himself, two Natures conditions or qualities.
forms of the Divine Being: one without himself belonging to this world, and
the other within him belonging to the Paradisicall world, which he also had
with full satisfaction to himself [as his Own] and therefore came the
Commandment and said; Eat not of the mixed fruit (Good and Evil) else ye
shall dye. But he Or, set his Imagination.
Imagined so long till he was captivated: he still thought he would eat of
both, [ viz. of the Paradisicall and of the forbidden fruit], and so live for
ever; and so he continued forty Days, as the second Adam in the Wilderness
was [so long] tempted: and Moses was [so long] upon the Mount, where Israel was
tempted, to try if it were possible to live in the obedience and will of the
Father: and so long he went on till he sunck down into a sleep.

30. For Moses says, God suffered a deep sleep to fall on him; and then God
saw that it was not possible for him. [to continue in perfect obedience;] (for
the Lust had captivated him) and so he suffered him to fall into a sleep,
(which signifies Death) where the Woman was made out of him; and the Spirit of
this world formed Adam into a Man (such a one as we are at this day) and Eve
into a Woman: which when they awakened they saw not: for they were yet in
Paradise till they had eaten the Earthly fruit; and then the Spirit of this
world took the soul captive; and its Essences became instantly Earthly, and
its flesh and blood Beastiall, at which they were ashamed, and took notice of
their Beastiall form in their Masculine, and Feminine Members.

31. And so they were driven out of Paradise; and the Word of the Lord, Verbum
Domini, (with a Promise of a Treader upon the Serpent,) set it self in the
Light of their Life, (which before dwelt and ruled in him [ viz. in Adam]) that
remained now in its own Principle, and the Image remained in the Outward
Principle, and was captivated by the Spirit of the Stars and Elements: the
Regiment [or Rule and Dominion] of this world dwelt now in these Persons, and
they became Earthly.

32. Whereupon God cursed the Earth also for Man's sake, so that no Paradisicall
fruit grew any more. All was gone save only the Grace and Mercy of God, which
was still left; for they now stood (as to the Ground of the world) in the
Abyss of Hell with all Devils, and they lived in weakness, as we do now at
this day.

33. They begat their Children in two Kingdoms [ viz. in the Kingdom of
Wrath, and in the Kingdom of Love] for the Anger of God had taken hold of
them, and desired to show its wonders in them: so also the Treader upon the
Serpent had taken hold of them in the Light of Life, and desired also to show
its wonders in them.

34. So there was strife and disquietnesse, as may be discerned by their
Children: the first that was borne of Woman, became a wicked Murderer, and
strove to suppress the Kingdom of God; and the second was a holy virtuous
Man: In brief, you see this throughout the Holy Scripture, especially by Caine
and Abell, by Isaac and Ismael, also by Esau and Jacob, who while they were
yet in their Mothers womb, strove Or, about.
for the Kingdom of God, and Or, about.
for the Kingdom of Hell, and therefore said God; Jacob have I loved, and Esau
have I hated.

35. And from hence arose the Predestination or Election of the Children that
cleave to him; the other, make but a mockery and scorn of that which is spoken
concerning the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Heaven, and they find not
the Precious Stone of the Philosophers; for they seek it not rightly. They are
mere. Hypocrites [such as make a show of Holinesse] like the Devil in the
form of an Angel.

36. But Abell, Isaac and Jacob, found it indeed. Jacob wrestled for it a
whole Night, and Isaac carried, the fuel for the fire, [to burne] himself
[with], and readily yielded that the darkness and dross, of his Stone, should
be burnt away: for he had attained the [Noble] Stone, in his Mothers womb. Look
upon the King and Prophet David, what he did with that Stone, how dearly he
loved it. For he said; Though body and soul should be broken in sunder, yet
thou art the desire of my Heart, and my Or, salvation.
Portion.

37. Look upon Solomon, in his Great and wonderful Wisdom; who knew the
[Nature and] property of all Living Creatures and Plants, which he learnt in no
Or, University.
Academy: he understood it only by the Precious Stone which he had in his
Heart.

38. Look upon Moses, what Miracles he did by this Stone: Look opon the
Prophet Eliah, who shut Heaven, for three years and six months: He brought
forth fire in the Anger of God, so that it devoured an hundred Men.

39. Look upon all Prophets, what Miracles they wrought with it, they knew
Things to come in the virtue of this Stone: they healed the Sick, and raised
the Dead.

40. And this Stone, is CHRIST the Son of the Living God, which discovers
it self in all those that seek and find it: what an admirable example have
we in the Apostles (who were but simple unlearned Laymen) how they went about
with this Scone, in Power and doing Miracles, and so did all their Or,
followers.
Successors.

41. O how eagerly have the rational Wise men, of the Schools of this world,
persecuted it at all times, and at this very day: they have a Glistering Stone,
with a pleasant Or, shell.
outside, or sound, and they think it is the right [Stone]: they spread
themselves abroad upon it, and boast themselves of it: and would be honored
for it as Gods.

42. But their Stone, is only a Mawerstein, a wall stone.
Stone belonging to the wall of the great building of this world, in which
[building] the seven Seals accomplish their Wonders, and under which the
seven Spirits of the Anger of God, power forth their Vialls of wrath and
abominations.

43. For we are with Adam shut up in the Anger, which holds us captive: and
yet the Grace also is presented toward us, and that desires to have us also,
and so there is a hard strife in us. This you may see in the Writings of Moses,
in that, God commanded, that all the firstborn of the Males should be Or,
sacrificed.
offered to him.

44. But ye see the vehement opposition of his Anger; how it has penetrated
[and prevailed], and many times taken away the first Birth; as may be seen by
Cain and Abel; by Esau and Jacob, also by the Children of Jacob, and throughout
the whole Scripture, that the Stone would rest, not upon the first Adam, but
upon the second.

45. We have a great Example in the Children of Jesse; when the Samuel.
Prophet thought the Eldest should be King, yet the Election fell upon the
youngest, because he had that Stone.

46. This Election was not thus from Eternity in God: for Adam was Good and
Perfect, also Pure, but he yielded himself to be overcome. For the Anger stood
in the Abyss, and was covered with the Principle of this world.

47. And know, that the Tree of Adams Tempting in Paradise, (which yet stood
only in the Abyss) grew out of the source of the Anger: and Adam was tempted,
to try whether he would with his will cleave to God.

48. Nothing compelled Eve to eat of it, but her lust, which the Devil in the
Anger Awakened or stirred up in her.
brought into her: If she had turned away her Eyes from the Devil and the
Serpent, she had continued in Paradise: had she not a Command [not to eate]?
but when she followed the Devil, and would be skillful, she became foolish.

49. And so if befalls us at this Day we are captivated by the Abyss of the
Anger; and so the Devil sets before us the Or, Glory, or seeming holy Luster.
flattering Hypocrisy and Bravery of this world; viz. Stateliness, Arts, and
Riches, at which we bite, [as a fish at the bait which the angle is covered
with, and so is caught and pulled out from its livelihood] and so we also are
driven out of Paradise, and loose the Noble Stone.

50. Christ has instituted Baptism, as a Or, Laver.
Bath, to wash away the Anger, and has put into us the Our Talent.
Noble Stone, viz. the water of Eternal Life, for an Paten-Gelde.
Earnest-Penny, so that instantly in our Childhood we might be able to Or, get
out.
escape the Wrath

51. But the Serpent presents it self to us [as he did to Eve] so that we
Imagine after [or set our Mind upon] the Tree of Temptation, as we see by
experience, that as soon as young Children grow up a little, they creep up in
Pride and flattering hypocritical arrogance, and set the Paradisicall Garland
[ viz. the blossom of their youth] upon the head of the Serpent; and thus the
Serpent plays with them, and teaches them all manner of Untowardness,
waggery, and perverseness.
wantonness, and leads them out of Paradise into this world, into bruvery
and pride, which require covetousness and deceit to maintain them.

52. And then the Noble Stone comes to be contemned: if they see a Man who
carries that Stone in him, he must be a fool with them, which is, because
they have the wit and suttlety of the Serpent, and he that has the Stone is
simple without wit and cunning, like a child; their Or, Part, or employment.
Play in this world they act, in care, sorrow, want, contempt and misery: but
it is written; They pass away, weeping and sorrowful, but they carry Noble
seed with them, [or their Employment is sowing in Tears, but they shall reap
in Joy.] Eternal Joy is far better, then a momentary Lust.
Pleasure of the Eye, and after that Eternal Lamentation.

53. Seeing then we know and fundamentally understand, that we lie thus
captivated in a close Prison, therefore we will reveal that Ground and the
Prison also, to try whether any will take notice what condition they are in.

54. We will not relate a History, but speak what we know in our selves, in
soul and body, also what we see in the ground or foundation of the World,
from our Aliter, Eternal.
own Light which we have from Grace: we will speak from that, and not from a
Or, Opinion.
supposition, as doubting whether it be true or no.

55. They say, that which the Eyes see, the Heart believes, it is good to see
with our own Eyes: but he that sees with the eyes of another, [or he that
depends upon another words] is always in doubt, whether the Spirit be true or
false.

56. Therefore it is good to have the Noble Stone [which Abraham, Moses, the
Prophets and Apostles had], that gives assurance, and points at the false
(...), Magus.
Magos, such as are Magi, in the History only, which they strut about withal,
in state like a whore, that would be accounted a Maid, and yet is big with
child.

57. And so they are big with Darkness and wrath, and yet they always cry
out, Here is the [true] Church, here is Christ, flock all hither! yes indeed,
run after the whore of Babell, who is big with stately Pride, give something
toward her childe-bed, that she may fatten her whorish stomach, and satisfy
her Seeming holy, Glistering.
Hypocritical stinking Pride.

58. They are like whores (who when they are said to be whores) will not endure
it, but curse and rail: and so also when the Spirit of Truth lays them open,
then they cry, O Heretic, Heretic, fire and faggot; O run away, be gone all of
you, the Devil is in him; thus they miscall the Spirit of God, because they do
not know The Spirit of God.
it.

59. We do not write this, out of a desire to contemn them, for we know the
great misery of our captivity, but we write it, to the end that the simple,
(who cleave so very fast to their words, and believe all that the Devil
powers forth in wrath,) might every one of them enter into themselves, and try
whether it be Truth or no, and that men might not be so zealous in blindness
with anger and envy, without knowledge whether it have any Ground of Truth.

60. We have too much experience of this, that many times the Holy Ghost, is
called a Devil, and the Devil called a good Spirit, which happens out of
Ignorance: for the flattering Hypocrites do so fill the Ears of the Layety
with their Eloquence in their Sermons, and drawing the Scriptures to their
desire [and meaning].

61. O what horrible O^, wickedness.
Blasphemy it is, that the Spirit of God must be thus slandered by the Image of
God, though we do not say that the Image it self does it, but the Serpent in
the Image: so soon as the Wind is turned away from God, the Serpent takes
hold of it, and then rules it, and powers forth Blasphemies against God, and
his Children. Therefore observe this following Text.

[Heere the Author again shows the Eternal Being.]
62. As God the Father himself is All; he is the Number-Three of the Deity, he
is the Majesty, he is the still Eternity; he is the Nature, and in it he is the
Love and the Anger: the Anger is a cause of his Strength and Might; as also a
cause of Life, and of all Mobility, as the Poison [or Gall] in Man, is: and the
Love is a cause of the Heart of his Majesty; and a cause of the Number-Three;
and of the Three Principles.

63. And as we know and have mentioned before* that the Fire is a cause of the
Light; for without fire there would be no Light, so there would be no Love
without Light, the Light is Love [or pleasantnesse], for it is kind and
amiable, and we see that the Light and the fire have two several [properties
or] sources, the fire is biting, wrathful, devouring and consuming: and the
Light is pleasant, sweet, and desirous of a Body, the Love desires a Body; and
the fire also desires the Body for its nourishment, but devoureth it quite,
and the Light Vivifieth it.
raises it up and desires to fill it; it takes nothing away from the Body,
but Vivifieth it.
quickens it up, and makes it friendly.

64. So you must understand us, concerning the Eternal Being. The Eternal
Being is so, and if it were not so, all would be as nothing, but an Eternal
Stillnesse without Being, and that we find to be so, in every thing.

65. Thus we may consider with our selves, whence it arises that there is a
wrathful and a good will: For you see the Fire has two Spirits, one is that
which proceeds from the heat, and the other that which proceeds from the
Light: Now the Heat is Nature, and the Light is the Eternal Liberty without
[or beyond] Nature: for Nature comprehends not the Light.

66. And so you must understand as concerning the two sorts of wills in God,
the one is Nature, and is not called God, and yet is Gods, for he is angry,
severe, sharp as a sting, consuming, attracting all things to himself, and
devouring them, always striving to fly up above the Light, [which is the
other will], and yet cannot; as the fire does, which the higher it flies, the
higher goes the Light, and so they may well be called two Principles.

67. For the Light desires substantiality, and preserves the substantiality,
and does not consume it: but the fire desires to devour all things, and turn
them to nothing, and when it has turned all to nothing, it becomes a
darkness.

68. And therefore has God moved himself in the Light of Meekness, and
attracted the Meekness, so that the Light has a substantiality, and that is
Water, or in Ternario sancto, the Water Spirit, which holds the fire captive,
so that the fire is a darkness, and is not known except it be kindled, and it
stands in it self in the hunger, in the Eternal Darkness, and so is a
continual Desire.

69. Out of such an Original come the Devils, for it is the fierce wrath of
God, and whatsoever is false and evil, has its original thus out of this Or,
womb.
Matrix, as also all the Creatures of this world, let it be Heaven, the
Stars, the Earth, or what it will; they have all a twofold source, viz. the
fire and the water: in those two consist all bodies, Heavenly and Earthly, the
heavenly consist in the Matrix of the Water, and they have the fire hidden in
them.

70. For the watery Matrix (which is only a Spirit of a soft property) holds
the fire captive, and so the Majesty shines in the Meekness Through and
through.
transparently.

71. And the Earthly [Bodyes] consist in the palpable substance; for the water
becomes material in the kindling* which matter, is drawn together by the
wrath in the Fiat; part to stones, and part to Earth, all according as Nature
is in its seven forms: and the water has quenched the Fire, so that the
wrath is in the Darkness, like a hidden Fire.

72. And where the Matrix continued, and was not so quenched by the
comprehensible water, there it is created into Stars; for a Star is only
Fire and Water [ concrete together]: but seeing the fire [in them] burns not,
and that the water [in them] does not quench the fire; thereby we under^tand,
that that water is not material, but is as an Oil, in which the light
burns, which is not [such] water, as puts out the Light but preserves a
continual burning Light without any great source [or fierce consuming
property.]

73. Thus the Stars are a Quintessence.
Quinta Essentia, a fifth form Quintessence.
distinct] from the Elements, as the fat in a Creature is a cause that the
fountain of life burns: so the Quinta Essentia is a cause that the Stars
burn: yet the Stars have them also all the Causes of every thing that is in
this world; all that live and move, is stirred up from their properties, and
brought to life.

74. For they are not only fire and water, (though the fire and the water be
the chief in them) but also they have in them hardness, softness, darkness,
bitterness, soreness, sweetness, and all the Virtues.
powers of Nature; they have whatsoever the Earth has contained in it. For
every Star has a several property; all according to the Effects,
operations, predominancy.
Essences of the Eternal Center of Nature.

75. All is comprehended in the Creation, and come to a being, so far as their
properties at the same time stood open in the wheel of Nature, when the
Eternity moved it self to the Creation.

76. And the Air, is the Spirit which is mixed with all sorts of Forms, and
as the heat goes forth from the Fire, so also the Air goes forth with all
powers continually from the fire, and therefore it is unconstant, suddenly the
Air awakeneth one form in the Center of Nature, suddenly another; and so
there is continually a wrestling and overcoming, suddenly a being above, and
then a being under again.

77. The whole Deep between the Earth and the Stars, is like the Mind of a
Man, where the Eyes suddenly behold a thing, and conceive or frame a will [or
desire] therein, and bring it To pass, or to be.
to substance, some things they behold only with cursory thoughts, and some
things in a perfect Resolution or purpose.
being, so that the mouth and hands go about it [to bring it to passe]: thus
the Deep also is like the Mind, suddenly it is intent upon one Star,
suddenly upon another, and the Sun is the King and the Heart of the Deep;
which shines and works in the Deep; and the other six Planets make the
senses and understanding in the Deep; so that altogether is as a living
Spirit.

78. Which you may understand by a Beast, which forms its Spirit herein, also
in the Fowls, and also in us Men, according to the Adamicall Man: but this
Government [or Dominion] and spirit has not divine wit and understanding: for
it has beginning and end: and that which has beginning and end is not
spiritual (or Divine) but it is Natural and Transitory; as you may see by the
Wind, how suddenly it is raised in one place, and suddenly laid again, and
then suddenly raised in another Place, and so forth.

79. So also the Constellation is a cause of all sorts [of outward worldly] Or,
wit.
Wisdom, Arts and Policy, also a cause of the Ordering of every Government [or
Dominion] of this world amongst Men after the Fall, also among the Beasts and
Fowls, also it is the cause and bringer forth of all herbs, plants, and
mettalls, also of Trees, that they grow.

80. For that which the Constellation contains in it, lies all in the Earth,
and the Constellation kindles the Earth: and it is all one Spirit and one
Dominion, which I call the Third Principle. For it is the Third Life in God,
the awakened Life, and not an Eternal Life; for in this Third Life, shall
only the Great Wonders (which lie in the Center of the Eternal Nature) be
brought into a visible substance, whose figures remain for ever, but not in
the Essences, they all return again into the Either; as it was before the
Creation, so it will be again at the End.

81. But all of this world, remains standing in the Eternal Nature, with its
colors and figures, like a Or, Land-skiffe.
Picture, else the Creatures, as Angels and Men, which are Eternal, should
have no Joy. Thus they shall Or, Be omnipotent.
enjoy all, and yet there will be a springing, blossoming, and growing, but
without feeling of any fierceness, or of the Fire: for the Essences are no
more a substance, and therefore it affords no fire, the fire is an Eternal
darkness and gnawing in it self, and that is called the Eternal Death,
concerning which, the Scripture witnesses throughout. Do not account this a
fiction: for it is true, we speak faithfully what we know [and understand]
in the boosom of our Mother. [ viz. in the Mercy and Eternal Wisdom of God].

The Eighth Chapter.
1. NOw as there is a Life, and Spiritual Government in he Deep of the World
in all places, so that all Creatures are included as it were in one Body, which
affords them life, nourishment, wit, wisdom and Art, in all kinds of them,
in Men, Beasts, fowls, Fishes, Worms, Trees, and Herbs, every one according
to the kind of their Essences; so there is also a life in the Eternity within
this world, which the Spirit of this world comprehends not, which has all
the properties of this world in it, but in no such kindled Essences.

2. For it has no Fire, though indeed it has a mighty Fire, but it burns in
anotte source [or property] viz. in the desiring; It is soft, delicate or
pleasant, without pain; also it consumes nothing; but its Spirit is Love and
joy: its fire makes Majesty and brightness; and that has always been from
Eternity; it has no ground, it has its springing up and blossoming, but not
out of such Earth as we walk upon, and yet it is Earth, which in my whole
Book I call Substantiality, for it is the Eternal Body, without any defect:
there is no want in it, nor sorrow, nor misery; no such thing is known there
at all; there is no Death, Devil, nor Anger known in it, but such things
stand altogether in the Darkness [or in Eternal oblivion] hidden in the first
Principle.

3. And this Angelical World [or Eternal Substantiality] we call Ternarius
Sanctus; and that very rightly, though the Latin Tongue understands only
the The Trinity.
Number Three thereby; yet the Language of Nature comprehends it together as
one only Body.

4. For as this Principle of this [outward] World, is together as one Body; so,
God, the Kingdom of Heaven, Angels, Men, Paradise, with all Heavenly and
Divine Beeings.
things and Properties, are all but one Body, and together are called God,
Majesty, and Eternity.

5. For the Majesty is the Light of that Body, and the Holy Ghost is its Air
and Spirit of Life; but the Creatures [ viz. Angels and Men] have the^r own
Spirit of life from themselves.

6. For Every Angel and Man is like the Total God, he has in him the
Number-Three, and the Holy Ghost proceeds forth in him also; of which you
have a similitude in a A Red Hott Iron.
flaming piece of Iron; The Iron resembles the Creature, the fire resembles
the Deity, the heat of the Iron resembles the Creatures own Spirit, the Air
which goes forth from the Heat, which has no source [or painful quality]
resembles the Holy Ghost.

7. In this manner, we give you in simplicity sufficiently to understand
these high things. If any will now be blind, God help them: and we can thus
with good ground set you down, what Man was before the Fall, and what he came
to be in the Fall: what he is in the New Birth again, and what he shall be
after this Life. For we know what he is in Death, and what he is in Life, we
know also what he is in Hell; and that not from our own wisdom, (as if that
were greater then any Man's Living) but [wee understand it] in the boosom of
the Mother, in the Mothers Spirit.

8. I am dead and as nothing [as to my own self,] when I speak and write
thus, also I write not from my self, but from the Mother, out of her knowing
and seeing: and yet I live in anguish, cares and labor, in fear and
trembling, and in affliction like all other Men, for I am also clothed with
Adams skin, and yet live also in the Hope of Israel.

9. Know therefore upon this description, that our Father Adam in Paradise was
in the Divine Body, and is gone out from it into the Body of this World, into
the Dominion of the Stars and Elements, which have now captivated the
[Adamicall] Body, and Spirit, Till it reach to the poor soul.
so far as to the poor soul, which is in the root of this world between
Heaven and Hell: and Hell and the Anger have bound it fast to the Darkness and
to the source [or property] of the Anger, with a strong Chain, which is called
Centrum Naturae, [the Center of Nature].

10. And God is come to help it again, and is become Man, and has received
the humane soul again into his heavenly Body, and has bound it fast to him (
To Christ.
in Christ) again. Thus the soul stands in the midst [being] beneath in
the Hellish Fire, and above in God in Heaven: and so whithersoever it casts
its will, and into what it yields it self, there it is, and is a servant to
that; there is no recalling out of Hell.

11. Thou Great Whore of Babell, if thou have Jus Divinum.
Divine power, help us and thy self: behold thy self here with thy Dreams;
if thou can, then break this chain, viz. the Center of Nature in sunder:
But we are told, we must be borne a new: the Divine Fire, must be kindled in
you, like a flaming Iron; for as the workman will not touch it with his bare
hand, no more can the Devil touch the soul; for it burns him, he is in
Darkness, and if he should come to the Light, his evil envious tricks would
be discerned, which he is ashamed at, and Or, shrinketh.
slideth back into the Darkness, as Adam and Eve crept behind the Trees, he
does not relish this bit [of the New Birth], he does not love to smell such
[Divine] Fire: for it is Poison to him: if he knew but of one such spark of
fire in his Habitation, he would not endure it there, but would run away from
it; as indeed he must fly away from Man when the Divine Fire with the New
Birth comes into him.

12. O how cowardly and faint is he when the soul begins to storm his
Fort! how many hundred thousand tricks does he study up, to keep the soul off
from storming! O how he fawneth, and streweth sugar before the soul, and
ascribes great holiness to it, as if it had Divine Power, that it is no
sinner any more, that he might by any means bring it to the top of the
Pinnacle of the Temple, that it might elevate it self: O how busy is he, what
good companions does he bring to it, till the good companions [or hypocrites]
begin to play with their own holiness and ability, as the Antichristian Church
has done for a long while.

13. All that while, [that the soul goes on in its own security,] the Devil
is at quiet, none storm his Hell: and he gets good fat venison, which he
sends to Saint Peter with good Passes, Licenses, or Warrants.
Passports [or absolutions] and if Peter be in the Abyss, he will read them
well enough, but if he be not there, then the Great Prince Lucifer will read
them, they will please him very well.

14. O Dear Children, see but in what misery we lie captivated, in what
lodging we are; for we are captivated by the Spirit of this [outward] world,
it is our life, it nourishes and brings us up, it rules in our Marrow and
Bones, in our Flesh and Blood; it has made our flesh Earthly, so that we lie
captivated in Death.

15. We swim in water up to our very lips, (as the Prophet and King, David,
says; The water reaches up to my soul; Great Bulls have compassed me round
about; I dwell amongst Serpents and Dragons:) O thou lamentable, miserable and
toylesom life, how dead are thou, thou swimmest in the water in a handful of
Blood, and yet art so proud and lofty.

16. What is thy Beauty, thy state, honor, and riches, do but consider thy
self, seek and find thy self, go forth from this dangerous life of Adders
and Serpents, into the Eternal: you have it fully in your power.

17. Whosoever teaches otherwise, teaches from the Devil, who will not allow
that it lies in Man's Or, possibility.
power to turn to be a child of God, though the Scripture says; That God
has given Man power (in Christ) to become the Children of God: and, God
wills that all men should be saved: also; Thou art not a God that willest
evil, or does delight in wickedness. And in Ezekiel it is written; As I live
I desire not the Death of a sinner, but that he turn and live.

18. For God has no other will, but to save that which is lost: therefore must
none despair* for if the Spirit of the soul lift up it self earnestly, it is
stronger then God, and overcomes God, (for the Anger belongs unto God, and
is Gods Greatest Might, which it overcomes): it is stronger then the Abyss of
Hell: it can remove Mounta^nes without A Storm.
any stir, only with its will. For by the will, God created Heaven and
Earth; and such a Mighty Will is hidden also in the soul.

19. But now it swimmeth in misery, and much weakness, in the sinking down of
Death: it is tied, and drawn up and down as a poor captive Creature from one
filthy puddle into another, and the Devil rouleth it presently in this mire,
and presently in that mire again, and so it is like a filthy Ragge, all mire
and dirt: all Stars dart their Poison Or, in.
into the Body, and defile the poor soul: it must endure to be defiled by the
Beasts, for the body feeds upon the flesh of Beasts, wherewith the poor
soul is As with a Body of flesh.
cladde. Do thou know why God did forbid the Jews to eat of some sort of
Flesh? Aliter, and commanded them to burn their fat; and consider the smell of
it.
Kindle their fatt, and consider their property, and thou shall discern it.

20. The poor soul is a kindled fire, and so when such a property comes into
the soul, do thou suppose that God will dwell therein? and therefore Christ
taught us, saying; Be sober and temperate, in eating and drinking; watch and
pray; for your adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, and
seeks whom he may devour.

21. Thus you see how we stand in a Threefold Life: the soul stands upon
the Abyss between two Principles, and is tied to them both; and the body
merely in the spirit of this world; and therefore that seeks only after
eating and drinking, power and honor, for it belongs to the Earth, and
cares little for the poor soul, which comes out of the Eternity, [and
belongs to the Eternity].

22. Therefore we ought to tame the Body, and not give way to it, but to dampe
[or kill] its desire, and not Fill it, or pamper it.
satisfy it when it pleases, but for necessity only; that it may not grow
wanton, and invite the Devil to lodge in it.

23. The poor soul must watch and pray, and Resign its will to God in
well-doing.
continually put its will into Gods will, it must not give way to the body in
any thing, except it have yielded it self to God first: the soul must not
please it self at all in its own power; but cast it self merely upon God, as
being it self weak and able to do nothing, (though it be strong) and so
continually go out from it self, from its natural will, and so fall into the
will of God, and then the Devil cannot meddle with it.

24. Indeed it is irksom and troublesome to the Body to be broken of its will;
but that's no matter, Eternity is very long: the body has but a short time of
continuance, and then it returns to its Mother [the Earth]: and you know not
in what moment Death will come, when the body must be gone into its Mother; and
then it lets the poor soul go whither it can: it is a very Slippery,
untrusty.
unconstant Neighbor to the soul.

A True Open Gate.
[Shewing] How a Man may seek and find himself. [From whence he has his
beginning: and what he shall be in the End].
25. Behold O Man! and Consider thy self, what thou art from thy beginning,
and what thou shall be again in the End: and then thou will certainly find,
what home thou art in, in what lodging thou lie captive, and thou will find,
that thou art both a Man, and also a Beast, thou will well see the heavy Fall,
if there be but a spark of Gods light in thee.

26. For no Beast is able to apprehend it, because a Beast has its Original
only from the Life of this world; and therefore we know, that here is another
manner of Life in us, in that we know the Ground of this world.

27. For if we were only from the Clay and Earth of this world, we should be
but Clay and Earth like a Beast which has no understanding, we should not be
able to know the ground of this world. For a Pot knows not the Potter; nor
does a piece of work know its workmaster: and so a Beast knows not its
Master, it has no desire after him, for it knows nothing of him.

28. The desire of a Beast is only to fill its Belly, to nourish and multiply
it self; (as the Center of Nature in it self is [such a desire]) and has no
understanding of any higher thing: for it has its own spirit whereby it lives
and grows, and then again consumes it self, and does it as well at one
time as at another: for such a thing is the Band of Eternity which is called
Nature.

29. But we that are Men have a higher apprehension and knowledge, for we can
see into the heart of every thing, and see what manner of thing it is, and what
property it has. So also we have quite another longing and desire, after
another thing and life, which is not Or, animale.
beastiall, nor Transitory, nor desires any Elementary Earthly food.

30. Thereby we know, that every life desires its own Mother, whence it has
its Original, and wherein it subsisteth; as also we must understand, that
every life desires the best [thing] that is in its Center; viz. the Heart or
Oil wherein the fire burns, and wherein the life is opened that it is Living.

31. For every living life is a fire: and yet the proper source of the Fire is
not the right life, but the Tincture which proceeds from the Fire, is a
pleasant Joy, and it is the Liberty Nature, [which is the right life]. For
Nature stands in great Anguish, and reaches with a strong desire after the
Liberty till it attain it: and so Nature is a sharpness in the Liberty, and
desires continually to swallow it up into it self, that it might come totally
to be the Liberty, and cannot; but the more eager it is, and raised up, after
the Liberty, the greater is the Tincture of the Liberty.

32. Thus Nature continues to be a Fire, and the Liberty continues to be a
Light; what the Tincture builds up, the fire devoureth for the Tincture
makes Substantiality, its Center is meek, and is a sinking down, [of
humility], as the fire is a rising up, [of Pride].

33. But as the Light ( viz. the Tincture) makes substantiality in its sinking
down, so that there is in the Light a substance like water, and yet is no
water, but such a spirit and property: so the fire swalloweth up the same
Substantiality into it self, and therewith quenches its wrath, and ascends
in the Substantiality, and burns like Oil set on fire.
kindled Oil; and this is the right Natural life of all Creatures, and is
called the Tincture.

34. But this life is Transitory, Corruptible.
fragile, and consists only in four forms; viz. in Fire, Air, Water, and
in Substantiality [or Earth] which is its Body. And we show you this one thing
more in this Tincture-Life; (as you see naturally,) that out of every fire
there goes forth a source [or vertue] viz. Air, which is after this manner;
when the fire strongly attracteth and swalloweth the Substantiality into it
self, then the Substantiality flies strongly again out of the source of the
Fire.

35. For it is so subtle, that the Fire cannot hold it, and so is an
attracting and Or, flying away.
recolling again. For the Fire wills eagerly to have that again which is
flying forth, and so there is a perpetual strife.

36. Thus you see it very plainly and openly, that the life of the fire lets
go the Air: for it will not stay in the source [or property] of the fire: for
it flies eagerly, and the source [or Or, virtue.
property] of the fire continually attracteth the same back again into it: And
so the Fire is blown up, or else it would be smothered, and become dark: and
for that cause it reaches thus after the Substantiality, viz. after the Air.

37. For no Virtue or Life.
source desires the shutting up in Death; and that is also called Death, when
the Life is shut up, besides that, there is no Death.

38. For in the Eternity there was never any death at all, nor shall be ever;
But that which is called the Eternal Death, is a shutting up of the Tincture,
where the Tincture goes away like a Or, figure.
shadow, and so the Center ( viz. the source [or fountaine] of the Fire)
remains in the Darkness, and flows in mere wrath in it self: and would
very feign reach the Tincture again, and yet it has no power to do so, for
the Tincture only is the power, which blows up the Fire.

39. Consider here what Hell and the Eternal Death is, for it is just so; and
know, that the Devils have lost the Tincture of Meekness, who now are a
wrathful fire-source without substantiality, for they have no Body.

40. Secondly, Consider also the Element of Water; and as you know that it has
its original in the spirit of the Creature; so also it has its original in
the Deep of the World, which is also a Spirit, and has such a life as other
Creatures have.

41. And Thirdly, Consider, that there are two sorts of Fires, a Hot and a
Cold: for as the Heat Or, concreteth.
contracteth together, so does the Cold, which turns Water into Ice, and
makes a Heterogene body.
strange body out of the Substantiality [or Water] which is not its own.

42. By this we give you dearly to understand, the Fall of Lucifer, who thus
reached into the Center of Nature into the harsh Matrix and awakened it, so
that it concreted the Substantiality, and so Earth and Stones came to be.

43. You will say, Why did God suffer The fall of Lucifer.
it? [The Answer is:] He was a Prince and Throne-Angell, and was created with
the first Creation: and therefore since he was a cause of the Third Principle,
(understand, of the Out-Birth,) therefore Christ called him also a Prince of
this World; for he had also a Free will, like us Men. We oftentimes Or, make.
do works which are contrary to God, only for our State and Honor, as is
seen in Forts, Castles, and Palaces.
Sumptuous Great Houses.

44. So Lucifer also would be as a God and Creator, all which might have been
well enough, for that was not his Fall, [no more then it was Adams Fall, that
he Imagined, whereupon God suffered the Tree of Temptation to Grow] but it was
his Fall, that he awakened the Matrix of the Fire, and would domineere over the
Meekness of the Heart of God.

45. That [awakened Matrix of the Fire] is now his Hell: and God has
captivated that Hell, with the Heaven, viz. the Matrix of the Water. For
[Lucifer would feign that] the Place of this World For the place of this world
would have burnt in the Fire for Lucifer.
should burn in the Fire for him [to domineere in]: and therefore God moved
himself to the Creation, and did create; and so there was Water, which
captivated his wrathful Hell [as the Pleasant Sun shuts up the Astringent
Cold, and turns Ice into Water, whereby Fishes and other Creatures grow and
Live].

46. And the Cause of the Sea and of the Great Deep Waters, whose bottom
cannot be fathomed, is, that the Matrix of Nature was in Where the Great Waters
are.
those places so far enkindled in the Fire.

47. And here we give you an Example of this. Consider Sodom and Gomorrha,
when their sins became Great, and that the Devil dwelt there: and would have
a Kingdom there for himself, God permitted, that the Prince of this world
should burn those five Kingdoms (wherein the Devil intended to dwell) with
fire and Brimstone. But when the Devil thought to be Lord, and to have his
Habitation there; then God brake his Pride and Stoutnesse: and caused Water to
come upon that Place, and alayed his Pride.

48. And in this we have an Excellent Example, of Gods care for his children
which depend on him: for when he saw the Or, that the Anger was kindled.
Wrath, he brought forth Lot out of Sodom. And further you have herein a full
Example, that when the Wrath of God begins to be kindled, he makes it
known to his Children before hand, that they might fly from it, as he told it
to Abraham, and Lot, and commanded him to fly from it; and so he has done
from the beginning of the World. For, the Prophets were for no other end, but
to declare the Anger of God, and to command the children of God to fly from
it; as may be seen by what was done to Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation, and
has been always done to all People from the beginning of the world to this
Time. [For when no Punishments or Judgments more can be expected, then
Prophesying shall cease].

49. Therefore let none blindfold themselves, Note.
but consider what such a Warning and Revelation signifies, which at present
is propounded to the World. This is the Time of the overthrow of the Dragon,
with the Whore of Babell, which shall go down into the Abyss. Now he that
will not fly, yet let him have warning of it. He that will bring the Whores
marks forth into the Light, will have great ignominy and reproach by it, we
speak what we ought: the Day dawneth the Sun will suddenly arise, account it
not for a Fiction, it is concluded and known in Ternario Sancto; Look into
the Scripture in the Revelation, which the Sophisters had rather it were cast
out of the Bible; but the understanding of it will soon bud forth: and then
the Pedlers of the Beast and of the Whore will stand in great shame; and none
will buy their ware any more. No sword destroys the Whore, but her own Mouth
choaketh her; for there are nothing but Lies and Blasphemies in it, and yet
she seems as if she were God. Therefore say we, let every one look to his
own Doing: lift up your heads, as Christ says; for the time of your Redemption
draws near; you are baptized with water; but he that will baptize with the
Holy Ghost, and with the Fire of his Wrath, is already on his way; be not
wilfully blind.

50. Thus understand us right concerning the Life of Man, as we have now
mentioned: This last forementioned Life, is Solely, or alone.
singly in the Beasts, for it has its Original only in the Principle of this
world, in the Matrix of Nature, which is every where such a Spirit, and such a
Life in it self.

51. And in Man, the life is twofold: for Man has also the life of this
[outward] Principle in him: but he desires also another life, which is higher
and better then this.

52. And now where there is a Desire, there is a Mother, who is the Desire it
self; for no Desire can make it self, it must arise out of a will, and the
will must come out of the Tincture, which is the Life of the Will.

53. Thus we know and have searched out, that in the Tincture of the Principle
of this world, viz. in the life of this World, there is also another Tincture,
which we have an apprehension of, in our selves. If there were not another
Tincture, the Life would desire nothing more.

54. Yet we cannot say, that the outward Life desires any thing more: it
desires nothing else but its own Mother, viz. the Principle of this world. For
it is only a Spirit therein, for no Principle desires another, a Principle is
a peculiar life, and has its Center to Nature; and therefore we call it a
Principle, because there is a Total Dominion in it, as there is in the
Eternity; which Dominion desires nothing more nor higher, but only that which
may be generated in its own Center; as you may easily perceive it by the
Kingdom of Heaven and the Kingdom of Hell; for the Kingdom of Heaven
desires nothing but the Divine Being: but Hell [desireth] that which is
wrathful, murtherous, fiery, sour, soarring, Astringent, and whatsoever is in
the Property of Anger in the Fire

55. Now there being in us, a desire after the highest Good, and after the
Eternity: that desire must needs proceed out of the Eternal and highest Will,
out of the highest Being, and its life is also out of the highest Tincture:
for where there is a Desire, there is Fire; for the Fire desires
substantiality, that it may have whereon to feed, and yet it self can make no
substantiality, but it makes the Tincture, and the Tincture makes the
substantiality, as is abovementioned.

56. Now the Tincture is a Creature, for it has a Body [as may be seen in the
Tincture (or color) of Gold]; though it be not palpable, yet it is Essential.
substantial; and the understanding is in the Tincture, for it is a wrestling
with the Fire, and flies before the Fire, and yet cannot fly away; because
the Fire Desires.
generateth it, and continually attracteth it again into it self, and it
still striveth to get out from the fire with the substantiality, and is after
the manner, as a Man fetches Breath.

57. Therefore we give you now rightly to understand it thus: you see that the
Tincture shines, and in the shining, there is no stirring, but a constant
Luster; and yet in the Luster there is all power, as in the Tincture: and it is
an Eternal Stillnesse, and the Tincture is the stirring, and also the life.
Understand us rightly and deeply, for it is the deepest Ground, and foundation
in Heaven.

58. The other Desire in Man after the Highest Good, is the soul; which
stands in the Eternal Mother: for every desire has its original out of its
own Mother: therefore this is a desire of the Eternity; and not the Eternity
[it selfe] but the Tincture of the Eternity, and the Majesty, viz. the glance
in the Still Habitation; as is now mentioned.

59. Now if a Spirit be in its own Mother, it desires not to go out from her
again: [as the Aire-spirit does not desire to go away from the Body]: neither
does it desire any thing more then what is in its Mother, and in its Center.

60. But yet we find and understand it in our mind, that the soul wills
to be out of this [Earthly] Mother, in which it stands at present: and not
only so; [but] it desires the house of its own Mother, viz. its own Tincture,
and the Majesty, also the Eternal Rest out of the Tincture.

61. And so we search and find, and have it in true knowledge; that the poor
soul in the Spirit and in the Tincture [or life] of this [outward] world,
lies captive in a strange Lodging, and has not its Light of the Majesty, for
if it had that, it would be at Rest and desire nothing more.

62. Also we find, that it lies captive in Death in much weakness: for if
it had its [right] Tincture, then should the Majesty wherein it is a child of
God, shine in it.

63. Therefore we say, that the poor soul of Adam was captivated by the
Spirit and Principle of this world: and received the Tincture of this world
into it? and then Instantly the Majesty and brightness of God remained
standing in its [own] Principle: for the soul put its will and desire into the
Spirit of this world, and it self entered into it.

64. Thus God shut up the Heaven in the soul, so that it knew its Majesty no
more; and there was perplexity and great misery, that an Eternal Creature
should come to be in another Principle in another Center. Here the seven
Seals to the Book of the Eternal Life were shut to the soul, for the Center
of its life was shut up and captivated in the Eternal Death, it could no more
stir any form in the Center of its Life, it lay in Hell like As a dead
Corpse in the Grave.
dead Bones, the Dragon had it in his Jaws.

65. For it was in the house of misery, there was none that could help it, no
Angel, no Throne-Prince, no Creature, neither could the Center of the soul
help it: for its fire was extinguished, the spirit of this world had swallowed
it up [as the water devoureth the brightness of the flaming Iron]: for the
Will of the soul was entered into the Spirit [of this world], and had married
[or joyned] it self thereto, The Will.
it was in another Mother, as it is now at this Day.

66. And so now if the Mother of this world had been broken (as it does break
[indeed]) then the soul should have stood in the Eternal Death in the
Darkness. Here Or, Remedy.
Counsel was at an end, the fair Creature was captivated by the Kingdom of
Hell, which triumphed over it.

The highly Precious Gate.
67. Here was no Counsel in the whole Deity, unless the Eternal Word and
Heart of God did become Man, and did enter into the Third Principle into humane
flesh and blood, and assume a humane Soul, and go into Death to the poor
soul, and did take away the Power of Death (which held the soul captive) and
the wrathful sting of Hell, which it had stuck into the soul: and did lead
the poor soul out of Death, and out of Hell, In, by, or through.
in himself.

68. And here we see, that after the Word did become Man that Man suffered
himself to be hanged on the Cross, and entered into Death on the Cross:
understand here, the New Living Man borne of God, went into the Abyss and
brake Death in the soul, and opened the Center of the soul: He brake all the
seven Seals of the Center of Nature, so that the soul came to have its own
power again, for he kindled the Divine fire in the soul again, so that the
soul did again reach the Eternal Tincture out of its own fire.

69. And thus it came again into its first Mother, in power and Majesty: and
the Old Adam hung to the Cross as Curse: to the scorn of all Devils, there
they might do so far as they could with it, as indeed they were busy with the
Sophisters and Antichrists, the Pharisees.

70. There the Devils ran with other suttlety and Tricks into Corners and
secret places.
holes, and did hide [cover and conceale] the Resurrection, through the
Ministers of the Dragon, the Pharisees, which yet pretend to be the Ministers
of God? but they served the Devil in his lies, as is done now adays, where
the Death and power of Christ is closed up and denied.

71. This hanging on the Cross is nothing else, but that as the soul has its
original upon the Cross in the Center of Nature, (out of the Word of the
Lord, ex verbo Domini,) where the Name of the Number Three stands. There has
the Word of the Father moved it self; and is entered into the Humanity; as is
heretofore mentioned concerning the Virgin, and is become Man on the Cross,
in the Eternal and in the Earthly Virgin: and has been made a spectacle on
the Cross, to the Old Adamicall Man and all Devils, and their lofty Pride;
and has slain Death on the Cross: and thereby broken through it, and so
brought the Adamicall Man (with flesh and blood) as a spectacle into Death: and
has cast away from him all Earthlinesse, and brought him powerfully through
Death into Life.

72. Thus he is newborn in God: and sits upon the Rainbow, on the
Substantiality and Colors of the Eternity, in the power of the Majesty, and is
a Lord of Heaven and of this world, and a Judge of Hell, and a Or, Power.
Conquest over Death.

73. Of this you have a true Gound, ye that are Regenerated in Christ: that as
Christ brought his body, both the Heavenly and the Earthly, (which he received
in his Mother Mary), out from Death again: and did cast away from him nothing
else but the Earthly source [or property] viz. the Spirit of this [outward]
world.

74. So also must our Bodies in the power of the souls that are in him (that
is, in his Word and Heart, which is every where,) come forth again at the Last
[Judgement] Day, and cast away no more from it, but this source and spirit: [of
the outward World]; for none rise again in the entire corrupt Body, but in the
flesh and blood of Christ.

75. But the corrupted Spirit (which remains in the Earthly Matrix, in its
Tincture) must appear before the Judgment of God at the End of Days: and
there shall the sentence and Judgment of the Judge Christ be pronounced; and
then after the pronouncing all goes into the Receptacle or Devourer.
Either: and then the Spirit of God which Created the World, will execute that
sentence.

76. But that I may not meet with false Interpretours, that may mistake his
Text, as the Spirit shows me: therefore you must know, that when the soul
is Borne anew in the Word and in the Spirit of Christ (in this [life] Time):
then also the first Substantiality ( viz. the inward Body of the soul, which
Adam had in Paradise) out of the Eternal Virgin (wherein he was created Man)
becomes newborn, and gets the flesh of Christ.

77. This new Body in which the New Regenerate soul sticks, sticks in the
old corrupt flesh, and is incomprehensible and immortal: But the Old Man
[which is] conceived from the Spirit of this World, must perish in the Earth:
it goes into its Mother, who must bring it fortb and present it at the Last
[Judgement] day: but after the Sentence of Christ, it goes into the Either: and
is only as a Figure For or before.
to the Eternal New Man; for in that Figure all a Man's works follow him.

78. So also they that be alive at the hour of the last Judgment; the Old man
will fall away from them, with the perishing of the World, and pass into the
Either: For all the Bodies of the wicked, shall be presented there in the
Mother: viz. in the Spirit of this world, and the souls shall hear the
Sentence: and their Bodies also pass away with the Mother, and stand as a
Figure: and their Works follow them into the Abyss.

The Ninth Chapter.
Concerning the Threefold Life. Also of the Driving or Impulsion.
Inclination and whole Government of Man in this World. Highly to be Considered.
1. IT is shown to me, what the Devils intention is, how he will endeavor
to smother these High and precious Writings: therefore be watchful ye
children of God, believe not the Sophisters too much; who cry out, Heretic,
Heretic, to the fire with them. That is not the voice of the Holy Ghost, but
the voice of the Antichrist, and of the Dragon: for these Writings will
exceedingly discover the Devils smoking Pit; and not only so; but they show
also the Whore of Babell very plainly; like a whore Am Pranger.
put to open shame.

2. But (because the Men of the Spirit of this world take care only for their
Belly, and are loath to loose their honor, credit, reputation, and Goods, but
had rather part with God and the Kingdom of Heaven) we shall be persecuted by
the Whore, through the Instigation of the Devil: therefore be watchful ye
children of God, and look not upon that which is high, and has great
authority; but regard the welfare of your souls; This we leave you for the
last [farewell].

3. Christ says; None kindles a light, and sets it under a cover, or under
a Bushel, but sets it upon a Table, that all that are in the house may see
by the light thereof. Thus must we do also, and must not bury our Talent
(which is so dearly bestowed upon us) in the Earth; for we must give an
account thereof at the Day of the Judgment of God, as the Spirit of the Mother
intimates to us.

4. If this knowledge [or understanding] of this Spirit, shall happen to fall
upon any, they will be then certain what it is Which is here written.
We need no Letters of Commendation; Christ is our Letter of Commendation,
which is sufficient for us. None ought to call themselves after my Name: all of
us that know Christ, put on him, and are members of his Body: we call our
selves Christians and children of God, and brethren and sisters one of another.

5. Therefore now when we consider the Dominion [or Course] of our Life, we
find a powerful strife therein, which the Devil has with the soul: and
also which the Spirit of this world has with the soul. For there is a
knowledge in the spirit of this world, indeed there is no divine understanding
in it, but there is an apprehension planted in the Matrix, viz. in the Center
of Nature.

6. For this world, before the Creation, stood from Eternity in the Eternal
Wisdom, as an invisible Figure: and is now created as a proper Principle of
its own, to the end that it might bring all its wonders and works into Essence,
that they may appear in their figure after the Time [of this world].

7. And so there is a natural strife with man therein, for no creature but
Man, can bring the Wonders of the world to light; and therefore also the Spirit
of this world has so very much longed after Man, and has drawn him to it,
that it might show forth its Wonders in him, that Man should produce all Arts
and Languages in The Spirit of this world.
it, Moreover the Spirit and Heart out of Earths and Mettalls, viz: that
Precious Stone, the Philosophers Stones, which indeed since Salomons Time, has
been found by few; but now at the End shall be found more clearly, as we know
and understand.

8. Note.
For he that rightly understands our Writings concerning the Center of
Nature, and its progress to the Number-Three upon the Cross, and to the
Glance of the Majesty, may well find it in Mettalls, it is not difficult, if
he learn but the right entrance, he has the end at hand: of which we shall
not here make mention: for it belongs to the Magi, which are borne
Magically: we speak only of the Ground of Nature, and of the Spirit of this
world.

9. And we declare unto you, that the Spirit of this world is created with
such an inclination, and that it has a natural will to reveal it self and
all its Mysteries, as we see before our eyes by what it has built or brought
forth, how it has erected a Dominion and Kingdom upon Earth.

10. Do but look upon the doings of Man, from the highest to the lowest: the
Spirit of this world has thus built the whole Course.
Order of them, and God has permitted it. For God is not a destroyer, but a
preserver of that which his power builds up, and accounts it for his
Ordinance: for there is nothing brought forth which has not stood in the
Eternity.

11. But you must understand it aright, Hell and the Anger are the Abyss,
which mingleth its wonders also therein, as we see where there is good Or,
soil.
ground, and that the Sower also sows good seed, yet thistles and thorns
grow up amongst it: according as Christ has given us a similitude of the
Sower: and as it is in the mind of Man, so it is also in the Spirit of this
world.

12. You are to know, that all weeds, as Thistles and Thorns, also Serpents,
Toads, evil Beasts and Worms, have their original from the Wrathful Matrix;
For in the time of the Creation, all both good and evil came forth, every
thing according to its kind and property: there is good and evil in every
thing, and the Kingdom of Anger has also wholly Or, formed its Image.
imprinted it self therein, and therefore the fruit is Good and Evil, and
Adam should not have eaten thereof.

13. I give you to understand by the fruits of the Earth, how good and Evil
are in one another: and have each of them their usefullnesse, the evil as well
as the good: All serve to manifest Gods deeds of Wonder: and each is
serviceable to the Spirit of this world, what the one hurts, the other
heals, and that also is a wonder.

14. Furthermore we see the Mysterium Magnum, the Great Mystery, in the Trees;
though indeed they be different and mixed, yet we discern the Paradisicall
form [or condition in them]; for they bear their fruit upon Twiggs, and the
fruit is a thing different from the Tree: the Tree is bitter, and the fruit is
sweet: And we give you to understand, that the Trees and fruit we have now a
days were Paradisicall, if the Curse did not stick in them: the Paradise is
flien from them, and now all fruit is but such as the Apple was from which Eve
did eat Death. And you are to know, that the Kingdom of Anger did also press
into the Garden of Eden, which brought forth a Tree, that did bear such fruit,
as all the Trees are now adays which we feed upon.

15. Only we are to consider, that the fruits for Man do not grow of
themselves, he must plant and dress them, as you see in all Trees, both in the
wood and stalks of them: and Man desires not willingly [to eat of] the
[first] Essences of the Earth; except it be a very Mild or sweet.
pleasant herb, but he desires the second Birth out of the Earth, viz. the
kernel [seede or fruit], which is indeed the second Birth out of the Earth,
whereby we understand our high descent, but before the Fall Paradise sprung up
through all Trees, and through all the fruits which God created for Man.

16. But when the Earth was cursed, the Curse entered into all fruits, and then
all was Evil and Good, Death and Rottenness or putrefaction.
Corruption was in them all, which before was but in that one Tree only, which
was named [the Tree of] Good and Evil, and therefore it is that we Eat Death
in all the fruits, and the Spirit [ Or, which is.
of] Evil and Good rules in us. The Spirit of this world rules in us, and so
does the Devil wish the Spirit of Anger, and each of them show forth their
wonders in and by Man.

[Of the Great Strife about the Image of Man].
17. There is a great Strife about Man's Image, each Kingdom would have it:
Hell in the Anger says; it is mine by the right of Nature, it is generated out
of my Root. Also the Spirit of the world says; I have it in my body, and I
give it life and nourishment, I bring it up, and give it all my powers and
wonders, it is mine. And the Kingdom of God, says also; I have set my heart
upon it, and have regenerated it: it is proceeded out of my Kingdom: I have
sought and found it again: it is mine, it must reveal my Wonders.

18. Thus there is a vehement Strife in and about Man: look upon his
Conversation and Doings; his desire stands especially in Three Things, and
they are Three Kingdoms which Rule him: and into which of them he falls,
there he lies.

19. First, he desires power, honor, and glory, that all might fear and
honor him: this is even the Poison of the Devil, who has also such an
intention, which he satisfies by doing as much as he can.

20. Secondly, he desires riches, goods, and money, much eating and drinking,
and cares not by what means he comes by it; it is the Spirit of this world,
which desires only shelter and fullness, as a Beast does.

21. And thirdly, he desires the Kingdom of Heaven also, he desires and
pants after that: but in much weakness, and is always in doubt [thinking]
he is a Sinner; [and that] God desires not to have him: yet he sigheth and
pants after it, and would same be saved: he prays and yet doubts, he
hops and yet fears, he hops for amendment and deliverance from one day to
another, and always supposes, it will be well to morrow, to morrow thou will
have power to go from this [course of] life and enter into another: thus it is
always with him.

22. This we do not speak concerning the Swine-like Men, who lie wallowing
in the Mire, who never seek for any amendment: but we speak concerning the
poor sinners that are between Heaven and Hell, who have incitements to both of
them, and yet are held back.

23. Yet observe what Man does: he follows all these three [desires], he
continually seeks power and honor till his end, he continually hunts after
covetousness, money, and goods, to eat and drink; and though he have
superfluity, yet in his covetousness, he has not enough; he does as if he
were to live here for ever; and then thirdly, he also pants [after the
Kingdom of Heaven] for the poor soul is very much perplexed, and is ever
afraid to the Devil, and the Anger of God, and would feign be released; but
the first two Kingdoms do press it down, and bar it up in their Prison,
in so much that many a poor soul casts it self away into the Abyss, and
despaireth of the Kingdom of God.

[Of the Devil, who changes himself into an Angel of Light].
24. They say, The Devil comes to Man, in the form of an Angel, and it is
true: Observe what he does, that he is accounted an Angel, and is accounted
good; when the poor soul is thus disquieted, and many times presents to the
Body, Death and the Anger of God: he hinders not that; he often lets the
poor soul run with the Body to the Houses of Stone, [to the Churches] or
whither it will: he puts it on most willingly of all to go to the Stone
Churches, and there says to the soul; Now thou art Godly and Devout, thou
go diligently to Church.

25. But what does he then? when any teach of the Temple of Christ, and of the
New Birth, then he sows other Thoughts into the Spirit of this world, in Man;
Sometimes Covetousness; sometimes he sets the Eyes upon Pride, State, and
Beauty; sometimes he catches the Spirit with the Lust and Imagination toward
Men or Women, according to their sex, and tickleth the Heart with wanton Lust;
sometimes they are lulled fast asleep.

26. But when the Preacher is a Sophister, and a malicious slaunderer, or
rayler: or perhaps many times in performance of his Office, and from a good
meaning, rebukes men according to their deserts. There the Devil sets open
every Door and Gate, and tickleth the Hearts [of the Hearers] therewith; and
the Heart wishes still more and more of that, that is very fine [to keep them
from falling asleepe].

27. And when such people go from Church, they can repeat every word very
readily, and that best of all which tends to the disgrace of others: with that
they feast themselves the whole week long; it is more acceptable to them then
the Word of God.

28. Behold, this is a Devil in an Angelical form: when they suppose that if
they do but run to Church together, such a one is a very good Christian. But
if they have learnt no more but to scorn, mock, and deride others, and bring
it home to their families, it had been better they had all that time been
wallowing in the mire, or that they had been fast asleep, and then the Devil
should not have defiled their souls in the Church of stone, with wantonness
and scorn: O how happy a sleep it is in the Church, when the Preacher
inviteth the Devil into the Heart for a Guest; it is better to sleep, then to
Imagine wantonness, or to fill the heart with revilings and scorn.

29. O you Sophisters! that fill your Sermons with reviling of your forefathers
that are dead long ago; you that out of Envy, often revile honest hearts
according to your own pleasure; how will you be able to stand with your Lambs,
whereas you should have led them into fresh green pastures, into the ways of
Christ, viz. into love, chastity, and humility, but you have filled them with
revilings, it were better you were in a stable or hogssty with your revilings,
then in a Pulpit; and there you would seduce no body.

30. I speak not this out of a desire [to reproach any body] but I do only
what I ought to do, I despise none, I only discover the smoaky Pit of the
Devil, that it may be seen what is in Man, as well in one as in another:
unless he be regenerated anew, and then he resists the Spirit of the Devil,
and thrusts it away from him.

31. The other Devil is more crafty and cunning then this, but is also a
Glistering Angel with Text, Cowes feet.
cloven feet; when he sees that the poor soul is afraid, and desires to
repent and amend: then he says, Pray and be devout; Repent for once and away;
but when the soul goes about to pray, he slippeth into its heart, and takes
away the understanding of the heart, and puts the heart into mere doubting;
as if God did not hear it: he represents Sin before the Heart, and says, To
morrow it will be better, leave off you will not now be heard.

32. Thus the Heart stands and repeateth over the words of a Prayer, as if it
were learning somewhat without Book; and the Devil takes away the virtue and
efficacy of them out of the Heart, so that the soul cannot reach the Center of
Nature: as Christ says, The Devil takes the Word out of your hearts, that
you may not believe and be saved.

33. Then again the soul stands and says it has Prayed, but it has not
prayed, it has only rehearsed words, not in the Spirit of the soul in the
Center where the fire is to be struck, [or Or, the earnest purpose awakened.
kindled], but in the Mouth, in the Spirit of this world, and they vanish in
the Air, or else as words wherewith Gods Name is taken in vain: But here
this should be observed; Thou shall not use the Name of God in vain and
unprofitably in thy mouth, for God will not leave him unpunished that uses his
Name in vain.

34. There belongs great Earnestness to Prayer: for Praying is calling upon
God: to entreat him, to speak with him, and to go out of the house of sin,
and enter into the house of God: and if the Devil offer to hinder it, then
Storm his Hell: Set thy self against him, as he sets himself against
thee, and then thou shall find what it is which is here told thee: if he
oppose strongly, then oppose thou the more strongly, thou have, in Christ,
far greater Power then he.

35. And if you doubt of the Grace of God, you sin greatly, for he is always
Barmhertzig.
Merciful, and there is no other will in him at all but to be Merciful: He
cannot do otherwise, His Arms are spread abroad Day and Night toward a poor
Sinner. And when any comes [with the lost Son to the Father], and so
stormeth Hell; Then there is amongst the Angels of God, greater Joy for such a
one, then for Ninety Nine righteous that need not that: as Christ himself
Teaches us.

36. With such a Devil as Or takes him off from an earnest purpose or
resolution of amendment.
covers the Heart of Man, there is no better course to be taken, with him,
then not to dispute with him at all about the multitude of sins; but to wrap
up all sins on a heap (though they were as many as the sand on the
Seashore) and throw them on to the Devils shou^ders; and to say in his heart:
Behold thou Devil, thou art the Cause of all this Evil, I leave my sins to
thee, but I take the Mercy of God, and the Death of Christ to my self, therein
will I roll my self, devour me if thou can.

37. Do but fix thy trust and confidence upon the Promise of Christ: and let
your Storming be always grounded in the Death of Christ, in his sufferings and
wounds, and in the Love of Christ: dispute no further about your sins, for
the Devil involves himself therein, and upbraideth thee for thy sins, that
thou might despair.

38. Make trial in this manner, and you will quickly see and feel another
Man, with another Thoughts and understanding.
sense and will [in you]: we speak as we know, and have found by Experience:
we speak not by way of Opinion, or as a Historical Relation: but that which
we have a ground for, for a Soldier knows how it is in the wars: but he
that has not tried and been present, always thinks otherwise then it is.
This we mention out of Love for your learning and Instruction; as One in
Spirit.
a Spirit which speaks how it has gone with it, for an Example to others; to
try if any would follow us, and then they should find how true it is.

The Gates of the Deep Ground Concerning Man.
39. Since the beginning of the world there has been a Controversy about
this: because these Gates were Sunck by Adam.
shut with Adam, and we have been held captive in Darkness: but seeing God
has favored us, and opened them to us, and also has given us an earnest will
to write it down: we shall therefore do it, and give thanks for it, to God
the Father in Christ Jesus in Eternity, who has redeemed us out of the
Darkness of Death.

40. Therefore when we would know what Man is, and why there is so great
difference and variety amongst Men, so that one does not as another does, and
that one differs in Form and Feature from another; we must set before us
the most inward Ground of his [ Incarnation or] becoming Man, and consider it,
and then we shall find all.

41. For when a Man that is Regenerated in God, so that he seeeth the Light,
begins to search out his original, then the Spirit of the soul searches
in all the Three Principles, what It.
he is in each of them; for we know it, and cannot say otherwise, then that
we, in the Image of the Spirit, and also of the Body, in all the Three
Principles, have but one only rule [or Dominion] in us; but that Dominion is
in three Sources [or qualities]: the Spirit and the Body is driven according to
each Principle, and what Principle it is which gets the upper hand in Man,
so that Man with his will inclines to it, according to that he performs his
work, and the other [Principles] do but cleave to it, not having sufficient
power.

42. But when we will speak of the Image, we must see what it is in the
Ground thereof. For we are sown as a seed in a field, into the Or, womb.
Matrix; Now consider what precedeth that: nothing but a longing will and
desire of Man and Woman to Copulate, and yet the fruit is not always desired,
of which we have an Example in Whores and Whoremongers, also indeed in the
State of Marriage.

43. Now the Question is, What is that which provokes [to copulation] in the
male and female of all kinds, as also in Man? Behold, in the Eternity all has
been in one Being, viz. the Tincture, which is the Center and cause of Life,
as has been mentioned at large before, and also the Substantiality, which is
generated out of the Tincture, which has also all the forms of the Center,
yet without Fire, for The Substantiality.
it is a sincking down, and cannot kindle the Life in it, it is corporeal and
affords Body; but not Life, for the fire affords life.

44. And we give you to understand, in the Copulation, that the Man has the
Tincture, and the Woman the Substantiality, viz. the Matrix, which is generated
out of the Tincture: Now observe, in the Eternity they were in one another, and
this world stood therein as a Figure; for the Wisdom had overshadowed the
Tincture, and received it into it self as the Body does the Spirit; and this
could not be brought to a substance visible to the Angels, unless God did move
the Eternity, for the Angels are in a substance.

45. Now when God, viz. the Number-Three, moved himself, there was moved
therewith also the Center of Nature in the Eternity, whereby all became
Essential, Substantial: the Tincture became substantial and prevailed; and
the Substantiality became material, and yet was not divided, for that cannot
be, it is one only Or, thing.
substance.

46. And now when God placed the Fiat in the Material Substantiality, or as I
may better say, did awaken [the Fiat therein] so that the Word in the
Substantiality said; Let there come forth all sorts of Beasts, according to
their kind; then there went forth out of the Material Substantiality two Male
and Female.
kinds, and that Corporeally, for through the Verbum Domini.
Word of the Lord, the Tincture took on it Substantiality: and the Spirit of
the Substantiality took also to it Corpus.
a Body, and so there were two sexes or kinds. The Body of the Tincture had in
it the Center of the Life: and the Body of the Substantiality had not the
Center to the Striking up of the Fire: indeed it had the life, but Or, faint,
weak.
an unpotent life.

47. This we demonstrate thus that you may rightly understand it: look upon a
Red hot.
flaming Iron, which sends two spirits forth from it self, one hot one,
which has the Center, and can kindle and awaken another fire: and one Airey
one, from which water proceeds, which has also all Powers of the Fire; yet
the Tincture therein is not fire, but it is an Eternal Bar, that no fire can
be therein, and yet is the Spirit of the Fire, which has its source out of the
Fire, and its life like to the Fire, for in the Eternity there is no Death.
Therefore in the female kind, no life can proceed out of their Tinctures, but
the Matrix must get the Tincture from the seed of the Male.

48. Thus we declare unto you also the Ground of the difference between the
Male and the Female kind: for when God created the Material Substance, there
went forth the kinds of all Essences in the Center of Nature, according to all
the Properties: for as you see the Stars, that one has a property different
from the other, which all, are created out of the Center of Nature, according
to the Material Substantiality, and so all Essences stood in the Material
Substantiality, and the Fiat attracted all toward the Created Earth.

49. And there has every form of the Tincture, and of the Spirit of the
several kinds, figured every one its own body, according to its Properties,
as to be Beasts, Fowls, Worms, Fishes, Trees and Herbs, also to be Metalls
and Earth, all according as the life was in them. And this you may well
perceive by the difference of each Days work [of the Creation].

50. For on the first Day, God Created the Material Water, (which has an
unpotent and life, and is a Bar upon the fire of the Anger, and upon the
Devils smoaky Pit, where he thought in the burning fire to domineere over God,)
Also [he then created] the Earth and Stones, and so the Dross.
Gross part was severed, which consisted in mortal and fierce Essences,
whereby Lucifer supposed to be King and Creator therein.

51. When this was done, God said; Let there be light (let the Light of the
Tincture open it self) and there was Light: then God separated the Light from
the Darkness. Understand this rightly. He [God] shut up the fierce fire which
Lucifer had kindled (which sourceth out of the Darkness) and let the Tincture
in the Quintessence burn, as in the fat of the Water-Spirit, as in a Beast
[the fire of its life burneth].

52. Thus the life did burn in the Tincture, and turned the fat, viz. the
Oil, into a Quintessence, viz. Blood, and so that life did burn in the Blood;
for therein stands the Noble Tincture: and God has reserved in his own power
the Center of the Fire: for he has shut it up in the Darkness, as it has
stood from Eternity in the Darkness: and so every Life stands in his hand:
for if he let the fire come into the Tincture, then the Spirit is in the
hellish Fire.

53. Now when the light did shine out of the Tincture, he divided the Tincture
into two parts, even as it divides it self, viz. into the Fire-Life, and into
the Light-Life: as was mentioned in the last foregoing leaf, and created the
two lives, the fire-life to be a Heaven and a firmament between the Holy
Meekness, viz. the Heart of God: and the unpotent Aire-Spirit: and yet the
Air goes forth from its Mother the Tincture of the Fire-spirit, and God
dwells between them both.

54. The Fire-spirit of the Tincture, has the Eternity for.
in its Root, and the Aire-Spirit has the material life, which sourced forth
with the awakened Substantiality, and rules the outward Beastiall Life: for it
is the Beastiall life of every Creature, also [it is the life] of Trees, Herbs
and Grass, it has also a Tincture, but not strong enough.

55. Thus you see, how the Life stands in the Water, and has two Dominions,
viz. Fire, and Air, and you see whence the Blood has its original, which
makes a Creature [that has bloud] more Noble, then one that has not blood in
it, for that Creature has a false Tincture, and is proceeded from the Will of
the Devil as you see in Vipours and venomous Worms, they have not the Noble
Tincture [or the Noble Life].

56. But when the Devil intended to be Lord in the Tincture, and would Create,
he awakened such a life in his will, which yet is not all his [life] he is
indeed of the same Essences, and the Devils Bodies are figured also in Hell
into such Serpents, venomous Worms, and Loathsome, deformed.
ugly Beasts: for they cannot in their own form be otherwise; although indeed
they have not a Body from the Divided Tincture from its Substantiality, but
[they have a body] out of the Center of Nature: out of the fierce Matrix, out
of the Eternal Substantiality, out of the Darkness, which is a Spiritual
Body.

57. Now when God had Created the Earth, the water was over the whole Earth,
which God separated, that the Earth became dry, and called the Water Sea, Mere,
which in the Language of Nature, signifies a covering, and holding fast the
fierceness of the Devil, a true reproach to the Devil, that his power was
drowned, to expound this, very acute Writings are requisite, and The natural
Man.
Man could hardly be able to apprehend it.

58. Thus the Earth sprung Put forth its own virtue.
in its own Essences and Tincture, which were also Or, conceived.
comprehended in the First Creation.

59. It shall also be rightly expounded to you, which Moses says: God
separated the Water above the Firmament from the Water beneath the Firmament;
that is, into the Water and Blood of the [living] Creatures, for the water
above the Firmament, is Blood, and therein stands the Or, life.
Tincture, which seperateth the Heaven from the water beneath the Firmament,
viz. from the Elementary water; as we see that each of them has its own
habitation and Dominion: of which may be spoken more at large in another place.

60. Only we understand therein two Kingdoms, viz. the soul dwells in the
Blood in the Tincture, and in the water dwells the Aire-Spirit, which is
corruptible: for it had a beginning, but the soul had none; for the Tincture
is from Eternity, and therefore the figures of all kinds must remain in
Eternity, account it not for an opinion, it is really so.

61. Now when Heaven, Earth, and the Elements were thus formed, then the fiery
Tincture was as a shining Light, and was a Firmament, called Heaven: for this
world had no other Light: And then God suffered the Center of Nature to open it
self in the Created Substantiality: (For this whole Principle became but one
body) and there brake forth its Heart [ viz. the Heart of this Principle] with
its own proper will and Or, senses.
faculties out of the Essences; that is the Sun, and the Stars are its
Essences, and the six Planets are the Spirits at the Center of the Heart; and
the Sun is their Heart: all just as the Deity has been from Eternity.

62. Thus there came a true life and understanding, with reason and Senses.
perception, yet a Beastiall one, into the outward Tincture and the Or, Spirit
of the Air.
Aire-Spirit, and so the Great Wonders stood there manifest, for God had
manifested himself in a figurative form; And you see that it is true, do but
consider what we have written before concerning the Center of Nature, and so
on, to the Light of the Majesty, and concerning the Number Three, and you will
find here in this world a figurative similitude [of Him].

Consider of the Planets.
63. Saturn, the first and highest, is astringent, cold, dusky, and makes the
desiring and attracting: for it is the sharpness. If you will have a right
understanding of this, you must As in the Figure following.
transpose the Planets.

64. First take the uppermost [Planet] and unto it the nethermost, for in the
wheel every where is uppermost and nethermost, understand in the Wheel of
Life, and it wheeleth the upper part nethermost when it turns Round: which is
only to be understood concerning fond conceited Men, and Beasts, with whom the
wheel of Nature falls a turning; for the Cross stays it.
Therefore observe well: Saturn attracteth the Moon, which is beneath, and
causes in the Matrix of the Creature, the Or, Corporeity.
Corporising, viz. that there be flesh; for Saturn and the Moon make Sulphur
[or Corporeity].

65. Now Saturn desires only to shut up, it seiseth upon and holds fast;
as [in turning] Liquor into a Sulphur. But Saturn has not sul; for sul is
from the Liberty, but Saturn has a willing, and the will has sul, for it
originally proceeds out of the Majesty.

66. Consider now, beneath Saturn stands Jupiter, which is proceeded out of
the virtue of Sol [or the Sun] as the Heart of Saturn (else there would be no
desiring, no Saturn) for Nature desires only the Heart, and Sol, [or the
Sun,] yet Jupiter is not Sol; But is the Brain.

67. And observe it, the wheel of Nature windeth it self from without inwards
into it self; for the Deity dwells innermost in it self, and has such a
Figure [as followeth]. Not that it can be delineated; it is only a natural
similitude; Even as God Represents or reveals.
pourtrayeth himself in the Figure of this world. For God is every where
Total, and perfect, and dwells thus in himself.

68 Observe; The outward Wheel is the Zodiac, with the Constellations, and
then the Seven Planets follow, to Sol, after Sol stands Fire, after Fire
Tincture, after Tincture Majesty, after Majesty the Number Three with the
Cross.

zodiac wheel

Although this Figure is not sufficiently delineated; yet it may serve to be
considered on; and a Draught might be made of it in a Great Circumference, for
the help of those that are of the weaker understanding, to consider of it.

69. And observe it, the desiring goes inwards into it self toward the
Heart, which is God, as you may conceive by such a Figure: for the Regeneration
goes also into it self to the Heart of God.

70. Observe it also well: for it is the Center [or the Ground] of the outward
Birth. In the Eighth Circumference [next] after the Zodiac is the Globe of the
Earth; after that right against it about on the wheel is Saturnus.
Saturn, and going about the wheel there is the Luna.
Moon, and again about on the wheel is Jupiter.
Jupiter, and again about on the wheel is Mercurius.
Mercury, and about again is Mars.
Mars, and then Venus.
and Sol.
Sol in the midst, and after Sol, the Fire which Sol affords, and after the
fire the other World, viz. the Heavenly Tincture, and after the Heavenly
Tincture the Number Three, viz. the Eternal Heart, and that is the Eternal
Center of Nature, and in the Eternal Center is the whole Power of the Majesty
of God throughout, held or shut up by nothing, and is of no substance or nature
[imaginable] even as the shining of the Sun.

71. You may well perceive what we set before you, thus; The Zodiac with the
Constellations belong to the Mind, as well in the Deep of the World, as also
in the Creature, the Twelve Signs are the twelve parts which the Cross in the
Center makes; from which the Upper Dominion is divided into twelve Parts, as
also the Mind is; For the six Forms in the Center besides Sol, do each of
them divide themselves into two Parts ([ Sol divides not it self but only
into the Number Three, or into the splendor fire and Tincture]) one according
to the Tincture that has Life [in it], the other according to the Tincture of
the Air, which has spirit [in it] and yet makes no Life.

72. Thus the Signs are Twelve, which divide themselves into two Governments,
viz. into a Heavenly according to the Tincture, and into an Earthly according
to the Spirit of this world, viz. the Air, and the two Kingdoms are also
twofold, viz. in the Tincture of the Fire there is an Angelical Kingdom, and
Or, retrograde.
backwards a Hellish; and the Kingdom in the Spirit of the Air is also
twofold: for the inward [Kingdome] is the Spirit of God, and the outward is the
Spirit of the Creatures; as David says; The LORD rides upon the wings of the
Wind; that is the Spirit of God which comes to succor and relieve his work.

73. So also the Tincture Kingdom in God makes six forms, and that of the
Spirit, out of the Tincture, which is the Heart and life, and is the Spirit of
God, makes also six in Number, and they are together Twelve in Number; These
the Woman in the Revelation, which the Dragon would devour, wears upon her
head, being twelve Stars: for one number Six she received from the Spirit of
this world, wherein the Holy Ghost Reteineth, possesses, or inhabiteth.
keeps the Eternal Life, and the other number six she has from the
Eternal Tincture out of the Eternal Center out of the Word: for she wears
the Angelical Zodiac and also the Humane.

74. And each Center has six in Number, which make together the number Twelve:
the seventh number of the Center is Substantiality, and the [Dominion or]
Kingdom; for God became Man, and brought the two Kingdoms into one; for Men
and Angels are in one Kingdom in God.

75. And so the Image Of the Woman.
in the Revelation has twelve Stars upon the Crown: for the Image Denotes
or signifies.
represents God; it is the similitude of God, in which he reveals himself,
and wherein he dwells. The Crown signifies the Power of the Majesty of God,
as a King wears a Crown, which signifies Dominion and Majessy.

76. But that the Image wears a Crown with twelve Stars upon the Crown,
it signifies, that the Deity is above the Humanity, and that Mary is not God
himself; But the Crown signifies God, and the Stars [signifie] the Spirits
of God: six in the Deity, and six in the Humanity: for God and Man are become
one Person: Therefore Mary also wears all [the twelve Starres] for we are
Gods Children.

76. Seeing then, that the number Twelve contains two Kingdoms in the
Doubled Number [of six] viz. an Angelical and a Humane, each in the Number of
six, which together make Twelve, so also the two Kingdoms have other two
numbers of six in them; ( viz. the Fire, the Kingdom of the Abyss; and the
Air, the Kingdom of Or, Beasts.
living Creatures and all Earthly things;) and these have each of them in the
Center, the number six, according to the six Planets, Earthy and according to
the six Planets, fiery, which now together make the number of Four and Twenty,
which are the four and twenty Letters in Languages, whence they are sprung,
and we perceive that the Tongue speaks that which is Good, and that which is
Evil, that which is heavenly, and that which is Devilish, according to the
two Or, properties.
sources of the Letters: as their proper names intimate, according to the
Language of Nature.

77. Now when this number according to the Or, Trinity.
Number Three, is numbered to thrice four and twenty, (as indeed the number
Three does manifest it self in Three Kingdoms and Persons, and according to
the Number Three all is Threefold, but according to the Creatures all is
Twofold) then the sum is seaventy-two in Number, which signify and are the
seaventy-two Languages, which signify Babell, a Confusion and Wonder.

78. If we should go on here, we should show you the Whore and the Beast
which the Revelation speaks of, and moreover all the Wonders which have been
since the world began: the Greatest Secret Lies herein, and is called
Mysterium Magnum, The Great Mystery, and all the Controversies in matters of
Religion and Faith arise from hence, and all willing Evil and Good.

79. The Seven Spirits, wherein the Son of Man consists, in the
Revelation, are the seven Spirits of Nature: one of them is the Kingdom, and
the six are the Center of Nature, [ viz. the] Heavenly, if this be set down
according to the Number of a Man.
Humane Number, it makes the number Twelve, and according to the two
Kingdoms, viz. the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of this world, out of Two
Kingdoms.
which the Faithful are Generated, then there are Four and Twenty Spirits,
which are the Elders before the Throne of God, who worship God, and the slain
Lamb; consider it well.

80. We further intimate concerning this world's Center of Nature, thus: The
Birth of Life windeth it self like a wheel inwards into it self, and when it
comes to the innermost point, then it attaineth the Liberty, yet not [the
Liberty] of God, but only the Tincture, out of which the Life burns.

81. For that which will Snatch.
catch hold of God must pass through the Fire: for no substantiality reaches
God, unless it subsist in the Fire, understand, in a peculiar Fire: if that
should kindle, the world would melt away: We mean not the Fire of the
Out-Birth, which is no Fire, but only a sharp fierceness, which consumes the
outward Substantiality which springs from the water, viz. Wood and Flesh, but
does not stir the Inward Fire in Stone.

82. Therefore observe it; the Liberty Extra.
without the Nature of this world, is only the Eternity without substance. Now
as the Eternal Center generateth it self out of the Desiring of the Eternal
willing, as is mentioned before; so has also the other Center of the Third
Principle, (through the Word Fiat in the Out-birth, out of the Eternal,)
generated it self [in like manner].

83. For from the first Creation of the first Day, the Outward Center of Nature
had wound it self Thrice about (understand before the Sun and Stars were
corporeally created), and had attained Six Forms, Three superior and Three
inferior: and there are always Twelve of them that belong to one Form of the
Center: where there is always a Sign, understand, the The Twelve Signs in
the Zodiac. Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Cancer. Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpio.
Sagitarius. Capricornus. Aquarius. Pisces.
Signs in the Eighth Sphere (in the Crown).

84. 1. Saturnus.
Saturn with his harsh strong attracting and cold, is one Form and Spirit in
the Center, which shuts up the Abyss, and makes darkness in the Deep,
and attracteth the Substantiality of the Outward power of this Principle, and
the Center windeth about like a wheel; and that which is concrete stands
over against Saturn, as in a wheel, and is called Monde, (the 7. Luna.
Moon] in respect of its property, which would be too large to set down in
writing.

85. Then the wheel windeth further Inwards into it self, and makes 2.
Jupiter.
Jupiter: for Saturn with its attracting desires the Liberty of the Divine
Substance, but he makes Him [the Brain;] for it catches with its desire the
power of the Liberty, and not the Liberty of the Divine Majesty it self, which
is without substance.

86. But because there is understanding in the Power, and yet the Power cannot
in its own might awaken the understanding; therefore Jupiter desires a Life in
the Power, and that is about on the wheel 6. Mercurius.
Mercury: for the wheel is always winding about, and Mercury is a stirrer,
a maker of a sound and a noyce, and yet has not the life, for The Life.
that existeth in the Fire; and therefore it desires the fierce stormy
Turbulency, which strikes up the Fire; and that about on the wheel is 3..
Mars.
Mars, which is a rager, stormer, and striker up of the Fire.

87. But now the Four Forms cannot subsist in the Fire: for they have
Substantiality, and the Fire desires Substantiality, (for the Fire it self
subsisteth not, if it have not fuel to feed upon) which Substantiality
desires Meekness, and that about on the wheel is 5. Venus.
Venus: for it is the Meaknesse of the outward Nature, and makes Love; for it
is that which the other five Forms desire: for every Form windeth it self
inwards and desires the Liberty of God, which is meek stillnesse, and as
nothing, and yet is All: and if they have the Meekness, which also makes
water [to be], then the water is Thick, and is like a duskinesse which desires
Light, and becomes pregnant with it, so that the Meekness, viz. Venus has a
luster of its own above all the Stars in the Firmament; for the desiring
catches the Light.

88. Now the Light is without substance, and only still and meek, which
desires life and spirit, and yet can produce no life nor spirit our of the
Water and Meekness: therefore Venus desires with its Meekness and Light, the
Heart; that is, the power and virtue of all Forms, and so it catches the
Heart, which about on the wheel, in the Point, is the 4.. Sol.
Sun, which is the Heart of all the six Forms, and they are the forms of
their Heart, which together is a life. Now if that were unstedfast and should
Or, move about.
pass away, so often as the wheel windeth once about, and though it would be
long, it would endure but a Seculum, Age, or Term of Nine and twenty years.

89. Now the seven Forms desire Fire, [being the Eighth Number] [and the
Eighth Number desires a life,] which may continue, for the Heart is not alive
without Fire, and [therefore] the Heart catches hold of the Fire: and that
fire is fierce and consuming, and consumes all the seven Forms of the Center
with their Substantiality.

[The Heart stands between two Worlds.]
90. Thus The Heart is in Anguish, vexed within and without, for it has
nothing more in the substantial life outwardly, though it seeks yet it
finds nothing, and yet seeks with anxious longing, and penetrateth through
all forms, and seeks mitigation of the Fire, and yet cannot so find it
neither.

91. Thus all the six forms of the Heart receive the virtue of the Sun: for it
penetrateth mightily into all the six Forms, and seeks rest and ease, and if
it find not that, then it presses in it self forth from it self through the
Fire, and desires the Eternal Liberty, and attaineth the Liberty through
desiring, and yet cannot be Free, for the sharpness of the Fire is in its
desiring. But the Liberty attracteth it self in the desiring in the Fire: for
the desiring presses into it [ viz. the Liberty].

92. Thus the Liberty sharpneth it self in the Fire, and appears through the
Fire as a flash [of Lightning] that is the Glance and shining of the Sun, and
that sharpened Liberty desires its Eternal Delight, viz. its meek still
virtue, and presses inwardly into it self into the virtue: and that Eternal
virtue in the Liberty is the The other world.
Eternal Word, and that Word is Generated out of the Eternal Heart, and in
the Heart is the
Cross of the Number Three, and is the End of Heavenly and Earthly.
Nature; and in the End is the virtue and Glance of the Liberty, which is
generated out of the Eternal Center, out of the Heart upon the Cross, and is
called the divine Majesty of the Eternal Or, Essence.
Substance.

93. Now consider, as the outward Desiring of the outward Nature goes inwards
into it self toward the Eternal Heart, which is God: (for the outward Nature
longs again after the substance of the Liberty, to be as it was before the
Creation, that it might be delivered from the vanity, viz. the fierce Wrath:)
so also the inward Heart longs after the outward Nature, and would feign
manifest it self outwardly in figurative Resemblane is.
silimilitudes, and thus the inward desires the outward for a figure, and the
inward catched the outward in its Desiring

94. For the similitude of the Eternal Center was indeed already before the
Creation of the Sun and Stars in the outward Substantiality: but it was not
figured and kindled [as a Limmer before he draws a Picture has an Image in
his Mind, but not framed exctly].

95. Thus Gods Heart of the Number Three, put its will into the astringent
Fiat, into the Matrix of Nature, into the Heart of the Out-birth, into the
Firmamentall Heart, viz. into the Place of the Sun, and Created with the Spirit
of his Mouth [the spirit of the soule] through the Fiat round about on the
wheel, the Aliter, seventh Form.
seven Forms of the Center of Nature, for as the wheel turns and windeth
so went the Fiat also Magically, in the midst in the willing of the wheeling.

96. And seeing the Out-birth of the Earth was a sinking down of Death,
therefore the Life turned away from that Death upwards. And you see that the
Three Planets, 1. 2.. 3.. 4. 5... 7.
viz. the Forms of the Center of Nature (which make the Spirit of the Center
and the House of the Spirit,) stand upwards above the Sun, as the life in its
beginning takes its Original: and the Three which belong to the body and to
Mobility, beneath the Sun one under another, even as the Corporising takes its
Original, and the Heart, viz. the Sun, in the midst; and the form
stands right upwards toward the firmament, as a Man.

97. Which you are to understand thus: observe, above the Heart, the Sun,
stands Mars, which is the striker up of the Fire, and a kindler of the Heart,
and a breaker in pieces of the Essences, that the thick Substantiality may not
remain covered and stifled, it breaks that, so that the Spirit can awaken
the Or, senses.
faculties, for it makes the Tincture in the Sun.

[ Mars is Poison and Anger, and denotes the fierceness of the Fire, as is
mentioned before concerning the Center: it is the bitter raging Form in the
Wheel, and causes the Essences in the flash of the Fire: It is a cause of the
Life. The Sun and Mars have together the Tincture-Life: and Venus with Mercury
and the Sun have the Spirit-life, viz. the Air; that is the Feminine Life,
understand the Matrix, viz. a female Life of all kindes].

98. And above Mars stands Jupiter, which is the power and virtue of the
Heart, (to which, Mars gives its fire-life which it receives out of the Heart
of the Sun) that makes the Brain, wherein Mars can dwell.

99. And above that, stands Saturn, which attracteth the virtue, and makes
for the spirit a house, viz. the Or, skull.
Brainpan, and makes the Substantiality, as the skin upon the Body; thus the
Outward life upwards from the Sun, [or Heart], is the Head, a house for the
Spirit, which takes its original in the Heart in the Fire, and dwells in
the Head in the five senses in the Aire-Life.

100. And under the Sun downwards, is Venus; which takes its original, from
the pressing forth out of the Fire, out of the Tincture, and therefore has its
peculiar luster, it makes Water and Love, and is a sincking down, for it is a
cause of the Suns Substantiality, and a beginner of the Inferior Aliter, Life.
Body, also it has the Tincture, and is a cause and beginner of the Seed to
another Center, to Propagation; for it strengthens it self with the
superior power and virtue, and receives therewith the form of the Spirit,
both from the Heart, and from the Brain: for all Forms desire to have it, and
do mingle with it: for it is Love and Kindness.
Meekness. Thus it has the power and virtue of all Forms, and is a pleasant
Or, Musician.
Lutinist: for it sings a song, that they all love to hear and Or, feel.
relish; which ought to be well considered.

101. And below Venus is Mercury, to whom Venus give its virtue, together with
its sincking, and therefore Mercury is so pleasant and loves to talk of all
then Or, Wits, feats, and devices.
Ingenuities of Nature, it is a nimble sudden awakener of the Seed which Venus
gives to it: for it will [needs] awaken the Body [or bring the body into
being, and because it has much skill, therefore it will Or, converse and
meddle in every thing.
wander into every thing, and gives speech to the Body, and awakeneth the
Body, and gives it senses, especially in the Brain, and in the Matrix of the
Seed.

120. Under Mercury stands the Moon, and there the sincking stands still,
and is a substance mixed of all: it affords the Carcass, and all that
belongs thereto: it takes all to it, and makes the whole Image as a Beast;
it is the Corporeity: Venus congealeth in it; it retains all; for it lets
nothing sinck down, and it stands always in fear of falling, in respect of
the Earth, which stands under it; for it feels the Anger in the Earth; and
therefore is afraid, and does not sinck down, but runs and makes have
about, as if it were fugitive: it is a false thing, for it desires both that
which is superior and that which is inferior, and flattereth with the Center
of the Earth, and with the Center of the Sun.

103. And as this Dominion or Government in it self is, so is the Dominion in
every Creature, also their life stands thus: and you see how the Wheel
turns round, as [in] in the Center, and the body with the Essences stands
still.

104. The six Planets run round about the Sun, as about their Heart, and afford
virtue to it, and draw virtue from Aliter in the Sun.
the Sun: so also the life windeth it self thus about the Heart, and
penetrateth into the Heart; for the Spirit-Life penetrateth to the soul, which
burns as a light, out of the Heart, out of the Tincture of the Heart, and
windeth it self inwards thereinto, and they always drive forth one another:
and so this form is as a turning Wheel: for the Life of the Spirit is thus in
its Original.

105. They who say, that the Sun Or, runs a course round about in an Orb.
Note.
goes forth, speak as the blind do of colors, and have never known the
Center [of Nature] yet they are not to be blamed for that: for it was reserved
[or sealed] till the Seal of the Sun opened it self, at the seventh sounding
of the Trumpet. Observe this, it is no fiction or boasting: it does concern
you all, or else you will die in blindness, for which God is not to be blamed.

106. The World after the Fall has but one Eye, for it has lived under the
six Seals, understand, under the six Planets, with its knowledge: but you You
shall see with solar eyes in the time of the seventh Seal.
shall see the seventh Seal with the Eye of Sol, we here speak what we
know.

107. Understand us aright, thus, we will give light to those that hardly
apprehend it: Behold and observe: The whole Government of this world in every
Life comes from the Constellations good and evil; and they are also the
cause, that the four Elements, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, were stirred up:
else all in this world would be still.

108. And so now you see the upper Government, especially in the seven
Planets: for they are the Government or Dominion of the Spirit, and that is
twofold: They have the Tincture-Government, viz. the Fire-Life, and also the
Aire-Government, viz. the Water-Life: the Three Planets above the Sun, do
together with the Sun manage the fire-life and Government: and the Three
beneath the Sun, are the going forth of the fires-Tincture, and are a sincking
down, and do together with the Sun manage the Aire-Government, and have the
female kind, for they have the Substantiality of the Matrix, and the Tincture
of the Upper Matrix; the Tincture retains the soul, and the Nether Matrix of
Venus [retaineth] the Spirit

109. Thus the Upper desires the Lower, and the Lower desires the Upper, and
is indeed but one body: for Sol is the Heart, and has the Luster of the
Majesty of this [outward Third] Principle.

110. Thus you understand the Two Of Sexes.
kinds, the Male and the Female; The [Male or] Man is the Head, and has in
him the Upper Government with the fire of the Tincture, and he has in his
Tincture the soul, which is desirous of Venus, which is the Corporeal Matrix:
for the soul will have spirit and also body, and that has the Matrix of the
[Female or] Woman.

111. And the Lower Government is the [Female or] Woman, and her Government
consists in the Moon: for Sol affords it Heart, and Venus [affordeth it]
Tincture, and yet has no fiery but a watery [Tincture]: and therefore The
Moon.
it affords the Aire-Spirit, and her Tincture does not stand in the O^, Wit.
Wisdom, and therefore the Man must Rule her: for the Tincture of the Fire is
the sharp Trial of every Or, Thing.
Substance.

112. Mercury is the stirrer up of Women's.
their Tincture: and therefore they are so talkative, and the Moon has Moon.
their Matrix, which is our of all the Planets, and is afraid of the Earth, and
therefore makes such have, and takes virtue and power in the wheel, from all
the Planets and Stars, where ever it can: It desires Sol vehemently: and
therefore draws also his Luster to it self; and as the Moon longs after
the Sun; for it self is of an earthly quality, and desires the Heavenly
Heart: so also the Feminine Matrix longs after the Heart of the Man, and
after his Tincture, viz. after the soul: for the foul is the Eternal Good.

113. Thus Nature longs after the Eternal, and would feign be delivered from
the vanity. And thus the vehement desire in the Feminine and Masculine Or, Sex.
Gender of all creatures does arise, so that one longs after the other for
Copulation. For the body understands it not, nor the Spirit of the Air,
only the Two Tinctures, the Masculine and the Feminine do understand it, for
a Beast knows not what it does, only the Tinctures know it, which drive it
thus.

114. For the Fiat sticks in The two Tinctures.
them, they musf manifest the great Wonders of God: For the Spirit of God
moves upon the Water of the Matrix in Venus, and in the Matrix of Jupiter, (
viz. in the Matrix of the Brain) and leads the Fiat.

115. For the Heart has the Matrix of Venus, and the Brain has the Matrix of
Jupiter; thus the Spirit of God rides upon the wings of the Wind in his own
Principle: and yet goes forth from the Father and the Sun, in the [continuall]
Creation; and opens the Wonders, which were seen from Eternity in the
Wisdom: and therefore he is the Workmaster of Every Being; and is sent of God
to that purpose.

The Tenth Chapter.
Further of the creation of Every Being: And how Man may seek and find
himself: Also how he may find all Mysteries, even to the Ninth Number and no
Higher.
1. YOur seeking in the Stars and Elements, supposing to find the Mysteries
of Nature, is but labor in vain, you find no more but one Eye, and see with
but one Eye, and when you suppose you have found Sol, you have scarce found
Luna, but only a Glance of Sol, and are far from the Heart, and do but run
with the Moon about the Center.

2. There is but one way, which you must go, if you will find the Great
Mystery, Mysterium Magnum, for if you should seek in Luna all your life long,
it would be wholly in vain: your desire would remain to be but Luna: if you
should take great and hard labor and pains in Mercury, and suppose the Stone
lies therein, your Alchimey would prove but dung and dross.

3. When you come into Venus, you suppose you have Sol, and that it is Gold,
but it is the Woman [or female] and has only a watery Tincture, her life is
Air, and so you vainly labor Or, upon the Body.
in the Body: but if you take the Spirit of the Tincture, then indeed you go
in a way, in which many have found Sol; but they have followed on the way to
the Heart of Sol; where the Spirit of the heavenly Tincture has laid hold on
them, and brought them into the Liberty, into the Majesty, where they have then
known the Noble Stone, Lapis Phil^s^ph^rum, the Philosophers Stone, and have
stood amazed at Man blindness, and seen their laboring in vain.

4. Would you feign find the Noble Stone, behold we will show it you plain
enough, if you be a Magus, and worthy, else you shall remain blind still:
therefore fall to work thus: for it has no more but Three Numbers: X. 10.
first tell from One till you come to the Cross, which is Ten, and is a Cross
Number (from one to Ten is one Number) but you have power only over the Number
Nine, you must stay at the Tenth, for it is the End of Nature, which the
Creature ought not to search into: if the Creature stay under the Cross, it
remains in the conceived will of God: and then it has 10. 10.


Ten times Ten, that is, an hundred, and 100. 10. 1000.


Ten times an Hundred is a Thousand: and there lies the Stone without any
great pains taking, for it is pure, and is not defiled with any Earthly
Nature: Make it thus, as I have written above [in the ninth Chapter] concerning
the Center: Transpose the Planets that are about the wheel; and take always
one Masculine, and then one Feminine, one for the Spirit of the soul, and the
other for the Aire-Spirit, you need not take care for the body: for each Planet
makes a body to it self well enough according as its desire is: Begin with
Saturn (for he is the first to the Fire-Life to the Noble Tincture): and then
go about the wheel to Luna: for you must always take one Planet for the Life
of the Tincture, and then one for the Spirit of the Air, for the one
subsisteth not without the other, or else you get a Spirit without a Body, a
fire-spirit, which burns in a Lantern like a kindled Fire, but it yields
nothing, it is only a mere Pride, willing to be, without a Body.

5. Go thus about in the wheel to Sol, which is the 7th Number.
seventh Number in the first Number [or account]: and when you get into that,
you suppose you have the Stone: but it does not prove fixed, Mars destroys
it: go on further through the Suns fire, which is the 8th Number.
Eighth Number, and when you come through it, lay hold through the Tincture on
the Eternity [which] is the 9th Number.
Ninth Number, and bring that upon the Cross, upon the 10th Number.
Tenth Number, which is the End of Nature; here handle the stone, and take as
much of it as you will, no fire will destroy it: it is free from the Wrath and
Outbirth: its Splendor and Light stands in the power of the Majesty: its
Body is out of the Eternal Substantiality, its number upon the Cross is an
Hundred, and in the Majesty a Thousand.

6. We give this to the Seeker: for none find the Stone in Luna, unless he
come upon the Cross into the Tenth Number: and then if he long further to
seek this world, and would feign have the splendor of this world, and
desires the Stone of this world, viz. in Mettalls; let him go thus from the
inward into the outward; let him go into Luna, and divide or break it into a
Thousand Parts, and give it a little of Sol, but if its Hunger and thirst.
covetousness be great, then give it a seventh part of Sol, and then it is
Made bright and beautiful.
complete.

7. For all the Planets and Stars run after the Heart, every one of them
takes strength and virtue from the Heart, and makes to it self its own Body;
for Luna is out of all the six Planets, and has even Sol, but not the Heart;
for it has Sol only in Desire: as you see that it shines with With the light
of the Sun.
Sol, and not with a splendor of its own: and therefore the Spirit of the
Heart must be added to it, which was pure before, and then all the Planets
resort to it, each of them desires the pure child, and each Erecteth its
Habitation.
builds its house therein: But look to it, have a care of Venus, that it may
not by tattleing bring its feminine Tincture therein: for it appears bright
and fair: but it is a Woman, and makes a dark Body, and quickly devoureth
Sol: keep black Saturn in Mars'es heat, and so at length bounteous Jupiter
will appear, who is courteous and kind, and has the superior House, the
House of the Spirit of the Tincture, when it is come out from black Saturn,
then that is the Metalline Stone.

8. Trouble not your self so very much and long with Fire, it affords no
more then it is able: or else you Number back again into loss, indeed not
into perdition, but yet in Solemn Hungariae, into the Sol of Hungaria: Venus
exulteth the more, but your covetous hope and expectation is disappointed and
taken away: Although indeed you ought justly to rest satisfied in the Tenth
Number: for the riches of this world is but dung [and drosse] and if you
attain to the Tenth Number with your former preparation, you need not take so
great care about the Number Thousand: it stands upon the Crown of the
Virgin, in which are set Twelve Stars: six [of them] Divine, and six Humane:
The Number 1000. is the Number of the Crown: the Number 100. is the Number of
a Man.
the Crown has the Number Thousand, and the Virgin the [Number] Hundred.

9. Christ says; Seek first the Kingdom of God, and all other things will be
added to you All lies in the willing, for the willing makes the desiring, and
the desiring receives where nothing is, though indeed there is something
there; yet it is hidden to us Men, unless a Man have attained the Stone upon
the Cross, and then he finds where Reason says there is nothing; for that
which has not been from Eternity is not at all, and thereof we know nothing,
we know only of that which is, and has ever been, though indeed not
manifested to us Men, but yet is of God in his Wisdom, from Eternity to
Eternity.

10. Therefore, although we speak of two Kingdoms, viz. of the Kingdom of
God, and of the Kingdom of this World, in that manner as if we saw them with
bodily eyes, let it not seem a wonder, if God reveal himself in Man, then is
he in two Kingdoms, and sees with twofold Eyes, and yet this way is not so
hard and difficult, as Reasons seeking in outward things: it lies all in the
willing; the outward willing must enter into the inward, it must deny it self,
as if it were dead to the outward, and had no life in the outward, and yet
lives: as God lives and is in the outward, and the outward is dead to him, so
that it cannot apprehend him: so also thou O Man, thou art with thy soul in
the inward: but thy souls will has turned it self about with Adam into the
outward: therefore if thou will behold God and the Eternity, turn thy self
about with thy will into the inward; and then thou art as God himself; for
thou were thus created in the beginning, and thus thou live according to the
inward will unto God, and in God, and according to the outward [will thou
livest] in this world; and has both Kingdoms thy own, and art indeed rightly
an Image and similitude of God; thou searchest out all things, and find that
which lay hidden in secret; for thou find that in the Eternity, and
beholdest it standing backward in the Out-birth in the Figure.

11. The Ground of the Creation of this world, is much easier to be known in
the Inward Man, in the Will of God; then visible things to the outward [Man]:
the outward knows less, that which he sees with his eyes, and takes hold
of with his hands, hears with his ears, smells with his nose, and tastes
with his mouth, then the inward does the Ground and the Existency of the
outward: The Inward sees indeed the Creature in the Ground of it; but is as it
were dead to the outward, and yet lives therein; and in that he lives to the
outward, he lives to God, in regard of his Works of Wonder, in that he
manifests, and brings into Being, that which stands hidden in the Figure.

12. And yet we say still, that the Eternal stands in the willing, and the
will makes desiring, and in the desiring stands the Figure of the willing.
Thus it was before the Time of this world: But when God moved himself in his
willing, he so created the desiring, that it stood in a Being, and other then
this very thing we know nothing.

13. Therefore now the desiring, is another thing then the willing, for the
willing is without Being [or Substance], and the desiring makes Being: and
so out of the Eternal Nothing is come whatsoever is, and before there was
nothing, but only a willing, which was a Virgin without Image, and yet was a
figure of an Image in the willing: and this figure has discovered the Spirit,
and created it into a Being [or Substance], as we perceive in the Form of
this World: the Figure has caused the Spirit, that it has Expressed the
Wonders in Figure, and that is the Matrix of the Genetrix, and that is the
Spirit of this world: for the Spirit could Spoken forth or Created.
express nothing but a similitude of it self; for there was nothing else.

14. Therefore we demonstrate the Creation to you thus; for to create
signifies to comprehend in the willing, whatsoever stands in the figure in
the willing: for when a Carpenter will build an house, he must first Frame a
Model of it in his willing, how he will build it, and then he builds it
according to the Model of his willing.

15. Thus also has the Spirit of God framed in his will a Model after his
likeness, and so created that Model: for you see in this world, that when the
Spirit through the word Fiat (upon the First Day) created the Out-birth in the
Wrath, viz. Water and Earth; he comprehended the Figure in the Will; and that
was the Heaven, which he created on the Second Day, and tried the Work on the
Third Day, and suffered to proceed out of the Earth, forms and Images out of
the Essences, viz. Trees, Herbs, and Grass, which were Images of the Essences
of the desiring: but the Image of the Spirit remained still hidden, and yet was
in Being even unto the Fourth Day. (Here understand) a Day without the Sun,
is one turning about of the wheel of Nature in the desiring of the willing,
and the Inward Will has the Number Six, according to the six Spirits, and the
outward [Will] in the desiring of the Figure has also the Number Six,
according to the similitude of the Spirit, and the two Kingdoms [ viz, the
inward and the outward] make with their Number Sixes The twenty-foure hours.
in 4 Quarte s, Morning, Noone, Evening, Midnight.

four and twenty; which divide themselves into four parts, viz. six before
noone, and six after noone, six before midnight, and six after midnight, till
the beginning or morning again.

16. And according to this, the Spirit in the desiring did set a sign, and a
Reckoning, whence Times and Years proceed, which were not before; for Every
Number [of the] Twelve, which is heavenly Divine, and Earthly, humane or
Beastiall, has a sign in the Firmament, which the Spirit created into a
visible Being, together with the Crown of the Center, which is the Or, Sphere.
Circumference of the Constellations. And we give you notice, that the Creating
of the Spirit, is a going forth out of it self into the outward. For in Loco
Solis, in the place of the Sun, is the Point, where the Spirit created the
similitude: for the word Fiat stood there, and went forth from the inward
Number Ten as a Body, and that is Luna, and in such a comprehension was the
manner and form of the Deep apprehended: and the Spirit went forth, and drove
the Essences of the Center even to the Crown: and there Or, framed them into
the Signs.
comprehended them with the Signs, and all Forms of the Image, which stood in
the Virgin in the Figure in the Willing, and they are the Stars, and created
them as a Circumference [or Sphere] of the Spirit, and they are all together a
Body of that Spirit which is called Sol: for there the Eternal Spirit has
comprehended or conce^ved the similitude of the Spirit [of this world]: and it
goes thus forth out of the Natural Body of this World, as a Spirit: even as
the Eternal Spirit [goeth forth] out of the Eternal Center of Nature, out of
the Number Ten. And as they have ordered themselves with their Revolution in
the Three Days, understand, before the Sun [was], so they also remained
standing in the Fiat in that Ordinance or Course.
Order, and are not material or palpable, though as to the Eternity it is a
material being, but not as to Us, but they are Powers; an Out-Birth out of
the Eternal hidden and secret Center, and a similitude of the Eternal, and
have power and strength to shapen and figure Bodies and Images, according to
all the properties of Every Star.

17. Understand us thus; Out of the Place of the Sun, Ex loco solis, go forth
the Manifestation of all the Stars and Elements, and all the Stars are the
Suns Children, even unto Saturn, which is the house of the Sixfold Spirit: for
the Planets are the Spirit, and the Crown which is the Uppermost Stars.
Uppermost [is] the Body; and is in that manner as we have mentioned before
concerning the Center of Nature, and concerning the Thrones of the Angels.
Very great things are herein contained, which we justly conceal, because of
the wickedness of the World, which if they knew them, they would misuse the
powers of Nature to their covetousness and falsehood.

18. Therefore we tell you, that those to whom the Number Ten is opened, have
it also given them into their Will to speak no more then what is requisite and
necessary for the World, and that at all times as need requires, and is known
in God.

19. Thus we give you to understand, how God on the Fourth Day created the
Sun, and with that Leading Spirit the Stars also, and what they are, being
together nothing else but a life according to the similitude of God, wherein
the Eternity has manifested it self in a Being.

20. On the Fifth Day God moved this Being and Life, and set the Fiat therein,
and created out of the Matrix all kinds of similitudes according to every
form in the Spirit: and in this Creation now has the third Kingdom, viz. the
Kingdom of Anger, pressed hard in with it; and there went forth all manner of
Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Worms, and whatsoever moves and lives; all went
forth out of the outward Matrix, and stood upon the Earth: and in the Deep
went forth all sorts of Spirits of Fire, (such as are the Ascendents and
Phoenix, and in the Air also all sorts of Spirits, according to the
Substantiality of the Air, and in the Water, and in the Earth, all sorts of
Spirits, every one according to the property of its Or, Genetrix.
Mother; and the whole Deep between the Constellations, so far as the Word
gave it self in unto the Creation, is nothing but a Life and stirring of
Spirits.

21. Now Reason asks: being the Devil dwells in this world, and has his
Princely Dominion there, where abouts does he dwell then? Behold O Man,
consider this well. There are in the whole Deep no more then seven Or, Orbs.
Revolutions, which roll and turn about like a wheel, or as the Life windeth
it self about the soul; and the Heart, as the Center stands still, in the
midst, that is, the Note the Sphere of the Orbs with the Sun standing still,
and the Earth having its daily and yearly Course.
Sun; and the Note the Sphere of the Orbs with the Sun standing still, and the
Earth having its daily and yearly Course.
Revolutions about the Sun, are the six Planets, as Spirits of the Center, and
the seventh Revolution is the Earth, which turns it self, once about in
four and twenty hours, and runs along in the course of the Planets, once a
Year, and besides carries the Moon with it, about the Sun, as the others do
also, but some in shorter and some in much longer Time: as first in 29. years.
Saturn in Twenty nine years in respect of his large Course; But the in 1.
Month.
Moon which runs back does it every Month Twelve times in a year, and
passes Some days over.
somewhat on yet further [in a Thirteenth Revolution].

22. Now this together makes the wheel of the Birth; wherein stands the
Verbum Fiat, which has driven the Devil out from this Circle, and so he
dwells without this Circle, and there is a great Darkness about the Crown
of Stars in the Firmament, so that many Stars in the Firmament are not
seen because of the Darkness, and that otherwise has a great signification
as to Men, which we would indeed make mention of, if the world were not so
mad, and suffered the Devil to drive it, who derideth all manner of
Revelations, that thereby he may blindfold Men; It shall in the Last Time stand
manifest to the Children, which see with both Eyes, [ viz. with the Eye that
sees into the Eternity, and the Eye that sees into that which is Temporary].

23. Thus the Devil dwells near us, and yet has a Princely Dominion much
deeper, nearer toward the Constellations in the midst [amongst them], where it
is darkest: for he Dare not, or likes not.
may not come near the shining Luster of the Sarres: and so is as a Prisoner,
and dare not Touch the seven Governments of the word Fiat, and has no power
therein, and so is the poorest creature in the Crown.

24. This cannot be described by a Circle, for the stun stands innermost in
the most inward Circle, and the other [Planets] always further outward, even
to the Crown which includes the outwardmost Heaven: and it cannot be
understood [by outward Reason] but the Spirit understands it in it self; for
as The Spirit.
it is, so is this Circle also: neither can it be set down in writing, for the
Life windeth it self inwards to the Sun: and so also the Spirit of Life in Man
windeth it self inwards into the soul, as you may consider, concerning the
Three Principles, where the outermost is also the innermost, which the outward
spirit of our reason cannot conceive, for it is but One and not Three in
Number: But the spirit of the soul, if it be turned about, so that it looks
with its own eyes into the innermost, and with the Eyes of this world into the
outermost, understands it: for this is the Vision in Ezekiel, of the Spirit
Having eyes within and without.
with inward and outward Eyes, where the Spirit goes right forward wheresoever
it goes.

25. Although the wise Magi and Mathematicians have made a Sphere and described
the Wheel, yet that is not enough: it is indeed a help to the unskilful to
consider of the Mysterium Magnum, the Great Mystery: but the wheel has a much
more subtle understanding, and cannot be made in any Circle after this manner:
for it goes into it self toward the Heart of the Sun, and out from it self
toward the figure of the Substantiality; it drives upwards and downwards, for
the Spirit of the Tincture, viz. the right firelife, drives upwards inwards
toward the Liberty of God, and yet desires the Spirit of the Substantiality,
which drives downwards, for without that, the fire-life does not subsist: thus
the fire-spirit turns it self about, as it were sidewayes, and always
reaches after the spirit of the Substantiality, and the spirit of the
Substantiality flies from the Fire; but since it is generated out of the
fire-Life, and cannot be severed from it, therefore it is wheeled about with
the fire-spirit: For when the fire-spirit, wheeleth to the rightside, and
reaches after the spirit of the Substantiality, then the spirit of the
Substantiality wheeleth also on the leftside upwards, and that makes a
wheeling round, and one makes have after the other; for the substantiality
flies from the Fire, and yet it comes out of the Fire, as you see that out of
the Fire goes Air, and Or, the Air comes to be Water.
out of the Air Water, which is the substantiality.

26. Thus the Fire which is an Anguish, desires meekness, and the Liberty,
which is without source, [or paine], and reaches after the Water-source: and
the meekness, viz. the Water-source, desires a Body, that it may be free from
the fire and covered, and the Fire runs always after the Water, and the
Water flies from the Fire, for if the fire should go away upwards, and the
water go away downwards, there would then be a great severation between them,
and each [both the fire and the water] would die and come to nothing. But being
the fire inclines toward the Water, and refreshes it self therein, it so
preserves it self, and can send forth the Spirit of the Air again from it
self, so that the life subsisteth.

27. Th^s we show you The Great Mystery, Mysterium Magnum, that you might
learn to understand, how far you should go, and where your Number and End is;
for the Fire, ( Or, according to.
after the seven spirits of Nature,) is the The 8th Number or Form.
Eighth Number, and is a cause of the seven Spirits. Now no creature
subsisteth in the Fire, for the Fire consumes the substantiality, wherein the
Natural life stands; But yet the Fire makes Tincture, and that Twofold: one
reching inward into it self after the Eternal Liberty, after the still
Meekness [that is] without being; and the other reaching forth out from it
self, after the outward substantiality, viz. after the Oil, which comes out
from the Water, which is from Venus, and wherein its outward splendor and
shining does spring up: and in the inward Tincture in the desiring of the
Eternal Liberty, the Majesty of the Liberty springs up.

28. Understand us rightly thus; the Fire has the The 8th Number or Form.
Eighth Number, and the inward Tincture has the The 9th Number or Form.
Ninth Number: and so far [onely] we ought to go: for the The 10th Number or
Form in the Eternal Fire.
Tenth Number is the Eternal Fire of God, and holds in the midst of its
Birth, the Cross, which severeth the Center of the Eternal Nature into two
Kingdoms: of which we have made mention formerly: and what creature soever
will go back through it, that creature comes through the Kingdom of God back
again into the outermost out from God, and out from this world back into the
Center of the Fire, as into an Eternal Darkness, where the Fire is black, and
a perpetual Hunger: The kindling of the Light of the Fire stands only under
the Gross; in the Meekness, in the Ninth Number, which is a In numeration:
the Places signify, 1. units, 2. tens, 3. hundreds. 4. thousands.
single Number; the Tenth Number is a Twofold Number, and belongs to Angels
and Men, but they ought not to reach further into the Center of the Cross, but
must stand there before the Cross of the Number Three, and cast their Minds
down into the Tincture of Humility backwards into the Ninth Number, and look
forward into the Tenth Number, buy with a Fearing God.
Timourous Mind, not desiring to create and have [any thing] in the Tenth
Number, viz. to go back into the Center of the Fire of God: but highly rejoice
before the Tenth Number Eternally, and with their songs of Praise, and
Halelujahs, sing; Holy! Holy! Holy! is our God the Lord Zeboath.
of Hoasts; and that song is a food to the Divine Fire, from whence goes forth
in the Divine Essences, the Wonder, Paradise, the Element and Heavenly
Substantiality, and it stands before the Number Three as a Virgin of the
Eternal knowledge of God; and that is the Wisdom of God: for in the Wisdom
appears the substantiality of all Divine Essences, which to write of here
we have no more Pen nor Tongue.

29 Only we show you, how far you should search into such a Revelation: for
in the Ninth Number you see all things: for it is the Tincture of the Heavenly
Life, you see [in the Ninth Number] the 100th Number.
Hundredth Number of the Virgin of Wisdom, and also the 1000th Number.
Thousandth Number of the Crown of the Majesty.

30. But you must not search further, into the Tenth Number, there to search
and dive into the Abyss, else you go out from God as Lucifer did, who would
feign be a Creator in the Tenth Number, and did seek [to have] the fire of the
Eternal Original, and therein he must remain as in the Death, in the
Darkness, Eternally.

31. Therefore let the Reader be warned, not to dive further into these very
deep Writings, nor plunge his will deeper, then [so far] as he apprehends:
he should always rest satisfied with his apprehension: for in the apprehension
he stands yet in the Or, Matter.
Substantiality, and there he Note.
erreth not, how deep so ever the Spirit leads him: for to one, more will be
given then to another: And this only is the Mark [to be aimed at] every one
continue steadfast in Humility toward God, and submit himself to God, that he
may make the Will and the Deed as he pleases. When you do that, you are in
your self as dead: for you desire nothing but Gods will, and the will of God
is your Life, which goes inward even to the Thousandth Number, and searches
into the Deep of the Deity with all Wonders: He leads your will, submitted
to him, into the Virgin of his Wisdom, so that you may behold all Wonders: But
you must not leave him and imagine into the Wonders, so soon as you do so,
you go quite out from Gods will, which is the Eternal Liberty, and are
captivated in your Imagination: Mark this; for Every Imagination makes
Substantiality, and therein you stand, and must go out from that again, or
else you shall not see God.

32. Therefore Christ teaches us Humility, Love, Pureness of Heart, and to be
Merciful; and calls upon us to seek after the will of God, and to submit
our selves to it: For in Gods will we are able to do ALL, our own Nature must
not do it; but God himself is Zealous in Us, and he is our doing if we work
any Or, Miracle
Wonder: For no humane soul should say or think, I will do Wonders: no that
cannot be: for the wonders above the outward Nature, go forth only from the
Center of the Eternal Nature out of the Tenth Number, which the creature
cannot [doe:] but if it be yielded up into the will of God, then God in the
creature does the Wonder: for it is his delight to manifest himself in the
weak: for the strong is stiff in his own will, and will not submit it unto
God: he relyeth upon his own Wit and Reason: Thus his will is out from God, and
is able to do nothing: And then if he speak from himself concerning Gods
Being and Will, he is an ignorant liar, he speaks not from Gods Spirit and
Will, but from himself, from his own Opinion, in which there is mere doubt,
and from thence arises the Contention about [Matters of] Faith [and Religion,]
about Divine knowledge, so that Men seek God in their own willing and knowing;
Men will needs find God in their own willing; and he is not therein: for he
dwells merely and barely in that willing, which yields it self with all
its reason and knowing, wholly to him, and to that he gives knowledge and
power to understand his Being.

33. Therefore lift up your Heads and observe this, the will of God is not in
any strife and contention, but Man's will and the Devils, it is the will of the
Wrath of God; let not the flattering Hypocrites seduce you, who enter in,
boasting of the History, and say; We have the Will of God by us, we are his
Ministers, look upon us, we are Gods Officers, and though we be wicked, yet
we rightly Bear the Office and [dispence the] Will [of God.] O Cursed
Generation of Caine and Judas, you are neither borne nor known in God: why
then Boast you of the will of God? How can you say that you Or, Bear the
office of dispencing the Great Divine Mysteries.
Bear the Great Mystery of God, whereas you are without God, in a strange
will, and in your self you carry not the Mysterium Magnum: But a poor Sinner,
who converteth, but is captivated by the Devil, and is strife against the
Devil; He that pants, sigheth, and cries after God, he runs in sorrow
and abstinence, to the Office of the The Mysterium Magnum.
Great Mystery, which Christ has given to his Discipes and Children, who are
in the will of God, and they have the True Jus Divinum.
Key to Heaven and Hell.

34. But you Sophister bear not the Office, while you are without the will of
God; But the poor Repentant Man brings the Mysterium Magnum, the Great
Mystery, with him to you, and rendereth himself up to the Apostolical Power;
which you have not, but the Church or Congregation of Christ, which is in the
will of God [hath it]: and so One Faith receives the other, and the Church or
Congregation of Christ, Absolveth the repentant sinner: and not you Sophister,
who have neither virtue nor powers, nor knowledge of the Kingdom of God; but
are your self the Devils captive, and you sit in the Anger of God: and are
only the Proud Whore of Babell, and swim aloft upon the office of the Great
Mystery, and are incapable of it; unless you be in the will of God, and then
you are Christ's Apostle, and wear the Garment of Aaron, and God Binds and
loses.
opens and shuts by your Mouth, but your natural will does it not, that
should always be dead, or else you are not capable of the Office; also in your
own will, you sit not in the Office of Christ, upon Peter's Chair, but upon the
Stool of Pestilence, and are the Antichrist, as we have known you, in the
Number Seaventy Two, which you bear: for you are in Contention about the Cup
of Christ, and you have it not in your Power, but the Church or Congregation of
Christ, which is submitted to the will of God, has it: The Arc of the
Covenant is with them at Shilo, and not in your [contentious] Schismatic
Sectarian Jerusalem, which you have made full of abominable Blasphemies.

35. But what shall the Spirit Judge more concerning you, seeing you are an
adulterous Woman, and have lost your Faith and Fidelity: He has given you time
to Repent, and you do not Repent, but lie in Whoredom, day and night, and
therefore he will spew you out in the Wine Press, and Babell shall burn up it
self. Thus Christ says: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered
thy Children together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, but
thou would not: Behold your dwelling houses shall be left unto you Desolate.
And so he says also to you now, you desolate Jerusalem in Babell* the Time
comes that the children of Christ will go out from you, and it is already,
and you shall perish in your whoredom. Behold your Merchants will stand a
far off and say: Behold! Babell in which we became rich and fat, is become
Desolate.

The Eleventh Chapter. Of the true Knowledge concerning Man.
1. WE have shown you, what the Essence of all Essences it, and what its life
and spirit is, and what the Matrix of the Genetrix is, viz. that it stands in
the Eternal willing, and in that Eternal willling, is the Center of Nature,
and therein is the Number Three, which is the Heart, which manifests the
Eternity, in Creatures, Figures, and Similitudes; especially in Three
Kingdoms; viz. the Heavenly Angelical, and then the Hellish fiery
Diabolical; and thirdly the Substantial Kingdom of the Out-birth, viz. this
world.

2. Now you know very well that the Dear Man Moses says in his first Book
[called Genesis] That on the Fifth Day, God Created all the living Creatures at
once: which you are to understand thus, that in one Revolution of the Earth,
God created, (out of the Earthly Great Mystery, out of the Matrix of the
Spirit of the Earthly property, as an Out-birth out of the Eternal Property)
all living Creatures, that they should be Images and similitudes of the
Eternal Essence of all Essences.
Being [Essence or Substance].

3. Now they are indeed created out of the Earthly Mysterium Magnum, but yet
the Spirit there is not so wholly Earthly; for it is yet Or, Lunarie.
Luna, as we see that the Earth stands next the Moon, and [in the Circle
about] from the Moon, and as every Circle is, so also is the Spirit in its own
inclination, and the property of the Wheel in that Orb.
Circumference.

4. Thus the Circle between the Moon and the Earth, is both Earthly and
Lunarie: for the Moon has the properties of all the Stars, and is as a sack
or conteiner of all the properties of the Stars; which it continually powers
forth in its Circle: for the Earth longs vehemently after the Moon, and
therefore attracteth the shining and Glance of the Moon, as also the shining
and splendor of the Sun: for all things long after the Heart, and desire the
Liberty, that so they may be freed from the vanity.

5. Thus the Earth in its longing desire, has attracted the Spirit of the
seavenfold Wheel, and holds that in it, as its peculiar Matrix of Nature,
and would always feign awaken in it selse the wheel of Life; and therefore it
Rouleth or turns.
wheeleth it self about, for it has both fires, the hot and the cold; and the
neithermost always striveth upward toward the Sun, for it receives virtue
and spirit from the Sun: and therefore it is so. Wheeled or turned.
Rouled about; for the Fire wheeleth it about: it would feign be kindled, that
it might have a life of its own, but though it must remain in Death, yet it
has a longing after the upper Life, and attracteth the upper Life to it: and
continually opens wide its Center Or, for.
after the Suns Tincture and Fire.

6. Thus from the longing after the S^nne, springs forth the budding, and
growing, out of the Earthly Matrix: for the Essences of the Earth clime forth
(with the captivated life of the upper Center) always upward out of the Earth,
and spread forth themselves into a Great Tree and stalk: and you see very
well, that upon the Tree and Stalk there grows a Mixed fruit, half Earthly
and half according to the Upper Center: and the fruit never comes into a joy
[or to perfection] unless it be satiated with the upper [part] and then it is
Ripe, for it has attained Venus'es Body. But as Venus'es Body is unfixt, and
would soon fade, if the Sun did not stay it with the virtue of Saturn. So
also [is it with the ripe fruit], it is not durable, but soon turns to
rottenness: it cannot be preserved [long]: because the Paradise is out of it.

7. And thus we give you to understand, that all creatures have been created
out of the nethermost and uppermost Life: the Matrix of the Earth afforded
Body, and the Constellations [afforded] Spirit, and their life ^eacheth not up
into the Sun: for the Earth has attracted the Suns virtue into its Matrix, and
so all the Creatures that dwell upon the Earth, have attained the virtue of the
Sun and of the Stars: but the Body of the Fowls is out of the Deep above
the Earth: and therefore also they delight most to fly in their own Matrix;
and you see also how all Beasts put their face and head forwards and downwards,
and look after their Matrix, and desire only the food thereof: for every life
desires its own Mother: as you may soon perceive in the Fowls, which are
near of quality to the Earth, that they Eat flesh and are Birds of prey: for
they proceeded from two Mothers in the Creation, viz. out of the Upper [Mother]
and out of the Earth.

8. The Earth is a peculiar Center, and therefore was created Apart by it self.
severally on the First Day, and is an out-birth out of the Eternal
Substantiality, a corrupted Matrix: [corrupted by the Fall of Lucifer]: in the
Eternity was therein known the Virgin of Gods Wisdom, In the Wisdom.
wherein all the Wonders of God are Discovered or beheld.
seen: and in the Creation, and afterward even till Adams Fall Paradise
sprung up through the Earth, and so the Upper Center of Nature, viz. the Suns
Heart, drew forth Paradisicall fruit out of the Earth, which indeed was not
eaten after an Angelical manner by any Creature, but only Man, though indeed
he had not eaten thereof neither, for the longing of the Twofold Life catched
hold of him suddenly, and there he stood, till his sleep, in In the Proba.
trial, whether his will would continue in God, and [whether] he [would] Eat
after an Angelical manner; But the Beginning shows how he stood, which we
must chew upon, and therefore must eat Earth, and at last must become food for
the Earth.

9. Thus, if you consider it, you may see the Creation of God, and how God
created the other Creatures before Man, and you see how the life of all
Creatures stands only in the Matrix, out of which they were created.

10. Now you know what Moses says: That God consulted in himself to create a
similitude of his Essence, an Image of himself; that should rule over all the
Creatures of this world, over Beasts, Fishes, and Fowls, and over all that
lives and moves, and says; God said, Let us make Man according to our Image:
and Created Man to be his Image, yea to the Image of God Created he him: But
out of what? Reason asks: and Moses says: God made Man's Body of a piece of
Clay.

11. Beloved Reason; behold! open both your eyes and look not with one eye
only, into the hidden Mystery of the Humanity, as has been used for a long
while hitherto. Do you hear what Moses says? God placed Man in the Garden of
Eden, which he had made, that he should till and keep it, and the Paradise was
therein: do you now understand the hidden Mystery of Man? He was in
Paradise, in the Creation, and was created in [and for] Paradise: for Paradise
grew up through the Earth; and of that Paradisicall Earth, wherein the Heavenly
Source or quality.
property was, the Body of Adam was created: for so it must be, seeing he was
to be a Lord over the Earth, and All that was Earthly: and was to open the
wonders of the Earth: else God had instantly given him an Angelical Body: But
then the palpable substance with its wonders, would not have been manifested:
therefore he thus gave him a Palpable Body, but not so dark a rugged and
Beastiall one as ours are, but a Paradisicall one.

12. You must understand it thus; The Eternal Virgin of Wisdom, stood in
Paradise as a Figure, The Virgin of Wisdom.
in which all the Wonders of God were known, and was in its figure an Image in
it self, but without substance like to Man: and in that Virgin, God created
the Matrix of the Earth, so that it was a visible palpable Image in substance;
wherein Heaven, Earth, Stars, and Elements stood in substance, and all
whatsoever lives and moves was in this one Image. The Matrix of the Earth
could not over-powre it [ viz. the Image Man] much less could the outward
Elements do it; because it was higher in degree then them all: it had received
the never fading Substantiality with the Virgin: the Virgin was not brought
into the Image; but the Matrix of the Earth was brought into the
Virginlike-Image: for the Virgin is Eternally uncreated and ungenerated: it is
the Wisdom of God and a [reflection Antitype and] Image of the Deity in
Ternario Sancto, in the Holy Ternary, according to the Number Three, and all
the Eternal Wonders of the Eternal Center of Nature, and is known in the
Majesty in the Wonders of God: for it is that which brings forth to Light the
Hidden things of the deep of the Deity: Thus beloved Note here, all People
and all Mankind.
Man you see what you are.

13. Now says Moses: And God breathed into him the Living Breath into his
Nostrills, and then Man became a living soul. This is the Ground: O ye
Universities and high Schools dance about this as much as you can, show your
selves here Doctors, Masters, or Bacchilours [in Arts]: if ye be, what you
please to conceit your self to be; why then are you blind in this? why will
you be called Doctors, when in the Ground you are yet searce School-boyes? What
do ye understand by that [inspiration or] breathing-in? does not Moses tell
you; that God breathed into Man the Or, Living breath.
Breath of Life? What do you understand here? do you understand it to be
only Air? That is not solely the breath of God: for he breathed the Air into
his Nostrills: but the Breath of God cannot be breathed in from without: for
God himself is the fulness of things, and is present there already
beforehand where any outward thing comes [to passe].

14. Now therefore that you may rightly and fundamentally and also Assuredly.
certainly come to understand it, look upon what we have before mentioned;
viz. How God longed after the visible substance of his similitude and Image;
And the Image of the Virgin, wherein his wonders stood, has thus caused it, so
that the one Imagination embraced and conceived the other; though indeed God is
without substance and Or, Lusting.
longing; [for his Or, Lusting.
longing is only Majesty and Liberty]; But the Center of Nature upon the
Cross of the wonders, Lusted.
longed after the Image which was beheld in the Virgin, where the Spirit of God
goes forth Or, in.
into the Wisdom, so that the Wisdom causes Substantiality.

15. Behold! Gods breathing-in was thus: The Spirit of God moves on the
Waters, and rides on the wings of the Wind, as the Scripture speaks: that [
Spirit] had then comprehended the Dominion of this world with the word Fiat,
and breathed it into Adams Nostrills: Now the Spirit breathed-in the Air from
without, and it self forth from within into the Center of the Heart; for it
dwells not outwardly, but in the Center of Nature, and goes forth from
within out of the Deity into the outward, and Or, manifests in a Being.
opens [or discloseth] an Image according to it self, understand, according
to the Center of Nature.

16. We have told yuo before: How the Wheel of the outward Nature windeth it
self inwards, even to the Sun, and further through the Fire into the Liberty
of God, where then it keeps its Condition.
station: and the inward Longing of the Eternal Center, presses with the
Spirit of God forth into the Heart of the Sun, which is the Great Life and
Fire, which melts away Stone and Earth, wherein the Eternal Tincture is
known within in the Ninth Number.

17. You must also understand the Breathing-in thus; the outward Dominion of
the Spirit of this world, which reaches even into the Sun, was breathed into
him from without, as an outward Life; and the Inward Dominion out of the Inward
Fire in the Eight in Number was from within breathed into the Heart: for that
was out of the Eternal Fire, which reached into the Ninth Number toward the
Cross, after its own Tincture which goes toward the Number Three, viz. into
the Eternal Liberty; and there Man became a Living soul, with spirit and
soul: for the soul has its original a degree deeper then the Sun, out of
the Eternal Fire which burns in the Eternal willing; which willing is, to
generate the Heart of God, and to exalt the Majesty in the Wonders.

18. Understand us right thus; Gods Holy Spirit, has awakened the living
soul, out of the Center of the Eternal Nature, upon the Cross, as a peculiar
Center of its own: not out of the Number Three, but out of the Eternal Nature,
out of the fire of the Center of Nature, in the Fifth Form of the Center, where
the two Kingdoms, viz. Gods Love and Anger, part: there has the Spirit of God
awakened the soul, and brought it in, forth from within, outward into the
Tincture of the outward Spirit, into the blood of the Heart, through himself;
and this is the soul: Master Doctor understand it aright, and do not vaunt so
proudly, stately, and insultingly: for the soul is the child of God: its will
should always be inclined into the will of God in the Tenth Number, and then
it is an Angel, and lives in God: and eats of the Word of God, of the virtue
and life of God: it should not turn back into the Spirit of this world, into
the fire of the Out-Birth, but into the fire of the Number Three, in Ternarium
Sanctum, into the Holy Ternary.

19. And thus thou may understand, what thou art, and what thou were before
the Fall: for thou could rule over the Sun and the Stars: all was in thy
power; the Fire, the Air, and the Water, together with the Earth, could not
compel thee: no outward fire could burn thee, no water could drown thee, no
Air could suffocate or stifle thee, every living thing feared before thee,
thou had thy own food of the Paradisicall fruit, to give to the outward life,
and the Verbum Domini, to the inward life of the soul: thou had lived
Eternally without woe, or feeling of any sickness or disease, in mere joy and
delight, and besides without care and toil: thy mind was as the mind of a
child,
that plays with his fathers wonders [or workmanship], no knowledge of any
evil will was in thee: no covetousness, no pride, no envy, no anger, but all
a sport of Love.

20. Now behold: that you may once apprehend this: God took to himself a
particular Dayeswork about Man; if he would have had him to have been Earthly,
Beastiall, and Mortal; he would have created him on the Fifth Day, with the
other Beasts: And that yet you may well apprehend this; He created but one Man,
with the Adam had the whole Cross in the Brainpan of his skull. But now the
Man and the Woman have each of them only one half of the Cross: thus; ^ ^
whole Cross in the Brainpan, which signifies the Number-Three: he was both
Man and Woman, yet you are not to understand any woman, but a virgin wholly
pure and chaste; he had in him the Spirit of the Tincture of the Fire, and also
the Spirit of the Tincture of the Water, viz. of Venus: he loved himself, and
through himself [he loved] God: he could generate Virgin-like (out of his
will, out of his Essences without pain, without tearing or dividing [his
body]) such a Man as himself was; for he had all Three Centres in him: and as
the Center of the Eternal Nature was not torn nor divided, when the Spirit of
God conceived his soul upon the Cross, and brought it into the Wisdom; also
as the Spirit of this world was not torn nor divided, when the Spirit of God
breathed into him the spirit of this world, as an outward life: so he also was
not torn or divided: for he had a Body, that could go through Trees and
Stones: if he had instantly gone on in the will of God, then had he brought HIM
[viz. God] with him into the Great Wonders.

21. The Noble Philosophers Stone, was as easy to be found by him as any
Mawerstein.
other stone, and then he might have adorned the outward life with gold,
silver, and precious Stones, Jewels and Pearls, all to his own joy, and to
[the manifestation of] Gods deeds of wonder: he had not needed Beastiall
Clothing; for he went naked, yet clothed with the Heavenly Tincture: he had no
such Members, as he might be ashamed of, as his Fall demonstrateth. This was
his Fall: his soul Imagined after the outward Fire of the Out-Birth, after the
spirit of this world, and turned himself away from God, and desired to live in
his own property [or selfe]; and to be Lord; his will turned it self out from
Gods will, and was disobedient to God, and desired the Earthly fruit, out of
the Earthly Essences, and caused God to suffer the Tree of Temptation to grow,
that he might try what his Image would do, and did forbid him that Tree.

22. But his Lust was instantly gone after the Earthly Essences, Good and
Evil, which the Devil did eagarly help forward, (as he does still) till Adam
was overcome, and went forth from the will of God, and suffered himself to be
wholly captivated by the spirit of this world: and then all was done with him:
the Heavenly Image became Earthly: the soul became captivated in the fire of
Gods Anger: it had the heavenly Tincture no more, and could not eat of the
Verbum Domini any more; it had turned it self away into the spirit of this
world, and was gone out from Gods will into the Lust of this world: and so also
at the instant of the Fall, the spirit of this world made the body wholly
Earthly: the Paradise, with all Heavenly Wit, wisdom, and understanding.
knowledge retired into it self [and so departed from Adam], and the Dear
Virgin of Wisdom remained standing in Grief, till the Word of the Lord came
again, and looked upon The Noble Sophia.
her again with the promise of the Seed of the Woman, and then The Noble
Sophia.
she passed into the light of Life, and now warns Men of their ungodly
ways; concerning which we have mentioned at large in our former Writings, and
also concerning Adams Wife, the Woman.
his Wife; therefore we here forbear to write any further of it, and only
further show you our Propagation as to body and soul.

23. We have In the Ninth Chapter of the Threefold life.
formerly mentioned: how the provocation between both kinds, Masculine and
Feminine, to copulate, existeth; viz. out of two Governments [or Dominions] of
one [onely] Being or Essence.
substance: for when Adam could not subsist, then God let a sleep fall upon
him, and took the one Dominion, viz. the Tincture of the Spirit from him, and
left him [ the other, viz.] the Tincture of the soul, and framed a Woman out
of him: But that she might have a soul also, God took a Ribbe from his Body,
with his flesh and blood, and comprised the soul therein, but without power of
further Propagation, [of it selfe], for her soul remained in Venus, being
desirous of the Man's soul, even as the lower Dominion of the Three Planets
under the Sun, which make Spirit and Flesh; desire the Three uppermost for
their Life, as is before mentioned: so also is the Dominion in the Man and the
Woman: for the Man has the Tincture of the Fire wherein the soul consists,
in his seed; and the Woman has in her the Tincture of the spirit of this
world, viz. of Venus, naturally so called, in her seed and Matrix. If it were
not for the scoffers I could exactly demonstrate it in the Members of their
Copulation: you would indeed wonder rightly why each are as they are: Note.
it shall be set down in a Paper by it self, for there is nothing without
cause. Nature has its own mouth, if it desire to have any thing, it makes it
self a mouth fit for it, and gives a form to that thing which it desires,
that it may fit the mouth, according as Nature likes best. Observe this.

24. Now when the Seed is sown, then not only the sower sows, but the
Ground also, affords its Essences [or vertue] to it: the Man sows soul,
and the Woman sows spirit, and both of them afford Body, and not the one
without the other: the Tincture of the Fire has indeed a Body, but it became
very small in this corruption: and therefore the Nature of the Water (in Venus)
must give a soft spirit to it: for the Man and the Woman are one Body, And
Saint Paul says; If the Man have an unbelieving Woman [to his wife] and the
Woman have an unbelieving Man [to her husband] let not the one forsake the
other: for the Man knows not whether he shall save the Woman, or the Woman
the Man. Even as Adam saved his [wife] Eve who first eat the bit [of the
forbidden fruit] for she was a part of the Life out of his flesh and blood:
and the same spirit and the same soul which Adam had, and which Eve got from
Adam, is now also in us in both kinds [or sexes].

25. Therefore ground your Judgment thus; When the Man sows his seed, he
sows flesh and blood, and the Noble Tincture of the soul; and the Woman
receives that into her Matrix, and instantly affords to the Man's seed her
Tincture of Venus, wherein stands the Elementary Spirit, and that assumeth
Saturn, and brings it round on the wheel about to Sol, and there the
Natural Life with the life of the soul is disclosed; for Saturn gives it to
the Moon, which breeds it, and in a Circuit of all the Stars, makes
Essences therein: and then the Essences exist; and wind themselves about to
Mars, which strikes up the Fire, and there count the Signs in the Heavens,
how many hours each of them has, and double that with two Kingdoms, and then
you have the Ground of the Incarnation [or becoming Man,] and what is done
every hour with the Sulphur [viz. with the substance which comes to be Man]
for Man has yielded himself over to the spirit of this world, and is fallen
home to it: and so now that Spirit makes an Earthly Elementary child
according to the Stars and their Dominion.

26. If God had not become Man [or been Incarnate], we had remained Beasts,
according to the Body, and according to the soul, Devils: and if we go not
forth out of the house of our sins, we are such.

27. And therefore God has made his Covenant with us in Christ, that we
should be newborn again in Christ: for he has given up his life into Death
for us, and has brought our soul again quite through the Eternal Fire, and
turned it about, that so we may see into the Tenth Number again.

28. Christ says [through the Apostle Paul] All shall be tried by the Fire:
let every one have a care that his works burn not, for so he shall suffer
loss. And know this, that at the End (when this world shall pass again into
the Either) God will awaken the fire in the Center, which is the Eternal
[Fire], and will purge this floare: understand, it is the souls Fire: and so
then if the soul have been turned into the will of God, then the Holy Ghost
with the Divine Tincture shall burn forth from the soul, and the Tincture of
the soul shall be taken into the Majesty of God; which the soul attracteth
again into it self, and that will be its refreshing and quenching, and so it
will be able to subsist in the fire: But that soul which is turned back into
this world, and that the substance of this world comes to be in the fire, then
the soul will be without God, for in the Abyss of this world is the hellish
fire, and into that it must go, and there eat what it had Cooked here: for
every ones works follow them.

29. And then they will say to the Wise Virgins, O give us some of your Oil:
but the wise Virgins will say; O no, least we should want as well as you, and
perish with you, Go to the Merchants of this world, to the Sophisters, and buy
Oil for your selves: But before they shall bethink themselves how the oil is
to be bought, and where it is to be had, the Gates of Heaven and Hell shall be
shut: and upon that follows the Eternity, and this Being [of this Created
World] passes away. Consider this, for there is no dallying with the Spirit of
this Revelation: it concerns body and soul: he that will see let him see,
but he that will not, yet he is warned.

The Gates of the Great Misery and Lamentation,
[shewing] How the Image in the Mothers Womb while it is yet a Sulphur [ viz.
and inanimate Lump or Masse] is Infected or poisoned.
destroyed: so that many an Image, according to the spirit is a Beast, also a
Toade, and a Serpent, which afterward appears plain enough by its Substance.
condition, will and Conversation, and if it should not be helped again by God
in Christ, so that it be newborn again, it must remain so Eternally in its
figure.
30. Dear children in Christ; our purpose in revealing this, is not thereby to
reproach Mankind: it is the very Truth, we have highly known it: Moreover,
Christ the Mouth of Truth it self says so, who calls Herod a Fox, and the
Pharisees a Generation of Vipers and Serpents: and the Scripture here and
there calls the Tyrants, Lions, Bears, Wolves, and cruel Beasts; and the
Revelation of John, also Daniel, and the other Prophets, have deciphered the
Potent Rulers of this World, by evil, fierce, and cruel Beasts; truly they
have not meant thereby the Image of God; for that were not right, that God
should compare his Image, which is Angelical to such abominable Beasts* and
yet he is the Truth it self, and out of his Mouth proceeds no deceit or
falsehood, nor no untruth: and seeing he has called the Rulers of this World
so, therefore it is [spoken] concerning their Governments; for they raise
Wars, Murder, and all Mischief in their Dominions: and are those devouring
Wolves, Lions, Bears, Foxes, Vipers, and Serpents, for they appear so in the
presence of God: though outwardly they have the Image of Man, yet the spirit of
their soul is such a Beast: and upon that follows Gods Election.
Predestination: although God wills that all Men should be Or, saved.
helped, yet he knows very well who are desirous and capable of any Help.

31. We do not here shut up the Grace of God, from those that turn and
become Newborn out of this Beastiall Condition: for Christ is therefore
become Man, of purpose to help us, that we may come again to the similitude of
God: and HE has therefore brought our humane soul into the fire of the Anger
of God, as into the Abyss of the Center, into Hell, and into Death, where our
souls lay shut up, and out of Death and Hell again, into the Tenth Number,
into the Eternal Tincture of God, upon the Cross, from whence the soul
Existed from Eternity, which appeared before the time of this World, in his
Wisdom.

32. And you are to know, that every soul while it is yet in the Seed, is no
Living Creature.
creature, but is in the Fire, or a Fire of the Tincture, and is a Will of the
Creature; and it stands yet in the power of the Parents, either to Awaken or
enliven.
quicken or destroy the Creature, which [to destroy] runs opposite against the
order of the Creation, and is an abomination in the sight of God: and hereby
is showed you, that such as the Tree is, such is the Fruit that grows out
from it: yet the compulsion is not Or, by necessity.
wholly perfect, for the two Kingdoms, viz. Love and Anger, stand presently in
the wrestling one against another: For God has brought his love in Christ
again into the Humanity: and so it stands in strife against the Anger.

33. But you must know, that a falfe wicked seed may well be forsaken: and if
that come to be so, then the nature of the fire often figureth the Spirit of
the soul in a horrible form, which is not known in the outward Image, but
only in the Or, false.
Evil Conversation and will; as is seen that every ones conversation is from
his Abyss, and the Spirit of his soul is so in figure: for the Inward goes
outward, whatsoever the will in the Abyss is, that the body does, and though
he dare not do it openly because of disgraceful punishment, yet he does it
secretly, and has continually a will to it, neither does he account it any
vice: for he knows not himself, but he himself does that which he judges
[to be evil in another].

34. And then secondly, we give you to understand, that the outward Dominion (
viz. the Spirit or this world) is also in the seed, while it is yet a Sulphur
[that is, matter without form or life], and in that [Spirit] has the
Constellation its Dominion, and it draws also with it inwards the
Constellation of the Stars, as they have Or, aspects.
influence and infect or poison a thing, and also make it Lovely, according as
the Imagination is at all times: for every Star is a seeking; a desiring (
viz. of the Or, to operate according to its property.
Wonders) according to its property: each of them desires a Life, and the
Elementary Sulphur, which is also desirous, longs after the desiring of the
Stars, and attracteth, or lets that into it, and becomes pregnant
therewith.

35. Now in the Stars there are all the properties of this world, whatsoever
all the creatures are, that the Stars are, every one of them helps toward
life, and to the Revelation of the wonders of God: for therefore they are
brought into Being, because God would open all forms of Nature: and many of
them make the property of a Dog in the outward Spirit of this world; many, of a
Wolf, a Bear, a Lion, a Fox, a Hare, a Bull, a Peacock, a Cock, also of a
Toade* a Serpent, and so forth, after the Condition of all sorts of Creatures;
and so if such a Star be fixed, so that it have received the virtue of the
Sun through the introducing of the Spirit; then it is powerful, and its
Imagination presses along in the seed, whereby a creature gets such a
property in the Elementary life and spirit, as well in Men as in Beasts.

36. And such an Evil property many times covers the soul, and enticeth it
from the will of God, so that it goes out from Gods will: for it often comes
to pass, that the Image of God is in the soul (which desires [or longs
after] God) and is captivated with such an outward spirit, which plagueth and
tormenteth it: this you see and may know, by such as many times fall into foul
and heinous sins and wickedness (for the outward spirit casts them
headlong thereinto) and then suddenly they fall into such great sorrow and
repentance upon it; that they sigh and turn and go on toward abstinence [or
amendment]; and that is a strong Combat of the soul against the Spirit of
this world: for it often does a thing, that it never had in its mind or
thought, much less in the purpose to do it, and yet is so suddenly entangled;
[and overcome].

37. For when a Man is secure, and does not always stand in fear, and
trembling before the anger of God, then the Devil slippeth into the Spirit,
and looks narrowly when there is in a Man any evil Constellation of his
property and Stars, and so casts a Man headlong into an unexpected fall,
into Wrath, Murder, Whoredom, Theft, Poisoning and Death: this is The Devils.
his Art, which he is most diligent in.

38. For the outward life is fallen quite under the power of the Stars, and
if thou will withstand them, thou must enter into Gods will, and then they are
but as a shadow, and cannot bring that to effect which they have in their
power: neither do they desire it, but the Devil only desires it: For the
whole Nature boweth it self before the will of God: for the Image of God in
Man is so powerful and mighty, that when it wholly casts it self into the
will of God, it overpowreth Nature, so that the Stars are obedient to it, and
do rejoice themselves in the Image: for their will is, that they may be freed
from the vanity, and thus are kindled in Meekness in the Image, at which the
Heaven rejoices, and so the Anger of God in the Government of this world is
quenched for when that is burning, Man's wickedness is guilty of it, in that
Men kindle it in the Spirit of this world.

39. For a false wicked malicious Man, kindles the Elements, for he casts
his evil power and falsehood into them, which the Wra h of the Abyss
devoureth, and thereby grows stirring and working: which otherwise the Love,
in the meek life, would keep back: but if the Wrath of God be strong, then it
over-powreth this world: and then says the Prophet from the Spirit of God; I
will let my Wrath come upon you which will devour and destroy you.

40. For God is nothing but Goodness, and wills not the Evil: he warns
Man beforehand, that he should still the wrath by turning and going out from
the Anger; but when this is not done, then he suffers that to come, which Man
has awakened, viz. Wars, Famine, pestilence: Now God does not this, but Man
himself, which makes Wars, and the Heaven withdraws its fruitfullnesse,
and the Spirit of this world kindles it self in the hellish Poison and Wrath,
and so diseases and the Pestilence come forth, which God is not guilty of: but
Man has awakened them, and they devour him: for thereby the Anger is
sharpened, and gets a Longing to devour: for Men awaken it in their
wickedness and Malice, and kindle it, whereas otherwise it would be at Rest.

41. You must understand it, thus; Adam has left it us for an Inheritance: if
he had continued in the will of God; the Anger, had not touched him, to
Eternity; and then the Devil had been shut up in the Wrath: and therefore he
has wrestled with Man, and thrown him into sin, so that he has awakened
the Anger in the spirit of this world, in which the Devil is the Great Prince,
and increases his Kingdom with the Souls of Men: and thus the Devil is a
Prince of this world: or else he could not touch a fly, or move a leaf, if
Man had not kindled the property [and working] of the Anger: even as he is
altogether void of strength, in a time when Men are virtuous and honest: and
therefore he drives men so eagarly to unchastity, for he knows well what he
gets by that, and what ability it has in the Incarnation [or Men's coming
to be] and what fine spirit is begotten out of a false will [and unchastity],
to which [Spirit] he has a Great access and Power.

42. And then thirdly, we give you to understand, from a true ground, what the
Great secret Mystery of the Anger, and of the Devil, is; for we demonstrate
it to you thus; There are two sorts of Dominions in Man, even while he lies in
the seed, enclosed in the Mothers womb: as in two Tinctures; one out of the
Eternal Matrix, as the Tincture of the soul, and the other out of the Center
of this world, as from the spirit and life of this world, so that often a whole
false soul is figured (according to the Devils will) and so is captivated by
the Anger: and then also the Spirit of this world, (if it be in a good
Constellation at the time of the Spirits awakening) oftentimes figureth a very
friendly, lovely, outward Spirit, which can give good words cheap enough, and
yet its soul is a Devil: He gives sweet words with his mouth* and the spirit
of his heart is Poison, and he thinks only how to do evil or mischief,
and that with a pretense of fair carriage to hide it: and such a one dwells
in two Kingdoms, viz. in this world, and with the Devil: He does not believe
in any God at all: for he accounts himself a God: and although he lives in
the History as an Hypocrite, as if he were the child of God, that he does for
a show; and so the Devil tickleth his heart, so that he supposes, the
Kingdom of God consists in an Historical knowledge, if he can tell that
there is one God in Three Persons, and that God became Man, and has turned his
Grace and favor toward us, then he is a Christian, and the child of God
[enough].

43. Some ascribe to the Sophister, Jus Divinum
power and authority to forgive sins: but he that is a Sophister, and
attributes such a power and authority to himself, without the will of God,
without entering with his will into God; He is the Devils and Antichrists
Priest; as well as the Hypocrite, which hangs on the History, and accounts
the knowledge [of that] for Faith: No Sir: Righteousness and truth must follow
Faith, and although the Devil in the outward Spirit (being Evil in respect of
its Constellation) assaulteth Man, and often overthrows him, yet the Heart
suddenly desires righteousness and truth again, and is at variance with the
Devil concerning the sin committed.

44. But a false wicked soul cares not for righteousness: if it can but
cover its sin, then it is well enough; it seeks merely to deceive, under an
outward appearance, which it carries about in the hypocritical spirit of this
world: its holiness is a mere outward show, and it knows not the will of
God at all: but it supposes the will of God consists in Ceremonies: but the
Ceremonies are Or, in.
of this world, and are but signs, that the simple Laity [or common people]
might consider what God has to do with Man.

45. The Covenants of the most precious Testament, which the Hypocrite uses
for a show, are no benefit to him: he does but provoke God to Anger, in that he
will go about to make God a dissembler, to cover his own wickedness.

46. O thou Antichristian World! What mischief have thou done with thy
Ceremonies, in that thou have set them in the place of God: if thou had
declared to sinners Gods Anger and Punishment, and the Devils false Lust, and
how a sinner must go forth from his sins into the will of God, and with true
sorrow and Repentance, in a right trust and confidence, be borne again in God;
and that God only seeks and would have the Abyss of the Heart, viz. the
soul; and that all false and wicked lusts and desires must be removed out of
the heart: What good Doctrine had that been.
O how well had thou taught.

47. But the Councills of Nice, Trent, etc.
Councills have been brought in, only that thou might be Lord over Silver
and Gold, and over the Souls, Minds and Consciences of Men; and so thou art
indeed the Antichrist in thy hypocrisy and appearing holiness: thou have
Instituted Ceremonies, and Glisterest in Imitation of Aaron, but why do you
not live in the obedience of Aaron toward God? Every one looks upon the fine
hypocritical performance of the work, and his heart is carried away toward
the hypocrisy, and supposes, when it keeps or celebrateth the Ceremonies,
that it is an atonement of the Anger of God: But it is Idolatry, and that
which entangleth the heart, and leads it captive in the hypocrisy: It were
better to use no Ceremonies, but barely to perform the express command of
God, which he has left us in his Covenant and Testament: The Congregation of
Christ can well sound forth, and sing of Gods deeds of Wonder, but best of all
in the Or, Native Language.
Mother Tongue, which every one understands, and can lift up his heart and
soul therein, and so the whole Church or Congregation of Christ as one Body
exulteth in God, and sings of the Wonders of God, which does stir up
attention and consideration, which in a strange or foreign Language is but
hypocrisy and ostentation, whereby Pride will vaunt it self, for it always
appears very willingly in a seeming Divine posture in hypocrisy: for the
Devil is such an Idol, for he mocketh God his Creator therewith, and so
painteth forth the Antichrist before the face of God, that God shoul see, what
a Potent Lord and Prince he is, who can shine, as the Majesty of God shines;
and so he makes such a Glistering in mockery to God, and brings the souls
of Men into the Glistering [hypocriticall show of Holinesse].

48. O thou Proud and Covetous Antichrist; what have thou done, that thou have
thus brought thy self and many thousand souls away from God to thy own
Glistering Pomp? how will thou be able to subsist, when the Bright Countenance
of God appears? where will thy poor soul turn away in thy Glistering
Hypocrisy, when the Day of Judgment shall come? Seeing all must pass through
the Fire, where will your own appearing holiness remain? will it not remain
in the Fire? For no soul can reach God, unless it be turned into the will of
God, and be Regenerated in God, else there is no subsisting in the Fire.

49. For the soul must be tried through the Fire, and must not be turned in
any whither, but into great humility, into the Love and Barmhertzigkeit.
Mercy of God in the Humility of Jesus Christ, it must bring Christ's Body, and
stand in the wisdom of God, that must be its Body, else it will not be
acknowledged for Gods child: for it must be as pure as it was when it was
Created upon the Cross: it must be Regenerated upon the Cross of Christ, and
enter with Christ in the flesh and blood of Christ, through the death of
Christ, through the Anger of God, into the Ninth Number, as into the Tincture
of the Eternal Divine Fire, and there it stands as a Creature before the
Tenth Number, as before the Holy Number Three, and humbles it self before the
Number Three, and the Majesty of the Number Three embraces it as a dear
child: So the Humility is the food and strength of the Majesty, out of which
the Brightness goes forth from Eternity to Eternity.

51. Where will thou Hypocrite remain, with thy Glistering Luster, which is
generated out of Covetousness and Pride? O ye Children of God, Go out from
this Whore, she stands on the Devils Stage, and is carried in a show of
Triumph, to Gods disgrace and contempt.

The Great Open Gate of the Antichrist.
52. Hearken and see thou poor soul, we will show thee the very Antichrist,
who domineereth over the whole world: whom God has made known to us that thou
might see him: for thou have hitherto accounted him a God: but now his shame
must come to light: for he is so secret that none know him, unless they be
borne of God, so that they apprehend Gods Essence and Will, otherwise he
remains hidden in every Man: for there is none but has him, and carries him
in his Heart: yea if one be a child of God, and yet has not the deep
knowledge of God, he Depends still on him.
hangs still to him: for the Devil has insinuated himself in the form of
an Angel into him: therefore mark what here follows, for it is the Number of
the Seventh Seal, and Or, makes known.
declares the Eternal Day.

53. Observe it ye children of God: For I my self formerly before the time of
my high knowledge, did thus reverence and honor him, and supposed it was
[according to] Gods will: for I was taught no otherwise, and the whole world is
in the same conceit; though that does not hurt the Ignorant, but that he may be
saved in his simplicity well enough, yet God will reveal him in this last
time. For here the Devil will loose his Sting, in the Children of God, into
whose hearts this knowledge shall spring up: for it is the Right Steel
wherewith Gods Love-fire is Struck, and whereby the soul receives Christ's
Body, and is borne in God: for the soul needs no other Birth, but a
returning and entering into God.

54. Behold! thou poor wounded soul, thou stand and Prayest thus; O God,
forgive me my sins, let thy Anger cease, and receive me into thy Grace: and
it is very well done: but thou understandest not how God receives a poor
sinner: thou supposest it is, as when thou come before the Prince or Judge of
the Land, and have forfeited thy life, and prayest him, and he Pardons.
forgiveth thee thy misdeed of grace, and so thou art quit and freed: But thy
sins fly in thy face, and thy heart accuses thee, that thou art yet guilty
of the Punishment: And just thus you come also before God: and so many
hypocrites are thereby generated: you suppose, God in his Essence and Spirit
takes your sins away from you: do you not know what the Scripture says:
that All our works shall follow us? And if it shall happen, as aforesaid, then
God must move himself upon every ones will and purpose to call upon him, and
cast away his sins from him, and yet from Eternity God has moved himself no
more but twice; once with the Creation of the World and all Creatures; and a
second time in Christ's Or, Incarnation.
becoming Man, and there the Heart of God moved it self. [Note, the Third Time
God will move himself in the power of the Holy Ghost through the Mouth of
Christ at the Last Judgment Day, when all shall return again into the Either;
The first Moving is according to the Father; the second according to the Son;
and the third according to the Holy Ghost, otherwise he moves himself no more
in Eternity].

55. Behold! when God forgiveth thee thy sins, when thou call upon him, he
takes nothing away from thee, neither does he fly down from Heaven into
thee: for he is from Eternity in thy soul; but in his own Principle; thy soul
as to him is only gone out from his Principle, understand, out from the Holy
Will in the Majesty, into the Anger. Now in the Anger thou were in the Eternal
Death, and the Man Christ, who is God and Man, has made a passage through the
Death and Anger, to the Majesty of God; you need only to turn, and go
through that passage, through the death of Christ, through the Anger, into the
Majesty, and so you will be embraced as the most beloved Angel, that never
committed any sin: also no sin will be known in thee, but Gods deeds of
Wonder only, which must be opened in the Anger: for the Love has nothing to
do with that fire [ viz. the Love cannot open the Wonders of the Anger],
neither does it mix it self with the Viz. The Fire of Wrath.
Fire, but flies from it.

56. Now therefore when you Pray thus: O God! forgive me: you always doubt
because of your sins, whether God will hear you, and come into your heart.
Behold! do not doubt; for by your doubting you despise and contemn the
Majesty: it is also a sin, but cast all your sins in general upon a heap,
and come Or, earnestly.
confidently, with your desiring soul, in humility, to God, and enter into
him: do but turn your soul out from the will of this world, into the will of
God: cast your self, with your whole Reason, and all your Thoughts, into the
will of God; and although your heart and the Devil say utterly No; yet make
your outward Reason dead, and enter in with force, and continue steadfast: look
not back, as Lots Wife did, who was turned again into Sulphur, and into a
Pillar of Salt; but stand fast; let the Devil, and the Spirit of this World,
and also thy heart, with flesh and blood, struggle [what they will], yet give
no place to reason; when it says, thou art without God; then say no, I am in
God, I am in Heaven in Him, I will not in Eternity depart from him: The Devil
may keep my sins, and the World this Body; yet I live in the will of God;
his life shall be also my life, and his will shall be my will: I will be dead
as to my Reason, that HE may live in Me; all my doing shall be his doing:
give thy self up to him in all thy purposes; whatsoever thou take in hand,
commit it to his pleasure and government, that all may be done Or, according to
his will.
in his will: Behold! if thou do thus, all evil Lusts will depart from
thee: for thou stand fast in the presence of God, and the Virgin of his
Wisdom leads thee, and Or, discovers.
opens to thee the way to Eternal life, she warns thee of the evil or
false ways, she always drives thee on to abstinence or amendment and
submission or resignation.

57. But that you have so great obstacles and hindrances of doubting in this
way, is [caused by] the strife of the soul against the Devil, who lays
himself in the way as a filthy swine, therefore cast thy sins upon his neck,
and do not doubt; and if thou can not leave that [doubting]; then reach with
thy soul into God: for God is in thee: Christ has opened the Gates into his
Father, do but enter in, let nothing keep thee back: and though Heaven and
Earth, and all Creatures should say, thou can not; believe them not, go
forward, and thou will suddenly get in, and as soon as thou come in, thou
gettest a new Body on to the soul, that is the body of Christ, which is God
and Man, and thou will afterward have ease and refreshment in thy heart, thou will get one that will draw thee, and set the falsehood of the World before thy
eyes, and warn thee of it.

58. Therefore observe; there are many that think with themselves, saying, I
will pray to God to take away my sins from me, that I may be released of my
old sins: and when it comes to pass, that they attain the Love of God,
they think the old sins are passed away and forgiven; [saying] I may now
sin anew, I will afterward Repent once again, and cast the abomination away
from me: Indeed that were a good way, if the purpose were at hand: But hear,
when thou go out from the Love of God, then thou have all thy sins, which
thou have committed all thy life long, upon thy neck again: for thou turnest
back again into the house of sin, and forsakest God; thou go out from God
into the Kingdom of the Devil, and thy Works follow thee, whither soever thou
go: the Purpose cannot help you, unless you go on in your Purpose.

59. Or do we alone say this? does not Christ say? When the unclean Spirit
goes out from a Man, he walks through dry Places, seeking rest and finding
none; and then he returns again into his house, and when he comes there, he
finds it swept and trimmed: and then he goes and takes with him seven
other Spirits, which are worse then himself, and enters in, and dwells
there, and so the last [condition] of that Man is worse then the first: Do you
understand this [similitude]? You have driven out Satan, and have cleansed
your heart, and have well swept your house of sin and trimmed it: and now
when you are secure and careless, then comes the Devil with all the seven
forms of Nature, and slippeth in, and thrusts the old worldly Lusts into thy
Heart again, out of which all wickedness and blasphemies are generated: for
he dwells in those seven Spirits, and tickleth thy heart therewith, and
deceives thee seven times more, and so thou yeeldest to him, and fallest from
one sin into another: and then he binds the poor soul fast to the sin,
and lets it not run after abstinence or amendment, but brings it into
fleshly Lusts: and when the soul begins to stir [or struggle]; he says,
to morrow to morrow, so long till he get the Venison.

60. Therefore it is said; We must stand still, and watch: for the Devil
goes about, as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: he comes at all
hours before the door of thy Heart, to see whether he can get in or no: for
it is his beloved Lodging; he has no rest in Hell: but in the soul of Man he
has joy and pleasure: he can therein open his malicious Wonders, wherewith he
may sport himself after this time also, wherein he takes his pleasure; for
Hell and the Anger of God desires that.

61. Again, you see how the Great Whore of Babell has set her self up in
this her play of forgiving [sinnes]: she boasts of the Keys of Absolution:
that she can forgive sins; and boasts of the Apostolical Keys, and
makes sale of sins for money; and usurpeth that from Christ's words; Whose
sins ye remitte, etc.

62. Now I would feign know; How the sins of the Repentant sinner, who
casts himself into Gods will, and who goes forth from this worlds Reason
into Gods Mercy, can have his sins retained: and much more would I feign
know; how one sinful Man, can fetch another out of Hell into the Kingdom of
Heaven, when he cannot get in himself, and goes about only to make the
Devil proud with his covetousness; in that he sells the Forgiveness of
sins for money? Whereas all sins are drowned only in Christ's New Body, in
Christ's flesh and blood: and Isaiah says in the Person of Christ: I Tread the
Wine Press alone: and I alone blot out your sins, and none besides me: But
if it were true which Antichrist boasts of; then one Devil must drive away
another: and then, what were become of the New Regeneration in Christ's flesh
and blood, whereby our souls are brought into God.

63. If it could possibly have been that God might have taken away Adams sin
in such a manner, God had not [needed to] become Man, and so have brought us
into God again; He might rather have forgiven Adam his sin, as a Prince
pardons a Murderer, and grants him his life; No Sir, you your self must
go out from sin, and enter into the will of God: for God does not stand by
as a King, and forgive sins with words: it must be power; you must go out
from the Fire into the Light: for God is no Image for us to stand before, and
give good words to: but he is a Spirit, and penetrateth through the Heart and
Reins, that is, Soul and Spirit: He is the Fire of Love, and his Center of
Nature, is the Fire of Anger: and if you were in Hell among all the Devils,
yet then you are in God: for the Anger is also his, it is his Abyss; and
therefore when you go out from that, you go into the Love of God, into the
Liberty that is without source [or paine].

64. There is no other forgiveness [to be] understood, but that thou go out
from [the will of] this world, and of thy flesh, also from the Devils will,
into Gods will: and then Gods will receives thee, and so thou art freed from
all sins: for they remain in the Fire, and thy will in the Tincture of God,
which the Majesty enlighteneth; All is near thee; thy sins are near thee;
but they touch thee not: for as we have mentioned to thee before, the Still
Eternity is a Liberty: but yet do not think that it will take away thy sins
from thee into it self, as also thy abominations and wickedness; but they
belong to the Anger of God, there they must swim, and be bestowed on the
Devil: but they stand beneath thee in the Center, and thou art as a fair
sprout [and fruit] which springs up forth through the Anger, to the Love
[fire] and to Gods deeds of Wonder: and yet the Anger is not in God, but in the
Abyss; and when the Devil lifted himself above God, then he went into the
Abyss, and became Gods Footstool.

65. The Text in Matthew, Chap. 16. verse. 18, 19. has another understanding in
it: The Temple of Christ, (viz. Christ's children,) is Christ's Bride, he has
adorned her with his fairest Ornament* and as he has loved us, and brought us
through himself into God his Father* so we should love one another: and when
a sorrowful Repentant Man comes, which will yield himself into the
Congregation of Christ, and desires Christ, him the Congregation should
receive; for Christ has received him: and so we are all one body in Christ:
and as one Member preserves and loves the other; so we should receive the
poor converted sinner into our Congregation, and in the Place of God, make
known to him the forgiveness of his sin, and lay our hands upon him, and
make him partaker of our Body and Congregation; and so our spirit and virtue or
power, will rest upon him, as is to be seen by the Apostles of Christ.

66. And when we receive him into the Congregation of Christ, then he is
[become] our Brother; when we say, thy sins are forgiven thee, then they are
drowned in the Blood and Death of Christ; and he is a Member of us: we take
not away his sins from him, but Christ in us drowneth them in his blood
through our and his Earnest desire.
Faith; When we lay our hands upon him, and pray over him, then we, with our
will which is [given up] into God, penetrate into his Will; and bring him into
our will, as into one [and the same] Body in Christ, to the Father: his will
becomes our will; for he gives up himself through Christ into the Bride, as
into our Will, which is also Gods will; and we receive him with good cause,
into our Love, into our Will, and sinck our selves down in him through Christ
into God: thus we forgive him his sins; for we are the Congregation and
Bride of Christ, whom he loves, and what we do, that does Christ in us, and
God in Christ: it is all one, Christ is ours, and God is Christ's; and the
converted sinner is ours, and Christ's, and also Gods; we live in one body, and
have one Spirit, and are one flesh: and as we enter into the Will of God, so
we also take our Brother along with us: we cast the sins away behind us
into the Fire of Anger: but we live and flourish in God: we have the Key of
Heaven and of Hell: when we make known to a sinner his sins, and he will
not be converted, then we bind him up in the Abyss; for we pass through
and shut it up, and then he must swelter in his sins: and then the Devil
buffetteth him, when we draw him no longer with our word, which has power,
then the Devil draws him: but if he turn at length, then we have power, to
take him away from the Devil again, and (through our Spirit) in Christ, to
bring him into God.

67. Behold! such a power Christ's Bride only has, and none else; and if it
were so, if a Man were in a Wilderness: where he never could meet or see any
Man: and did turn himself away from sin into Christ, and did desire and
long after our society, when he came ^t possibly come to us; and though we did
never know of him, yet nevertheless, since he casts himself into our
society [by his desire], we take him along with us through Christ, to the
Father, and thrust his sins quite away behind him, and spring up with him
out of one and the same Field or soil.
ground: for Christ's body is the Ground of our souls, wherein he grows and
bears fair fruit in Ternarium Sanctum.

The Highly Precious Gate.
68. Now says Reason; How can Christ's Body be our Body? Is he a Creature? How
can we dwell in the Body of Christ?

69. Behold O Man, Adam was our Father, and also our Mother: Now we have all
of us Adams flesh, soul, and spirit; for we are all begotten out of one and
the same flesh, soul, and spirit: and are all of us Members of him, (as the
branches are Members of the Tree) and he brought us into Death.

70. He had the fair Virgin of the Wisdom of God in him; which is every
where, and is the fulness of all things, as God himself is, which the lost:
he should have left it us as an Inheritance, yet he went out from it: but the
second Adam, Christ, came forth from God, and was the Heart of God, and had the
fair Virgin in him; he took our flesh and soul into his Virgin, and that
became flesh, soul, and spirit: flesh of our flesh, and soul of our soul,
and yet remained God; our flesh stood in Christ in Ternario Sancto, he received
from us Or, into.
in the Virgin of God, the Eternal and also the Earthly Flesh: though indeed
it was only the Earthly source [and property] for nothing that is corruptible
enters into God.

71. When the Word Became or was made.
came into the Flesh, it then became Heavenly, as in Adam it was become
Earthly: for the flesh of Christ was in the Eternal Will brought into the
Word, so that the flesh and the Word was one undivided Person: Now Or, the
matter is about the Eternal Will.
the business is done in the Eternal Will, out of which Adam was gone away,
and God brought us, in the soul of Christ, into that will again.

72. Now Christ's soul is our soul: for it is Adams soul, and Christ's flesh
is our flesh: for he took it on him from our Humanity, and the fair Virgin of
God in Christ, is our Virgin: for Christ has put the same into our souls: and
so now if we give up our selves wholly into Christ, then Christ lives in us,
and we in him: though the outward mortal Body hang to us, yet Christ lives
in us, and will at the End of the world present us, wholly pure without
blemish, in his flesh.

73. Thus we are one body in him: for he is our body in God, and Adam is our
body in this world: there is no such gross untoward body in God, but a body in
power, with heavenly flesh and blood, where our will is, there is our heart
also; God is in us; and when we enter into his Will, then we put his wisdom
on to us, and in the Wisdom, Christ is a Man; thus we enter into his
humanity, and are a New Man in the life of Christ, in the soul of Christ, in
Christ's flesh, in the Tincture of Christ, in the Majesty of Christ, and Christ
is in his Father, and his Father is the Eternity, and the End of Nature.

74. And whither will thou go further, thou poor Man? let not the Devil and
Antichrist befoole thee; No Man has any power in God, unless he be in the
Will of God, in Gods Love in Christ, and then he has the soul and flesh of
Christ; but if he have that, then he is not a covetous wretch, nor a flattering
hypocrite, and one that sells the Kingdom of Heaven for money, as Simon
Magus offered to give Money to Saint Peter, that he would give him the power,
that on whomsoever he laid hands, they should receive the Holy Ghost: then
says Peter: Be thou accursed with thy Money: Do thou suppose that the Gifts
of God will be sold for Money?

75. And where then have you your Power and Authority ye Sophisters, to sell
the Kingdom of Heaven, and usurp it into your power? ye are not Christ's
disciples, but the disciples of Antichrist, the whore of Babell, No Priest is
capable of the office, unless he be in the will of God, his Absolution is no
Absolution; but the Congregation of Christ, to whom he gives up himself,
Absolveth him: the Sophister is as useful to the Church, as a fifth Wheel is
to a Wagon.

76. Thou Sophister, how will thou impart the Mysterium Magnum, which thou have
not; The Congregation or Church has it, and the Repentant sinner that comes
to thee has it, and thou art a Sophister, and art fitter to be in a stall of
Oxen, then in the Church: How can the Devil Absolve a sorrowful Sinner? And
thou only servest thy Belly-God.
Idol the Belly.

77 O thou blind world, how art thou blinded? thou supposest thou ought not
to dare to meddle with the The Great Mystery, the office of the Ministry.
Mysterium Magnum, and that thou art not capable of it; and that the Those that
call themselves Divines and Ministers.
Priest only is capable of it: but if thou art in Christ, thou have All free
[unto thee], thou have his Covenant [together] with the Baptism and Sacrament,
and the Body and blood of Christ therein: but the Covenant belongs to the
Believers, and not to the Sophisters, Christ's disciples and again their
disciples and successors have baptized: and the Believing Church or
Congregation have broken bread in Houses, and where they could, and have fed
upon the body and blood of Christ: the Temple of God was every where;
wheresoever Christians were met together.

78. We do not mention this, for the Pulling down of Churches, in which
Christ's office is Exercised; but we show you the Hypocrites, who bind you
wholly to them; that you may go out from them, and go to the Congregation of
Christ, into the Temple of Christ, and that you may not rest satisfied merely
with the Church of Stone walls, for they are only a heap of stones, which is
a dead thing: but Christ's Temple is Living.

79. Ye are all consented about the Church, and go diligently thither, but
none will enter into the Temple of Christ: But pray go into the Temple of
Christ, and then of dead you will become Living: there is no other Remedy,
neither in Heaven, nor in this world, it must be so, or else you remain in
Darkness.

80. Not that we judge so rigorously, for the will of God stands open for
All Men: by what name soever they are called: A Heathen may be saved, if he
turn to the Living God, and with true reliance, yield himself up to the will
of God, for then he comes into the will of God, though he knows not what the
Kingdom of Christ is, and in the will of God, there is the Heart of God, and
Christ has the Heart of God in him; for such a one does truly Believe: yea one
that is Dumb and Deaf is saved, that never heard of God at all: if he incline
his Imagination unto obedience, into the will and righteousness of God.

81. Who will judge such a one? Will thou Sophister do it? thou who make
[Articles of] Faith out of opinions? what need opinions? Opinions are not the
Spirit of Christ, which is a quickening Spirit; but Christ's Spirit testifies
to our Spirits that we are the children of God: it is in us, what need we
then seek so long after Opinions: we say, that in all [sorts of] opinions
there is Heresy, as also Antichrist. But if you have the words of Christ,
cleave to them sincerely, not only to the Letter, but to the Living Word,
which is God and Man, that is the Scripture which you should read and preach
out of Christ's Spirit, and not out of conjecture; but if you cannot apprehend
that, why then do you teach so much, and contrive Opinions; do you suppose
God to be a liar, as you are? that he should hold your invented Opinions to be
his Word, whereas you are but dead to God; he that has an Opinion whether a
thing be or no, he is in doubt: Now doubting is not Believing; but is a
dangerous way to go.

82. But now the troubled soul, which is thus tossed too and fro, from one
conceit and opinion to another; when it perceives every one to cry out: Here
is Christ, here is Christ; follow me; the other party are Heretics, and
speak from a false Spirit: the soul then asks, to what party shall I turn
and apply my self? whither shall I go that I may hear the right Gospel
preached? Where shall I find Christ? they all curse and judge one another: and
yet I hear them all speak from the Bible, and confirm their doctrine from
thence, and teach the way of God: What shall I do? for I find them to be so
spiteful and bitter one against another, and they ride up and down in the
Hearts of Princes: and stir up wars and persecutions for the cause of Faith
and Religion, and Or, Excommunicate one another.
deliver one another up to the Devil, and say one of another, that the Devil
speaks out of this and that Man; He is a Heretic, fly away from him.

The Gate of Immanuel.
83. Behold dear soul, How faithfully Christ warns us concerning these
times, concerning which we have been hitherto blind: For these false
selfe-erected Priests will cry out and say: Christ is in the Wilderness:
another of them will say, he is not in the Wilderness, he is in the Chamber;
or he is in the field; and another again will say No; he is here or there: or
he is in the Supper, or in the Baptism: and another will say, he is not in
them, they are only signs, and symboles: But Christ says, Believe them not,
and go not forth; for us the Lightening shines from the East to the West, so
also shall the coming of the Son of Man be; for where the Carcass is,
thither the Eagles gather together.

84. Christ says; I am the way, the truth, and the Life; none comes to the
Father, but by me: I am the door to the sheepfold, and am a Good Shepherd;
but all that came before me in their own Name of themselves, are Thieves and
Murderers, and seek only to rob and steal; for they seek their own
honor; but I seek not my own honor, but my Father honors me, and they
dishonor me: I am the Light of the world, whosoever follows me, shall have
the Light of the Eternal Life, my Father will give the Holy Ghost to them that
pray unto him for it; when he shall come, he shall lead you into all truth,
for he shall receive of mine and make it known unto you: take no care for your
life, for my Father cares for you: for where your heart is, there is your
treasure also. [Therefore let your heart and mind be in the will of God, and
then your treasure is there also].

85. Which is as much as to say, Run not after the selfe-erected Teachers, who
teach from the History without the Spirit of God: if they can speak a little
in a strange Language, then they will be Teachers, and teach out of Art and
vainglory, to exercise their Eloquence, wherein one flattering Hypocrite
helps forward the other, especially where much money and honor may be gotten
in the Office: Christ said, I seek not my own honor: my kingdom is not of
this world: but they Teach that Christ's kingdom is in the History [ viz. in
Art, in Eloquence, in the Universities, in Synods and Councills]. But Christ
said to his Disciples: The Holy Ghost will receive of mine, and make it known
unto you, and bring into your mind all whatsoever I have spoken.

86. This dear children of Christ, let none run after contentions,
controversies and disputations, they all say the truth one of another; for they
are all grown out of one and the same Tree, and they are at variance about the
Booty and Spoil and Plunder.
Prey of Antichrist, whose End is at hand: Turn away your heart and mind from
all contention, and go in very simply and humbly, at the door of Christ, into
Christ's sheepfold, seek that, in your Heart; you need not much disputation:
pray to God the Father, in the Name of Jesus Christ, upon his promise, that he
would open your heart through his holy Spirit, turn with all diligence into
him, let all go whatsoever makes a fine glistering holy show in the heaps of
Stone, and enter into the Temple of Christ, and there the Holy Ghost will meet
you; yield your self quite up unto him, and he will open your Heart, and bring
into your mind, all the merits and benefits of Christ; he will open your
understanding; and bring into your mind whatsoever Christ has spoken, for he
shall receive from Christ, and make it known unto you.

87. Neither trouble your self with taking care, where the best Place is, for
him to open it in, [whether in a Cloister, a College, a Wilderness, in this
or that Office, Ministry, or Opinion] for as the Sun rises in the East and
shines to the West, so Christ shines in every corner and chinck of his
Incarnation or being Man, even to Eternity: Seek not after one place more then
after another, he is every where; for where the Carcass is, thither the Eagles
gather together: Christ is every where, and his children can come to him every
where, and when we enter into Christ, then we are with our Carcass, and
satiate our selves with his flesh, and drink of his blood: for he said; My
flesh is the true food, and my blood is the true drink, they that eat of my
flesh and drink of my blood, continue in Me and I in them. Also [he saith]
Father I will that those whom thou have given me, may be where I am; they were
thine, and thou have given them unto me, and I give them the Eternal Life:
and I will raise them up at the Last Day: if you continue in me, then my words
continue in you.

88. Now therefore when you see that the world contendeth about the Kingdom of
Christ: then know that they have lost the keys, the Mysterium Magnum, and are
not in Christ, for there is no contention in Christ, but love, and humility,
and a desire to walk before his neighbor in righteousness, wheresoever we
a^e, there we are in Christ: whenever we meet together, we should all
bring his will with us into the Congregation; viz. the desire of Christ: and
when we desire him we receive him, and become one body in him: he feeds us
with his body and blood; when we use his Testaments, with the Last Supper,
then he feeds us with his flesh, and gives us his blood to drink, he
Baptizeth us with the Baptism, to be one body in him: why then are we so long
a searching? for as the Sunshine fills the whole world, so does the body
and blood of Christ also: his substance is the Eternity, where there is no
space nor place: he is shut up in nothing: for he is in the Father, and the
Father is in him, and the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Father and the Son:
Now every Being [or all whatsoever is brought into a beeing] is created out of
the Father, and the Father is in All [things], and upholdeth and preserves All
[things], He gives to all things Life and Being: and the Son is in the
Father, and gives to all things virtue and Light; he is our Light; without him
we know not God; how can we then speak rightly of him? if we will speak
rightly of him, we must speak from his Spirit, for that testifies of God:
but if we speak from Art and History, we speak from our selves, and not
from God, and so we are Thieves and Murderers, and not Shepherds of Christ:
A Thief comes but to rob and steal, and so the Disputers come but in their
own Name only, in that they desire to have great respect, and many rich
friends, and such cry out, here is Christ: and there are Heretics.

89. Dear children of Christ; stop your Ears from these blaspheming Wolves:
for they scandalize not only one another, but the Congregation of Christ,
which is every where in all Countries where there are Repenting Men, who turn
from their sins to God: They are in Christ, though they be Turks: there is
no respect of Persons or of Names and Opinions with God: he seeks the Or,
Bottom of the Heart.
Abyss of the Heart.

90. Antichrist is the cause of the Turks falling into Peculiar Opinions of
their own; for there was no End in Controversies and Disputations; which was a
stumbling block of offense to the Asians, Assyrians, Egyptians, Moors,
Grecians and Africans: the Indians lead a more Godly and Pious.
Divine Life in their plain simplicity, then Antichrist; though indeed not all
of them: yet nevertheless there are many Customs among them, that are more
Pious then the Pride of the Whore.

91. The Whore hinders the Kingdom of Christ, so that all people are
scandalized and stumble at it, and say; How can those be Gods people, who are
only Tyrants, Proud, Covetous, Obstinate, Stubborn, Bloodthirsty People,
which practice only how to get away that which is another, and seek after
power and honor: The very Heathen are not so malicious: we will not make our
selves partakers with them: God dwells every where, he is as well with us as
with them: we will lead an honest, virtuous, and pious life; and call upon
the only true God, who has created all things, and go out from their
Contentious Disputations: we will continue in one sort of Opinion, and then
our Country will continue in Peace, when we all believe in one God, then
there is no strife, but then we have all one and the same will, and may live
in Love one among another.

92. See here beloved Christian! this is that which has so advanced the Turk,
and brought him to that Great Strength: so that their Might is climed up, into
the Number Thousand; they Rule, in one Opinion, and Love Or, over.
toward the whole world: for they are a Tree of Nature, which stands also in
the presence of God; but it grows no higher then to the Number Thousand, for
then its wild Heart gets a countenance, having Eyes: [or he will then come
to see].

93. Thou Antichrist shall not devour him with thy Dragons Mouth: as may be
seen in the Revelation: He possesses his Kingdom to the End: but when thou
shall be gone down into the Pit; and that Christ himself shall feed his
Lambs, then he will come to be [of the fold] of the Lambs; when thy murdering
sword is broken: thou shall not be broken with Spears, or Pikes.
weapons of war, thou hypocrite; but thy lies shall stifle thee.

94. He that goes about to slay Antichrist, is Antichrists Beast, upon which
he rides: he will be but the more potent in Contention; for the Hearts of
people turn away from the truth, and go out from God into Contention: and
there every one looks after the Wonders of the Contention, and run after the
Eloquent Sermons, and so come out from Christ into Opinions, and seek ways in
the Darkness, wherein there is no Light: thus the Devil Rules in the
Antichrist, and leads the children astray into bywayes of Humane Inventions,
so that they see no more in the Light of Christ.

95. Thus it happened also to the Mighty Countries, over which the Alcoran
rules, where they departed from Christ, and fell into Opinions, and then there
grew to them a Tree out of Nature in their heart, and they fell upon one
opinion, and so lived in that Wild Tree.

96. But the Antichristian Kingdom lives in many Trees; they run from one to
another, and know not which is the best; for they are gone forth from the
Paradise of Christ, they boast of the Doctrine of Christ, and deny the power
thereof, and thereby they testify that Christ is not in them: nay, they desire
not to have him in them: they thrust him, with his body and blood, with his
Humanity, out of the Congregation, they will have a sign from him, whereby
they may in their Pride possess his place, and so keep up their rich fat
Bellies: Christ in this outward Life upon the Earth, was poor, and had not
whereon to lay his head: But they in Christ's place will be rich and fat: they
say; He is in Heaven, we will therefore erect a stately glorious pompous
Kingdom to his honor, that we may enjoy good Times, and honor in his
Office. We are the highest in this world: for we are Gods Ambassadors, or
Vicegerents.
Stewards, we manage the Office of Christ, and have the Mysterium Magnum: How
dare any speak against us, we will quickly make them hold their peace.

97. O beloved children of Christ, open your Eyes, and see; do not run so
after the Devil; do you not see? pray learn to see! do you not see how all
is done for Money? if one give them store of Money, they praise him, for a
gracious Christian, who is beneficial and bountiful to the Church: If one
die, though all his Life long he was an unjust false Usurer, whore-monger,
Thief, and Murderer, and they know it very well, if he or his bestow much
upon the Church [Colledges or Learned Men]: O how is he applauded for a
blessed and gloriour Man! What great And Monuments, Epitaphs, and Poemes.
Sermons do they make for him, that other unrighteous men, may hear and
consider, and follow their example to do the like: But stay, does the Kingdom
of Christ consist in such [giving of] Money, and in the Mouth of the Priest:
No, it shall not prosper; here the Wine Press yields much blood, as that
Revelation of John speaks.

98. And thus the Innocent are seduced [or the poor souls heerby fall into
despaire] for he that gives not them much, or has it not to give, is no
honest Man with them: He is not beneficial toward the Ministry: if but the
least moate be found amiss in his life, oh how they divulge it, and make a
great matter of it, how is he trodden underfoote; how ever at length they
devoutly send a good wish after him, and say, God forgive him: Open your Eyes
ye children of Christ, this is the Antichrist, go not a whoring after him:
Many such have been sinners, and have turned from their sins, and have entered
into Christ, and their soul is in Christ an Angel of God; and therefore how
dare you proud Antichrist, according to your own pleasure despise one that is
the Angel of God: O thou blind Man, do thou not see this? Art thou the
Shepherd and Minister of Christ, and Steward of God? have thou the Mysterium
Magnum about thee? Is thy office the office of Christ, as thou boastest? why
then art thou a Liar? in applauding the wicked for Money; has Christ and his
Apostles done so.

99. Hearken thou opposer of Christ: look into the Acts of the Apostles; Where
one sold his Possessions, and laid a part of the Price of the Money at the
Apostles feet: And Peter asked him, saying, Have you sold the field for so
much, and he said, yea; and had a false, doubtful [and deceitfull] Mind: then
said Peter; thou have lied unto the Holy Ghost; behold the feet of them that
stand at the door, shall carry you away out of the Congregation of Truth: what
think you now of your self? being this has happened to the Hearers of
Peter: what would have been done to Peter himself; if he should have thus lied
for greediness of Money, and so blasphemed the Holy Ghost? But thou art he
that does so: thou applaudest the unrighteous, that thou may but get money;
but thou regardest not his soul, neither do thou regard how thou broachest
forth thy lies in the Congregation, how many times do some stand and bewail
the wickedness and deceit of those thou praisest, wherewith he unjustly
oppressed and wronged the needy, and also bewail thy flattering hypocrisy and
lies.

100. Hearken! Is not the Name of Christ blasphemed thereby, and the
Congregation of Christ scandalized? when they say; The Priest tells lies in
the Pulpit for Money: if it were a sin he would not do it: and so in like
manner, when any lie and deceive people to get money, goods, and honor, if
they can but cover it with a fine pretense; what matter is it: for [they think]
if it were so great a sin, the Priest would not do it: they think they will
once repent of it: and the Priest has Grace enough in store for them.

101. Behold thou false and wicked Antichrist, thus thou lie to the Holy
Ghost (in Christ's office) who tries the Heart; and thou lie to the
Congregation of Christ; and do scandalize it therewith; It were a great deal
better, they had never heard thy lies, and then their hearts would not have
been so filled with lies.

102. How can thou say, that thou executest the office of Christ, seeing thou
art a liar and mocker of Christ, thou art not borne of Christ, but of lies: and
when thou speak lies, thou speak from thy Beast, on which thou ridest, in
the Revelation, thou speak of thy own, from the Spirit which is in thee,
and yet wilt [take upon thee] to feed the sheep of Christ: thou should
feed them in a green meadow, in the fat pasture of Jesus Christ, and tell
them the Truth; but thou feedest them upon the Devils Rocks, and the
Mountains of the Abyss in his lustful Grass.

103. If you be the Minister of Christ, then serve him in Spirit and Truth:
reprove sins without any respect of Persons, spare not; lift up your voice
like a Trumpet; reprove all wickedness of all persons, both superior and
inferior: teach the way of Christ rightly: praise [or sooth] none, for his
money and honor sake: for Christ praised none of the Potentates for gain
sake: neither did he reprove any of them out of Envy of their Greatness and
honor; for he commends Order, and says; Give to Caesar the things which are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods: but he reproves the hypocrites
the Pharisees, in that they made long prayers, and stood in the Or, Ga^es.
streets making devout show, and would be seen of People, and sought only
after Praise; and such a one is the Antichrist also: and therefore the Spirit
in the Revelation of Christ says; Go out from her my People, that you be not
made partakers of her sins; for he that allows of sin, is one spirit with
the sin: he that for favor Or, consents to.
confirms the lie of a Liar, he is guilty of that lie, and of the wickedness
thereof.

104. God the Father has Regenerated us in Christ out of the Truth, therefore
we should not be the servants of lies: for when we enter into Lies, we go
out from Christ, and are with the Devil, who is the Father of Lies: and so is
the Antichrist also, and all that depend on him, and serve him: it were better
to be far absent, and to have Christ The life of Christ imprinted in us.
formed in the Heart, then to hear Lies in the Antichristian Office [of the
Ministry].

105. I know thou Evil Beast, wilt cry out upon me for an envious Person, as
if I did grutch what good people give thee: no, that is not my ground [or
meaning]; for Christ says; Whosoever ministers the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel: you must not mussle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn,
it must feed: they cleave not all to the Antichrist; we have only set forth
the wicked Antichrist, who rides in the Hearts of Men: we despise none for
their good Conscience: Only the Antichrist shall stand Naked for a Witness to
All People: He rides over the face of the Earth in all Countries and Nations.
[Note, wheresoever Pride, Covetousness, Envy and Wrath, are predominant in
falsehood, deceit, selfe-seeking, and an hypocritical show of holiness, there
is the Greatest Antichrist of all].

106. People now suppose they have rooted him out, and are now in strife and
contention about him; every one will slay him: O thou blind simplicity, thou
slayest him not; do but go out from him, and enter into the Temple of Christ;
and let Antichrists houses stand [empty], and then he will fall of himself,
and at length be ashamed of his own abominations and whoredom: only do not
Or, Pray to.
worship him: do not bow thy knee before him: but Or, Pray to.
worship God.

107. Do but open your Eyes, the whole world is full of God, the whole matter
[of Conversion] is about the outward Life, in the Inward God dwells in
himself; and the outward Life is also Gods; but the Abyss is in it, viz. the
Center of Nature, in which the severe, stern life, is, which is the cause of
this Warning.

108. There are Three Principles, (Three Kingdoms,) two are Eternal and one
has a beginning and is transitory: Each of them is desirous of Man: for Man is
an Image of All Three: and the Being of all Beeings, is a longing, seeking,
and desiring; which existeth out of the Eternal Will, and the will is the
Eternity.

109. In God there is no Dominion, but in the Three Principles, in their
Creatures: There is in God no more but one only Spirit, which comes to
succor his whole Being in the Water and in the Fire, out of which every thing
existeth; He is no destroyer; but preserver of a Thing: and if any thing
perishes, the fault lies in the Government.
Dominion of Nature; but that which is out of the Eternal, cannot perish; but
only changes into another property; for which [cause] we give you warning:
and all the Teaching and seeking in this world is only that you may be warned
of the severe source or property of the Fire; there is indeed a Life in it, and
no Creature can subsist, without it have that life: but we that are Men, are
not Created for that life, and therefore God would have every Creature in that
property wherein he created it: that his Eternal Will may stand steadfast, and
not be broken.

110. Every thing has Free Will, and therein its inclination to its property;
the whole Being of this world, and of the Angelical world, also of the
Hellish world, is merely a wonder in the presence of God: He has set light
and darkness before every one, thou may embrace which thou will: thou will
not thereby move God in his Being; his Spirit goes forth from Him, and
meets all those that seek him, it is Gods seeking, in which God desires the
Humanity, for The Humanity.
it is his Image, which he has created according to his whole Being, wherein
he will see and know himself: yea he dwells in Man, why then are we so long
a seeking; let us but seek to know our selves: and when we find our selves,
we find all; we need run no whither to seek God, for we can thereby do
him no service; if we our selves did but seek and love one another, then we
love God, what we our selves do to one another, that we do to God;
whosoever seeks and finds his brother and sister, has sought and found
God: In him we are all one Body of many Members, every one having its own
Office, Government and work; and that is the wonder of God.

111. Before the time of this world we were known in his Wisdom, and he
created us into a Being, that there might be a sport in him. Chi dren are our
Schoolmasters (in all our wit and cunning we are but fools to them), when
they are borne, their first lesson is to learn to play with themselves, and
when they grow bigger they play one with another: thus has God from Eternity
(in his wisdom, in our hidden childhood) played with us: but when he created
us in knowledge and skill, we should then have played one with another, but
the Devil grutched us that, and made us fall out at our sport; and therefore
it is that we are still at variance in contention, but we have nothing to
contend about but our sport, when that is at an end, we lie down to rest, and
go to our own Place: and then come others to play, and strive and contend also
till the Evening, till they go to sleep into their own Country out of which
they are come: for we were in the Land of Peace, but the Devil persuaded us
to go in to his unpeaceable Country.

112. Dear children, what do we mean; that we are so obedient to the
Devil, why do we so contend about a Tabernacle which we have not made, nay
this Country is not ours, nor this Government ours: it is our Mothers, and the
Devil has defiled it, let us pull it off, and go to our Mother that she way
put us on a fair pure Garment again, and then we need not contend about the
defiled Garment: here we contend about a Garment, because one brother has a
fairer Garment then another; and yet the Mother puts every ones own Garment
upon them: and why therefore do we contend with our Mother, who has brought
us forth? are we not all her children? Let us be obedient children, and then
she will purchase a new Garment for every one of us, and then we shall
rejoice, we shall all forget the defiled one.

113. We go into the Garden of Roses, and there are Lillies and flowers
enough, we will make a Garland for our sister, and then she will rejoice with
us: we have a Round to dance, and we will all hold hands together: let us be
very joyful: there is no more might to hurt us, our Mother takes care for us:
we will go under the figtree, how abundant is its fruit: How fair are the
Pine Trees in Lebanon: Let us be glad and rejoice that our Mother may have joy
of us.

114. We will sing a song of the Driver [or Oppressour] who has set us at
variance; How is he captivated? Where is his power? He is not here to be
found; neither has he gotten the defiled Garment, which we contended about,
the Mother has it in her keeping; How poor he is? He domineered over us, but
now he is bound: O Great Power, how art thou thus brought to scorn, thou that
did file aloft above the Cedars, art now laid under foot, and art so void of
Power: Rejoice ye Heavens, and ye children of God; for he that was our
Driver [Oppressour and persecutour] who plagued us day and night, is
captivated; Rejoice ye Angels of God, for Men are delivered, and malice and
wickedness is taken captive.

The Twelfth Chapter.
Of the [true] Christian Life and Conversation. What Man is to do in this
Valley of Misery, that he may work the works of God, and so attain the
Eternal Highest Good.
1. THere is nothing more necessary and profitable to Man in the valley of
Misery upon Earth, then for him to learn to know what he is, from whence he
is, and whither he tends; what Or, business he undertaketh. What he gets
or acquireth.
course he takes, and whither he goes when he dies: there is nothing more
profitable then to know these things: for the outward conversation remains in
this world, but what the heart conceives, that a Man takes with him: The will
of the spirit of the soul is Eternal, that which is comprehended in the will
of the spirit of the soul, that, the soul carries with it when the soul and
body part. Therefore it is necessary for us, to labor for somewhat that is
Good; wherein the soul may accomplish its Eternal sport, and have its joy
therein: for the works of our soul follow after us: and the works of our
hands, and of the outward spirit remain in this world: for the soul is in the
Eternity, whatsoever it makes and imagines here, that stands always
before it: unless it break that again; and then it is as a broken work,
which it has no more to do withal: for it is gone out from that; for the
Eternal cutteth an Eternal Model, and the corruptible and Or, Inchoctive.
inceptive cutteth a corruptible Model: for after this time every thing will
stand in its own Model; for that which the Eternal Will conceives, that
gets an incorruptible form, if it self do not break it.

2. Therefore it is good for Man, to choose in this life that which is best, in
which he may have joy Eternally: for when thou choosest Beauty, Bravery, and
Honor or Riches, then thou art thereby made Vselesse^
unbeneficiall to thy brother and sister, who are in Misery in this world: for
the Bravery of this world despises the mean and simple; and Riches wringeth
away the sweat from the poor, [or grindeth the Faces of the Poore], and great
Power and Authority presses and oppresses the low and miserable: Great
honor, despises the simple, and will not condescend to the needy: seeing
therefore in the other life, the souls of many that have been simple,
miserable, and in this world contemned, poor, oppressed, and dejected, will
appear; and seeing it is certain, that in their form will not be
comprehended much highness, bravery, desire of might and honor: for their
souls have in this valley of misery, only shut up themselves into the meek
Love of God, and yielded themselves into simplicity and lowliness, and have
not dared to have communion with might, pomp, and great honor, for such things
have had no affinity with them.

3. And seeing it is so, that the souls in the other life shall have Joy one
with another, and enjoy the gifts and virtues one of another; and seeing then
the souls will have their substance which they have here taken in and
conceived, appear in their Eternal Will, as a Figure: therefore we ought
very highly and heartily to consider it, that we do not in this world
conceive and let into our hearts, Pride and stoutnesse, also covetousness and
oppression of the miserable: for with these we cannot enter into the
Congregation of Christ, they receive us not into their society: for it is a
contrariety to them.

4. For in the Kingdom of Heaven there is nothing but Love and Concord: every
one inclines his love and favor to the other, and every one rejoices in the
gifts, power, and Iustre or Brightness.
Beauty of the other, which they have obtained from the Majesty of God: and
they all give thanks to God the Father in Christ Jesus: that he has chosen and
received them to be children: for the mighty power of the strong [who have been
Mighty in Faith, and in the Wonders of God] rejoices for the weak, that the
Spirit of God is in them, and that they also are in the Wonders in the Eternal
Will.

5. Therefore dear children and brethren in Christ, let us, in this world,
enclose our hearts, minds, and wills, in humility into one Love, that we may
be one in Christ: If thou art highly advanced to power, authority, and honor;
then be humble: despise not the simple and miserable: but consider that in the
other life they shall be in one highness with thee: squeeze not the oppressed;
afflict not the afflicted: that they may not take it to Or, conceive it in
their Heart.
heart, and bar up the Gates of Heaven against thee: If thou art fair,
Beautiful, and comely of body, be not proud, nor do thou despise those that
are not like thee: that thy simple brothers and sisters soul may not loath
thee, and reject thee out of their Mind: Be humble that thy brother and sister
may rejoice in thee; and present thy Beauty to the Praise of God, who has
created so Beautiful a Chaste and Humble Creature; be Courteous.
modest and friendly in words and works.

6. Thou that art Rich, let thy streams flow into the houses of the miserable,
that their soul may bless thee; Thou that art in Authority, bow not the
Right to please the Mighty; that the oppressed may bless thee in thy
Righteousness; and then thou also art in the Congregation of Christ: If thou
art exalted to high dignity, give not place to thy mind to fly [aloft,];
humble thy self, in the Congregation of Christ, and then the Congregation will
bless thee, and will receive thee into their Love.

7. O how well is it with the Rich, and Potent, when the mean and simple
Congregation of Christ love and Desire all happiness to them.
bless them: O how well is it with a Teacher and Preacher, who is a right
Minister of Christ, who gives the meat and drink of Christ to the Lambs that
are committed to his trust, and refreshes them therewith, so that they yield
their souls into his obedience, and heartily love him, and desire all welfare
to him; O how happy and shining is he in Christ, how Glorious a Shepherd is
he: for his Lambs follow him, and he brings them to the chief Shepherd.

8. O how ill a condition is he in, whom they curse according to his true
deserts! the bright Garment will be taken away from him, and he puts on the
vizard of wickedness: But he that is cursed for righteousness sake, he
presses forth as the Gold out of the Or, Stone.
oar, and puts on Christ's Crown of Martyrdom; wherein all the holy souls
at the Last Day will highly rejoice, in that he has continued a steadfast
Disciple of Christ, who has not looked upon honor, power, money or goods, but
has rightly fed the sheep of Christ.

9. Dear Brethren and Sisters in the Congregation of Christ, bear with us:
let us a little rejoice one with another: we bear a hearty Love toward you,
and speak from the Spirit of our Mother: out of the Spirit of the Eternal
Wisdom of God [ viz. from the Spirit of humility].

10. We will speak friendly with you, concerning our Mother, and concerning
our Native Country: we will speak of Great Wonders, how things go with us
all: and so we will comfort our selves: for we are in a strange Country; we
will persuade one another and agree, and will go home into our own Country to
our Mother; O how will she rejoice when she sees her children [come to her
into the Eternity] we will tell her of the Great afflictions, which we
underwent in That is, in the way from Jerusalem falling among Thieves.
Jericho, we will speak of the great danger we were in, among many evil
Beasts: we will speak of the Driver or Oppressor, who held us so long
captive, and we will speak how we were freed from him: let us be unanimous,
that our Mother be not grieved and offended with us.

11. Rejoice ye Heavens with us, and let the Earth be glad, for the Praise of
the LORD goes over all Mountains and Hills: He opens the Doors for us,
that we may go to our Mother: let us rejoice and be glad: for we were borne
blind, and now are come to see; Open the Gates (...) great honor and
reverence to Men: even from a good meaning out of your Love, as thankful
People toward the Government of the Holy Ghost: But because ye have given
such honor to Men as belongs unto God, (though God was contented, so long as
they continued in the Love of God in humility) therefore they are fallen off
from From being endued with the power of God and his true Ordinance.
what they were, into lust after temporal honor, and have fallen into a Lust
to domineere with cunning and deceit, over your Goods and souls, and are
become a snare unto you: for the Antichristian Devil is slipped into them, and
the Spirit of God is departed from them, and they have no more spoken from the
Spirit of God, but from their Pride and Art: strange Languages must do the
work, and must be the bringers sorth of the Mysterium Magnum.

19. But behold dear Brethren, how very Theevishly they have dealt with you,
they have set themselves up over the Earth, and have Usurped.
drawn to themselves all Power, might and honor, and ascribe all authority to
themselves, and have blinded you with flattering Hypocrisy, and have lead you
from God into Opinions, and there you go astray; they have egged ye on to
Contention and Wars, so that you have murdered one another, and wasted your
Native Countries: they have bereaved you of body and soul, also of your goods
and wits, and made you believe, you did God good service in it, when you
became Enemies to those that are not of your Opinion; and yet you are all thus
blind [even on both sides].

20. Behold! these are the That have Cure of souls, Beneficed Ministers that
have Livings.
Curats over your souls, your Spiritualty the Clergy: look upon Popery,
whence has that sprung, from the Devil at Rome, He has caused Asia, Africa,
Assyria, Persia and Greece, to depart from his deceit: for the Antichristian
Priest-Devill has blinded the whole world, and brought them into vain
Traditions and Opinions, and turned them away from that unanimous Love: he has
placed more holiness in one Order and Opinion then in another, and has sold
the highest Degree of Such as the Orders or Ordinations of Deacons, and the
several Orders of Priests or Presbyters, and of Bishops, Primats,
Archbishops, Cardinals, etc.
Orders for Money: that Order which had much and rich Livings and Revenues,
must give much to the Chief Devil, that he might be fatt and a Lord upon
Earth: the simple Lay People were persuaded these Orders were Holiness, and so
worshipped before the Dragon in the Revelation, and sought for Pardon,
Absolution, and forgiveness of sins from thence; O how the Common people
were tied to them; whosoever spoke against it, was accounted a Heretic, and
the People burnt them with Fire; thus did the simple People do, and were
persuaded they did God good service in it.

21. O thou simple Devotion.
Holiness! thou art not Guilty in so doing: neither shall it be imputed or
accounted to you at the Last Day (for you went on blindly in it, and though on
that day the Holy Martyrs shall be set before your eyes) yet you have been
Zealous for God in Blindness; The Blessed Martyrs (who have seen the Light of
God) will not therefore cast you out of their Communion and fellowship.
Congregation, seeing you knew not [what you did] but were blindly lead on to
do it.

22. Yet Behold and Observe, what a Zealous Will, or Earnest desire, can do,
if one enter into the will of God with his whole desire; and although he does
not know what he does, and is Zealous in a strange Opinion, and yet his heart
is directed into God, and believes in ignorance very steadfastly, that it is
pleasing to God. In such an Opinion many Great Or, Miracles.
Wonders and Works have been done in the midst of the Antichristian Kingdom:
for there is not any thing impossible to a strong Faith.

23. Into these Wonders has Antichrist insinuated himself, and has made
almost as many Tenets or Sects and Orders of Religion.
Opinions, as there be Days in the year: amongst which in the Believers who
have so in blindness believed in their Opinion, even Wonders and Miracles have
been done; and the Antichrist has ascribed it to the Opinion, whereas the
Opinion could not make a fly to stir, but the firm and strong Faith, which
went out of the Opinion into God, that has Or, wrought the Miracles.
awakened the Wonders: for the Spirit of God is in the Faith, and not in the
Opinion; and the Faith is from God; for the soul inclines it self in the
Opinion into God, and lays hold on the Spirit of God: the Opinion is the
Fire; but the soul stays not in the Fire, but presses out from thence into
God, it blossometh out of the Fire as a fair flower [out of the Earth].

24. The Opinions have been Tolerable enough, in God, and God rejected them
not, so long as the soul sought God through the Opinion, and so long also the
Church of Christ Or, had a true Government.
stood in a Government: but when the Devil crept into it, and made a stately
Glistering Kingdom of it, when the Priests sought only honor, covetousness,
and voluptuousness in it, and did lead men away from God merely into their
The performance of Ceremonies.
Works, and so the Opinions became altogether blind: for they themselves went
out from God into the works of their hands, in forged and invented ways,
therefore God let them go, seeing they would not be directed by his Spirit.

25. And Asia, Africa, and Greece, are to be accounted happy, in that they are
gone out from the Works of Men into the One only God again: although indeed
they have been blind concerning the Kingdom of Christ; yet their Mind
continued in the One only God, and in concord one among another; and have not
so vehemently scandalized and reproached one another about the dear Name of
Christ, as these have done who have been lead blindfold in the darkness of
their works, for these have not only hated those that departed from them, but
they themselves have reproached and snarled at one another in their Opinions,
as Dogs about a Bone, and have lead the Or, Common People.
Layity astray, who go groping in the dark, and know not which Opinion is the
best.

26. Thus you hang to Opinions, and are perfidious to God, so that when a
simple Man comes to dye, he knows not whither his soul shall Enter: he
hangs to his works and Or, Profession of Religion.
Opinion, and forsakes the Will of God, and so remains without God: And
where now do you suppose the poor soul remains, when it is Extra dei
voluntatem.
without Gods will? Behold we will tell you: for we know certainly, for the
Spirit of our Mother opens it to us, so that we see with both Eyes.

27. Behold! Christ says; Where your Treasure is, there is your Heart also.
Behold! the soul is involved in the Opinion, and so runs with it to the Patron
[or author of it] who has so taught it, and seeks him, and if it find him
not, then it becomes sorrowful, and has no rest: and so hovereth between
Heaven and Hell, and would feign Or, Get away from the Devil.
escape the Devil: therefore it happens, that many times the poor souls
have appeared again in the Congregation, or else in houses, fields, and
Churches, and have cried to the Congregation for help with their Prayers, and
have submitted themselves to the Order, and supposed so to find Ease; from
whence Purgatory was framed: for that soul has the Purgatory indeed, if it
cannot attain the will of God: and in such fervent casting it self down in
the Opinion, it is sunck down through the Opinion, and at length come into the
Still Eternity. But we understand here those souls, which in their Opinions
have Imagined [or sought] after the Kingdom of God; and not the souls of the
Deceivers, who have sought their profit and pleasure therein; those are quite
gone a whoring with Antichrist, for they are bound to him with an Oath: and
though they sit in hellfire a whoring with him, yet they flatter him with
their hypocrisy, and reproach God, as if he had dealt unjustly with them; for
what the soul does here in this [life] time, into which it involveth it
self, and takes it into its will, [that it takes with it in its will, and
after the ending of the Body cannot be freed from it: for afterward it has
nothing else but that; and when it goes into that and kindles it, and seeks
with diligence, that is but an unfolding of the same Being, Essence, or
Substance of the work it has wrought here in this life.
thing; and the poor soul must content it self with that: Only in the time
of the Body it can break off that thing which it has wrapped up in its will:
and that stands afterward as a broken wheel, which is broken and useless,
and no soul enters into it any more, neither does it seek any more therein.

28. Thus we say unto you, that the Antichristian souls after the breaking of
the body, seek no more for the Door of Christ, for they know nothing of it;
they know only of what they here conceived, or took in, and the souls sinck
down in that Opinion into the deepest Ground, much deeper then they here
conceived; for that which was known in many of them of the same Opinion, what
any or all of them know in the same Opinion, that one soul alone knows: for
it is one Body with all those that are of the same Opinion, and they have one
Heart in many Members, wherein every one manageth their business, which
stands so till the Judgment of God: which afterward shall make separation,
where then all kindreds upon the Earth, shall houle and lament when they shall
know that Judge whom they here so despised.

29. Hearken you accursed Antichrist, what answer will you give? in that you
have lead astray the People from faith in God, and from the Justification of
the Passion and dying of Jesus Christ, into thy deceitful hypocrisy in
Opinions, only for thy Pride, honor, and covetousness sake? You have
persuaded them so, that many of them in their youth and ignorance have sworn
and vowed to you: What have you done? even the same that Christ said to the
Pharisees: Woe unto you Pharisees, who compass Sea and Land, till you have
made a Jew and Proselyte; and when you have made him so, then you make him
twofold more the child of Hell then your selves; and this also the Antichrist
does.

30. In Germany they suppose they are now gone out from Antichrist with their
Contentions, but it is not so yet: for they which now curse Antichrist, and lay
his shame open, are even grown out from the Tree of Antichrist, and are the
Wolves and Bears of Antichrist, which suck from him, and devour him, for the
Spirit of this Principle has commanded them so, they must do it, for they are
one Trumpet among the seven Angels in the Revelation: but they all wind one
horn, and sound so that the Earth shakes with it: but when the Thunder of it
shall follow, then will the Mystery of the Kingdom of God be revealed again,
and our Door of Grace in Christ be opened again, which Antichrist had sealed
up, for he shall be thrown down into the Abyss: Observe this.

31. The Opinions about the Cup and Person of Christ, which are frequent now in
Germany, are also sprung from the Antichristian Tree, and they are the Children
of Antichrist, which he introduces very finely and suttlely: O what a Cunning
Artist is the Devil! If you will not open your Eyes, it will continue so to
the End; It is told to the simple, and they are directed to open their Eyes,
and not to regard Opinions: there stick mere Heresies in Opinions: and though
they be zealous in their Opinion, and in the Opinion press into God, and so
attain God and the kingdom of Heaven, yet they have the Tail of Antichrist
hanging on them, for they are zealous against others, and reproach and
persecute them, who are not of their Opinion.

32. Mark this ye Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates, suffer not your selves to
be seduced, drive the Teachers into the Churches, and command them to teach the
Will of God in his Love, give them not Lordly Power, and do not put any
Authority into their hands to make Cannons and Constitutions, else they will
hang to Covetousness, and Antichrist sticks in all Covetousness, and so do
what you can, you will have him on your Neck.

33. Look to it ye Princes, and regard to hear those Men that are Borne of
God, and not of Art only: for where there is great Or, Learning,
Art, and not an humble heart inclined to God, that seeks not its own honor
and Covetousness; there is Antichrist most assuredly: for in Or, Learning,
Art sticks Pride and selfe-honour, which would feign Rule the World and
desire to get much Gain to themselves, trust not these, they are not Christ's
Shepherds: if you will not follow what is revealed to you, then the last
Antichrist will be worse then the first, and it will come to that pass, that
the world will be constrained to cast them headlong together on a heap into
the Abyss, which Daniel and the Revelation shows them plain enough, and as
we have known it, that it will so befall them: for they are now a Beesom and
Or, Scourge.
Rod upon the Old Antichrist their Grandfather: But there is one Coming who
will Gird them also, and set the Truth before their face.

34. Observe it ye Children of God, this is a sign of the last Antichrist: in
his Kingdom and Opinions they deny the Body and Blood of Christ, in which we
are Borne in God; lift up your heads, and behold: for your Redemption draws
near: be not so lead astray, and luld asleep, look not with strange Eyes,
but open your own Eyes, and fly from Antichrist into the Spirit of Christ;
there is no more ways but one to enter into the Kingdom of Christ; which is
set down thus, [as followeth].

A Gate [shewing] which way we must walk though this world into the Kingdom
of God.
35. You must go out from your Reason out of the fleshly Spirit, and bring
your heart, mind, and thoughts, wholly into the Obedience of God, and yield
your will into Gods will, and do not feign ways of your own Reason, or ask,
Where is Christ? Direct your way into Christ, and know for certain, that Christ
is in your Heart: submit your self to him in great humility, cast all your
purposes and doings into his will and pleasure, and consider that you always
stand before the clear countenance of God, and that Christ sits on the
Rainbow at the right hand of God in you, and consider that you stand Every
moment before the Holy Number Three: and that God the Holy Number Three always
examineth and sees the Abyss of your Heart; and take heed that you enter into
no deep Thought or searching, but merely into his Love and Bamhertzigkeit.
Mercy: and resolve never to go out from it any more, but ever to continue
therein.

36. And then secondly, consider that you do what is pleasing in the sight of
God the Most High, when you seek with your love your Brethren and Sisters in
this world, whosoever they are, and by what name soever they are called, and
what Opinion soever they are of, Embrace them in your Heart, help to pray for
them, and help them to wrestle against the Devil, and as far as is possible
instruct them with all humility: but if they will not receive it; then put on
the Garment of Christ, and be a good example unto them; be serviceable and
helpful to them; forgive them when they hurt and wrong you: when they curse
you, do you bless them; when they do you injury, if you cannot turn it into
Good and avoid them, let it pass, and consider you are but a Pilgrim here:
withdraw your Love from none, for your God in whom you live, withdraws
himself from none that do but seek him; be readily yielding to your
adversary, if he once offer to turn his mind; In all your affairs and
conversation love Righteousness, and always have a care that you do your
work for God; we must in this world, in this troublesome valley of misery,
compass our affairs with labor and pains, we should not go into holes,
Cloisters, Cells and Corners: for Christ says; Let your light shine before
Men, that your Father may have praise in your works: do all things from a
Heartily, from the bottom of your heart.
sincere heart, in a pure mind, and consider you do it to Christ, and that
the Spirit of Christ does it in you: be always ready, expecting the
Bridegroom: let your heart have no leave to meditate and search into any other
opinion: it is not profitable for you to know much: let every one learn to do
his own work, wherewith he may have sustenance for his body, whether he be
Superior.
Magistrate or Inferior.
Lay Person.

37. Let the Superior.
Magistrate learn righteousness, and to distinguish the false from the pure,
for he is the Officer of God: what he does and judges, that he judges for God
and God through him. Let the Layety be humble and Or, respective
mannerly before the Ordinance of God: if any wrong be done him with a high
hand, and that it cannot be otherwise, let him consider that he suffers wrong
for the truths sake, and that it is a great honor for him in Christ, in the
presence of God.

38. In all your matters, conversation, dealing and actions, always se;t the
judgment of God before your Eyes, and have a care that you live blamelesly
here, for this [life] time is short: and we stand here in a field a growing:
therefore see that you be good fruit for God, at which all the Angels and
Hoasts of Heaven may be pleased and rejoice: bear malice to none, for that
inviteth the Devil to a Lodging; Be sober and Temperate: let not the desire of
this world persuade you; and though it happen sometime; do not go on in it:
Go every hour out of Death into Life: Crucify your selves in true Repentance
and Conversion from Evil.

39. When you are reproached for your fearing God, and evil spoken of, and
that it be false and untrue, then rejoice most of all, that you are become
worthy to suffer reproach for the Doctrine and honor of Christ: when you are
in affliction, be not dismayed, consider you are in the will of God, he will
suffer no more to be laid upon you then you shall be able to bear.

40. Turn away your Eyes from covetousness, from high-mindednesse and state,
and do not readily look after such things, that you be not captivated: for
the Devil catches his birds with state and high-mindednesse, but go not into
his net: Be always watchful, never be secure: for that fowler goes constantly
about to see where he can catch any one; where honest people are mocked and
scorned, go not thither, make not your selves partakers of such wickedness,
let it not enter into your Ears, that the Devil may not tickle your heart
with that foolish Laughter, and so you become infected with it.

41. Summarily, commit your selves to God in Christ, and pray to God the Father
in the Name and upon the promise of Christ, for his holy Spirit; desire it upon
the promise of Christ, and so you will receive it: for he is faithful who has
promised it; he will not deny you of it: you will receive it most certainly:
only give give your self wholly up to him, that, is the greatest and chiefest
[thing]: commit all to his will: and when you have it, that will teach you
sufficiently what you are to do: he teaches you to speak: he gives you a
mind and knowledge and understanding how to behave your selves: be not
careful after what manner you should do a thing when you are to deal with
Men; but commit all your doings to him, he will do that in you well enough
which is well pleasing to God; and though you should be in a burning Zeal, and
should bring fire from Heaven from the Lord of Lords upon the wicked, yet it is
acceptable to him, for the wicked has awakened and kindled it.

42. But go on in the Power of God, and then all your doing is well pleasing to
God, for that any defends himself against his Enemy upon necessity without
any other intent or desire, that is not against God: for he who has his house
on fire may quench it: yea God has given leave to Israel to defend themselves.

43. But he that causes and begins a war, he is the Devils Officer: for
all wars are driven on by the Anger of God wherein the Devil dwells, God
has not been the Author of wars: for he created us in Love, that we should
dwell together in Paradise in friendly Love, as loving children, but the Devil
grutched us that, and led us into the spirit of this world, which has awakened
all wars and mischief in the Anger of God, so that we hate and murder our
selves.

44. Seeing then we are thus begirt with Enemies in this valley of Misery, so
that we grow among thorns and thistles, therefore we ought to watch: for we
must watch also over the Enemy which we carry in our Boosom: viz. our mind
and thoughts, for that is the worst Enemy, also the Devil has his Or, Fort of
Prey.
Den of Thee-very therein, and there is required great labor and toil, to
cast out that Devil: he slips many times into our Mind, and leads us on in
smooth delightful hypocritical ways: so that we suppose we are in God, and
that our ways are Right: there we should constantly have our Touchstone with
us, which is the Blessed Love toward God and Man: we should not take pleasure
in our selves, but we should be of such a Conversation that God and Man may
take pleasure in us for our virtue. [selfe-seeking must be quenched, and true
Resignation and self-denial must grow and flourish].

45. And when we thus converse in the Love and the Righteousness of God, and
in the Obedience of Faith; then we put on Christ, who sets the fair orient
Crown of Pearls upon us; viz. the Crown, the Mysterium Magnum: he crowns
us with his wisdom, so that we know his Wonders, which we were blind in
before, as it has happened to this Hand, which before the time of the Tenth
Number, when it was yet in the unite, was as simple in the Mystery as the
meanest of all; But as the Gold must be tried in the Fire, so also it happened
to this hand* Corruption and Putrefaction was not wanting: every one would
needs tread the simple child under foot, where was the first time that a
Garland was set upon it: O what great labor and toil, did the Devil take
that he might fully it, O how busy was he, which when I think upon it, I very
much wonder, and thank God who has preserved me: O how he bestirred himself
that he might tear the Garland in pieces; O how eagar was he with Antichrist,
in putting him on to persecute this hand: that every one might abominate it.
But it happened to the Devil, as about Christ, when he so set on the
Pharisaicall Antichrist that they Crucified Christ, then thought the Devil: he
is gone now, I shall be quiet enough, and not be troubled with his Doctrine,
which destroyed my Kingdom: so also here; but he thereby awaked the first
storm; Christ stormed his Hell, and took him captive in the Anger: and so his
Den of Robbery was first opened by this hand, which he shall never be able to
shut up again, but it shall stand open till his judgment: this we write for
an Example to the Reader, that he may know what he must expect in this way,
even nothing else but scorn and reproach.

46. But be of good courage ye Dear Children of God, do but help to wrestle
saithfully and valourously, for we all wrestle in this life for an Angelical
Crown, which Lord Lucifer had upon his head. And how can he but be Angry, who
has lost his Country and Kingdom? when another comes and takes his Crown,
and throws him to the Ground, and holds him Captive.

47. But wrestle courageously, ye dear Children of God, it is but for a
little while, and then we shall get the Scepter and Crown; it is better to be
a Lord, then a captive slave and servant: the sufferings of this world, if they
cannot be avoided, are not worthy to be called sufferings in respect of the
great Glory, which shall be manifested on us.

48. We stand here between Heaven and Hell in a field, and there grows
either an Angel or a Devil out of us: now therefore if any have a Love to the
Kingdom of Heaven, and would feign be an Angel, he ought to look well to
himself; it is soon done with a Man, Thou have free will, whither soever thou
inclinest, there thou art: What thou sowest, that thou shall also Reap: let
this be told thee [for a warning].

The Thirteenth Chapter.
Of Christ's most precious, Baptism and the Lords Supper.
Testaments, That Fair Garland of Pearls of the Noble Highly Precious Stone
Mysterij Magni and Lapidis Philosophorum.
of The Great Mystery and Philosophers Stone, which the Antichristian Church
Danceth about, and is ever seeking it: but not in the Right Ground and Place.
1. IN this Stone there lies hidden, whatsoever God and the Eternity, also
Heaven, the Stars, and Elements contain, and are able to do: there never
was from Eternity any thing better or more precious then this, and it is
offered by God and bestowed upon Man, every one may have it, that does but
desire it, it is in a simple form, and has the power of the whole Deity in it.

2. Christ says; I have the water of Eternal Life, whosoever thirsts let
him come to me and drink of it for nothing, it shall flow in him into a
fountain of Eternalll Life, and whosoever drinks thereof shall never thirst
any more: Christ gives us his flesh for food, and his blood for drink: we
should eat his flesh and drink his blood, and then he will continue in us,
and we shall continue in him, where he is there shall we be also, both here
and there [in the other Life]: Note.
for he will be with us always unto the end of the world: he will not let us
his children want; as a father cares for his children, so He cares for us;
and though a father perhaps should forsake his children, yet he will never
forsake us: for he has imprinted us in his hands struck through with nails,
and received us into the Or, Hole.
wound of his side, out of which did run water and blood; we should believe
and trust him, as his precious Word has told us; he is the Mouth of truth, and
cannot lie.

3. Hear thou dear Christianity: open thy M^nde, and let not Reason, which is
without God, lead thee astray: consider this well: we will show you the right
ground and scope, without conceits and opinions; we will set it before you
wholly pure without spot or blemish, and only show you what Christ is; we
will bring no conceit of humane Invention, to please any Man's Opinion; neither
will we take it from that which the World sets forth, as in their Glosses, but
we will speak, that which is revealed to us out of the Mouth of Christ, and
what his Testaments are in Or, in substance indeed.
reality.

4. For this is the Jewel, the Noble Stone, which the Church of Babel danceth
about, and about which she raises wars and persecution; how very many
scandalous and scurrilous Books and Pamphlets have been written about it.

5. This is the true Jewel of the Congregation of Christ; when the Church of
Rome lost it, then it became a Babell, and the Spirit of God departed from her;
and the most potent Countries toward the East, South, and West, turned away
from her: For the Revelation told them, saying; If thou continue not in my
Love, I will come unto thee, and take away thy Candlestick from thee: which
came to pass thus.

6. Europe kept the Name of the Jewel, and Asia, the Color of it: but the
virtue of it remained sealed to them both, for they were both departed from it;
they went Groping in the dark, they grew fat, proud, and stately, and would be
Lord over the Jewel: they only sought Frolic days.
good Days, great honor and glory by it; they built them upon it a brave
Glistering Earthly Kingdom, as is to be seen by the Romish Babell, which they
do as hypocrites, that they may be honored by the Congregation, and had in
great esteem. That which Paul and the Apostles left [behinde them] viz. That
the Congregation should abide in reverence and in Love; and that the Elders
which behaved themselves well, should be accounted worthy of double honor
(which was right in the Congregation, to do it to them that behaved themselves
well) this they usurp to themselves into their own Power in [away of]
Compulsion; men must perform it to them, though they be no way worthy of it:
and because they could not handsomely use any other sword, therefore they made
to themselves a false sword: viz. the Censure.
Curse [of Excommunication] and that should make men reverence their holiness,
that they might not seem to be bloody Executioners themselves; just as the
Pharisees did; who delivered Christ up to Pilate: so these also, they are so
devout in show and appearance [they will shed no blood with their own hands,]
but their heart is a Devil: They stir up the Magistrate upon their Devilish
Censure.
Curse of Excommunication, who must be their Executioners to execute what their
Devilish Heart has concluded upon.

7. O Dear Princes, open your Eyes; your office if you do that which is Right
is indeed grounded in Nature: but their fictions and conceits are not:
therefore be not Executioners under them: see with your own Eyes, ye shall and
must at the Last Day, give an account of your Office, be not led about without
Eyes blindfold, you should see with your own Eyes: ye are the true Heads of
the Congregation: the Lambs of Christ are committed to your trust, the Priests
are but Elders in the Congregation, if they walk rightly before them, and give
good Example to the Congregation, by their good Doctrine, life, and
conversation; and then honor and respect should be given to them as Elders of
the Congregation of Christ: not that they are Lords over the Congregation, but
servants of the Congregation: they should have the Spirit of Christ, and bless
the Congregation: and the Congregation should give themselves up with them into
one Love, into one Will, and so pray, and, sing, and speak together of Gods
Love and Wonders, that so there may be one Spirit, one Heart, in one Will, and
so the weak may be helped by the Prayer and Faith of the strong.

8. The Congregation should incline their Ear to the speech of the Elders, who
are strong and powerful in the Spirit, and should receive the Word of the
Spirit with earnest desire: The Elders should teach with meekness, and deal
with the Congregation as with their own Children, they should instruct them in
their teaching an reproving with modest admonition: they should not bring
bitter Hearts into the Congregation, in sending forth reproaches against the
weak chlidren, that the feeble be not quite Afraid and disheartened or
daunted.
discouraged.

9. But he that despises the Congregation of Christ, and departs from the
Christian way, they should privately warn and admonish such a one: if he will
not regard, then they have the Curse [or Excommunication] of the Spirit, to
bind him in Hell in the Anger of God, that Satan may Disquiet his heart with
Anguish.
vex his Heart, till he turn and repent: For the Congregation has in Christ
Great Power, they have the Key to open and shut: but as is mentioned before,
the Priest alone has not the Power: No, he has it not alone: for he is but
the servant of the Congregation: the meanest of them all, if he be A Believer.
faithful, has as much authority in the Curse, or Excommunication as the
greatest: for we are all Members of the Body of Christ: if the meanest of all
shut any out of the Congregation in the Curse of Excommunication, if the party
be guilty, then he is in [or under] the Curse, or Excommunication: but if the
party have wrong done him, then he is in the Curse or Excommunication who has
done him the wrong, who has belyed him: therefore look to it ye Elders,
consider what ye do: and do not make the Congregation of Christ, which
Christ has dearly purchased with his blood, to Reproach or offend.
scandalize one another, else you your selves are in [or under] the Curse of
Excommunication, and are without the Congregation of Christ: Try and examine.
search and consider beforehand, ere you judge: what Spirits child he is whom
you judge: try his spirit before hand; for many are zealous out of Ignorance,
Bear with him and help him up.
whom you should instruct and receive: you know not what Gods Spirit gives to
every one: for he has many and sundry Gifts: Judge all in the way of Love, be
not rigid, be not furious, stern, and obstinate; instruct the simple in
meekness, that he may place his delight in the Congregation: for such were
Christ's Apostles, your Predecessors; they taught in such a manner, and did
instruct the Congregation by Good Bxample, Doctrine, and Life.

[Concerning the Lords Supper].
10. When they met together, and did make known the Wonders of the LORD, and
sat together with a fervent Spirit; then after exhortation one of another they
distributed the Lords Last Supper, as he had commanded them: they took Bread
and brake it, and eat of it, and thereby, and therewith have Commemorated the
Lords Death: in like manner also they took the Cup, and drank of it, and
Commemorated the shedding of his blood, saying one to another, Take and eat
the Lords Body, which was given for us on the Cross.

11. So also they did with the Cup, they took it in their hand, and drank of
it: for the uppermost of the Congregation began and said to the other: Take the
Cup and drink the Blood of Christ our Lord, which he has shed for us on the
Cross, for the Remission of sins, and Commemorate his Death, and the
shedding of his blood, until he come again to Judgment, and bring us into
himself.

12. This Dear Children was the true Apostolical practice, and the Last
Supper of Christ was even so: for when Christ had instructed and taught his
Disciples, he began (after Supper when they had Eaten the Or, Easter-Lamb, or
Passover.
Paschall Lamb,) the right Eating of the Paschall Lamb, and gave them that
Paschall Lamb to Eat, of which the first instituted by Moses was but an Image
and a Or, T^pe.
shadow: for he gave them his heavenly body to eat, and his heavenly blood to
drink, which he had introduced into Mary's womb in the Eternal beginninglesse
Heavenly Virgin of God, in the Pure Chaste Immateriall [Virginity] without spot
or blemish, and had asssumed it from his Earthly Mother.

13. You ought Deeply, or accurately.
highly to understand this; he gave not his Disciples the Earthly substance,
which did but hang to Christ's Body, in which he suffered Death, which was
despised, buffetted, spit upon, scourged and slain: for then he had given them
the mortal flesh; but he gave them his holy Body, his holy flesh, which hung
also on the Cross in the mortal substance, and his holy blood which was shed
together with the mortal, as an immortal flesh and blood which the Disciples
received into their Body, which was put on to the soul as a new Body out of
Christ's Body, whereby the Disciples were capable of [receiving] Christ, and
became Members of his Body.

14. You must not understand it thus, that Christ's Disciples took a piece of
the outward Body of Christ, viz of his Earthly Body, and put it into their
mouths, and did chew it with their outward earthly Teeth, and so swallow it
down into their Bellies; no: which is apparent, in that he sat with them at
the Table, and did not divide his outward Body.

15..
But Note! As the Deity had conceived in its will, the Image, which God created
in his Virgin of his Wonders and Wisdom, and brought the flesh and blood
together with the Eternal Tincture in which the soul lives, ( viz. the
Eternal Fire, which reaches into the Deity after the substance of the
Majesty, and allayeth, fills, and strengthens it self therewith) out of
Mary in the Virgin into the Holy Ternary, into which the Word gave it self (as
a life in the Tincture of the Eternity) and became the spirit, life, and virtue
of that flesh, which sprouteth out of the Tincture of that fire of the soul:
for the Spirit was in the Word, and the Word was the Power of virtue, and out
of the virtue shone the Light of the Majesty, and the Kingdom, with the Power
of this world, hung to The Spirit.
it also as its proper own, which was generated out of the Virgin of its
Wonders and Wisdom out of the Eternal Center of Nature, wherein also Mary
stood, with the outward virtue and life, with the outward flesh and blood: so
also in such a manner as this, has Christ the true Son of God, [and] our
Brother, given to his Disciples, his body to eat and his blood to drink.

16. And as God, in his heavenly Virgin, (out of which the heavenly
Substantiality is espied, and attaineth substance in the Tincture of the Fire)
is a substance; which substance, God (with the Word and Heart, with the
receiving in of the Tincture out of Mary's blood, in which the soul dwelt,
did,) with the Word Fiat, as with the Eternal astringent Matrix, comprehend,
and let them together become flesh and blood after a humane way and manner;
(understand, as the Eternal Substantiality, with the Wisdom, viz. the
Eternal Virginity, has given it self into the perished Tincture and Matrix
of Mary, wherein was the Promised Word, which gave it self also in the
Eternal Substantiality into the Perished Tincture [or life] and so became a
New Man, being strange and unknown to the Earthly Man,) so this New Body of
Christ, (understand the Inward Christus.
Christ, which the outward Man which was mortal covered,) gave it self, under
Bread and Wine as an Outward [thing], into the Tincture of the Souls of the
Apostles, and became Man in the Apostles in the Tincture of the soul; and that
is the New Body which Christ has brought us from Heaven; [of which he said:
None goes to Heaven, but he that is come from Heaven] so that when we wholly
yield up our selves to him in Obedience, and with our old will, go out from
our selves into his will, and so come into Christ's Congregation, and desire his
flesh and blood, with all his benefits, then he gives us this body and blood
to eat and to drink: which the Inward Man borne of God receives: for the
Body of Christ is Omnipraesens et Omnisubsistens Corpus.
Every where present in Substance: it contains the Second Principle: [that is
the Angelical world, according to which God is called Merciful, and the
Eternal Good].

17. For, to say that Christ feeds the soul with Spirit without Body, is not
true; the Holy Ghost makes not a Principle, but the Eternal Substantiality in
which the Holy Ghost dwells, and goes out from thence in a form, of many
thousand innumerable Essences, even that which is so gone forth, is the Virgin
of Chastity, viz. the Eternal Wisdom, in which all the Wonders of this world
were beheld from Eternity.

18. Understand us right, according to its high and precious worth; That
Substantiality wherein the Virgin of God consists, Adam had on him: for the
Spirit of this world was given him, and breathed into him therein; but the
Essences were Paradisicall, and sprung up through the [one pure] Element, which
the Substantiality contains, and that Substantiality the Spirit of this world
in Adam took into it self, into its Power, [as the Water takes the Light (in
a flaming red hot Iron) into it, and quenches it].

19. First the Heavenly Substantiality had the Power [or predominancy] but
afterward when Adam went back with his lust into the Earthly [Substantiality]
then the Earthly [Substantiality] got the Power and predominancy, and that is
the Cause that our perished heavenly Substantiality is become Earthly: and
therefore must God with the heavenly substantiality in us become Man, and in
the Heavenly Virgin and in the Earthly, God is become Man, and has put on upon
our souls the heavenly Substantiality again, viz. his heavenly body: yet our
Earthly must pass away, but the heavenly remains standing for ever.

20. And yet nevertheless, we are captivated poor sinners with the old Adam,
into which the Devil has an entrance, and we go many times out from the
fair Image, understand the soul turns its will often into the Outward Man;
and therefore God has appointed this The Lords Supper.
Testament, so that when we turn again to him, he then gives our soul the
New Garment again, viz. the New body, and renews and feeds it.

21. He that once gets the Body of Christ, it departs not from him,
unless he spoil it as Adam did, it is only covered with the old Adam, and
moreov^r passes into the Mystery, and it is very possible for the soul to go
out from it, therefore the soul should not be secure or careless, but
watchful.

22. Therefore know, that Christ gave his Disciples his True All-present
Eternal Divine Body to Eat, and his Blood to drink, out of which the Holy
Ghost proceeds: and the Inward Mouth which received it was the desirous
willing of their souls; for the soul of Man hungreth and thirsts
continually since the heavy fall, after such flesh and blood, and puts the
same on as the Garment of God: for the soul in it self is a Spirit, and has
need of a Body; and there it attaineth a body, a new Eternal incorruptible
body into the old Adamicall Body.

23. Thus you are to know, the bread which Christ gave to his Disciples, was
that which the outward Mouth took, and gave to the belly; but the word, whereof
Christ said: Eat, this is my Body, that same word was the Eternal body of
Christ, and had heavenly flesh and blood in it, and that the soul received, as
a New body: and thus there was at once in the hand of Christ, two Kingdoms,
viz. a Heavenly and an Earthly.

24. But you must know, that the Heavenly cannot be comprehended or carried
forth by the Earthly: for the heavenly Man, viz. the heavenly Body of Christ,
which was in the Outward Christ, that all at once and in Eternity also filled
the Angelical world, viz. the second Principle of God, so that without that
same bodily substance God is not known at all, for the power of the Deity has
manifested it self therein, and yet the Outward Image remains standing, Note.
so that in heaven men see the Humane Nature palpably and apprehensively
standing in that form it was in here upon Earth: thou see nothing else in
it but the Majesty of the Clarity of the Brightness, which fills the
Angelical world: and wheresoever now the Majesty is, there is the
Substantiality of Christ: for the Heart and the Word of God has united it in
the Substantiality: as we consider, that the Word is every where, so is the
Substantiality (the body of the Word) [every where] though indeed without
Image: for the Creature has only the [formation or] Image.

25. Behold I give you a similitude; Consider, all things are created out of
the Water, and in the Water was all Power and virtue; for you find that all
things have Water, though it be a very Stone, or flesh, or whatsoever it is;
but the Sulphur is therein with the power of Nature, which forms the
Substantiality.

26. Now behold, in the whole Deep, there is nothing but Water, Air, and
Fire, out of which there is the Substance, viz. the Body or the Earth [come to
be].

27. Now you see very well, that the Sun (being but one) causes that, and is
also the virtue and majesty in this Elementary Substance: It all belongs to
the Sun, and all desires the Sun, and the Sun with its virtue affords the
Dominion [or Government of every thing in the Universe].

28. See and consider this in a similitude; God is the Eternal Sun in the
second Principle: understand the Heart, splendor, virtue, and Majesty: and the
Elements, Fire, Water, and Earth, are, (spoken by way of similitude,) [as it
were] God the Father: Now the Sun stands there as a Body, as indeed it is,
which resembles the Creature Christ: and the whole substance of the four
Elements, resembles the Substantiality of the Creature, wherein the splendor
of the Sun shines: the Sun resembles the Word and the Majesty; and the four
Elements resemble the virtue of the Body, and the Father, out which the Son
shines.

29. Therefore know, that in Heaven every where all over is the Fathers virtue
or power, and in the virtue the Word: and the Word has the substantiality,
which belongs all to the Person of Christ: for Christ stands in the Father
[as] an Image, as the Sun in the Elements.

30. If God should once open himself, the whole world would be mere Sun: for
the Deep receives the splendor of the Sun: or else if there were no such
thing in the Deep as the Sun is, the Deep could not receive the Light: but
thus it desires its like: and thus it is, also in Heaven; the Son is every
where in the Father, and is become Man; the Total Holy Number Three without
end and substance, has manifested it self in an Image in substance, and that
is Christ, and we are his Members: we are Gods, if we continue in him; he is
our fountain, our Light, and we are his Stars: He gives us his Body and
virtue, and his splendor for [our] Light.

31. Thus he feeds us here upon Earth in the Supper, and when we desire it
with the virtue of his Body, and with the spirit which proceeds from that
virtue; (for that is the spirit and life of the virtue or power,) then we
receive the Total Holy Or, Trinity.
Number Three: the substantiality has Sulphur, understand the Body of Christ,
that is the Father, and the Sulphur has the virtue or power: and in the virtue
is the Light of life as another Person, and out of the virtue in the Light
goes forth the smell and spirit of the virtue, and is not comprizable or
detainable by the virtue, and yet it goes forth from the virtue, and is the
Holy Ghost.

32. Understand us aright thus; we receive not in the Supper, another
creature, with a new soul; no: but we receive on to our soul, the Body of
Christ, which fills Heaven, and is already [beforehand,] the Eternal
Creature: the soul Eats Christ's flesh, and drinks his blood, which fills
Heaven: and out of that which the soul receives and eats, there grows a
body to the soul, and in that body, it is in the hand of God, and can at the
End of the world, go with that Body through the fire of the Anger of God,
without feeling [of it] and as the fire cannot lay hold on Christ in the Number
Three; so not of us neither: for the fire receives the meekness [or allay]
from Gods meekness and ours, and becomes in us changed into a rising up of
the desire of Love, so that our fire and burning in us is a mere Love-desire:
for it comes to be a brightness of the Majesty, and thus we are in God, and
the Children of God, Halelujah, Halelujah, Halelujah.

[Concerning the Baptisme].
33. And after such a manner is it with the Poedobaptisme. Baptism of Infants.
Baptism of Children, the soul consisting in two things, viz. in Fire and
Water: for the blood has two forms, viz. sulphur and water: sulphur gives
Tincture and life: for it gives light, which is the burning out from the
sulphur, and that is life. The Phur is fire, and the sul is Light, and out of
the Light goes the Meekness, which draws the phur to it again, and
quenches its fierceness therewith, and that attracting makes the meekness
substantial, which is water; and Mercury makes therein the Great Life, viz. a
life in the water, and the Heavenly Luna breeds it that it turns to a
liquor and to blood, wherein is the Center of Nature with seven forms.

34. Now Observe; When the Seed to the child is sown, then the Tincture of
the Fire, viz. the Man's Tincture, is sown into the Tincture of Venus; out of
which proceeds a Twofold Life, viz. a fire-life of the soul, and in Venus a
water-life of the Spirit, [or a Water-Spirit-Life], which spring up together,
and become a Man. And thus now both Tinctures in Adam are corrupted.

35. The Tincture of the soul was captivated by the Eternal Anger of God,
wherein the Devil sat, and the Tincture of the Spirit was captivated by the
Spiritus Macrocosmi.
Majoris Mundi, the Spirit of the Great World, the Spirit of this world, and
they had both remained captivated by the Devil, if the Verbum Domini, the Word
of the Lord, which at length became flesh, had not interposed in the midst [as
a Mediator].

36. Therefore has God through Christ, instituted two Testaments: One
[Testament] (for little Children), in the Holy Ghost, who performs the
Office, who chiefly manageth the office in the Baptism, and makes in the
water of the soul a water of life in his virtue: and one [other Testament]
(for poor sinners that are more in years, to understand it,) in the Word of
Life, as in flesh and blood, where the Word, viz. the Heart of God, chiefly
manageth the Office, and feeds with his body, and gives his blood for
drink: which Testament with flesh and blood belongs to the Tincture of the
fire-life, to the soul: and the Testament of water belongs to the
Spirit-Life, viz. to the other Tincture, and yet is but one Man; But before the
Birth of Christ, the Devil used great treachery, and wrought much mischief
with Man: in that he spiritually possessed them [as may be read concerning the
Idol Oracles], and here [in the Baptisme] his trade and handicraft was laid
aside: for Christ erected for the Children, a Laver of Regeneration in the Holy
Ghost, (for a Child has not Faith as yet; also there are very few that learn
[or are taught] what Faith is;) that there might be one Testament that might
preserve poor ignorant Man.

37. Not that the Holy Ghost alone baptiseth: indeed he chiefly manageth the
Office, and takes the virtue of the Number Three wherewith he Baptizeth; and
so when the Baptizer says; I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; then the Holy Ghost takes hold in the Number
Three, and Baptizeth in the Water of the soul, in the Water of Life, which is
in the Blood of the Tincture, which contains the Spirit Life, viz. the second
Center of Nature: and so the spirit of the soul receives the virtue Of the
Office.
and Office of the Holy Ghost; and here lies the Mysterium Magnum, [the Great
Mysterie].

38. Dear Brethren in Babell, do not so dance about on the outside of the
Mystery, enter in, or else ye are not the Ministers of Christ, if you cannot
apprehend this, yet continue in the Faith on the Word: But when ye say,
Christ's Testaments are only signs and not substance, then ye are the
Antichrist, and deny the Deity; and are not capable of the Office; you cannot
Baptize the Child, but the Congregation of God, (which has the Faith,)
Baptizeth it: a A Shepherd, or Swinheard.
keeper of sheep, or a keeper of swine, that simply believes that Baptism is
a Great hidden Mystery, wherein the Holy Number Three Baptizeth, and that
himself is but the servant, Minister or Instrument, which performs only the
outward work, he in his simplicity baptizeth much better then ye do.

39. Ye great Schoole-Rabbies, and Masters, that sit aloft, let this be told
you; There is one a coming, who will baptize you with the fire of Wrath,
because you deny his power and virtue: ye have a hard bit [to chew] of Christ's
Testaments: if ye will not go forth from your Councills into the Temple of
Jesus Christ, ye must be quite cast away.

40. In times of old ye were very many of you: for ye propagated your selves,
and not the office of Christ: but ye are now become very thin in Germany,
where ye were a thousand, ye are now scarce a hundred of you; if ye will not
leave off your humane wit and your own Inventions, God will so cast you away;
that where ye are now a hundred, there shall not remain ten of you, nor a
less number. Awake from your sleep, lest you thus go down into perdition
into the Abyss.

41. Ye say we laugh you to scorn: it may be you think so, for there is one
that laugheth you to scorn, whom we know, who shows it to us: he will
suddenly awake, be not so secure and careless, consider of it: for none takes
any thing to himself, unless it be given him of God; neither will this be
spoken in vain.

42. Note.
O beloved and worthy Christendom, observe it well: do not say: if our
Teachers lead us not aright, let them look to it: O no, it concerns your very
self, it will cost the loss of your body and soul. Dear Christendom is
departed from all the Apostolical Ordinances, virtue, and power, into humane
Inventions and Institutions: and in stead of Christ's Kingdom, there is a
Pompous, Stately, Hypocritical one set up, by Baptism and the [Lords] Supper.

43. Men set up Ceremonies: O, if they had kept the true Faith, and had shown
Godly or Pious.
people the Divine way unto the New Regeneration, if they had shown them the
clear countenance of God, then people had departed from their sins, into a
Godly or Pious.
Divine Life.

44. But thy wit and suttlety O thou whore, has blinded all: if my Eyes had
not been opened by God, how should I have known thee: I should indeed have
still worshipped thee: the world shall seek thee; and at length find thee:
and then Europe shall be a Crown, and Asia the Or, husband.
Man, and Africa the Country, and a simple Shepherd shall lead us to
Pasture, if thou did understand this, thou would enter into thy self: but
thou will be blind till thou art recompensed; as thou have powered forth
affliction, so thou shall drink up misery and torment, for thou have made it
so very great, as it is: and art a wild Tree, and shall be broken off: There
is no remedy, thy own wrath casts thee to the ground: for thou art weighed in
a Balance, and art found too light, says the Spirit of the Great Wonders.

The Magia out of the Wonders.
45. A thing which grows out of a beginning, has beginning and end, and
grows no higher then that thing has in its Number, out of which it grows;
but that which is in the Or, Unite Number.
One Number, is uncorruptible: for it is but one and no more, there is nothing
in it that can break it: for, not any thing that is one is at enmity with it
self: but when there are two things in one, there is plain contrariety and
strife: for that which is one striveth not against it self, but draws into
it self, and out of it self, and remains one, and though it seek more in
it self, yet it finds no more, and that can never be at odds with it self;
for it is one thing, whither soevet it goes, it goes in one will; for where
there are two wills, there is division or separation: for one will often goes
inward, and the other outward; and then if that thing have a Body, then that
Kingdom or Government in that Body is at odds: and so if one enter into the
other with Enmity, there that is a contrary will which goes in against the
other, and then therein dwells the Third Number: and the third Number is a
Mixed Essence out of the first two, and is against them both, and will be its
own, and yet has also two wills in it self, from the first two, one whereof
tends to the right hand, and the other to the left.

46. Thus the Thing rises up from two into many, and every one has its own
will, and if it be in one [onely] Body, then it is at odds with it self, for
it has many wills, and needs a Judge to part them, and keep the wills in
awe; but if the wills be strong, and will not be kept under in awe by the
Judge, but go out aloft, then of one Or, Kingdom.
Government there becomes two, for that which is flien out judges or rules
it self according to its own will, and hates the first, because that is not
in its will, and so there is a strife, one desiring to Or, quash.
keep down the other, and so to elevate it self alone in one substance, and
if it cannot Or, quash.
keep down the other, (though it make never so much opposition) then each of
them increase in it self to its highest Degree or Pitch of its strength or
limitt.
Number, and is always in strife against the other: and if it come to pass,
that it be grown to its highest Number, that it can go no farther, then it
enters into it self, and vieweth it self, to see, why it can grow no
further, and so it sees the End of the Number, and sets its will in the End
of the Number, and desires to break the band or limit asunder, and in that
will, (which it puts into the End of the Number, wherewith it will break it,)
the Prophet is borne, and he is its own Prophet, and Foretells, Divineth, etc.
Prophesies of the Errors in the Will, that they cannot go further, and of
the breaking of them, for he is borne in the highest Number of the Crown, at
the End of the Limit, and speaks of the Or, Disturbrance.
Turba in its Kingdom, how it shall have an End, and what the cause is that it
cannot go beyond its own Number; and then he prophesies of a New [Kingdome or
Government] which shall be again generated out of the Breaking: for he [the
Prophet] is the Mouth of that Kingdom [or Government] and points at the
contrary Will, how it is grown from one will, and how with its own desire, it
is gone out of it self into many wills, and discovers the Pride of the
Kingdom [or Government] and the Covetousness and Envy of it, and in that the
Kingdom had but one Root, out of which it was grown; therefore he shows
the Evil Twigs or Branches which are grown out of the Root, which are the
distraction and disturbance or Turba of the Kingdom, which destroy the old
Tree, and take away its virtue and sap, so that it must wither away.

47. And then he shows also the falsehood of the Twiggs and Branches, which
have taken away the virtue of the Tree, and thrown it to the Ground. They say
they are a New Tree, and a good Kingdom, [or Government] and vaunt it, as if
they were strange Guests, with great wit and seeming Devotion, and yet they are
grown out of the old Tree, and are its Children, and so devour their own
Father: and therefore says the Prophet, they are no children but Wolves, they
are come, to murder and devour, and to set up themselves in the stead of the
Old Tree: which Pride of theirs thus also drives on, till the limit, and then
it will again be devoured by their Children.

48. This is their own Prophet, which is grown upon their Crown: for he
declares the Evillnesse of the root, out of which the first Tree was grown:
he shows the poison wherewith the root was poisoned, so that out of one will
many wills are grown, out of which the strife and malice is sprung.

49. And so then if the Turba in a thing be grown up with it, which of one
makes many, where the Multiplicity is at Enmity to it self, then the Turba
also breaks the Multiplic^ty; for the first will to a Thing, desires only
that one thing which is its Body and delight: but the Multiplicity in a Thing
makes Enmity; for the one will always rise up above the other: and yet the
other will not endure it, and thence comes envy and falsehood, out of which
grow anger and strife, so that one desires to break off, and throw down the
other: and although the first will be Judge, yet the Turba is also sprung up in
all the Twiggs and Branches, which destroys Obedience, and so each will go
its own way, and will not be judged or ruled, but takes upon it self, and
contemns the Father, and all the [other] Children, which yet are its brothers
and sisters: and says it self alone is the Tree and the virtue of it, whereas
it is but a broken selfe-willd proud Murderer, which opposes it self against
the first will, viz. the Root.

50. And now when the Father sees his evil disobedient child, he seeks a
Remedy, to heal that which is broken, and powers Oil into the wounds: but he
finds that the Oil is poison to them, for they have turned away their will
from the first will, as from the Root, out of which the Oil flows, and the
Turba has generated another Oil in them: so that there is no Remedy to heal
this Government, or Dominion.
Kingdom: it must be devoured in and by it self, as an evil Government, or
Dominion.
Kingdom: and yet it grows to its highest Number, as to the Number Thousand,
till the End: for the Crown has the Number Thousand, and then there is no
Remedy more; for then it will be wholly one with it self again, and go into
the first will again, and give it self into obedience, and become one thing
again, and then it begins to Number again, yet it is good at first, so
long as it remains in Or, a small or little thing.
paucity: but that which has a great deal of room is not easily quasht; but
that which is squeezed into a narrow room, and shut up close, will always
strive to get out above its limitt, and easily surmiseth that its neighbors
dwelling does also belong to it, and will always break the reine and Bounds.
And although, thus out of one thing there grows another, yet being not
agreeable to the first will, out of which it is grown Originally therefore it
is not its true son, but is a wild Or, Branch.
Twigge, which is opposite to the Mother, and loves not the Mother: for it
grows up in its malice, and therefore the Mother takes it not again into
her first will, that it may subsist Eternally, but lets it run on to its
Limitt [or End].

51. But when the Mother sees, that all her children thus break off from her,
forsake her, and become strange to her; she falls into sorrow and
lamentation, she hops for amendment, and yet it comes not, and then she
her self seeks the Turba [or destruction]: for she turns her will again
into her self, and seeks the Genetrix: and there she finds a new Child
in the The Purity.
Lilly Twigge, and gives the Apostated children to the Turba, so that they
themselves devour and murder one another; also she powers forth their own
Turba and poison upon them, that they may be divided and taken out of the way;
that she may bring up her young son that may continue in her house, wherein
she may have joy.

52. Thus it is spoken to thee thou Great and Broad Tree of the Generation of
Adam] who in the beginning were a little Branch, thou were created in one will
only, all thy Twiggs should have that will of thine, but the Devil grutched
thee that, and strewed poison into thy will, out of which the Turba grew: and
so thou have spoiled all thy Children and Twiggs therewith, so that the Turba
is grown up also in every little Twigge: Thou did enter into Pride, and
wentest forth from the first will, which God gave thee, into the Great Wonders
of the Great Turba [or Uproares and Commotions, Contention and Destruction in
the four Elementary World]: wherewith all thy Children were enamoured, and
left Thy first will.
thee.

53. Therefore says the The Eternal Nature.
Mother of the Genetrix, I am in Anguish, I had planted me a little Tree, and
desired to Eat of its good fruit: but it has borne much wild fruit, which I
have no mind to Eat of, I will conceive, and bring forth a young son in my
old Age, which may continue in my house, and do my will, that I may have joy
at last; since all my children leave me, I will take comfort in my young
son, and he shall remain in my house while I live, and Satan shall not tempt
him, I will put a childs Garment upon him, and he shall dwell with me in a
total childish simplicity: behold! I will generate him out of the first Root,
and will break the Turba: for The highest pitch of the Apostate children.
its number in the Crown is accomplished.

54. What seek ye so much, ye wild Branches? ye say ye are above the
Mother, [above the Spirit of God]; ye have Art, Knowledge, and Learning; what
delight has the Mother in your Wit and Art? She desires no Art and Wit; for
she is altogether simple, and counts but [the Number] one; if you would
please the Mother, you must go from the Multiplicity into One again, not
through Art and Wit, but you must go forth out of your proud Turba, out of
self, into simple Humility, you must leave the bravery and hypocrisy of your
own wit that proceeds from the Turba, and become as children, else ye are not
acceptable to your first Mother, but the Turba takes you up, and then consider
where you shall remain, when God shall judge the secrets of Mankind, when all
shall pass through the fire of his wrath, says the Spirit of the Great
Wonders.

55. Mother Eve said, when she brought forth the first Child: Behold! I have
the Man, the Lord: he shall Effect the breaking of the Serpents head, and
possess the Kingdom, but it was Cain the murderer.

56. And thus also you now say, we have found the Lord: now we will possess
the Kingdom; for we have found the true Doctrine, we will teach thus and
thus, and then we are Gods Children; But hearken! You have indeed found the
true Doctrine; But you are Cain, you look after the Kingdom, and not the
power and virtue of Abells sacrifice: you desire only to continue in fleshly
pleasure, and retain only the shell of Gods-Word, which has no virtue or
power: You retain the History (and contend about it, and so destroy your
Country and People) but you deny the power of it: you say, we are near to
the Kingdom of God, and are yet far from it, which your End will testify.

57. What does your knowledge avail? The Devil knows as much as you, but he
does it not, no more do you: and therefore the Kingdom of God remains hidden
from you both: your knowledge is the snare that catches you: if you were
simple, you would not be so proud: what do the simple know concerning the
false, subtle, cunning deceit, if he learn it not from the wit of the
Contentious jangling Disputations.
Turba? Do you say, that you have Gods Will and Teach it? Are you not Cain,
that murder Abell every day? Consider your self well, you are he indeed:
Abell lies at your feet, and beseeches you, but you are that Evil Beast,
that treads Abell underfoote, you ride over the bended knee, and account the
poor and simple to be but dirt and dung, and yet devour his sweat and labor
and fill your self with deceit without measure: How dare you then say, Here
is the Church of Christ? O you are Babell, that City of whoredom and falsehood.

58. Thou know the Will of God, and yet do only thy own will, and say
moreover, We are gone out from Babell: we have the True Teaching [or
Doctrine] amongst us: indeed if you had the spirit of righteousness, and
truth, and would content your self with a little, then the Mother would
always give you enough, you should want nothing: but your Pride and
haughtiness, does not trust God, therefore you trust only upon Covetousness,
and are greedy to devour the fatt of the Earth; you take it by force and not
of right, the right you produce, claim, and plead, has only been invented by
your covetous heart, you live only in deceit: you persuade and deceive your
self to your own loss: if you had wit and understanding, you would have
respect to your end, and what will follow hereafter: but you blindfold your
self with Pride, and say: Behold here are Golden Times; many have desired to
see what we see; and hear what we hear, and have not seen nor heard it;
Hearken: indeed that shall be a witness against you, and will make your
Judgment the heavier, you have not hitherto been the better for it but the
worse, therefore know that what is declared to you [by the Reformation] is by
your own Prophet, who has called you back again from your Pride into your
Mother Humility: but you are become worse and worse; you have broken the sword
of the Spirit, that you may do what you list: but he has left you, and given
you up to the Turba, which shall devour you: as was done of old to Israel:
there is no Council or Remedy to help; Your Covenants are all Nothing, while
you rely upon the Arm of flesh, and so God also is departed from you, and
leaves you to devour your self.

59. Or wherefore do you take the Covenant of God into your Mouth? seeing you
hate to be reformed, and thirst after Covetousness, do you suppose God to be
a false hypocrite and liar as you are? leave off your Clamouring, you are not
acceptable to God, except you turn, and go out from your falsehood.

60. It is with you now according to the Turba's driving, which takes its
recreation, in accomplishing the Anger of God; and to devour what is grown in
its Kingdom, and you are bl nde concerning it, and see it not: why are you so
covetous: go but out from it, do you not see, how the The Blossom of Life.
Noble Tincture has raised up it self: it is near its blossoming, and then
you will have Silver and Gold enough.

61. But what shall we say? you have committed whoredom till you are fallen
asleep: you go down alive into the Abyss, rather then you will forsake the
whore; and therefore it shall be unto you, as your own Prophet Testifies, who
has very long called you by his Trumpet; you wait for [deliverance by] the
fiery sword, which will also cut you in pieces.

62. Or do you suppose us to be mad, in that we speak thus; Indeed we are
borne out of you; we see and understand, the Complaint of our Mother, which
reproves her children; for she declares the wrath in the Turba, which is
grown up into the fierce wrath of God.

63. We speak what is given to us, which we know in the Zeal of the Lord:
what have we to do with Confusion, strife, and jangling.
Babell? we speak to our self, and to the fellow members of our body, and
those that dwell in the Courts of God, with those who at present mourn with
us, whose mourning shall be turned into Joy.

The Fourteenth Chapter.
Of the Broad Way in this World which leads us into the Abyss. And of the
Narrow Way [that leadeth] into the Kingdom of God.
1. Dear Children of God, let us heartily and seriously Consider, from whence
we are, and whither we are to go, and what we do and purpose, that we may
not loose the Eternal and highest Good: wherefore do we so very much labor
after temporary pleasure and voluptuousness, after Honor, Money, and Goods:
are we not in this world strange Guests, and Pilgrims, which should
continually expect when this life shall End; we are not created for the
pleasure and lust of this life; but for Paradisicall Joy, and to lead a simple
childe-like life; we should not know of any pomp, state, or haughtiness: but
live together as children in a loving sport of Joy: we are gone out from our
true, pure, Paradisicall Mother; wherein we should live in her as dear and
loving children.

2. We are shut up in the Mother [the Temporary Nature] which generateth the
Evil Beast; and have received beastiall Properties; we do no otherwise, then
as Evil Beasts, we have given up our selves to a strange Mother, which
educateth us, and leads us captive in her bands: and we must at length leave
the outward Man to the Earthly Mother, we cannot get away from her, for she
has captivated us in flesh and blood: she breeds us, and brings us up in
her self; and keeps us for her children; But yet we have a very precious
Jewel hidden therein, with which we are Gods children: with that let us
endeavor after the highest Good, that we may attain it.

3. Dear Children, our strife about the Highest Good, consists not in the
sword, in killing and slaying, that we should make Wars and fight for the
Cause of God and his Kingdom, and so persecute and murder one another:
neither does it consist in much knowing: but merely in a simple childe-like
obedience, that we should go out from the will of our flesh, which is
Beastiall, wherein the Devil dwells, and enter into the will of God: it
lies in no man's opinion or knowledge; Note.
for the Spirit of God gives knowledge to every one out of the Wonders, out of
which he is borne.

4. You see how we are put under subjection to the spirit of this world: for
when a child is sown Or, into.
in its mothers Or, Body.
womb, that Spirit is there ready, and forms it according to the wheel of
the outward Nature; that gives condition, will, and disposition to it: that
shows it the wonders of its secret Mystery, and opens to it the way of the
will Of the spirit of the outward world.
thereof, that leads it in the entrance into its Mother, and out of its
Mother through this world: that gives its body to the Earth, and its soul to
Hell.

5. Therefore since we know this, we ought to lift up the Spirit of our
soul, and make war only against that evil Earthly Spirit, and oppose it
with our soul and body, and not against our brethren and sisters; we cannot
overcome the Devil with disputing and knowing much; neither can we maintain
Gods Word, with wars and the sword, but with the simple obedient A Godly or
Divine Life.
life of God, that we be contented with that little which we have, and depart
from the Evil lust after Pride, into an humble childe-like life, wherein every
one should with all diligence perform his work, for the benefit and profit of
his brethren and sisters, endeavoring thereby to serve God his Creator, and to
pleasure his brother: not seeking his own honor, but with a desire to do so
well, that his brother and sister may sincerely love him, and wish all
happiness and welfare to him.

6 If you will serve God, give offense to none, that your good and benefit be
not hindered; Let not Satan have power over your heart to sift [or prevail
with] you; Put away all evil thoughts, instigations, and influxes [of the
minde]; for Satan insinuates himself, in the influxes from the spirit of this
world, and possesses your mind; be continually watchful, and strive against
him; cast those false and evil influxes upon his head, and send him away with
them; and consider that you walk upon a very narrow path between Heaven and
Hell in very great danger, be at no time secure or careless, for you know not,
when the spirit of this world will take away from you, its own; for your limit
was set in your Mothers Or, Body.
womb, which you cannot pass, neither do you know the day and hour, wherein
the Spirit of this world will leave you, and then your poor soul will stand
quite naked, hungry and Or, naked.
empty, and then if it have not Christ's Body on it, it will be captivated by
the Devil.

7. Dear Children, it is a very streit narrow way that leads into Gods
Kingdom; he that will walk therein in this life, must [ submit and] prepare
himself for affliction; for every thing is against him; the Devil is
altogether against him; his own flesh and blood set themselves earnestly
against him; for the Spirit of this world in flesh and blood seeks only the
matters and Dominion of this world: the Devil continually sets on his children
and servants against him: he [that walks toward Heaven] must be trampled upon
and despised: he is not in this world acknowledged to be a child of God.

8. Dear Children, look well to your selves in this world: at present Men
lead you on in hypocritical ways: they Boast much of Faith, and lead people
on in an Historical Faith, which is but mere Or, knowledge.
Notion, they teach you the Or, knowledge.
Notion and he that does not stick to that, is accounted an Heretic: O how
dead is the present Faith, it stays at the knowledge or the Notion: they
suppose that when people know how to speak much of God, of Christ's merits,
sufferings and death for Mankind, and comfort themselves therewith, that it is
the way to eternal life.

9. O no, all that avails nothing, that thou know and ticklest thy self
with it: True Faith in Christ is quite another thing; it lies not barely in
the History, and in the Letter: the [bare] Letter is not the Word, it is but a
leader and directour to the Word: the Word is Living, and has the Spirit; Note.
the right Faith is the right will, which enters into the Living Word.

10. If you comfort your self never so long with the sufferings of Christ, and
yet your will and purpose remains in deceit and wickedness, then the spirit
which proceeds out of your will, is a thief and a murderer; you teach one
thing, and do another: God desires no flattering Hypocrisy, but an Earnest [
sincere purpose and] will, which enters into him by obedience, and this is
right Or, Faith.
Believing in the Holy Ghost; and therein is the Word and Death of Christ
fruitful indeed.

11. Christ says; You must turn and be as little children, who are not yet
conscious of any falsehood, deceit, or wickedness, and in Christ through
Christ's death, be borne of his flesh and blood, if you will see the Kingdom of
Heaven; for he that eats not the flesh of the Son of Man, and drinks not
his blood, has no part in him.

12 Dear brethren, it consists not in the Oast which the Priest delivers
for Holy Bread.
Oast only which you deliver to the people, and in the Cup or The Chalice, or
Cup, wherein they carry the Oast.
Chalice: No, but when the soul converteth and brings the body under
subjection, and gives it self up wholly in obedience unto God, and into his
will, and desires to go in at Christ's Entrance to the Father; then it goes
out from the life of this world: and goes with Christ into the Father, who
gives it Christ's flesh and blood; for it eats of the Word of the Lord at
Gods Table, and gets Christ's flesh for its body, and Christ's blood for its
Refreshment and habitation; for the soul dwells in the Heart, and burns
out of the Heart blood, as a kindled light; and has its principal Dominion in
the Head, in the Brains, and there it has The five senses.
five open Gates, in which it governs, with the spirit of its life.

13. And therefore if the Tincture in the soul in the Heart blood, be entered
into Christ's will, then that Will governs the spirit of the soul in the
Head; and though it have many obstacles, and hindrances from the Earthly
beastiall spirit; as also from the Devil, who infecteth the Earthly spirit (so
often as the soul is secure or careless) and brings it into fleshly lust:
yet nevertheless, when the soul does but reject the Earthly beastiall
thoughts and influences, or instigations, then it remains in Christ still;
for the body of Christ, which the soul has, is too hard a bit for the Devil
to overcome: and yet a harder bit it is for the soul to turn away from the
spirit of this world, and enter into the Obedience of God.

14. Dear Brethren, it is not a handful of Historical Faith that will do
it: for men to set the Merits of Christ aloft: it must be sincere and Earnest,
you must earnestly enter through Death and Hell of the Devils into the Merits
of Christ: you must overcome the spirit of this world: your will must press it
self with all its reason and thoughts into the will of God, and then you will
well see how little the Historical knowledge can do.

15. If you will not drive the Devil out of your Heart, then he will not let
you enter into Gods will; if you will keep the iniquity of falsehood in your
heart, and so fight with the merits and satisfaction of Christ against him,
then you will be hindered; for the Devil opposes it strongly: he striveth
against the soul as long as he can; he lets not the soul go, before it
heap all Earthlinesse upon his neck, and depart from it; when the soul does
so, then it departs out of his Country, and then he is overcome: but O how
does he continually lay that [as a Net] before it, and goes always about like
a Fowler, and if he can possibly he will cast the Earthly Garment on to it
again.

16. O how hard a Combat must the poor soul hold out, against the Devil:
but therein the sufferings merit satisfaction, and death of Christ is
availeable when the Devil has ensnared the poor soul again, and will not
let it go, but goes down with it into the Abyss into despair: there the
soul must take with it the sufferings and death of Christ, and walk with the
Devil through Hell into the Death of Christ; and out of Christ's death spring
up with Christ into God again; and then it is the Lilly which the Devil does
not like to smell upon.

17. But for you to depend wholly on the History, and so to apply the merit,
suffering, and death of Christ, and will still keep the Devil lodging in your
soul, that is a reproach to Christ; What does it avail you to pray, that God
would forgive you for Christ's sake; when you forgive not all others? your heart
sticks full of revenge and robbery.

18. You go to Church, into the Congregation of Christ, and you bring a false
hypocrite, liar, covetous, angry adulterous, proud person and soul, in with
you, and the same you bring out with you again, what benefit have you thereby?
You go into the Congregation to the Supper of Christ, and desire Christ's flesh
and blood, and yet keep the black Devil in you for a Guest: what mean you?
you receive nothing but the severe Anger of God: how will you feed upon Christ's
flesh and blood, if your soul be not inclined with all earnestness and
sincerity into God: do you suppose that Christ's body and blood dwells so in
the Earthly Element, that you can chew it with your Teeth? No, friend, it is a
more pure and subtle thing; the soul must apprehend it, the mouth of the
soul must receive it; but how shall it receive Christ, if the Devil be still
lodging in the soul? the soul must be in the will of God, if it will feed
upon God; indeed it can continually eat of Christ's flesh, if it live in the
flesh of Christ; for every Spirit Or, is fed by its own substance, which is
its flesh and body.
eats of its own body.

19. This Testament is ordained to that End, that in the Congregation we
should there eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood: that we should
thereby commemorate his Death, and teach the same to our children, and tell
them what Christ has done for us, that we might be preserved in one mind and
will, and that we should be one body in Christ, and walk together in one
Love: and therefore we should eat of one and the same Bread, and drink of
one and the same Cup, and acknowledge, that Christ has begotten us again to
one Body in himself, and that he has, through his death brought us again
through Hell and the fire of Gods wrath, into his Father in himself, that we
might wholly put our wills into his will, and love one another, and make one
another rejoice, in him, and sing, speak of, and declare his mavelous Deeds
and Benefits, and thereby renounce the old Devil, who has held us captive,
and tread him under foot in our Mind.

20. This is the right Catholic way of true Faith: he that teaches and lives
otherwise, is not appointed for a Shepherd, by Christ: but is a Shepherd
sprung up of himself from his own Art and Reason, which, in the Kingdom of
Christ, according to the Outward Man, should be continually dead, that Christ
in us may live; None is a true Shepherd over Christ's sheep, unless he have
the Spirit of Christ; if he have not that, then he has not the true The true
Jus. Divinum.
Apostolical power and authority of Excommunication: he must in Christ's Spirit
have the Key to Heaven and to Hell, else he is but a vizard and Image without
Life: How can such a one who is captivated by the Devil, judge in the
Congregation of Christ; can the word and Commandment of such a one be the Word
of God, whereas he speaks but from a false Spirit.

21. O ye false Bishops [come] from the Universities, how has the Devil of
Pride blinded you, that you set Shepherds over the Lambs of Christ, according
to your own favor and respect: Saint Paul teaches you, do but read it, what
an heavy account you are to give: nothing avails with you but Art: and in the
Kingdom of Christ, Art is but dross and dung; God leads a pure heart by his
own Spirit, if one incline toward him, and submit unto his will, to such a one
he teaches heavenly Art.

22. The Congregation of Christ should be in one will, and the Shepherds
thereof, should have the spirit and Or, Consent.
will of the Congregation: It is not so slight a matter to put on the Garment
of Christ, as many suppose, who seek only covetousness and honor therein,
and they find nothing but the Anger of God therein.

23. Or what shall we say? The Priest Devil has blindfolded the Kingdom of
Christ, so that the Congregation of Christ is stark blind, where men suppose
they are Gods, and that they teach from the Holy Ghost, whereas their own
honor and covetousness is merely sought after in deceit and falsehood: Men see
how great mischief they have caused in the world, how many Countries have they
caused to be laid wast, and murdered many hundred thousand persons with their
false Opinions, and have only served the Devil, in the Garment of Christ; if
the Congregation did but discern it, they would presently consider it; but all
this comes to pass, in that they afford not honor to the Spirit of Christ:
Men will choose Shepherds themselves, whereas the Devil is in all mere
humane Elections, when it concerns the honor and doctrine of God.

24. The Or, Pastors.
Bishops that are grown up of themselves and chosen for favor without the
Spirit of God, are as profitable to the world, as a fifth wheel to a wagon:
indeed they do but little, except it be to make the Congregation go astray,
slander, jangle, and dispute, as their scandalous Pamphlets testify, in many
of which there is as much of the fear of God and love to their Neighbor, as
the Devil in Hell has: Bloody provocations are the Devils Drums and
Trumpets, by which he reproacheth the simple Congregation of Christ.

25. O dear Children, open your eyes wide, go out from the Priests
Contentions: and enter into combat against the Devil, against your voluptuous
flesh and blood: A Christian is not a wrathful Soldier or Warrior, who
desires the Kingdom of this world: for Christ says, My kingdom is not of
this world, else my servants would contend for it: Saint Paul says; Seek that
which is above, where Christ is; we are called by Christ out of this world;
that so we might serve God with the soul, and be in Christ; but with the body
in this world, that we may have maintenance and sustenance for it: therefore
the Earthly life ought to labor and maintain its body, but the soul should
be Lord and Governor, and rule the Body, it should not suffer the
Starry-Spirit to practice any falsehood, and fill it self with lies and deceit,
for such things are so brought into the soul,

26. The poor soul is here in this life in very great danger, where the
Jaws of Hell continually reach to its lips, for it is infected with the
Spirit of the Stars and Elements, which fight against it day and night;
Consider thy self now thou dear Mind, and think in what vessel thy soul,
viz. thy best Treasure lies, and thou will surely awake out of the sleep of
the beastiall Life, and consider what will follow hereafter, when the Spirit of
the Stars and Elements will leave thee, where then, thy best Jewel (which
thou thy self art,) will remain; in what condition thou will be for ever
without end; for we know that the soul dwells in the Heart: its own
substance is the Center of the seven Spirits of Nature: the six Spirits are
the Government of the Life, and the seventh is the Tincture of the
Substantiality, for its Substantiality is blood and flesh, which makes the
Tincture, though the Tincture is not blood and flesh, but a virgin without
Generating; yet the six Spirits in the Tincture continually generate one
another, as is mentioned heeretofo^e concerning the Center of Nature; But the
brightness of the Noble Pearl of the soul, is especially known in the
Tincture; for therein it attaineth Gods power and Spirit: and there gets its
right Name, [Seele], SOVLE; for as God is above Nature, which cannot comprehend
him: so the virgin in the Tincture, is a spirit above the spirits of Nature,
which belong to the Center; and yet the virgin, without the spirits of Nature,
would not be; even as the Number Three of God, without the Eternal Nature,
would not be known; so also the soul.

27. The six spirits of Nature contain the Eternal Center, with which the
Darkness and Anger of God is comprehended: for the Original of Mobility
consists therein; for the fire existeth therein, though indeed it stands
but in four forms, and in the fifth form springs up the true Life, and in
the sixth the understanding: and then first there is in the seventh another
Spirit, which is not the Center in the Anguish-source, [or property], for in
the seventh form there is another source [or property], indeed the first six
forms rule therein, and are the life of the source, and a cause of the life;
but they make together one Spirit, which lives in the Blood, Water, and Air.

28. And though it be so, that we are through the heavy fall of Adam, brought
into the outward Dominion, so that the soul swimmeth in the palpable [or
visible water], yet the Eternal Water, viz. the Mother of the Water, is hidden
in the outward, in which the soul is an Angel; we give you to understand,
that the soul is a Spirit, as God the Holy Ghost is, who goes forth from the
Father and the Son, and is the Mobility of the Deity: for the Father stands
still, and has moved himself but once, viz. in the Creation: but the Spirit
has the Word of the Father, and performs all things through the Word.

29. And thus also, the soul is a spirit generated out of the Eternal Center
of Nature, out of its own spirits of its own Nature, not strange ones, Viz. the
soul.
which has the word, which comprizeth it self in the six forms of Nature
upon the wheel of the Cross, and performs all things, through the Word: for
it is the Spirit and Life of the Word, and moves upon the Wings of the Wind
as a flash or blaze, it forms the Word, and produces it, and the Six Spirits
are its Counselors; though there are but five: for the Sixth is the form of
the Word it self: but the five contain the five senses.

30. Where we woefully find and have great cause to lament it, how our father
Adam has here introduced the Evil, poisonous, Earthly Dominion: so that the
poor soul is thus wholly captivated by the Spirit of this world, which
flows forth and works powerfully in the soul, so that often and hourly,
there breaks forth out of the Word of the soul, the Evil of the Abyss; in
which the Devil mingleth himself, and possesses our hearts outwardly, and
then also most inwardly, viz. in the first four Forms of Nature, and turns
us away from the Will of God, into all abominations and wickednesses which are
in him: And as he now observes how Man is qualified, viz. what spirit is
predominant according to the Dominion of his Body [whether it be pride,
covetousness, envy, wrath, unchastity, wantonness, voluptuousness, and such
like] accordingly he Or, Tempts.
assaulteth him continually, and effects such great wickedness with the
soul, as no Tongue can Express; for in the outward Dominion there are also
seven Forms, viz. the seven Planets which Rule the outward Man, and reach
into the bottom of the soul, if without ceasing it do not resist, and reject
the Evil malignant Influxes or instigations.
influences: in the same the Devil has a powerful access to the soul, but
yet he has not that Dominion, nor any complete power therein, unless the
Turba Magna in the Anger of God be kindled, [as in Judgments, Pestilence,
Thunder, and the like Plagues and Punishments] and there he is the Executioner:
but he has the inward Dominion of the four Forms to the fire-Life, these he
can possess, as often as the soul plungeth it self thereinto; if he get it
there, O how fast he holds it, and will quite down with it, for that is his
Kingdom [viz. the Abyss of the four Formes].

31. And Observe it according to its precious depth; The Four Forms contain
in them the Original of Nature; where first (in the desiring willing,) the
Darkness with the attracting enters into a desire: and so the desiring
becomes strong, Sharp astringent.
harsh, hard and cold, and the desiring makes an attraction and stirring in
the strong harshnesse, which are two Forms, and the third Form is the great
Anguish, in that the Desiring would be free, which stirs the anxious wheel
of Nature, and in the End [stirreth up] the flash of fire, which is the fourth
Form, as is at large mentioned before.

32. And so that harsh attraction makes in the desiring of the will, in the
outward Nature of this world, a great Covetousness, so that the Mind would
attract all to it self, and possess it alone, and though it cannot devour
it, yet will possess it, and would not willingly afford any thing to any
other, and this is one Root of the Abyss of Hell, wherein the Devil
vehemently assaulteth the soul, that it might nor go out, and come to the
Light of God.

33. The second Root is the bitterness of Nature, which in the harshnesse is
an enimicitious sting, and will not endure to be subdued: the more it is
resisted, the greater is its sting; This is the second form, which makes in
the outward Nature, an enimicitious stinging, envious, bitter Mind, whereinto
also the Devil windeth himself, and kindles the Word of the soul, with a
despitefull, stinging, envious Matter or substance.
subject, so that the will continually burns in envy, and never speaks any
Good, but mere vanity and wantonness, which is serviceable to the Devil:
whence proceed liars, slanderers, backbiters, false hearts; God have mercy upon
us in our great misery, into which we are plunged.

34. The third Root is the Anxious Wheel of the Mind, whence the Or,
Thoughts.
Senses arise and are Generated, which contains in it especially, the
miserable house of Or, Mourning and Lamentation.
sadness, and yet is the house of the springing up of Life, this is chiefly
the dwelling place of the Devil, within which he seateth himself; it is his
seat, and he continually raises up that house of sadness, so that the soul
grows timorous and doubts of the Grace of God, and of the Light of Eternal
Life: he continually casts in the two first forms, viz. covetousness and
envy, and with that poison windeth the wheel of the Mind about, and makes a
hurlyburly in the Essences of the thoughts: he continually mixeth Covetousness
and Envy together, that he may retain his seat: and so when the poor soul
would go out aloft and be gone, then he barreth it up into the Chamber of
Anguish, and straitneth it, than it might and should despair: for the Chamber
of Anguish is always in Darkness, and there he casts it down, that it may
not get aloft on the wheel, least it should Or, cause ^he fire to appear.
discover the fire, and so he would be known.

35. The fourth Root is the fire-flash; and when the Devil cannot detain the
soul still in the house of sadness, but that it reach after the flash of the
Light of the Liberty of God, then he slips into the flash, and brings the
thoughts in the word of the soul out aloft above the Cross, in
high-mindednesse, [as Men that through Learning strive after the Light of God,
and having attained it, little think how the Devil slippeth into it, and
brings them into high-mindednesse, to be proud of themselves, esteeming
themselves as Clergymen to be better then the Laity] so that the soul thus
flies out aloft, and elevateth it self above the Meekness, as the Devil
himself did.

36. For (as we have mentioned before) Nature gets in the kindling of the
Fire, two Kingdoms [or two Principles, as may be seen in a Candle, out of
which (in the kindling) arises the Consuming fire, and the pleasant refreshing
Light,] viz. one in the fierceness of the fire, which flies out aloft above
the Center, with the sour wrathful severe forms: and the other, in the Light
of the Meekness, which remains standing immovably, and has also all the
power of the Center, in which power the Spirit of the Deity and of the Majesty
is known; wherein stands the [Rain]-Bow with the Cross of the Number-Three:
for the Majesty is here the Brightness of the Deity: and here the Eternal
Liberty Extra Naturam.
without [or beyond] Nature (which has but one only will) gets the
strength, power, majesty, and glory; for the Eternity is thus Or, manifested.
Revealed, which otherwise would be as it were a still nothing, in the
Creatures esteem and account.

37. Above this still soft humility, the Devil leads the soul of Man in its
will out aloft in the fire-flash: for herein according to the spirit of this
world, consists the Dominion of the Sun, which gives might and strength to
the Outward Man, and also the light and power of the outward senses, so that
Reason comes to see; and the outward spirit gets great outward skill and
wisdom, according to the Dominion of this world.

38. Also herein all suttleties of the Essences and senses disclose
themselves: which the Devil very well observes; if any in the Predominancy.
upper Dominion, according to the spirit of this world, be a child of the
Sun, then he, in the Center of Nature without ceasing, slippeth into the
fire-flash of the soul, where the fire and heat existeth, and always
brings in with him the other three poisonous forms in the Original; he
brings the soul out aloft over the Cross above the Meekness of the
Majesty, in the wrathful fire-flash, so that it grows proud, lascivious, and
fierce; he makes it to contemn meekness and humility: and so it flies forth
in its own wit in the fierceness of the flash above God and the Kingdom of
Heaven, [and scorneth all that belongs to God and to Eternal Life].

39. And all this, (dear Brethren in Babell) proceeds from hence; that you
are void of the Divine wit and understanding, so that you fly above the wheel
of Nature in your own wit, you should stay in the Cross in humility; and
your soul should be inverted and inclined in to the meek Majesty of God; but
now you fly upon the wheel of the fire, in your pride, aloft over the Deity;
and this the Devil does to you in subtle craftiness, that he may thus lead
you, that thereby the Kingdom of God might not be known; you seek the
Kingdom of God in Art; but Art has the six forms of the wheel of Nature;
the Deity has another Center in the Cross: for the Divine Spirit seperateth
it self from the fire, and yet is not quite asunder from it: but it makes
another Principle, which consists in meekness, in mere Love and Joy, the
forms of Nature are therein a mere Power of Love; for it is an Or,
fullfilling.
accomplishment of the Eternal Will, out of which Nature existeth, and the
wrathful kingdom is an accomplishment of the Eternal hunger and thirst,
which cannot be otherwise in Eternity, for the Being of Beeings. Substance of
Substances.
Essence of all Essences is thus.

40. For it is sufficiently known to us, (seeing God is merely Good) that he
created nothing Evil: for that which was not from Eternity, was not in the
Creation.

41. God created no Hell, nor no Devils, but Angels: only Lucifer has
turned himself away from the Meekness, and is flien out above the Cross of
the Number Three, and has himself awakened the fire of Anger in the flash;
which had from Eternity remained hidden in secret; which is now his Hell and
Habitation, he can now be no otherwise then Covetous, Envious, Anxious and
Wrathful; there is no other Quality, or living faculty.
property or source in him; for his own Mother, out of which he was brought
forth and created, holds him now, so that he is a Devil with all his Legions.

42. Therefore dear Children, since we know that we are thus environed with
Hell and the Devils, in the Anger of God, it is very necessary for us to fly
into Humility: and therefore Christ teaches us, so very earnestly to study
Meekness, Love, and Mercy, that we should Love one another; and should not so
eagerly endeavor after the Spirit of this world; for the Devil slippeth into
it, and seduceth us; we should watchfully take heed of Pride, for the Devil
flies into it: and of Anger; for that is the Devils sword, wherewith he
commits all Murders.

43. O how lamentable a thing it is, that the poor soul is thus blinded, that
it knows not the heavy shackles and bands wherein it lies captive. The fire
of Hell rises up to its very lips, the whole world is full of snares which the
Devil has laid to catch the poor soul: if the Eyes of the outward Man
should be opened, he would be terribly affrighted; All whatsoever Man does but
touch or look upon, there is a Net and snare of the Devil in it; And if the
Verbum Domini, the Word of the Lord, which is Incarnate.
become Man: were not in the Middle, so that the hidden Eternal substantiality
of the Word is a Body, there would none be saved; the Devil would catch and
devour all souls.

44. Therefore dear Children, Christ has well told us, That the Kingdom of
God in us, is small as a Grain of Mustard seed: but he that endeavors
seriously, and striveth after it, to him it grows great, as a Tree, and the
Devil must needs let it alone: and though he often break off a Twigge, yet
the stock stands still.

45. Christ warned the Rich young Man, To beware of Covetousness, and told him,
that a Camel would easier go through the Eye of a Needle, then a rich Man
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and the Cause of all this is, that the soul
enters into Lust, and into the Dominion of this world: for if the soul
wholly give up it self into the lust, pleasure, and Dominion of this world,
then the Devil does not Or, Tempt.
Sift it so strongly, but carries it in his Or, Bride-Chariot.
Triumphant Chariot; from one abomination and wickedness to another: his
Chariot is Venus, viz. the Love of the flesh, wherein the soul continually
endeavors after Temporary Power, Authority, and Honor, after Riches,
Beauty, and the desires of the flesh, after Beastiall inordinate Copulation:
though indeed the soul does not so eagarly desire it, unless it be totally
infected: but it is only from hence, that the soul in Adam has lusted after
it, and is captivated therewith; and the Devil continually makes it stirring,
he continually tickleth the soul therewith, that it might, confidently and
freely eat of the forbidden fruit.

46. We find that the Humane Life is Threefold, with Three Spirits together
in one, as if it were but one Spirit, and it is indeed but one Life; but it
has Three Dominions, each of which has its own Mother, which affords or
generateth it; the Center of Nature with its forms [or properties] is the
Eternal Life; for it is the fire-life; and the spirit which is generated and
goes forth out of the Center of Nature, which dwells in the Tincture, is the
Eternal Soule-Life.
life of the soul; and the Air spirit, with the qualities or properties of
the Dominion of the Stars, is the beginning, ending, and Transitory Life,
which is the Beastiall Life, [the Animal Life which we have common with
Beasts].

47. Now the soul is generated only out of the first two, and the Third is
breathed into it: not that it should enter into it, and give up it self
thereto, as Adam has done, but that the soul should mightily rule over it,
and therein open the Great Wonders of God, which from Eternity were beheld in
the Wisdom of God: for the Third Dominion is generated and Created out of the
first; and the second Dominion should continue in its own place (in the Noble
Tincture) in Paradise; and should open the great Wonders in the Third: and
therefore Man was made Lord over all things; he had the Tincture [or life] of
the Earth in his own hand [or power] and Gold and Silver were as easy for him
to find, as any other visible thing; The Tincture of the Earth was his
Ornament and sport, altogether childe-like, without Covetousness; he needed no
other clothing; and as the Gold was pure without dross, so was his
childe-like Mind also.

48. But the Devil awakened unto him the Sulphur [or Gross Matter] therein,
and has set the Beastiall spirit in the superior Dominion in him, that which
Man should have ruled over, rules over him, and that is his Fall.

49. Thus now the Devil has gotten power, in as much as the Outward Dominion
is generated out of the Inward [ viz. the Center of Nature] and that he
dwells in the most innermost; and so he slideth out of the innermost into the
outermost, and kindles the outermost in the Mind; from whence arise false
lusts and inclinations, and evil Concupiscence, so that two Dominions [viz.
the inward and the outward] strive against the soul: and so the poor soul is
in the midst between the Dominion of this world, and the Dominion of the
Hellish source [or quality], and there it stands before the Gate of Heaven in
a very great Deep in great danger, its Root is the Anger of God and
Hellfire, its superior or predominant spirit is the Dominion of this world;
and there it stands in the Tincture of the Fire, in the midst; and whither
soever it inclines, thither it enters; if it go into the lust and pleasure
of this world, then it stands therein, and is captivated by the Devil; but
if it enter into it self inwards into God, then the Devil will buffet it: for
then it is in his Country.

50. But when it gets the flesh of Christ for a new Body, then it is not in
his Country, that is a Tree before him, which is poison and death to him; at
which he is vexed, and loath to touch it: but he stirs up his servants and
Ministers against the outward Body, that must bear Shame and disgrace.
reproach and scorn, that thereby he may cover and hide this Tree, that it may
not be known; else it might bring forth more branches, whereupon at last, Hell
would be too narrow for him: therefore he will prevent it as long as he can.

51. And so now when the poor soul breaks away from him; and with its dear
Bridegroom Christ, turns to the Love of God, so that through earnest
Repentance and turning into God, it enter into the will of God; yet then the
Devil has seven Snares or Ginnes.
coards still, with each of which he holds it fast, before he will let it
go: and then it must get it self through all the seven, and leave his cords
wholly to himself. [These seven Bands are the seven spirits of Nature
hereafter mentioned.].

52. And Eighthly, it must go through the Fire, and there is the Earnest severe
Proba or hard trial; And when it is come through it gets the heavenly
Tincture in the Ninth Number: and in the Tenth Number upon the Cross, it
gets the Body of Christ, and so is an Angel in Heaven, and a stranger and
Pilgrim upon Earth in this Tabernacle.

53. The seven snares wherewith it is entangled, are the seven spirits of the
outward Nature of the Dominion of this world; these it must wind through, and
press quite through them, and cast them all behind it, and in the Eighth
Number stands Moses with his Law; and there is first read to the soul, what
a Or, fair Bird.
fine Foul it was; and there comes the Devil with his Or, Account.
Register or Catalogue, and reads what it is, and shows his right to it:
and there it is directed to bow down and lay hold on the Wounds and Passion of
Christ: and here it is necessary that the poor soul take hold on the Merits
and Death of Christ, and wrap it self fast therein, for out of these swaddling
bands, the Devil cannot pull the soul, nay he dares not touch them: and
here the Devil must leave the soul, for Christ stands in the fire of the
Fathers Anger, and is the accomplishment of Obedience; and there the soul is
brought into the Ninth Form, into the Tincture of the Eternal Life; and there
it is surrounded with the Majesty of God; and the fair blessed Virgin (the
Wisdom of God) meets it, with her Garland of Pearls, and Crowns the
soul, as a heavenly Conqueror.

54. What Joy is here to the Angels of God, and what Joy the soul attaineth
there, we have no Pen to describe it, nor in this world any tongue to Express
it; Only we wish to the Reader and all Men, that they might themselves have
experience of it, for which cause we go about this Writing with much toil
and deep labor.

55 For we write what we our selves have known, and have seen with
spiritual Eyes; we speak it not to our own boasting, but that the Reader
may know, that if he will follow us, what he is to expect from it; seeing he
perceives, how the world makes a Gazing stock of the children of God; But we
shall after this short Life have full recompense: and moreover, this Garland is
more delitious then this whole world: and though it be often covered and hidden
from us, yet it dies not.

56. For as the rough winter hides the budding and flourishing of the Earth,
so that reason says all is Dead; but when the Spring comes, then it begins
to bud and blossom again; and so also it is with the Noble and fair Garland
of Christ; when that springs again, then it produces Lillyes without
Number, and every Spring, when the Mind is renewed in Christ, it multiplyeth
Tenfold.

Of the Company and assistance of the Holy Angels.
57. As we that are Men in this world, if we be the children of God, assist
and help one another in necessity and distress, and readily deliver one
another from misery and trouble: thus also it is in heaven, concerning the
children of God, while the soul belongs to the fellowship of Angels, they
affect the company of honest, virtuous, and chaste Men, that fear God, and
stand by them in necessity: for the Scripture says; They are all Ministering
Spirits, sent forth for the service of those that are to inherit the Kingdom
of God; they often avert the fiery darts of wickedness: what mischief would
the Devil often do, if he were not opposed and hindered by the Throne-Princes
of the Legions; how often would he terrify and cast men down headlong to the
ground.

58. But the Angels are our servants and keepers, if we be Christians, and
not Beasts; though indeed the Devil sets upon Christians most of all; how
very often would many be drowned and killed by a fall, who yet receive
wonderful deliverance from Angels: they are ready about people, who sing and
speak of God; they have great delight among little Infants, so that they many
times manifest themselves to an Infant, and play with it, if it be the child
of God.

59. How many Examples are there in the Scripture, of the Angels leading and
conducting of the Children of God; Especially the Example of Tobiah: though our
School- Rabbis will rather have it cast out of the Bible [then believe it]:
but consider of the Three Angels with Abraham, and the two Angels with Lot:
also how they have plainly foretold and declared the Conception of highly
worthy Men, [as of Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, Samson, etc.] Especially of John [the
Baptist] and of CHRIST: consider what was done at his Birth [to the Shepherds
in the field] and to the Or, Magi.
Wisemen of the East: and at length to Joseph [how he was directed] to go with
Mary and the Babe into Egypt: whereby we may sufficiently perceive their great
carefullnesse about us; for they are Gods Ministers; he sends them to conduct
us, [through this valley of misery, through this world of Thistles and Thornes]
and to defend us from the Devil: O how great joy they have for one poor
soul, when it is delivered from the snares of the Devil, yea more than for
Ninety Nine righteous, as Christ says.

60. Therefore we should not so suddenly Be dejected and discouraged.
despair in adversity, when we are in Streits and afflictions.
necessity, when we often suppose, that the whole world is against us, yet
the Quire or Host of Angels, and the Spirit of God, are with us; It is often
with us as with the Canaanitish Woman, so that we cannot find the Countenance
of God; but we must wait; for the proof and trial must pass over the
soul; the more Gold is Purified, the finer it is: so also the soul, the more
it is brought into Trial, if it hold out, the fairer and brighter it is: and
Gods aim is to have fair lovely children, and such as are of understanding,
and do learn to discover [the deceits of] the old Devil.

61. But you must know, that the Angels are very pure, chaste, modest Spirits,
also humble and friendly, and are like to Infants, who know of no deceit or
iniquity, but what is Or, Generated.
innate in them.

62. Now whosoever will enjoy the company and assistance of Angels* must not
be a Lustful Bull or Heifer, or a lascivious wanton Venus, or have a false
wicked mind, which day and night studieth nothing but cunning tricks and
deceit, how to get money and wealth: neither must always dabble and swim in
the worlds backbiting, scoffing Jests and conceits, and tickle and feed the
soul with them, in which the world uses to provoke one another, and to Or,
find fault and stir up malice.
take exceptions one at another; No, no Angel will stay with such Men, but the
black Devil, who possesses the Hearts of these Men, so that they take
pleasure in wickedness.

63. Whosoever will have the assistance of Angels, need not call upon them or
pray to them; for they accept not of that honor, they give all honor to God,
but [he] ought only to turn away from uncleanness of Heart, and enter
through true Repentance into Gods will, and continually put away evil thoughts
and Influxes and Instigations.
influences; he must continually incline his will to God [and Goodnesse] and
pray to God for the guidance of his holy Spirit.

64. And though the Devil hold fast, and will not let go, and does lay open
his uncleanness before him, there is no better course to be taken, then to
leave all his uncleanness and filthiness upon the Devils neck, and wind
himself out from it, in spite of all [Carnall] Reason, and cast himself in
humility into Gods will, and commit himself to it, and leave all doubting to
the Devil, (for that is his lodging) and he must consider that it is a great
sin to continue in doubting; he should consider, that doubting is the Devils
Band wherewith he holds the soul fast; When any Man's uncleanness meets
him and represents it self before him, so that the soul can receive no
strength; that is not Gods hardening [of the Heart], but the Devil wrappeth
himself about the soul, and will not let the soul come to the light, that it
may receive strength and virtue; and there the words and promises of Christ,
with his bloud-shedding, suffering and Death, is a sovereign Medicine; when
the soul wrappeth it self up in them, and leaves all its uncleanness upon
the Devils neck, that is poison to the Devil, which makes him faint and
feeble; and so the soul then presses forth into the Light of God, and
receives strength and virtue; and there it must earnestly enter into humility,
and then it treads upon the Devils Head, and destroys his Hell; and then
the Angels associate with that Man, and have Great Joy, that the Devil is
overcome, who intended to be God and Creator in the soul.

65. But a soul in Christ must be a continual Soldier, Champion, or Resister.
Warrior, and although the Devil cannot get possession of the soul, yet he
still holds it before the unclean forbidden Tree, that it should, taste of
unchastity, iniquity, lies and deceit, of Anger and Envy: and if he can bring
it to pass, that the soul let in the evil lust and desire into it self; O
how does he hide and cover it? how does he strew sugar upon it? and if he
should once draw it into Venus'es Heaven, he will spare no pains to get his
His Fort of Prey in the soul again.
fortress again. For the Devil is never better at ease, then in Man, for
there he can be Lord of this world, and perform his work, and accomplish his
will; which he cannot do, In Spiritu Mundi, Extra Hominem.
in the spirit of this world, without Man; for his Kingdom is not in the
outward Dominion of this world, but in the inward, in the Root in the Abyss.

66. He can do nothing in this world, in the External [part], unless the
Turba Magna in the wrath of God, be kindled, and there he is busy, especially
when the Elements are kindled [or inflamed] with Tempestuous storms [of
thunder and lightning]; and then if the Anger of God, burns therein, there he
is a busy Executioner; if he could ruin the whole world, he would do it; but
he has no further room, then the fierce wrath in the Turba affords him; The
Plague, Vengeance, and Destruction.
Turba is his Master, he is but a Jugler and destroyer, so far as the Anger in
the Turba is kindled.

67. Know also, that the Devil often striveth and fights with the Angels;
and when the soul is careless and secure, he sets upon it strongly: but he
is held off, that he cannot do what he will; but so soon as the soul
Imagines, and is captivated by the Lust, [like Adam and Eve] then the Devil
overcomes; but then again so soon as the soul casts away that evil Lust
[and enters into Repentance] then he is driven away by the Angels.

68. And there is a continual strife about the soul of Man; God desires to
have it; the Devil also would have it; and the cause of this is, that the two
Kingdoms do part in the Cross: the one is the Love of God, the Kingdom in
Ternario Sancto: viz. the Angelical one: and the other is the fierce wrath out
of the Center of Nature, which is the Anger and Or, sharpness.
Severity of God.

69. And therefore it is, that God manifests his will to us, and sets
before Man Light and Darkness, he may endeavor after which he will: And that
we might know, that God would have the soul into his holy Kingdom; he
affords us Teaching and Instruction, and shows us the way to Life; [or
Light]: he stirs up by his Spirit highly worthy Teachers, who are the Light
of the world, that Men might beware of his Anger and fierce wrath, and not Or,
stir it up.
awaken it in themselves.

70. For tne Anger must indeed be in every Life; [as the Gall in living
Creatures], but where the love and meekness prevails over it, it is not
manifested in Eternity, but is only a cause of the Life; for in the Love, the
Anger makes the great exulting Joy and Paradise. The Anger [or Mars] in the
Kingdom of God is the Great Wondrous Joy, where nothing of the Anger is
perceived. As Weeping and Laughing come from one place, and the Weeping is
turned into Joy: after such a manner is it with the Love and Anger of God.

71. Therefore it is, that Christ so earnestly teaches us, Love, Humility, and
Mercifullnesse; and the cause why God is become Man, is for our Salvation and
happiness sake, that we should not turn back from his Love: God has spent
his Heart, that we might be his Children, and remain so Eternally: when there
was no Remedy neither in Heaven, nor in this world, then he Moved himself for
Man's sake, that he might be delivered from the Devil, and from his Anger:
[into which he was fallen in Adam].

72. Therefore dearly beloved Children, do not so reject and cast from you,
the Love and Grace of God, else you will lament it in Eternity: for after this
Time [of the Temporary Life] there is no more Remedy or help: Pray learn
Divine Wisdom, and learn to know what God is; and do not Imagine or set an
Image of any thing before you, thinking God to be an Image any way but in
Christ: we live and are in God, we are of his [Essence or] substance [or
Beeing] we have Heaven and Hell in our selves. What we make of our selves,
that we are; if we make of our selves an Angel in the Light and Love of God,
in Christ, we are so: but if we make of our selves, a fierce, angry, false
and wicked, haughty, flying Devil, which flies aloft above all Love and
Meekness, in mere Covetousness, greedy hunger and thirst: then also we are
so: for after this Life, it is otherwise with us there, then here; what the
soul here imbraceth, that it has there; and so though the outward breaks
in Death, yet the will retains that embraced thing in its source [or
property] and that is its Food or recreation.
sustenance: but how that will subsist before the Paradisicall source and
dominion of God, and before his Angels, you your self may consider: we would
have it faithfully set before you For a warning.
, as it is given to us. [for that purpose].

The Fifteenth Chapter.
Of the mixed World, and its wickedness; as it now stands, and as it
Exercises its Dominion at present. A Glass wherein Every one may see
themselves, and may try what Spirits Child they are: Out of the Seal of the
Wonders.
1. CHrist says, Matthew. 23. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! how often would I have
gathered thy Children together as a Clock-Hen.
Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and you would not: O Jerusalem,
thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, etc.
Also, we have piped unto you, and you have not danced, etc. What should I do
more to this stiffenecked People, who will not suffer my spirit to reprove
them. Also, their Mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; the Poison of Or,
Asps.
Adders is under their Lips; they speak mere deceit, and their hearts are
never at unity. O how feign would I eat of the best Grapes: but I am as a
Vine-dresser that Gleaneth: I had planted me a Vineyard, but it brings forth
nothing but sour Grapes: I am become strange to my Mothers Children; they
which eat at my Table, tread me underfeete.

2. Thus the Mother then complained of the wicked children of Men: but what
shall she now do in these present times? she stands yet in great sorrow
and lamentation, and has turned away her countenance from those wicked
Children, and will not have any of them that are in Of filthy Lust and
wickedness.
that Garment: She cries, and none hears; she stands in great mourning
and lamentation over the wickedness of those false unruly and perverse
Children: Every one runs after the covetous Whore, who is full of
Blasphemies and Abominations; both the Pastor and People,
Shepherd and the sheep do so: it is a most Lamentable Time: and if it
should not be shortened, no man should be saved.

3. It is a Time, which all the Prophets have prophesied of, and thou supposest
it to be a Golden Time; but consider thy self thou blind Man, whither art
thou Gone? Do thou suppose that this wickedness and falsehood which thou
practisest is the Ordinance of God? Wait but a while, and you will soon see.
It is the Time of the last Seal, wherein the Anger of God has powered forth
its Viols, so that the Wonders of Hell come to Light, [that they may be
knowne]. Let this be told you, we have known it in Ternario Sancto: [or
understood it in the Angelical world, in the Heavenly Substantiality].

4. For the Mother has rejected This wicked time or Generation.
it; and will none of those Abominations any more; She is big with child, and
brings forth a son in her old age, which shorteneth the days of
wickedness. Let this be told you; whosoever persevereth and goes on in
wickedness, shall have great shame thereof.

5. Is not the little boy (which runs up and down in his childish sport)
very full of the poison, venom, and wickedness of the Devil, and do not all
vices and abominations stick in him: he is a Mocker or Scoffer.
scorner, and blasphemer of God, a swearer, curser, liar, and deceiver, very
fit and apt to serve the Devil in all manner of shameful filthiness:
scurrility and obscenenesse is his best Latin or Eloquence, he knows how to
mock, disgrace, and lay all manner of aspersions upon the simple; all manner of
theevery, cheating tricks, and cousenage is fine Art with him; deceit,
overreaching and circumvention is his Glorious Boasting, they mock and deride
poor people without any cause, he that fears God is by them accounted a
fool, and set as an Owl to be wondered at; This, Parents and Ancient People
see, and take delight and pleasure in it, that their children are so dextrous
and witty in their wantonness and waggery: they are tickled at the heart with
it, when they unhappily jest at honest People; that which Old folks dare not
do for shame, that they Teach the children, that thereby the lust of their
hearts may be brought to pass; all this the Devil teaches them; and so
rides in their hearts as Lord over body and soul.

6. If any can but conzen and cheat his neighbor, despise, slander, and find
fault with him, and bereave him of his honor and goods, that is the satisfying
of their lusts: all immodest wanton words and manners are held the best Art and
Courtship; he that can laugh and jeere his neighbor out of countenance, is
Master upon the Place: all these are the Devils Prancks and Tricks: and thus
he leads the poor soul in his string, and Man understands it not.

7. Youth, both of the Male and female sex, learn first the Devils Trade,
before they take any thing else in hand; disdainful, malicious wantonness, is
the first work they learn: and the Parents encourage their children in it, and
hold it for a necessary worldly fashionable accomplishment.

8. When they are grown up a little, then the desire of beastiall unchastity
is the second work they learn, which they call a trick of youth; and allure
one another to it: thus youths give room to the Devil, at the first
blossoming, to enter into the Heart, so that the Devil makes his nest
therein, and so catches one, with the abominations of another, the male with
the female, and the female with the male.

9. If any send a son to the University, to learn somewhat that is Good,
that he may be serviceable to God, and useful To his Country.
in the world; then he learneth wantonness, bravery, Pride, suttlety, how to
deceive the simple of their own, and bereave them of their sweat, and
contrive a cloak for it; saying, it is Sua Jura: Rights, Titles, Interests.
his right by Law: but that cloak is the Devils, and the false deceitful
heart is his Minister. If he can speak a little Latin or foreign Language,
then no simple Man is good enough for his company; his high-mindednesse flies
aloft, the stinking Carcass [which is but meat for Wormes] must be trimmed
with Ribbands and bables; to go a whoring, and deflouring Maids is Courtship:
there are people that can behave themselves so finely, till they awaken the
gnawing worm of Conscience in the heart of many a Mothers daughter.

10 And such are advanced in the Churches and Universities, and set up, for
Pastors or Ministers.
Shepherds of Christ, and yet they have the Devil lodging in their heart: and
so also they are promoted to worldly Government [or the Civil Magistracy] and
then they Govern as their Guest in their heart will have it: Thus the
Superior or Magistrate works the greatest abominations, and the Inferior
learneth of him; He inventeth Tricks and slights of Law.
tricks how he may with the appearance of Law, Justice, and Equity; get the
Goods or Estate of the Inferior to himself: He makes Constitutions, Orders,
and Statutes, and says they are for the public Good: he constrains the
poor and miserable to do hard service, that he may satisfy his Pride and
State: he crusheth the simple with harsh, cruel Language, he takes away his
sweat, and tormenteth his body: he makes him his very slave, and though he
has no more but one soul of his own, [no more then others] and is but a
stranger and Pilgrim in this world, [yet he thinks] the needy must spend his
sweat wholly in his service; there is no pity nor release to be had from
him: His Dog has a better life then the poor needy soul under his roof, and
this he accounts his Right and Or, Privilege
Prerogative; whereas it is not at all grounded in Nature, but only in the
Abyss, where one form or property plagueth, vexes, and tormenteth the other,
where the Life is its own Enemy* [and there it is grounded].

11. This the Inferior learneth from the Superior, and so gets his living
also with suttlety and deceit, covetousness and knavery; for if he do not use
these things, he can hardly fill his belly in righteousness: and therefore
Reason persuades him, that necessity forces him, that he must enhance his
labor and commodities, and must wrest from his neighbor, his sweat again,
without love and righteousness, that he may but fill his belly; he learneth
from his superior to Gurmondise and Pamper his body, and live a beastiall
life. What the superior spends in a Courtly stately fashion, that the
inferior spends in a Beastly swinish fashion, and manner of life: thus one
wickedness effects another, and the Devil remains Prince on Earth over
body and soul.

12. How will thou be able to subsist, when God in his Zeal, or Jealousy,
shall Judge the secrets of Mankind? when the cause of every thing will
appear, why that or the other thing came to be Evil: and there every soul,
will cry out of those that lead it astray, and curse them; Every thing will
have its cause appear before it, and the soul will feel it in its
Conscience: where then will you superior remain, when your inferior shall
cry out and say, woe be to you, in that you have forced him to such wicked
courses, and that you have bereaved him of his sweat, and consumed his goods
and labors in Idleness and Wantonness: how will you give an account of your
Office, into which you are put, wherein you should stop unrighteousness, and
hold the wicked in awe by reproof and Punishment: and you have not regarded
his wicked courses, that you might prevent and hinder them, but have only
looked after your covetousness, how you might bereave him of his sweat: you
have not sought his souls Good, but his sweat and labor; he might else do
what he would: and besides, you have given an Evil Example to him, so that he
has looked upon your courses, and made it his Pattern. Cursing, blaspheming,
threatening, daring, Or, provocations to wrath and malice.
surlinesse has been your fashion, and that he has learnt of you, and has so
constantly reproached the Name of God; which you have not regarded; you have
only looked after his money, and not after his soul.

13. And now when the severe Judgment of God shall appear, and that every
work shall be manifested in the fiery Essences, where then all shall be tried
in the fire: What think you? Shall not all such works remain in the Eternal
Fire? and there will the poor soul cry out upon your ungodly cursed deeds,
words and works: and one will curse and wish all Evil to the other, for being
the cause of such Evil to him, and the source or property of falsehood and
wickedness will rise up in the soul and gnaw it, that, for so short and empty
vanity, voluptuousness, and false lust, it has fooled away such great
Eternal Glory.

14. All manner of reproachings, all slanders, all scoffings, all
Covetousness, Pride and Deceit, shall rise up in the soul, and one source [or
property] shall continually kindle and gnaw the other, which has given cause
to the stirring up of the other, and the soul will think, if these
abominations were not in thee, thou might attain Grace; and when it shall
behold and consider it self, it will find how one abomination has generated
another, and will see that it self is a mere stinking abomination in the
presence of God: and there it will cast it self down in the source of anguish
into the Center of Nature, and curse God, that he has made it a Soul; and the
deeper it desires to plunge it self, the deeper it falls, and yet must
continue in the place of its abominations, it cannot go from thence for the
hellish Matrix holds it, and it must thus feed it self with anguish,
cursing, abominations and bitterness, and even with that which its heart has
done here [in this life] wherein at length it despaireth, and that is its
Eternal food.

15. All Earthly food and lust passes away at the End of Days, and it
returns again into the Either: but the will remains standing Eternally, and
the desire in the will.

16. Therefore ye Parents and children, ye Superiors and Inferiors,
Observe! We have filled the Mother of Nature full with abominations, the
fierce anger of God is at hand, the Last Judgment is at the Door, God will
purge the Earth with fire, and give every one his wages, the Harvest comes,
this Garment will remain no longer, every Or, property.
thing will be gathered into its Barn; He that will not take counsel, let him
take his course, he will find by woeful Experience, what the Seventh Seal
Or, at its End.
at the Center brings with it.

17. When Reason looks all about and considers, it says; I see not yet
that it is otherwise then it was in former Times; moreover, the world was
always good and bad, as Histories relate: Also a man must take such courses,
else he will be accounted a fool and an Owl in the world, and must starve and
perish for hunger.

18. If I do not give my children leave to learn the manners and fashions of
the world, then they would be despised and scorned of every body: and if I my
self did not carry it out with state, loftiness, and stoutnesse, I should not
be regarded: and if I must have credit, I must use some cunning to get it: for
with truth; love, and righteousness, I shall not attain it: I must therefore
do as other People do, and then I may be able to live amongst them: must I
needs be made the fool of all the world? though indeed I commit Sin, yet God
is Gracious and Merciful; and has not Christ slain sin, and Death on the
Cross, and taken away the Power of the Devil? I shall one day Repent well
enough? and be saved.

19. This is the Rule of the world which the Superior and Inferior go by;
also Pastor.
the Shepherd and the Sheep: Christ's sufferings must be a cover for their
wickedness: Every one will be a Christian under the Cover of Christ, when the
poor soul, sits a whoring with the Devil; if one do but say with the
mouth he is a Christian, and yet covers his wickedness with the purple
Mantle of Christ, all is well: thus we are brave Lip-Christians under the
Mantle of Christ, but in the heart we have the Antichristian Whore sitting as a
Guest.

20. O ye false Shepherds of Christ, who go into the sheepfold at your
theevish back door, why do you cover your wickedness with Christ's sufferings
and death; do you think Christ was wicked? Seek the Center of Nature, and
show people the Abyss that is in their Heart, show them the snares of the
Devil, wherewith we lie bound, that they may not esteem cursed worldly
things; but that they may learn to strive against flesh and blood, against the
Devil, and against the hypocritical life and conversation, that they may go
forth from the Devils high-mindednesse into righteousness, into Love and
Humility.

21. The suffering of Christ is profitable to none unless they turn from
their false evil purposes, and repent, and enter into the Covenant of God, and
to these it is very Effectual. The Hypocrites use this for a show, that they
may be called Christians; but thereby they take the Name of God in vain, and
must give a strict account thereof.

22. O ye Antichristian Shepherds of the Made in the New way of Ordination.
New Order, who use the suffering of Christ with false hypocrisy, to please
Men, for their favor, and for your Idol the Bellies sake, to cover over the
hypocrite and false Or, Impostor.
deceiver, who is but a shew-Christian: how will ye be able to answer it, when
Christ will require his sheep at your hands, and you have wittingly and
willingly, under his purple Mantle, covered Wolves, in whom the Devil
dwells? why do you not crack the Nut-shell wherein the Kernel and Heart
lies, and tell the Superior as well as the Inferior of his abominations? Are
ye Christ's Shepherds? why do you not then as Christ did, who set the Truth
before the Eyes of every one; he reproved and healed, not for Man's favor and
respect, but according to the will of his Father: and so ought Christ's
Shepherds to do also.

23. O dear Reason, thou walk wisely in the Paths of this world, in what
concerns the outward Body: but where lies the poor soul? the soul is not
at home in this body, that is not its Eternal Inheritance, or Patrimony.
Native Country; what will it avayle thee to enjoy Pleasure for a little while
with Eternal shame and Torment? Or why do thou suffer thy children to have
their wills, to follow fashions and bravery, for a little while in this world:
and take delight therein, when they scorn the miserable and needy; and shall
loose them hereafter Eternally? thou think thou love them, and do well
for them; when the world commends their cunning and bravery, falsehood and
wickedness, that commendation delights thee, but the Devil accepts and
receives it as belonging to him, and thou art the Murderer of thy children,
thou art their greatest Enemy: for children look upon their Parents, and when
their untoward tricks please their Parents, then they follow them the more, and
grow the more Bold, sturdy, and stout in them.
audacious in them. At the Last Judgment day, they will cry out of their
Parents, that they have not rebuked their wantonness, and ungodly life, and
brought them up in modesty and in the fear of God.

24. If you love your life, and your Children, then loose them as to the
wickedness of this world, that they may not be, nor converse therein; and then
you shall find them, together with your life, in Heaven again; as Christ
teaches us: saying; He that loves his (...). Animam suam, his soul.
life shall loose it: but he that loses his life, goods, and honor for my
sake, shall find it in the Kingdom of Heaven; Also, when the world despises,
persecuteth, and hates you for my sake: then rejoice; for your recompense is
great in the Kingdom of Heaven. Also; What will it profit a Man to have all
temporal honor and pleasure, and loose his own soul: whereas this life
continues but for a Moment, in comparison of the Eternity.

25. Dear children in Christ, let every one have a care in what soil he
grows: you must not expect any better time of life to repent in, but to day,
while the voice of God sounds, let every one enter into himself, and search
himself, let none regard the broad way of this world, for it leads into the
Abyss to all Devils, but the way to the Kingdom of Heaven is very narrow and
strait, he that will set into it, must not defer nor linger out the time till
the Devil barreth up the Door: he must not regard the course of the world, he
must go directly into himself, and Or, search.
seek himself; the time will come, that he will think, that he is alone in
this way, but God has always his seven Thousand with Eliah, whom he knows
not of.

26. For a sincere Christian does not wholly know himself, he sees nothing
but his And untowardnesse.
vices, in which the Devil striveth against him, they are continually before
him; but in this world he knows not his Or, Holiness
Sanctity: for Christ hides such people under his Cross, so that the Devil
does not see them. Therefore be watchful and sober, and resist the subtle
Devil, that ye may live Eternally.

The Sixteenth Chapter.
Of Praying and Fasting, and Due preparation to the Kingdom of God. What
Praying is, and brings to Effect: What the Power of it is, and what the
final use and benefit of it is.
1. TO the Instruction and Comfort of the sincere simple Christianity, and for
a constant awakening of our selves, that we might be found worthy to hear the
voice of the Noble Bridegroom, who calls his Bride, and will bring her home!

A very lovely Gate.
2. A hungry Spirit that is weary and faint, is desirous of the Still Meekness
and Rest, that it may go forth from the Swindge or power.
source of the Driver, and may satiate it self with meekness and stillnesse,
and so with that which is the desire of its Life, whereby it may sustain its
body.

3. Thus my dearly beloved Mind; thou art generated out of the Eternal Still
meekness: and were (before the time of this world,) in the Wisdom of God: [in
the Eternal Virgin]: the Meekness of the Love of God, was thy source [or
property] and thou were a fruitful Or, shower.
Rain in thy Still Eternal Mother, [the Eternal Nature], where thou were not
yet created a Spirit: Consider thy felfe, how great unquietness thou art now
in; thou art immeasurably hungry, thou always thirstest after the food, and
source [or property] of thy Mother: O that the Time of Refreshment were come:
this does the poor soul wish and pant after: one day cries to another, the
Morning cries to the Evening, and the Night longs after the Day, and there
is no place nor rest (from the Persecutor, or Tormentor.
Driver) for the poor soul, the Driver takes hold of its very Throat: and
though it hide it self, yet it finds no place nor rest free from the source
[or property] of its Driver; he drives it further and further, till it finds
the boosom of its Mother, where it lays down its self, and is as one that
is escaped With his life among the slain.
in a great Battle, who dares not lift up his head for fear of the Enemy.

4. My dear Children in Christ, and all ye that have given up your selves in
Christ, to the Kingdom of Heaven, ye Elect in Christ; thus it is with our
souls, our souls stick in such great unquietness; and as it is with a
Sculdier in a fight, who is continually in expectation of Death, where the
Enemies press upon him on every side, and strike at him, and continually
desire his Death: or as it is with one that is fallen into a Deep Sea, and
swimmeth there, and sees no shore, and continually expects Death, where the
water goes into his Mouth: who sigheth and desires help from above. Or like
one that is falling into a Deep Pit, where no help is discerned, who also
expects help from above.

5. So it is also with the poor soul, it is fallen into a dark Dungeon, and
swimmeth in a dangerous and deep water, where it is encompassed with Enemies
on every side, who all strike at it; Every one would murder it, and it sees
no help about it, if it search through its body, through its flesh and blood,
also through marrow and bones, it finds they all are its Enemies, which lead
it unto the Abyss.

6. The spirit of this world (in flesh and blood) draws it, and boweth it
down to the ground, in the Deep of the waters, and continually desires to
drown it; for it would only maintain and Pamper the Beastiall Life.

7. So also the Devil draws it mightily down into the Abyss, and would
feign throw it into the Eternal aching source [or Torment] of Hell: and if it
resist, he strikes at it with the Anguish of Hell, that it should despair,
and throw it self into the Abyss: and there it has no helper with it, nor
about it, nor can it discover any to appear, till it raise it self upwards
into the Love and Mercy of God, where then it must leave and forsake all
whatsoever is in its house, and must wind quite through from it, as a spirit
without substance, that is, it must go forth with its will from all its
Thoughts, and out from all its Mind, into the Mercy of God, into the first
Original The Eternal Nature.
Mother, where it was only a seed before the Creation of the world.

8. And when it comes thither, it finds, that the same Word, which Created
it, is become Man; into which it casts it self, and eats of that humanity,
as of a pure and new body, in which there is no source [or property] of Emnity,
but only a meek, pure, desirous Love, and there its will is Or, received.
accepted of God, and the Holy Ghost enters into its will, and brings to
the poor captive soul, Heavenly Refreshment and Comfort, so that it feeds
on the flesh of the Eternal Word, of its Original Mother, and drinks of the
Water of Eternal Life, wherein, before the world, it was only a seed.

9. There it finds the place of its Rest, and cools its flames therewith,
and rests in the boosom of its Mother, for it enters into the Land of the
Living, and the Holy Ghost leads it out of Prison, and it eats at Gods
Table, and sits among the children of Gods Love.
Love. O how humble it is, that the Holy Ghost has delivered it from the
Strife of Battle, and then God has a true obedient and humble child of it.
And thus it is with the souls which forth out of this Sea of Misery into God,
or which with the Deliverance from the Earthly Life enter into God, and so are
released from the Driver [the Devill].

10. Since therefore it is certainly thus, and that we have found out the way;
we will speak what we know, and testify the Truth; For Christ says; My
Father Desires to give the Holy Ghost.
will give the Holy Ghost to them that ask him for it: No son asks the
Father for an Egg, and he offers him a Scorpion in stead of it: or for
Bread, and he gives him a Stone, or for Fish, and he gives him a Serpent:
Ask and ye shall receive, knock and it shall be opened unto you, says Christ.

11. When the Heart and Mind, and all the senses or thoughts, resolve into a
will and purpose, that the soul will enter into the Mercy of God, and repent
of its misdeeds, and is resolved to seek after Love and Mercy: then it is
said; Before they call, I have heard them: as may be seen by Daniel, when the
Angel said to him; When thou chastizedst thy self, and did entend to pray
for thy own sins, and the sins of the People, I brought thy Prayer before
God, and this command went forth. Read the History of Tobiah, what Praying and
fasting and due preparation for the Kingdom of God, is able to effect briefly;
the whole Scripture is full of such examples.

12. Consider the Prayer of Christ; how his humane soul in God the Father
called, and awakened the Verbum Domini in him, when he would do Great Wonders
[or Miracles], especially about Lazarus, whom he Awakened from Death.
raised from the Dead: Then he sighed to his Father, and awakened the Center of
Nature and the Word in the Center of Nature on the Cross of the Number Three:
there the Holy Ghost, and the Word which the Holy Ghost then awakened, went
forth in his soul: and then the soul of Ghost thanked his Father, who had
heard him, and said in the power of the Word to Dead Lazarus: Lazarus come
forth: and there they saw the power of the Word in the soul, that the Dead
must arise: which Power the soul of Christ had opened and awakened with his
knocking.

13. You must know that Lazarus was awakened from within, and we shall all at
the Last Day hear the voice of God Ab intus.
from within in the Center of the soul: for the Word, with the Number Three,
dwells within it, in the Center on the Crosses, and that sounds forth
outward, and raises up the Body of the Essences: For the souls of Men are
all, as it were, one soul: for they are all propagated out of one only soul:
and therefore they will all hear the voice of the Humane soul m Christ, and
arise with their Bodies.

14. So then when we pray to God, God hears our soul in the Center in our
selves, that is, the soul presses forth with its repenting will, out of the
Center of Anguish, out of the Abyss of Hell, and also out of the Spirit of
this world, into the second Principle into God, which is also in the soul: for
all the Three Principles are in the soul, viz. the two Eternal, and the
Corruptible, which makes the Death of this world.

15. Understand us accuratly according to its high worth, thus: God the Father
moves not himself [when thou Prayest] the Holy Ghost only moves himself:
though that indeed avails not us neither; But the Word which has created our
soul is become Man, and that has the Holy Ghost in it, and he goes forth
from the Father in the Word, and meets the calling Mind and Will, and Or,
Manifests, or reveals.
opens himself from within outward into the soul; For the outward Beastiall
Body, is not worthy of the Holy Ghost, that he should open himself in it,
though sometimes it happened so to the Saints, that he went forth of the soul
into the Outward Principle; and then the body Triumphs, and for very Joy
knows not what is happened to it: but in the New body of the soul in Christ,
when the soul attaineth the body of Christ, in that the Holy Ghost dwells.

16. And so when the Devil comes, and will set upon the soul from beneath,
in the First Principle, in the Center of the first four Forms to the source
of the Fire, then the will of the soul presses into the flesh of Christ, into
the second Principle, inwards into it self, and there it is refreshed and
released, and the Devil must go down; for that life does not relish with
him: yet he is so furious, that he sets upon the soul, so often as he
perceives it to be secure and careless, or never so little burtheneth it
self with falsehood and wickedness: he always seeks an opportunity, wherein
he might find his Neast open [for him].

17. Therefore dear Children; When ye Pray, think not that God dwells a
far off from you, and so neither hears you, nor sees you; that is a false
Conceit and Opinion. Indeed those, who will not enter into God, those that
stick fast in their Malice and Iniquity, and retain wickedness in their
soul, those indeed are not heard. He that cries to God that he would
outwardly accept his words from him, and yet retains the Evil one in his
soul, he mocketh God: God dwells not outwardly; for the outward is the
Beastiall Starry Spirit: he dwells inwardly in himself; the outward
Substance is only a figure and similitude of God: Indeed it is of God, and
generated out of the Inward Center, and Expressed [or spoken forth] through the
Verbum Fiat: but it is not the substance of the Number Three, which is a
Substance and Spirit in the Trinity, above Nature, and yet dwells in Nature
in it self, incomprehensible to Nature, as the Wind and the Light is not
comprehended by the Fire, and yet are the spirit, brightness, and life of the
Fire.

18. Therefore, when you will pray, put away the abominations out of your
soul, and enter into your self, that is, you must loath the Abominations, and
frame a will and purpose in your soul, that you will not let such abominations
into you any more; also you must not suffer your will to stick in any Lusts and
unchastity.
abomination, and despair: for when you despair, you sinck your self down
into the Abyss.

19. But consider, that it is the dear will and pleasure of God, that you
press earnestly and strongly through, and leave the Abominations to the Devil
upon his neck, and come very humbly Praying, as a sinful child to God: he is
the Father of the Lost son, you have vainly riotted and spent your beauty and
righteousness, with the Devil, and with the Antichristian Whore, you are
amongst the swine at Babell: and having lost your Goods, you eat grains and
husks with the swine; you are naked and torn, and are not worthy to be called
his son; Consider and Imagine this in your self, for it is true, and so come
with true conversion out of the filth and mire of the swine, to our Ancient
Loving Father, and pray for his Grace and Favor, that he would but make thee
as one of his hired servants in his Court: acknowledge to him thy evil deeds,
and that thou art not worthy to be called his son. Behold dear soul,
Observe it, it is the very precious Truth.

20. When you thus enter into your self, and search out your abominations, and
the husks of the Devil, and of the world, which you have so long devoured: and
Consider of God and his Mercy, then turn not again into the Hogsty, and say
not, I am ashamed to come before my good old Father; I dare not come into his
sight, for great shame and abomination: for I was a glorious son, and now am
a naked Swineheard; but consider, that your Father takes more care about you
who are his lost Prodigal son, then you do about his favor and love, which
you have wilfully trifled away.

21. Frame but a loving, humble, submissive, obedient will and purpose, and
come, come away from the Swine, leave the husks to the world, let the Swine
devour them and feed themselves fatt: but enter you into your self, and knock
at your evil Heart; break in through the Doors and Gates: and though all
swine cry, and Devils should howl for their Or, Herdsman.
Keeper; yet come you to your Father with any humble demeanor and words, you
need not trouble your self about the adorning of them with accurate Eloquence;
for though you have no more words then the Poor Publican, it is no matter, it
lies not in them, but in an Earnest constant purpose without ceasing: and
though Hell should break in pieces, and body and soul part asunder, yet stand
still, and go not forth again out of the Doors of the Father.

22. For as soon as you will open the Door in your soul, and will go out of
the Mire, toward the Ancient Father, that he does but perceive that it is you
his son, and that you are returned to him, then he says; This is my son
which was Lost, for whom my heart was troubled, and is entered into the
Humanity, into this world, and has sought him, and now I have found him.

23. And there he sends the Holy Ghost to meet him, and falls kindly about
his Neck, and receives him with Joy, and for a token of his love, he puts
the Seal and the Ring of the Holy Trinity, in the suffering and death of
Christ on to the Hand of the soul: and there he brings the blessed Virgin of
his Wisdom, the New Angelical Garment (viz. the flesh of Christ) and puts
it on to the soul; and all the servants of God, ( viz. the Holy Angels in the
House of the Father) must rejoice and be merry with the lost son; and there
the Ancient Father slays the fatted Calfe, and feeds his son at his
Table, (of the Heavenly Substantiality) with the power and with the flesh of
his Obedient Son Christ, and gives him to drink of the Water of Eternal
Life, in the blood of Christ, in the first Mother, out of which the soul has
been created; and there is Joy in Heaven among the Ninty-Nine Angels or holy
souls, which are with God, that a dear brother is come into their Society.

24. And although the own [Invented] works of Holiness ( viz. the Elder son,
who has always been busy at home in the Antichristian house,) murmur and
grumble at it (and boasts of his Obedience labor and toil which he had
taken in Hypocrisy) the Father regards not that; the New son pleases him
better, then he that had continued in the House: he thought that he alone was
heir, that the Kingdom of Heaven belonged to him: he had merited it, and has
not gone out of the house; to him belongs the Keys of the Treasure; the other
is but a Swineheard: All this does not divert the Father, but he is merry with
his servants the Angels and holy souls, and lets him that was Angry (who
would not rejoice with his brother) go down into the wrathful Pit of the
Devil; and he is merry with his children. But seeing the Hypocrite is Angry,
and despises the Supper of the Father, therefore he does not taste of the
Heavenly Joy.

25. Hearken you Roman Pope, and you Roman Or, Caesar.
Emperor, why are you angry with us poor lost sons in Germany, who go in
to our first true Father? Would he not feign have us? are you not our brother?
wherefore then do you grumble? Are you Pope in the House? then have a care
that you be the Fathers obedient son, and rejoice with the lost son, when
he goes out from Antichrist, to the Father: If you will not do so, you must
Eternally be angry, and shall have no Joy with us [once] Lost, but [now] again
living children, to Eternity.

26. O you Antichristian Wolf, why are you Angry, when the Father receives a
Swineheard for a dear child, and Gives him the Seale-Ring, the Mysterium
Magnum? do you think you do right in it? though indeed you are borne of an
Academie [or from an Vniversity] and the Swineheards [are borne] in the field
among the swine, as you account them; yet in them the greatest Wonders are
awakened [or manifested] above your Hypocritical Reason: look to it, Rule
well in the house of your Academie; we heard a Watchman say; That the
Contentions, Janglings, and Disputations may cease.
leave off; The City Babell is fallen; see that you be not taken in Babell: for
it burns in the Fire: the Turba Magna will spew it out, there is no other
Remedy or Counsel, but for all to go, together with the Swineheard, to the
Father, and pray to him for Grace; else you will be feign to try by woeful
Experience, what this Pen has written, and out of what Spirit it did flow and
was revealed.

27. When Christ drove the Devil out of the Lunatic that was possessed, his
Disciples said to him: Master, why could not we drive him out? Then said
Christ; This kind does not go out but by Fasting and Prayer.

28. Dear children, brethren and sisters, be advised, for the kind Love of
the God the Father in his heart, (which for our sakes is become Man,) has
lifted up himself in the Or, Highest Age.
Crown of the Spirit of this World, and calls us; It grieveth his Mercy,
that we are fallen home to the Wrath in the Turba Magna; he now sends you
many Messengers, and calls you in their voice, and he will send more unto
you: why do you despise them, and kill them? Try them whither their Spirit be
borne of God or no: or whither they seek their own way of their Belly in
Antichrist: surely it is time to awake from sleep: No jesting matter will
follow: you should not dare to jest so with the Keys of the Holy Ghost; and
make Conclusions of Faith, according to your own Opinions, Tenets, and
Conceits: Faith will not be begotten by Conclusions and Cannons; but is
awakened by true sincerity; as by being obedient children of Christ.

29. Saint Paul did not say to his Disciple: Dispute of the Mysteries of God;
but he said, Awaken or stir up the Gifts that are in thee: No man's own wit
can do it; much less the Pride of the High Schools [or Universities] which
yet they cloak with hypocrisy, and hide it under the Mantle of the Holy
Ghost: why do you make Conclusions about the Body and the Person of Christ?
Have you power and authority to do so? Is it not a Mystery to you? and you
understand nothing in it; unless you be newborn again in Christ; Does he
not say? Behold I am with you even to the End of the World? Is he with you? Why
then do you set your selves upon his Throne, and deny his Presence? Are you
not Pilate who sentenceth Christ? from whom have you the might and authority,
to make Conclusions and Articles? are you his Lords? then you are not children:
have a care you prove not the Eldest son in the House; who striveth about the
Inheritance, and about the power and Authority, and yet continues to be a
proud Angry Murmurer against the Father? Dear children, it avails nothing to
go such a way: Christ said to his Disciples, when he drove the Devil out of
the Lunatic that was possessed, which the Disciples could not do in their own
Reason; This kind goes not out but by Fasting and Prayer.

30 Dear Brethren, you will not [be able to] drive the Devil out of us, if
you have not Christ with you; your Art and Conclusions of Reason will do
nothing else but cause people to go out from God into their own self will;
We must fast and Pray, that we fall not into Temptation, and into the Netts
and snares of the Devil, in our Reason: for the Devil always holds his Net
before Reason, and he that falls into it, supposes he is caught in Christ's
fishing Net; but he is taken in Antichrists Pursenet.
Net; Reason Comprehends Nothing of the Kingdom of God, but the husk; the
virtue and power of it remains hidden to Reason, unless it be borne in God,
and then Reason goes forth as a burning Fire in the Spirit of God but the
Spirit lets it not fly aloft, but boweth it to the Earth [in humility] for
he knows the Satan.
Warrior that fights against Reason.

31. A watchful Life is requisite, which is chastened and not overflowne with
the fleshly voluptuous spirit of this world: and not a Life always drunken and
full: for as soon as the soul is inflamed with the vigor and power of the
Earthly Spirit, then Gods Spirit passes into its own Principle; and the soul
is captivated by the Spirit of this world, and the Devil gains an access to
it; and then its former wit and understanding (known^ ^n God) is changed into
outward Reason, and then Man supposes still, that it is Gods Spirit.

39. O no friend! the Or, Configuration of the Stars in us.
Constellation, which should rest in the Spirit of Christ, lusts also to
possess such a heart and soul, where the Spirit of God has been sitting; for
every Creature longs after the virtue and power of God: but the
Constellation, though it come into the Temple of God, drives on its own
matters that lie in its power, it knows nothing of Divine Wisdom; it has a
wisdom, and Makes.
constituteth the Spirit of this world: indeed it has great Art and Learning:
for the Earthly and Elementary Mysterium Magnum lies therein: but it has not
the Key to the Principle of the Liberty of God without and beyond Nature; for
it has a beginning and End, and looks no further; it makes and seeks
only an Hypocritical Beastiall life.

33. Therefore let us not be Stout, surly.
proud and secure, nor rely upon Art and Learning, much less upon the Letter:
for the spirit thereof is hidden to us, without the Spirit of God: we have the
will of God in the Holy Scripture: yet without the Spirit of God we have but
the Husk and the Dead Word: (except Gods Spirit first awaken the Living Word in
us, that we may understand the Letter, and the written Word;) which is plain
enough, in that the Learned in Arts are but Learned in the Letter, and not Or,
Taught of God.
Learned in God, otherwise they would not contend and wrangle about Christ's
honor and Doctrine, nor so dispute about the Cup of Christ.

34. Though there were a Thousand men Or, Taught of God.
Learned in God, who are borne in the Spirit of Christ, and were together, and
had each of them a special gift and knowledge in God, yet they would all be
but one in the Root of Christ, and would every one desire only the Love of
God in Christ: what Disciple or Scholar, will exalt himself above his Master?
we are one Body in Christ, why then should one Member contend with the other
about the food? when the desirous Mouth feeds, then all the Members receive
strength and virtue; Every Member has its own Office or work, in opening the
Wonders of God: we do not all bring one and the same words, but one spirit in
Christ: every one has that which is his own imparted to him what he shall
open in God, that the Great Mysteries of God may be made manifest, and the
Wonders which have been foreseen from Eternity in his Wisdom, might be
revealed: to which End the soul was created of God.

35. I know, and the Spirit shows it to me, that thou Antichristian
Sophister wilt Object against me: that even among the Apostles there has been
strife and contention about the words of Christ? It Is true indeed, and it was
Satan's Masterpiece, to sift Christ's Disciples, the Disciples of those
Disciples, so soon as they became secure: forthey were Men well as we, and
one was stronger in Spirit then the Other, according as they did Or, Examine.
search themselves; and raise up themselves in God: for they lived among Evil
Men: and many times must apply themselves to the world, and must give the Weak
Milk to drink, at which others many times stumbled in their Reason, and grew
hot and Zealous, and reproved one another for it; as may be seen about
Cornelius, when Peter went in to the Heathens, and the other Apostles supposed,
that the Kingdom of God belonged only to Israel.

36. But you are to know, that the Love of God is so Lowly, submissive and
pliable.
humble, that when it has kindled the soul with its self; it self is
subject to the soul? but no soul will enjoy that, but those that are humbled
in the Love of God, and constantly go forth from their desires, that the
Spirit of God may live in them, and that they may have an eye unto him: the
soul is permitted to be Zealous, but it does better to live in Meekness, in
which it enters into the Majesty [of God] and is a totally beloved child:
what does it avail me, that I power out fire upon my brother, and so burn my
self therein: It is more blessed, to continue under the Cross in Patience and
in Meekness, then to bring fire from Heaven.

37. Christ is come to seek and to save that which was Lost; not to awaken his
Anger against us, but that he might help us out of the Jaws of the Devil, and
has Regenerated us in himself to be a Living Creature in God, and has
brought us quite through the fire of his Fathers Anger. He has broken the
Bands, that we might follow him in Love and Meekness, as children should
follow their Parents: therefore he Teaches us faithfully what we should do,
and how we should Pray.

[Of the Lords Prayer.]
38. The Prayer which he has Taught us, is an Instruction and Teaching of all
whatsoever we should do and leave undone; and what we should ask and Expect
from God: and is always rightly to be understood according to the Three
Principles, which we will here make a short Manuduction.
Introduction to, though it cannot be Circumscribed or limited in its
Interpretation.
confined or concluded, for the Spirit in the Prayer comprehends in it the
whole Eternity, also Nature and Every Thing; so that No Tongue can sufficiently
Expound it. The more it is Considered, the more is found in it. Yet we will
venture upon it, and give the Reader an Manuduction.
Introduction; not to tie or limit the Spirit: for it rises up in Every ones
soul, as virtue and power is given from the Wonders of God. And so it is also
with the Gospel, that is not tied to any Exposition: The more any search into
it, the more they find therein: For the Spirit of God it self teaches us to
Pray aright, and also presents us to God. For we know not what we should
say; out whole business of Praying and Conversion consists only in the Will
and Purpose, that we give our selves up into God; God the Holy Ghost himself
makes the springing and growing up through himself in God, he drives forth
the blossom of the New body of the soul, out from the Divine Center forth
through the soul, so that the fruit of Eternal Life, springs forth out of
the Souls body, with many Branches and fair fruit, and stands as a Glorious
Tree in the Kingdom of God; so that when we pray, our soul eats of many
heavenly fruits, which are all grown out of the Body of the soul, as out of a
heavenly soil or ground: and the soul eats of them again in Prayer, and
they are its food on the Table of God: Thus it eats ex verbo Domini of the
Word of the Lord; concerning which Christ says; Man lives not by Bread only,
but by every word which proceeds out of the Mouth of God.

39. The Pater Noster. Our Father.
The Lords Prayer affords a very high and excellent understanding in the
Language of Nature: for it expresses the Eternal Birth, also all the Three
Principles, also the Lamentable Fall of Man, and shows him the Regeneration
in Christ; it shows him what he should do, and how he should behave
himself, that he may come again into the Divine union, and shows him how
kindly the Spirit of God meets him.

40. But because it is hard to be understood, we will set down a brief
Summary Contents and Understanding and meaning.
Exposition; and commit the further Work of the highest Tongue, to the Spirit
of God in every soul, and may well be handled at large in a It may be his
Treatise, called, The holy Weeks, or the Prayer Book, which was not finished.
Treatise by it self, if the Lord give us leave.

[Heere follows a Summary Exposition of the LORDS Prayer, how it is to be
understood in the Language of Nature from syllable to syllable, as it is
Expressed in the words of the German Language.
High Dutch Tongue, which was the Authors Native Language; but because the
Language of Nature is not yet clearly understood by me, therefore I cannot
transfer it to the English Tongue: but must set it down in the syllables of
the High Dutch words, and Interline the English under it. Whosoever desires to
see more concerning the Language of Nature, let him read in the fifth Chapter
of this Book verse the 85. upon the word Schuff, and In the Aurora, in the
Epistles, in the Mysterium Magnum, etc.
elsewhere in his other Writings.]

[The Entrance.]
Vnser vatter im Himmel.

Our Father [which art] in Heaven.

41. When we say: V;nser vatter im Himmell: then the soul raises up it self
in all the Three Principles, and gives it self up into that, out of which it
is created; which we understand in the Language of Nature very exactly and
accurately. For un-, is Gods Eternal Will to Nature; -ser, comprehends in it
the first four forms of Nature: wherein the first Principle Consists.

42. Vatter, gives the two distinctions of the two Principles; for va-, is the
Matrix upon the Cross, -tter is Mercury in the Center of Nature; and they are
the two Mothers in the Eternal Will, out of which all things are come to be;
the one severeth it self into Fire, and the other into the Light of Meekness,
and into water: for va- is the Mother of the Lights, which affords
Substantiality, and -tter is the Mother of the fires Tincture, which affords
the great and strong Life: and Vatter is both of them.

43. When we say im, we understand the innermost, viz. the Heart, from which
the Spirit goes forth: for the syllable im goes forth from the Heart, and
sounds through the Lips, and the Lips keep the Heart in the innermost
unawakened.

44. When we say Him-, we understand the Creation of the soul. The syllable
-mel is the Angelical soul it self, which the Heart on the Cross in the
Center between the two Mothers has comprehended: and with the word Him-,
framed it into a creature, viz. into mel: for Him-, is the habitation of -mel:
therefore, the soul is created in Heaven, that is, in the loving Matrix [or
Mother].

The First Petition.
Dein Nahme werde geheiliget.

Thy Name be Or, sanctified.
Hallowed.

45. When we say Dein, we understand how the poor soul swimmeth in the
water of this world: and how it casts it self with its will into the
Principle of God: it goes with the syllable Dein into the voice of God.

46. In the syllable Nah- it inclines inwards, and in the syllable -me it
comprehends the Heavenly Substantiality: and this is done in the Will of the
soul.

47. And when we say were-, then the whole Creature goes along in the will:
for were- has the whole Center, and with the syllable -de it lays it self
down in Obedience in the Meekness, and will not kindle the were- in the fire,
as Lucifer had done.

48. And when we say ge-, then the soul goes into the Heavenly
Substantiality, as a quiet child without Anger: and then -hei- is the
powerful entering upon the Cross, into the Number-Three, where the souls will
presses into the Majesty, into the Light of God; with the syllable -li-, the
souls will has comprehended the Holy Ghost. [In the syllable] -get, there the
souls will goes forth with the Holy Ghost: for the brightness of the Majesty
shines in the will, and the Holy Ghost goes along in the Glance of the
Majesty upon the Chariot of the soul: for the will is the souls Or,
Triumphant Chariot.
Wedding Chariot, with which it rides in Ternarium Sanctum into the Holy
Ternary, wherein the Holy Ghost sits with the brightness of the Deity.

The Second Petition.
Dein Reich komme.

Thy kingdom come.

49. Dein, there the poor soul gives it self up again into the will of
God, as Gods child.

50. Reich, here the soul gives it self into the virtue and Power of the
Angelical world, and desires to come out of the Deep of the waters into the
power of God.

51. Komme, in the syllable kom-, it goes in into the virtue and power, and
apprehends it: and with the syllable -me, it makes the Heaven be open, and
goes forth with the apprehended power, into the Kingdom, as a sprout: for the
-me, makes the Lips be open, and lets the sprout of the Will go forth, and
lets it grow softly by degrees.

The Third Petition.
Dein willen geschehe wie im Himmel also auch auff Erden.

Thy will be done as in Heaven so also on Earth.

52. Dein, here the soul does with its will, as in the first and second
Petition: it casts it self into Gods will.

53. Will-, is its desire to will the same with the Holy Ghost, -len, with this
syllable, it takes in the Spirit with the Will into the Center, as into the
Heart, and wills that its will in the Holy Ghost should Or, boil up.
flow up in the Heart.

54. Ge-, with this syllable it goes into the will, -sche-, with this syllable
it works the work of God: for there it does, what the Counsel of the Father
is, what the Heart of God will: as the soul of Christ suffered it self to be
hanged on the Cross, and as we in misery bow down under the Cross; -he, in
this syllable it takes patiently what God works; it Yields or submits.
boweth it self as a child.

55. Wie, there it goes again into the voice of the high Majesty. Im, is the
Heart of God, out of which the Spirit goes forth: in which will, it would be.
Him-, is See in the first Petition.
again the Creating of the Creatures; -mel, is the soul, that is, it wills
to act in the will of God, like the Angels, who do that which Gods will
accepts.

56. Al-, there it comprehends that will, and drives it on with the
syllable, -so, out of its Center into this world, into the outward Principle.
Auch, there it affords all whatsoever it has in it self out into the
outward, out from it self into this world.

57. Auff, With this syllable, it apprehends the same again, and desires
that its substance should not be dissipated: for it only lets the will of
the substance go forth through the closed Lips to the Teeth: and desires that
the form of the will should remain as a figured substance Eternally.

58. Er-, with this syllable it brings its substance into the Spirit of this
world upon the Earth, and there the Will shall work Or, Miracles.
wonders, as in the Kingdom of the Angels in the Power of God: the will must
manifest the hidden Secrets of God: -den, with this syllable it shows, that
they must not be done in the fire of the Anger, in which the Devil dwells:
for this syllable does not break up the Center: they should be done in meek
Love, and yet be taken out of the Er-, The soul shall mightily rule in all
hidden secrets: but it must not let in the Devil.

59. Here our want is very much, the Heavy Fall presses us hard. O there is
very much herein hidden, which would be too long to describe. For the Will of
God should be done, and not the Will of the flesh, and of the Devil. Note.
And therefore it is that we are so doubtful in Prayer, because the poor
soul runs on in the will of the Flesh, and of the Devil. If it did live in
Innocence, we should have this skill perfect, and there would be no doubting
in our Prayers, but an acting and accomplishment of them: [This the Apostles of
Christ wanted when they asked why they could not cast out the dumb Devill] we
do rightly swim here in misery, which the Spirit of the Wonders shows us.

The Fourth Petition.
Gieb uns unser taglich Brodt heute.

Give us our Daily Bread to Day.

60. Gieb, there the will sticks in the Heart, and presses outward, and the
Mouth catches it: that is, the soul would be fed: what the Word gives forth,
that the soul takes: for that belongs to it, it will have that.

61. Vns, with this syllable the soul desires food for all its [fellow]
Members, viz. for all souls, as if they were but one Tree with many Branches,
whereof every branch must have sap and virtue from the stock: and so it
desires to have this in common out of the virtue of God, for the Life of all
souls: for it attracteth that with all its desire to it, and in all [others],
as a loving brother; it wills to have it in common; and not alone to it self
in Covetousness, as the Devil did.

62. Un-, with this syllable, the will of the soul goes into the Eternal
Wisdom, wherein before the Creation in the seed, it was discerned in the
Eternal Will: -ser, with this syllable it takes the Original of Nature in
the Will, where one form in the Original generateth, fills, and preserves
the other: and that is the Band of the soul, whereby it Eternally lives and
subsisteth: and that the will or the soul desires, else it would be
dissolved. For a Spirit desires no more, then to retain its Band, and to fill
it with virtue that it may flow forth.

63. And here lies the Key of the Greatest hidden Secret of the Being of all
Beeings. Beloved Doctor, if you were Learned, you would seek here; and if you
understand nothing here, nor will to understand, then you are not learned, but
are only tellers of stories, which the simple if he did use himself to it,
would perform as well as you: This is the true Doctorship in the Holy Ghost:
the outward [in the Learning of the School of Reason] is but a foppery, and
puffs up into a high mind.

64. Tag-, with this syllable, the heavenly Number is understood, as wherein
the Spirit on the Cross in the Holy Matrix comprehends the Genetrix in the
Multiplication, where the Will of the Spirit, recreateth, confirms, and
strengthens it self; -lich, in this syllable the souls will quickens it
self in the light and virtue of the Majesty of God, and strengthens the
soul with the heavenly Number, which springs up out of the Majesty
infinitely: and herein the soul is acknowledged for an Angel, and lives in
the Hand of God.

65. Brodt, here the Corporeal substance springs up, and our misery: for
Brodt [Bread] is generated out of the Center of Nature, although the last
letter in the syllable Brodt As it is pronounced, signifies.
Expresses that it is Paradisicall Bread: for the Cross Character [T] in the
Language of Nature, carries the severe Name of God: [GOTTES]: which if men
will rightly Expound it, and understand it according to the Language of Nature:
may be understood powerfully, and in its highest depth, in the word (...) *
(...) DEUS GOT GOD.


Tetragrammaton [Jehovah], for that word comprehends all the Three
Principles, And in the word (...) r
Adonai, God is understood as in one Principle, viz. in the Angelical World:
which may be expounded in a Treatise by it self: we set down this, that this
syllable might be considered of: For Brodt [Bread] is the food of the Body; and
is to be understood concerning the fierce wrath, that it has mixed it self in
it, and signifies the house of Lamentation and Mourning: but since we must
have this food, therefore the soul reaches after it for the maintenance of
its Beastiall Body.

66. Heu-, This syllable signifies the Eternal Bread of the soul, the New
Body, viz. the Heavenly Substantiality: for the will goes forth out of the
Bread into the Heu-, that is, the Eternal Substantiality, viz. the bread of
God, Christ's flesh; -te, this syllable confirms that it affords and frames
the severe Name [Gottes] of God: for the soul desires a twofold Bread, one
for the Belly, and the other for its holy Heavenly Body.

The Fifth Petition.
Vndt verlasse uns unser schuldt, als wir verlassen unser schuldigern.

And forgive us our Or, Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us.
as we forgive our Debtors.

67. Vndt, this syllable is that, wherein the will of the soul awakeneth the
Love of God; for the will sticks fast in the word vndt, as in the Meekness;
it satiateth the ver- viz. the Anger, and springs with the undt [or
meeknesse] up, as a budding, Vegetables.
growing Substance, like a blossom out of the ver-, and yet they remain one
in another: for ver- is the Center of the Life: it has the fire of the wrath,
and the undt belongs to the second Principle: -less or -lass is the
cleansing of that which is generated out of the ver-, of which Isaiah says;
Were your sin as red as blood, if you turn, they shall be as wool, white as
snow. In the syllable -less, is the Bath or Laver, wherein the ver- must be
washed, or else it cannot subsist in the kingdom of God.

68. Vns, is the union again, where the will of the soul, viz. the Communion
or fraternity, that is, all souls, in one will, desire to be washed.

69. Un-, there the will yields it self into the Love of God, Or, cleanses.
and washes the Evil Child, -ser: and thereby confesses all Evil and
wickedness [for all in common] as if they were but only soul.

70. Schuldt: this is the true Catalogue or Register, which the Anger has
brought into the soul, which Catalogue the will desires to cast away
altogether: But the Mouth catches the syllable again as a flash: to signify,
that our works shall stand Eternally to the wonders of God; and we need only
wash them, that they might not be comprised in the fierce wrath of God, and
inflamed; else they belong to the Abyss Or, into.
to the dark Principle.

71. Als, in this syllable, the will of the soul compriseth together, all
whatsoever is called Soul, and speaks of Many, as if they were but One.

72. Wir, in this syllable the will complains against the Anguish of the
source of disquietnesse in the soul, where one soul often Offends or
wrongeth.
hurts another, and therefore, the will compriseth together the Turba of All
souls, and says [as followeth].

73. Ver-, that is, the will [of the soule] desires that the fierce wrath of
all souls might be thrust downwards upon a heap, into the Abyss: -las-, that
is, to Put it away, or remit it.
let it go, and not know it more in the fierceness of the Anger: for the
syllable -sen, retains the form of the Wonder: but it must be washed in the
Lassen [or Or, scowring it away.
letting it goe] for lassen is the Laver or Bath [to wash it in].

74. Un-, this syllable yet again presses into the Love of God, and desires
to bring the washed souls into the Love; -sern, this syllable, in the presence
of God, shows the Evil child, which is now washed in the Love, and there
puts it among the Wonders of God, for it sets forth, whatsoever is come
to be a wonder in the Tincture of the fire in the soul.

75. Schul-, this syllable shows the unprofitable [or vaine] works, which one
soul has wrought toward another out of the Or, Fierce wrathful Life.
Tincture of the Fire: and is a setting forth of the Evil, which the soul in
the will it self, has washed and cleansed again: -di-, this syllable puts
the union again into the Majesty, and into the Holy Ghost, where there is no
contrary will any more: -gern, is the Evil child, which now stands before
God, to Gods deeds of Wonder: from whence the will took its Pravity or
vileness and Infirmity.
fall, and desires that the Holy Ghost will take it in as a Wonder in to the
Majesty.

The Sixth Petition.
Vndt fuhre uns nicht im versuchungh.

And lead us not into Temptation.

76. Vndt, is once more an injection into the loving Meekness of God, where
the will of the soul in the Majesty humbles it self before the Number Three
[or Trinity].

77. Fuh-, there the will goes along with the Holy Ghost; -re, there the will
would not go through the fierce wrath: for it is afraid of the Prison of the
fierce wrath; for the will should always be steadfastly inclined into God, that
it may pass through the Fire without molestation, and also through the outward
Principle, viz. through this world: and yet should not catch at, or offer to
lust after any thing: but seeing the soul knows, that it stood not out in
the first Temptation, when it was brought into the spirit of this world, when
the Verbum Fiat breathed it into the Image, therefore it flies now to the Holy
Ghost, entreating that he would not enter with its will into the Temptation,
Proba, or Trial, for it trusts not in it self, that it shall stand
steadfastly against the Devil, when he shall sift it: as Christ said to Peter;
The Devil has desired to sift thee: but I have prayed for thee that thy Faith
fail not: that is, I have enclosed thee in the Word, and have not given the
Devil any leave, but I have in my Prayer brought thee into the will of God,
that thou should be preserved by the Holy Ghost: else thou should have been
sifted by the Devil through the Anger and through the spirit of this world.

78. Vns, this syllable once again compriseth the Brotherly union, as in one
will in the Majesty, and flies into the Spitit.

79. Nicht, in this syllable the will rendeth it self quite out from the root
of the Anger, and reteineth a peculiar Government Extra Iram.
without the Anger, and then the soul burns forth from the fire, and is the
true Life without the Fire in the light flaming Tincture in Air and virtue or
Power.

80. Im, there it stands as a sound and substance of its own, as if it were
the Center it self: ver-, there it must with the will go through the fierce
wrath, and mitigate or satiate it, and must cool it, that it might not inflame
its Meek Life: -such-, with this syllable it presses through the fierce wrath
with its love-Tincture, viz. through the Center of Nature, and quenches the
fierce wrath after a Divine manner, and drives the suttlety of the Devil out
of the fire-source out of the Original, where otherwise he would have an
access into the soul: -vng, there the soul takes the virtue out of the
seven forms of its Nature with it, as a Spirit, and sets it self mightily
over the Center, and rules over it as a King over his Kingdom; for now it
has overcome [or cooled] the Center with its Love: and will now let in the
Tempter no more.

The Seventh Petition.
Sondern Erlohse uns vom vbel.

But deliver us from Evil.

81. Son-, in this syllable The Soul.
it appears in the Majesty with its virtue, power, and brightness over the
Center of the Heart, and has a principle of its own in the Majesty; -dern,
there it commands the fierce wrath in the Center, and rules over it, and
tameth it with its will [as may be seen by Moses, when the fierce wrath said;
Let me alone that I may consume Israel].

82. Er-, there it brings a blossom and sprout out of the Center, and opens
the Wonders of God: for it here goes about with the Center, as it will, for
it has overcome: -loh-, that is the sprout, which grows out of the fierce
wrath out of Nature, and is now lovely, good, and useful in the Kingdom of
God; -se, there it continues to be fruit upon Gods Table, free from the Anger.

83. Vns, there it once again takes the union of all souls with it, and
lays it open there, that it was a root in the Kingdom of God before its
Creation, and has now brought forth many, that is, it is a Tree and has put
forth many Branches, and presents them there as in a Tree.

84. Vom, that is the Great Wonder, that God has made of one two, and yet it
remains but one: it shows this: for ye see that the Root in the Earth is
another thing then the stalk which grows out of the Root; so you must
understand it also concerning the true holy soul: that grows as a stalk out
of the Root, out of the Center of Nature; and is another thing then the
Center: and yet the Center generateth it, and it moves in full Omnipotence
over the Center, and rules over it, as God rules over Nature, and yet there
the Name of the Number-Three in the Eternal Nature arises: And as God is free
from Nature, and yet Nature is of his Essence or Substance, and unseperated
from God, so is the soul also, it is free from Nature, and is a Lord of
Nature; for it is one Spirit with God, and yet blossometh or sprouteth out of
Nature. Indeed God is not wholly to be likened to the soul: for Gods Eternal
will is a cause and beginning of Nature, but [the soul is to be likened] to
the Majesty of God, whose brightness arises out of the sharpness of the
Eternal Nature, and yet arises before Nature, like the flash of the Eternal
Liberty, from whence Nature in its sharp generating, receives the Luster, and
elevateth it in the fire, to a Triumphant high Light: for which cause sake, the
Eternal Liberty without Nature, longs after Nature, because it desires to
be manifested in Wonders, and will have Majesty in Glory and Power.

85. For if there were no Nature, there would be no Glory, nor Power, much
less Majesty: also there would be no Spirit, but only a Stillnesse without
Substance [Essence or Beeing]: But thus in Nature there appears, Power and
Virtue, Might, Glory, Majesty, Number-Three, [Trinity] and Being [Essence or
Substance]: and are the Manifestation of the Eternal Being. Now since the
soul, as a Spirit is discovered and taken out of this Being; it has
therefore two forms, One is Nature, and the other is the Divine Blossom, or
the Sprout out of Nature, which is above Nature, and is a Spirit in it self;
as God is a Spirit in himself; as you may see this by the Fire: the Fire is
the Nature, and the flame with the Air [or vapour] which goes forth out of
the Fire, is a Spirit with all the Power of the Fires Nature, and yet is above
the Fires Nature; for the Fires Nature cannot Or, rule it.
comprehend it: and so also the Fires Nature could not subsist, if the Spirit
of the Air did not blow up the Fire again.

86. Thus the Fire generateth the Spirit with the Luster, and longs earnestly
again after the Spirit, and attracteth it continually into it self, and yet
reteineth it not: for it is the life of the Fire, and the Glance or Luster is
out of the sharpness of the Fire, yet there is no feeling in the Glance or
Luster, and yet the Glance has the virtue or power, and not the Fire: for from
the virtue of the Luster there springs up and grows a sprout, and not from
the Fire, as you may perceive by the [Sun-shine or] Luster of the Sun.

87. Now seeing the poor soul in the heavy fall of Adam was captivated by two
fires, viz. by that fire, through which the Spirit of this world, has
comprised it in it self, under which lies the fire of the Original;
therefore it would be again free with its Spirit-Life, in which it is an
Angel, and the Image of God, and goes with its will Vom [from], that is, as a
sprout out from Nature, and also out from the Spirit of this world out of the
Wonders of God, forth from them; and stands rightly quite vom [from] that is,
it has now the virtue of Nature and Mercury, in the virtue and power of the
Majesty, which is another Principle, and yet has also the severe fiery
[Principle] but not manifested; for the Holy Principle in the Majesty changes
the fierce wrath into Love.

88. And if the severe Principle should be awakened again, it would be fire,
and the first four forms of Nature would flow forth: and therefore God is
become Man, that the Love-Spirit [might] have a Body.

89. Therefore it flies (if it be yet unregenerated, and so does stick only
in the Earthly Body) and says: Erloohse uns vom vbel [deliver us from Evill]:
it desires to be released from the Anger; for v-, and -bell, are two wills in
one Substance; v-, is the fire-childe, and -bell has also two Principles; for
the first letter -b-, has the outward Dominion, and the other two, viz. -e-
and -l, that is -el, has the Angel, the will, to be delivered from both, [
viz. from the child of the fire, and the spirit of the outward world] not
presently separated (for it is the Counsel of God that they d^^^l in one
another:) but the Angels will would be free from the falsehood: it would rule
over the vbel or Evil: he desires to be in the will of God, and the vbel or
Evil shall stand, the one [part] according to the Spirit of this world) to the
Wonders of God, and the other [part] (according to the source of the fierce
wrath,) to the Wonders of the Anger of God.

90. For both the Mothers are stirring, and desire to open their Wonders; yet
the will of the soul would not go into the Anger; for it knows the Devil,
that he is haughty, and flying aloft over the Love and Meekness of God, at
which the soul is amazed; so also it would not willingly work in the Spirit of
this world; for that hides also Gods Light from it, and therefore it goes
forth with its will from them both, and would be free in its will, the Spirit
of this world may awaken its Wonders in the flesh; but it casts its will into
Gods Spirit, he shall govern it: and he will not let the vbel [or Evil,]
enter into its will: it desires [with its will] to be dead Or, to.
in this world, that it may live in the Holy Ghost: so also it will not awaken
the Abyss, and therefore it hides or sheltereth it self under the Cross, and
lets the roaring Devil pass by; also it lets the Spirit of this world,
viz. the fleshly Life, pass by, it does as if it were dead; it suffers, yet
not in God, but in the vbel [or Evill] which the soul of Adam has left it as
an inheritance: it holds not that vbel or [Evill] for its own, but for the
Wonders of God.

91. Therefore it remains Patient, as a sufferer, (and yet also not a
sufferer) under the Cross of Patience, till Christ shall settle it again upon
the Cross, in the Rainbow [in the Eternal Substantiality, or in the Eternal
Covenant]. For he sits on the Rainbow, and his body, his substance, is the
fulness of Heaven [or the Heaven is full of his substance].

92. The Three colors in the Rainbow, are the Three Principles, the fourth
[colour] is his body in Ternario Sancto; [or in the Inward heavenly working
power, in the Angelical world, in the Eternal Substantiality, wherein the
Divine Trinity works.

93. O how Great are the Wonders! he that comprehends them has great Joy
thereon, there can nothing be named that is like these hidden secret Mysteries,
no Tongue can express them: for what is better then to have God for his
Spouse, to be in God with ones will; and after this [life,] time, to be wholly
in substance a heavenly body, and a Clarified or Glorified soul.

94. O Great Depth, why art thou so hidden to Men? it comes from hence, because
they love the Devil, and the haughty proud fierceness, more then thee; and
therefore they are not able thus with fierceness, to enter into thee; O Mercy
of God! bring again the Tree which thou have planted why should thy Wrath
boast, that it has borne more fruit upon thy Tree, then thy Love? Build again
the ruined City Jerusalem, that thy Kingdom may come, and thy will be done;
who will give thee thanks in Hell? Draw us yet in with thy Spirit, into thy
Praise [or Temple, where they sing of thy Praise]. How long shall Hell drop
with fatness? Behold! it has opened its Jaws, and would devour us all; Come
yet and build the City of thy Court, that we may dwell near thee, that thy
Wonders may leap for Joy, when thy Love-Spirit Or, is Judge.
Judges. Tarry not O Lord: for thy Tree is become old for sorrow: [that is,
the Number of virtuous people is small]: bring yet forth the new green
Branches, which against the Devils will spring up through his Kingdom: Let
the Day break forth: wherefore shall the night of the Anger keep back the
Lilly-Twigge? O Lord, thy Tree grows through the whole world; therefore
awaken us O Lord, that we may eat of its fruit.

Of the Amen.
So be it. And For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever and
ever.
Close [of the Prayer in the Language of Nature.]
95. A-, is the first Letter, and presses forth out of the Heart, and has no
Nature [or fierceness in the pronunciation] but we clearly understand
herein, the seeking longing or attracting of the Eternal Will without Nature,
wherein Nature is generated, which has been from Eternity. For the Will
desires the Heart, and the Heart desires the Will, they are Father and Son,
and the virtue, which goes forth from them, is the Spirit of the Eternal
Life, of which we In this Book of the Threefold Life.
formerly made mention.

96. Now as the A-, is generated out of the Heart, viz. out of the Eternal
Will, and thrust forth out of the Will, so out of A- afterward comes the
whole Alphabet with four and twenty Or, Letters.
Numbers: for the A- begins to Number, and compriseth the whole Number in
the [syllable] -men; These are the Wonders and Works of God, which appear in
the Spirit above Nature, viz. in the brightness of the Majesty: which you may
understand thus: we are with our Souls in a strange Inn, viz. in the spirit
of this world; which holds it captive, and so it could not come into God, if
God were not become Man, who has brought our soul into the Word, as into the
Living Power of God, in himself: but now we are branches on that Tree, and
must attract the sap of the Tree into us; if we would spring from the Tree:
else if we only Imagine, [and reach] after the Air and Sun, then our
Branch withers: Our Will must be put or grifted into the Tree; and that is
The Ground of true Prayer.
Prayer.

97. When we Pray, then the will goes into the Tree, and attracteth the sap
of the Tree into the hungry thirsty and dry soul; and then there grows out
of that sap, a Body, and then says the soul with great joy, -men: that is, it
is mine, that is to say, yes, it is done, take what thy The Desire of the Will
is Faith.
will desires: this is Faith; and not [the knowledge or] the History which
Babell makes a stir about: for Prayer has two things in it; one is the
Earnest Will, which presses forth out of the miserable smoaky house of the
Heart, out of the soul in great humility, and gives it self up into the
Heart of God, which became Man, as into the Tree of Life.

98. And that is called Glauben.
Glau- [ Belief or Faith.
belee-]: and then the Will eats of the Divine power, and that [is the other
and] is called Glauben.
-ben, Belief or Faith.
fe]: for the Spirit of the soul apprehends it, and holds it with the
Tongue to the Teeth: Understand it according to the Language of Nature; and let
the Holy Ghost go forth, out of the virtue and power which the will introduces
into the soul, out of the virtue and power which the soul has apprehended:
even as it mightily goes forth out of the heart through the apprehended virtue
and power through the Teeth: for in the virtue and power of God nothing
consumes; the more the will apprehends, and the soul Eats; the more is
the virtue and power, and the mightier and more joyful is the Body of God,
that is, the Body of Christ, not that it is greater at one time then at
another; no; for it is [alwayes] greater then all: only the virtue and power
in the Great Wonders of Joy, clime up out of Eternity into Eternity, [or from
Eternity to Eternity].

99. Understand us accurately according to its precious Depth thus: When we
pray we do not only speak before God: indeed the Will boweth it self
before God; but it enters into God, and there is filled with the power and
virtue of God, and brings that into the soul; the soul eats at the Table
of God; and that is it of which Christ said; Man lives by Every word of God.

100. The Lords Prayer is Gods Word; and has seven Petitions, and an
Introduction, or Preamble.
Entrance, and Amen, or Conclusion; which together is Nine in Number, and the
Tenth is God himself: with the Entrance of the Lords Prayer, the will of the
soul enters into the Father: and with the seven Petitions, it receives
whatsoever is the Fathers; for thereby it becomes an Angel again; for in the
seven Petitions it attaineth the heavenly and Divine Center of Nature; and in
the Amen it compriseth all together, and dwells therein: for it is the body
of the soul, it is the flesh of Christ, the body of God: that is the Ninth
Number in Ternario Sancto; herein is the Tincture heavenly and Divine; and the
Tenth Number holds the Cross, into which no creature can go, the will of
the soul only goes thereinto; the will of the soul is as subtle as the
Spirit of God, and Gods Spirit rides also in the will of the soul, it is his
Chariot, which he loves to have.

101. Understand us thus, the mere Deity, is Spirit; and as thin as a will:
but it is Incarnate.
become Man, and the thin Spirit of God dwells in the Humanity, so that our
souls may well come to God: and so when the soul thus eats of the body of
God, then it gets also the body of God on to it, and is the child of God;
God in Christ is the Tree, and our souls in its holy Body, are the boughs and
branches thereof.

102. Let this be revealed to you, O worthy Or, Christendom.
Christianity, [from the East to the West] from the rising to the setting: the
time is near, wherein the Bridegroom will fetch home his Bride: be not blind
but see; buy you Oil, O you foolish Virgins, go forth from the whoredom of
Covetousness, and of Pride, or else you will not taste of this Wedding Supper.
Supper: whosoever shall not have the body of God on the soul, shall not be
Guests, neither can they enter into the Kingdom of God.

103. And so now when we speak of the Or, close.
Conclusion of the Lords Prayer, we find that God.
He is the Tenth Number: for it is said: Dein is it das Reich, und die krafft
und die Herrligkeit in Ewigkeit: Thine is the kingdom, and the Or, virtue.
power, and the glory in Eternity. That is, God himself in his Number Three
[or Trinity]: for, understand it Right thus; The kingdom is the Fathers, he is
it All, and the virtue or power is the Sons, who is also All in the kingdom:
and the Holy Ghost is the Glory: for he possesses All in the kingdom, and is
the Life in the kingdom.

104. And this Trinity is of the Eternal Liberty, and remains Eternally to
be the Liberty. There is One God, one Will, one Spirit, one Lord, which
together is called, Wonder, Counsel, Power, and is become Man; who is called,
Prince of Peace, Savior, and Conqueror; and it is done to the End, that his
Dominion may be great, and that Peace may have no End: says Isaiah the Prophet
of God.

The Seaventeenth Chapter.
Concerning Gods Blessing in this World. A very good and necessary: Or,
discovery.
Revelation, for those that are weak in Faith.
1. Dear Children; if we be converted from our Reason, and Or, submit.
give up our selves into the will of God, that he may do with us, and make us,
what he will, then when we put our trust in him, we go in to our true
Father, and are his children.

2. And now, as a father cares for his children, so also God our Father does
for us, as Christ has faithfully taught us: saying; First endeavor after the
kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and then all other things
shall be Or, added to you.
afforded you. Also: Behold the Fowls of Heaven, they sow not, neither do
they spinne, neither do they gather into the Barn: yet your heavenly father
feeds them: and are ye not more worth then these; O ye of little Faith!

3. The soul knows, that this Garment (of Earthly flesh and blood) is a
strange Garment; wherein it is heartily and deeply ashamed before the Majesty
of God: and Note.
therefore it does so much doubt of Gods Grace, when it prays, it always
thinks its sins are so many, that it cannot reach into the Majesty of God.

4. And such pain the Devil puts it to, who always opens his smoaky
Pit, with the Anger, and draws the smoke into the will of the soul, that it
keeps back, and is afraid of God: The Devil always presents God as a
severe Judge.

5. Thus the poor soul keeps back, and enters into the Spirit of this
world: and seeks a livelihood and maintenance; it thinks God lets things
go as they will; and that things prosper with those that build upon, and trust
in themselves. For, when the soul thus sticks in Reason without God, it
supposes that it must use carking and caring to bring it to pass, it thinks
there is no other way, it must be done thus, the Labor of the hands (or else
cunning and suttlety) must do it: from whence so many Strong Delusions.
potent Evils do arise.

6. Dear Children, be rightly informed. The outward Earthly life is fallen
home to the Spirit of this world, the Belly needs Earthly food, and the Body
Earthly Clothing, and a Tent or Tabernacle.
house to dwell in, after these things the outward Spirit must endeavor: it
should labor and travail: for in the sweat of thy face shall thou (Earthly
Man) eat thy Bread till thou return to Earth from whence thou were taken:
says God in Moses.

7. For the Body was taken from the Matrix of the Earth, and has Imagined [or
put its Minde] into the Earth, and the Earth has captivated that again, so
that it has eaten Earthly fruit; and so is turned to Earth, from whence it was
taken.

8. For God took it from the Earth, that is, [he tooke] a Mesch, a Mass or
Concretion of (...) f
Red Earth, [ (...) *
from (...) f
Adamah] from the Fires-Centre, and from the Waters-Centre, viz. from both the
Mothers of Nature, and breathed into it the breath from without by the Spirit
of the great World, and the soul from within out of the second Principle into
the Heart.

9. The soul does not dwell quite in the outward, only it is captivated with
the outward: its will is entered into the outward, and there is Or, big bellied.
impregnated with the outward Dominion, and so the outward Dominion is come
into the soul.

10. And that was it which God did forbid to Man, that he should not lust after
Earthly fruit power and virtue: neither was there any necessity that drove him
to it, for he was in Paradise, and had Paradisicall food without need and
Death; And as God dwells in the Earth, and yet the Earth knows him not, and
apprehends him not: so also Man; he could have dwelt in the Matrix of the
Earth, and yet have been with the soul in God, and the will of the soul had
brought divine food to the soul: but now being turned away, the soul eats
of the Center of Nature, and the outward Spirit eats of the Earth; but if the
soul turn, and go with its will into the Love of God, then it eats of Gods
Word, and the outward body eats of the Blessing of God.

11. For when the soul is blessed, then God blesses the Body also; for the
soul carries an heavenly Body in the Old Adamicall one: And so his meat and
drink is blessed, and all that the whole Man does and has: he obtains a
wonderful blessing, which his reason cannot apprehend: he must labor and
trade, for therefore he is created into the outward world, that he should
manifest Gods wonders with his skill and Or, Handicraft and business.
Trading.

12. All Trades, Businesses and Conditions, are Gods Ordinance, Every one
works the Wonders of God: And so now if the soul stand in the hand of God in
his Love, then the body is in Gods works of Wonder; and God has no displeasure
at its business or Or, Matters.
Doings; whatsoever it does, whereby it gets its food and living.

13. The outward Life consists in Three parts: one is the Dominion of the
Stars; the second is the [one] Element divided into four parts; as into the
four forms of Fire, Air, Water and Earth: the third is the Dominion of God;
for the Spirit of God moves upon the Water, upon the Or, surface of the water.
Capsula, upon the Matrix. What Man soever does put his trust in God, and does
not wholly set his heart upon his Reason, has the Spirit of God for a
Creator: which Spirit of God has the Verbum Fiat, and Creates continually:
it blesses him in body and soul, in the house, and in the field, in the work
of his hands, his business and trading: whatsoever he does, the Spirit of God
is continually in it, and creates [or effects it].

14. How should it be otherwise? the soul has the Body of the Spirit of God;
how can the Spirit of God then forsake the outward Body, which must open its
Wonders?

15. Man does well enough, in every thing that is not false or wicked, and if
it be not contrary to God, and the Love of Mankind: if one did only cast
stones into the Sea (if his brother be pleased with it, and that he get his
living by it) then he is as acceptable to God, as a Preacher in a Pulpit: for
what cares God for the Opus Operatum.
Labor? he has not any need of that.

16. Man has free Choice or Liberty.
will; he may recreate himself upon Earth, in what work he will, let him do
whatsoever he will, it all stands in the Wonders of God. A Swineheard is as
acceptable to God, (as a Doctor;) if he be honest, and trusts only in Gods
will, the simple is as profitable to him as the wise; for with the wise he
Rules and Governs, and with the simple he builds and tilleth the Ground,
they are all his Laborers in his works of Wonder.

17. Every one has an Employment [or Calling] wherein he spends his Time;
all are alike to him; Only the Spirit of this world has its Height,
Exaltation or highest degree or measure.
Pitch, which it distributeth in its Might, as the Spirit of God does in
Heaven, there are great distinctions and degrees there also, as the spirit or
soul is endued with divine power and virtue, so accordingly is its degree of
Highness or degree.
Exaltation in Heaven, also its Beauty and Clarity or Glory, but all in one
Love.

18. Every Angel and soul has Joy in another Power and Beauty: as the
flowers of the Earth do not grutch at one another, though one be more
beautiful and fuller of virtue then another; but they stand kindly one by
another, and enjoy one another virtue: and as a Physician puts many sorts of
herbs together, and every one of them affords its virtue, and all benefit
the sick: so we all please God, if we give up our selves into his will; we
stand all in his field.

19. And as the Thorns and Thistles grow out of the Earth, and choke and
spoil many a good herb or flower: so also does the wicked, who trusts not
in God, but builds upon himself, and thinks with himself; I have my God
in my Chist: I will cover, and leave my children great treasure behind me,
that they also may sit in my place of honor and dignity, that is the best way,
and thereby he spoyleth many a good heart, and makes it take base and wicked
courses, and to think that to be the only way to get happiness, and so if
they have riches, honor and power, then they have goods indeed; but if any
consider it, it is no better with these then others, and besides the poor
soul is lost thereby.

20. For the Dainties of the Rich relish not so well with them, as a Bit of
Bread does to the Hungry: there is every where, care, sorrow, vexation, fear,
sickness, and at last Death: All in this world is but mere foppery: The
Potentates, Rulers and Magistrates.
Mighty sit in the Dominion of the Spirit of this world: and they that fear
God sit in the Dominion of the Divine Power and Wisdom: The Dominion of this
world, takes its End with the Dying of the Body; and the Dominion in the
Spirit of God, continues standing Eternally.

21. It is a very lamentable thing, that Man runs so eagerly after that,
which would run after Man, if he were righteous and honest: he runs after
cares and sorrows, and they run after him, he is as if he were continually
Mad; he makes disquiet to himself, if he would be contented, he should have
rest and quiet enough. He puts an Or, Canker.
eating Worm into his heart that plagueth and tormenteth him, and causes an
Evil Conscience that gnaweth him, and he is a mere fool with all this: for
he leaves his goods to others, and takes the gnawing Worm in the Evil
Conscience with him from this world, and that which plagueth him Eternally,
that he holds for his Treasure. There cannot be a greater folly found under
the Sun; then that Man, who is the Noblest and Rationallest Creature in this
world, should in Covetousness be the Greatest fool of all, to hunt and press
so eagerly after that which he has no need of; for every one has his
sufficient portion given him from the Spirit of th^s world, if he would but be
contented therewith.

22. Thus one Man is a Devil to another, and tormenteth one another, and all
the business is but about a hand full of Earth, or for a Stone, of which the
Earth has enough; And must not that needs be a Wonder indeed? Does not the
fierce hellish Spirit accomplish it Wonders according to its wish in Man? As
the Book of the Revelation witnesses; where one Seal of Anger has been
opened after another, and men are become the servants and Ministers of wrath:
they have wilfully entered upon it with their Blood and Or, Estate.
Goods, and thought they did God good service in it.

23. O Blind Man! how art thou captivated in the Anger? what do thou, or
where art thou? why do thou suffer the Devil to be-foole thee? Heaven and
Earth is wholly thine, God will give it thee all: He has given thee all; thou
have a Natural Right and propriety in it; the Sun and the Stars are thine,
thou art Lord of all, let now thy foolish will go: why do thou give thy
self up into Covetousness and haughtiness? Does not the kingdom of God
Consist in Love and Humility.

24. Or do thou suppose it is so good to dwell in the wrath? Behold when the
light of thy Eyes does cease, then thou go into Darkness, and take thy
folly, to which thou have here addicted thy self, along with thee: Is then
the Darkness better then the Eternal Light? Ask the Night whether it be
better then the Day? or do thou suppose that we are mad that we thus
speak? we speak what we see, and testify what we know, and thou art blind.

25. Thus art thou blinded by the Babylonish Whore, which the Covetous-Devill
brought forth, when Men were secure and careless, when they loathed the Word
and Spirit of God, as the Revelation of John testifies, saying; I will come
and take away thy Candlestick from thee: And Paul says; God shall suffer
powerful Errors to fall among them, that they shall believe the Spirit of
Lying, which speaks Lies in Hypocrisy and deceit; [So that] they will stick
Cleave or hang to Devils.
close to the Devils. But in the Last Time (says the Prophet David) shall the
word of the Lord spring up like grass upon the Earth: open the Gates in the
World wide, and set open the Doors, that the Lord may enter in; Who is the
Lord? he is the Champion in the battle; all swords and spears shall be
turned into plowshares and sickles, (says the Prophet of God) and it shall be
done: whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be saved.

26. Therefore it is Good to trust in God, and though the Earthly Body should
always lie in Dung; it is but for a little while, and none know what hour his
Time in this world is out, and then follows the Judgment according to his
life: Therefore desist from Covetousness, it is the Eternal Root of all
Evil, and of all Folly. A Covetous Man is the Greatest Fool on Earth, for he
devoureth himself, and causes disquietnesse to himself, and so brings
Evil upon himself by it: He knows not what Man it will be, who shall
possess his Covetousness; and many times it is shamefully consumed in
Whoring: That wherewith one has destroyed his soul, with the same another is
frolic in another foolery: for it must all come to its Effect. But he that
trusts in God has continually enough: whatsoever he has he is contented
with it, and so he is much richer then the foolish covetous [person] who
oppresses the miserable for Money, which cannot prolong his life from Death,
nor preserve him from Hell.

27. The Honest and virtuous gathers treasure in Heaven, he gets a New
Body, wherein there is neither hunger nor thirst, nor frost nor heat, and he
has rest in his Conscience, and will Eternally rejoice in his Treasure: And
the Covetous Fool gathers an Earthly Treasure, which he must leave to
others, and an Evil Conscience, and a Treasure in the Abyss, which will gnaw
and eat him Eternally.

28. Gods Blessing never leaves any that sincerely trust in God, and lets
that go which will not stay: God has Wonderful ways, wherewith he feeds
and nourishes his children; as Daniel in the Lions Den, and Elijah under the
Juniper-Tree: and the Widow of Sarepta in the Famine. He that trusts in
God, has built sure in Heaven and on Earth.

The Eighteenth Chapter.
Of Death, and of Dying. How Man is when he Dies; and how it is with him in
Death. A Great Gate of Wonders.
1. I Know that Reason will say: thou have never Or, undergone it.
tried it, and thou art yet in this world in the outward Life, how then can
thou know this? Indeed Dear Reason, according to my outward Man I must say so
too, and I say the Truth as to the outward Man.

2. But seeing we can Live both in God and in this world together; and seeing
the soul, if it will know God, must with Christ press into God through a
Narrow streite Gate, through Death and Hell; therefore we have power to write
of the way, and will set it down for a Memorial, since we are yet in this
world: For God is wonderful, who Or, determines.
judges in a thing, and yet the Judgment is not executed in the thing at the
instant: and so though we are in the Earthly Life, we shall yet speak of the
Life in Death, which we well know [and understand].

3. For there is no knowledge incomprehensible to the Matrix of Nature, if the
Spirit ride upon its wings it goes through the Three Principles, and if it
ride upon its Triumphant Chariot may it not then ride through Death and Hell?
who can hinder it? And may not a soul thus behold the wonders of God?
especially when this is the Time, wherein all Wonders shall be revealed [or
made manifest].

4. We speak not of our selves alone: The The Star of the sixth Seal.
star is appeared which has broken the Seal: why do thou long stand
gazing? Observe it, the Time is come, there is no preventing of it more.

5. All that has a beginning, has an end, that which is included in Time,
goes with Time again into the Either: If we had lived in this world without
necessity, and without Death, in a Pure Body without spot or blemish, yet the
outward Kingdom at the end should have departed from us, and so we should
have remained in the Heavenly Substantiality, after the manner of Enoch and
Eliah, as also Moses, yet Moses entered through death into the Paradisicall
Life: But Enoch and Eliah were taken up without Dying; and there the outward
Dominion with the spirit of this world, was taken from them without Dying:
which will also be done at the Last Trumpet; upon which will follow an Eternal
Life, and an Eternal Death.

6. The true Man in the heavenly Image, has no Time; his Time is like a Round
Crown, or a whole Rainbow, which has no beginning nor no End: for, the Image
which is the similitude of God, has neither beginning nor Number: it has
stood from Eternity in the Wisdom of God as a Virgin without Or, Generating.
bringing forth, or without willing; for Gods willing was the willing in her;
she has Or, Shone forth.
appeared in the Holy Ghost with all the Wonders which we have brought to
Essence and Light in this world.

7. But she was without Body, without Substance, without Essences, the
Essences were out of the Eternal Center in her made stirring with their
Creation, as in Three Mothers, according to the Three Principles: That God
would be manifested in all the Three Principles, was the Creation: and that the
Dominion of the Image, did not continue in its Or, Ordinarce.
Order and Appointment, was the Death, in that the Middle gave it self into
the outward, and the outward into the Middle, which is not the Order or Law.
Ordinance of the Eternity: and therefore there happened a Breaking: for the
outward, in the Middle has a Beginning, and a Number, and therefore it goes
to the End, and must break it self off from the Middle again, and this the
Longing Desire has done, it has set the Middle, (wherein there is an Erernall
Life) outward, and let in the outward into the Middle.

8. Thus the Life consists in three Parts; as first, the Inward, which is
Gods Eternal hidden Mystery in the fire, from whence the Life existeth; and
secondly, the Middle, which has stood from Eternity as an Image or similitude
of God in the Wonders of God without substance, in which Gods desire was to see
himself in an Image; and just as a Man sees himself in a Glass, so was this
also: And so thirdly, this Image in the Creation has again got a Glass to
see it self in, which was the Spiritus Majoris Mundi, the Spirit of the Great
World, viz. the outward Principle, which is also a figure of the Eternal
[Principle].

9. And on this [outward] figure the Image has so gazed, that it has Imagined
and received in the outward Image, which must now break off again: but seeing
it is bound with its Bond to the Eternal Center of Nature, therefore it
happens to be very painful to break off, as to that bond; for there one
Life is broken off

10. And when the Air cease, then the fire must be smothered, and go into
its Either, and that is Death: for the outward Principle and the Inward break
off one from another; for the outward has a beginning, and the Inward not; and
therefore the outward must break off.

11. The outward consists only in the Suns Tincture, and its Dominion are
the Planets and Stars, who always drive on their Dominion to the Limit [or
Period of their course] for Every Planet has its Limit in that place it stood
in at the Creation, and that is its Period, and its seculum, or course: and
when it comes to that place or point, then all whatsoever it was wholly Lord
over, breaks: for it begins a new course or seculum.

12. But you must understand it aright [thus], Every one [of the Planets] has
not the Tincture of Life; Saturn, Mars, and Jupiter have the Great Life;
Saturn seperateth whatsoever he gets in his Limit, he does it not
[actually], but he leaves the Life, and then it has no Leader, but breaks
of it self, and so it is with the other[Planets]. But its limit or period must
reach to the Or, Zodiac of the twelve signs.
Crown of th Stars, in that sign and Point which the Planet has its limit
and period in.

13. And therefore many a young child even in its Mothers womb is old enough
for Death, for its The Lord of its Ascendent.
Lord is at his Period, and leaves its child; and the cause why we cannot
[easily] search out our End is, that we do not properly and exactly know the
Limit of our Note the Calculation of Nativities.
Leader: for we must know its Number or Period, and the Number or Period of the
sign, if we will hit the point of our Limit or End.

14. Behold now in what Danger we are according to the outward Life, neither
are we at home in this Life, and yet we are quickened and awakened through
the outward Life, and so a soul comes to be Generated; though indeed the
outward life cannot generate a soul; Note.
for the seed is sown with [or in] all the Three Principles, and there are
Three Mothers, each of which hatcheth its Chicken.

15. This Might was given to Man; though indeed the Image of God did not stand
thus: For Adam, before his Eve [was made], was a chaste Virgin, not Man nor
Woman: he had both the Tinctures, that in the Fire, and that in the Spirit of
Meekness, and could of himself have brought forth after a heavenly manner,
without dividing or rending of himself, if he had stood out the Trial; and
then one Man had been generated from another, after that manner as Adam in his
Virgin-like manner was Man, and the Image of God.

16. For that which is out of the Eternal, has also an Eternal manner of
Generating, its substance must go wholly out of the Eternal, else it
subsisteth not in Eternity. But having no Tongue to Or, to Express.
bring to Light how one is in Death, when he is Dead, though indeed we
understand it: therefore we must show it in similitudes.

17. A Dead Man has no breath, neither has he any fire in his body: the Body
has no feeling, for it breaks [or corrupteth] altogether: its Essences go
into the Earth: its Elementary Spirit, viz. the Air, goes into the Air, and
vanishes in a vapor; the water and blood is received by the water and Earth,
and then there remains nothing of the outward Man; he is quite gone, for he
has beginning and End, all his Essences are gone.

18. Understand us after this manner: as the Image stood in a form from
Eternity, and yet it had no certain form, but was a Wonder, like one that
Dreameth of a sight or Image, and so it has been foreseen in the Wisdom of
God, with all wonders.

19. Also observe this; when God the Father once moved himself to the
Creation, then he awakened (in the Image,) Essences, which stood hidden in the
Center of Nature; and these Essences art out of the Eternal Liberty, they
should work their wonders in or according to the will of God; they should
frame no other will, for that which they should do and open, should stand
Eternally: for it was out of the Eternal; and should work in the fragile or
corruptible, and bring its similitudes into the Wonders.

20. For the fragile or corruptible has in the inward an Eternal Mother; and
seeing now that the Eternal Image has let the Corruptible into its will;
therefore has the Root of the Corruptible (which is also Eternal) wrought in
the Image, and put its Wonders therein, ^ Note.
which continue now standing Eternally as a figure, seeing they are generated
out of the Eternal: and so they stand in the Will in the Desire of the soul
when it is departed from the Body.

21. And though it happen, that the Will (in the time of this Life, viz. in the
time of the Body) do go forth out of falsehood and wickedness, yet the Will
[purpose and The representation of the Thought.
intention] remains as a figure, which follows the will as a shadow, for
it is generated out of the Eternal, the soul, in its Eternal Essences has
made that; for the soul works by its will in the Center, and the Starry
Spirit works in the Body, in the flesh and blood, and hangs on to the
soul, and makes the soul to long and lust; that it also may do as the
Starry Spirit does.

22. Note.
And so now what the soul does, it does in its Principle in the Eternal, and
all that follows the soul in the deceasing of the Body; only in the time of
the Body, it has ability to draw its will out from it: and when the will is
renewed, then also the Or, subject matter.
substance, which the will has made in the Center, is renewed: and though it
had been Evil, yet it becomes Good, and so stands in the Center, to the
[manifestation of] Gods works of Wonder.

23. Thus also we give you to consider; how the Condition of the wicked soul
is, which thus in Covetousness, haughtiness, in Tyranny, and mere falsehood
and wickedness, departs from the Body, when all that, sticks still in the
will of the soul unconverted from it, in those very works the soul must
Eternally Or, swelter.
swim, for that is its substance which it has here made [to it selfe],
neither does it desire any other: And though it offer to hate it, and seek in
the Center for abstinence [to avoyde it] yet it awakeneth but the fire-Roote
thereby, which kindles and increases this substance; for the Meekness [ viz.
the Water of Eternal Life] is not in its will, whereby it might quench the
fire, and turn it self from the Evil into the will of God: and though it
seek for that, yet there is no finding of it.

24. Then comes sorrow and lamentation upon it, and kindles the Evil
substance many hundred times more, so that the soul desires to cast it self
down headlong, and yet falls continually deeper into the Center of the
Abyss.

25. It is with that soul as with one that Dreameth, that he is in great
torment and Anguish, and seeks help every where, and yet cannot find it, and
so in the End despaireth and gives himself over to the Driver [or Tormentor]
when he sees no remedy, to do what he will with him: And this the poor soul
falls into the Devils Arms, and neither dare nor can go any further: but
what he does, that it must do also.

26. It must be Gods Enemy, and, in high-mindednesse, in its falsehood and
wickedness which it committed here, fly out in the Fire above the Princely
Thrones of Angels: and that is its recreation in its foolish sport; and being
it has constantly, (here on Earth in the Body), made it self a fool, there
also it remains to be a fool and a Juggler.

27. For Every Damned soul, goes forth (in its here practiced false wicked
Matters) in the Anger of God, as a Stout, Proud Devil; that which it has
here acted, that it does there also; for that very Matter of Folly, is its
Note here the Treasure of the soul.
Treasure, and therein is its Will also, and its Heart, as Christ says.

28. But those souls which at the End narrowly escape the Devil, and but then
first enter into the will of God, when the Body is deceasing; they are as one
that is escaped from a fight, for they are quite Naked, and have little of the
Body of the Heavenly Substantiality; and they are very humble, and love to lie
down in Rest, and so in the Stillnesse wait for the Last Judgment, hoping,
with the Clarification [Transfiguration or Renovation] of the Heavens to have
Joy with all the souls: and although they have Joy with them, yet they see
their substance under them, and are very humble in the Majesty: for their
dwelling and delight is only Paradise, viz. in the one Element, but not
Majesty, for the Clarification or Glory is different, all according as the
holiness and Love is.

29. But the Zealous souls in the Wonders of God, which here under the
Cross, wrought the Wonders of God in Obedience to his will, which are mighty
in the Power of God, which have put on the Body of God, that is, Christ's Body,
and walked therein in Righteousness and Truth, all their Works, Matters, or
Essences.
Doings also follow them in their strong Will and Desire; and they have
unspeakable Joy in the Love and Barmhertzigkeit.
Mercifullnesse of God.

30. For the meek Love of God embraces them continually: all the Wonders of
God are their food; and they are continually in such Glory, Power, Might,
Majesty, and Wonder, as no Tongue can Express; for they are Gods Children,
Gods Wonder, Gods Power and virtue, Gods strength, Gods honor and glory; they
are his Praise, they sing his song of Praise or Halelujah in Paradise, in the
Element, and in the Center of Nature; there is no awakening of the Wrath
[there] in Eternity: but Every Spirit in Nature is a Love-desire: they there
know no Devil, Anger, nor Hell; there is Eternal Perfection: whatsoever the
will desires, that is there, and all in Power.

31. It is written: The kingdom of God consists in Power, and not in the
Earthly Matter or Thing.
substance, for this Earthly substance is not from Eternity, therefore also it
will not be to Eternity: If you will conceive of the Heavenly Substance, you
must have a care that you bring a heavenly Mind to it, and then the Spirit of
God will well show the Heavenly Substance; it is much easier for the
Enlightened to conceive of the Heavenly Substance, then of the Earthly; Let not
the Reader Imagine the thing so difficult.

32. But in the Thoughts of his own Reason, he cannot reach to it; let him
leave off, for thereby he attaineth only a Glimps, even as Antichrist has but
a Glimps of the Word of God, and of the Doctrine of Christ, and yet strongly
supposes that he has apprehended the Word; but it is a mere foppery, their
Crying and Roaring is mere Juggling.

33. If you have not the right hammer, you cannot strike the Clock that
awakeneth the poor captive soul, Heaven and Earth and Every thing lies in
Man, you need but to use the right Hammer, if you will strike his Clock and
awaken him out of his sleep: your Crying aloud will not do it, you will not
be able to beat the Divine sound into him, if you your self have it not: But
those that have the right Hammer, they awaken him indeed; therefore all
Teachers without Gods Hammer, are but Jugglers, Hammers for the Belly, Hammers
for the Ear, and no Hammers for the soul.

34. The soul dwells not in the outward Spirit; Indeed the Outward Spirit
has insinuated it self as an Germanice Schalk.
Evil Companion into the soul, but has not the Principle in it, wherein the
soul dwells, but is only a cover and hinderance to it.

35. And so also the Antichrist is but a hinderance to the poor soul; for if
the poor soul were not so fast tied and bound to the Crying, which only
fills peoples Ears in Sermons, it would enter into it self, and seek it
self, it would endeavor after amendment and abstinence from sin; but now it
supposes that to be Holiness which enters in at the Ear, and yet many
times there is nothing but dross, filth, and reproach against Love and Concord
in it.

36. What shall a Man say? Is not all quite blindfolded and full of Hypocrisy:
every one endeavors after nothing but for the Belly; Both the Shepherd, and
the Sheep, the Superior [or Magistrate] and the Inferior [or Subject,]: the
Spirit of God is very scarce and rare among them, and though they boast much of
it, yet it is but a show of holiness and hypocrisy, where the heart knows
little of the Spirit of God, it is a mere Notionall Conjecturall knowledge and
Or, Thing or confused Hotchpotch.
matter without spirit.

37. O thou worthy Christianity, behold thy self, O Europe, Asia, and Africa,
open thy Eyes and look upon thy self, do but Or, Examine.
seek thy self. Let every one seek himself, or else it will not be well
with them: There is a strong Bow bent: fall into the Arms of the Archer, and
be converted, and find thy self, or else thou will be shot away [as an arrow
out of a Bow]. Be not rocked asleep by children, but rise and walk upon thy
own feere, it is high Time, the sleep is at an End, the Angel has sounded
his Trumpet, do not draw back, consider what the Revelation of Jesus Christ
says, That those which hang to the Whore of Babell, that is, to the Confusion]
will go along with her into the Lake which burns with fire and brimston:
[viz. the Lake of Gods Anger, which burns with Judgment, Famine, and
Pestilence, which will sweep the whole Earth].

38. For the Whore will not be converted, she must What measure she has
meted to others shall be meted to her.
drink of the Dregs of that Cup which she has filled: therefore let every one
himself, open his own Eyes, for God is Great, who will Judge her, she will
continue and go on in her sins, and at length Despair; she cries Mordio
[Murther, Murder,] and yet none hurts her, but it is her own Evil that
plagueth and tormenteth her, viz. the Hypocrisy, supposed Holiness,
high-minde and Covetousness; she has Wolves that bite and tear her, yet
they are but Wolves, that do so, and are none of the sheep.

39. Therefore it is necessary to awake, not in much searching after Opinions
and fooleries, but in seeking thy self: for much searching without Conversion
from Evil is mere deceit, and seduction from this way: And though thou
should Read this a thousand Times without Conversion of thy will, thou
would undestand as much of it as the Ass does of the Psalter.
Psalm Book: and Just thus it is with the Belly-Priests, the Antichrist.

40. Do you suppose it a slight matter, to set an Ass upon a kingly Throne?
How then shall the Belly-Asse stand before God, who sets himself with an
Asses Heart, in the Throne of Christ, which is the dwelling place of the Holy
Ghost, only for Gain, honor, and Esteem sake, and is merely a teller of
Stories, or Relator of a History, without any knowledge; and besides is full of
blasphemy and wickedness: Or do thou suppose thou art fit enough to fit in
the Throne of Christ, when thou have studied some Arts and foreign Languages?
Dear Sir consider! Look upon Gods choice, upon Abraham and the Patriarcks,
also upon Moses and the Shepherds, also upon the Prophets and Apostles, and
thou will soon see, whom God chooses, and whether he chooses Art or Spirit.

41. Therefore be warned, let every one consider his state and condition he is
in; He that works works the Wonders of God, and goes in simplicity with
his will into Gods will, and hangs as a child to God: he has but two ways
to go, one in his work wherewith he may sustain his belly, the other in the
will of God, and so puts his trust in God, let him make and do with him
what he will: and wheresoever he is, or whatsoever he is going about, he says,
Lord it is my Employment, or Calling, thy will be done, give me what is good
for me; and such go on very rightly in Gods works of Wonder.

42. But he that is chosen by Nature to be a Ruler, Governor, or Or, Captain.
Leader, Especially in a Spiritual State and Condition, he ought well to have
a care of his Doings, that he do not go without his Weapons, or Armor; for
he Leads the flock of Christ; He is a Or, Pastor.
Shepherd, the Wolf is continually about him.

43. If he be watchful, and does consider that he has Christ's sheep under
his keeping, and feeds them aright as a faithful Shepherd: then the
Shepherds Crook shall be a Great Glory to him in the Eternity: But if he
seek only the Wool, viz. his own honor and Esteem, might, power, and
Authority, Pomp, State, Glory, and voluptuousness, and spends or consumes
the sheep Pasture, and does not give them food and drink, but is a lazy
sleeper, snoring in fleshly Lust and pleasure, while one sheep is going astray
here, another there, being scattered and liable to be devoured by Wolves, who
will not go in by the Door of the sheepfold, but clime up on the out side,
and only contrive how they may by cunning, suttlety, and crafty tricks, steal
away their food, and Or, fleece them.
sheare off their wool: All such are of the Number of Wolves, and have not the
Shepherds Crook of Christ; but they have and use the Devils Sheares: and
must hereafter howl with the Wolves Eternally.

44. How may any call himself a Shepherd of Christ, who is not chosen to be a
Shepherd by the Spirit of Christ? Or may a Wolf make a Shepherd over the
Sheep? are they not He that makes and he that is made a Shepherd or Pastor.
both Wolves? or do we speak from conjecture? It is not so in the Order of
Nature, for an Evil thing cannot produce a good thing out of it self, but one
Evil thing generateth another.

45. How then can one wrathful Soldier Or, make him mild and gentle.
appease another furious Soldier, who fully purposes to kill, slay, and
murder? Or how will thou awaken the Holy Ghost in Man, seeing there is only
the Spirit of this world in thy voice? That cannot be, unless it were already
awakened in the Hearer, who hears the voice of the Holy Ghost in Every word
that is spoken by any whatsoever they are.
all words which are spoken of the wonders [or works] of God.

46. And if an Ass could speak, and should speak of Gods Word, the Hammer of
the Awakener would then strike in the soul which is in God: Whosoever is of
God hears Gods Word, says Christ: ye therefore hear not, because ye are
not of God: but of the Devil, and of the spirit of this world.

47. In some there is no Word or Spirit of God at all to be awakened; for the
Wrathful Matrix has captivated them; which is plain and manifest in some to
whom Christ himself spoke: he had the Hammer indeed, but his Spirit enters
not into the malicious obstinate soul, but into those, who would feign be
virtuous, honest, and godly, if they could: And when once the Hammer thus
awakeneth the Spirit of the soul, that the soul turns and casts it self
into God, then it can.

48. The The Old Adam.
Old Man should not have the Dominion, but the Spirit of God should have it;
else there is no ability, but a keeping back by the Wrath; For there is a
Twofold Longing or seeking in the soul: one is the fires greedy covetous
fierce Longing, which always seeks after Earthly Matters; and the other is
from the Spirit which is brought forth out of the Fire, wherein the right Life
of the soul in the Image of God, is understood, that is Gods Longing, which
seeks the Kingdom of Heaven.

49. And so when the right Hammer (viz. the Spirit of God) strikes in it, then
that Longing is so strong, that it overcomes the Fire-source and Longing, and
makes it meek, so that it desires the Longing of Love, viz. the Longing of
the souls Spirit; and there is good to be done; such a soul is easy to be
awakened, so as to subdue the outward Dominion, especially when the Hammer of
the holy Ghost sounds through the Ears into the Heart, then the Tincture of
the soul receives it instantly: and there it goes forth through the whole
soul, through both the Longings, for it casts it self into one will: for
two wills do not subsist in Eternity, there must be but one; one of them must
be impotent or unmighty, and the other Omnipotent, or Allmighty, or else there
is disunion, or no agreement.

50. For that is the right [or true property] of Eternity, and of the Eternal
subsistence, to have but one only will: if it had two, one would break or
destroy the other, and so there would be strife: Indeed the Eternity consists
in many Powers and Wonders, but its Life is merely and only the Love, out of
which goes forth Light and Majesty: All Creatures in Heaven have but one will,
and that is inclined into the Heart of God, and goes into Gods Spirit, even
into the Center of Multiplicity in the springing and blossoming, but Gods
Spirit is the Life in Every thing.

51. The Center of Nature affords the substance, and the Majesty affords
power; and the Holy Ghost is the bringer forth: He has the Predominancy: and
it has been so from Eternity, but in an Invisible substance Or, to.
before the Creatures: There is nothing New in Heaven, that was not before, but
only that the substance is become palpable and comprehensible; God himself
has shown forth himself in Similitudes and Images, else all had been but
merely and only God: The Devil is Gods; he is his wrath or fierceness in
the most inward Center, which is also the most outward, for his kingdom is the
Darkness in Nature, as is before mentioned.

52. Therefore Man should have a care of himself, and endeavor to propagate
or put forth himself, for he is a root in the soil of God, and has gotten
the Spirit of understanding: he must Bring forth or regenerate himself.
bring forth fruit out of the Spirit of the soul, in the power of the Holy
Ghost; not according to the form and manner of Darkness, but out of the Power
of the Light: for whatsoever grows out of the power of the Light, that,
belongs to Gods Table; and whatsoever grows out from Darkness, which
remains a fruit in Darkness, belongs to the Darkness in the Abyss in the
Wrathful Matrix [or in the fierce Genetrix].

53. After this [Life] time there is no recalling; for as an herb is sprung up
and grown, so it remains, and so it relisheth, and is afterward desired for
food only of those that are of the same Essences [or quality]: but those that
have not the same Essences, desire it not for food, neither do they gather it
into their Barnes,

54. Therefore let every soul try and examine it self, and consider what
kind of fruit it is: it is good converting while we are here in this Life,
and to prune off [the Evill] Branch, and to send forth a better from its root:
but when the Great Reaper comes, he cutteth off all, one and other, and then
the weeds and evil branches are bound in Bundles, and cast into the fire; but
the good herbs are set upon Gods Table.

55. We have very faithfully opened this according to our Gifts, and whosoever
is hungry let them eat, and whosoever thirsts let them drink; they may have
it without money: that our Joy in God may be full, and that we also may have
to eat in the The world to come.
other world. Hallelujah Amen.

The End of the Book of the Threefold Life.
An Alphabeticall Table of the Material Contents of the several Verses of
this Book of the Threefold Life of Man.
Abyss. Chap. 5. WHerein the Abyss of the Anger of God consists. Verse. 109
Chap. 5. Admonition to the Seekers that suppose the Abyss where the Devils
dwell, to be a far off. Verse. 111 Chap. 5. The Abyss upon which the Four
Elements stand, is the Anger of God, and the Habitation of the Devil. Verse.
141 Chap. 6. The Abyss of Hell is in this world. Verse. 67 Chap. 9. How the
Abyss mixeth its wonders among the wonders of God. Verse. 11 Chap. 14. Whence
the Great Covetousness (which is the first Root of the Abyss) arises, which
affords nothing to any willingly. Verse. 32 Chap. 14. Of the Enviousnesse in
the Word of the soul, the second root of the Abyss, from whence liars and
slanderers arise: the Author lamenteth the Great Misery. Verse. 33 Chap. 14.
The Third Root of the Abyss which is the seat of the Devil, viz. the
Anguish: of the wonderful working of the Devil in this property. Verse. 34
Chap. 14. The working of the Devil in the Fourth Root or form of the Abyss,
viz. the Flash, the springing up of the Light in the understanding. Verse. 35
Adam. Chap. 5. How Adam was in Paradise before his sleep. Verse. 135 Chap. 5.
How Adam is become Beastiall and Earthly. Verse. 136 Chap. 5. Out of what Adam
is Created. Verse. 137 Chap. 5. How Adam would be like God, and how Eve was
misled. Verse. 138 Chap. 5. How Adam was Created in the beginning. Verse. 144
Chap. 5. How Adam should have remained for ever. Verse. 145 Chap. 6. Out of
what it was that God spoke to Adam. Verse. 1 Chap. 6. A Lamentation that Adam
and his Generation has not continued to be children of God in Paradise. Verse.
14 Chap. 6. How the perished soul of Adam was again set in the Eternal
Humanity. Verse. 85 Chap. 6. The Fall of Adam is likened to the quenching of
Iron. Verse. 90 Chap. 6. The Deity was not Extinguished in the Fall of Adam:
the Condition of Adam if his will had continued in God. Verse. 91 Chap. 6. How
Adam was captivated by the world, by Death, by the Devil, and Hell. Verse. 92
Chap. 6. What the Fall of Adam was. Verse. 93 Chap. 6. How the poor soul of
Adam was ashamed: and what his clothing was before the Fall. Verse. 94 Chap.
7. From Adam to Christ the Tree of Pearl grew hidden under the veil of Moses.
Verse. 12 Chap. 7. The Power and Condition of Adam before his Fall. Verse. 26,
27 Chap. 7. The will of Adam before his Fall was in God, and God in him, and He
in Paradise. Verse. 28 Chap. 7. Why the Commandment not to Eat of the
Forbidden fruit came: also how long Adam was in Paradise before he fell
asleep. Verse. 29 Chap. 7. How Adam in his sleep became Male or Man, and so
Eve was formed into a Woman. Verse. 30 Chap. 7. The miserable condition of Adam
after the Fall, and of ours also. Verse. 31 Chap. 7. How we are shut up in the
Anger with Adam. Verse. 43 Chap. 8. Adam was in Paradise in the Divine Body,
and now he is between Heaven and Hell. Verse. 9 Chap. 11. Reason should open
both Eyes: The Creation of Adam Explained: also the Cause why God did not at
first create Adam an Angel. Verse. 11 Chap. 12. A speech to all that are
proceeded from Adam. Verse. 12 Chap. 18. How Adam was before his Eve. Verse. 15
Air. Chap. 7. Of the Instability and wrestling of the Air. Verse. 76 Chap.
7. Of the Spirit of the Air in the Creatures, and its transitorinesse. Verse.
78
Allmighty. All, All things, Allmightinesse. Chap. 3. Men should search their
own Property, All is full of God. Verse. 33 Chap. 3. Men must be scorned: also
how All may be found that is desired. Verse. 36 Chap. 4. All consists in the
Will; the Will carries and leads us. Verse. 6 Chap. 4. The Essence of All
Essences, is a continual hunger and satiating: Also how All changes, and yet
remains still. Verse. 7 Chap. 4. Whence All that is come to be has
proceeded; also where Time began. Verse. 25 Chap. 9. How All is become
substantial. Verse. 45 Chap. 15. All shall be tried in the Fire. Verse. 13
Chap. 5. Why All things are come to a coporeall substance. Verse. 123 Chap. 17.
God has given All to us. Verse. 23 Chap. 10. How in the will of God we are
able to do All things. Verse. 32 Chap. 2. How God is Allmighty. Verse. 26
Chap. 4. Nature consists of Endless Forms: no number is found in the
Allmightinesse. Verse. 9
Amen. Chap. 16. How in the Amen is understood the seeking of the Eternal
Nature. Verse. 95 Chap. 16. How the whole Alphabet proceeds out of ^he A:
Also of the syllable men: If God were not become Man we could not attain him.
Verse. 96
Angels. Chap. 14. How the Angels often assist the virtuous, in necessity.
Verse. 58 Chap. 14. How the Angels often deliver Christians. Verse. 57 Chap.
14. What the Condition of the Holy Angels is. Verse. 61 Chap. 14. What
condition they are of that want the Assistance and society of Angels. Verse.
62. Chap. 14. The Angels accept of no honor nor worship from us. Verse. 63
Chap. 14. The Angels strive with the Devils about the soul of Man. Verse. 67
Anger. Chap. 3. The Anger of God is not a thing without God, neither is it the
mere Deity. Verse. 19
Anguish. Chap. 2. What the Desire of the Anguish is. Verse. 30 Chap. 3. That
which makes Anguish in the dark Center, makes Joy in the Light. Verse. 15
Antichrist. Antichristian. Chap. 6. The Spirit which has Blinded us in the
Antichrist. Verse. 11 Chap. 6. How Antichrist rides over Heaven, Earth, and
God. Verse. 13 Chap. 11. Here the proud covetous Antichrist is told where its
poor soul shall remain. Verse. 48 Chap. 11. Of the very Antichrist: his
Mysticallnesse: every Man carries him in his heart. Verse. 52 Chap. 11. The
Antichrist hurts not the Ignorant: God will manifest him, and he shall loose
his sting in the children of God. Verse. 53 Chap. 11. The Antichrist is a cause
of the falling away of the Asians, Assyrians, Egyptians, Moors, Grecians, and
Africans: the Indians are better then the Antichrist. Verse. 90 Chap. 11. They
that will slay the Antichrist are the very Beast whereupon he rides: also what
Contention Effects. Verse. 94 Chap. 11. How the Antichrist Pronounces People
happy for Money. Verse. 97 Chap. 11. A speech to Antichrist concerning the
buisinesse between Peter and Ananias. Verse. 99 Chap. 11. It were often better
not to be Hearers of the Lies of Antichrist. Verse. 101 Chap. 11. Antichrist is
borne of Lies: also where he feeds his sheep. Verse. 102 Chap. 11. How
Antichrist is to be slain and pulled down. Verse. 106 Chap. 12. How by the
buisinesse of Cain and Abel, Antichrist may be discerned. Verse. 17 Chap. 12. A
speech to the Antichrist concerning his leading people astray. Verse. 29 Chap.
12. Who are the Bears and Wolves of Antichrist: also when the Mystery of the
Kingdom of God shall be manifest. Verse. 30 Chap. 12. Advice to Princes:
Antichrist sticks in all Covetousness. Verse. 32 Chap. 12. The Marks of the
Last Antichrist: admonition to the Children of God. Verse. 34 Chap. 6. How the
Antichristian spirit shall be rightly shown to us. Verse. 12
Art. Chap. 3. How Men bind true understanding to Art and study. Verse. 83
Chap. 4. Without the Will of God all that is done in Natural Art is but a
Graven Image. Verse. 46 Chap. 7. Art, Eloquence, and an University avail
nothing. Verse. 5
Asia. Chap. 12. Why Asia, Africa, and Greece, are to be accounted happy.
Verse. 25
Author. Chap. 1. Who those are that can understand the Author. Verse. 22
Chap. 1. The End of the Authors writing. Verse. 41 Chap. 1. The Author will
show what we are in body and soul; also what God, Heaven, and Hell are: and
says we are blinder then the Heathen. Verse. 44 Chap. 2. The Author speaks
of his knowledge. Verse. 18 Chap. 2. The Deity subject to no Alteration. The
Author speaks but in Part. Verse. 66 Chap. 3. The Author will show that
which has been hidden since the Fall of Adam. Verse. 6 Chap. 3. Advice to the
Children of Christ. The Author does not forbid going to the Churches of stone.
Verse. 90 Chap. 3. The Author has not sought after the Sophisters, but the
Heart of God. Verse. 92 Chap. 4. If the Author did not see and understand, he
should hold his Peace. Verse. 3 Chap. 4. The Author writes these things down
for a Memorial to himself. Verse. 4 Chap. 5. The Author speaks as a child
speaks of its Mother. Verse. 23 Chap. 5. To those that are not borne of God,
the Author is Dumb. Verse. 25 Chap. 5. The Author speaks from two
Languages. Verse. 26 Chap. 5. The Author Admonishes the Wolves to Embrace the
poor A B C Scholars. Verse. 78 Chap. 6. Why the Author has undertaken to
write this Book. Verse. 5 Chap. 6. The Author writes as for many. Verse. 7
Chap. 6. The Author speaks by Living Experience. Verse. 35 Chap. 6. The
Author speaks what he knows, and must speak. Verse. 73 Chap. 7. The
Author will show the hard Prison of our blindness. Verse. 53 Chap. 7. The
Author bewaileth our Blindness. Verse. 59 Chap. 8. The Author is clothed
with Adams skin, and also lives in the Hope of Israel. Verse. 8 Chap. 9. The
Author speaks what he must speak, and despises none. Verse. 30 Chap. 9.
The Author speaks what he himself has Tried. Verse. 38 Chap. 10. The
Author shows how far we ought to search. Verse. 29 Chap. 11. The Author
desires not to blemish Mankind by his wonderful discovery in his writings.
Verse. 30 Chap. 13. The Author speaks what is given to him, and known to
him. Verse. 63 Chap. 14. The Author writes that which he has seen with
spiritual Eyes. Verse. 55 Chap. 16. The Author has Experimented what he
mentions concerning the soul. Verse. 10 Chap. 18. The Author has Ability
to write these Mysteries. Verse. 2
Babell. Chap. 3. When Babell breaks, then there is the Tabernacle of God
with Men. Verse. 81 Chap. 3. Babell reproved for Judging those that are in the
Angelical world. Verse. 88 Chap. 7. What the Poor soul in Babell must do to
be Happy. Verse. 7 Chap. 8. A wonderful description of the Fall of Babell, and
the Dragon, that is, the Contentious Disputation and Tyrannical Government.
Verse. 49 Chap. 10. Vengeance denounced over Babell. Verse. 35 Chap. 14. An
Admonition to Babell. Also concerning the Eternal satisfaction or Atonement.
Verse. 39
Band. Chap. 1. Soreness and bitterness together are the Band that makes it
self. Verse. 29 Chap. 1. Of the Eternal Band, out of which All things are
made. Verse. 40
Baptize. Baptizer. Baptism. Chap. 13. The School Rabbis will be Baptized by
One that is Coming: who will Baptize with the Fire of Anger. Verse. 39 Chap.
13. They that say the Testaments or Sacraments are but mere signs or
symboles, are the Antichrist. Also how a simple Person is able to Baptize.
Verse. 38 Chap. 7. Wherefore Christ has Instituted the Baptism for us. Verse.
50 Chap. 13. A wonderful yet certainly true description of the Baptism of
Infants. Verse. 33 Chap. 13. Why God by Christ Instituted two Testaments or
Sacraments. How the Devils Oracles ceased at the coming of Christ. An
Exposition how the Baptism is for the Ignorant and such as have not Faith yet.
Verse. 36 Chap. 13. The Holy Ghost chiefly manageth the Office in Baptism.
Verse. 37
Beast. Beasts. Chap. 3. The Spirit resembles us to an abominable Beast, upon
which he sets the fine Spiritualty or Clergy. Verse. 61 Chap. 3. What Beast
the dainty Woman rides upon not Christ's Ass but the Devil. Verse. 62 Chap.
5. In the Courts of Princes the vialls of Anger are powered forth, through the
Instigation of the Hypocrites the Clergy: the Might of Princes is the Beast of
the Whore. Verse. 66 Chap. 6. Advice to the seeking Mind that would be rid of
the Beast. Verse. 16 Chap. 8. A Beast understands not its beginning, but
there is another life in us. Verse. 26 Chap. 8. We are not merely out of the
Earth as a Beast is. Verse. 27 Chap. 8. How the Flesh of Beasts which we eat
sullyeth the soul. Verse. 19 Chap. 8. We are both Men and Beasts. Verse. 25
Chap. 8. Of the Desire which Beasts have. Verse. 28 Chap. 9. Whence the Weeds
and Evil Beasts have their Original. Verse. 12 Chap. 9. The Evil Beasts are
proceeded according to the Devils desire. Verse. 55
Beginning. Chap. 4. What the Beginning is. Verse. 21
Birth. Chap. 1. How we may enter into the New Birth. Verse. 17 Chap. 1. No
Nature is felt in the Divine Life: The soul is a Fire in the Eternal Nature:
The soul is a Spirit having seven Forms, wherein Heaven and Hell consist: The
Author here understands the Eternal Birth. Verse. 19 Chap. 2. Of the Birth
of Nature in a similitude. Verse. 27 Chap. 2. How the Birth is; also of the
Essences and of the Fire-Spirit. Verse. 71 Chap. 3. Of the Birth of the four
Forms of the Eternal Nature. Verse. 8 Chap. 3. The Names of the second Birth
or Word. Verse. 24 Chap. 3. Without the sour Birth there would be no Nature
nor life: the Life is the most delectable: the sour Birth is Eternal. Verse.
27 Chap. 3. A thankesgiving for the New Birth out of darkness into the Light.
Verse. 59 Chap. 4. A warning to the Mind to consider it self; for the
Eternal Birth is like the Mind. Verse. 75 Chap. 5. The Author will speak
and not be silent concerning the Eternal Birth of the Heart of God. Verse. 35
Chap. 6. How the whole Birth of the Eternal Nature is included in a small
Circle or Point. Verse. 43 Chap. 9. What the Eternal Word is, and its Birth:
The End of Nature. Verse. 92
Bishops. Chap. 14. How Profitable the Bishops chosen for Art sake, are to the
world. Many of their Writings have as much Love to their Neighbor in them as
the Devil in Hell has. Verse. 24
Blessed. Chap. 17. How the Body also is Blessed. Verse. 11
Body. Chap. 5. Why the Body is like a Cross. Our Fall and Redemption. Verse.
34 Chap. 8. How we should tame the Body, and not pamper it as a wanton Ass.
Verse. 22 Chap. 8. The Body will not readily break off its will: also it is a
very unfaithful Neighbor to the soul. Verse. 24 Chap. 9. How every Form or
Creature has figured its Body. Verse. 49 Chap. 11. Out of what, the Body and
also the Spirit of the Creatures is Created. Verse. 7 Chap. 11. What kind of
Body we have in God. Verse. 73 Chap. 13. What Body it was that Christ gave to
his Disciples. Verse. 22 Chap. 13. Of the Heavenly Body of Christ that fills
the Angelical world, and yet the Creature [Christ] may well be seen standing
Palpably. Verse. 24 Chap. 14. How the Anger of God is received instead of the
Body and blood of Christ. Verse. 18 Chap. 17. Whence the Body is, and what it
will be again. Verse. 7 Chap. 17. The Body is a Mixed Mass or Lump of two
Centres. Verse 8
Breath. Chap. 11. Of the breaking in of the living Breath: Advice to the High
Schools or Universities. Verse. 13
Bridegroom. Chap. 16. Advice to Christendom. Of the Coming of the
Bridegroom. Verse. 102
Brightness. Chap. 2. Whence the Brightness Existeth. Verse. 82
Candlesticks. Chap. 3. Why the Candlesticks were taken away after the Time of
the Apostles. The seven Seals are the Fathers Nature: and the seven
Candlesticks are the sons. Verse. 42 Chap. 3. Of the Image in the Midst of
the seven Candlesticks or seven Spirits of God. Verse. 46 Chap. 3. What we
must do to behold the seven Candlesticks in our selves. Verse. 65
Care. Chap. 17. How God takes Care for us. Verse. 2 Chap. 17. How Man relyeth
upon his own Labor and care taking. Verse. 5
Center. Chap. 9. How before the Creation of the Sun the outward Center of
Nature wheeled it self thrice about. Verse. 83 Chap. 9. The similitude of the
Eternal Center was not figured before the Creation. Verse. 94 Chap. 9. How the
Heart of God Created the seventh Form of the Center of Nature. Verse. 95
Ceremonies Chap. 11. A Speech to the Antichristian World, with its Ceremonies:
showing what it should have taught Men. Verse. 46 Chap. 13. It is better to
show the way of the Lord, then to set up Ceremonies. Verse. 43
Children. Chap. 11. How Children are our Schoolmasters. Verse. 111 Chap. 15.
If our Children did not as others do, they would be the scorn of the world;
some Parents allege so. Verse. 18
Christ. Christ's. Christendom. Christian. Christians. Chap. 3. The Authors
meaning is to be sought and found in the Life of Christ. Verse. 4 Chap. 3. How
Jesus Christ must become Man in us if we will find God. Verse. 31 Chap. 3.
What Man must do to have Christ, the Supper, the Baptism, and the Holy Ghost.
Verse. 86 Chap. 3. Men must go with Earnestness into the Temple of Christ as
well as into the Churches of Stone. Verse. 91 Chap. 5. What Body Christ gives
us to Eat: also of the One Element. Verse. 68 Chap. 5. Why the New-Adam
Christ, must hang on the Cross. Verse. 140 Chap. 5. Why the New-Adam Christ,
must go through Hell. Verse. 142 Chap. 5. The New Adam Christ must be Tempted
forty days in the Wilderness. Verse. 143 Chap. 6. How the Innermost Court
shall be given to those that know not the Name of Christ. Verse. 23 Chap. 6. A
wonderful Exposition how Christ sits at the Right hand of God upon the
Circle of our Life. Verse. 71 Chap. 6. How the Three Principles were manifested
in the Person of Christ. Verse. 81 Chap. 8. Of our Power in Christ to become
the children of God. Verse. 17 Chap. 8. How the Ministers or servants of the
Dragon would have smothered the Resurrection of Christ. Verse. 70 Chap. 8. How
Christ is Newborn in God, and sits on the Rainbow. Verse. 72 Chap. 8. How
Christ did cast away nothing from him at his Resurrection but the Spirit of
this world. Verse. 73 Chap. 8. How the soul attaineth the Flesh of Christ even
in this Life time. Verse. 76 Chap. 11. The Author shuts not up the Grace
from any, but writes why Christ is borne. Verse. 31 Chap. 11. Reason asks how
we can be in the Body of Christ. Verse. 68 Chap. 11. Men must enter into the
Temple of Christ, else they stay in Darkness. Verse. 79 Chap. 11. How Christ
warns us, his appearing is as the Lightning. Verse. 83 Chap. 11. Christ is
the Way, the Door, and a good Shepherd. Verse. 84 Chap. 11. It is not
necessary to choose any place to find Christ in, he is every where. Christ is
our Carcass to whom we fly as Eagles. Verse. 87 Chap. 13. How Christ will be
with us, and take care for us. Verse. 2 Chap. 13. Christ gave his Disciples no
Earthly Transitory thing. Verse. 13 Chap. 13. The Apostles did not eat the
outward Flesh of Christ. Verse. 14 Chap. 13. A plain (though to Reason a high)
similitude of the Eating the Body of Christ. Verse. 15 Chap. 13. Another
similitude of eating that Body of Christ which is every where. Verse. 16 Chap.
13. Christ feeds not the soul with Spirit, but with Body. Verse. 17 Chap.
13. How the once received Body of Christ departs not from us, except we our
selves like Adam spoil it. Verse. 21 Chap. 13. How there were in the hand of
Christ two Kingdoms at once. Verse. 23 Chap. 13. How Christ stands in the
Father, as the Sun in the Elements. Verse. 29 Chap. 14. How Christ is
reproached. Verse. 17 Chap. 14. It is no slight matter to put on the Garment of
Christ. Verse. 22 Chap. 15. The Lamentation of Christ at the disobedience of
the world. Verse. 1 Chap. 15. To whom the sufferings of Christ are profitable.
Verse. 21 Chap. 18. He that sits in the Throne of Christ with an Asses
Heart, is but a teller of Stories, and no Preacher. Verse. 40 Chap. 16. What
profit Christ becoming Man, is to us. Verse. 88 Chap. 13. How Christendom has
fallen asleep by her whoredom. Verse. 61 Chap. 13. The Author asks whether
Christendom thinks him mad or no. Verse. 62 Chap. 6. The vain Boasting of
the Name Christian or Jew. Verse. 25 Chap. 15. How a sincere Christian knows
not himself. Verse. 26 Chap. 6. The Christians say yea; in the Parable of the
two sons. Verse. 27 Chap. 6. The Christians judge and condemn that in others
which they themselves do. Verse. 29 Chap. 6. Christians should not be Judges
but Lights t^ the world. Verse. 30
Church. Churches. Chap. 7. He that rests contented with mere going to
Church, is as well before as after he comes there. Verse. 2 Chap. 7. The falfe
Magus cries here is the Church of Christ, but it is the Whore. Verse. 57 Chap.
9. For whom it is best to stay from Church. Verse. 28 Chap. 11. How one may be
alone in a Wilderness, and yet in the Congregation or Church of Christ at the
same time. Verse. 67 Chap. 11. The Church of Christ is every where. A Repentant
Turk is in Christ. Verse. 89 Chap. 11. What it is the Antichrist scandalizeth
the Church of Christ with. Verse. 100 Chap. 12. The Author declares his
hearty love to the Church or Congregation of Christ. Verse. 9 Chap. 13. When
the Romish Church lost the Jewel, it became Babell. Verse. 5 Chap. 14. How the
Priest-Devill has made the Church, and Congregation of Christ, starck blind.
Verse. 23 Chap. 9. The Devil most readily drives the distressed soul into
the stone Churches. Verse. 24 Chap. 11. The Author would not have the stone
Churches destroyed: but he shows the Hypocrites: and shows also the living
Temple of Christ. Verse. 78
Circle. Chap. 11. How each Circle in the wheel of Nature gives its own
inclination to its Creature. Verse. 3 Chap. 11. Of the Circle between the Moon
and the Earth: also of the property of the Moon and of the Earth. Verse. 4
Clergy. Chap. 5. The worldly Governments have their original from the
heavenly, which the spiritualty or Clergy believe not. Verse. 62 Chap. 12. The
Clergy have Theevishly dealt with the Congregation of Christ. Verse. 19 Chap.
15. How the appearing holy Clergy have the predominancy in the world. Verse. 19
Chap. 16. By the Elder Son in the Parable, the appearing holy Clergy are
deciphered. Verse. 24
Conceits. Chap. 4. All Conceits are Graven Images in the Wonders of God.
Verse. 50
Contrariety. Chap. 2. Whence Contrariety, Anguish, and Cold arises. Verse. 14
Conversion. Convert. Chap. 8. Reading without Conversion is as Beneficial as
a Psalter to an Ass. Verse. 39 Chap. 8. It is good to Convert in this Life
time. Verse. 54
Corporeity. Chap. 4. The seaventb Form is a substantial Form, out of which
Corporeity proceeds, which consists also of two Forms, Light and
Darkness. Verse. 12
Corruptibility. Corruptible. Corruption. Chap. 18. Of the Corruptibility.
Verse. 10 Chap. 18. How that which is Corruptible has an Eternal Mother, also
wherefore the wonders shall continue Eternally. Verse. 20 Chap. 1. Whence
Corruption and Torment arise. Verse. 30
Covenant. Chap. 11. Why God made his Covenant with us in Christ. Verse. 27
Covetous. Covetousness. Chap. 17. The wicked Covetous Person has his God in
his Chist. Verse. 19 Chap. 17. An admonition to depart from Covetousness.
Verse. 26
Councills. Chap. 11. Why the Councills are instituted: How the Antichrist
glistereth in the form of Aaron. Verse. 47
Create. Created. Creation. Creatures. Chap. 10. What it is to Create. Verse.
14. Chap. 14. Admonition to consider whence we are, and to what End we were
Created. Verse. 1 Chap. 5. The Author will rightly show the Creation to the
children of God. Verse. 124 Chap. 6. As all things were formed in the Creation,
so our Mouth forms them. Verse. 2 Chap. 6. Why the Seekers have not found the
Pearl of the Creation. Verse. 17 Chap. 7. Without the Creation of the world,
the wonders of this world had not been known to the Angels. Verse. 23 Chap.
7. How the Eternity has moved it self to Creation. Verse. 75 Chap. 10. The
Ground of the Creation is clearly to be understood by the inward Man. Verse.
11 Chap. 10. Of the Creation of the Fifth Day: also the Creation of the
Elementary spirits. Verse. 20 Chap. 11. How God on the Fifth Day created all
Living Creatures. Verse. 2 Chap. 11. The Life of the Creatures consists in
the Matrix out of which they are Created. Verse. 9
Cross. Chap. 8. What the hanging on the Cross was. Verse. 71 Chap. 2. The
several kinds of Conditions of the Damned are not only four, but infinite:
they have all forms but the Light. Verse. 56 Chap. 18. The here acted
Fopperies are the Treasure of the Damned soul. Verse. 27
Dark. Darkness. Chap. 1. Of the Forms in the Dark Nature: the Darkness
longs after the Light. Verse. 27 Chap. 2. Of Darkness: according to which
God is said to be a consuming Fire. Verse. 90 Chap. 5. Out of what Darkness is
Generated: also of the Fathers Property. Verse. 20 Chap. 5. How the Flash
expels the Darkness. Verse. 38 Chap. 6. God is not Guilty of any ones
remaining in Darkness. Verse. 18
Day. Chap. 17. It is asked whether the night or the Day be best. Verse. 24
Death. Chap. 2. How Death trembles at the Life. Verse. 72 Chap. 8. What is,
and is called Death. Verse. 37 Chap. 8. There is no Death in the Eternity: also
what is called the Eternal Death. Verse. 38 Chap. 9. After the Curse Death was
in all fruits, whence we eat Death. Verse. 16 Chap. 14. How Men must go
through Death and Hell of the Devils into the Merits of Christ. Verse. 14
Deity. Chap. 1. The pure Deity, the Birth of the Trinity, and the Angelical
world, are every where present. Verse. 48 Chap. 2. The Author will show the
Form of the Deity. Verse. 59 Chap. 2. The Deity is subject to no alteration.
Verse. 66 Chap. 4. Without and beyond Nature the Deity is called Majesty: and
in Nature it is called Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Wonder, Counsel, Power.
Verse. 86 Chap. 16. Of the Pure Deity: also how the soul attaineth the Body of
God, and becomes the child of God. Verse. 101 Chap. 3. Of the Deliverance of
the soul. Verse. 57 Chap. 3. In what manner the soul has Deliverance. Verse.
58
Departs. Chap. 18. How the soul is that Departs from the Body without
Conversion. Verse. 23
Desire. Chap. 2. What the Desire is, and what it works. Verse. 11 Chap. 2.
What the impregnation of the Desire is whereby it generateth. Verse. 12 Chap.
7. Of the Desire of the Light: and of the Desire of the Fire. Verse. 67 Chap.
8. How the Desire makes not it self, but is made. Verse. 52 Chap. 8. Whence
our Desire after the highest Good proceeds, and whence it has its
sustenance. Verse. 55 Chap. 9. The first Desire of Man, is for Power, Honor,
and Glory. Verse. 19 Chap. 9. The second Desire, is for Riches, Plenty, and
Voluptuousness. Verse. 20 Chap. 9. The third Desire, is for the Kingdom of
Heaven. Verse. 21 Chap. 9. How the Desire goes inwards into it self to God.
Verse. 69 Chap. 10. All Lies in the Will: the Desire assumeth where nothing
is. Verse. 9 Chap. 10. The Desire and the Will are two distinct things. Verse.
13
Despair. Chap. 14. Advice not to Despair in distress. Verse. 60
Devil. Devils. Chap. 5. Why the Devil is called a Prince of this world.
Verse. 18 Chap. 5. A Prince does as readily serve the Devil, as a poor
Shepherd does: yet each of them bears his Office for God. Verse. 65 Chap. 8.
When it is that the Devil stands in fear. Verse. 13 Chap. 9. The Devil and
this world strive with the soul. Verse. 5 Chap. 9. The Tricks of the Devil
when the soul hears any thing taught concerning the New Birth. Verse. 25
Chap. 9. The Tricks of the Devil when the Teacher slaundereth: and when he
reproves fully according to his Duty. Verse. 26 Chap. 9. The Devil has
kindled the life of the Evil Beasts in himself. Also in what Forms the
Devils shape their Bodies in Hell. Verse. 56 Chap. 10. The Devil dwells
near us: He hates the Light, and is the poorest Creature in the Crown.
Verse. 23 Chap. 14. Of our Misery: of the Great Assaults of Satan against Man.
Also where it is that the Devil has Power. Verse. 30 Chap. 14. How the Devil
has gotten Power in the outward Dominion: Also how the poor soul is between
two Dominions in the Deep. Verse. 49 Chap. 14. How the soul is released from
the Devil. Verse. 50 Chap. 14. Of the seven coards of the Devil which he
holds the soul fast withal. Verse. 51 Chap. 14. How those must do, (to
whom the Devil setts all the sins they have committed before their Eyes)
that the Devil may be faint and weak. Verse. 64 Chap. 14. How the Devil
betrayeth the soul. Man is the Devils best beloved Lodging. Verse. 65 Chap.
14. Where it is that the Devil has power outwardly. Verse. 66 Chap. 16. How
the Devil overwhelmeth the soul terribly. Verse. 7 Chap. 16. In what manner
the Devil assaulteth the soul in its security. Verse. 16 Chap. 17. One Man is
a Devil to another. Verse. 22 Chap. 2. How the Devils lost the Light of God,
and now are in the four Forms. Verse. 48 Chap. 2. How the Devils came into
the Abyss of Hell in a Moment. Verse. 54 Chap. 4. The Devils stand in the
Wonders of God to Gods Glory. Verse. 90 Chap. 7. Why the Devils are not
Transitory. Verse. 16 Chap. 7. How the Devils are Eternal Spirits in the
fierce Matrix, and are a looking Glass for Angels and Men. Verse. 17 Chap. 7.
Whence the Original of the Devils is, wherein all Corporeity does consist.
Verse. 69 Chap. 8. How the Devils have lost the Tincture of Meekness: They
have no Palpable Body. Verse. 93 Chap. 10. Where the Devils dwell: how the
world scorneth all Revelation. Verse. 22 Chap. 11. Of the Great Mystery of the
Anger, and of the Devils: also of the two Dominions in Man: also of the
Totally false souls Figuration; outwardly courteous, and inwardly a Devil,
and so betrayeth it self. Verse. 42
Divines. Chap. 2. Physicians now understand not the Center of Sulphur,
Mercury, and Sal: nor do the Divines understand the Spirit of the Holy
Scriptures. Verse. 17
Doctrine. Chap. 12. Of the seed which the Antichristian Devil has sown
into the Doctrine of Christ. Verse. 16
Doings. Chap. 17. All our Doings are acceptable to God, if they be not false
or wicked. Verse. 15
Doubt. Doubtful. Doubting. Chap. 7. How the soul is kept in Doubt by leaning
to Opinions. Verse. 6 Chap. 7. It is good to see with our own Eyes, others
Eyes make us but Doubt. Verse. 55 Chap. 9. It is a great sin to Doubt of the
Grace of God. Verse. 55 Chap. 11. That Men should not Doubt in Prayer: plain
instruction. Verse. 56 Chap. 11. How poor souls fall into distrust and Doubt.
Verse. 98 Chap. 17. Why the soul is Doubtful in Prayer. Verse. 3 Chap. 4. The
Mind searches after the most inward Ground which is here shown: also how
Doubting comes. Verse. 60 Chap. 11. Whence Doubting in Prayer arises; fair
Instruction. Verse. 57 Chap. 16. In the word Erden, which signifies Earth, lie
many hidden Mysteries: Also concerning our Doubting in Prayer; and our Misery.
Verse. 59 Chap. 17. How the Devil brings Doubting into the soul, and makes
a severe Judge of God. Verse. 4
Driver. Chap. 11. A Song concerning the Fall of the Driver, who has set us at
odds. Verse. 114
Die. Dies. Dying. Chap. 18. How a child in the Mothers womb is at first old
enough to Die. Our Limit is hidden in us. Verse. 13 Chap. 18. The Author must
speak by way of similitude, how one is when he Dies. Verse. 17 Chap. 12. How
the simple Dying Man knows not whither his soul shall go. Verse. 26 Chap.
12. Where the simple Dying Man's soul remains: whence Purgatory is framed:
where the souls of the Deceivers remain. Note it is wonderful. Verse. 27
Earth. Chap. 5. Out of what the Earth, Stones, and Metalls come. Verse. 98
Chap. 6. What the Earth signifies. Verse. 64 Chap. 9. How the Earth springs
in its own Life. Verse. 58 Chap. 10. Where the Devils dwell: also of the
wheeling of the Globe of the Earth, and of the other Planets. Verse. 21 Chap.
11. Of the longing of the Earth; why it wheeleth, or is wheeled about. Verse. 5
Chap. 11. How the budding forth of the Earth springs toward the Sun: also of
the unlastingnesse of the fruits of the Earth. Verse. 6 Chap. 11. Of the Matrix
of Earth, being a Corrupted Matrix; what it was before the Fall. Verse. 8 Chap.
12. Whence the Divisions among all people of the Earth, have arisen. Verse. 18
Chap. 18. He that hungreth let him Eat, and he that thirsts let him drink,
without Money. Verse. 55.
Elders. Chap. 5. Of the Glassie Sea before the Seats of the Elders. Verse. 10
Chap. 9. What the seven Spirits are, (where the Son of Man stands) and
also the Four and Twenty Elders before the Throne of God. Election. Verse. 79
Chap. 7. Whence the Election of the Children of God comes. Verse. 35 Chap. 7.
Of the Election among the Children of Jesse. Verse. 45 Chap. 7. The Election is
not Ordained from Eternity in God. Verse. 46
Element. Elements. Chap. 5. Out of what the Element of water is Created.
Verse. 13 Chap. 5. How the fruit gets its Ornament: and how all is like a
wrestling: viz. in the Pure Element. Verse. 54 Chap. 5. How the Four Elements
are in One pure Element. Verse. 118 Chap. 5. Out of what the four Elements
have proceeded. Verse. 105 Chap. 5. How Gods Spirit drove forth the four
Elements that have appeared as a peculiar Principle. Verse. 106 Chap. 5. Why
all that live in the four Elements must corrupt. Verse. 121 Chap. 6. Whence
the stirring of the Elements arises. Verse. 50 Chap. 11. How Evil Men kindle
the Elements: also how the Anger wills to devour; which the Prophets
foretold. Verse. 39 Chap. 13. How the substantiality of the Earth proceeds
from the other three Elements. Verse. 26
Employment. Chap. 17. Man may use what Innocent Employment he will to get his
living with. Verse. 16
Enemies. Chap. 12. Our worst Enemy is in our Boosom: also direction how we
ought to walk. Verse. 44 Chap. 12. How men may defend themselves against their
Enemies, and not displease God. Verse. 42 Chap. 16. How the soul is begirt
with Enemies. Verse. 5
Essences. Chap. 1. Whence multiplicity of Essences or faculties arises.
Verse. 31 Chap. 2. How the wheel of the Essences stands Trembling. Verse. 70
Chap. 3. Of the wheel of the Essences, whence the Fire proceeds. Verse. 9
Chap. 3. How all Essences which have laid hold of the Light, stand in the first
Generating Will. Verse. 11
Eternal. Eternity. Chap. 6. What is Eternal, and what is not Eternal.
Verse. 42 Chap. 18. That which is proceeded out of the Eternity, is of an
Eternal kind. Verse. 16 Chap. 14. How the Eternity is revealed. Verse. 36
Eve. Chap. 7. What moved Eve to Eat of the fruit. Verse. 48 Chap. 13. How
Mother Eve was deceived in her Opinion. Verse. 55
Evil. Chap. 3. In these Writings may be found, whence Evil proceeds.
Verse. 25 Chap. 9. The Evil as well as the Good is useful. Verse. 13 Chap.
13. How the good salve is poison to the Evil. Verse. 50 Chap. 14. If Evil had
not been in the Eternity, there had been no Evil in the Creation. Verse. 40
Chap. 15. Delight in Evil is the Devils chain and fetters. Verse. 6. Chap.
18. How by the striking of the right Hammer, the good overcomes the Evil.
Verse. 49
Excommunication. Chap. 12. Of those that are cursed with Excommunication
deservedly: also of those that are cursed for the truth sake. Verse. 8 Chap.
13. Of the Churches reproof and Excommunucation: he that reproves and
Excommunicateth in the wrong is himself Excommunicate. Verse. 9
Exposition. Chap. 2. The Exposition of the word Sulphur Verse. 19 Chap. 2. The
Exposition of the words Sul-phur, Mercurius, and Sal. Verse. 41, 42, 43. Chap.
2. An Exposition of these words; In the beginning was the word. Verse. 60 Chap.
5. An Exposition of that Text: We have piped to you, and you have not danced.
Verse. 8 Chap. 11. A plain Exposition of these words of Christ: When the
unclean Spirit goes out of a Man, it wandreth through dry places, etc. Verse.
59 Chap. 14. An Exposition of those words of Christ: A Cammell may sooner go
through the eye of a Needle, then a rich Man enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:
also what the Devils Triumphant Chariot is. Verse. 45 Chap. 16. To what this
Exposition tends. Verse. 1 Chap. 16. The Authors Exposition of these words:
Before they called I heard them. Verse. 11 Chap. 16. An Exposition of the word
vom or from. How the soul grows as a stalk out of the Root. A wonderful
description of the soul. Verse. 84 Chap. 16. Further Exposition of Nature, and
of the soul, by the similitude of Fire. Verse. 85, 86
Faith. Chap. 10. Concerning the Lies of those that speak from their own
conceit: also whence the strife about Faith and Religion proceeds. Verse. 32
Chap. 11. A saying to the Sophisters, who of Opinions make Articles of Faith:
there is Heresy in Every Opinion: Men must cleave to the Living Word. Verse.
81 Chap. 14. Of the dead Faith, and of the true Faith. Verse. 9 Chap. 16. What
we attain in Prayer: what the syllable men in Amen signifies: what Faith is:
how Prayer comprehends two things. Verse. 97
Fall. Chap. 5. What the heavy Fall of Adam was. Verse. 120 Chap. 11. Of Adams
wisdom, ornament, clothing, and members before his Fall: how he went out from
God, and caused the Creation of the Tree Good and Evil. Verse. 21 Chap. 11.
How the Devil did blow up Adams Lust. Adams condition after the Fall. Verse.
22
Father. Chap. 1. The speaker is the Father of the Word. The Abyss of Hell
stands in the Center of the Father. Verse. 39 Chap. 2. Of the Fathers Will to
Generate his Son or Word. Verse. 61 Chap. 2. How God the Father is without
Name. Verse. 76 Chap. 2. How God the Father comprehends his will out of
nothing but only out of himself. How the Genetrix is to be understood wherein
the Essence is Generated. Verse. 77 Chap. 4. Whence the Father has the Name
Fatther. Verse. 64 Chap. 4. The Mind in the Father in Nature, but not in the
Liberty, is like the Mind of Man. Verse. 65 Chap. 5. When the Father speaks
or Generateth the Word. Verse. 40 Chap. 7. How God the Father is all in Nature,
both Love and Wrath. Verse. 62 Chap. 16. How we should go with earnestness
to the Father of the lost Prodigal Son. Verse. 19 Chap. 16. How the Father
rejoices at the finding of the Lost Son. Verse. 22 Chap. 16. How the Father
entertained the Lost Son. Verse. 23 Chap. 17. How we go to our true Father,
and become his children. Verse. 1
Fiat. Chap. 7. How the Water is become Material. The working of the Fiat.
Verse. 71 Chap. 9. How the Spirit of God drives the Fiat. Verse. 114
Figure. Chap. 5. When God shall be manifested; the Figure of Every thing
remains Eternallly. Verse. 122 Chap. 5. The Beasts after the Last Day get no
Bodies more, but the Figure of the Elementary substance remains. Verse. 131
Chap. 9. Why the Figure of all kinds of Creatures must remain in Eternity.
Verse. 60 Chap. 9. How God has manifested himself in a figurative form, in
the Great Wonders of God. Verse. 62 Chap. 10. How the Figure of the Will
stands in the Desire: also of the Creation. Verse. 12. Chap. 18. The Image
has stood from Eternity, as a Figure in a Dream. Verse. 18
Fire. Chap. 2. A recital of the Original of the Fire. Verse. 69 Chap. 4. Of
the Fire of the Liberty: how Death affords weight: How the Anguish becomes
Material. Verse. 14 Chap. 4. Without Fire there is no Body has any any
feeling. Verse. 15 Chap. 5. Of the Original of the Fire; and of the Air or
Wind. Verse. 103 Chap. 5. How the property of the Water holds the Fire
captive. Verse. 104 Chap. 7. The Eternal Nature, and the Eternal Liberty are
represented by the Fire. Verse. 65 Chap. 7. How the Matrix of the Water holds
the Fire Captive. Verse. 70 Chap. 8. How the Fire devoureth the Substantially.
Verse. 33 Chap. 8. How the Substantiality flies out from the Fire again.
Verse. 34 Chap. 8. Of the Twofold Fire. Verse. 41 Chap. 9. A description of the
Eighth Number, viz. the Fire. Verse. 89 Chap. 10. The Author shows us the
Mysterium Magnum. The Fire is the Eighth Number: also a description of the
Fire. Verse. 27 Chap. 10. The most Inward Tincture is the Ninth Number, the
Tenth Number is the Eternal Fire of God; with a wonderful description of it.
Verse. 28 Chap. 11. What Fire that is which will melt away the Stones and
Earth. Verse. 16 Chap. 11. How all must pass through the Fire, and the floare
be purged. Verse. 28 Chap. 14. How the soul must pass through the Fire, viz.
the Eighth Form, or the Law of Moses. Flash. Verse. 52 Chap. 2. The Flash is
free from Nature. Verse. 25 Chap. 2. The Flash is the Third Form. Verse. 28
Flesh. Chap. 11. We are all one Flesh, soul, and spirit. Verse. 69 Chap. 11.
How the Flesh that in Adam became Earth, became Heaven again. Verse. 71 Chap.
11. How Christ's soul and Flesh is our soul and Flesh: also how we live in
Christ. Verse. 72
Form. Forms. Chap. 2. Harsh, sour, tart, stern, fierce attraction is the
first Form. Verse. 32 Chap. 2. Bitter Sting is the second Form. Verse. 33
Chap. 2. The Flash of Liberty is the Third Form. Verse. 34 Chap. 2. What
makes the Third Form in Nature. Verse. 35 Chap. 2. What is called the Fourth
Form in Nature. Verse. 36 Chap. 2. How the Fifth Form rises up. Verse. 73
Chap. 2. How the Fifth Form is the true Original of Life. Verse. 74. Chap. 3.
How the Sixth Form in Nature is Generated. Verse. 13 Chap. 3. Of the Seventh
Form of the Eternal Nature. Verse. 29 Chap. 1. The Two first Forms sour and
bitter, are the original of every thing: and the Eternal will is the Mother
of them. Verse. 28 Chap. 2. How the two first Forms hold the Center. Verse. 20
Chap. 2. How the two Forms without the other are in Great Anguish. Verse. 21
Chap. 2. Further of the working of the four Forms. Verse. 47 Chap. 2. The
Author will show the Three other heavenly. Fo^mes that are generated out of
the first four Forms. Verse. 65. Chap. 5. A Mention of the seven Forms.
Verse. 15 Chap. 14. A Mention of the four Forms that contain the Original
of Nature. Verse. 31
Forsaken. Chap. 17. He that lets go what will not willingly stay, will not
be Forsaken of God. Verse. 28
Fruit. Chap. 18. Man is a Root in the field of God: what Fruit belongs to
Gods Table, and what to the wrathful Mother. Verse. 52 Chap. 18. As a Fruit
Grows, so it tastes. Verse. 53
Furious. Chap. 18. How can one Furious person appease another furious person.
Verse. 45
Garden. Chap. 11. How we walk under the Figtree in the Garden of Roses.
Verse. 113
Generator. Genetrix. Chap. 2. Wherefore the Generator of the Word is called
Father. Verse. 88 Chap. 1. The Genetrix is a Darkness: the Birth of the
Eternal Being. Verse. 35 Chap. 2. The Ground of the Genetrix and Circle of
Life. Verse. 1 Chap. 2. How all is generated out of the Genetrix. Of the
Eternal Word, and of the Name God. Verse. 6 Chap. 4. Of the Properties in the
Genetrix, or the Eternal Mother. Verse. 35 Chap. 11. Mention concerning the
Being of All Beeings. Of the Genetrix, and of the Three Kingdoms. Verse. 1
Chap. 13. How the Mother the Genetrix, desires to Generate a young Son in
her Old Age. Verse. 53 Chap. 16. How the Genetrix of the Anger of God, and the
Genetrix of the outward Nature, are working in this outward Life. Verse. 90
Gifts. Chap. 12. How one soul shall rejoice over the Gifts of another. Verse.
3
God. Chap. 1. None can know God rightly without the Spirit of God. Verse. 46
Chap. 1. A warning not to seek God only above the Stars. Verse. 47 Chap. 2.
How God is a Consuming Fire. Verse. 58 Chap. 2. How Men shall speak rightly of
God. Verse. 68 Chap. 3. God is without Beginning: his Word has an Eternal
bottomless Beginning, and is rightly called a Person. Verse. 2 Chap. 3. The
Author tells the Mind of the Reader, that he means not two but one God.
Verse. 16 Chap. 5. We must Lodge in Heaven with God, or in Hell with the
Devils. Verse. 27 Chap. 5. A direction how to find and see God. Verse. 31
Chap. 5. How we are not able to know any thing of God. Verse. 51 Chap. 5. How
God is manifested in a Creaturely Form by the Angelical world. Verse. 60
Chap. 5. The A. B. C. Scholars reach the Deep of God; their speech is
various. Verse. 73 Chap. 5. What is truly called lifting ones self above God.
Verse. 76 Chap. 5. Why we cannot see the Kingdom of God. Verse. 119 Chap. 6.
By what we may know that we are the Children of God. Verse. 3 Chap. 6. We
are Gods in God: also why a Beast cannot speak. Verse. 4 Chap. 6. How God is
found of them that sought him not. Verse. 24 Chap. 6. How God is in us, and we
without God, and how we enter into God. Verse. 31 Chap. 6. Nothing is from
Eternity, and in Eternity, but God. Verse. 45 Chap. 6. Why God bec^^e Man.
Without the New Birth all is lost. Verse. 61 Chap. 7. What is the right means
to see the Kingdom of God. Verse. 4 Chap. 7. God moves himself no more but
Thrice. Verse. 19 Chap. 7. The first, second, and Third Moving of God. Verse.
20. 21. 22 Chap. 8. God and all heavenly properties are but one Body. Verse. 4
Govern. Government. Chap. 18. The Spirit of God, and not the Old Man should
Govern: there is a twofold seeking in the soul: also of the true Life of the
soul. Verse. 48 Chap. 4. What Government there was before the Time of the
Angelical world. Verse. 56 Chap. 4. The Spirits are incomprehensible to us.
The Author will show us the Government of Heaven further, and then the
Government of Man. Verse. 57 Chap. 13. A wonderful discourse concerning the
Rise and Fall of a Kingdom, Government, Dominion, or Religion. Verse. 47 Chap.
17. All in this world is but mere Foppery. Also of the Government of the
Potentates, and the Government of such as fear God. Verse. 20
Heart. Chap. 4. The Eternal Essence desires a Number or Limitt: The Heart of
God is the End of Nature. Verse. 10 Chap. 4. What is necessary to the Attaining
of the Heart of God. Verse. 47 Chap. 4. The Principle of the Heart of God
changes not. Verse. 49 Chap. 5. Wherefore the Word is the Heart of God. Verse.
36 Chap. 5. Why the Body must pass away, and the soul not: and why the Heart
God must become Man. Verse. 139 Chap. 6. The Form of the Heart of God
described by the smilitude of a Rainbow. Verse. 68 Chap. 7. If the Heart of
God had not become Man, the Image of the Number Three, or the Eternal Virgin
had not been known to the Angels. Verse. 24 Chap. 9. How the Heart is in
Anxiety. Verse. 90
Heathen. Chap. 6. A False Christian is without God as well as a wicked
Heathen. Verse. 20 Chap. 11. Gods wilt stands Open to all Men: also how an
Heathen may be saved. Verse. 80
Heaven. Heavens. Chap. 4. Wherein the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Angelical
world consists. Verse. 62 Chap. 5. Of the outward Heaven. Verse. 67 Chap. 5.
How we ought to be, that we may come into the Kingdom of Heaven. Verse. 71
Chap. 7. The Strife about the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of Hell.
Verse. 34 Chap. 12. What there is in the Kingdom of Heaven. Verse. 4 Chap. 12.
We stand between Heaven and Hell, and will becme either an Angel or Devil.
Verse. 48 Chap. 14. What Men must do to see the Kingdom of Heaven. Verse. 11
Chap. 18. In the Heaven there is nothing New. Verse. 51 Chap. 12. He bids
the Heavens rejoice: the praise of the Lord goes over all Mountains. Verse.
11
Hell. Chap. 2. The Ground of Hell, and of Evil. Verse. 8 Chap. 2. The
Condition of Hell, and of the Damned in the four Forms. Verse. 50 Chap. 2.
How Hell is not limited, nor circumscribed by Place. Verse. 51 Chap. 2. God
made no Hell, or peculiar several Place to torment the Angels and Men in.
Verse. 53 Chap. 8. What is Lucifers Hell. Verse. 45 Chap. 14. God has created
no Hell, nor Devil: what is the Devils Hell, and the property thereof. Verse.
41
Heresy. Heretic. Chap. 11. There is Heresy in Every Opinion: Men must
cleave to the Living Word. Verse. 81 Chap. 3. How one calls another an
Heretic in their Devil Disputation. Verse. 82
Hidden. Chap. 2. That which was hidden to the Heathen, and is still hidden,
shall be revealed. Verse. 39
Holy Ghost. Chap. 3. How the Apostles received the Holy Ghost in Love, but not
in Contention and Scorn. Verse. 89 Chap. 4. Of the Holy Ghost, which is the
Spirit Mercurius in the Divine Nature, which is the sound that makes the will
manifest. Verse. 72 Chap. 4. A Comparison between the Holy Ghost, and the
Spirit and Life of Man. Verse. 83 Chap. 5. God fills all: and seeing the
Holy Ghost goes out from the Father, the Mind asks whither does it go.
Verse. 9 Chap. 5. How God dwells in Heaven: also how the Holy Ghost
proceeds. Verse. 14 Chap. 12. How Men may get the Holy Ghost. Verse. 41 Chap.
16. It is not the Father but the Holy Ghost that meets the crying soul.
Verse. 15
Hypocrites. Chap. 2. A warning to the Hypocrites, and those that are Learned
in the Letter. Verse. 2 Chap. 11. Of the Generation of the false Hypocrite, and
of his behavior. Verse. 33
Image. Chap. 3. We are the express Image of God: wherefore the Father has
Regenerated us in Christ. Verse. 49 Chap. 6. How the Spirit created the
Substantiality into an Image, and how the Image stood in the Angelical world.
Verse. 51 Chap. 6. What properties were in the Image. Verse. 52 Chap. 6. How
the Image was a whole similitude of the Eternal substance. Verse. 53 Chap. 6.
A Comparing of the Fall of Lucifer to the Fall of the Image or Adam. Verse. 54
Chap. 6. How the Image awakened the property of Anger, and became the Image of
a Serpent. Verse. 58 Chap. 6. How the Regenerate put on the Eternal Image.
Verse. 75 Chap. 7. How the Image doated on this world, as Lucifer did on the
Matrix of Nature: Adams power before the Fall. Verse. 26 Chap. 7. The horrible
Blasphemy whereby the Serpent by the Image Blasphemeth the Spirit of God.
Verse. 61 Chap. 9. What the Image in the Revelation, and the Crown signifies.
Verse. 75 Chap. 11. What caused God to create his Image. Verse. 14 Chap. 18.
How the Image attained Essence or Substance in the Moving of the Father Verse
19
Incomprehensible. Chap. 18. Nothing is Incomprehensible to the Mother of
Nature. Verse. 3
Joy. Chap. 1. Of the Joy in the Divine Life. Verse. 18 Chap. 5. How every one
shall have Joy or sorrow of that which is his. Verse. 133 Chap. 12. What we
must choose that we may have Eternal Joy therein. Verse. 2 Chap. 14. The
Anger in the Kingdom of God, is the great wondrous Joy. Verse. 70 Chap. 17.
How the Angels and souls have Joy of one another Clarity, Brightness, or
Luster. Verse. 18 Chap. 18. Of the Joy of the soul that fears God. Verse. 30
Judges. Judgment. Chap. 5. He that sees not Judges amiss. Verse. 36 Chap.
6. What the Last Judgment Day is. Verse. 130 Chap. 8. How our Bodies at the
Last Day of Judgment must come forth again. Verse. 74 Chap. 8. The Judgment
of the Spirits of Perdition Also who shall execute the Judgment. Verse. 75
Chap. 8. Of those that shall be alive at the Last hour of the Judgment.
Verse. 78 Chap. 11. The discourse between the wise and foolish Virgins in the
Judgment. Verse. 29 Chap. 12. Clear advice to have the Judgment of God
before our Eyes. Verse. 38 Chap. 15. How it shall be with the Superior and
Inferior in Judgment. Verse. 12
Kingdom. Chap. 14. How we must be prepared, if we will walk in the narrow way
to the Kingdom of God. Verse. 7
Know. Knowers. Knowing. Knowledge. Chap. 18. The Author tells how he can
know these things. Verse. 1 Chap. 13. How the Kingdom of Heaven remains
hidden to the Knowers that are not Doers. Verse. 57 Chap. 14. the Devil is not
overcome by much knowing and disputing. Verse. 5 Chap. 1. None can come to the
Knowledge of the Essence of God, but by Grace. Verse. 20 Chap. 3. Every one may
find the Authors knowledge in himself. Verse. 7 Chap. 5. The Author having
this knowledge cannot be silent. Verse. 2 Chap. 6. This knowledge is not Borne
of the Wisdom of this world. Verse. 6 Chap. 7. The Author will speak from
his knowledge not Opinion. Verse. 54 Chap. 14. Wherein our striving for the
highest Good consists, not in the sword, nor in much knowledge. Verse. 3
Chap. 16. What is requisite and necessary for us that we may attain the
knowledge of the Kingdom of God: also how we are deceived in the outward
Reason. Verse. 31
Lamb. Chap. 3. How the Lamb took the Book. He who understands not this is
under the Seals. Verse. 79 Chap. 6. How Men must go to the Lamb, and fly
from the Beast. Verse. 15 Chap. 13. How Christ gave the true Paschall Lamb to
his Apostles; viz. his heavenly flesh and Blood. Verse. 12
Language. Chap. 3. What is understood in the word Ternarius in the Language of
Nature. Verse. 17 Chap. 3. What is understood in the word Ternarium Sanctum in
the Language of Nature. Verse. 18 Chap. 4. What is meant by the word, Schuffe,
or Created, in the Language of Nature: a substance may proceed out of a
Thought. Verse. 30 Chap. 5. He shows what the Creation of God was by the
Language of Nature. Verse. 84 Chap. 5. In the Languages of all Nations the
Language of Nature may be understood: Adam in Innocence understood the Language
of Nature, in his Fall we lost it, and attain it again in Christ. Verse. 85
Chap. 5. It is not good that the unregenerate Man should know the Language of
Nature, which contains the secrets of the Creation. Verse. 8 Chap. 5. A
discourse according to the Language of Nature, upon the word Schuffe, which
signifies Created. Verse. 88 Chap. 5. Further of the Language of Nature.
Verse. 93 Chap. 5. As the Mouth forms the word Schuffe, according to the
Language of Nature, so was the Creation formed. Verse. 101 Chap. 8. Of the word
Ternarium Sanctum, in the Language of Nature. Verse. 3 Chap. 9. How God
separated the water and the earth. The word Mere [or Sea,] in the Language of
Nature, is a scorn to Devils. Verse. 57 Chap. 9. Out of what the Seavenly Two
Languages proceed which signify Babell. Verse. 77 Chap. 16. Of the most
excellent understanding which the Lords Prayer has in the Language of Nature.
Verse. 39 Chap. 16. An Exposition of the word Glauben [or Beleeving] in the
Language of Nature, in the Power of God there is no Consumingnesse. Verse. 98
Lazarus. Chap. 16. Of Christ's Prayer when he raised Lazarus. Verse. 12 Chap.
16. How Lazarus was raised: and how we shall hear the voice at the Last
Judgment Day: All souls are as it were one soul. Verse. 13
Learned. Learning. Chap. 1. The Learned have only the History of the Saints.
Verse. 42 Chap. 3. Why the Learned contemn simple lowliness. Verse. 51 Chap.
3. Why the Learned in Reason contemn the Commandments of God, and have
gainesayed them. Verse. 52 Chap. 3. How Lay men or the Vulgar dance after the
Pipe of the Learned. Verse. 84 Chap. 5. Of those who boast themselves to be
Masters and Learned. Verse. 75 Chap. 13. How the Conceits that are built upon
the Doctrine of the Learned are deceitful. Verse. 56 Chap. 16. The Doctor is
admonished to seek, what the true Doctorship in the Holy Ghost is. Outward
Learning is but a shadow. Verse. 63
Letters. Chap. 9. Of the Four and twenty Letters, their twofold property
Evil and Good. Verse. 76
Liberty. Chap. 2. How both the Liberty and the fierce strength are in the
Fire. Verse. 24 Chap. 2. The Liberty without and beyond Nature is God the
Father. Also how God is Allmighty. Verse. 26 Chap. 9. What the Liberty without
Nature is: also how the Center of the Third Principle has generated it self.
Verse. 82
Life. Chap. 1. Life is a Burning Fire that goes out if it have no fuel.
Verse. 3 Chap. 1. The Divine Life of the soul needs food. Verse. 5 Chap. 1.
Every Life desires its Mother for food. Verse. 6 Chap. 1. Wherein the
Transitory Life consists: The souls Life Eternal. Verse. 7 Chap. 1. Whence
the Life of the soul proceeds. Verse. 8 Chap. 1. The Threefold Life is not
divided: How God the Father is all. Verse. 9 Chap. 1. A Consideration whence
Life and death comes, offered to the Mind. Verse. 36 Chap. 2. Of the breaking
and raising up of Life. Verse. 16 Chap. 5. How the Blossom of Life springs up
in the Tincture: also how Every Life eats of its own Mother. Verse. 22 Chap.
5. How the fierce might manageth its order after an Heavenly manner. We have
Life and Death before us. Verse. 63 Chap. 5. After this Life there is no
alteration, till the End of this worlds Time. Verse. 129 Chap. 5. That which
proceeds out of the Center of the Eternal Life, continues; also how all
words and works continue. Verse. 132 Chap. 6. Of a twofold property in the
Eternal Life, Joy and Pain. Verse. 65 Chap. 6. How all rules in and over our
Earthly Life. Verse. 72 Chap. 8. Of the Temporary Spirits Life, and of the
Eternal Spi^its Life, and government in this world. Verse. 1 Chap. 8. Of the
Fire of the Life of Eternity. Of the Eternal Earth or Substantiality. 2 Chap.
8. Of our ability to go out of this dangerous Life into the Eternal Life.
Verse. 16 Chap. 8. Of our Longing after an Incorruptible Life. Verse. 29 Chap.
8. Every Life desires its Mother, or the best that is in its own Center.
Verse. 30 Chap. 8. What is the right Life in every Life: how Nature reaches
after the Liberty. Verse. 31 Chap. 8. The Deep of the world has such a Life
as the other Creatures have. Verse. 40 Chap. 8. How the Light or Elementary
Life in Beasts is simple. Verse. 50 Chap. 8. How the Elementary Life in Man is
twofold. Verse. 51 Chap. 8. How there is another Tincture or Life, in the life
of this world. Verse. 53 Chap. 8. What the outward Life desires. Verse. 54
Chap. 8. Of the second Motion or Life in Man. Verse. 58 Chap. 9. Whence every
Government in every Life in this world proceeds. Verse. 107 Chap. 13. Of a
Twofold Life that a child gets in the Conception, viz. the two Tinctures
corrupted in Adam. Verse. 34 Chap. 14. What we must do if we desire to serve
God. The Limit of our Life is set in the Mothers womb. Verse. 6 Chap. 14. A
short Exposition of the Threefold Life in Man. Verse. 46 Chap. 14. How the
Three Lives in Adam were pleasing to God. Verse. 47 Chap. 14. How the Third
Life through the suttlety of the Devil did get the predominancy. Verse. 48
Chap. 14. After this Life time there is no Remedy; If we make our selves
either an Angel or a Devil, that we are, and remain so. Verse. 72 Chap. 15.
They that will sinde their own Life and their children, in Heaven, must loose
them in this world. Verse. 24 Chap. 17. How the outward Life consists of
Three Parts. Verse. 13 Chap. 18. How Enoch, Eliah, and Moses, are entered into
the Paradisicall Life. Verse. 5 Chap. 18. How Saturn leaves the Life. Verse.
12 Chap. 18. The danger in the outward Life. The seed is hatched and brought
forth out of Three Mothers. Verse. 14
Light. Chap. 1. How the Light and life of God comes into the soul. Verse. 15
Chap. 2. How the fifth Form is the true Original of Life. How the Light
shines in the Darkness, and yet the Darkness remains. Verse. 74 Chap. 2.
How the Light stands opposite to the Darkness: but the Light is chief.
Verse. 89 Chap. 4. The Longing of God has Created all things to the Light, and
not to the Darkness. Verse. 26 Chap. 4. The Light consists in Meekness, and
dwells in the Liberty. Verse. 63 Chap. 7. How the Light is the Love, and how
the Fire is a cause of the Light. Verse. 63 Chap. 8. Of the Light of the
Majesty, and of the Light of the Life of the Creatures. Verse. 5 Chap. 9. We
should not bury our received Talent in the Earth, but set our Light upon a
Tables. Verse. 3 Chap. 9. Of the Creation of the Light. Verse. 51 Chap. 14.
Whence the outward Light or Wisdom arises. Verse. 37
Limitt. Chap. 2. The Limitt of the Eternal Death. Verse. 29
Lilly. Chap. 14. What Lilly it is the Devil is not willing to smell of.
Verse. 16
Love. Chap. 2. How Love is the Death of the fierce wrath. Verse. 86 Chap. 2.
The fountain of Love, is the overcoming of the fierce might. Verse. 92 Chap.
3. Of the Birth of the kind Love, and of the sixth Form of Nature, wherein the
five Senses are to be found. God makes the Genetrix. Verse. 1 Chap. 3. How the
soreness sharpeneth it self in the Love. Verse. 14. Chap. 12. A clear
Invitation to Love and Concord. Verse. 10 Chap. 12. Wherewith we are
well-pleasing to the Most High: by seeking every one with our Love. Much
knowledge is not profitable. Verse. 36
Lucifer. Chap. 4. Of the heavy Fall of Lucifer. Verse. 33 Chap. 4. The Mind
asks what moved Lucifer to Fall. Verse. 34 Chap. 4. Whence the superior
Principal Dominion comes. In the Matrix the purpose and Imagination of
Lucifer is to be understood. Verse. 38 Chap. 4. The cause of the Pride of
Lucifer, and his Angels. Verse. 40 Chap. 4. Lucifer was created in the fourth
Form of the Matrix, where Love and Anger stand opposite. Verse. 41 Chap. 4.
The Desire of Love is generated in Humility; which was not in Lucifer. Verse.
44. Chap. 4. The Mind is warned of that whereby Lucifer became a Devil. Verse.
61 Chap. 5. Why Lucifer with his whole Dominion is Fallen. Verse. 61. Chap. 8.
The Fall of Lucifer is compared to the Cold Fire that makes Ice. Verse. 42
Chap. 8. Lucifer being a Throne Prince had Free Will like us Men. Verse. 43
Chap. 8. What was Lucifers Fall, and what was not his Fall. Verse. 44 Chap. 9.
Of the Creation: Also how Lucifer lost his supposed Kingdom. Verse. 50 Chap.
10. Lucifer would be Creator in the Tenth Number, he sought the Eternal
Original Fire which is now his Hell. Verse. 30 Chap. 12. We wrestle for the
Crown which Lucifer once had. Verse. 46
Luna. Chap. 10. How Luna shines not of it self but from Sol. Verse. 7
Lust. Chap. 9. Out of what the provocation or Lust to copulate in all kinds
arises. Verse. 43 Chap. 15. The second lesson Youth learn is the Beastiall
Lust. Verse. 8
Lie. Chap. 11. They that go into a Lie, go out from Christ into the Devil.
Verse. 104
Magistrate. Chap. 12. Of the Office of the Magistrate. Advice to Subjects.
Verse. 37 Chap. 13. The Office of Princes, but not Babells Tricks are founded
in Nature. Babell makes the Magistrate blindfold. The Princes are the True
Head of the Church. Verse. 7 Chap. 18. All hunt for the Belly, both the
Shepherd and the sheep, Magistrate and people: so that there is very little
of the Spirit of God amongst Men. Verse. 36
Majesty. Chap. 4. The Majesty has Generated Nature. Verse. 88 Chap. 11. What
the food of the Majesty is. Verse. 50
Maker. Chap. 2. God and the Will have no Maker. Verse. 7
Man. Men. Chap. 1. Man belongs not to the outward World. Verse. 1 Chap. 1.
Man has a Threefold Life. Verse. 2 Chap. 1. How Man may know God, and rightly
speak of him. Verse. 45 Chap. 4. The Three Principles stand open in no
Creature but in Man. Verse. 58 Chap. 4. How God in Love and Anger has
manifested himself in Man, and how the Omnipotence of Man was barred up
through Adam. Verse. 76 Chap. 5. According to the outward Man we are strangers
in our Mothers House, and therefore understand not the Mother Tongue. Verse. 24
Chap. 5. How Man is drawn by two and is in this world as a Balance. Verse. 30
Chap. 5. When the four Elements in Man break, then the soul is either in
Paradise, or in the Abyss. Verse. 126 Chap. 6. We wholly sleep in the
outward Man. Verse. 37 Chap. 6. When it is that Man sees with his own Eyes.
Verse. 39 Chap. 6. Man cannot carry the Eternity up and down, much less the
Deity; what that is that makes Locality, and why God is A. and O. Verse. 44
Chap. 6. All whatsoever can be named is in Man. Verse. 47 Chap. 6. The whole
Man consists of Three Principles, and how that can be. Verse. 48, 49 Chap. 6.
How Man was constituted of Three Principles, and which they are. Verse. 55
Chap. 6. How Man stands between the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of
Hell, and is the servant of that he yields to. Verse. 56 Chap. 6. The Fall of
Man touches not God. How the number Three dwells in the Anger. Verse. 57
Chap. 6. How Mankind is without beginning. Verse. 74 Chap. 6. How the Eternal
Flesh is hidden in the Earthly Man which must perish. Verse. 97 Chap. 7. The
soul must not set the Garland of Pearls upon the old Man. Verse. 10 Chap. 7.
How children are begotten in two Kingdoms: also of the strife about Man.
Verse. 33 Chap. 8. A description of Man before the Fall, in the Fall, in the
Regeneration, and after this Life. Verse. 7 Chap. 9. Hell in the Anger, the
spirit of this world, and the Kingdom of God: All Three strive about Man.
Verse. 17 Chap. 9. The Desire of Man stands in Three things or Dominions.
Verse. 18 Chap. 9. How Man follows all Three Desires. Verse. 23 Chap. 9. The
Gate of the Deep ground of Man was barred up by Adam, and opened to the
Author. Verse. 39 Chap. 9. What we must do to know what Man is. Verse. 40
Chap. 9. Here the Author begins to handle the Image of Man, how Man comes
to be, or is Incarnate. Verse. 42 Chap. 10. How Man sees in two Kingdoms with
a twofold Eye: the inward will should be Lord: what Man must do to be like
God, and to find all things. Verse. 10 Chap. 11. How God created Man to his
Image: and out of what he is created. Verse. 10 Chap. 11. Man's ability before
the Fall, and his Condition. Verse. 19 Chap. 11. Why God Created Man in a
seventh Day by himself, and not that Day that the Beasts were created: also
why he created but one Man. 20 Note that according to our Authors setting it
down the 23 verfe of the first Chapter of Genesis is put after the 24 and 25
verse: and that not without Ground, and so the Conclusion of the fifth Day, and
God saw that it was good, follows then upon the End of the 25 verse.
Chap. 11. How the Man sows soul, and the Woman spirit: How Adam saved Eve
and Eve. Adam. Verse. 24 Chap. 11. Of the Devils practice in Man's carelessness
and evil constellations. Verse. 37 Chap. 18. How Heaven and Earth and all
things lie in Man: also of the true Heaven. Verse. 33 Chap. 7. What concerns
us Men most of all. Verse. 1 Chap. 9. Men can better remember the slanders,
then that which concerns the soul. Verse. 27
Mary. Chap. 6. The Error of the Ancient that sppuosed Mary was one come from
Heaven, and not of Earthly Parents. Verse. 76 Chap. 6. Of the Blessing of Mary,
and how God and Man became one. Verse. 77 Chap. 6. How the Word became Man in
Mary. Verse. 79
Meekness. Chap. 4. Of the two Centres, the one thirsting after Meekness, the
other after fierceness. The Meekness is generated out of the fierceness.
Verse. 67 Chap. 5. How the fierceness is changed into Meekness. Verse. 21
Chap. 7. How the Meekness of God holds the Anger Captive. Verse. 68
Mercy. Mercifulness. Chap. 3. The Word only can overcome the Wrath, and is
rightly called Gods Mercy or Mercifulness. Verse. 22 Chap. 3. An Exposition of
the word Barm-hertzkeit, Mercifulness. Verse. 23 Chap. 16. How at present the
Mercy of God is grieved for us. Verse. 28
Mind. Minds. Chap. 1. A Question to the Mind why it speaks more of God
then it understands. Verse. 37 Chap. 2. How the Mind and the poor soul see
the Devils, and the Anger of God: and how it comes that many fall into
despair, and make away themselves. Verse. 52 Chap. 4. The Mind searches
after the most hidden ground which is here shown: also how doubting comes.
Verse. 60 Chap. 5. Here we need an Angelical Tongue: the Mind understands
a corporeal Thing. Verse. 55 Chap. 7. The whole Deep likened to the Mind of
Man. Verse. 77 Chap. 9. What the Mind in the Deep is, and in the Creatures.
Verse. 71 Chap. 12. The Devil has sown an Evil will into our Mind. 14
Chap. 16. What the Desire of the Hungry and Thirsty Mind is. Verse. 2 Chap.
16. A description of the state of our souls or Minds, before the Creation of
the world, and in this Time and valley of Misery. Verse. 3
Ministers. Chap. 11. A discourse about, the Ministers of Antichrist, who will
be rich, and have fat Bellies or Livings. Verse. 96
Miracles. Chap. 12. A wonderful Exposition what the zealous Will can do in
the wonders or Miracles. Verse. 22 Chap. 12. How the Antichrist has ascribed
the miracles that have been wrought to the Opinion of those that wrought them.
Verse. 23
Moon. Chap. 9. Why Women are talkative: how the Moon governs their Matrix:
also why the Moon runs her course so soon. Verse. 112
Mystery. Mysteries. Mysterium. Chap. 1. Of his Labor in vain who seeks for
the Mystery in the Stars. Verse. 1 Chap. 2. Pride forbids searching after
Mysteries. Verse. 3 Chap. 3. Why these deep hidden Mysteries are written
down. Verse. 5 Chap. 3. Of the seventh Form of the Eternal Nature. We need
not read many Books, or go to the Universities to understand the Mysteries.
Verse. 29 Chap. 3. When the seventh Seal is opened, the Great Mysteries of
God shall be revealed. Verse. 78 Chap. 4. That in the seventh Seal the
Mysteries might stand open, nothing should here be omitted. Verse. 2 Chap. 10.
It is a narrow way that the Mysterium Magnum is found in. Verse. 2 Chap. 11. By
disputation and debate men may perceive that the world has lost the Mysterium
Magnum. Verse. 88 Chap. 12. How we shall be crowned with the Crown, the
Mysterium Magnum of the Authors simplicity in the Mystery before the Tenth
Number: here he mentions his struggling in the attaining of this knowledge.
Verse. 45 Chap. 16. A complaint of the Great Depth of the Mystery: A Petition
to the Mercy of God with a Lamentation. Verse. 94
Nature. Chap. 1. In the Eternal Nature without the Light of God is the pain
and Torment. Only the Angels and souls proceed from the Eternal Nature: why
outward things are Transitory: the cause of the Fall of our souls. Verse. 16
Chap. 2. Nature consists of four Forms. Verse. 31 Chap. 2. Without Nature
there would be no word to Create in the Genetrix. Verse. 79 Chap. 2. Without
Nature there is no brightness. How the word of Love is Borne out of Nature.
Verse. 83 Chap. 3. Whence kindness in the Fathers Nature and in this world
comes. Verse. 26 Chap. 4. What the vanquisher of Nature is. Verse. 22 Chap. 4.
How the fierceness of the Nature of God would also be Creaturely. The fallen
Angels have kindled the Matrix which is now their Eternal habitation. Verse.
42 Chap. 4. How the Divine Nature is free from the fierce Darkness. Verse. 70
Chap. 4. That which is without Nature cannot help us, because we are borne out
of Nature. Verse. 87 Chap. 4. The Eternal Divine Nature is our Mother and
food: our soul is Gods food. Verse. 89 Chap. 5. Nature in the spirit of Man,
and in the Spirit of God is one substance. Verse. 94 Chap. 9. The description
of the Wheel of Nature, how God is totally every where. Verse. 67 Chap. 9. A
Portraiture of the Wheel of Nature. Verse. 68 Chap. 9. A further Exposition of
the Center of Nature. Verse. 80 Chap. 9. How the outward Nature longs to be
delivered from vanity. Verse. 93 Chap. 9. How Nature vehemently longs to be
freed from vanity. Verse. 113 Chap. 13. How the Mother the Eternal Nature
lamenteth for the evil children whom she has given up to be devoured, and
chooses a new Son. Verse. 51 Chap. 13. How the Eternal Nature desires not
Art, but Obedience. Verse. 54 Chap. 14. How we lie captive in the outward
Nature, and of our precious Jewel hidden therein. Verse. 2. Chap. 15. The
Mother of Nature bears a young Son, who will shorten the Days of
wickedness. Verse. 4
Opinion. Opinions. Chap. 11. Of the distressed soul that knows not what
Opinion to choose. Verse. 82 Chap. 12. How far Opinions are Tolerable that
are held in God, and not to be rejected. Verse. 24 Chap. 12. Of the Opinions
about the Cup and Person of Christ, in Germany. Those that are zealous in an
Opinion, hang to the Tail of Antichrist. Verse. 31
Paradise. Chap. 5. Of Paradise. Adam was in this world in Paradise. Verse. 69
Chap. 5. Paradise is both within and without this world. God is every where.
Verse. 116 Chap. 5. Where Paradise is, into which the souls of the holy
children of God enter. Verse. 125 Chap. 5. What souls go into Paradise, and
what into Hell. Verse. 127.128 Chap. 7. How long Adam was in Paradise before he
fell asleep. Verse. 29 Chap. 7. How young People set the Garland of Paradise
upon the Serpent. Verse. 51
Pardon. Chap. 11. Of Praying. Also of the wrong meaning of Pardon of sins.
Verse. 54
Patience. Chap. 16. How the soul in Patience remains under the Cross.
Verse. 91
Perfection. Chap. 2. The Divine Mind in the Heart of God is only Perfection,
and how we comprehend that which is Perfect in our Mind. Verse. 67
Person. Persons. Chap. 1. Of the second Person, the brightness of the Father.
Verse. 50 Chap. 2. Why the Father is the First Person. The Desire in the Will
is the first. Verse. 10 Chap. 2. The working of the Three Persons. Verse. 63
Chap. 4. The Light consists in Meekness, and dwells in the Liberty. Also
of the Three Persons. Verse. 63 Chap. 4. Why the Father and Son are called
two Persons. Verse. 69 Chap. 4. How the Third Person is the Imager and Formour
in Nature. Verse. 77 Chap. 4. How the Third Person manageth the sword of
Omnipotency. Verse. 78
Petition. Chap. 16. An Exposition of the first Petition of the Lords Prayer:
the will is the souls wedding Chariot. Verse. 45.46.47.48 Chap. 16. An
Exposition of the second Petition of the Lords Prayer. Verse. 49.50.51. Chap.
16. An Exposition of the Third Petition of the Lords Prayer. Verse.
52.53.54.55.56.57.58 Chap. 16. An Exposition of the Beginning of the fourth
Petition of the Lords Prayer. Verse. 60.61.62 Chap. 16. An Exposition of the
latter part of the fourth Petition of the Lords Prayer: also what lies hidden
in the word Tetragrammaton and Adonai. Verse. 64.65.66 Chap. 16. An Exposition
of the fifth Petition of the Lords Prayer. Verse. 67.68.69.70.71.72.73.74.75
Chap. 16. An Exposition of the sixth Petition of the Lords Prayer. Verse.
76.77.78.79.80 Chap. 16. The Beginning of the seventh Petition of the Lords
Prayer. Verse. 81.82.83 Chap. 16. An Exposition concerning the soul: also of
the seventh Petition of the Lords Prayer. Verse. 89
Philosophers. Chap. 2. An admonition to the Philosophers. Verse. 91 Chap. 5.
The Author tells the Philosophers of the Creating the world in six days.
Verse. 46
Physicians.. Chap. 2. Physicians now understand not the Center of Sulphur,
Mercury, and Sal, nor the Divines the Spirit of the holy Scriptures. Verse. 17
Planet. Planetts. Chap. 9. Of the property of the Planet Saturn. Verse. 63
Chap. 9. What the Desire of the Planet Saturn is. Verse. 65 Chap. 9. A
description of the Planet Jupiter. Verse. 66 Chap. 9. How the Planet Saturn
and the Moon, stand opposite one to another. Verse. 84 Chap. 9. Of the
Operation of the Planet Jupiter. Verse. 85 Chap. 9. Of the Operation of the
Planet Mercury, where Life takes beginning: also of Mars. Verse. 86 Chap. 9.
The description of the Planet Venus: who has a peculiar Luster of its own.
Verse. 87 Chap. 9. The Planet Mars stands above the Sun, he is Poison and
Anger, and betokens the fierceness of the Fire. Verse. 97 Chap. 9. The
Planet Jupiter stands above Mars, and makes the Brain. Verse. 98 Chap. 9.
The Planet Saturn stands above Jupiter, and makes the Brainpan. Verse. 99
Chap. 9. The Planet Venus stands under the Sun: also what Venus makes and
causes. Verse. 100 Chap. 9. The Planet Mercury stands under Venus; also what
he causes. Verse. 101 Chap. 9. The Moon stands under the Planet Mercury:
the operation and fear of the Moon; The Moon flattereth with the Center of
the Earth, and Center of the Sun. Verse. 102 Chap. 9. How the Planets are to
be transposed, the Moon and Saturn make the body. Verse. 64 Chap. 9. Of the
Operation of the Three Planetts above the Sun, and the three under the Sun
which is in the midst. Verse. 96 Chap. 9. The Dominion of all Creatures is like
the Dominion of the Planetts. Verse. 103 Chap. 9. As the Planetts draw virtue
from the Sun, so does the life from the Heart. Verse. 104 Chap. 9. Of the
Rule of the Three Planetts above the Sun, and of the Three beneath the Sun.
Verse. 108 Chap. 10. Outward Reason cannot understand the Course of the
Planetts. Verse. 24 Chap. 11. How the mixture is made: also of the working of
the Planetts with the seed. Chap. 18. Wherein the outward Life consists:
also of the Spirit of the Planetts. Verse. 11
Pope. Popery. Chap. 16. Admonition to the Roman Pope and Emperor. Verse. 25
Chap. 12. Whence Popery is grown. The Antichristian Priest-Devill has led
the People astray. Verse. 20
Portion. Chap. 17. Man runs after that which would run after him if he were
virtuous and honest: Every one has his sufficient Portion. Verse. 21
Power. Chap. 11. He that has Power in God is no Simon Magus. Verse. 74 Chap.
16. How the Reason-Spirit of the Stars also longs after the Divine Power.
Verse. 32 Chap. 16. How the soul in the Fall of Adam was captivated by two
Fires: also how the soul has the Power of Nature. Verse. 87
Pray. Prayer. Chap. 16. How we must root out the Abomination out of the
soul when we desire to Pray. Verse. 18 Chap. 16. Why Christ came in the
Flesh: also what he has taught us to Pray. Verse. 37 Chap. 16. How we enter
into God when we Pray: and how the soul eats at Gods Table. Verse. 99 Chap.
9. How the Devil takes away the Earnestness and virtue of the Prayer out of
the Heart. Verse. 32 Chap. 9. What Prayer it is which is no Prayer: whereby the
Name of God is mis-used. Verse. 33 Chap. 9. What Prayer is: and how Men must
strive against the Devil. Verse. 34 Chap. 16. How God hears our soul in
Prayer: There are Three Principles in the soul. Verse. 14 Chap. 16. God
dwells not a far of: A warning against false Thoughts in Prayer. Verse. 17
Chap. 16. Concerning Prayer. Verse. 27 Chap. 16. What that Prayer is which
Christ has taught us: No Tongue can sufficiently express the contence of that
Prayer, nor of the Gospel. Verse. 38 Chap. 16. The Author sets down but a
brief contence of the Lords Prayer. Verse. 40 Chap. 16. An Exposition of the
Lords Prayer from the 41. to the 104. Verse. Chap. 16. The Lords Prayer
contains seven Petitions, with an Entrance and Conclusion; also what the
soul attaineth therein. What the Amen is. Also of the subtilenesse of the will
of the soul. Verse. 100 Chap. 16. Of the Three Persons of the Trinity in the
Conclusion of the Lords Prayer. Verse. 103
Priest. Priests. Chap. 11. A saying to the blind world that supposes that
the Mystery of God should not be touched but by the Priest alone. Verse. 77
Chap. 14. Admonition to go out from the Priests Contentions. Who is a right
Christian. Also our Duty in maintenance of the Earthly Body. Verse. 25
Principle. Principles. Chap. 5. How the Principle is divided into two
Dominions, as into Love and Anger. Verse. 19 Chap. 5. Wherein a Principle does
consist. Verse. 108 Chap. 5. How the second Principle is in the midst of both
the Principles. Verse. 113 Chap. 5. How the second or Divine Principle is the
power of the First. Verse. 114 Chap. 5. How the second Principle works in the
outward Principle. Verse. 115 Chap. 6. How the Third Principle was Created, and
what it is. Verse. 62 Chap. 6. A description of the Third Principle. Verse. 63
Chap. 6. How this Third Principle would be if the Sun were extinguished.
Verse. 66 Chap. 7. What the Third Principle is, as also the Third Life in God.
Verse. 80 Chap. 1. The Author will show the Ground of the Principles. Verse.
43 Chap. 5. Where the distinction in the Three Principles begins. Verse. 100
Chap. 11. How all the Three Principles Desire Man. Verse. 108 Chap. 11. In God
there is no Dominion, but in the Three Principles: also whence the Guilt comes
that any thing perishes. Verse. 109
Rabbis. Chap. 13. How thin the Rabbis in Germany are, of a thousand scarce
a hundred left. Verse. 40 Chap. 14. The School Rabbis hate the Example of
young Tobiah. Verse. 59
Rainbow. Chap. 6. A description of a Rainbow, and its colors. Verse. 69 Chap.
6. How Christ shall appear upon such a Rainbow at his Coming. Verse. 70 Chap.
16. What the Rainbow and the Body of Christ is, which Mystery no Tongue can
Express. Verse. 93
Reason. Chap. 3. Blind Reason will go above the Heart of God like the
Devil. Verse. 32 Chap. 5. The Glistering Art in Reason is a hinderance to the
Light. Verse. 32 Chap. 5. Of Reasons blindness in knowing what the Earth,
Stones, and Elements are Generated of. Verse. 79 Chap. 6. This writing is no
word of outward Reason. Verse. 8 Chap. 6. Admonition to blind Reason to see
with inward Eyes. Verse. 38 Chap. 7. What Reason judges concerning the Danger
of being overcome by the world. Verse. 15 Chap. 15. Reason thinks it will be
no otherwise now then in former Times. Verse. 17 Chap. 15. How Reason walks
wisely in outward Things, but the soul is forgotten. Verse. 23 Chap. 16. How
the Devil captivateth us in Reason, and deceives us by it. Verse. 30
Rest. Chap. 4. In the six Forms there is no Place of Rest. The sour Mother
is the Rest of the hungry Nature. Verse. 8
Regenerate. Chap. 9. The spirit of the Regenerate soul searches through all
the Three Principles. Verse. 41
Rejoice. Chap. 12. They should Rejoice who are despised for their fearing of
God. Verse. 39
Revelation. Chap. 3. The cause why the Revelation has not hitherto been
fundamentally understood, is because it has not been in Man's Ability. Verse.
39
Riches. Chap. 6. What Transitory Riches, and what Eternal Riches are. Verse.
33 Chap. 10. How the Riches of this world are but Dross and Dung. Verse. 8
Rule. Chap. 17. The Rule of the Spirit of this world, and of the Spirit of
God. Verse. 17
Renewing. Chap. 18. How in the Renewing of the will the framed Substance is
renewed. Verse. 22
Scriptures. Chap. 5. The Author has no other knowledge of the Creation then
that of the Holy Scriptures. Verse. 80 Chap. 7. To be able to say all the Holy
Scriptures without Book brings no salvation. Verse. 3
Sea. Chap. 5. The Glassie Sea is the Water Spirit. Verse. 11 Chap. 8. The
Cause of the Great Sea. Verse. 46
Seeker. Chap. 4. The Author judges not the blind Seeker, he shall find his
reward. Verse. 51
Seal. Sealed. Seals. Chap. 3. The Time from the beginning to the End is the
seventh Seal, wherein the six Seals accomplish their work: where, (in the
Heart of God) Men have found Wonders. Verse. 41 Chap. 3. After the Opening of
the seventh Seal, the Archshepheard will feed his sheep himself. Verse. 80
Chap. 9. The world since the Fall of Adam has but one Eye: but by the seventh
Seal it has two Eyes. Verse. 106 Chap. 15. Now is the Time of the Last Seal,
wherein the hellish wonders come to light. Verse. 3 Chap. 18. The Star which
has broken the Seal is appeared. Verse. 4 Chap. 3. Wherefore God has Sealed
us and left us Blind. Verse. 60 Chap. 3. The seven forms are the seven
Seals of God, out of which the powerful Word is Generated. Verse. 21 Chap. 3.
The Time is that the seven Seals are broken open. Verse. 38 Chap. 3. Of the
Glassie Sea. The six Seals are the Birth of the Eternal Nature. Verse. 44
Chap. 3. Wherefore the Word of God must enter into the sharpness of Death,
where he brake the seven Seals in the soul. Verse. 54 Chap. 3. How any in
God have power to Open the seven Seals in the desirous Mind. Verse. 68 Chap.
3. The Seals are hidden from the Whore till she has devoured her self.
Verse. 75 Chap. 4. The Spirit opens the Seals in the Thoughts: He
manifests the Deity in Nature: He is the power of the Brightness. Verse. 82
Chap. 5. The Seals bring their Wonders to Light under the worldly Governments.
Verse. 64
Search. Chap. 2. How we may search aright and find. Verse. 4
Seventh. Seaventy two. Chap. 9. What the seventh Number in the Center is.
Verse. 74 Chap. 9. In the number Seaventy two lies the Greatest secret, the
Original of Contention. Selves. Verse. 78 Chap. 3. Admonition to consider our
selves: also of Heaven and the Anger of God. Verse. 28
Senses. Chap. 3. Of the Birth of the kind Love, and of the sixth form of
Nature, wherein the five Senses are to be found; God makes the Genetrix.
Verse. 1
Sermons. Chap. 18. The Antichrist is a hinderance to the soul with the
filling Peoples Ears with Sermons. Verse. 35.
Sex. Sexes. Chap. 9. By a flaming Iron the two Properties in Male and Female
Sex are deciphered. Verse. 47 Chap. 9. Of the two kinds or Sexes, Masculine
and Feminine. Why the Man is the Head. Verse. 110
Shepherd. Shepherds. Chap. 13. A Reproof against the Whore: also of a
simple Shepherd that shall feed us. Verse. 44 Chap. 14. The true Catholic
way: also who is a true Shepherd of Christ. Verse. 20 Chap. 18. How can a
Wolf make a Shepherd over sheep. Verse. 44 Chap. 14. The false Bishops
appoint Shepherds according to favor, and in respect of their Art. Verse. 21
Chap. 15. A Speech to the false Shepherds of Christ. Verse. 20 Chap. 15. A
Speech to the Antichristian Shepherds of the New Order. Verse. 22 Chap. 18.
The ways of the Good and of the Bad Shepherds. Signs. Verse. 43 Chap. 9. How
the Twelve Signs part themselves into two Governments. Verse. 72
Simple. Chap. 3. Advice to the simple Holiness. Verse. 85
Sin. Sinner. Sins. Chap. 11. The false soul seeks after no
righteousness, but only that it may cover its Sin. Verse. 44 Chap. 11. How
the Sinner should have his forgiveness pronounced. Verse. 65 Chap. 11. How God
forgiveth our sins when we pray to him. Verse. 55 Chap. 11. How he is
mistaken who supposes he is delivered from his old sins when he sins
anew. Verse. 58
Snare. Snares. Chap. 6. Of our snare, and the Excellency of Patience. Verse.
34 Chap. 12. Men should not look after Pomp and Pride; also which are the
Snares and Netts of the Devil. Verse. 40 Chap. 14. The world is full of snares
to entangle the poor soul: also what that is which hinders that the Devil
does not devour every soul. Verse. 43 Chap. 14. An Exposition of the seven
Coards or snares: also an Exposition of what the soul undergoeth in the trial
before it gets through. Sodom. Verse. 53 Chap. 8. How the Devils purpose
concerning Sodom was nullified. Verse. 47
Son. Sons. Chap. 3. Of the Son the brightness of the Father, what
proceeds from it, and is created by it. Verse. 3 Chap. 3. How we must seek
the Son of God in the Manger if we will find all. Verse. 30 Chap. 4. The
Son is one with the Father: also what his sole will is called. Verse. 71
Chap. 6. Of the two Sons, the one saying yes, the other no. Verse. 26
Sophist. Sphister. Sophisters. Chap. 5. The Sophist looks upon the wisdom
of the world; but this Author not: he mentions his Joy in the Wonders of God.
Verse. 1 Chap. 5. Admonition to the Children of God concerning the contention
of the Sophisters. Verse. 70 Chap. 9. A reproof against the Sophisters
slaunderings and blasphemings in the Pulpit. Verse. 29 Chap. 10. The
Author-speaketh to the Sophister, and the stubborn Whore that sits upon the
stool of Pestilence, Verse. 34 Chap. 11. Of the Sophister who is the Devils
Priest: also of those that fall into sins against their will. Verse. 43 Chap.
11. The Sophister is as Profitable to the Church, as a fifth wheel in a wagon.
Chap. 11. The Sophister were better in a Hogsty then in a Pulpit. Verse. 76
Soul. Souls. Chap. 1. The Soul is a fire and needs food. Verse. 4 Chap.
1. How the Soul dwells in the Body, and is captivated by the Humane Spirit.
Verse. 10 Chap. 1. The Soul lives in another substance besides the Spirit of
the Elements. Verse. 11 Chap. 1. Of the Originall-of the faculties of the Soul
out of the Eternal Nature: and how God dwells merely in himself. Verse. 12
Chap. 1. How the Soul desires to press out from the Band of Nature into God.
Verse. 14 Chap. 1. No Nature felt in the Divine Life; The Soul is a Fire in
the Eternal Nature: The Soul is a Spirit, having seven Forms, wherein
Heaven and Hell consist. The Author here understands the Eternal Birth.
Verse. 19 Chap. 1. How the Soul comes to see, and to be able to speak of its
Native Country. Verse. 21 Chap. 2. Of the Light of the Soul: also of its fall,
and how it must enter into the Light again. Verse. 49 Chap. 2. How it is with
the Soul that attaineth not the Light of God: and how it is regenerated anew
again. Verse. 55 Chap. 3. The Condition of the Soul, when Adam was gone out
from the Word, it was in the seven Seals of the Father. Verse. 56 Chap. 5.
How the Soul loses the Majesty of God, and is called a Castaway Devil.
Verse. 95 Chap. 5. How Adams Soul was captivated by the Anger of God. Verse.
146 Chap. 6. The difference between the Soul and the Word. Verse. 86 Chap. 6.
How the Word and the Soul stand not as two Persons. Verse. 87 Chap. 6. An
Earthly Similitude of the Iron and Fire, showing how the Soul dwells in the
Deity, and the Deity in the Soul. Verse. 88 Chap. 6. How the Soul trembled at
the Prison of this Flesh: and why God became Man. Verse. 95 Chap. 6. How our
Soul gets incomprehensible Flesh. Verse. 96 Chap. 7. What Resolution the
Soul must take against the striving Mind and the Devil. Verse. 8 Chap. 8.
The Soul, beneath is in Hell, and above is in God in Heaven. Verse. 10 Chap.
8. Of the fainting of the Devil before the Earnest Soul. Verse. 12 Chap. 8.
How the Soul is a Fire that receives the property of its food. Verse. 20
Chap. 8. How the Soul stands between two Principles: also of the desire of
the Body. Verse. 21. Chap. 8. How the Soul must watch: how it must forsake its
own power. Verse. 23 Chap. 8. How the Soul desires to be out of this Earthly
Mother, and desires the Eternal Rest. Verse. 60 Chap. 8. How the poor Soul
lies captive in the Spirit and Tincture of this world. Verse. 61 Chap. 8. How
the Soul has not its own Tincture, but lies in impotency. Verse. 62 Chap. 8.
How the Soul of Adam is gone out from the Luster of God into the Spirit of
this world. Verse. 63 Chap. 8. The miserable condition of the Soul after the
fall of Adam: the closing of the seven Seals. Verse. 64 Chap. 8. How the
Center of the Soul cannot help it self. Verse. 65 Chap. 8. How the Kingdom
of Hell would have triumphed over this fair Creature the Soul. Verse. 66
Chap. 8. How the Soul came again into its first Mother. Verse. 69 Chap. 9.
How the poor Soul is between Heaven and Hell. Verse. 22 Chap. 9. The Soul
must not dispute with the Devil. Verse. 37 Chap. 11. The Soul stands a
degree deeper then the Sun. Verse. 17 Chap. 11. Out of what the Soul is
rouzed and awakened: the Soul is Gods child: also of the food of the Soul.
Verse. 18 Chap. 11. A description of the Soul, how it is ere it is in the
seed. Verse. 32 Chap. 11. How the Soul has a hard Combat against the Evil
innate properties. Verse. 36 Chap. 11. How the Soul must be, that it may be
acknowledged for a child of God. Verse. 49 Chap. 11. The Soul is the Devils
most beloved Lodging. Verse. 60 Chap. 12. What is most profitable for Man to
do: also what the Soul takes with it when it departs from the Body. Verse.
1 Chap. 14. Not in the Oast but in the Verbum Domini the Soul eats at the
Table of God: also where the Soul and the Spirit of the Soul dwells. Verse.
12 Chap. 14. How the Soul is freed from the Devils assaults: which the Soul
has a hard task of. Verse. 13 Chap. 14. How the Soul must fight against the
Devil, and overcome him. Verse. 15 Chap. 14. Of the Great danger a Soul is
in, in this life: what the Center of the Soul is: what the Tincture is: also
of the true name SOUL. Verse. 26 Chap. 14. In the Eternal Water the Soul is
an Angel. Also concerning the Fathers standing still. Verse. 28 Chap. 15. How
all committed abominations shall flow up in the Soul. Verse. 14 Chap. 16. A
similitude of the fear and disquietnesse of our Soul in this Body. Verse. 4
Chap. 16. How the Spirit of this world (in flesh and blood) overwhelmeth the
Soul. Verse. 6 Chap. 16. How the poor Soul receives heavenly refreshment.
Verse. 8 Chap. 16. Of the Great Humility of the redeemed Soul. Verse. 9 Chap.
17. Where the Soul dwells. Verse. 9 Chap. 18. How the Soul is, that
departs from the body without Conversion Verse. 23 Chap. 18. How the sorrow
and lamentation of the Soul goes on: and how the Soul gives up it self.
Verse. 24 Chap. 18. A similitude of the state of the Soul after its departure.
Verse. 25 Chap. 18. What joy or recreation the wicked Soul has. Verse. 26
Chap. 18. Of the Condition of the Soul, that converteth at the very last.
Verse. 28 Chap. 18. Of the Condition of the earnest zealous Soul that fears
God. Verse. 29 Chap. 1. In the Eternal Nature without the Light of God is the
pain and Torment: Only the Angels and Souls proceed from the Eternal
Nature: why outward things are transitory: also the Cause of the Fall of our
Souls. Verse. 16 Chap. 2. Men should not trust their Souls with any Man.
Verse. 5 Chap. 2. Angels and Souls are Eternal. Verse. 64 Chap. 12. How the
Antichristian Souls are after Death till Judgment. Verse. 28 Chap. 18. How
the Spirit of God cannot be awakened in some Souls: also what Soul can, and
what cannot be converted. Verse. 47
Sound. Chap. 4. Further description of the sound, and its operation. Verse. 73
Chap. 4. How the will which puts forth from the Heart, produces and forms
the sound. Verse. 74
Space. Chap. 1. How the vast space desires contraction, and that there must
be a contrary will, or else nothing would be, neither Darkness nor Light, Life
nor Death. Verse. 33 Chap. 2. What has shut the vast space into a narrow
room. Verse. 15
Sphere. Chap. 10. The Sphere of the wise Magists and Mathematicians is not
perfect, of the wonderful turning of the wheel of Nature. Verse. 25
Spirit. Spirits. Chap. 1. The Spirit of God is not subject to the Band of the
Eternal Nature. Verse. 13 Chap. 2. The Brimstone Spirit is the will in the
four Forms, wherein the Devils dwell Verse. 37 Chap. 4. The Spirit desires
to bring the Light forth in its highest Depth. Verse. 1 Chap. 4. Of the
seventh Form. Also how a Spirit is, and how it subsisteth. Verse. 5 Chap. 4.
A similitude describing the Out-flowne Air and Spirit of God. Verse. 79 Chap.
4. Of the further working of the Spirit. Verse. 81 Chap. 4. How the Spirit
differs from the Body. Verse. 84 Chap. 4. The Spirit is not the Light, but
the blower up of the Light. Verse. 85 Chap. 5. Men should not judge least they
fall on the sword of the Spirit, which will reprove the World for Sin,
Righteousness, and Judgment. Verse. 4. 5. 6. 7 Chap. 5. How the Spirit of
this world may know it self. Verse 28 Chap. 5. How the Spirit that proceeds
from God, opens the understanding of the Mind. Verse. 29 Chap. 5. How the
Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Word. Verse. 37 Chap. 5. Whither the
Spirit goes when it goes forth from the Father and Son. Verse. 39 Chap. 5.
How the Holy Spirit reveals the Opened Seals. Verse. 42 Chap. 5. The Aim of
the Different Wisdom. The Touchstone to try whether the Spirit of God, or the
Spirit of the Devil speaks. Verse. 74 Chap. 5. How the Spirit has brought
all the Three Principles into a Body. Verse. 89 Chap. 5. The comparing of the
Spirit of Man with the Eternal Spirit, and the Number-Three. Verse. 90 Chap.
5. As the World is spoken forth from the Spirit, so is it also in Man's Spirit.
Verse. 91 Chap. 5. The Spirit of Man has in it self the Kingdom of God, of
Hell, and of this World: also how all was without Being till the A. and O.
Verse. 92 Chap. 5. The Center was but one Spirit: How all came to be thick,
gross, and hard, as it were opposite to the Majesty of God. Verse. 99 Chap. 5.
How the Air or Wind is not the Spirit of the Number-Three. Verse. 102 Chap.
6. How the Spirit of God Rules in us: and how the soul attaineth the
Paradisicall Garland. Verse. 32 Chap. 6. As the Spirit is, so is the body of
it. Verse. 59 Chap. 7. How often unwillingly the Holy Ghost is called a Devil,
and the Devil accounted a good Spirit. Verse. 60 Chap. 8. A similitude of the
going forth of the Spirit in a Red hot Iron. Verse. 6 Chap. 8. How no Spirit
desires to come out from its Mother again. Verse. 59 Chap. 9. He on whom the
understanding of this Spirit falls, he understands it. Verse. 4 Chap. 9. Of
the root of the Fire- Spirit, and of the impotent Air- Spirit. Verse. 54
Chap. 10. How the Spirit of God has planted and created a Model in his will.
Verse. 15 Chap. 11. Of the Breathing in of the Air- Spirit, and the Spirit of
the soul. Verse. 15 Chap. 11. How the Spirit of this World introduces its
Government also in the seed. Verse. 34 Chap. 14. How we are subjected to the
Spirit of this world from our Entrance into the womb of our Mother. Verse. 4
Chap. 17. How the outward Spirit should look after outward things. Verse. 6
Chap. 18. How the outward Spirit has insinuated it self into the soul.
Verse. 34 Chap. 3. How the six Spirits have executed their fierce might in us.
Verse. 50 Chap. 4. Wherefore and of what the Spirits are created. Verse. 29
Chap. 4. The Spirits are created out of the Center of the Eternal Mind.
Verse. 31 Chap. 4. How the Creation of the Spirits was. Verse. 36 Chap. 4. The
Spirits are created every one according to its kind. Verse. 37 Chap. 4. Of the
Spirits that have their original out of the Inceptive will. Verse. 54 Chap. 4.
Out of what the Earthly and Watery Spirits are. Verse. 55 Chap. 4. The Spirits
are incomprehensible to us. The Author will show us the Government of Heaven
further, and then the Government of Man. Verse. 57 Chap. 5. When it is that the
six Spirits shall be known. Verse. 47 Chap. 5. When the hidden Spirits go
into the Either: also of the Time when the seventh Seal takes its beginning
known by the Author. Verse. 48 Chap. 5. How the Spirits of Darkness lie
captive. Verse. 110 Chap. 10. How the Creating of the Spirits was. Verse. 16
Chap. 14. Of the six Spirits of Nature: also of the Original of Mobility.
Verse. 27
Star. Stars. Chap. 7. How every Star has a several property. Verse. 74
Chap. 3. The Word is in the Father, and has the seven Stars or Forms in
its power. Verse. 47 Chap. 3. We are under the power of the seven Stars, or
seven Spirits of the Fathers Nature. Verse. 48 Chap. 5. How the Image of the
wisdom of God has the seven Stars. Verse. 43 Chap. 6. Out of what the
Stars are: also why they are to us innumerable. Verse. 41 Chap. 7. If the
Stars and Elements had not been created, the Ground of Nature had not been
manifested to the Angels. Verse. 25 Chap. 7. Out of what the Stars are, and
their property. Verse. 72 Chap. 7. The cause of the Burning of the Stars:
also how they awaken all Creatures. Verse. 73 Chap. 9. Of the Tinctures number
six, and of the Spirits number six; which together make Twelve in Number; or
the Stars which the Woman in the Revelation wears Verse. 73 Chap. 10. How
the Stars are children of the Sun: very great things are to be concealed
here. Verse. 17 Chap. 10. How God on the fourth Day created the Sun and the
Stars. Verse. 19 Chap. 11. Of the working of the Stars in the Creatures, to
the manifestation of the wonders of God. Verse. 35 Chap. 11. How the soul can
subdue the power of the Stars, which indeed would feign be delivered from
vanity. Verse. 38
Sting. Chap. 2. The sour harshnesse is the Mother of the Sting or Goad: also
how in the Liberty it becomes joyful, and how the fifth Form rises up.
Verse. 73
Stone. Chap. 6. The Eternal Flesh is the Noble Philosophers Stone, which the
Magi find. Verse. 98 Chap. 6. There is nothing like the Philosophers Stone: It
is manifest and also hidden. Verse. 99 Chap. 6. Of the Excellency of the Stone.
Verse. 100 Chap. 6. The great joy which he has that finds the Stone. Verse.
101 Chap. 6. This Stone is the slightest and most contemptible. Verse. 102
Chap. 6. The power of those that have this Stone: they who rightly seek it,
find it: others scorn it. Verse. 103 Chap. 7. What help the soul gets in
its earnestness: also how little knowledge is necessary for the attaining of
the Corner- Stone. Verse. 9 Chap. 7. The Noble Stone is to be found every
where. Verse. 14 Chap. 7. How Isaac, Jacob and David found the Noble Stone,
Christ. Verse. 36 Chap. 7. How Moses and Eliah had the Noble Stone. Verse. 38
Chap. 7. How all the Prophets prophesied and wrought Miracles by the power of
this Stone. Verse. 39 Chap. 7. The Stone of the Wise Men is Christ the Son of
the Living God. Verse. 40 Chap. 7. The worldly wise Schools have always
persecuted the Stone. Verse. 41 Chap. 7. What the Stone of the worldly wise,
is. Verse. 42 Chap. 7. How we are lead astray at this Day by the Devil, and
loose the Noble Stone. Verse. 49 Chap. 7. The distinction between those that
have the Stone, and those that have the subtilty of the Serpent. Verse. 52
Chap. 7. They that have the Stone know the false Magi or whore. Verse. 56 Chap.
9. How the World longed after Man. The Stone was known in Salomons Time.
Verse. 7 Chap. 9. In what way it is not hard to find the Stone. Verse. 8 Chap.
10. How the true Magi shall find the Noble Stone. Verse. 4 Chap. 10. At the
End of Nature lies the uncorruptible Stone. Verse. 5 Chap. 10. How the Stone
is to be sought in Metalls. Verse. 6 Chap. 13. What lies hid in this Stone,
which is the Eternal Son of God. Verse. 1
Strife. Chap. 2. Of the strife between the fierceness and Meekness. Verse.
93 Chap. 7. Of the vehement strife of the Anger of God. Verse. 44 Chap. 8. Of
the strife of the Tincture against the Fire. Verse. 32 Chap. 8. The strife
between the Fire and the Substantiality. Verse. 35 Chap. 13. One will alone is
without strife, in two wills there is discord. Verse. 45 Chap. 13. Whence
strife arises, one seeking to subdue another: also of a things own Prophet
that is borne in the highest number of the Crown. Verse. 46 Chap. 13. How the
Prophet shows the Crown, out of which the strife and malice arises. Verse.
48 Chap. 14. The cause of strife about the soul of Man is, because there are
two Dominions in Man. Verse. 68 Chap. 16. Among a thousand that have a several
Gift and knowledge taught of God, there is no strife about the food of the
soul. Verse. 34 Chap. 16. Whence the strife amongst the Apostles arose. Verse.
35
Subsistence. Substance. Substantiality. Chap. 2. Of the Eternal Subsistence
of the Hellish Creatures. Verse. 57 Chap. 4. A description of the Substance in
Darkness: and of the desire which has Generated it: als;o what is called
Fire. Verse. 13 Chap. 4. A Substance may proceed out of a Thought. Verse. 30
Chap. 6. Why that which is palpable is a dead Substance. Verse. 60 Chap. 7. How
the Eternal Substance is. Verse. 6^ Chap. 7. In what manner every Substance
remains standing in the Eternal Nature. Verse. 81 Chap. 18. How Men may be
able to understand the heavenly Substance. Verse. 31 Chap. 18. Own Reason
cannot attain the heavenly Substance. Verse. 32 Chap. 8. What is called Air;
also what is called Substantiality. Verse. 36 Chap. 9. How out of the Material
Substantiality two Kingdoms are come. Verse. 46 Chap. 9. How all Essences went
forth: they all stood in the Material Substantiality. Verse. 48
Sun. Chap. 9. What Light was before the Sun. How the Sun and all Stars
came to be: The Sun is the Heart. Verse. 61 Chap. 9. How the Zodiak, the
Earth, and the Planetts stand in Order: and the Sun in the midst. Verse. 70
Chap. 9. A description of Lights, and of the Sun. Verse. 88 Chap. 9. How the
Sun penetrateth powerfully into all the six Forms. Verse. 91 Chap. 9. How
long the Suns standing still was to have remained hidden. Verse. 105 Chap.
10. In what way many have found Sol: or the Sun. Verse. 3 Chap. 13. How the
Sun has the Dominion in the four Elements. Verse. 27 Chap. 13. A
resemblance of the Elements and the Sun to the Father and the Son. Verse.
28 Chap. 13. Of the Suns being every where in this world: and how it is a
similitude of the Sons being every where. Verse. 30
Superior. Chap. 15. How the Superior provokes the Inferior to wickedness.
Verse. 11
Supper. Chap. 13. How the Apostles and their Successors have broken bread and
celebrated the Lords Supper. Verse. 10 Chap. 13. How they have drunk of the Cup
in the Supper. Verse. 11 Chap. 13. How we receive the whole Trinity in the
Lords Supper. Verse. 31 Chap. 13. How in the Lords Supper we assume into our
soul, the Body of Christ, which fills the Heaven, whereby at the Judgment
it will pass through the Fire. Verse. 32 Chap. 14. To what End the Testament
of the Lords Supper was Instituted. Verse. 19
Swine. Chap. 16. That Men must not turn back to the husks of the Swine.
Verse. 20 Chap. 16. How we may powerfully cast away all Swine and Devils.
Verse. 21
Tabernacle. Chap. 11. How the Present Tabernacle, about which we strive is
none of ours, the Devil has defiled it: our Mother will purchase a new
Garment for us. Verse. 112
Teachers. Teaching. Chap. 11. Of the Teachers grown up of themselves, who
teach for Money, to show their Eloquence and foreign Language. Verse. 85 Chap.
11. The Author envyeth not what good people give to their Teachers: The Ox
that thresheth should not be mussled: Antichrist is laid quite Naked. Verse.
105 Chap. 12. The blessedness of the Potentates and Teachers, who Govern and
Teach those that are under them well. Verse. 7 Chap. 12. What Teachers the
Princes should choose. Who is certainly the Antichrist. Also of one that comes
who will teach the Truth. Verse. 33 Chap. 13. What the Congregations and the
Teachers behavior should be. Verse. 8 Chap. 3. The Spirit of Christ in God, is
without Law: The Teaching from self Authority is false. Verse. 67
Temptation. Chap. 3. Men ought to hold out in the Temptation. Verse. 35
Testament. Testaments. Chap. 13. How our soul often goes out from the fair
Image: and how God gives it the New Garment again through the Testament, or
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Verse. 20 Chap. 3. Without Faith the Testaments
are shutt Seals. Also how the Trinity is ours. Verse. 87 Chap. 11. The
appearing Saints anger God with their use of the Testaments. Verse. 45 Chap.
13. The Author will show what the Testaments of Christ are. Verse. 3 Chap. 13.
The Church in Babell danceth about the Jewel of Christ's Testaments. Verse. 4
Chap. 13. How the virtue of the Jewel remains sealed to Europe and Asia. The
Great misuse of this Jewel (the Testaments) by Babell. Verse. 6
Tetragrammaton. Chap. 16. Of what lies hid in the word Tetragrammaton and
Adonai. Verse. 65
Theologists. Chap. 2. An admonition to the Theologists or Divines with a
reproof. Verse. 94 Chap. 4. A Hint to the Theologists, who Preach of Gods
will. Verse. 45
Thoughts. Chap. 2. Whence the Mind and Thoughts proceed. Verse. 40
Thunders. Chap. 3. Of the seven Stars, and of the seven Thunders. Verse.
43 Chap. 3. Of the voices of the seven Thunders: They are not manifested in
the Center of the Son. Verse. 53 Chap. 5. What the Corporeity of the Divine
Nature is: also how the seven Thunders shall be opened one after another.
Verse. 12
Time. Chap. 4. How the wheel of the Eternal Essences moved before the Time
of the Fiat: also of the Beginning of Time. Verse. 32 Chap. 15. The Mother of
Nature complains, or her children: and the Time shall be shortened. Verse. 2
Chap. 15. Admonition that the Present Day is the Time of bettering. Verse. 25
Tincture. Tinctures. Chap. 4. That there is another Will borne that attaineth
the Liberty in the Fire, and is called the Tincture. Verse. 17 Chap. 4. The
second Will or the Tincture is the Luster in the Darkness, and the Ornament of
the Essences, and blossom of Life. Verse. 18 Chap. 4. Why the Power of the
Tincture is hidden from the Alchimists. Verse. 23 Chap. 4. The Tincture is the
Light of the Earth. The Sun is the Life of the whole wheel. Verse. 27 Chap.
4. The Tincture of the kind Joy shone also out of the fallen Angels. Verse.
39 Chap. 4. The Tincture in the Will of the Devil is become false: they would
domineere over the Son of God. Verse. 43 Chap. 8. How the Tincture is a
Creature, and wrestleth with the Fire. Verse. 56 Chap. 8. How the Luster is
still, and the Tincture moveable and living, and the deepest Ground of Heaven
Verse. 57 Chap. 9. Wherein the Noble Tincture consists: how every Life
stands in the hand of God: How the Spir^t were in Hell fire. Verse. 52 Chap.
9. Of the separation of the two Tinctures, of the Fire-Life, and the Aire-Life.
Verse. 53 Chap. 13. How without the Verbum Domini both the Tinctures had
remained captivated by the Devil, in the Anger of God, and in the Spirit of
this World. Verse. 35
Tongue. Chap. 5. What the Tongue signifies or denotes. Verse. 107
Trade. Chap. 17. Every Trade and buisinesse is in the Ordinance of God. Verse.
12
Treasure. Chap. 17. What Treasure the virtuous gather, and what Treasure the
covetous gather. Verse. 27
Tree. Trees. Chap. 7. Out of what the Tree of Good and Evil in Paradise grew.
Verse. 47 Chap. 13. A speech to the Great and wide Tree the Generation of Adam.
Verse. 52 Chap. 14. How the small Grain of Mustard seed becomes a Great
Tree. Verse. 44 Chap. 17. Why God did forbid Man to eat of the Tree: also of
his state before and after the Fall. Verse. 10 Chap. 9. How the Paradisicall
forms were known on the Trees. All our fruits are Good and Evil. Verse. 14
Chap. 9. Our fruits upon the Trees grow not of themselves. Verse. 15
Trial. Chap. 14. The Author cannot write nor express what Joy the soul
has, after it has passed through the Trial. Verse. 54
Trinity. Chap. 3. What the Number Three or Trinity is. Verse. 12 Chap. 5. How
that which is spoken forth is an Image of the Holy Trinity. Verse. 41 Chap. 5.
Where the Number Three or Trinity dwells. Verse. 57 Chap. 5. The Spirit of
the soul, but not the Light of the Eyes, comprehends the Trinity. Verse. 58
Chap. 5. There is nothing Perfect, but the Number-Three, or Trinity. Verse. 59
Chap. 16. What the Trinity is from Eternity to Eternity. Verse. 104
Turba. Chap. 13. How the Turba destroys the Multiplicity: from whence it is
that envy and falsehood proceeds. Verse. 49 Chap. 13. How the Turba exercises
it self in the Anger: also of the springing up of the blossom of Life. Verse.
60
Turk. Turks. Chap. 6. How a Turk attaineth God, together with the children
that are without understanding. Verse. 21 Chap. 6. The Turks say no. He that
honors the Father honors the Son. Verse. 28 Chap. 11. The cause of the
Turks Potency: also how long their blindness shall continue. Verse. 92 Chap.
11. The Antichrist shall not devour the Tree of the Turks with his Dragons
Mouth, or Tyrannous Policy: also what it is the Antichrist shall be destroyed
by. Verse. 93 Chap. 11. How the Turks are became a wild Tree. Verse. 95
Vanity. Chap. 15. Vanity and wantonness is the first lesson youths learn.
Verse. 7
Vialls. Chap. 5. In the Courts of Princes the Vialls of Anger are powered forth
through the Instigation of the Hypocrites. Verse. 66
Virgin. Chap. 6. How the Eternal Virgin came into substance. Verse. 80 Chap.
6. The Word is the understanding in the Eternal Virgin. Verse. 82 Chap. 6.
Neither the Virgin nor the Flesh do operate, but the Spirit. Verse. 83 Chap.
11. Of the Eternal Virgin, out of which the Matrix of the Earth became an
Image. Verse. 12 Chap. 13. How our corrupted substance became Earthly: and how
God in the heavenly Virgin, and also in the Earthly Virgin became Man. Verse.
19
Understand. Chap. 3. They that are borne of God shall understand this. Verse.
37 Chap. 4. Advice to them that are able to understand this Text. Verse. 59
Chap. 18. If an Ass should speak the word of God, that soul which fears
God would understand it. Verse. 46
Universities. Chap. 15. What our children learn at the Universities. Verse. 9
Chap. 15. How Students in the Universities are advanced to govern in Church
and State; and how they Rule then. Verse. 10 Chap. 16. The Person of Christ is
a Mystery, hidden from the Pride of the High Schools or Universities. Verse.
29
Uppermost. Chap. 9. How the uppermost desires the nethermost, and the
nethermost the uppermost. Verse. 109
Warning. Chap. 5. A Warning not to account these things Fictions. Verse. 147
Chap. 5. A Warning to go out from Contention, a reproof to Babell. Verse. 149
Chap. 7. A Warning to him that is fallen to rise again. Verse. 13 Chap. 8. Of
Gods care in Warning of his children. Verse. 48 Chap. 11. A Warning to the
children of God to go out from the whore of seeming Holiness. Verse. 51 Chap.
11. A warning not to run after disputation and contention. Verse. 86 Chap. 12.
A warning to those that are here advanced to Honor. Verse. 5 Chap. 12. A
warning to the Rich to be Meek and Gentle. Verse. 6 Chap. 12. A warning
against the Devil who sows weeds; what the Doctrine of Moses and of Christ
was. Verse. 15 Chap. 12. A warning to wrestle in Patience. Verse. 47 Chap. 13.
The Authors warning will not be in vain. Verse. 41 Chap. 13. A warning to
those that say; If our Teachers teach us not right, let them look to it: also
of the mis-use of the Baptism and Supper. Verse. 42 Chap. 14. A warning
concerning the way of appearing, holiness. Verse. 8 Chap. 14. How God warns
Man of his wrath. Verse. 69 Chap. 15. A warning concerning the Punishment that
shall be over the face of the Earth. Verse. 16 Chap. 16. A fore warning of the
Antichristian Wolf borne of an Academy. Verse. 26 Chap. 16. A warning not to
trust in the skill of the Letter, but in the Spirit of God. Verse. 33 Chap. 18.
A warning to Europe, Asia, and Africa, concerning thg strong Bow that is bent,
advice to arise from sleep, and to see with our own Eyes. Verse. 37
Wars. Chap. 5. Of the right murtherours that provoke Princes to wars.
Verse. 77 Chap. 12. Of him that is the cause of Wars. What war is, and
whence it springs. Verse. 43
Watchful. Chap. 14. What we are to be watchful against. Verse. 42 Chap. 18.
Every one should be watchful, both in a spiritual and Temporal state and
condition. Verse. 42
Water. Chap. 8. How the water reaches up to our Lips. Verse. 15. Chap. 9. Of
the water above the Firmament, and of the water beneath. Verse. 59 Chap. 10.
How the water flies from the fire, and the fire runs after the water.
Verse. 26 Chap. 13. A similitude, showing how all things have water, and the
Substantiality from it. Verse. 25
Ways. Chap. 18. We have but two ways to go, one outwardly in working for
necessity, and the other inwardly in the will of God. Verse. 41
Weight. Chap. 2. How Death trembles at the Life: and whence weight in Nature
proceeds. Verse. 72 Chap. 3. Whence the weight, matter, Luster, and satiating
the hunger of the first will proceeds. Verse. 10
Whore. Chap. 3. How the obstinate whore has caused her Laws to be reverenced
and worshipped. Verse. 71 Chap. 3. How the whore possesses the Kingdom of
Christ with Deceit. Verse. 73 Chap. 3. The Prophets have prophesied of the
Babylonish whore, who must into the Lake. Verse. 74 Chap. 3. the whore scorneth
the Angels sounding of his Trumpet, and flattereth her self. Verse. 76 Chap.
7. The false Teachers compared to the whore. Verse. 58 Chap. 8. An admonition
to the whore of Babell. Verse. 11 Chap. 11. All people are scandalized and kept
back by the whore. Verse. 91 Chap. 13. A mention of the Conceitedly wise whore:
who is not better but worse by the Reformation: also of her punishment. Verse.
58 Chap. 17. When Men were careless the Babylonish whore brought forth the
covetous Devil: also concerning the Last Time. Verse. 25 Chap. 18. How it is
that the whore will not be converted. Verse. 38
Wicked. Chap. 5. The wicked as well as the Good grow to the Wonders of God.
Verse. 3
Wilderness. Chap. 3. How Men must go into the Wilderness, and be tempted of
the Devil. Verse. 34
Will. Chap. 1. The Eternal Will of the Father is the Original of the Fire of
Life. Verse. 23 Chap. 1. Of the Eternal Will, and the Eternal Desire. Verse.
24 Chap. 1. How the Will impregnated it self. Verse. 25 Chap. 1. How the Will
desires to be free: also what the second Will, or the Eternal Mind is.
Verse. 26 Chap. 1. Why the first Will generated a second Will, and falls into
Anguish. Verse. 31 Chap. 1. What the Will, the contrary Will, and the Desire
are. Verse. 32 Chap. 2. Of the Eternal Will, Word, Father, of the two wills;
what is called Nature and A. and O. Nature is manifested in the second will, as
Fire in Light. Verse. 9 Chap. 2. Of the will, and of the Desire in the will.
Verse. 13 Chap. 2. That the will cannot be captivated by the two Forms. Verse.
22 Chap. 2. How the will is sharpened by the two Forms. Verse. 23 Chap. 2. How
the second will is free from Nature, and consumes not. Verse. 62 Chap. 2. A
description of the first Eternal will that is called God. Verse. 75 Chap. 2.
The first will causes the Birth of the Love: also of the Original of the
Names, Father and Son. Verse. 87 Chap. 3. Of the first and second will, and
of the Birth of Nature. Verse. 20 Chap. 4. A cleerer demonstration of the
Alteration in the will; or of the second will. Verse. 24 Chap. 4. The will is
the Master of every work, its first Original is out of God. Verse. 48 Chap. 4.
How Men shall attain a Divine will. Verse. 53 Chap. 4. Of the twofold
acceptibility from one will. Verse. 66 Chap. 4. Why the second Will is called
Son, Word, Person, Heart, Light, Luster Love, and Wonder. Verse. 68 Chap. 6.
It lies not in the opinion or knowledge of any, but in the good will and
well-doing: the will brings us either to God, or to the Devil. Verse. 19
Chap. 6. How we are all blind; Our life and all our doings consist in the
will. Verse. 22 Chap. 8. What will is in God. The great power of the will
hidden in the Spirit of the soul. Verse. 18 Chap. 10. The will of God is not
contention and strife: also concerning the Hypocrites. Verse. 33 Chap. 12. We
must go out from Reason into the will of God: also what our continual purpose
should be. Verse. 35 Chap. 14. God desires to have no Hypocrites, but a
sincere earnest will. Verse. 10 Chap. 15. Earthly food passes away, but the
will and the desire in the will remains. Verse. 15
Wisdom. Wise Men. Chap. 5. The Wisdom of God is a Virgin, and no Woman or
Wife. Verse. 44 Chap. 5. Of the Operation of the Wisdom of God in both
Matrixes. Verse. 45 Chap. 5. The Wisdom of God is an Image of the Trinity.
Verse. 49 Chap. 5. How the Wisdom is the Body of the Spirit, through which we
know his form. Verse. 50 Chap. 5. How we know the Virgin of Wisdom: she is
the Ornament of the heavenly fruit. Verse. 52 Chap. 5. The Virgin of Wisdom or
the Trinity is no local thing, but without End Verse. 56 Chap. 5. Our own
Wisdom attaineth not the Crown of Gods secrets. Verse. 72 Chap. 6. The
Eternal Virgin, the Eternal Wisdom, and the Eternal Word are not divided.
Verse. 78 Chap. 7. Solomon learnt his Wisdom in no University. Verse. 37 Chap.
7. The Constellation is a cause of Wisdom, Art, and Subtilty, and of all
worldly Government among Men, Beasts, and Fruits. Verse. 79 Chap. 11. How the
first Adam lost the Virgin of Wisdom, and how the second Adam had it. Verse.
70 Chap. 13. How the Light of the Eternal Wisdom of God in Adam was
extinguished. Verse. 18 Chap. 14. The Devils practice in the Wisdom of those
that are advanced to high Places. Verse. 38 Chap. 14. How the Divine Wisdom is
often covered in the children of God. Verse. 56 Chap. 2. What the Wise Men
understood by Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal. Verse. 38
Woman. Chap. 3. The Woman of the Dragon, is told what she has built. Verse.
63 Chap. 3. A warning to the fair Woman. Verse. 64 Chap. 3. The Woman has no
Authority but from the Dragon. Verse. 66 Chap. 3. How the Woman upon the Dragon
rides in Pride, Pomp, and State. Verse. 69 Chap. 3. The Anger of God
accomplisheth all its wonders on the Woman of the Dragon Verse. 70 Chap. 3. How
the Woman is said to be the God of the Beast: viz. how the spiritualty or
Clergy are said to be the God of the Magistrates or worldly Power. Verse. 77
Chap. 9. How Man has the Tincture, and Woman the Substantiality, and how that
was in Eternity. Verse. 44 Chap. 9. Why the Woman must be under the Government
of Man. Verse. 111 Chap. 9. Why Women are talkative: how the Moon governs
their Matrix; why the Moon runs her course so soon. Verse. 112 Chap. 11.
How God divided Adam, and made Woman out of him. Verse. 23
Wonders. Chap. 3. How Christ prayed to his Father, and wrought great wonders.
Verse. 72 Chap. 9. How the Spirit of God opens the wonders which were
foreseen in the Eternity in the Wisdom. Verse. 115 Chap. 17. The outward Body
should manifest the wonders of God. Verse. 14
Word. Chap. 1. How the Word is God that Eternally makes it self. Verse. 38
Chap. 2. The Word Creates in the Genetrix. What the Eternal Still Joy is.
Also in what Nature is Generated. Verse. 78 Chap. 2. The Word takes its
Original in Nature: Two words are Generated in Nature: the first expresses
the fierce power which is the Fathers Nature. Verse. 80 Chap. 2. A description
of the second Word which is cal^ed God. Verse. 81 Chap. 2. How the second Word
dwells in the first will Verse. 84 Chap. 2. How the second Word is the Son,
and the brightness of the Father: also how Love and hate stand in opposition.
Verse. 85 Chap. 3. The Word of God has broken the fierce Might in the soul.
Verse. 55 Chap. 4. How the Heart is the Word: and the Spirit is the former of
the Word. Verse. 80 Chap. 5. The soul, the spirit, and the body form a Word.
Verse. 86 Chap. 5. How the meaning, the Word, and the forming of words is to be
understood. Verse. 96 Chap. 5. How the third Principle also may be understood
in the Word. Verse. 112 Chap. 6. How the Word in Nine Months became a perfect
Man. Verse. 84 Chap. 6. What in the Iron represents the Word, the Majesty,
and the Holy Ghost. Verse. 89 Chap. 8. How it is that the Eternal Word was to
become Man. Verse. 67 Chap. 8. How the Word which became Man, entered into
Death on the Cross, and brake the seven Seals. Verse. 68 Chap. 14. How the
soul forms the Word. Verse. 29
World. Chap. 1. The Angelical world is not without the place of this world.
Verse. 34 Chap. 3. Of what and wherefore this world has been created. Verse.
40 Chap. 3. God is a Spirit: the seventh form manifests him: wherein the
Creation of this world is effected. Verse. 45 Chap. 4. This world shall not
die, but be changed: the shadow of every thing therein remains Eternally as
a figure to the Glory of God. Verse. 28 Chap. 5. The inward Government is not
severed from this world. Verse. 16 Chap. 5. Whence this world is become
corporeal. Verse. 17 Chap. 5. This world is a similitude of the Deity in Love
and Anger. Verse. 81 Chap. 5. This world is a Sprout out of the Eternal
Nature. Verse. 82 Chap. 5. The Form of this world was from Eternity in Gods
immateriall Nature. Verse. 83 Chap. 5. How before Time the world was without
substance. Lucifer has stirred up the Fire in his habitation. Verse. 97 Chap.
5. Where the Angelical world is manifest. Verse. 117 Chap. 6. How we are yet
blind concerning the substance of this world. Verse. 10 Chap. 6. What we are:
also what the world, and the Original thereof is. Verse. 40 Chap. 6. The
Eternal Substance and this world are like a Man, they each generate their
like. Verse. 46 Chap. 7. Why God rejects not the world before the End of
Time. Verse. 18 Chap. 8. Of our own hard Prison in the spirit of this world.
Verse. 14 Chap. 9. Why this world was Created, which before the Creation stood
in the Eternal Wisdom as an Invisible Figure. Verse. 6 Chap. 9. Of the
inclination of the Spirit of this world. Verse. 9 Chap. 9. Of that which the
Spirit of this world has built. Verse. 10 Chap. 9. That which desires to
reach God must pass through the Fire: also what Fire that is which must
dissolve the world. Verse. 8 Chap. 11. The world is full of God: where God is,
and where the Abyss is. Verse. 107 Chap. 11. What the substance of this world,
the Angelical world, and the Hellish world are in the sight of God: also where
God is to be sought. Verse. 110 Chap. 14. The world makes the Children of God
but a Gazing Stock. Verse. 55
Works. Chap. 4. As the building shall appear, so shall the builder, our works
follow us. Verse. 52 Chap. 5. How the evil works of the Regenerate in Christ
shall appear. Verse. 134 Chap. 8. The description of the New Body, and of the
Old Man: and how our works shall follow us. Verse. 77 Chap. 18. How all works
follow after the will: also how Lust in the soul is awakened. Verse. 21
Wrath. Chap. 1. The severe Kingdom of wrath is in the Center: how the Father
is but one: how the third Principle could not have been created. Verse. 49
Chap. 11. How God warns Men of his wrath: and how he lets that come which
Man himself has awakened, as Wars, Famine, Pestilence, etc. Verse. 40 Chap.
11. What we have inherited from Adam: How the Anger should have rested
Eternally: without the awakened wrath no Devil can move a Fly. Verse. 41
Writings. Chap. 4. Though the Authors writings be hard and incredible, yet
they have an Infallible certainty of assurance. Verse. 19 Chap. 4. His writings
have an assurance in the Center of the Earth. Verse. 20 Chap. 5. This is no
understanding, but childish writing. Verse. 33 Chap. 6. How people may be
benefited by these writings. Verse. 9 Chap. 9. What the Devil intends to do
with these writings. Verse. 1 Chap. 9. The worlds servants had rather loose
God, and the Kingdom of Heaven, then their honor and Goods. The whore by the
Instigation of the Devil will persecute these writings. Verse. 2. Chap. 10.
Advice, in these writings to rest contented with the present apprehension of
them. Verse. 31
Youth. Chap. 15. Of the wickedness and unrulinesse of youth, if they perceive
their Parents give way to it. Verse. 5
Zeal. Chap. 12. The Innocence of the blind simple zeal against the Martyrs.
Verse. 21 Chap. 16. Of the Great submission of the Love of God. Patience is
better then zeal. Verse. 36

FINIS.
XL. QVESTIONS Concerning the SOUL.

Propounded By Dr. BALTHAZAR WALTER. And Answered, By JACOB BEHMEN. Alias
Teutonicus Philosophus.

And in his Answer to the first Question is the Turned EYE, OR, Philosophic
GLOBE.

(Which in it self contains all Mysteries) with an Exposition of it.

Written in the Germane Language ANNO. 1620.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew. Simmons, in the year 1647.

A CATALOGUE OF THE 40. QUESTIONS.
READER,
THe Author wrote this Answer to these Questions, chiefly for his friends sake
that sent them to him, as also for the benefit of all such as love the
knowledge of Mysteries: this friend of his was Dr. Balthazar Walter, who
traveled for Learning and hidden Wisdom, and in his return home, happened to
hear of this Author in the City of Gerlitz, and when he had obtained
acquaintance with him, he rejoiced that at last he had found at home in a poor
Cottage, that which he had traveled for so far and not received satisfaction:
then he went to the several Universities in Germany, and did there collect
such Questions concerning the Soul, as were thought and accounted impossible
to be resolved fundamentally and convincingly; which he made this Catalogue of,
and sent to this Author, from whom he received these answers according to his
desire, wherein he and many others that saw them received full satisfaction.

QUESTION. I. Whence the Soul proceeded at the Beginning? 2. What is its
Essence, Substance, Nature and Property? 3. How is it created the Image of God?
4. What, and when was the breathing of it in? 5. How is it peculiarly
fashioned, and what is its form? 6. What is its Power? 7. Whether is it
corporeal or not corporeal? 8. After what manner comes it into the body of
Man? 9. Which way does it unite it self with the Body? 10. Whether is it ex
traduce and propagated after an humane bodily manner? or every time new created
and breathed in from God? 11. How, and where is it seated in man? 12. How, and
what is the Illumination of it? 13. How does it feed upon the word of God? 14.
Whether is such new soul without sin? 15. How comes sin into it; seeing
it is the work and creature of God? 16. How is it kept in such union, both in
the Adamicall and Regenerate Body? 17. Whence and wherefore is the contrariety
between the flesh and the Spirit? 18. How do that depart from the Body at the
Death of a Man? 19. How is it Mortal, and how immortal? 20. How does it
return to God again? 21. Whether goes it when it departs from the Body,
be it saved or not saved? 22. What does every soul departed? does it rejoice
till the last Judgment Day? 23. Whether do the souls of the wicked, without
difference (for so long a time before the Day of Judgment) find so much as
any mitigation or refreshment? 24. Whether do men's wishes profit them any
thing? or sensibly do them any good? 25. What is the hand of God and the Bosom
of Abraham? 26. Whether does the soul take care for men, their friends or
Children, or their Good^; and whether does it know, see, approve or disapprove
their undertakings? 27. Whether does it know this or that Art, or Occupation,
whereof (while it was in the body) it had sufficient skill? 28. Whether also
does it obtain, somewhat more certain knowledge of Divine, Angelical,
Earthly and Diabolical Matters then it had in the body? 29. What is its Rest,
awakening and Glorification? 30. What is the difference between the
Resurrection of the flesh and of the Soul, both of the Living and of the Dead?
31. What kind of new Glorified bodies shall they have? 32. What shall their
form, condition, joy, and Glory be in the other Life? 34. What is that
lamentable and horrible condition of the damned Souls? 35. What is the
Enochian Life, and how long does it continue? 36. What is the soul of the
Messiah, or Christ? 37. What is the Spirit of Christ, which he willingly
commended into his Fathers hand? 38. Of the things which shall come to pass at
the end of the world? 39. What, and where is Paradise with its Inhabitants?
40. Whether is it mutable, and what shall it be afterward?
TO THE READER.
IF we knew the preciousnesse of our own souls, we would confess and
acknowledge with an inward feelingnesse, the answer to Christ's Question, when
he said; What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world and loose his own
Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? the soul is so
precious that nothing can truly be valued at so high a Rate. To save it is the
greatest gain, to loose it is the greatest loss: then who will not highly
prise the study and understanding of the way to save it. Christ says, He that
will save his soul shall loose it, and he that will loose his soul shall save
it: but who understands this? we know it is the earnest desire of every soul
to be saved, and to be happy and glorious, but the way is very unknown to us
poor fallen souls, for we can hardly suppose that loosing will be the saving
of our selves: Christ also taught that the way to Glory was through many
tribulations and Death; this way he entered into Glory, and so have all the
blessed from the beginning of the world, and can no otherwise to the end
thereof: but how shall a soul know the way to loose and deny it self, so that
it may assuredly attain Eternal Salvation? Let it listen, in its heart and
Conscience inwardly to that Teacher, which it shall find there, who is in God
himself: we have the Testimony of Moses for this; who told the Israelites the
Word, the Commandment is nigh thee, in thy heart heart and in thy mouth (not
the outward but the Inward heart and mouth) as also the Apostle Paul says to
the Romans, that Christ the Eternal Essential word of God, the word of Faith
which they, the Apostles, preached, is nigh us in our hearts and in our
mouths, and in another place he says, Do you not know that Christ is in you,
except you be past reproof (...) improbi? furthermore the Apostle John says,
that God is Love, and he that loves; G^d dwells in him, and he in God, which
we all perceive is true, for in him we live and move and have our being, and
this may be known though the Apostle Paul had not said so much, for one of the
Poets of old spoke what he knew and said, we are all of his Offspring, as the
Apostle mentions it: nay we all know that he that does well is the servant of
God, but he that does evil is the servant of the Devil who rules in his
heart: and though there is none that does good, no not one, nor can do of
himself, while he is in this mortal, life yet through Christ in him he can
desire to do well, and be sorry when he has been drawn away to do evil by
the lusts of his own heart, by which the Devil tempts us to do evil; but
if we will resist the Devil he will fly from us, if we will leave off to do
evil, and desire, try, and learn to do well, without doubt we shall be able
through God that dwells in us: and then he will teach us all things, and lead
us into all truth by his Spirit. All this we shall fully understand, and all
Mysteries when God shall manifest himself in us, if we earnestly desire it with
all humility, self-denial losing of our souls, and being nothing in our
selves; for then God will be All in All, and nothing is impossible with God:
All this and much more has the Author of this Answer to these Questions
concerning the soul, found true, and has out of his inward Mystery manifested
many things in this, and other Writings of his, the knowing whereof will be
exceeding useful to the furtherance of the salvation of every soul; which
when I had read I was very much satisfied in my own soul, and do desire that
others may be made partakers of them, so far as lies in me: I have therefore
taken in hand to put this Treatise into English, which I chose to do rather
out of the Original then out of any Translations, because they many times come
short of the Authors own meaning, and because I found many errors in some of
them, and he is so deep in his writings, that we have need to desire that our
souls may be put into such a condition as his was in, else they cannot be
fully understood: but the same God that satisfied his desires will satisfy
ours, if we cast our selves upon him in our souls, and let him do with us
what he pleases.

Concerning the Author, he was from his youth much addicted to the hearing of
Sermons; and hearing that speech of our Saviors, Luke 11. ver. 13. Your
heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask it, and by the
differences and controversies in Religion, which he knew not how to satisfy
himself in; he was so stirred up and moved, to ask, seek, and knock, that he
might know the truth; upon which hy the Divine drawing and will, he was in
Spirit wrapped into the holy Sabbath in which he remained seven whole days in
highest joy by his own confession; after he came to himfelse he laid aside the
folly of youth, and was driven die Divine zeal earnestly to reprehend impudent,
scandalous, and blasphemous speeches, and did forbear in all his actions the
least appearance of evil; and continued to get his living by the labor of his
hands, till the beginning of the sixth Seculum, which was the year 160. When he
was a socond time possessed with a divine Light, and by the sight of a sudden
object, was brought to the inward ground or Center of the hidden nature: yet
somewhat doubting, he went out into an open field, and there beheld the
miraculous works of the Creator in the signatures, figures, or shapes of all
created things, very clearly and manifestly laid open; whereupon he was taken
with exceeding joy, yet held his peace in silence praising God. But ten years
after in the year 1610. through the overshadowing of the holy Spirit, he was a
third time touched by God and renewed, and became so enlightened, that least so
great grace bestowed upon him should slip out of his memory, and he resist his
God, he wrote privately for himself, (without the help of any Books but the
Holy Scriptures) many Books the Titles whereof follow at the end of this
work. Which books contai^e such high and deep grounded Mysteries of the
Deity, as have not been revealed since the Apostles times.

On the 18. November. Stilo novo, betimes in the morning he called one of his
sons, and asked if he also heard that excellent music? he said no, then he had
that the door should be opened, that that music might be the better heard.
Afterward he asked what a clock it was? being answered that it had struck two;
he said, it is not yet my time, my time is three hours hence, in the mean
time he was heard to speak these words.

O thou strong God of hosts deliver me according to thy will, O thou crucified
Lord Jesus, have mercy upon me, and receive me into thy Kingdom. When it was
near about six of the clock, he took his leave of his wife and sons, and
blessed them, and said; now I go hence into Paradise; then spoke to his son
to turn him, and sighing deeply, he mildly and quietly departed this world.

If it were not for the great fruit that I conceive may grow to every one that
studieth it, I should be sorry that I am the Instrument, to make such things
known in my Native Language; and much more unwilling it should be published to
the view of so many various minds, as are now sprung up: But my hope is,
goodness will get the upper hand, and that the fruits of the Spirit will
prevail to the subduing of the Lusts of the flesh: now I readily submit to the
censure of those who have that good desire: and of those who are not proudly
and perversely wedded to their own conceits, (when they have considered this
Authors meaning:) whether this will not be as beneficial to us as it has been
to other Nations: Indeed my mind is lead to think, that our troubled doubting
Souls may receive much comfort leading to that inward Peace which ^asseth all
understanding: that all the disturbing Sects and Heresies arising from the
Darkness and malice of men and Devils, will be made to vanish, and cease by
that understanding which may be kindled in them from it: they that rule will
perceive how to effect all their good purposes, to the joy and happiness of
them that are subjected to their government; and Subjects will soon learn to
obey in every thing as the Primitive Martyrs did, though they should live under
such Governors as they did: so God shall be glorified by all men's love to one
another, and peace will flourish over all the Earth.

It may be some will think it so hard to attain the understanding of this
Author, when they read the answer to the first Question, (which is far more
difficult then any of the other, because it contains the sum of them all in
brief) that they will forbear to take so much pains as they suppose is
requisite; but if it should prove a little harder then other writings, the
profit will countervaile the Labor with a hundredfold advantage; yet let every
one read it themselves, or hear it read with their own ears, that others
misreport hinder them not from so great a benefit, and they shall no doubt
attain it, for I am convinced by my own experience that every one may receive
according to their vast or narrow capacity, who have according to mine own
measure been satisfied, though I be

One of the unworthiest of the Children of Men, J. S.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE TO BALTHAZAR WALTER.
1. Dearly beloved friend, it is impossible for Reason to answer these your
Questions, for they contain the chiefest and greatest Mysteries, which are
alone known to God:

2. Hence says Dan. 2.27. And such an answer Joseph gave to the King of Egypt.
Daniel to King Nebuchadnezzar: That which the King asks and desires of the
Learned, Chaldeans, Astrologians and Wise men, is not in their power. The God
of Heaven only can reveal secret things: it is not in my Reason to answer the
King, but yet, that the King may perceive the thoughts of his heart God has
revealed it, not that my Reason is greater then any man's living.

3. So likewise I say to you: you shall be answered (not that my reason is
greater then any man's living; but only that you may perceive the thoughts, the
earnest seeeking and desire of your heart,) it is given me to answer you.

4. And you should not so anxiously seek after these things, they are in no
outward reason: But to the Spirit of God nothing is impossible; seeing we are
the children of God, and in Christ newborn of God: the son sees very well
what the father does in his house, and also learneth his Art and work.

5. Seeing also we are the mystery of God we ought not to suppose, that we must
not meddle with such mysteries, as Antichrist teaches; for none takes unto
himself any thing of Gods Mysteries unless it be given him: and St. James
says, James 1.17.
Every good and perfect gift comes down from above, from the father of
lights, with whom there is no change nor alteration.

6. And seeing you seek so eagerly after such things, you become thereby even
the cause of finding them: for God gives his mysteries both by means and also
without means, but that no man might boast, he often makes use of very mean
people about them, that it might be acknowledged that they come from his hand.

7. You shall be answered with a very sound and deep answer, yet briefly
comprised, not according to outward reason but according to the spirit of
knowledge.

8. And although I could sufficiently show and demonstrate these things in a
larger description: yet seeing they are all described, and explained at large
in my other Writings: at present I set them down but briefly for the ease and
delight of the Reader, and that it may serve for a short memorial of the great
mysteries.

9. But he that desires to know these things fully and fundamentally, let him
seek them in my former Writings, especially in the The threefold life.
third part, and there he has the whole ground of the Note that by the words
divine essence, substance, or essentialitie in the writings of this Author he
means not that essence which is God himself, but whatsoever is besides God,
and which takes its orginall from God, as the eternal Idea's in the wisdom
of God do. And that which is essential according to the form or figure of
the Idea, and that wherein all Idea's lie, he calls Mysterium magnum and
Coeleste Arcanum.
Diving Essence, and also of the creation of all things, of that which is
eternal, and of that which is corruptible; and how every thing was made, and
is come to be as it is, and act as it does, and what it shall be in the end.

10. And therein also lies the Key of the Mysterium magnum, so far forth as
a creature is able to comprehend or bear, and thither we refer you for
further explanation: and so I commend me to you into the brotherly love in
Christ, Anno 1620.

Jacob Boehmen.

The first Question Answered.
QVESTION the First. Whence proceeded the Soul Originally at the beginning of
the World?
1. We have, both in our second and third Book suff^ciently laid open the
mysteries of the Soul according to the three Principles of the Divine Essence:
where also we have set down by many Circumstances, the eternal Center of the
eternal Nature: and also the Ternary of the Divine Essence; and moreover what
Eternity has ever been, and how the beginning of the Creation Or came to be.
was brought forth; and what an Angel, and what a Soul is: Also we have laid
open the heavy fall of Lucifer, and moreover both the Mothers which have so
brought it forth, the one Engendring.
procreating the heavenly Essentiality, and the other the Hellish: where also
we have written of Light and Darkness.

2. Therefore we shall not be very well understood by the Reader in this
Treatise unless he has read over and well Or understood.
comprehended Or book.
the third part of our Writings.

3. Although that apprehending is not in humane power, yet the way thereto is
very faithfully shown him, so that if he do long to attain it, he shall
obtain a Leader, or the holy Ghost.
Guide and directer, (if he follow our counsel) who will show him the key of
the Mysterium magnum, leading to that precious Philosophers stone, and to all
Mysteries: let none think this impossible, for with God all things are
possible: He that finds God, finds all things with and in Him.

4 Now you know In or by.
according to Reason, that all things are originally sprung and derived from
Eternity: This also the holy Scripture tells you: in God are all things; Act.
17.28.
In him we live and move and have our being, and we are his offspring.

5. And although men cannot say of God that the pure Deity is Nature, but that
it is the Majesty in the Ternary: yet we must say that God is in Nature,
although Nature can as little reach or comprehend him as the Air can
comprehend the Sunshine: However we must say; that Nature is borne in his will,
and that it is a SEEKING, produced out of Eternity; for where there is no Will,
there is also no Desire.

6. But in God there is an eternal Will (which is himself) to beget his
Glance or Luster, or brightness of his Glory.
Heart or Son: and this Will makes the Or rousing.
stirring or proceeding out of the will of the Heart, which is a Spirit: so
that the Eternity consists in 1 Will; Father. 2 Heart; Son. 3 Proceeding or
Efflux; holy Ghost.
three Eternal Forms, which are commonly called Persons: as we have very
accurately Declared or Expounded.
explained it in our third Book.

7. Then if we discern and know that there is not only Light and Majesty, but
also Darkness, as is plain; it behooves us to know whence Darkness arises.

8. For in the Eternity beyond Nature there can be no Darkness, for there is
nothing to bring it forth: we must only look into the Will and the Desiring,
for a desiring is attracting.

9. And whereas in the Eternity it has nothing but only it self, it draws
it self into the Will, and makes the Will full, and that is its darkness,
whereas otherwise, if it were not desiring it were a Nothing, Or viz.
but an eternal stillnesse without Or Being.
Essence.

10. Thus the Attraction makes Moveablenesse.
Mobility and Essences which otherwise could not be in the stillnesse: and so
also this makes Astringency or bitingnesse.
harshnesse, hardness, and drouth together with Acidnesse.
sharpness.

11. Neither can we say for all that, that the Darkness swalloweth up the
Light, as the Eternal Liberty; for, that which is Eternal cannot be altered
nor changed: but yet we must say that Light and Darkness are in one another.

12. Now the Light is good and has Or power.
virtue, but the Darkness has the harshnesse, hardness and coldness: and
the desire of the Will makes Essences and attracting, which is a Riggling.
stirring in the hardness, and if that which is attracted do stir by the
drawing then it causes a jarring, whereby Light and Darkness are mingled
together in the sharpness.

13. And we must consider, (...) the free Light is sharpened in the Essence in
the sharp stirring, whereby we come to understand the Lightening.
fire-flash, and the eagerness; and yet we cannot say that there is any
rending.

14. For that which is Eternal without beginning admits no severing, but
stands as a wheel which begets it self in it self: whereof you have a
similitude in the Mind of Man, where indeed there is a Will of a rising and
running, but no removing: the greater the Will is, the greater also is the Or
Being.
Essence, and the more strongly it is sharpened.

15. Thus the still Liberty which is neither Darkness nor Light is sharpened
in the sharp Desiring attracting, so that it appears as a flash which
shines.

16. Also we cannot say that the Liberty does take in the flash, for from
Eternity it has had Nothing: but we can well say, that the Light and Splendour
shines in the Liberty.

17. For that which is free lets in the Light, but that which is not free
(as the Or estringency.
harshnesse which makes Darkness, and is material, to speak in a
Spiritual sense) that does not receive the Light.

18. This we can truly say, that whatsoever is transparent and not of a Mild
or fluid.
gross Nature does take in the Light, as appears by the water which takes
in the Light, and the harsh Earth not.

19. Moreover in Fire you have a sufficient manifestation of the Essence of all
Essences, for you see that the Fire burns in an harsh dry matter, for it is
the harsh Desire which enters into it self like a great anguish, and reaches
after the Liberty; where also it receives the Liberty, like a flash, and it
kindles by the flash that it burns.

20. And although it must be understood that there is no such fire in the
Eternal Essence as that is which appears externally, yet it is internally,
in the harsh Desire and externally remains dark: Therefore the Eternal Fire
is externally dark, and internally, as it is in it self in the Will of the
Eternal Liberty it is a Light, which shines in the Still Eternity.

21. Or d^fferences kinds or manners.
Now then, we understand, that in Fire there are ten Forms; all which are
borne in the Will, and all belong properly to the Eternal Will: therefore we
rightly say that the Eternal Will is Gods Will: and that the Liberty which
has the Will is God himself, for it is the Eternity and nothing else.

The first Form.
22. First, there is the Eternal Liberty, which has the Will, and is it self
the Will: now every Will has a Or longing,
seeking to do or to desire something; and herein it beholds it self, and
sees in the Eternity what it self is; it makes to it self a glass of its
own likeness, for it sees what it self is, and so finding nothing but it
self it desires it self.

The second Form.
23. The second Form is the Desiring, and yet it has nothing but it self,
thereupon its desire seeks a model of its own Will in it self, and makes
it self pregnant, so that a darkness or over-shadowing comes to be in the
Will: which the Will would not have; but the Desire: the seeking causes it;
and yet there is Nothing that is able to consume or expel the Desire.

24. For that which is before the Desire, beyond the seeking is Free and a
Nothing, and yet it is: yet if it were a thing that could be perceived, it were
an Essence, and must subsist in that Essence which brought it forth: but seeing
it is without Essence, it is the Eternity, viz. Good: For it is no source, and
has also no Mutability, but it is a Rest and an Eternal Peace.

25. But seeing the immense Space is bottomless, therein being neither number
nor end and also no beginning, therefore it is like a Glass, it is All things
and get as a Nothing: it beholds it self, and yet finds nothing but an A,
which is its Originali Textu. A V ge.
Eye

26. A V is the Eternal Original of something, for it is the Eternal
beginning and the Eternal End: Thus the Eternal Abyss looks into it self
and finds it self.

27. The A is below and the V is above, and the O is the Eye, and although it
be no Essence it self, yet thus it is the Original of Essence; there is
neither below nor above but its Glass in the A V is a sight. As the sight of
the Eye.


28. But whereas there is no ground, therefore its Glass is such an Eye as
this O; for God himself says in the Revelations I am A and O, the beginning
and the end, the first and the last.

29. Consider us according to its precious depth, for we speak not here
according to Nature in a Sim^litude, or Parable, or F^gure.
Form, but according to the Spirit above Nature in the Go T tes Character T
Divine Character T.

30. The is the Eye of God, the Eye of Eternity; This makes and is a Glass,
and it is a round circle like a Globe not like a Ringle; for we cannot describe
it otherwise. Hereby we mean the Globe of Eternity; wherein lies the
foundation of Heaven and Earth, of the Elements, and also of the Starry- Or
Wheel or Orb.
Sphere.

31. For it is a Globe like an Eye, and it is Gods wonderful Eye.
the Eye of Gods Wonders, wherein every thing was seen from Eternity, yet
without Essence, as in a Glass or Eye, for it is the Eye of the Abyss;
concerning which we have no Pen, Tongue nor utterance either to write or
speak; only the Spirit of Eternity leads the Eye of the Soul thereinto;
and so we see it, else it must remain in Silence; and this hand could not
describe any thing of it.

32. Now seeing that in the Eternity there is such an Eye, which is God
himself, (and yet is not called God but Eternity; and according to the Eye he
is called A and, before the A there is Nothing, and in the there is All, and in
the A and beginning and End) hence we find, that there is a Will in the, and
the Will is the it self which makes the A, ( viz. the Eternal beginning of
the Drawing or longing, or attracting.
seeking) so that the Abyss beholds it self, and makes a Form in it self
like a Globe.

33. For the Eye finding no bottom, it closes it self, and becomes like a
round Globe of Glass, and so it is the similitude of Eternity, in that it can
find it self: for there is no finding in the Abyss, because there is no
place or limit but the mere Abyss: and when it does find it self in the Eye,
yet it finds nothing but the Eye, which is the Globe.

34. Now the Eye makes the Globe, and it is the Globe, and all put together is
a Or an Fternall Will.
Will to seek it self, and so to see what the Eternity is, which is made
manifest in the Eye.

35. For the Eye makes a beginning and an End; and because there is nothing
that can give it, it gives it self, and it is from Eternity to Eternity, the
Eternity it self, it g touches Nothing for it is a Nothing in it self.

36. Then if there be a Will, which is the Eye, and which keeps the Eye, that
keeping is the Desire of the Eye, and so the Desire causes an attraction in
the Eye, yet nothing is there but the Eye: and the Desire only attracteth it
self in the Eye, and impregnateth the Eye with that which is attracted, so
that it becomes full, and yet also nothing is there but a darkening of the
Free Eye; yet the Eye is not dark, but the Desire in the Eye is impregnated in
it self.

37. For the Will of the Eye is still: and the Desire of the Will makes it
self full, and the Eye continues free in it self: For it is free in and from
Eternity, and this we call the Eternal Liberty in all our Writings.

The third Form.
38. Now a Desire is sharp and attractive, and that makes the third Form,
viz. a moving in it self, and it is the Original of the Essences; and hence
come the Essences in the Eye and in the Will, and yet the Will may not suffer
it self to be attracted.

39. For its peculiar right is to be still, and to hold the Eye in the Circle
in the Globe, and yet it cannot defend it self from the drawing and filling,
for it has nothing wherewith it can defend it self, but the desire.

40. And here arises the Eternal Enmity and contrary will, the Will, will not
be dark, and its Desire makes it dark, the Will would suffer the Motion
willingly, because it is its manifestation, but the drawing in and darkning
pleases it not, though indeed the Will is not attracted nor darkened, but the
Desire in the Will impregnateth it self.

41. Now when the Desire thus sticks fast in the darkness, there is a great
anguish, for it is troubled and attracted and also darkened, and brings
anxiety to it self in it self, and desires liberty: and drawing so strongly
at the liberty, would feign draw it self into the Liberty, and so it makes it
self more eager, rough and hard, and the Darkness is like an horrible
consuming sharpness.

42. For it snatcheth the Liberty into it self: but it is so sharp that it
appears in the Liberty as a flash of lightning, which consumes the darkness
with its eagerness: and hence it is that God says, I am a Deuteronomy. 4.24.
consuming fire.

43. Hereby understand, how every Materia.
matter consiseth in the power of the true Fire, and how the floare shall one
day be purged: for it is the Original of the Fire, which has all power; for
it consumes whatsoever the Desiring has made, whether it be stone or
mineral, Centrum Naturae.
for it is the sharpness of the Etenall Liberty and makes the Center of
Nature.

viz. in the Desire, and then in the matter of that which is attracted, viz. in
the darkness,

45. For the Desire in the Darkness, would have nothing else but the Liberty,
and the Liberty is a light without shining, it is like a very deep blew color
mixed with green, so that it is not known what color it is, for all colors
are in it; and the Desire in it self in its eager anguish and sharpness
breaks the colors, and makes an horrible consuming flash in it self, and
changes it according to the anguish that it becomes Red.

The fourth Form.
46. Now the Liberty in the Desire suffers it self not to be bound or
captivated, but changes it self from the Red flash into Light, into a glance
of the Majesty, and it is an exulting great Joy in the Liberty.

47. For the Eye is made manifest in the Light, and the Or Substantiality.
Essentiality is made mannifest in the Will, and then it is known what Light
or Darkness is: also thus the Eternity is known, and so Gods Holiness
always arises in the wonders from Eternity, and it has neither limit nor
beginning, for it is an Eternal beginning comprehended in Nothing but only in
the Wonders, which are its own Essence, where there is neither limit nor Time
or years.
number.

48. And thus nothing is known in the still Eternity, but the glance of the
Majesty, and the Spirit which is borne in the Will, and the Majesty has the
Regiment.
Dominion.

49. Beloved friend, understand the sense right: we mean not, that the Birth
apprehends the Liberty without, but within it self in its Center, it
apprehends it self in it self, and makes Majesty in it self, and yet
there is no including there, but it is, as when life arises from Death or from
Nothing, which Life.
dwells only in it self, and this is called a Principium.
Principle: and that wherein it dwells is called Nature, which has seven
Spirits and Forms, as is to be seen in our second and third Book.

50. Yet this Principle has but one Spirit, which is the life of that
Principle, and it has but one will neither, which is the Or satiating.
fulfilling of the Eternity with the glance of the Majesty.

51. For this principle is the Power proceeding from the will of Eternity, and
the entrance, or the Eternal beginning of the Power, is the Life and the
Spirit of the power, which thrusts forth the Essences of the begettresse, and
opens the Original of the Majesty.

52. And the whole Eye (which has thus Or formed, or figured.
made it self a Glass in the A and O) is all things, it is the Eternity, and
in it self in the Eye it begets the Majesty, which is the Heart and power
of the Eye, and also the Spirit, which proceeds from the Power in the Heart,
even from the fiery Light flaming Essences.

53. Thus understand the Holy Ternary in one Essence; the Father is the
Eternity without Ground, which is Nothing and yet all things, and in the Eye of
his glance he sees that he is all things: and in the Power of the Majesty he
feels, tastes and smells that he is Good, that is, that he is God:
although the The Tau or Cross.
T* ( viz: the Schwerigkeit often Breetheitguere.
harshnesse) arises in the Center.

54. And in the Spirit is the moving of the Power, and the Multiplication
without ground and number, wherein consists an Eternal bottomless
multitude, and all in Power.

55. For, that which has no ground has no number, nor is there any shutting
up or comprehension therein, and that which is within it self cannot be known
Or without ab extra.
externally, but it may be felt by the Spirit; Thus the Internal drives out
from it self and manifests it self in Figures, or else God could not be
known.

56. Thus God is together one Spirit: and is from Eternity in three beginnings
and ends, and that only in himself: There is no place found in his sight: and
he has nothing in himself that may be compared to him; also there is nothing
which can search and manifest any thing further then his Spirit: which always
manifests it self from Eternity to Eternity.

57. He is an Eternal seeker and finder of himself in the great Wonders; and
that which he finds he finds in the Power: He is the Opener of the Power;
Nothing is like him, neither does any thing find him, but that which yields
it self to be his own, that enters into him: That which denies it self to
be, in that thing the Spirit of God is all things; For it is one only Will in
the Eternal Nothing, and yet it is in all things as Gods Spirit it self is.

58. And this, my beloved friend, is the Highest Mystery: Therefore if you
would find it seek it not in me but in your self, though not in your Reason
neither, which must be as dead, and your Desire and will must be in God: and so
God becomes the will and the deed in you: also the Spirit of God brings
your will into himself, and then you may well see what God is, and what
Spirits child this hand is, and from what kind of Spirit it writes.

59. Furthermore I brotherly exhort you, that you seek not with such
eagerness, you will not reach the bottom of it with such searching: although
you are known and beloved of God; and therefore we give you this for a Rule,
yet externally I have no power to give it you.

60. But follow my counsel, leave off your laborious searching in Reason, and
enter into the will of God, into Gods Spirit, and cast outward Reason away, and
then your will is Gods will, and Gods Spirit will seek you within you.

61. And if he find your will in him, then he manifests himself in your
will, as in his own propriety. For if you quit that will, then it is His who
is all things: and when he moves go you with him, for you have Divine Power,
and then whatsoever you search he is in it, and then nothing is hid from the
will: thus you see in his Light, and are his.

62. And let no fear terrify you, there is nothing can take it away but your
own imagination, let not that enter into your will, and so you shall work the
wonders of God in his Spirit, and acknowledge me your brother in him, else I
shall be but as one that is dumb to you: This I tell you for good will.

63. And seeing we write of the Eternity, to the end to satisfy your will,
concerning the soul, (our purpose herein being according to the will of God)
we will therefore first show you the ground of the soul, and then its
Original: and so open your eyes that you may be freed from your laborious
searching.

64. For you have now to your old age gone about this, and so far as I
understand, you have not yet found that deep Mystery in the Spirit: But seeing
it is Gods will that you should know it, and have it given you for a reward of
your so great labor, therefore have a care that you receive it aright: and
then that you cast not the Pearl before swine, which are not worthy of it, nor
will not be worthy of it to Eternity.

65. For that which shall be revealed to you here, belongs to the Children of
God, therefore be faithful and employ it according to the Spirit, and not
according to humane reason.

66. For it is so sublime that it will not endure earthlinesse which proceeds
from Covetousness, Pride, Selfe-glory and Arrogance, although you be not such;
but look well into whom you pour oil, for it is poison to many: let others
themselves seek as you have done; But give the Children bread that they may
eat, and praise Our Father which is in Heaven, for to that end it is given you.

The fifth Form of Fire in the Eternal Will.
67. As we have opened an entrance and a glass to you of the Eternal
Original, from whence the Eternal fire proceeds, and what it is, so it is
also necessary, that we show you further according to the highest depth, what
the Eternal Nature is, in its propagation.

68. Wherein we must understand two Kingdoms, the one good and pleasant, the
other an evil, wrathful, and ever envious sad one: of which the Philosophers
from the beginning of the world have treated, and sought after it, but the time
of finding it was not then.

69. But now it is at hand, that the hidden Or secret Mystery.
thing should be found, not only by me, but also by many that will be
faithful, and humble themselves to God, and seek in his Spirit and will; it
will be found in the Eye of God only, and no where else; therefore let none
dive deeper in searching elsewhere, or he will find the Devil.

70. Seeing then the Eternity is thus which yet is Nothing, and yet there is
Light and Darkness, Life and Spirit, which are all things: and so there is a
seeking (that is, a desire) in both, to find it self, though there be Nothing
that can be Or that can find any thing.
found but the Spirit.

71. Now seeing it has nothing that it can find, and yet the Desire goes on
Eternally forward, therefore the Desire is a figure of the seeking will, the
similitude of the Eye of God, and it is as a glass of the Eternal Eye which
is called God.

72. Now this is in two manner of ways, one according to the Light, and the
other according to the Darkness: for the seeking is in both; and yet there is
no departing of the one from the other; the Light is in the Internal, and the
Darkness in the External, and yet that which is most internal is also most
External, but the Light is the middlemost.

73. For it is in the Nothing; therefore it cannot be the most internal, for
it has no Place nor limit; it is its own finding, which the Darkness finds
not, but the will in the Darkness, which desires the Light, goes out from
the darkness and remains Eternally in the Light.

74. Now the Desire of the Light presents a Model like it self, wherein the
Eternity is manifest: that is, all whatsoever the Spirit, in the Eternal power
of God, finds in it self from Eternity to Eternity.

75. This Model is not God the Eternity it self; for it takes its beginning
in the Spirit, and it is the wonder of the Spirit which it seeks and finds
from Eternity; and The Model.
it is in the Eye of God as a figure, and all the wonders of the Abyss of
Eternity are therein, and are beheld in the Light of the Majesty, as one wonder
in many Endless wonders.

76. Also it is an Image of God, a virgin full of purity and chastity, and no
begettresse, for the Holy Spirit only opens the Wonders in the Power.

Erblicket.
77. Yet this Virgin is the similitude of God, his Wisdom wherein the Spirit
Discovers it self.
discerns it self, and always and in Eternity opens the wonders therein:
and the more is opened the more is in it.

78. For she The wisdom.
is without ground and number, and as unmeasurable as the Eye of God himself
is, there is nothing like her, also nothing can be found, that may be likened
to her, for she is the only similitude of the Deity, and the Spirit of God is
her Essence therein.

79. She is a Circle and Model, which so opens our mind that we see her,
and God in her; for our will is cast into her, and she is in our Will:
Therefore we speak of God, and see him in her, as in our Own propriety,
according to the hiddennesse of the Humanity, this Or Seeing.
sight is exceeding precious.

80. We must speak somewhat also of Of the way or condition of
Darkness: It is in it self an enclosing, though there be nothing which
barreth it up, but it shuts it self up, and begets it self, and is its
own Enemy to it self, for it makes its own source, without Ground and
number; and has no giver that can bestow this but the Darknesses own Form.

81. It arises from the first Desiring when the Desiring Or draws into it
self.
contracteth it self and impregnateth it self, so that it becomes a very
stinging, bitter Or astringent.
, harsh, hard, cold, wrathful, fire-Spirit: For the Desire causes harshnesse
by the Attracting in the will, yet the drawing is stinging and the suffering
bitter: which the Will wills not, and therefore goes forth from the stinging
and enters into it self, and makes a peculiar Principle, wherein the Majesty
appears.

82. Thus the great Anguish arises in the bitter suffering: and yet nothing is
there neither that can suffer, but it is thus in it self, and it is its own
Life: and if this were not, the Or glance.
splendor of the Majesty would not be, the one is the cause of the other, for
the flash is in the Darkness, and the Light with the Majesty is in the Liberty.

83. And this only is the Or differencing.
divorce, that the Liberty is a still Nothing, which receives the Light into
it, and makes the Darkness material, and yet there is no comprehensible Or
Substance.
Essence, but a dark Spirit and power, a filling of the Liberty, in it self,
that is within the desire and not without it: for without it is the Liberty.

84. Therefore God is the most hidden, and the most manifest, and that is the
Or Mysterium magnum.
Great Mystery, and the Abyss is hidden and yet manifest; as the Darkness is
to our fight: But the source is unsearchable, till the Will sink down into
it, and then it will be found and felt, when the Will loses its Or Life.
Light: And herein lies the Ground of True Faith; let this be told you, ye
Teachers in Babel.

85. Seeing then there is an Abyss, which in regard of the impression of the
darkness is called Ground, wherein the source is a cause of the life: (for the
wrathful flash is the awakening of the life, although it be nothing there but
in it self) and it is also a Desiring, and that desiring is a seeking, and yet
it can find nothing but a glass, and a similitude of the dark wrathful
source wherein Nothing is.

86. For it is a Figure of the Earnest wrathful flash, and of the sharp and
Stern.
severe power which is Gods according to which he calls himself, a consuming
Fire, and an Angry Or zealous.
Jealous God.

87. And this glass is also without Ground, without beginning and without End,
and yet has an Eternal beginning and an Eternal End: and is the only Cause,
that the Abyss is blew, dusky and fiery: Ir is the cause of the Stars and
Elements; for the Firmament is a second Glass proceeding from this.

88. As there is a Threefold source in every thing, and each is always the
Glass, begetter and cause of the other; nothing excepted, all things are
according to the Essence of the Ternarie.

89. Seeing then there is a Glass in the Abyss, in which the source beholds
it self: so it is also a figure and Image of the source, which stands before
the source, and does or brings forth nothing, but is a Virgin of the source
wherein the wrathfulnesse of the Flash Or discovers it self.
discerns it self infinitely without number; and always opens its wonders
therein, by the bitter Spirit of the Or rigling.
stirring Essences.

90. which has its life in the flash, so that it flies more swiftly then a
Thought; and even the thoughts of the Creatures are and proceed herein, also
the Spirits of all living creatures are herein with their root; each life
according to its Principle.

91. And in this Spirit of the Fire-flash, consists the Great Almighty Life,
for it is consuming; as the flash consumes the Darkness, and as the Fire
consumes all things, and yet remains a Life in it self; yet it is an Hunger
and Thirst, and must have Substance.
Essentiality or else it remains a dark Hungry Fire: a will to devour and
to enjoy nothing, a will to Rage and sting and to find Nothing but it self:
whence Essentiality ( viz. the water) and also Or Substantiality, or Earth.
Sulphur is begotten and begets it self from Eternity to Eternity.

92. And here my beloved friend, seek the first root of the soul in the Fire
life, and the second in the life of the Light, in the Majesty, and so you shall
find Gods Image and likeness, and the Greatest Or hidden secrets.
Mysteries of the Deity lying therein.

93. And although there be such an Eye of the wrathfulnesse, wherein the
Earnest Or strong, or stern.
severe Fire-life takes its Original, yet it is not at all Or rent.
severed from the life of the Light: but is one only life that has two
Principles; for it burns in two sources which are within one another; and it
is one only Spirit, having two differences, and two wills, one will dwelling
in the Fire, and the other in the Light.

94. And know certainly for a Truth; that the dark Fire-life is the Abyss of
Hell; for it is the Or stern, or fierce.
severe Anger of God.

95. But do not you seek, as Babell that great City of confusion upon Earth,
has sought: which we blame not for any thing but her negligence and
carelessenesse, and for seeking her Own Glory and power, and by that means
has ensnared her self in the wrathful Anger of God; which has a long time
subjected her under its wonders, and drawn many souls into its source.
Consider this.

96. In the third Book of our writings, this is set down at large, and that
book is somewhat easier to be understood then this is, but in this is the
deepest ground of Eternity, so far as a spirit can conceive, for it cannot
bear more, well may it be described more largely, but not more deeply, for it
is comprehended in the Abyss in both the Principles, for the soul arises in
the Abyss in both Principles, and in the spiritual will, in the Eternity.

97. And yet if it be not wary and circumspect, the Devil may easily ride in
its Chariot, viz. in its Will; but if it be circumspect, and do cast it self
into the will of the Majesty of God, then the Holy Ghost rides in its Will,
and it is his Chariot.

98. And herein you may now finely search the Ground of Heaven and Hell, of
Angels and Devils, of Evil and Good, of Life and Death, if you seek, as we
shall further direct you.

The sixth Form of Fire.
99. Seeing then, two Principles are so in one Essence, (as no man with Reason
can speak against it; for every life consists in venom and in Light, each
in its own principle, and according as it has the source, so has it also its
Light) therefore we must search what that is which sustaineth the life that it
be not starved, and what drives forth its source, that it can endure for ever.

100. This now also has two differences, for the Light-life has its own
source and driving, and the Fire-life also its source and driving, each in it
self: but the Fire-life is the cause of the Light-life, and the Light-life is
Lord of the Fire-life, and herein lies the Mysterium Magnum.
Great Mystery.

101. For if there were no Fire there would be no Light, and also no Spirit,
and if there were no Spirit to blow up the Fire it would be smothered, and
Darkness would be, and the one would be a Nothing without the other, therefore
they belong both together, and yet divide themselves one from another, but
without any Or removing.
fleeing, and yet there is a fleeing of the Spirit.

102. You may understand it by this: look upon the glowing Fire; first there
is the Matter from whence it burns, viz. the harsh attracted bitter
substance, which has an Anguish source, and is a Corpus Opacum.
dark Body, whether it be wood or any such thing.

103. Now when it comes to be kindled, you see Three Principles, first the
wood, in the Darkness with the External Property and Condition, or Quality.
source of this world, which also has its own Life, or else it would not take
fire.

104. Now the Fire has a wrathful, harsh, strong, bitter desiring Quality.
source which begets thirst, a devouring and consuming, and the great
bitterness is its right Spirit, an Enrager and awakener, which has all
Essences of the Life in it, and it is the power of the life and of the driving,
otherwise there would be no burning.

105. That makes the great anguish-seeking after the Liberty: and in the Fire
it attaineth the Liberty: for it consumes the darkness in the wrathfulnesse,
and also the matter of the Fire, from which it burns.

106. And thereby we know that one Spirit, which divides it self into two
Principles, Inseparabiliter.
into two Spirits, but not severedly, and yet fleeing one before another, and
the one catches or apprehends not the other, and the one is the life and
cause of the other.

107. And therefore they are two Principles seeing they have a twofold source
and life, and yet there is but one root from whence they proceed, and one of
them affords life, and the other affords food for that life: This is a
wonder and yet no wonder, for there is nothing that can wonder at it, for it
self is All things in one only Essence.

108. Now the fire 1. Fire.
in it self is first a seeking 2. Seeking.
to draw into it self, and that is the substantiality the Phur, for the
seeking makes it in the Desiring by its attraction; 3. Desiring attraction.
or else there were Nothing; and the Attraction is the bitter sting, a
destroyer, which the substantiality 4. Substantiality or Corporality.
cannot endure, and will not suffer, and that not willing to suffer is an
anguish, a will to overcome the substantiality with the bitter sting, 5. Sting.
and the anguish, 6. Anguish.
pierces into it self, and catches at the Liberty; 7. Liberty.
and the Liberty is a light in comparison of Darkness.

109. Now the Anguish is an horrible sharpness, and thus the Liberty is taken
and sharpened, so that it becomes a fire-flash and the Anguish-will in the
sharpness of the bitter flash, consumes the Substantiality, be it wood or any
other thing.

110. Now when this has consumed it, then the Anguish is a Darkness again,
and the flash remains hidden in it self again; and is an Extinguishing, and
the anguish is in the darkness as at first, before the flashing of the Fire,
and it remains only in a terrible source, where the bitterness is always
made more terrible, by the rough attraction.

111. Now this is thus according to the Outward Principle of this world, as we
see undeniably by experience; seeing then there is an always enduring Essence
in the Eternity, we therefore demonstrate it thus: behold and consider it
deeply and read this with diligence.

112. The sinking of the anguish in the Eternal darkness, is an Eternal
hunger, and an Eternal thirst, and an Eternal Desiring; and the darkness in
it self attaineth nothing in the Eternity, that Or Liberty.
it can satiate it self withal out of the Understand by this the sinking of
the hunger and thirst of Hell, and of Anger.
Eternity, therefore it is rightly and truly the hunger and thirst of the
Abyss of Hell and of the anger of God.

113. But the will in the anguish (because it can attain or find nothing)
therefore it makes a figure and a similitude to it self in the desiring with
the eager attraction, and the eager, harsh, bitter dark Essence, is the
Material similitude it self, it eats it self, and is it self the matter
of the Fire, that so the Eternal flash may always continue, and the wrath is
always an Eternally continuing burning, and burns Eternally, out of the
Darkness, and has its own Life in it self, viz. the bitter sting of the
Anguish, which rages and raveth, and is the Rigling.
stirring and original of the Life, and that is Or Principium.
A Principle.

114. And understand hereby the Eternal desiring seeking, an Eternal
Coveting, and yet having nothing but it self an Eternal Envious Enmity, a
seeking of the Essences, when the innumerable, and Groundless multitude is
always borne in the Will: and an Eternal craftiness, a continual rising in
the hunger, an Eternal finding of the similitude of its own desire, the
similitude of the Essences, in the Will, and this is manifest in the flash: for
the flash elevateth it self ever above the darkness; and the Essences are in
the flash, and are continually brought into the Will.

115. Thus the Fire-will is a Sucking or attraction.
seeking of the high swelling Pride, and a Contempt of the darkness: it
contemns its own root; it is covetous and would devour more then it has,
or more then it should, it has all lusts; for the desiring Essences are
manifest in the Fire, and thence it comes to pass that in each Will each
Essence is again Center of a whole substance.

116. And this is the cause of Creation of this world; viz. that the Model
has appeared from Eternity as in a Glass, and was in the Eternal Essences in
the figure, as in a virgin without bringing forth, and was seen in the light
of God: and hence comes the Matter of the Earth, Stars and Elements, also
All Arts, wit and subtlety, deceit, falsehood, covetousness, haughtiness in
the Creatures of this world.

117. For this world is a Material seeking, comes from the Eternal Viz.
seeking.
and is become material and perceptible in the Creation, viz. in the word
Verbum Fiat, Let there be, as Fiat Lux. Genesis 1. Let there be light.
Fiat, by the Heaven of the waters, as may be seen in Earth and stones: and the
Firmament together with the Elements is yet this Or attraction.
seeking, and still it seeks the Earthy; for it cannot reach back again into
the Eternal.

118. For all substances go forward in their progress so long, till the End
finds the beginning, and then the beginning swalloweth up the End again, and
is as it ever was: but that the Figure, or Idea.
Model remains, for the Model did proceed from the Eternal, from which the
Creation came forth into a substance: as The Eye of Gods wonders.

119. You must know also, that the Spirit of the Air, proceeds from the
bitter Eternal Fire-spirit, which also goes forward after the Wonders, in the
will of the Or attraction.
seeking of the Essences, which are the Stars: and therefore it makes Or
Wheelings Or Jarring.
whirlings, and comes from many places: as from above, from beneath, and
sidewayes, and many times round about like a wheel, all according as the
Fire-seeking is kindled by the Essences of the Stars.

120. This is wholly like the wheel of the Mind, and it has its own Spirit,
and a proper life of its own, and a proper Will of its own: and therefore it
is a Principle, and continued so long, till the End finds the beginning, the
the beginning takes the End into it self, and makes the Middle which
manifests what is done between both beginning and End therein, which ye will
consider further of, unless ye be Or Mad.
foolish Matthew. 25.8.
Virgins.

121. Also this Regiment. Viz. Turba Regimen secundum Werdenhagen.
Dominion continues no longer, then it can remain in the number of the
Creation: For every day of the Creation is a Circle of a Revolution in the Eye,
and has its 1. Number, or Time.
number, 10. X. 100. 1000.
Ten whereof is the the highest number: and Man has ten times ten, viz. a
hundred, for his number: and in the Crown of Paradise he has the number
Thousand; but in the Eternal Essentiality in the Divine Center of the Majesty
he has 0.
no Number.

122. Now look narrowly, with very clear Eyes: God created this world with
every substance, in six days, and they were finished about the middle of the
sixth Day, somewhat afternoon toward the Evening, and then the Rest, and the
Sabbath of the seventh Day, began on the sixth Day: And so the Eternal Rest
found the beginning of the Greation on the sixth Day afternoon; this was the
End, then came the Beginning and the End together in One again, and it was
manifest what God had made in the Days.

123. Seeing then Man by his Imagination has destroyed the heavenly Angelical
Body, and has brought it into a corruptible number, that is, into the outward
Principle, and therefore he is in it: for he has lost the Paradisicall number,
and is placed in the hundredth number, wherein he is also now given up to the
Outward Life, as to his leader, that is, he has given himself up to this
Leader, so that his number, to be fulfilled in the Circle of the Outward
Principle, is clearly known to us.

124. If we knew certainly the hour of the sixth Day wherein the Creation was
finished, we could then set you down the year and day (we mean the Or
Judgment Day.
last Day) for it goes not a minute further, it has its limit hidden in the
inward Circle.

125. Therefore know for certain that the time is near; for in the sixth Day
afternoon the Rest of the Eternal Day began, and therefore God instituted the
Sabbath of the seventh Day, for a Rest, and an everlasting Remembrance.

126. And as the Rest began on the sixth Day toward the Evening, and the
Entrance to the manifestation of the Working, Viz. the wonders.
works of the Creation (the End then taking in the beginning again, and the
six Days stood thus in the Circle as a wonder) so know that ye were created in
Paradise, and yet are gone out from it into the Spirit of Wrathfulnesse into
Death Which Spirit
; which has now wrought its wonders in you these 5500. years and upwards.

127. And now the End has found the beginning again, and ye shall see, also
feel and find, what Paradise has been, even every one of them that shall be
borne in God.

128. For (to speak after the manner of Reason, and not according to God)
Paradise is borne again, but ye shall not escape mortality, nor the wrath in
the Flesh, but Paradise is now already manifest in the Mind, in the soul of
the Children of God, and they have the true taste of the Power.

129. And no subtilty nor power can hinder it, no subtilty can suppress it,
nor can any Devil destroy it; for the End has found the beginning, there can
be no hinderance of it, the Power of falsehood breaks, and then remains
nothing but a waiting for the bridegroom; for the Children of God shall be
found in Paradise, when the Turba in the Wrath shall be swallowed up. We speak
high things, yet we understand and know them certainly in the Wonders.

130. Thus as is mentioned above (if you understand us aright) there is borne
out of the Wrathfulnesse of the Anger; out of the Eternal Center (out of which
this world was produced and created, which is a Or attraction.
seeking of the Eternal:) in the Spirit of this world, (in this Principle
wherein we now live:) and there will always be borne falsehood, Covetousness,
subtilty, deceit, enmity, in the Will; Lying, Murder, Pride, desire of honor,
Selfe-Power, Art, Cunning or Policy.
wit, the wisdom of this world proceeding from Reason, they all come from this
root and remain in the Wonders of Gods Anger, and though Reason and self Or
Wit.
prudence be never so fine, yet it is in the Anger of God, and springs from
the Abyss.

131. And here behold thy self thou fair world; it is no Fable, as thou
hold it to be, it is known in Ternario Sancto, and he that cannot get
within the limit of that, he is captivated by Antichrist, and belongs at last
to that Lake from whence he sprung, it is no time to linger now, both the
doors stand open; and whatsoever has grown in the Turba shall be swallowed
up with it.

132. So also consider the Eternal Fire further, and take a similitude from
all sorts of fire in this world, for that which is a Spirit, in the Eternity,
is a substance in this world. You see also that fire in it self is an
anguishing wrathful rising bitter Essence and source, and yet you see nothing
else in the proper Form of Fire, but the flash which shines, you see not the
source, you can only feel that.

133. You see also that the fire when it burns, sends up from it self a
Smoke, in which there is water, whence soote comes which sticks to the
sides, especially where the fire is enclosed and not free, then the soote is
seen as in a chimney; and the soot and water are in one another, and thus the
Material Earth comes originally from the Eternal fire; which Lucifer
kindled; Then in the wrathfulnesse Time began, and the Creation was after that
manner which is mentioned in the Third Book.

134. Understand, the Mysterium Magnum.
Great Mystery further: you see that every Fire gives light, and you see also
that Air goes forth from the source of the Fire, and you know very well that
if the fire had no Air to blow it up, it would be smothered, as all fires are
smothered when they have no Air, and yet they produce Air.

135. The Air is the life of the fire, and the Air has its Original from
the Anguishing bitter stirring source of the Essences, out of the Will: Now you
see also very well, that fire must have fuel to burn, or else it is a
Darkness, and although it devour it self (by its eager attraction,) yet that
fire is nothing but a source in the Darkness, which we understand to be the
Abyss of the Anger of God, which is not manifest in God, but is only as a
cause of the Life in the Kingdom of God.

136. You see that all fire must have Substance.
matter, or else it will not burn, understand it thus, the fire produces
Air, and in the Air water, and it mightily attracteth the Air with the water
into it self again, whereby the source of the fire is so allayed that it
shines.

137. For without water no fire shines, if no water can be procured in a
thing, in that thing the fire will not shine, but glimmer; as for example, in
Glowing.
a red hot stone, which has the source of the fire, and no shining but a
glimmering, and hardly that, but in Iron it shines wherein the fire has
water: and therefore Iron at length comes to be consumed and gets Rust, but
a stone does not: This is thus according to the Outward Principle of this
World; but according to the inward ( v^z. the Kingdom of God) it is as
follometh, observe it.

138. The Eternal fire burns Eternally; yet it is a Spirit: but not
manifested according to the wrathfulnesse in the Kingdom of God: understand it
thus: the flash makes a shining; which arises from the fire, and yet it
dwells not in the wrath of the Fire, but satiateth the fire wholly, and
gives light also out from the fire, and is not comprehended nor retained by
the fire: but carries with it another source of its own, viz. Amiablenesse or
Friendlinesse.
Meekness, and yet has the Power Wit, reason, or knowledge.
, Wisdom and Art of the Fire, for in the Light, the Essences of the Source of
the fire are first manifested.

139. Now the light makes no Or pain.
source, but it enters into it self into a Meekness, and yet is desiring,
which proceeds from the source of the Fire; and its desiring is an attraction
of the Meekness and power into it self: and so it makes it self pregnant
with Meekness.

140. For the Light is a Fire also, a very yerning fire, a desiring fire, and a
perpetual finding Fire, which always finds what is generated in the
Original.

141. All the Power which arises in the wrathful fire, is manifested in the
Light; and the Light desires it in meekness: for the wrathfulnesse of the
Fire and the shining of the Light, are two Principles, of a twofold source,
each dwelling in it self, and one comprehends not the other, to Eternity,
and yet the one is the life and the cause of the other.

142. And we must understand it thus: we must consider that an horrible
anguishing Or pain.
source makes a sinking into it self, like Death, wherein the limit of
Separation is, and yet the Anguish keeps its source in it self: but the
sinking into it self as it were into Death enters into its Sky, or
receptacle.
Ether, wherein the life of the Anguish is no more known: for the sinkng
breaks forth from the anguish source, as a dying, and it is a dying* and yet
in the Eternity there is no dying; but a kind of entering into another world, of
another Principle, of another source.

143. For the sinking enters into the still Eternity; viz. into the Liberty;
and as the source of the wrathful Fire did remain in it self, in its life,
so the sinking is a going quite out from the fire-Life, and yet it proceeds
from the fire-life, but it has not the source thereof, for it is broken off
from that in Death: and the limit of the Separation is a Death; so that the
sinking Life pierces through Death, and sprouteth through Death forth in
another world, and has another Substantiality, ( viz. another water) wherein
the Light shines: and therein is no wrathfulnesse.

144. For in the Eternity there is no Death to detain any thing with, but
there is a kind of entering into several Conditions: for that which has no
beginning has also no End nor no Foundation or bottom.
ground: and thus the Light arises from the source of the fire.

145. For the Light dwells in the Fire, and yet not in the Fire; it is
another world, and it is another Fire, called Love, Power, Wonder, sweet,
mild, pure, and it is no substance, also it is not Nature, but Extra without.
beyond Nature in another Principle.

146. It is nothing but a Light flaming Powerful Majesty, and it has its own
Spirit, which brings, the sinking through Death, and which sinking out of the
Anguish through Death, makes the sprouting forth through the Death.

147. The Spirit.
It is free in it self both from the fire, and from the Light, and it is not
held or captivated by either of them both, (no more then the Fire detaineth the
Air:) It proceeds from the Light, from the power of the Light; and opens
all whatsoever is either in the source of the Fire or in the source of the
Light.

148. Yet it has no feeling of the Fire in it; but it is a blower up of the
fire of Light, a producer of the Essences of Love in the desiring Power; and an
Opener of the Essences of Love.

149. And that we might be understood (speaking of the Essences of Love, as of
another Fire, let it be observed: behold when the light is so brought forth
through the wrathfulnesse, that one fire goes forth through the other, then
the fire of Light desires the wrathfulnesse no more, for it is dead to the
wrathfulnesse, and it is a peculiar Fire in it self, and it sends forth its
life out of it self, which is a sprouting: for it is both desiring and
attracting whence Essences proceed, and it has all forms in it, as the
fire-life has, also such a rising.

150. And yet the Essences are borne out of the Or Virtue.
power of the Light, and when they fully taste one another, there is a mere
Desire and satiety, and yet there is nothing that the Desire of Love can draw
into it self, but it attracteth it self into it self, and makes it self
pregnant with the Power of the Majesty, so that this Will becomes satiate, and
yet it is nothing but this Power, which is an Image of the Wonders: It is a
similitude of the Birth; and it is the power it self: it is the Essence of the
Spirit from whence the Spirit has its food, it goes forth from the Image and
Moves, waveth.
floateth as the Air in this world does.

151. Now the Spirit finding nothing like Without it self.
it self, and so not finding it self but in the Power, therefore it is
desiring; for it dwells in the Ground of the Power, and yet is not the Power
it self, therefore its desiring makes a similitude of it self.

152. For a desiring is a seeking, and the figure of the seeking is in the
seeking; the figure makes the Seeking manifest: Thus the Spirit also dwells
in its own Figure, in the Power, and in the Light of the Majesty; and Viz. The
Desiring.
it is an Image according to the property of the Spirit.

153. The Spirit is not the Image; but the seeking and its desiring is the
Image; for it dwells in it self, in its seeking; and in its figure it is
another Person then the figure of the Power, and according to this Essence God
is said to be Threefold in Persons.

154. But that we may open your Eyes wide, that you may see the whole ground of
the Deity (for now it both shall and must be made manifest) you must look upon
the Great wonders, which we lost by going forth from Paradise, where now we
must labor in the six working days of this world; Therefore consider now
what and where we are; and you shall here find such a thing as was hidden even
to Nature.

155. Behold, when you will speak of the Trinity, then look upon the fist
Number, upon the A, upon the Eternal beginning which is the Father: and then
look upon the O, in the middle, viz. the Son, and then look upon the V,
which is the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, which in h^^selfe goes with the
sinking through the sharp wrathfulnesse into the second Principle which has
E, and goes forth through the power, as a light flaming flash which has I. A.
O. V. E. I. I. E. O. V. A.


156. Now put thereto the swift going of the flaming flash that is T the
omnipotence of the Eternal GoTtes.
God, which consumes in the wrathfulnesse as a flash, but in the LIebe.
Love in the I, as an exceeding loving God Exalts, thorough pierces and
powerfully Exulteth: Now if you put the L, thereinto, then you have the Matter
of the Divine Essence, in the power it is an Angel, and in the out-birth out of
the Center it is GoLT.
Gold.

157. The World is Covetous and Ambitious (especially those that will be
counted Masters of Arts) and say they know Gold; and are blind people; why do
you not then seek it? perhaps thou will ask, how should ye seek it? Go with
the outward life into Death, there the outward life must die, and in the
anguish yield it self up into the Number of the Crown, viz. into the number
1000. and there the End is, and the Death arises to a glorious life with a new
fair body, you need afford nothing to it but the soul, which will then bring
forth much fruit, and then thou have an Angel which is free from the
wrathfulnesse, for it is wholly pure, seek it and you shall find it.

158. Yet perhaps thou supposest thou shall find it, as thou art That is, in
the wisdom of Reason, in the Old Adam, in the Ihood and selfehood of the
outward man.
in thine old Clothes: No Sir, we will teach you another A B C, learn that
first, then seek it if you please, if not, let it alone: For the O is much
nobler then the L.

159. Behold now the A ( viz. the beginning of the Eye) together with the V
(which is the mark of the Spirit,) and go through the Middle of the Or Eye.
O and so you will make a stroke or line through the O thus Viz. two
Principles.
{nitre}.

160. Now part the two principles one from another, seeing they part
themselves, and set them one to the other with its half O like a Rainbow thus
^ for so they stand in the figure, and set the wrath at the left and the light
at the Right hand, for it cannot be pourtrayed otherwise; but it is one Globe.

161. And take the Spirit which is borne in the Fire, and go therewith out of
the wrath in the sinking through Death into the other half Eye ( viz. into the
second Principle,) and you shall see this Figure. ^

The figure following belongs to this place.

(...) The Philosophique Globe, or Eye of ye wonders of Eternity, or
Looking-Glass of wisdom
Law.

Gospel

Self

Resignation



The Exposition of the Philosophic GLOBE or EYE, of both the Threefold Or
semicircles.
Circles which signify especially the two Eternal Principles, The Third
Principle.
Third being also clearly understood therein, and how it must be understood.
162. THose Circles should be like Round Globes through which a Cross should
go: for it is the Eye of Eternity which cannot be pourtrayed; It Represents
the Eye of the Essence of all Essences; the Eye of God, which is the Glass of
wisdom, wherein all wonders have been seen from Eternity: and hereby is
described how it is entered into an E^^ence, for the Reader of this book to
consider of.

163. Not as if it could be described or pourtrayed, for the Mind only
apprehends it, and only That Mind.
that which can walk in the Divine Mystery; Not by Art or Reason, but by that
understanding which the Spirit of God opens to the humane Spirit of the soul
in the Great Mystery, otherwise it cannot be apprehended.

164. The Reader should observe the Numbers, and also what stands within or
without a Circle, and where every word in a Circle begins and ends, all of
it has its peculiar signification and meaning: for every word stands in its
due place.

165. That which is without the Circle and wheel, signifies the Liberty of
the Abyss Extra Principium.
without the Principle.

Number. 1. Abyss. 166. The Great Mystery of the Abyss, wherein the Eternal
Divine Essence, in the Glass of Wisdom, does bring it self forth in the Or
Center.
Ground; is marked with the number 1. and the number 2. stands close by it;
which is so to be understood round about that whole Circle.

Of the Three Circles. 167 The Three Circles drawn about one another, signify
the Eternal Birth of the Divine Essence; and All Etrrnall Mysteries both
within Nature and without. Viz. the Original of All Essences, as it is here
described.

Of that half of the Threefold Circle at the Left hand, and of number 2. 168.
The threefold Circle at the left hand, (where also there stands without the
Circle at Number 2. the Mystery Extra naturam.
without Nature) signifies, how the Abyss brings it self into a Ground;
that is, how the Eye of Eternity, viz. the First will (which is called the
Father of Eternity, and of all beginnings) brings it self in the wisdom
into Trinity, into an Eternal Ground, and dwells in it self and possesses
it self; and how it brings it self into Nature, also how Essence arises;
as also perceptibility and perception.

Of that half of the Threefold Circle at the Right hand. 169. The other
Threefold Circle at the Right hand, signifies the Divine Essence of the Holy
Trinity; and the Angelical world, which arises from the Great Mystery of
Eternity, and is manifested by the Principle of Fire.

What the Cross signifies. 170. The Cross [whose Arms goe] through both the
Threefold Or semicircles, or half Globes.
Circles; signifies the Persons of the Deity; and how they part themselves in
the Eternal Unigeniture, as is further mentioned hereafter, according to the
Numbers.

Of the Eye in the Circle. 171. The Eye in the Circle through which the Cross
goes with an Or Two Arms.
Angle, each [half of the Eye] signifies a world, both that at the Left, and
that at the Right: That at the left signifies the Great Mystery of the Dark
world, where the Eye of the Wonders brings it self into Nature: that at the
Right signifies the Light world, where the Divine Mystery having brought it
self forth through the fire, dwells in the Majestic Light, with the first
Mystery of the Wonders.

Of the in the angle of the 272. The Heart in the angle of the Cross,
signifies the Ground or Center of the Deity: Not as if it were separate and
did possess a Place; (for it self is the place or Ground of the Deity, and is
the midst every where) But that men might learn to distinguish God from
Nature; and that Christians may learn to understand the Regeneration, viz. how
God has Regenerated us in Christ, out of his Heart upon the Cross: Therefore
this Figure is thus delineated, that the Reader might further consider it. For
This Figure comprehends all whatsoever God and the Eternity is.

The Expositton of the Circle at the Left hand. number 3. 4. 5. 173. The three
Or Letters.
Characters A. O. V. marked with 3. 4. 5. signify the Mystery of the Holy
Deity Or beyond.
: without Nature, and how it manifests it self in Nature.

Of the A. number 3. and of the Tincture, number 6. 174. A. signifies the
first Eternal Or Abyssall.
unsearchable Will: which is called Father; go round that Circle to the nether
point, where Tincture stands at number 6. which is the Ens of the Will, and
the first beginning of Naaure: for the Divine Mystery of the Trinity stands
above, and the Mystery of Nature beneath; Each Circle signifies a Person of
the Deity in the first Mystery.

Of the O. number 4. and of Principle, and of Fire; number 7. 175. The O at
number 4. signifies the Ground of the Mystery; viz. the Birth of the Heart or
Word of God, which the first Will ( viz. the A) in the Glass of Wisdom,
receives and holds in it self as a Ground of its Essence: For the O
signifies also the Eye of the Glass of Wisdom: for the Eternal word is
Conceived, or formed.
comprehended in the wisdom, and manifests it self in the Light world by
the Principle of Fire, go round from the O and you will find, Principle and
Fire, beneath at N. 7.

Of V. number 5. and of Essence, number 8. 176. The V at number 5. signifies
the Spirit of the Mystery Or beyond.
without Nature: viz. the Spirit of the First Eternal Or Abyssall.
unsearchable will, it arises out of the will in the Power of the Word in the
Great Mystery, and proceeds from the Will and Word, and its Exit makes
Essence: viz wonders of the Power colors and virtue; where yet in the Mystery
of the Abyss without Nature, no colors are Or known.
discerned, for they lie all hid in one, which is a Glimps of a Great Wonder,
and it is called an Essence of the Wonders: Go about in the Circle from V and
you shall find beneath nee^e number 8. Essence: which signifies that the
Essence of All things is under the Spirit of the Or Number Three.
Ternary, and that we must always distinguish Essence from Deity.

177. For in the Essence, Nature with its seven forms arises; For the
Ternarie is but a Spirit in the Essence; and yet there is no Essence Absque.
without the Ternary: for the desire of the Ternarie is the Eternal M^g^^k.
Magia; and it makes Essence; it brings things] into a Ground according to
the Or Idea.
Model which the Spirit opens in the wisdom, out of it the Creation came
forth, according to the Model in the Glass of the Virignalis sapientia.
Virgin-like Wisdom.

A further Exposition of the first Principle, and of the Mystery of the
Beginning in the Creation, also of the Dark world: and how the Angle or line
of the Cross, and number 9. at the left hand, with its upper and nether space
must be understood.
Of FATHER: N. 9.
178. AT N. 9. FATHER stands before the Or angle.
Point of the Cross, and Abyss before that, which signifies the Mystery of
the Father without Nature. For Nature begins at the Point of the Cross. The
first and Greatest Mystery is the Abyss; wherein the Nothing brings it
self into a will, which is called Father, or the Original to something: The
Creation is arisen out of the Mystery of the Father through Nature; here by
this Mystery the Eternal Nature with its seven forms is Or meant.
understood.

Soul. number 10.
179. At the Or Angle.
point of the line N. 10. Soul stands: which signifies the Original of the
Eternal Spirits, viz. of Angels and souls of Men, for the The point of the
Arm at the left hand.
point signifies the Center in Nature, where the threefold Spirit manifests
it self by Nature, which again signifies the Magic Fire in the Fathers
Property, from whence the Angels have their Original, and also the Souls of
Men.

180. We must here understand the Ground and Original of an Eternal Spirit;
for Nothing is Eternal except it have its Original from the Eternal Magic
Fire: the Original is not to be taken for the true Spirit, but for the Center,
viz. the Cause of the Spirit.

The Souls Will: number 11.
181. Every right Spirit is understood in the Light of Life, Or and so is the
und^rstanding.
with the understanding; for no right understanding can be in the fire but in
the Desire of the Light: and therefore the fiery will must bend and incline
toward the heart of God, that is, toward the power of the Light and
understanding, as may be seen here, where the Souls will stands upon the
line of the Cross, marked with the number, 11. and there receives power from
the Heart of God, and so it becomes an understanding Spirit.

Will number 12. and Soul, number 13.
182. For it receives the Power of the Light, in the meekness and humility,
and goes with the Spirit of its will, (that is, with the Noble Image and
similitude of God,) through the power of the Heart, into the second Principle;
that is, into the Light world, as may be seen in the other Or half Globe.
Circle at the Right side of the Heart, where N. 12 Will stands, and Soul N.
13. which signifies, that the soul goes out of the source of the Fire, which
is the Fathers property, and Enters into the Sons Property: and dwells in
the Divine power in the Light world.

HOLY GHOST. number 14.
183. Or beyond.
Without the Point of the Cross, N. 14. HOLY GHOST stands signifying the
Holy GHOST, who arises from Eternity in the will of the Father at N. 9. before
the Or point of the Cross.
point at the left hand, and brings himself through Nature, along through the
Heart and Divine Power at the right hand, out Or beyond.
from Nature; and also through the power of Angels, or of the Spirit of the
soul, quite out; and dwells in the Liberty in the Glance of the power and
Majesty; and is in Nature yet not comprehended by Nature; but in the property
of the Divine power only.

Image; number 15.
184. Beyond the Word H: GHOST N. 15. Image stands, also without Nature;
which signifies that the Noble Image grows out of the Fire of the Soul, as
a flower grows out of the Earth, and has no feeling of the fiery property:
for the fire is as it were swallowed up in it, and yet it is there, but in
another source, ( viz. in the Desire of Love) a light flaming fire in the
Divine property.

Abyss number 16.
185. After Image stands Abyss N. 16. signifying that the true Image
stands in the Abyss Extra without.
: beyond all source, and dwells in Nothing, viz. in it self only, and
through it God dwells; therefore there is nothing but the Divine Power, that
can find, move, or destroy it; for it is not in Nature, although it arises
from Nature, in its Root, yet it is quite another thing; as an Apple differs
from the The tree it grows upon.
Tree; though it be upon the Tree and receives virtue from the Tree, yet the
Sun also gives virtue to it: and so the Divine Sun ( viz. the Majesty)
gives virtue to the Image.

Of the Word Omnipotence; number 17. and Wrath; number 18.
186. Furthermore, at the left hand N. 17. there stands Omnipotence, and it
stands without the Or bounds.
Circle of Nature also: which signifies the Fathers Mystery, which brings
it self by the Magia (that is, by the Desire) into Wrath: wherein the strong
sounding life and strength is understood in the entrance of Nature in the first
three forms, viz. Astringency, bitterness and Anguish: and therefore the word
wrath, stands in the space under the line, N. 18. which signifies, that the
Wrath touches not the Angle of the Or number Three.
Ternarie, but is borne in the Desire.

Or Subtilty.
Craft; number 19.
187. Craft stands at N. 19. under the Word Omnipotence: which signifies the
Essence coming out of the Glass of the Principle, which Craft, in the second
Principle is changed into a right understanding, and here in the Magic fire it
is but craft; for it is subtle and sharp, and a cause of the understanding.

Devil; number 20.
188. Over against craft Devil stands, N. 20. in the space of the dark
world, which signifies the Malice of the Devil, in that he is departed from
the point of the Ternarie, and has put his will into Wrath and craft on
purpose to Domineere over the Meekness of God thereby, and to use the strength
and power of the Fire and Wrath.

Devils Art; number 21. 22.
189. Under the Word Craft stands Devils Art, N. 21. 22. Devils stands
without the Circle of Nature, and Art stands within the Circle of Nature;
which signifies, that the Devil was created out of the Mystery of the Father
upon the line or stroke of the Cross in the Eternal Nature as well as the
other Angels: But he did get his Art N. 22. in the Magic Or sucking, or
Attraction.
seeking of Nature in the Center of the dark world, whereas he should have
gotten it in the power of the Heart of God, and that is the cause of his fall
and of his Envy.

Will; Number 23.
190. Over the line number 23. stands Will; signifying that the Devil has
raised up himself from the Divine Line, (upon which he was created) as a proud
Spirit, who would feign have been his own Lord, and have ruled by his own Art
and Wit.

Darkness: number 24.
191. As also the Pride and subtilty of Men does now: who in the same manner
raise themselves up from the Line of God, from Obedience, in own selfehood in
which the will cannot reach the Divine power and light, but falls into it
self, into the dark anguishing Magic Fire; as above over the word Will, is
noted with number 24. and first into Darkness: for Reason loses the Divine
understanding, and the Divine Desire, wherein it can receive the Essence of
God, and so Or fill.
impregnate it self with Or Virtue.
power from God.

Fire; number 25.
192. And then Or Reason.
it kindles the Magic Fire of Covetousness; so that it wills to have Or
more.
much, and never has enough, as here N. 25.

Anguish; number 26.
193. And when it has filled it self with Covetousness, then the Magic Fire
in the Anguish begins to burn, N. 26. for that which is thrown into the
fire by Covetousness, is fuel for the Magic fire wherein the fire burns:
and there Death is borne; which must separate what Covetousness has brought
in.

Death; number 27.
194. And herein also consists the Grievous fall of Adam, who has imagined
as the Devil did, and desired to have the variety of this world as his own:
He would be cunning and get much Or Wit.
skill, and even the Earthly and hellish source in the skill: Had he continued
upon the stroke in the Line of God, he had not been Earthy, for the Spirit of
his will should have dwelt in God, and have brought Divine food into the body:
but now he is in the Anguish, N. 26. and must again go through the Principle
into Death, N. 27. where his body must be consumed in the Mystery.

195. And if he do not in the time of this Life turn his will into the Cross
of Christ, (as is to be seen in this Figure) then he is reserved in the
Myster^e for the Judgment of God, where he shall be tried in the ^ire, whether
the Spirit of his will have any Divine Power or Virtue.
power in it or not, or whether he can subsist in the fire, and there his proud
Earthly works will be burned up: and if the soul remain in the Dark Magic
fire of the Will, (for it self is a Magic fire, when the Divine Light-fire is
not in it) then one ^agick fire receives the other, and then there is no
remedy to help out from thence.

Will, number 28. Light, number 29. Spirit, number 30. Man: number 31.
196. But the soul which in the Time of this Life did turn again, and did
yield it self up with its will into the Death of Christ, at the line of the
Cross, N. 27. that soul is then sunk down from its proud and Or evil.
wicked works and become free in that same will, and is entered into the Death
of Christ; and sprouteth forth, with the Spirit of its will, N. 28. in the
Divine power from The Death of Christ, through the second Principle; where the
Spirit of the Will ( viz. the Image) Or reaches.
obtains the Divine Light again, N. 29. and the Or Spirit.
Image N. 30. stands again in the Divine Man, N. 31.

Image: number 3^. God: number 33.
197. For ^hen the Spirit of the Will enters into Death at the Cross, then it
puts on the Divine Essentiality (that is Christ's flesh) into it self
again, and brings it with it self, into the Light world, where the Divine
life springs forth again in the Holy Body; and the Image is free again; as
here N. 32. is to be seen, and it dwells in God N. 33. and eats of Gods
word or Essence: For the Image here is Or beyond.
without Nature, in the Liberty, but thie Humanity is in Nature, as it is here
set down.

198. But for those souls, which abide in their proud covetous works in the
Anguish N. 26. they abide indeed in the Magic Fire of Anguish, and their
works are fuel for that fire.

199. But if the Spirit of the Will at length yet do incline it self toward
the death of Christ, and yet is hard bound to the wrath, then it hangs as it
were by a thread to the death of Christ.

The ninth Number; number 34.
200. This soul must needs burn thus a while, till the Spirit of the Will can
enter into the Death of Christ, and till its Sydereall fuel be burnt up: when
the Earthly body dies the Image must be Or washed, scoured, or purged.
Or washed, scoured, or purged.
bathed, which this present too wise world scorneth, but shall be forced to try
it in Death, where that little Spark, (which did hang but as by a thread) must
enwrap it self quite into the Death of Christ: for it has lost both body and
Essence, and remains naked without Divine Or substance.
Essence or body in Gods Mercy in the Divine Tincture: viz. in the ninth number
N. 34. and waits for the last Judgment, wherein God will restore in the
Tincture all that which Adam lost: But the works which it has done here, will
not pass through the fire, but the Dark Magic fire has swallowed them up
into its Mystery in the Dark world; let this be told thee O Man.

Souls Eternal Habitation: number 35.
201. After the ninth Number, stands the souls Eternal Habitation noted
with the N. 35. which signifies that these escaped souls, are yet in God, in
the Angelical world, but without their works, and they cannot so highly
attain the Glance of the Majesty, as those which Or here.
in this life have clothed themselves with the power of God. The word
Habitation enters into the Liberty, without Nature, as also above it the word
Image does. For the soul must stand in Nature, but the habitation of the Image
is without Nature in the Divine Liberty.

Angelical World: number 36.
202. Bevond the word Habitation, stands Angelical world N. 36. signifying
the whole Or place.
Court of Angels or Thrones or Principalities.
Princely Thrones in the Liberty of the Divine Majesty, whereas their root, is
in Nature but is not Or acknowledged.
felt.

Proud Devil: number 37. Will of the Devil Lucifer: number 38.
203. At the left hand in the upper space, N. 37. stands proud Devil, with
two Or Legs.
lines: one reaching to be upon the Character Q, N. 4. and the other reaching
up above the Great Mystery of the Ternary, where stands Will of the Devil
Lucifer N. 38. Here the Devils fall is to be considered.

204. He has driven his proud will from the line of the Cross upwards, and
would domineere over the Mystery of the Divine wisdom by Or reason, or in Wit,
craft, and fury.
cunning subtilty and wrath, in the power of Fire, and Or inflame.
kindle the Mystery of the Ternary, that he might be Lord, (as indeed he did
kindle the Essence in the Mystery: where from Earth and stones proceed) and
would feign have flowen out above the Mystery of the Ternarie N. 38. as still
at this very day he desires to fly out above the highest Thrones of Angels.

Abyss of the Dark world: number 39. Eternal Hell of Devils: number 40.
205. And hence it followed that he was thrust out from the Divine Mystery,
from the highest Thrones, into the dark Magic fire, and is thrown down
beneath ( viz. into the Abyss of the Dark world; N. 39.) where he must dwell
without the Principle in the horror of Fire: (that is, in the first three
forms Or till fire or before the fourth form which is fire it self.
of Fire) in the Anguish: and there he has his Hell, as below N. 40. is to be
seen, and thither also do the damned souls fall, where to Eternity they
cannot see God.

The other line of the Cross upwards.
206. Over that line N. 1. above stands Abyss Eternity, signifying the
Liberty without the Principle, and thereby is Or understood.
meant, the Mystery of the Eternity, wherein every Creature stands in its
own source, in its own fire, whether in Darkness or in Light, and has no
other light but what shines Or in the Creature it self.
in it self, and it also comprehends that light Or beside it self outwardly.
without it self: Both worlds, viz. the Light and Dark world are in one
another: but the Light is not attained, except a creature be capable Or to
receive it.
of it.

207. There are Angelical Thrones, which we know nothing of, our knowledge
reaches only In Locum, or space, or bounds.
unto the place of Or that.
this world, so far as the kindling in the Creation did reach, and For a
resemblance of it.
therefore this wheel is made with the Cross in it.

SON; number 41. and of the Heart.
208. Over the upright line stands SON N. 41. and at the left Angle or
Point N. 9. FATHER, and at the right line N. 14. HOLY GHOST: signifying, the
Persons and birth of the Holy Or Triplicity.
Trinity: The in the Cross is the Center, and signifies the Eternal band of
the Or Threenesse.
Trinity.

209. The word SON, N. 41. signifies the Word, which the Eternal FATHER
always speaks from Eternity in the Light and Dark world, according to the
property of each source.

210. But the Three Persons are free from the Cross and touch not the line,
which signifies, that God is free from Nature, and is not comprehended Or by.
in Nature, but he dwells in himself, and indeed also in Nature, but is not
comprehended by that which does not Give up it self to him.
yield it self into him.

Of the Heart in the Cross.
211. The Heart in the Cross signifies, first, that the Heart of God has
manifested it self in Nature Or with.
by the Principle of Fire, whence the Majestic Light arises: secondly, it
signifies the Manifestation in the Humanity, wherein the Heart of God has
manifested it self with a Humane Heart, and how that humane Heart has
obtained the comprehension of the Holy Trinity: as it is the Center in the
Cross; where we must understand the Inward man, viz. the Inwward Heart.

212. And we may see that the HOLY GHOST at the Right line, N. 14. goes forth
from the Heart in the Light world: which signifies that the HOLY GHOST
dwells in the Newborn Heart ( viz. in the Image,) and continually brings
the Will of the Image into the Divine Light world: and as this Heart in the
Cross is united Or with.
to the Holy Trinity: so must the Humane Heart ( Or we mean.
understand the Inward man) be united Or with.
to the Deity that God may be all in all in him, even will and deed.

213. But the word SON, number 41. standing above over the line of the Cross
severed from the Heart, signifies that the Man Christ, is become Lord Or over
All.
of All, and is King over this whole Circle: For God has manifested himself
in the Humanity, and this Man comprehends the whole Divine Or substance.
Essence in him: for there is fullness, there is God, and the Divine Or know,
or acknowledge.
Essence, in him and without him: we can find God no where else but in the Or
substance.
Essence of Christ, therein Or Deity.
is the whole fullness of the Col. 2.9.
Godhead bodily.

Heaven; number 42.
214. The word Heaven upon the upright line of the Cross, number. 42.
signifies, first, that heaven is in the Man Christ and also in us, and that we
must enter by his Cross and Death into him, in his Heaven which is himself,
for upon the Cross Heaven is opened again and borne anew Or to us.
in us. Secondly, it signifies, that the true Divine Heaven is an Habitation
For.
of the Divine Desire, viz. of the Divine Magia; Therefore it cannot be said
that we enter into it, but that we are begotten Or into it.
in it, Or by.
out of Gods Fire in the Divine Or substantiality.
Essentiality, and no otherwise but upon the Cross, viz. through and in the
Birth of the Holy Trinity.

Pure Element; number 43.
215. The words Pure Element, number 43. upon the upper line of the Cross
signifies the internal world, out of which the External, with the four
Elements, is brought forth, and its Or substance.
Essence stands in the internal root.

Holy Ghost; number 44. Son: number 45.
216. Moreover it is to be noted, how Viz. pure Element.
those words stand, begin and end: for they begin at the outward Circle at the
left hand, where above number 5. the Holy Ghosts Character V stands and below
number 8. Or Being. or substance.
Essence, and they go through the two Circles at the Right hand, to the Viz.
the space between the second Circle and the third.
second space; which signifies the Original of the pure Divine Element, the
Habitation and Or substance.
Essence whence it arises: viz. from the Spirit of the Eternal Mystery in
the Divine Essentiality; viz. in the Essence of the Great Mystery: and yet it
is manifest only in the second Principle, viz. in the Essence of the Son and
Holy Ghost, as above at the Circle on the Right hand may be seen, number 44.
and 45.

Father: number 46. Holy Spirit of Divine Or Wit, or Reason.
Wisdom and understanding; number 47.
217. The Pure Element is the working in the True Heaven, and it shuts it
self in and up with the Cross; it is the springing or stirring in the Fire
and in the Heaven of Light, whence the Divine Essentiality (understand the
Essence; and not the Spirit of God) is a life: for it reaches not into the
Essence of the Father, number 46. below which Circle there stands Divine
wisdom: but the Holy Or Ghost.
Spi it, number 47. gives Divine Or Wit, or Reason.
wisdom and Or knowledge.
understanding.

218. The Element is an Or substance.
Essence in respect of the Deity, as the life in the Flesh Must be taken to be.
is in respect of the soul; For the Tincture is higher and gives the Ens of
the Spirit, wherein the Light-fire is understood.

Humanity, Flesh: number 48.
219. Under the words Pure Element on the upper Or stroke.
line of the Cross, number 27. Death stands, and the Word begins at the
left Circle, and goe^h through the Cross and through the first Circle at the
Right hand. There look upon both the outward Circles, that at the left and
that at the righ^ above and below, and then thou shall quickly find what the
Or Jurisdidiction.
Right of Death is, and that it is the dying source in the Magic fire, and
holds the Essentiality captive in it self, as at the left hand below number
8. and at the right, number 48. may be seen: and then above at this Circle
number 44. and at the left above, number 5. is seen that the spiritual life
goes and sprouteth forth through Death, and possesses the highest Circle. For
whatsoever will attain the Divine life, must go through the dying Magic Fire
and subsist therein, as the Heart on the Cross must subsist in the Or Divine
fire.
Fire of God.

220. Moreover we must know, that in Adam we have turned our selves away from
the Cross, and are above the Cross with our lust and Desire, number 23. and
gone with our will into Or own Regiment.
a self Government, and now Death has captivated us in it self: we must
therefore sink down from Death upon the Cross, upon the line of Christ into
the Heart again, and be borne anew in the Heart, or else Death retains us
captive: For Death stands now upon the line of the Cross: but at the
Judgment it shall be given to the Dark world: For our will must now enter into
Rest through the Death on the Cross, but the outward Cross shall be done
away, and then death shall be made a scorn.

221. Thirdly it signifies, that the life of God in Christ, made death a A
show.
spectacle upon the Cross, when death was destroyed on the Cross Or In.
by the Dying of Christ, where life grew up through death, and the Heart
yielded it self into the Middle ( viz. into the Center) as a Conqueror of
Death.

Paradise; number 49.
222. Under the Heart, number 49. stands Paradise: the word begins at the
outward Circle on the left hand, where above number 5. is the Spirit of the
Great Mystery of the Abyss of Eternity, viz. V. and below at the same Circle
number 8. Essence is written, and it goes through the Cross, and at the right
hand through all the three Circles, and into the Liberty; which signifies the
Or Place.
Station of Paradise: It arises in the Mystery of Eternity and grows up
through the outward world, and also through the Light world, hidden in the
outward world, and manifest in the second Principle in the Light world, and
therefore that word goes through all the Three Circles; signifying the
Original of the humane body.

Divine Or substantiality.
Essentiality; number 50.
223. For in this Place, out of this Essentiality was Adams Body (understand
the outward Body) created according to the third Principle, and the Inward body
(understand the body of the Image,) out of the heavenly part in the Light
world, out of the Divine Essentiality, as it is set down at the right hand
near Paradise, number 50.

Christ's Flesh; number 51. 52.
224. That Divine Essence (understand Essence, not Spirit) is enclosed in the
wisdom of God, and the Heavenly Tincture is in it; For this Essence brought
Gods word (which became Man, Into.
in Mary,) into her Essentiality ( viz. in the body of the Image) which was
enclosed in Death; and in Viz. the Essentiality. Or substantiality.
it God and Man became one person: For this flesh is Christ's flesh according to
the Heavenly Part, therefore after Essentiality stands Christ's Flesh, number
51. 52.

225. Christ had such flesh in the Inward Man, as Adam had before Eve [was
taken out of him] when he stood in the Divine Image in Purity: and therefore
none can enter into Paradise except they obtain that flesh again that Adam
had before the fall, and Christ in his Incarnation: Therefore we must all be
Regenerated.
borne anew out of the Heart upon the Cross, and put on Christ.

Mystery; number 53.
226. Under the word Paradise, number 53. stands Mysterium.
Mystery, and the word arises at the left hand in the second Circle, where
above at the same Circle number 4. the Character O stands, and below
Principle and Fire, number 7. and it goes to the right hand through the
Cross, and through the first Circle at the right hand: This rightly shows
man's creation according to the body.

227. For, the body is a mystery taken out of the Inward and outward world,
from above and beneath: understand out of the Matrix of the Earth: this is the
Matrix of the Earth; out of this Principium.
Principle The Earth.
it is created, and we see that it was created out of the Inward and outward Or
substance.
Essence (that is, out of the Dark and Light world) and is mixed with Evil
(that is, with wrath) and also with Good.

Wonder; number 54. Angel; number 55. Spirit; number 56.
228. But Man was created out of the Mystery an Image and similitude of God,
for Or a wonder of God.
a Divine Wonder: Therefore at the right hand number 54. there stands Wonder,
for he was a wonder of all Essences, a Lord of all Essences, taken out of all
Essences: and he was an Angel in the Inward Image: as next the word Wonder,
there stands Angel in the Liberty, number 55. for his spirit dwelt in the
Liberty of God, that is, in the Majesty: as after the word Angel there stands
Spirit, number 56. which signifies every true Man, viz. the first before the
Fall, and the second in Christ, into whom he must enter again, or else he
remains separated from God.

Four Elements; number 57.
229. Under the word Mystery there stands at number 57. Four Elements,
which arise at the outward Circle on the left hand, and go to the right hand
through the Cross, and through two Circles; which signifies the outward
world, which arises as an Or Outbirth.
Effluence out of the inward Essence of the outward Circle; and brings its
wonders into the Mystery, first into the second Principle into the first two
Circles; for it should not go with its Essence through the third Circle at the
right hand, into the Liberty, but in the Principle pass into the Mystery, and
be Or Refined. or purified.
tried in the Principle, viz. in the Fire: for there is the limit of Separation.

The Souls Joy In the Holy Ternary or Trinity.
in Ternario Sancto; number 58.
230. Above at the second Circle on the right hand number 45. stands Son,
who is the Judge and Or Separatour.
Arbitratour, and below at the same Circle stands, Souls Joy in Ternario
Sancto: signifying, that the soul shall have Joy in its works, which it has
brought into the inward Mystery in the Angelical world, and which it has
wrought in the four Elements to the praise of God: for the four Elements
stand with their root in the Great Mystery.

231. And were not the Angelical Earth.
Earth come into such a corrupt state and Condition, and if the poison of the
Devil and his kindling had not procured it: it had been one Essence in the
other three Elements, as in the Heavenly Essence it now is.

Spiritual Bodies Habitation: number 59.
232. Adam has swallowed this morsel, and thereby lost his Angelical form:
For the four Elements should be hidden in him, and he should live but in the
one Element in Divine Power, and know nothing of Evil, as at the right hand in
the Liberty, number 59. there stands the Spiritual bodies Habitation: and
there should the body of the Image (that is, the body of the soul) dwell, but
it was hindered, it must under the Earth, and be shut up in the Earth.

Earth; number 60.
233. Under the words Four Elements stands Earth number 60. signifying that
Earth is wholly slipped out or fallen off from the inward world, for the word
Earth touches neither the left nor the right Circle, it is as it were dead,
but the Cross goes through it, signifying, its Restoration: that the Humane
Earth is Regenerated on the Cross, and that the Heavenly Divine Essence shall
be severed from the Essence of the Dark world by the Divine Fire, where then
there shall be new Earth in a Heavenly source, form, Essence and property, and
that which is in the Earth hidden shall spring up again in the heavenly part:
and here the Resurrection of Man is to be considered, and further it is to be
considered, that the Earth is placed thus in the Abyss, for it reaches no
Principle, therefore it must vanish.

Earthly Man; number 61.
234. Under the word Earth stands number, 61. Earthly Man, there the Cross
is between the words, which signify the fallen Earthly Man, that is, fallen
under and into the Earth; that is, he is fallen Or to the Earth as to his own
home. Or to the subject to it.
to be the Earths; and the Cross parts the words Earthly and Man, for Man
shall be severed from the Earth again, and enter into his Eternal part,
whether it be into the Light or Dark world.

Wonder; number 62.
235. Under the line of the Cross stands, number 62. Wonder: which
signifies that the Evil Wonders and also the Evil part of the Earth, shall
Or in.
at the Judgment of God, (when God shall make separation) fall As to its own
place.
home to the Abyss of Darkness, and be the Earth for all Devils and Or Evil.
wicked people to dwell together upon: for the Abyss stands under it, number
1.

Babell; number 63.
236. Next to that word Wonder stands, number 63. Babel, signifying that
Babel is only a Wonder of the Abyss, and she works only Wonders in the
Abyss.

Or self Reason.
Own Reason in Babell; number 64.
237. A little above, under the Circle at the right hand, after Earthly Man,
number 64. stands Own Reason in Babel, which goes about the Circle of the
second Principle, and goes along in its own Power under the Divine world, it
supposes it self to be in God, and that it serves God, and yet it is without
God in it self, and teaches and does its own Matters only, it rules the
outward world according to its own Reason without the Spirit and Will of God,
even according to its own self-will only. Therefore it goes about the Light
world flattering, and gives God Or good.
fair words, but remains without God still in the Abyss and enters into it.

Wonder of the Great Folly; number 65.
238. Under Own Reason, number 65. stands Wonder of the Great Folly,
signifying Babell: which has found all Or Inventions.
Arts, Cunning deceit, fallacies.
subtleties, and Feats or tricks.
devices, and lost it self: it seeks Gold and loses God, it takes Earth
for Gold, Death for life, and that is the greatest folly that can be found in
the Or Being of all Beings.
Essence of all Essences, as is enough demonstrated in other places.

The Conclusion.
239. Thus we see where our home is; not in this world but in the two inward
worlds, in which of them we Or converse.
trade here in this life, into the same we enter when we dye; we must leave the
outward: we must be newborn only on the Cross.

240. Babell has wholly turned it self away from the Cross; which signifies
proud men wedded to their own Wit and Reason who rule themselves by their
witty folly.

241. The Earthly Man upon the Cross, number 61. signifies that simple flock
of people, which yet hang to the Cross of Christ, and are at length
regenerated through the Cross.

242. But Reason has also rent it self off from the Cross By taking its own
pleasure, and makiag Laws according to its own power, though against right.
by own pleasure, own Power and Laws, and that is the Wonder of Folly which
the very Devils do mock at.

243. The Reader should consider this further; for there lies much under it,
it has the understanding of all the three worlds; behold thy self therein, it
is a most true Glass; for the Ternarie is a Cross, and it has two Kingdoms
in One, which part themselves by sinking through Death.

244. Therefore the Devil would be above God, and therefore God became Man,
that he might bring the soul out of the Wrath, through death into another
life, into another world, which yet remains in the first, but it turns the
back to it, as this Figure is: and the Cross stands between the two
Principles, and goes from the Fire-life into the life of Light.

245. Understand us thus my beloved friend; the soul has its Original in the
fire-life (for no Spirit subsisteth Or sine, absque.
without the source of the fire:) and it goes out from it self with its own
will through Death: it accounts it self as dead, and sinketh it self down
as dead, and so falls with its will through the Principle of Fire, into the
Divine light Eye, and there it is the Chariot of the Holy Ghost, whereon he
rides.

246. But when it will go [of] it self, then it continues in its own
Fire-nest, in the Original, wherein it was awakened, as Lucifer did: for it is
awakened at the beginning of the Cross at the left hand, as is to be seen in
this Figure, and that is its Original, as shall be further mentioned hereafter.

247. The soul.
It is a whole Figure of the Cross: according to the outward Image of the body
it resembles a Crosse-Tree, the body having two Arms, signifying two
Principles, and the body in the midst, which is a whole Person: The Heart is
the first Principle, and the Brain is the second, the Heart has the soul
Viz. seated in it.
, and the brain the Spirit of the soul: and it is a new child, and yet not a
new one neither, the stock is from eternity, but the branches grow out of the
Stock.

248. And though it has not been a soul from Eternity, yet it has been
known from Eternity in the Virgin of the Divine Wisdom, upon the Cross; and
in the Root it belongs to God the Father, in the soul to God the Son, and
in the Will to God the Holy Ghost.

249. Seeing then its will could not stand in the Father (but would domineere;
and so it fell into the fire of Wrathfulnesse) therefore the Father gave it to
the Son, and the Son took it into himself, and became Man in it, and
brought it by the Verbum Fiat.
Word F^a^ into the Majesty, into the Light again: for the Son brings it
through the Anger and Death into the Eye of Holiness again, at the right hand:
into another world in God to the Angels; whereof there shall be further mention
made hereafter.

Now we come again to the sixth Form of Fire.
250. Know then, wherefore we have set the Cross here; the. X.
Cross is otherwise the number ten, when we number in the order of Reason: But
according to the two Principles where the Eye appears parted, the Cross
should be between the fifth and sixth form, where Light and Darkness part.

251. But you must know, that God is both the beginning and the End, and
therefore we put the Cross at the End according to Reason: for there we go
through Death into life, it is our Resurrection.

252. Again, the Number X or 10.
Ten, is the first and also the last, and through it is death, and after death
Hell, viz. the Wrath of the Darkness; which is Or Extra Crucem.
without the Cross, for it falls again into the A, and the Creator is in
the A, into which Lucifer would feign have insinuated himself, but he is
driven out into Darkness, which is his Kingdom in the source.

253. You must understand, that we mean by the twofold Eye, a Round Globe cut
in two, wherein the Cross stood from Eternity, it cannot be drawn in any
portraiture, because the halfes are so in one another, they are one and yet
two: the Spirit only understands this, and whosoever does not enter through
death upon the Cross, into Regeneration, (that is, into the Divine Body) he
understands not this: and let him leave it Or unmastered.
uncensured, or else he will be Or make himself a Devil in so doing.
a workman and censurer for the Devil: we would have the Reader faithfully
admonished; for it is most certain.

254. For this figure contains the whole Ground as deep as a Spirit in it
self is: and the Reader cannot know it without Or right Eyes, viz. Spiritual
Eyes.
true Eyes; words cannot be set according to its right order, for the first is
also the Last, and the middlemost goes through all; and is not known but in
it self, Therefore searching is not the best way to find the Mystery in: But
to be borne Or of God.
in God is the right way to find it: for without The New Birth.
that, all is but Babell.

255. All lies in the will and in the earnestness, viz. that the will enter
into In Magiam.
Magic, for the Eternity is Magical; all things come to Essence out of
Magic: for in the Eternity in the Abyss is Nothing; But that which is, is
Magic.

256. From Magic comes Philosophy, which sounds the Magic, and seeking
finds Astrology therein Eternally; and Astrology again seeks His cause
and Ruler.
its Master and Maker: viz. Astronomy, the Sulphur and Mercurium
Sulphur and Mercury, which has its own Principle, and therein is the third
Magic, viz. the Medicus.
Physician; who seeks the Or disease which destroys the health.
corrupter and would heal it; but he finds the fourth Magic, viz. the
Theologus.
Divine, who seeks the The curse of God.
Turba in all things, and would heal the Turba; but he finds the Eye of the
first Magic, and there he sees that all is the wonder of Magic: then he
leaves off from seeking, and is a Magician: (...). Matthew. 2.1.
Magus in the first will; for he sees he has all power to find and to make
what he will: and then he makes himself an Angel, and remains in himself,
and so he is free from all other things, and continues Eternally: This is the
highest Ground of the Essence of all Essences.

257. Although the Whore of Babell will by no means relish it, yet we speak
from good ground and say: that Babell and her children are Adulterous.
borne of whoredom, in their Magia. Philosophia. Astrologia. Astronomia.
Medicina. Theologia.
Magic, Philosophy, Astrolog^e, Astronomy, Physic, and Divinity; Babell is
the true Child of none of these, she is a Refractory proud Bastard. We have
known her in the A and O, searching for Philosophy and Astrology, and have
Or found.
known her to be a Whore in all Specula mirrours, or looking Glasses, or
Expositions, representations, and illustrations, and similitudes in her
teachings.
Glasses, she commits whoredom in all Glasses.

259. She says she is the Eye, but she has a Or squint-Eye.
false Eye, that glimmereth out of her whoredom, in Pride, Envy, and Anger,
and her seat in the Magic is the Or back turned.
averse left Eye: she boasts upon the Cross, but she enters not into the
Center, she will not go through Death into life.

260. She says, I live, and yet has an unrighteous life, but that is her true
life, if she would continue in it alone to her self; But she oppresses the
Children that are borne Or live in Patience and R^signation.
upon the Cross, and treads them under her feet.

261. Therefore the Cross has bent its Bow, and will shoot away Babell from
the Cross: The Spirit of the Wonders declares this in the Magic. (The first
Cross is the first Principle, and it will shoot away Babell from the second
Principle.)

The seventh Form of Fire.
262. One Magic always proceeds from the other, and is the Glass and the
Eye of the other, wherein the wonders are known and propagated; for in the
Abyss there is nothing; but in the Magic is all, each Glass is a Center, but
yet its own, for, the lust Or longing.
seeking, and Desire, brings it forth: it is the Model of the first.

263. For when I search to the beginning of the Essence, then I find the Eye
which is God: which is a desiring will of Eternity, which enters into it
self, and seeks the Abyss in it self.

264. It is in Nothing, but it is the Glass of the Abyss; it seeks it
self, and finds it self; and that which is found seeks again a Model,
wherein it can seek, find, and see it self: and that proceeds so far
till it comes to the Number X. 10.
ten.

265. Then the last finds the first again in it self, and so the last
becomes the Model and Glass of the First, and the first of the last, and so
it becomes an Eternal Band, and it stands in the will, in the desiring,
seeking and finding, and the Great Mystery.
Mysterium Magnum is included in this Essence.

266. But now the middlemost in the Desire wills to have a Or satiating.
fulfilling, wherein it may Rest, or else all would be in an anguishing source:
and the Desiring draws forth the Middlemost of All forms, wherewith it
satiateth its hunger, wherewith also it is in Joy in it self in perfection,
and so out of the Anguish there comes a Love, a satiating of the source, and
the Middlemost is Sulphur, wherewith the Spirit Or quickneth, or enliveneth.
Refreshes it self in the will, for Sulphur has two forms in it, viz. Phur,
Power, Sul: Light.
power and Light.

267. And this together is the Essence borne out of all forms, it is Materia.
Substantiality.
Matter, Essentiality, corporality, the Divine Body, Christ's heavenly flesh,
and it is the full satiating of the Spirit in the O, also it is the Rest, and
the manifestation of the Deity; it subsisteth in the Virgin Wisdom.

268. The Cross is its Or end, pitch, Bounds.
limit: and it is the Essentiality, which by sinking enters into Death, as is
mentioned before: where the Wrath remains in Death; and it is Or quiet.
still as a Death or a Nothing, and the life sprouteth up out of it, in another
Principle.

269. It self is not the Principle, but the Principle is borne in it, all
Glasses of the Magic are manifested in it, and all the wonders of the Or
Genitrix, or Bearer.
Begettresse, it contains the Mysterium Magnum, and out of it the Spirit
opens the Wonders of Eternity: the Spirit gives it the Essences, for it is
the food for the hunger of the Spirit.

270. It is an Essence of Wonders, without Number and End, also it has no
Beginning, for the Spirit in the Desire makes it begin from Eternity, and it
continues Or in.
to Eternity: it is Or a.
the Body of the Ternary (which is called God) and the Or a.
body of Angels, so that the Spirit subsisteth in an Image; or else he would
not be known.

271. Thus he knows himself in the Image, and seeks the best Magic, and
he finds what he seeks, and eats it, and thereby gives his will to the
Divine Body, so that there is an Eternity in the Holy Principle.

272. For the Wonders arise in the will of the corporeal Spirit; which wonders
take hold of the Spirit of Eternity, viz. of the Holy Ghost, and thus there is
a sound and song proceeding from the Eternal wonders, for the Will of the
Corporeal Spirit is therein.

273. And in these seven Forms the Joy of the Deity is increased and
perfected, for it is a satiating of the Etenall desire, and it is the Eternal
food.

274. But seeing all Essences arise from fire: Therefore we will clearly set
before you the Mysterium Magnum, and show you Paradise, if any to whom this is
told and discovered, will be blind, let him adventure To per sh.
it with Babell.

275. You know that every life consists in fire and Water, and the
Essentiality is its Body, and the Body proceeds from the power of the Spirit:
for it is the food of the Spirit, and the Spirit again is the food of the
body, and the highest and greatest Or Nourishment.
Nutriment is in himself: for the outward body could not sustain him, if the
true life were not in himself.

276. Now then Fire is the first cause of life, and Light is the second cause,
and the Spirit the third cause: and yet there is but one Essence, which closes
it self in one only Body, and manifests it self, and so finds by seeking.

277. And every Essence Is.
consists In.
of two Essences, viz. of an inward and an outward, one seeks and finds the
other, the outward is Nature, the inward is Spirit above Nature, and yet there
is no separation but in that which is included in a Time; there the Time
parts the limit; so that the End finds the beginning.

278. Thus you see also, how the true Essentiality arises from the Light: for
it is the satiating of the will: the water arises from the meekness of the
Light, for the Desire takes hold of the meekness and keeps it: because it
has a good Or taste.
relish: and so the meekness becomes Essential, and it is an Essence of the
Fire, a satiating of the desiring Wrath, a quenching of the Wrath, and a
corporality of the Fire: for when the body Or perishes, or dies, or
corrupts, or departs.
is dead, then its Spirit is in the beginning; in that which gave a beginning
to it, it is in that Glass.

279. Now then as the source is twofold, so also the water is twofold; viz. an
outward and an inward, the one belongs to the Spirit, the other to the
outward Life; the outward is as it were a Death, and the inward is the life of
the outward, for the outward stands between Wrath and Paradise, in the Death
that is sunk down into the Center in a thing.
insunken Death, and the Inward is Paradise it self: for the Spirit grows up
therein out of the Eternity.

280. You may very well see that this is true, as follows. Observe the Summer
and Winter, Heat and Cold, and your eyes will soon be opened, if you be borne
not Or without.
outwardly but within your self, with a true Magic will to find God; for it
is very Visible.
plain.

281. For the Water in the Deep arises from the fire, not from the Wrath but
from the Light; for the Light proceeds from the fire and has a Longing,
Sucking, Drawing.
seeking of its own, it seeks a Glass, to behold it self in, and it
seeks an Habitation, and draws it Or in.
by its desire into it self, and dwells therein, and that which is drawn in
is water which receives the Light: else if the light did not dwell in the
water, the deep of the world could not comprehend the Light: The water is the
satiating of the Desire of the Light.

282. And the water again seeks the Glass, and would have a House to dwell
in, and that is flesh; as you see, the water receives the shadow of all bodily
substances, so that the body may be seen in the water, and that is, because
the seeking of the Water has captivated it.

283. Furthermore you see herein, the End of Nature; For the Eye finds its
Life in the Water: and so goes back into the seventh Form, and sees its body
in the Water: the Outward desires no more, this body desires no other body
more in the outward, but it looks back after its Mother, of which a Glass is
a true Example, which is water and fire, and it receives the Image very
plainly.

284. And thus you see, that the End goes back again, and seeks the
beginning and no further Or outwardly.
in the outward. For this world has a limit, and is included in Time, and
hasteneth to the limit, and there the End finds the beginning, and this world
is as a Model or Glass in the Beginning: by this you may find somewhat of
the Mystery, and behave your selves well in the beginning, that you may be
found to be a wonder in the Love of God.

285. And know that the second Or Form.
kind of water is in the Spirit, it is the Glass of its father, of its maker,
which dwells in the Spirit, and is found only by its Maker, it self finds
not it self: for so long as a thing goes Outward.
forward, there is no finding in the inward, but the Spirit which dwells in
the inward, that finds it self in the outward.

286. Yet the outward life finds not the inward, unless it have the Spirit
of the inward; and then it finds by the inward Spirit, and so the outward
life speaks of the inward, and knows it not; but the inward Spirit fills
the outward, so that the outward is as it were a mouth, and the Inward has,
and produces the Word, and so the Inward Kingdom is manifest in the outward
by the sound: which is a Wonder.

287. The Inward is a Prophet: and the outward apprehends it not, but if he
do apprehend it, he has the Essentiality of God in him, that is, the Divine
flesh, Christ's flesh, the flesh of the Virgin, and yet the Prophet is in the
Spirit, but that flesh receives his power and virtue, and assures the outward
Man that he does nothing but what his Maker will have done, and such a
condition this pen is in, and no otherwise.

288. And thus we know the Foundation.
Ground of this world, that it is a figure of the Inward according to both the
Mothers, that is according to both the Fires, viz. according to the fire of
Wrath, and according to the fire of Light; The Sun is a Or Idea, or instance.
Model or Glass of the Light of Eternity, and the outward fire is a Glass of
the Wrath, and the Essentiality of them both is Water and Earth: the Resembles
the Father.
Earth is the Essentiality of Wrath, and the The Son.
water of the Light, and the The Holy Ghost.
Air of the Eternal Spirit; which is called, God, the Holy Ghost.

289. Yet you must know, that this world is not the Essence of Eternity, but a
figure, or a Glass of it; therefore it is said to be a peculiar Or third
Principle.
Principle, because it had its own life, and yet consists only in the Magic
seeking of the Inward.

290. The Verbum Fiat.
Word Fiat, is the Or Maker, or Ruler, or Orderer as an Artificer.
Master of the outward; for it keeps the outward in its conceived Glass; the
outward is not the Glass; but it is a similitude in which his Spirit does Or
contrive, form. Appear.
express it self, in works of wonder: that it might see the Wonders of both
fires; viz. of the Wrath and of the Light: and so continually brings the End
of all Essences into the Beginning: therefore this world Or is like a wheel
that turns round.
turns round; for the end continually seeks the beginning: and when it
finds the Wonders, then the End gives the Wonders to the beginning, and this
is the cause of the Creation of this world.

291. The life of every Creature was a Wonder before the beginning; for the
Abyss knew nothing of it: and the beginning of the Eye finds all, and
sets the Model in it self, so that it has an Eternal number, and
delights it self in the number of the Wonders.

The eight Form of Fire.
292. Seeing then an Essence consists thus in two Forms, the one of which,
takes an Abyssall, bottomless.
unsearchable beginning into it self, and keeps it Eternally: and the other
of them, is the Model of the Eternal, Or contrived. Or conceived. Or formed.
framed, and the body of it included in a limit: therefore the Turba must be
considered, which destroys the included, framed life again, and sets the
Model of the framed Wonders in the beginning again, and presents such a
thing to the beginning as was not from Eternity, but only in the framed Time.

293. My beloved friend, such things as these, are shown to you, and such as
you are, who seek the beginning: for your Mind is our Mystery; you should
seek it in Us, not in me; I, (the outward Man) have it not: but the Inward in
the Virgin, (wherein God dwells) has it, which Or calls it self twofold.
speaks of it self in the plural number.

294. My outward Man is not worthy of the Mystery; but God has so prepared
it, that he might reveal himself to you by that means, that you should know
him by some other means, and not say my wit has done it.

295. Because you are a very learned person, therefore you shall know that God
also loves the simple, and such as are contemned of the world, if he seek God
as I have done, and you shall know also that the true Invention consists not
in Art, but in the Spirit and Will of God.

296. For this Hand is simple and accounted foolish in the Eye of the world, as
you know: and yet there lies such a Arcanum. Or an h^dden treasure.
secret therein, as is incomprehensible to Reason.

297. Therefore have a care, pour Oil into the wounds, that require healing;
and consider what Christ Mark 10.23, 24, 25.
says: how hard it is for that man to enter into the Kingdom of God, who is
entangled with Or cares for the belly.
worldly cares, having great power and honor.

298. You shall not find this plant among the high ones of this world; for You
have no power with them.
you cannot, you are a Mystery to them: the Spirit it self seeks the
beginning: look to it, play not the Hypocrite; (for the beginning is
Paradisicall:) that the impure enter not into the pure, and at last the Serpent
beguile Eve again.

299. Let no Soothing.
dissimulation be in you, but plain dealing, yea and no: and fear not, for
that which is Eternal will continue, and the distemper is nothing else but the
Turba, which as a destroyer always insinuates it self, beware of that, (for
the Old Serpent is subtle) and have a care, that you may be pure both in the
beginning and in the End.

300. For this work endures no dissembling, it has a clear ground, also it
belongs not to the Turba, but to the beginning of the Or Clarity.
Glory: therefore, beware of those that are borne with a wolvish disposition;
whose Spirit is a subtle Serpent; we speak freely to you.

301. Every thing that has a beginning, is sought by the beginning, for the
beginning seeks through the Deep, and would find the Or bottom.
Ground: and if the beginning finds the Ground, and that there be a limit in
a thing, then the beginning proceeds to the limit, and leaves the Or former.
first, and seeks further till it find the Abyss: and then it must remain
in it self, and it can go no further, for there is nothing beyond.

302. But if the beginning leave the first, then it is under the power of the
Turba, which destroys it, and makes it to be as it was in the beginning.

305. Then when the thing is destroyed, the Turba is naked without a body, and
yet seeks it self, and finds it self, but without Or substance.
Essence, and then it enters into it self, and seeks it self till it come
into the Abyss, and then the first Eye is found, whence it proceeded.

304. But seeing it is naked, and without Essence; therefore it belongs to
the Fire, for it puts it self into it, and in the fire is a Desire to seek
its own body again, and so the Or Original fire.
Fire of the beginning is awakened.

305. And herein we know the last Judgment, in the Fire, and the Resurrection
of the flesh: for the Turba desires the body which it had before, though
destroyed in the limit, and the desire of the soul was the life of the body.

306. But seeing there are two fires, therefore the Turba is known in a twofold
Or Form.
manner: in an incorruptible, and in a corraptible body: viz. the one in the
fire of Wrath, and the other in the fire of Light, Viz. in the light fire.
wherein we understand the Divine Body; and in the Wrathful fire the Earthly
body, which the Turba destroys, for the Turba finds the limit of it.

307. Now the Eternal fire in the Eye of God, is Understood to be.
both the fire of Wrath, and also the light-fire of Love: and you must
understand, that the spirit without a body must remain in the wrathful fire,
for it has lost its Or substantiality, or Body.
Essentiality; the Turba in the fire has swallowed it up.

308. But the Spirit which has a body, which the Turba could not devour,
remains for ever in the Essentiality, in the Divine Body, wherein his Spirit
is: which is the body in the love of God, which is the hidden Man, in the Old
Adamicall man, which has Christ's flesh in the corruptible body.

309. And thus we understand the soul, to be a life awakened out of the Eye
of God, its Original is in the fire, and the fire is its life: but if it go
not forth out of the fire with its will and Imagination into the Light, ( viz.
through the wrathful Death into the second Principle, into the fire of Love;)
then it remains in its own original fire, and has nothing for a body but
the Turba; viz. the Astringent.
harsh wrath in the Desire in the fire, a consuming, and a hunger: and yet an
Eternal seeking, which is an eternal Anguish.

310. But the soul which with its Desiring will, enters into it self: and
sinketh down in its Reason ( viz. in its Desire) and seeks not it self, but
the Love of God; its own fire is as it were dead: for its will which the fire
awakened is dead to the Fire-life, and is gone forth out of it self into the
fire of Love, that soul is fully in the fire of love; it has also the body of
the fire of Love, for it is entered into it, and is a great Wonder in the Divine
Body, and it is no more in it self, for it has mortified its will: and
therefore the Turba also is as it were dead, and the will of love does wholly
satiate the Original fire, and therein it lives Eternally.

311. But the souls which have awakened the Turba. they have lost the Image;
for the Turba has devoured it: and therefore such souls get bestiall Images
in the Wrath, and in Hell, according as the Turba is in them: as Lucifer gat
the Image of a Serpent: as the Will was figured here in this life; it remains
then Or in its true similitude.
naked as it is.

312. For the wrathful Turba always seeks the Image, but finds it not,
and therefore it figureth the Image according to the Will: for the Earthly
desires stick in the will: and that Image remains in the Wonders of God, in
the Eye of the wrathful Principle.

313. And here we understand that the eight Form is the Turba, which seeks
the Image: and if it find the limit of it, it destroys it, and enters into
the limit, and seeks further in it self, and finds at last the
Abominations of that which the soul has wrought in this life.

314. And also we understand here the Fire (which at last shall purge the Or
threshing floare. Matthew. 3.12.
floare) and the severe Judgment, and we understand that every fire shall
receive its Essence from the Turba; and also what that Turba is.

315. Where then the fire will devour the Earth, and draw the Elements with
the wonders in them, into the Beginning: where that which was at first will be
again, and the Elements become one: and every thing will represent its own
Wonders, every thing in that fire whereinto its will entered.

316. Hearken to this you Children of men, it concerns you: for no beast
proceeds from the Eternal beginning, but from the Model of the Eternal;
and its Spirit attaineth not the Eternal, as the soul of man does.

317. Also the corruptible body cannot possess the Eternal; it belongs to
the Turba: But the new man, borne of God, shall possess the Eternal: for he
is departed from the corruptible, and has put on God in Christ, he has the
Divine Body in the Old Body.

318. The Turba takes away the Earthly source, the outward body from the
Earth, remains in the Earth, but the will takes its works along with it
self: for they are in the new body, and follow it: therefore let him consider
what he does while he is here in this life.

The ninth Form of Fire, The great Severity.
Earnestness.
309. Seeing then we understand, that all things proceeded from the Beginning,
and that one thing thus proceeds always out of an other, and seeing we
understand, that the Fire is a cause of the Life, and that the life divides it
self into two parts, and yet corrupts not, only the outward life is that
which corrupts, it falls into the Turba, which destroys it: we are now
therefore to consider, wherein the inward Eternal life consists, and what
upholdeth it, that that body Corrupts or breaks not.
fades not, seeing Essentiality has a beginning; and yet we can say with good
ground, that it has no End: for it must have a Or sure foundation to uphold it.
ground, or else the Turba will have it, and that finds the limit.

320. The Eternal Body must not have a limit, but be free in the Abyss, in
the Eternal nothing, or else another Essence would again be in that Essence,
which would divide it and make a limit.

321. We have told you before, that all which shall endure for ever, must pass
quite through the Fire, for the Turba takes that which remains in the Fire;
now no Spirit is created In.
for the fire that it should remain in it.

322. Only the Turba has captivated many of them, but not from the Will of
God, for Gods Will is only Love, but the Turba is the Will of his Wrath: which
by its vehement hunger has gotten a great Dominion, wherein it has manifested
its Wonders: viz. the Devils and wicked souls of Men.

323. But the Eternal life consists in Meekness, and has no Death or Turba
in it; therefore we must say, that the soul and Spirit are not in the Turba,
especially the Or Image.
body of the soul: if it were, the Turba would destroy it.

324. This is only to be understood, as it is mentioned before, that the will
in the anguish source, in the fire (understand, the will of the soul) sinketh
down in it self as into Death, and May not.
cannot live in the fire, and so The Will.
it falls into another world: viz. into the beginning, or (as we may better
say) into the free Eternity, into the Eternal Nothing, wherein is no source,
nor any thing that Or makes.
gives or receives a source.

325. Now there is no dying in the will that is thus sunk down; for it is
gone quite out from the fiery beginning, in the Eye, and so brings its life
into another Principle, and dwells in the Liberty, and yet it has all the
Forms of the Essences, which arise from the fire, in it, but Or impercept^ble.
unperceived: For it is gone quite out from the fire.

326. And therefore the life of its Essences is in the Liberty, and it is also
desiring, and receives in the desire in its Essences, the power of the light,
which shines in the Liberty; which is power without Turba: For this fire is
only Love, which consumes not, but yet always desires and satiateth, so
that the will of the soul Gets, or a^tracteth.
puts on a body.

327. For the Will is a Spirit, and the soul is the great life of the Spirit,
which upholdeth the Spirit, and so the soul is Endu^d.
clothed with power, and dwells in two Principles, as God himself does, and
as to the outward life in three Principles, and is the similitude of God.

328. The inward Water in the spirit of the soul is the water of Eternal
Life; of which Christ said: John 4. ver. 14.
He that drink^th the water that I will give him, he shall never thirst: this
is that water.

329. And the Essentiality of the Spirit which the soul puts on, is
Gods-Christs-body, of which he says: He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, he Or dwells. Joh. 6.56.
is in me and I in him.

330. But the true Life in the Light of the Majesty, in the N^nth number, is
the Tincture of the Or Wisdom of God.
Virgin, it is a fire, and yet not a Fire, it burns but it consumes not, it
is the Love, the meekness, the humility; it is the life of God, and of the
Holy souls, and incorruptible life, and a Or infinite unfathomable.
groundless life; for it is in the Abyss in it self, it is in the Center of
it: which Center is its first life, and yet does not comprehend it, as the fire
does not comprehend the Light.

331. And thus the Ninth number, is the life in the fire of God, and it is Or
is called, or accounted the life in the presence of the Trinity.
the life which stands before the Ternarie: viz. an Angel standing before
the Cross Or to set forth.
for Gods works of Wonder, and Or to set forth.
the Heavenly Glory.

The 10. X.
Tenth Number and Form of Fire. The Gate Into the Holy Trinity.
in Ternarium Sanctum.
332. You know from Reason, that where there is a Root, there is a desiring
will, which is the Noble Tincture, that drives upwards, out of it self, and
seeks a similitude of its Form.

333. The Tincture is a Virgin, and is known in the Wisdom of God, in the
Wonders: it is Not one that is a bearer or bringer forth.
no begettresse, but an opener of the Wonders which are in the wisdom; it
seeks no Glass, but merely opens the Essences, that a whole similitude
may bring forth it self out of the Essences, it drives the twig out of the
Tree.

334. This we understand of Angels and the soul, they proceed from Gods
Essences, from the whole Tree, the Angels from two Principles: And the soul
with the body of the outward life from three Principles; and therefore Man is
higher then the Angels, if he continue in God.

335. And in the 10.
Tenth number at the Cross, the Angels and souls are Or first quickened, or
enlivened.
awakened, and incorporated into the Heavenly Essentiality; though you must
understand, that the Tenth number belongs to the place between the fifth and
sixth Form.
, in a Globe, and the Heart is in the midst in the Center: which is the Heart
of God: viz. the Word of God.

336. The Power in the whole Tree ( viz. the Pith in the wood) has the
Essences of the whole Tree: and thus God is a Spirit, and the Word is his
Heart, which he Speaks out of all, etc.
sounds forth from all powers and Wonders: Therefore Isaiah calls it a Isa.
9.6.
Wonder, Counselor, and Power, the Prince of Peace, as a Pacifier of the
Wrath, and an Eternal power of the Wonders; a Counselor of the begettresse.

337. For the Word upholdeth the Center of Nature, and is the Heart and Lord of
Nature, it is the begettresse in the Eye of God, a giver of Power, and it is
the strength of the Omnipotence, it holds the Center of the fire captive with
the Love-fire, so that the fire must be dark in it self, and the word only
has the Light-life.

338. We cannot find but that the Tenth number is a Cross, and it is the
Original of the By this Essence God himself is not meant, but the powers that
flow from him.
Essence of all Essences, which Essence divides it self into three
beginnings, as is mentioned before: each of which has its Essence, and they
are all in one another, and have no more but one Spirit.

339. And in the middle of the point is the Center, which is the cause of the
Life, and in the Center is the Light of the Majesty, out of which the Life
proceeds, viz. the second Principle, and out of it; the Tree of the Eternal
Life always grew from Eternity, and the twigs grew out of the Tree.

340. These twigs are the spirits of Angels, which indeed were not corporeal
from Eternity, but the Essences were in the Tree, and their Image appeared in
the Virgin of Wisdom from Eternity, for they were a figure from Eternity in
the Tincture, not corporeal, but only Essential without corporality.

341. And therefore this is the Greatest Wonder that the Eternity has wrought:
that it has Or created, or formed.
made the Eternal a Corporeal spirit, which thing no Reason can comprehend,
nor no sense find out, and it is Or not to be dived into by us.
unfadomable to us.

342. For no Spirit can sound it self: It sees well its deep even into the
Abyss, but it comprehends not its Former, or moulder.
Maker, it beholds him indeed, and diveth into him even to the Abyss, but it
knows not its Forming, or fashioning.
Making, this is only hidden to it, and nothing else.

343. For a child knows its Father and Mother well, but it knows not how
its Father made it; it is also as That is, as perfectly a Man. Quoad genus
humanum.
highly graduated as its Father: but it is hidden to it, how it was in the
seed: and though it sound that, yet it knows not the time and place; for it
was in the seed, in the Wonders, and in the Life a Spirit in the Wonders: And
here we are commanded to leave off diving any further, and to be silent.

344 For we are a Creature, and should speak but so far as belongs to a
Creature to know, in the inward and outward, in body and soul, in God, Angels,
Men and Devils; also in Beasts, Fowls, Worms, in Plants and Grass, in
Heaven and Hell, all this we are able to sound, but not our own Making.

345. And yet we know and find the first Fiat in Viz. our own Making.
that, though indeed we know not that which first moved God to create: we know
well the making of the Soul, but how that which Or stood.
was in its Essence from Eternity, is become moveable: we know no ground of
that: for it has nothing that could awaken that, and it has an Eternal Will;
which is without beginning, and unchangeable.

346. But if we should say, the Angels and souls have been from Eternity in
the Spirit: the propagation of the soul will not permit that, as we see by
experience: Therefore this is only Gods Mystery, and the creature should
continue in humility and obedience under God, and not soar higher, for it is
not God.

347. God is a Spirit from Eternity without Ground and beginning; but the
Spirit of the soul and of Angels, has a beginning, and are in Gods hand: the
Ternarie has the Or Fan.
casting shovell, which will purge the Or threshing-floare.
floare.

348. We must only have patience and humility in Obedience, here in this
life, or else our proceeding from God avails Nothing; the Devil was indeed
an Angel, but his Pride threw him into Darkness: let none climb We should
not go beyond Obedience, Patience, humility and Chastity, and live according
to our own self-will, and desire.
above the Cross, or if he do, he will fall into Hell to the Devil.

349. God will have children near him, and not Such as will domineere.
Lords, He is Lord and none else: we have received of his fullness, we are
borne out of his Essences, we are his true children, not step-children out of a
strange Glass, also not a similitude only, but children; the body is a
similitude, and the Spirit is a similitude of Gods Spirit, but the Or right.
true soul is a Child borne out of God.

350. Romans 8.16.
Gods Spirit witnesses to our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, not in
that manner, which Babell Imagines, or dreameth.
teaches: who would so willingly be God upon Earth: but our souls are
Children begotten of Gods seed, our heavenly body, which the heavenly soul Or
is clothed with all.
wears, comes out of the Divine Body, and is hidden from the Devil, and
the Old Adam.

351. Therefore my loving brother in the Divine body, know this clearly, and
it is our Answer to your first Question, whence the soul proceeds. It
proceeds from God out of Eternity without Ground and number, and endures in
its own Eternity; but the beginning to the moving of the Creature which is
done in God, that should be mentioned no further, only we give you to
understand thus much.

353. That the Ternarie longed to have children like it self out of it self,
and so has manifested it self in Angels, and in the soul of Adam, and is
become an Image: like a Tree which brings forth fruit, and bears a Twig out
of it self: for that is the due right of Eternity, and nothing else beside.

354. It is no strange Glass; but indeed one Glass out of the other, and one
Essence out of the other, and all seek the beginning, and it is all a Wonder.

355. This is the Entrance, and now we will answer the rest of the Questions:
but briefly, for you see already in this description all your Questions
Answered.
. But for your Longings sake, and to satisfy the simple, who have not our
knowledge, we will go through with them.

The second Question.
What are the Essences, Substance, Nature, and Property of the Soul?
1. THe Essences of the soul come out of the Center of Nature, out of the
Fire, with all forms of Nature; All the three Principles lie in the soul; All
that God has and can do, and that God is in his Or Trinity, Threenesse.
Ternarie, all this is in the Essences of the soul, as the virtue of a Tree is
in the twig that grows out of it.

2. The substance of the Soul is heavenly, created out of the heavenly Divine
Essentiality: yet the will of it is free either to demerse (...)

7. And in this twofold body (which was created in the sixth Day, in the sixth
hour of the Day, Note. Or Kingly.
in the same hour in which Christ was hanged on the Cross) after the body was
finished the a Royal soul was breathed in from within, by the Holy Ghost into
the heart, in the Holy Man, into its principle, like an awakening of the Deity.

8. The Trinity, or Number three.
Ternarie moved it self with the Creation, and breathing in of the soul, for
it was in the Center of the seed, as a bud Or of growing Essences.
growing from the Essences, and thus it was breathed into the Inward Center,
into the Inward Man, into the heavenly heart-bloud, into the water of the
Eternal life, with both the inward Principles.

9. And the outward Spirit ( viz. the Air) and the whole outward Principle,
with the Stars and Elements did cleave to the inward, and the outward Spirit
breathed its life At the same time.
in the same manner with the soul, through the nostrills into the Heart, into
the outward Heart, into the Adams first flesh.
Earthly flesh, which was not then so Earthy, for it came from the Matrix, from
the Sucking, drawing, or longing.
seeking, from which the Earth became corporeal.

10. And thus the Holy Ghost was carried upon the Chariot of the soul, upon
the inward Majestic Will, and moved upon the water: for the water comprehended
him not, and therefore he moved upon it, and in it, it is all one: and the
soul burned out from the blood of the Heart, as a light does from a candle,
and went through all the Three Principles, as a King through his Dominions.

11. And it could Rule powerfully over the outward Principle, if its will were
entered again into the Heart of God, into the word of the Lord.

12. But the Or Property.
source of the Wrath, also insinuated it self with the breathing in, viz. with
the Original of the soul.

13. So that the soul could not remain Gods Image, unless, it remained in
humility and Obedience, and yielded its will into Gods will, wherein it was an
Angel and the Child of God) or else it were very Or dangerous.
difficult for a Creature to rule such two Principles, as the wrathful and the
outward are, the outward being also borne out of the wrathful.

14. Therefore sure its Temptation was not only the biting of an Apple, nor
did it continue only for some few hours, but forty days, just so long as
Christ was tempted in the wilderness: (and that also by all the three
Principles) and so were the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, while Moses
was forty days in the Mount, when they stood not but made a Calfe.

The fifth Question.
How is the Soul peculiarly fashioned, and what is its Form?
1. WHen a twig grows out of a Tree, the form of it is like the Tree, indeed
it is not the stock and the root, but yet the form of it is like the Tree: so
also when a Mother brings forth a Child, it is an Image of her.

2. And this cannot be otherwise; for there is nothing else that can make it
otherwise, unless it belong to the Turba, which many times awakeneth a Monster
according to the Spirit of this world, according to its The Imagination, or
longing, or lusting of a woman with child,
inceptive Maker, as in the Monde signifies the Earthly Matrix of the
Elementary Macrocosme, in the Microcosme, wherein
the fiat makes a Makes a Monde Monstrum a Moon Monster, Monstum Lunare, or a
Lust-monster, such a Child, as is deformed by the Mothers wanting of her
longing.
Menstrous Monster in the Turba.

3. So we must understand that the soul is in the form of a Round Globe,
according to the Eye of God, through which the Cross goes, and which divides
it self into two parts, viz. into two Eyes, standing back to back; as we have
made the figure above with two Rainbowes, the Cross going through them both,
and with one point reaching upwards in the midst between the bows: which Or
signifies.
resembles a sprouting through the fire, through the Anguish as through Death,
and yet it is no Death, but a going forth out of it self into another source:
standing thus in the midst between the two bows, as a sprout springing out of
the Cross.

4. And the Arm of the Cross at the right hand, signifies that the Spirit of
the soul, enters into the Majesty of the Light, and cloatheth the soul, (
viz. the Center,) with Divine Essentiality.

5. The Arm at the left hand of the Cross signifies, that its original is
in the Fire, and it contains the first Principle, and so belongs to the
Father: and stands in the Original Eye, in the strong and eager power, as a
Lord and Ruler over Nature.

6. And the nether part of the Cross represents water: viz. humility or
Death: signifying that it should not domineere in the Fire, and inflame it
self, but should sink down in it self, and under it self before the
Majesty of God, and be as it were dead in its will, that God may live in it,
and the Holy Ghost lead and govern it, so that it may not do what Turba in
the fire will: but what the Will in Or Love.
Light wills.

7. Therefore its will should sink down into soft humlilty, in the presence
of God, and so it goes out from the Turba of the Fire, for its will is not in
it: and then there can be no Imagination which can bring forth such a Glass,
as in which it may behold it self in the Fire, and find that it is a Lord;
and so be proud, and rule it self by its own Might, as Lucifer did, and Adam
Paradise.

8. We mean thus, the soul in it self is a Globe with a Cross, and two
Eyes, an Holy Divine one, and a wrathful, hellish one in the Fire; this it
should shut and Or hiddenly.
secretly reign therewith, through the Anguish ( viz. through Death) in the
second Principle in Love.

9. And if Love embrace it, then the wrathful fire is as it were dead, and not
perceived, but it becomes the joyful life of Paradise: otherwise there would
be no life, nor Dominion in the Meekness, if the fire did not put it self
into it: but the still Eternity would remain without Essence: for all Essences
arise in the Fire.

10 And then thirdly, as to the whole Body, with all its members, the soul is
formed, as follows.

11. The soul is the stock or Root, resembling the Center of the Ternarie,
which is like an Eye, a Globe, a Cross, and its will (which proceeds from
the Eternal will) is a Spirit: which has the true soul Or under.
in its power.

And this Spirit opens the Essences in the fire and water, so that its whole
form seems like a Tree, having many twigs and branches, being distributed
into all the Branches of its Tree, which must be understood, as follows.

13. The Spirit parts it self into the whole body (we mean in the
Tincture) into all the Members, they are all of them its branches: The Spirit
of the soul resembles the whole Man, with every member.

14. And herein it is the true Image of God also, for the Holy Ghost dwells
in the Spirit of it, if it be faithful: if not, then the Devil dwells in
it: to which of these it gives it self, either to Covetousness, and
haughtiness, or to love and humility, to that it belongs.

15. But if it persevere in Malice, or abominations.
wickedness, and so loses God, then it loses the Cross, and its Eye is a
Hellish Eye, and its Turba introduces the Form, and i Model of an horrible
Beast into the Eye, and into the Will and Spirit.

16. Therefore Christ called the Pharisees, Mat. 23.33.
Serpents, and Generation of Vipers: for so the figure of their Spirit in their
Pride, and covetous will appeared to him: for they would be Lords of
themselves, and not the servants of God in Love and humility.

17. And so the figure of Antichrist in Babell appears, in the presence of
God like a Dragon with seven Heads, which are seven Spirits, upon which its
hypocritical spirit rides in the Image of Man, in the Abyss; Viz. the Spirit.
It will be accounted an Angel, and yet is a Monster of a true child of God,
it bears the Name, but its heart is that Beast, Apocalypse 12. It is desirous
of God, and also of the Devil: therefore it is such a Monster, as is like a
Man, and yet contains the Devil in it.

18. O child of Man, fly away, the door is open, the Turba is come, it will
destroy this Image, if you fly not you must go with it; there is no other
Medic ne, or Counsel.
remedy or help but to seek the true Image in Love, or else there remains
nothing but Tribulation and Death, says the Spirit of Wonders.

19. And this is now our direct Answer to this Question. That the soul in the
first Principle according to the Original, has the form of an Eye, and yet
twofold like a Heart, wherein there is a Cross.

20. And in the second Principle it is a Spirit, and a whole Image as the
outward Man is.

21. And in the third Principle it is a Glass of the whole world; all
whatsoever is contained in Heaven and Earth, every property of every Creature
lies therein; For that Glass is like the firmament and Stars.

22. This is such a Crown, as in which the How long he shall live.
number of the End of the life of the outward Man is contained, and all
whatsoever fortune or misforune can happen outwardly from the Spirit of this
world.

The sixth Question.
What is the Power and Ability of the Soul?
1. WE know, that whatsoever comes out of the Abyss, and is the ground of it
self, can in it self do all things, for it is its Or subsisteth from it
self.
own Essence, it makes it self.

2. But though the soul be a twig out of the Tree, yet now it is Or entered
into the condition of a Creature.
become a creature, and is its Or sui Juris, or a thing of it self.
own; it is an Image of the whole, and a child of the whole: For when a
child is borne, then the Mother and the child are two, they are two persons;
but so long as it is in the seed, in the Mother, so long the seed is the
Mothers, and the Mother governs it.

3. But when the Child is borne, then it has its own life in it self, and
has the Centrum Naturae.
Center of Nature in its own power: It governs not only in it self, but
also without it self in all that which is seed.

4. We mean thus, Gods Spirit, and the Spirit of the soul are two Persons,
each is free from the other, and yet both stand in the first beginning, each
has its own will.

5. Now it is but right, that the Child should be obedient to his Father, upon
pain of losing the Fathers inheritance: For the Holy Ghost is the A work
master, or builder.
Maker of the Soul, he created it, and therefore the Spirit of the soul
should be obedient to the Holy Ghost, upon pain of losing the Inheritance of
the Holy Ghost: viz. the Deity.

6. And though we have much to say here, yet it is very dangerous to say it,
in regard of the false Magia: for when the false Spirit knows it, it
practices Witchery therewith.

7. Yet we will speak, so that the Children may understand us, and reserve the
full speaking of it for them: for it is not good to write such things, not
knowing who shall be the Readers.

8. But to the wicked we say; that they belong to the Devil; and shall have
no part in our writings, we shut them out with a wall and strong enclosure,
that they may be blind and not know our Spirit; for we will not set the
Serpent in Viz. in our Spirit.
it, our will is gone out from them, and therefore they shall not Or understand
us.
know us, though they should Carry us in their hands: there is a fast seal
upon it.

9. Christ said, if ye Mat. 17.20.
have Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, then you might say to the Mountain,
be removed, and cast thy self into the sea: this is no vain word without
Truth: The will ( If it be strong) note what Faith is.
that goes strongly forward) is Faith.

The first Power of the Will of the Soul.
10. It frames its own form in the Spirit, it has also such Or might.
Power, that it can frame another Image in the Spirit, out of the Center of
Nature; it can Change the body into another shape.
give another form to the body; according to the outward Spirit; for the
inward is Lord of the outward, the outward must be obedient to it: It can
change the outward into another Image; but not durably.

11. For Adams soul has let in the Turba of this world, so that, if the Turba
see a strange child, it rises against it instantly and destroys it: It
continues to endure, only so long as the inward Spirit can subdue, and
overpower the outward.

12. And this kind or manner of power.
Form is called Negromancy a Transmutation, where the inward over-powereth the
outward, for it is Naturally; and we understand that when 1 Cor. 15.51.
we shall all be changed, that change will be made thus by the same Turba which
has the first Fiat in it.

13. For the body is Sulphur, and sticks in the Tincture, and the Spirit
drives forth the Tincture: now if the first ground, viz. the soul wholly
consents to it, then the soul can make another Form.
manner of Image in the Sulphur, but the Devil readily mingleth himself
therewith, for it is the Wonder of the Abyss over which he is Lord.

14. You must understand, Note the power of the Will.
that the earnest will (which otherwise is called Faith,) can do great things
with the Spirit, the will can change the Spirit it self into another form, as
follows.

The second Power of the Will of the Soul.
15. If the Spirit were an Angel, the similitude of God, yet the will can make
it A wicked man.
a proud Devil; And also make a Devil an A child of God. Book of the three
Principles. cap. 15. v. 64.
Angel, if it sink it self into Death, into humility under the Cross, and
cast it self into the Spirit of God, and so submit to his Government, then it
sinketh into the Eternity, out of the source into the still Nothing, which yet
is All; and so it is in the beginning again where God created it, and the Word
Fiat which keeps the Image of God, receives it again.

The third Power of the Spirit, or Will of the Soul.
16. And then also thirdly, the Spirit of the Soul has power, to enter into
another Man, into his Marrow and bones, viz. into the Sulphur: and to bring the
Turbi into him if he be Or wicked.
false, so far as every one is not armed with the Spirit of God, but is found
naked in the Spirit of this world, as may be seen by Or the bewitching whores.
Witches.

The fourth Power of the Will of the Soul.
17. And fourthly, it has such power, if it be the child of God, that it can
lead the Turba captive, and can power it out upon the house of the wicked: as
Elias did the Fire, and Moses before Pharaoh: for it can throw down Mountains
and break Rocks.

18. This you must understand to be, so far as that thing is Or l^able to the
Turba,
capable of the Turba, by awakening the wrath then it is possible, but if not,
and that the Spirit of God be in a thing, then it cannot be, for it would power
water upon the Turba of the Fire, which would then be as it were dead, and its
power would lie in Derision.

19. And therefore Heaven is a Middle between God and Hell: viz. between Love
and Anger, and was created out of the midst of the waters, so that the Devil
cannot rule with his Turba, the water turns his purpose into derision; as the
false Magic, and blinding Enchantment are Or nullified.
drowned in the water.

The fifth Power of the Will, or Spirit of the Soul.
20. And fifthly, the Spirit of the Soul has such power, that it may and can
seek all Wonders that are in Nature, viz. All Arts, Languages, buildings,
plantings, Destruction, knowledge: It can command the starry Heaven, as Joshua,
when he commanded the Josh. 10.12.
Sun, and it stood still, and Moses the Sea, and it stood up, also he
commanded the Darkness and it came; it can make an Earthly Life, as Moses made
the Lice and Frogs, also Serpents and other Or Wonders.
Wonders.

21. It has Death in its power, so that it can overpower that; if it ride in
the The will of the Holy Ghost.
Chariot of the Bride. It can bridle and overcome the Devil; if Viz. will or
Spirit of the soul.
it be in God: there is nothing can be named that it cannot subdue.

22. Only you must understand the soul has such a power from its Original,
and it had still had ability to Or give, or afford.
send forth such a Spirit out of it self; if it had not let in the Turba Magna.
Great Turba into it self, which now gives it the Rest.

23. Unless the Holy Ghost ride upon its Chariot, as it did in Moses, and
Elias, and in all the Prophets, also in Christ and his Disciples, and always
still in the Holy Children of God, they all have this Power, Note the soul
must now seek this power in Jesus Christ.
they can raise the Dead and heal the sick, also drive away all Diseases, it
is Natural, the Spirit only reigns therewith over the Turba.

24. But it has this for an objection, that the soul knows well, whether it
has made any compact with the Devil, and whether he has any thing to do
with it, it will not go naked, except the Spirit of God drive it, and except
it have him for a shield, lest the subtilty of the Devil insinuate it self.

25. It does no Or Miracles
Wonder, except the Spirit of God Or awaken it.
stir it up, it attributes the power to God and gives him the Glory, it
does as an humble Child, and stands still under the Cross, and lets the
Devil go rushing away over it, but it sprouteth forth in humility and
meekness, through Death into Eternal Life, and brings forth much fruit in
Patience.

26. And so the Devil can do nothing to it, it is as it were dead Or before.
to him, he may keep a racket with his Turba in the Earthly Life, with his
helpers die wicked men, this he has but as a scorn in the sight of God: for
he is a proud Spirit, and would be above the Wonders of God, but an humility
can Or subdue.
bind him.

27. After this manner every man may escape the false Or Magus.
Magician, and also the Negromancer: for no Power can touch him in whom God
dwells: and as Christ in his Death overcame Death and the Devil, so also can
we in Christ: for the Word which became man dwells in us, and in the Word we
can reign over the Devil and Hell, nothing can hinder us.

28. And thus we give you for an Answer to this Question, that the soul in its
Original is greatly powerful, it can do much: but its power is only in that
Principle wherein it is, for the Devil cannot reign over God.

29. Its power is not given to it, as a King gives favor and power to a man;
but it consists in a Natural Right: therefore we are Children of the Or
Allmightinesse.
Omnipotence of God, and inherit his Goods in the Omnipotence.

The seventh Question.
Whether is the Soul Corporeal, or not Corporeal?
1. THat thing which comes from no beginning, has also nothing: But if it be
somewhat, then it seeks its beginning in it self; for every Spirit dwells
in the deepest Abyss of its Or Being.
Enence: and if it must make the Essence to it self, then it can dwell in
nothing that is strange to it, but in it self, in its own Essence.

2. When God created the Soul, then the Holy Ghost Or encompassed.
clothed it with the Tincture; for one part of the soul consisted in the
Tincture, it was Or without a body.
naked of it self, as the glowing Fire is Or Source.
naked, and is clothed when it has the Tincture.

3. But you understand, that the growing proceeds from the warmth, that is
the driver forth of the Tincture, it drives the twig out of its root, viz.
out of its own Fire, be it cold or hot fire.

4. For Darkness has the cold fire, so long till it attaineth the Anguish,
and then it kindles it self in the heat, as you see in an Herb, if it come
into another Or Source.
Property.

5. And thus we give you to understand, that the Tincture is the true Body of
the soul: for the soul is Fire; and the Tincture arises from the Fire: the
fire draws it again into it self, and allayeth it self therewith, so that
the wrathful source is quenched, and then the Tincture subsisteth in meekness.

6. For the soul has no Essence, nor Might or ability.
Power in it self, but the Fire is its power, and thus water proceeds from
the meekness of the Tincture.

7. For, the fire is desirous, and where there is a desiring of the Original,
there is also a finding of the Original, thus the fire finds water in the
Tincture, and turns it into Sulphur, according to the power of all the seven
Spirits of Nature: and this is Or the.
a water of Life.

8. For, the Tincture springs up in the water like a sprout, and the fire in
the Abyss causes it: and so the water in the Sulphur of the seven Spirits is
turned into the Mystery; for, the Great Arcanum.
Secret, what God and the Eternity can do, lies therein.

9. And thus the Mystery contains two forms, viz. fire and water, and
changes it self according to them both, viz. according to fire, into Red, and
according to the Tincture into White; This white.
this is a splendor or Glance of the Fire, by which the Life may see and know
it self, from whence Reason and the senses arise: And the Mind is in the
wheel of the Anguish in the Fire, out of which the Essences arise.

10. And so we see what the blood is, viz. Or an Habitation.
a house of the soul, but the Tincture is its body.

11. The true soul, has no comprehensible body, which may be called soul:
but the body grows in the Tincture, in the Sulphur out of Sulphur; that is;
each Spirit of the seven Spirits of Nature desires Essentiality, and that
concrete Essentiality is Sulphur.

12. For Sul is the virtue of the Light: and Phur is the virtue of the four
Forms of the Original of Nature; as is mentioned at large in the third Book.

13. And thus the Phur desires flesh, that is, a Mesch, mixture or concretion.
Mass of fire and water, and it is conceived and borne in the Tincture.

14. And the Tincture is the sprouting of the body, and the fire is an
Original of the Spirit, through the Tincture; for the Spirit of the soul
takes its Original in the Tincture, which then figureth the true Image
according to the Image of God, that is, according to all the three Principles:
for in the Fire, the soul is no similitude of God; but in the Spirit it is the
Image of God.

15. For, the first soul was incorporated with the Divine Essentiality
together in the Tincture, so that it had the Divine body in the virgin of
Wisdom, in which the Tincture stands, which is the Angelical Image.

16. And so we answer you, that as to the soul only beside the Spirit; it is
a Globe of Fire, with an Eye of Fire, and an Eye of Light, which turn
themselves backwards into one another, as the wheel in Ezechiel, that could
go on every side: though Babell has contrived another meaning about it, but a
blind one without Spirit.

17. But, as to its Tincture proceeding from the Light, which arises both from
the fire and Light, The soul.
it is a Spirit, in which the Original of the soul, and of the Spirit cannot
part asunder in Eternity: It is an Eternal band, and when the blood Run out.
is gone, and the body dies, then that band remains in Eternity.

18. As to the soul only; the body belongs not to the Essence of the soul,
they are two several Essences: for the body is the Glass and dwelling house
of the soul, also its Inheritance, own Lands, or goods, or possession.
Proprietary, and it is also a cause, that the Or poor.
mere soul alters the Spirit according to the lust of the body, or of the
Spirit of this world.

19. Whereby the Image in the Spirit is altered altogether, according to the
Contence of the Will, which the soul has Or created, or formed.
brought out of the Center of Fire, also out of the Wrath into the Light, and
all according to the Imagination.

20. And, we give you to understand, that the Spirit Or in this time of the
body.
while it stays here in the body, can alter it self; which is done without
its knowledge by the Imagination, viz. by the desire of Lust-sucht.
Lust, so that the Desiring figureth such a form in the will of the soul, as
the lust either to evil or good is.

21. And we further say, that the mere soul is not corporeal, but in its
Tincture, a body grows whether it be a heavenly or a hellish body, and yet is
not a body which can be comprehended outwardly, but a vertuall body, the Divine
body, Christ's heavenly body, the heavenly flesh: which he gives us to eat in
his Testament.

22. It is such a body as the Turba cannot touch or apprehend, it is immortal
and incorruptible, concluded in nothing but only in the Noble Tincture, which
is without Or substance.
Essence, or Materiality; and that body is incomprehensible to the outward
flesh.

23. But the outward Spirit, (if the soul do not hinder it but let it in,)
brings its Imagination into it, and spoyleth it, so that another strange
Image comes to be in the Spirit, in the Tincture according to the contence of
the Lust: as the Covetous comes to be a Wolf, the envious a Dog, the Proud a
Horse, Peacock or other Beast: also Toads, Adders, Serpents and other worms,
and creeping things; Now Gods Spirit receives not their Images, so long as
they continue such.

24. And therefore Christ said, ye must be borne anew of water and of the
Spirit, if you would see the Kingdom of God: and therefore God became Man,
brought the Divine Image again into the Tincture of the soul, when it was
spoiled in Adam: so that now we must be borne anew in Christ, if we will see
God.

25. And that also is done by the Imagination, or Faith; for Faith is an eating
of the Divine Body, as also every body grows by eating.

26. And the New Birth is not at all after such a manner as Babell teaches:
her matters are only as it were a Glass of the true way to God, but that
Glass must be broken, for Moses his Veil is gone, we shall see hence-forward
with clear Paradisicall Eyes: we mean the Children of God.

The eight Question.
After what manner does the Soul come into the Body of Man?
1. MY beloved friend; I understand this Question to be meant concerning its
Propagation; for Moses tells you how it came into Adam, and we have declared
that before; But if you ask concerning its Propagation, how it comes into a
child, in the Or body of the Mother.
Mothers womb, Turn over a new leaf, or change our Copy.
we must put on another habit.

2. You know what is written in our third Book, very punctually and at large,
with many Circumstances concerning its Propagation; how Adam was created one
Image, he was both Man and woman before Eve, he had both the Tincture of the
fire, and of the water; that is, soul and Spirit, and he should have brought
forth his similitude out of himself, an Image After, or according.
of himself, out of himself by his Imagination and his own Love, and that he
was able to do without rending of the body.

3. For, as we have mentioned before, the soul had might or ability.
power to change the body into another form; and so also it had power to bring
forth a Twig out of it self, according to its property, if Adam had stood out
in the Proba, or Temptation.
Trial.

4. But when he imagined In, or as, or with.
according to the Omnipotence, and let in the Spirit of this world into the
Soul, and the Serpent into the Tincture, and took a longing in himself after
the Earthly fruit, to eat of evil and good, then also his Tincture conceived
such an Image as was half Earthly: viz. a Monster, into which also the Turba
then instantly insinuated it self, and sought the limit.

5. And so the Noble Image was found in the Earthly, and then destruction and
Death began, and Adam could not Beget, or bear.
bring forth, for his Omnipotence was lost.

6. And should indeed have ever been lost, if the Heart of God had not
instantly turned it self, with the word of the Promise into Adams soul; which
did so preserve it, that its Image must perish, and the soul must sink down
with the Heavenly body through death into the new Life, where its Spirit will
be renewed again.

7. And thus Adam in Inability or weakness.
impotence fell asleep: and then the second Creation began, for God took the
Tincture of the Water; as a twig our of Adams soul, and a Rib out of Adam, and
half of the Cross that was in Adam, and Or framed, or built a woman with them.
made a woman of them.

8. As you know that the woman has the one half Cross in her head, and the
man the other, for the spirit of the soul dwells in the Head, in the brain,
out of which spirit God has taken a Twig ( viz. a Child out of the spirit of
the soul of Adam) and has given it to the woman.

9. And has given the Tincture of the water to her, that she should not bring
forth Devils, and the Man has the Tincture of Fire, viz. the true Original
of Life.

10. And therefore the woman has gotten the Matrix, viz. the Tincture of
Venus, and the Man has the Tincture of Fire: understand, the woman has the
Tincture of Light, which cannot awaken Life, the life arises in the Tincture
of Fire.

11. And so it cannot be otherwise now, but that they must propagate as Beasts
do, in two seeds, the Man sows soul, and the woman sows Spirit, and being
sown in an Earthly field, it is also brought forth after the manner of all
Beasts.

12. Yet nevertheless all the three Principles are in the seed, but the inward
cannot be known by the outward: For in the seed the soul is not living; but
when the two Tinctures come together, then it is a whole Or Being, or substance.
Essence: For the soul is Essential in the seed, and in the Or out-breeding,
or hatching.
Conception Note how the soul is before the conception.
becomes substantial.

13. For so soon as the Fire is Hammered by the Smith, or the Faber has
struck fire.
is struck upon by Vulcan, the soul is wholly perfect in the Essence, and the
Spirit goes instantly out of the Soul into the Tincture, and attracteth the
outward Rule, or Regiment, or influence.
Dominion to it self, viz. the Stars together with the Air.

14. And then it is an Eternal Child, and has the corruptible spirit also
with the Turba cleaving to it, which Adam took in by his Imagination.

15. Then instantly the Turba seeks the Or bound, or term, or Goal, or End.
limit in the Spirit of this world, and will enter into the limit, and so soon
as the soul has its life, the body is old enough to die: and thus, many a
soul perishes in the Essence, while it is in the Sulphur in the seed.

16. But that you may perceive, that the Man has the Tincture of the Fire, and
the woman the Tincture of the Light in the water, viz. the Tincture of Venus;
you must observe the eager Imagination of both toward one another: For the
seed in the Essence eagerly seeks the life, the Masculine.
Man's in the Feminine.
woman's in Venus, and the woman's in the Fire, in the Original of Life: As we
have very clearly demonstrated it in the third Book: and therefore we
refer the Reader thither.

17. And we Answer here, that the soul comes not at all into the Body, or is
breathed into it Ab extra, or externally.
from without, but the three Principles have each of them its own Work-master,
workman, or Smith.
Artificer, one Forgeth or strikes fire, Smiedet.
works Fire in the Center, and the other makes Tincture and water, and the
third makes the Earthly Great Mystery.
Mysterium Magnum.

18. And yet it is not any new thing, but the very seed of Man and woman, and
is only Or bred ^orth.
conceived in the mixture, and so only a twig grows out of the Tree.

The ninth Question.
Which way does the Soul unite it self with the Body?
1. IT is cleared before, that all the three Principles are in one another, and
they beget a Child according to their similitude, and they all are in one
another, till the Turba destroy the body: And then the soul is in the inward
body, viz. in the Divine body, or if it be false, in the Turba; which gives a
body to it, according to the Imagination; all according to the wickednesses it
has committed.

2. The soul stands in the blood of the Heart, there it has its seat and
Original; the outward water and blood mingle themselves, but it does not
wholly receive the water of the blood, but it is captivated by the Imagination.

3. It receives indeed naturally the inward water, but it receives not the
Majesty with the Tincture of the Light, but only by the Imagination: therefore
many times a Child is more Or in a better condition.
blessed then one that is old, who Or harbors the Devil.
has the Devil for his Guest.

4. But there are not many borne Or Saints.
Holy, except only from good seed, and yet many times a wrathful Turba
windeth it self in according to some powerful Constellation, as is seen,
that honest parents many times have Or evil.
wicked Children, but God knows who are his.

5. You see it in Jacob and Esau, that strove in their Mothers Or body.
womb: also in Caine and Abell, in Isaac and Ismael, and many others.

The tenth Question.
Whether is the Soul Ex Traduce, and propagated after a humane bodily manner,
or every time new created, and breathed in from God?
1. I Very much wonder what kind of understanding and Philosophy the world
now has that it cannot Grunden.
resolve this: yet I do not blame you; for I know such questions are agitated
by those, that account themselves learned Doctors in the Schools and
Universities, who make great disputations about it. I cannot but wonder at the
proud blindness, that there is no knowledge at all of God in Their Reason, or
Arts of Logic, etc.
Reason.

2. Now therefore ye wise men, behold your selves what ye are, and what you
understand; you understand even nothing of the Mystery; how will ye then be
teachers? it were better for you to carry a Shepherds Crook in your hand,
then to put on the garment of Christ.

3. O! ye shall give an account for your seducing of the world: and yet you
vaunt your selves, as if ye were God, and arrogate Divine Or might, or
Authority. Jus Divinum.
Power to your selves; Take heed what you do: you shall see against whom you
have Or striven.
kicked; I fear me ye are for the most part of you in Babell; awake, it is Day.

4. To you, my beloved friend, I give this Answer: that the soul is not every
time new created and breathed in: but is propagated after a humane manner, as a
Or twig springs.
branch grows out of a Tree, as I may better render it, as a man sets or
sows corn or seed, and so a Spirit and body grows out of it.

5. And this only is the Difference; that the three Principles are always in
Or wrestling, or contending.
strife about Man, each would feign have him: so that many times a wonderful
Turba is brought in, while yet he remains in the seed.

6. But if the Parents, both Father and Mother, have their souls clothed with
Christ's flesh, the Divine Essentiality, then it cannot be: For Christ says, a
good Tree cannot bring forth evil fruit: yet the Turba in time can enter in Or
by^*
with the Reason.

7. So also an evil Tree cannot bring forth good fruit; that is, if both the
Parents be evil, and held captive by the Devil; then an evil soul is sown:
but the Principles cannot yet judge it, nor the Turba neither: It is indeed an
evil Child, yet if it turn, it may with the Imagination, enter into the In
verbum Domini.
Word of the Lord.

8. But it is rare, and seldom comes to pass, that a black Raven becomes
white: but where it is but One parent good, the other evil.
half in half; there it may more easily be done: but however it is possible,
it may very well be; God casts no soul away, unless it cast it self away:
every soul is its own Judgment.

9. Consider this ye evil Parents: ye gather Goods, Riches.
money for your Children; get them good souls, that is more necessary for them.

The eleventh Question.
How and where is it seated in Man?
1. A Thing which Or ungroundable.
is unsearchable, and yet seeks and makes a ground in it self, that has
its Original and seat in its first Forming, or making.
Conception, where it conceives it self in it self: therein is its limit, viz
in the most innermost, and it goes forth out of it self, and seeks forwards,
where then it always makes one Or resemblance.
Glass according to the other, until it find the first again: viz. the
unsearchable limit.

2. Thus also is the soul, it is in God Or formed.
conceived in the Or Son, or Word.
Heart, and the word which conceived it was in the Heart, viz in the Center;
and so it continues in the Figure and in the seat, as it was comprehended by
the Fiat; and so it is still at this Day.

3. It dwells in three Principles: but the Heart is its Original; it is the
inward Fire in the Heart, in the inward blood of the Heart: and the Spirit of
it which has a or splendor.
glance from the fire, is in the Tincture: for it is clothed with the
Tincture, and burns in the Heart.

4. And the Spirit moves upon the Heart in the Or concave, doale, or hollow
pi^, or d^nt, or furrow of the Heart, praecordia. (...).
bosom of the Heart; where both Principles part themselves, and it burns in
the Tincture as a brimstony Light: and diffuseth it self abroad into all the
members of the whole body: for the Tincture goes through all the members.

5. But the true Ignis faber. Vulcanus.
Fire-Smith in the Center, sits in the Heart, and governs with the Spirit
in the Head, where it has its Counsell-house, viz. the Mind and Inward senses.
senses; also the five chief Counselors, viz. the Or outward senses.
five senses; which arise from the five Spirits of understanding, as we have
declared in our Threefold life.
third Book; and in our Three Principles.
second, and also in our Aurora.
first.

6. The soul is indeed seated in the inward Principle, but it rules even in
the outward, viz. in the Stars and Elements, and if it be not an Ape, suffer
it self to be captivated, it has power enough to rule them: and if the soul
demerse it self into God, the outward must be obedient to it.

7. And if it comes again into the outward, riding upon the Chariot of the
Bride, and so have the Holy Ghost for an assistant, no assault of the Devil is
of any consequence, it destroys his Nest, and drives him out, and he must
stand in scorn and shame.

8. And this is our Answer to this Question; it must not be so understood, as
if when a man is beheaded, and so his blood gush out, and the outward Life
perish; that this reaches the soul and kills that; no, it loses Viz. the
third Principle.
one Principle indeed, but not the Or outward works.
Essence of that Principle, that follows it in the Tincture, in the Spirit,
as a shadow.

9. For the outward Essence reaches not the inward in the soul, but only by
the Imagination: there is nothing else in this world, no fire, nor Sword, that
can touch the soul, or put it to Death, but only the Imagination; that is its
poison.

10. For it Originally proceeded from the Imagination, and remains in it
Eternally.

The twelft Question.
How is the Soul enlightened, and what is the Illumination of it?
1. WE must consider, that if the Sun were taken away out of this world, that
all things would be in Darkness, and then outward Reason would say, we are in
dark Death and in the Or bitterness.
wrathfulnesse of the cold; and it were so indeed.

2. Now observe, my beloved, mind, and consider with thy self, when thy body
perishes, and so thy spirit loses the Viz. the light of the Sun.
Sun: How can thou then enjoy the Light? and wherewith will thou see? In
simplicity we put thee in mind of this, that thou may consider it.

3. That thing which consists in the Eternal Liberty, if it always enter
again into the Eternal Liberty, it has no darkness, for it dwells in
Nothing, that does Give, make, or cause.
afford darkness: it is free as the Eye of God, which beholds it self
through a Or Being, or Essence.
substance.

4. When that imagines after somewhat, in Lust, then the will enters into
that somewhat; which the Desiring Lust it self makes: and this receives the
will into it self, and overshadoweth it, so that it dwells in darkness, and
can have no Light, uness e it go forth again out of that thing into the
Liberty.

5. Thus we earnestly give you to understand, that we have no Light in all our
matters, or business. Note the caus^ of our spiritual blindness.
affairs and works; if we let our will enter into that which we have
wrought, by setting our Heart and will upon the work of our own hands; in
Covetousness; then the soul is wholly blind, and we have no light in us, but
only the outward Light of the Sun, which gives light to the outward body;
and when that perishes, then the soul is imprisoned by that thing It was set
upon.
.

6. Thou must here understand, the Spirit and will of the soul; for the Prison
of the soul is a Dark Cave, or hole.
vale Void of Light.
having no Light; and although it do elevate it self, and inflame it self,
yet it becomes only a wrathful flash of fire, and is like the Devil, and
cannot Or reach.
attain the Divine Light in it self.

7. The cause is, it has brought Abominations into its will and spirit, which
darken the Spirit, and hold it captive with the Turba: for Gods Light goes not
backwards, but forwards into the Eternity.

8. And therefore Gods Eye is Or in two halves, or parts.
twofold, standing back to back; as before in the figure; one part tends
forwards into the still Eternity, into the Eternal Nothing, viz. into the
Liberty.

9. And the other part tends backwards into the Desire, and makes darkness
and the Center of Nature therein: and drives it to the greatest anguish and
sharpness.

10. And then the will again sinketh out of the Anguish through the darkness,
into the still Liberty, and brings the wrathfulnesse of the Mobility and
earnest sharpness, out of the Anguish with it.

11. In which sharpness, the Liberty (when the will brings the sharpness
into it) becomes a highly triumphing Majestic Light, which is called Gods
Light, which shines for ever, and cannot be Or shut up.
smothered by any thing, for it shines in the Eternal Liberty, and desires
no more.

12. And if, (as thou Earthly man perhaps do suppose) God would receive thy
spirit into his Majestic Light, while thou let in thy Abomination ( viz.
Covetousness, which has brought forth Pride, Note, Pride is the fiery life,
and the reflection of Covetousness, as in a Glass.
which is the fiery life of Covetousness) into thy will: so that thy will
sticks wholly in Earthlinesse; thou would darken Gods Majesty, and thy
spirit and will would nevertheless stick in Covetousness, and burn out with
the fiery source of the soul, as a Reflection in a Glass, viz. in Pride, and
thou should not be able to reach the Majesty of God.

13. Nay if thou should sit in the Cross of the Holy Or Trinity.
Ternary, and were encompassed with all the Holy Angels; yet thou should sit
but in the Darkness, and thy Spirit should shine but in the Glass of that
Essence; which thou thy self have brought into the Spirit.

14. But if now the soul with its Spirit, in its Image will see God, and
behold the Eternal Light in Gods Majesty, then it must go in a twofold way,
in this world; and then it shall obtain the Eternal body, viz. the Image of
God, and also sustain the outward Life with the Earthly body: and then it
shall bring all the Wonders (for which God created it in an outward Life, which
wonders also it ought to awaken in the outward life) into the inward life, and
eternally rejoice it self in them, and have them as a Looking-glass also as a
sport.
Glass, and this is the right way which follows.

The exceeding Precious Or Gate of the Day spring* from on high.
Gate of the Aurora.
15. Behold thou beloved Soul; if thou will attain the light of God, and see
with the Eye of God: and wilt also enjoy the light of this world, and sustain
thy body, and seek the wonders of God, then do this as God himself does it.

16. Thou have in thy soul two Eyes; which are set together back to back; the
In Resignation.
one looks into Eternity, the In self-hood.
other looks backwards into Nature, and proceeds forth, always and seeks
in the Desire, and always makes one Glass after another: let it be so, it
must be so, God will have it so.

17. But turn not this Viz. the left Eye.
other Eye back into the Longing; but with the Right Eye always draw the left
backwards to thee, and let not The left, or Eye of Nature.
this Eye with the will of the Wonders go from thee; viz. from that Eye which
is turned into the Liberty; but draw to thee its wonders, which it has
manifested and wrought.

18. Let this Eye seek food for the Earthly body; but let it not enter into
the food, that is, into Covetousness, but draw it close to the seeing Eye,
and let it not go.

19. But let the hands labor and get food: and let the Eye draw the Wonders to
it, but not Covetousness, Envy, Pride, or Anger.
Matter; Else that which is drawn in will be darkness to thee.

20. Let the Devil roar at thee, making a noise before thy left Eye: he
cannot get in, unless thou suffer thine Eye to receive in Somewhat wherein it
trusts.
Matter.

21. Thus, when thy Earthly body perishes, thou shall see with the right Eye,
all the Wonders Or which are in the Eye of Reason.
in the Left Eye; which thou have wrought and found out here; and when the
Earthly life is gone, then thy left Eye is free from the Ephesians. 2.3. (...).
Nature of Wrath.

22. And although it has Nature, (for it is Nature it self which does awaken
and hold the Wonders) yet then it is with the Wonders, in the Eternal Liberty:
seeing it has taken in nothing of Matter, therefore it is free.

23. And Nature with its Wonders, is a fiery sharpness, and takes hold of the
Eternal Liberty, and so makes Majesty in the Liberty in the Wonders; whence,
the Right Eye (which is as it were dead here in this life) becomes enlightened,
and does Or solace it self.
rejoice with the left Eye for ever, in the exceeding joyful Majesty, and
sees God with both Eyes eternally.

24, This is one Gate. He that sees and knows this rightly in the Spirit, he
sees all that God is, and can do, he sees also therewith, through Heaven,
Hell, and Earth, and through the Essence of all Essences: also it Or the
understanding of the whole Scripture is contained in it.
is the whole Scripture, whatsoever has been written from the beginning of the
world hitherto; but this is a rare and precious S ght, or vision.
seeing; the Old Adam knows it not, he sees it not; only the New Man that
is borne in God.

25. But seeing the weak Mind will so hardly understand us, therefore we will
set it down more plainly; Behold! if thou will see Gods Light in thy soul,
and would be enlightened from God; then do thus.

26. Thou art in the world: have thou an honest Or employment.
calling void of Deceit? continue in it, work, labor, finish thy business;
as necessity requires, seek out Wonders, both in the Earth and other
Elements; let the Art be what it will, it is all the work of God: seek Silver
and Gold in the Earth, and make Artificial works of them: build and plant:
All serves to manifest Gods works of Wonder.

But mark this Or Lesson.
A. B. C.
27. Thou must not give thy spirit leave to enter into, and fill itself
therewith, and so make a Mammon of it, and Or make its Nest therein.
set it self therein, as in a Darkness, else it is but a fool in the sight
of God, and the Devils Ape, and its will is wholly fixed therein: and so thy
noble Image is altered according to thy Imagination in the Spirit, and
according to thy will, which sticks in Covetousness, and so thou losest Gods
Image.

28. For that is Magical, it is as subtle as a spirit, yea much more subtle,
it is much more subtle, and thin then the soul it self; it is as God, who
dwells in the Eternal Liberty, and yet is not comprehended by any thing; for
he is thinner then any thing, and so is thy Noble Image.

29. And yet it consists Or of.
in heavenly flesh and blood, and is an Essentiality come out of the Divine
Body; it is Christ's flesh and blood, and thy soul dwells therein; The soul.
it is the fire of the Majesty therein.

30. And the Holy Ghost sits in the Heart of the Image, and proceeds from
the Image with voices, Languages, wonders, sounds, and songs.

31. If thou be Faithful, and sincere.
upright, thou bring thy wonders into this Image, and do it thus: set thy
left will upon the work which thou do, and consider that thou art Gods
servant in the vineyard of God, and labor faithfully.

32. And direct thy Right will upon God, and that which is Eternal; and think
not thy self secure at any time; think that thou art but at thy day-labour,
and must always listen for the voice, when thy Master shall bid thee come home.

33. Give Reason no Or leave.
room to say, this is my treasure, it is mine, I have enough, I will gather
much, that I may get honor in the world, and leave much to my Children.

34. But consider, that thy Children are Gods Children, and thou Gods servant,
that thy work is Gods work, and that thy Money, Goods, mind, and blood are
in Gods hand, he may do what he will with them: when he calls thee home into
thine own Country, then he may take thy labor, and give it to another.

35. And give thy heart no Or leave.
room to suffer the Spirit of thy will to bring in haughtiness into the
Image, but cast down thy will continually in humility before God; and so thy
Image always enters with thy will in humility into the Majesty of God: and so
thy Image is continually enlightened with the high Triumphing Light of God.

36. O! how cheerful is the soul, when its anguish source of fire Or
perceives.
tastes Gods Light; how exceeding Or friendly.
courteous is it? O! how it boweth it self before God!

37. Thus the soul and the Image in the Spirit, are all three in one another,
for they are one Essence according to the Holy Trinity: My beloved brother, we
answer to this Question of yours thus, that the soul cannot be any other way
enlightened then thus, its Illumination is only after this manner.

38. The soul is in this world, and also in God; here in this life it is a
servant of Gods Wonders, which it should open with one Eye, and with the other
bring them into the beginning before God, and set and cast all its doings into
Gods will; and by no means say of any thing in this world, this is mine, I am
Lord of this, for it lies, if it say so.

39. All is Gods, thou art a servant, and should walk in Love, and Humility
toward God, and thy Brother: for thy brothers soul is a fellow-member with
thy soul, thy brothers joy in Heaven with God, is also thy joy, his Wonders
are also thy Wonders.

40. For in Heaven God is All in All, he fills all, the Holy Ghost is the
Life in All; the^e is mere Joy, there is no sorrow, there all is Gods, also
all belong to the Image of God; all things are common; one rejoices at the
Power, brightness, and beauty of another, there is no malice or envy; for all
that remains in Death, and Hell.

41. Therefore ye Elect Children of God, who are borne again in Christ, take
it into Consideration, depart from Covetousness and self-will: ye have been a
long time led blindfold in Babell; go out from her, you are called with a
Strong, or loud, sounding voice.
shrill voice, it will shortly raise the Dead, let it be a furtherance to you,
that you may obtain Eternal Joy in God

42. The Spirit shows plainly, that whosoever will not grow forth, together
with the new sprout, which grows in the Viz. the Eternal Word.
Mother, shall and must be cast into the Lake of Brimstone, with the Dragons
Whore in Babell.

43. There is a time of earnestness at hand, and though thou see it not with
earthly Eyes, yet it will certainly come upon thee: thou will see well enough
in thy Death, what kind of Judgment this is, and in what time, and under what
Turba thou have lived, we speak in good earnest, as we ought.

The thirteenth Question.
How does the Soul feed upon the Word of God?
1. IF the soul do enter thus (as above mentioned) into the Light of the
Majesty, and receive the light of God, then it has wholly a longing, and
lusting, and continually attracteth in its Desire, the Divine Power, viz. the
Divine body into it self; and the Holy Ghost is the Power of Gods Spirit, and
so it obtains the body and Spirit of God, and eats at Gods Table; All that
the Father has is the Sons, and whatever the Son has, that belongs to
his Image.

2. It eats Gods flesh and Christ's Body, and by this eating the Divine Body,
does also grow Or to, or from, or out of it, or as a Chicken grows in an Egg.
in it, so that it thus gets the Divine Body, and so becomes Gods Child, not
only a similttude, but a Child borne in God out of his Essences, and lives
in God.

3. When it hears Gods Child^en teach, and speak Gods word (even in this
world) it receives it, and eats it. Note the food of the Soul.


4. The outward Man eats Earthly bread, and the soul eats the Bread of
God, of which Christ said, that he gives us his body for meat, and his The
Author calls Baptism and the Supper of the Lord two Testaments.
Testaments are nothing else.

5. Indeed we eat not Spirit without Body, for the soul is Spirit already,
before hand, and desires to have a body, and so it gets both body and
Spirit.

6. Let this be spoken to thee O Babell, and see how thou handlest Christ's
Testaments, and what thou teach; when thou say, Christ Testaments are
Spirit without Body; thou belyest God, and denyest Gods Substantiality, Christ's
heavenly Body, which is greater then all things, which is the fullness of all
things, but in its own Principle.

7. O Earthly mouth, thou shall not bite it with teeth: the soul has another
Mouth, which receives it under the outward Element: the outward receives the
outward, and the Inward receives the Inward.

8. The Supper of Christ with his Disciples was so: the outward is a
Remembrance; the Inward is the substance; for the Kingdom of God consists in
Power, it is Magically; not as a thought; but Essential, substantial.

9. The Magia makes substance: for in the Eternal Nothing there is Nothing;
but the Magia creates Something.
where nothing is.

10. Now in God there is not only Spirit, but Nature, substance, flesh and
blood, Tincture, and All: this world outwardly is a similitude of the Inward
world.

11. We tell you, we speak what we feel, see, taste, and know, and not a
fable or Opinion, and that not for our selves only, but for you, as one member
is bound to do for another, that so our Joy may be in you, and we also may
enjoy you again, as brethren together in one Essence: He that desires to know
further of this, let him read our Threefold life. 13. Chap.
third Book, and there he shall find the Circumstances, concerning the
Seele-Messe, the food Mess Supper, or eating of the soul.
Soules-Meale, and Christ's Testaments.

The fourteenth Question.
Whether is such a new Soul without Sin? We understand here, the propagated
Soul in a Child newly borne.
1. MY beloved friend; this is a very sublime, or sharp, or subtle.
deep Question; yet you shall be answered: for the time of the manifestation is
borne, the Day breaks, the Night is past; therefore eternal praise and
thanks be given to God, that has again begotten us to light, and to an
inheritance that never fades away; and has received us for his beloved
Children.

2. My beloved friend, you know well the heavy fall of Adam, as we have shown
you copiously in all our writings, viz. that the soul has turned it self
away with the right Eye, from God into the Spirit of this world, and is become
disobedient to God, and has wholly depraved its Noble Image, and changed it
into a monstrous Image; and has let in the Spirit of this world, whereas it
should have powerfully ruled over it with the will, and not have let the soul
eat of evil, and good at all.

3. But now it has plainly transgressed Gods pleasure.
Command, and has put its Imagination into the Earthly Spirit, where the Turba
which brought the Earthly Monster into its Noble Image, instantly took it
captive, and so the Turba instanly sought, and found the Limit, in which the
Image perished; and if the Word had not Set it self in the midst.
mediated, or interposed it self, it would have continued so for ever.

4. And so, now the Turba is once seated in the Earthly Abyss, and has
captivated both body and soul, it always drives the body to the limit, and
there destroys it, and casts it away, and then the poor soul remains
Naked without a Body.

5. And except it turn with its Right Eye again into the Word, and get again
a body borne out of God, it is but naked, and has the Turba in it; which
stirs up the fire in its great Anguish: for Viz. the Turba.
it is an eager hunger, a seeker, and a finder.

6. Now it is thoroughly known to us, that our soul is fast bound to the
Spirit of this world, for the Turba holds us captive in the Wrath of the
Anger of God.

7. And although our soul get out, and become Newborn in God, yet The Turba.
it possesses the outward body still, and consumes it, for it pierces
through it even to the Abyss, and there it finds that it is only a Glass
of the Eternal, and then it goes forth from the Glass into the Eternal, and
lets the body lie in the Nothing.

8. Also you know well; that the soul, which the body in the seed, is half
Earthy: for it is Sulphur, that is, Phur is power, Matter, or substance.
Phur and Sul is Spirit, or Light.
Sul In one another.
together, and the Turba is in it, which has ability enough to destroy the
seed.

9. How then can a soul be borne pure? It cannot be, it brings the Turba
with it into the world, and is sinful in the Mothers Or body.
womb.

10. But know that God is become Man, and the Word Fiat has agiane put it
self into the seed; an although the Turba be now in the Earthly part, so that
the seed is not altogether free, yet the matter stands thus with the soul.

11. The soul is not wholly forsaken of God, so far as the Father and Mother
are Or virtuous.
honest, and in God; for it comes from the soul of the Father, and of the
Mother: and although a Child dye in the Mothers womb without External
Baptism.
Baptism, yet it is baptized with the spirit of the Father, and of the Mother,
viz. with the Holy Ghost which dwells in them, and the Turba is destroyed in
Death; for the That which belongs to Faith.
Faiths part passes through to God.

12. But the matter is far otherwise with wicked Parents; if the Child die
in the Mothers womb Vide Question. 19. ver. 12.
the soul of it falls into the Turba, and reaches not God to Eternity: it
also knows nothing of him, but it is a life according to the Essence, and
property of the Parents.

13. And yet it does not by this reach to the inflammation, for that soul it
self has not yet committed Actual.
sin; but it is a spirit in the source, quite void of selfe-desire, and
wonders, it is like burning Brimstone, like the Wandering false Lights, that
lead people astray in the night. (...).
Ignes Fatui, and cannot reach God, but remain between Heaven and Hell in the
Mystery, until the Judgment of God, which shall at last gather in its
harvest, and put every thing apart in its own place.

14. Although Or one that is learned in the letter, or carnal Reason.
Mr. Sophister may herein have other Meaning, or Opinion.
Philosophy, but we care not for his Art, we have Eyes, and he has art; we
speak what we see.

15. Thus we give you to understand, that no soul is borne into this world
without sin, how honest soever the Parents be; for it is Ausgebrutet,
engendered, or hatched.
conceived in the Earthly seed, and brings the Turba of the body with it,
which also has begirt the soul.

16. Therefore God made a Covenant with Children in the Old Testament, in the
Circumcision, and bound them in that Covenant to have their blood shed, and so
drown the Turba of the soul therewi^h.

17. And in the New Testament, the Baptism, wherein the Holy Ghost washes
away the Turba, with the water of Life, the water of the soul, that it may
Stand, or appear before God.
draw near to God, and be his Child.

18. But they who say, that those who have not baptism (as Jews and Turks,
and other people, who have not the knowledge thereof among them, nor the
Candlestick) are all rejected of God; (although in their Doctrine, Life, and
deeds, they do earnestly strive to enter into the Love of God;) they speak
phantastically, and without knowledge, like Babell.

19. Blessedness lies not only in the outward Word, but in Power, who shall
cast out him that enters into God?

20. Is not this Babell? which has confounded the whole world, so that People
have divided themseves in Opinions, and yet in the Will they go but one way;
what caused this but only the Antichrist, when he Took Gods Government upon
himself.
drew the Kingdom of God into his own Jurisdiction: and made a mere fable of
the New Birth, which very Children will be ashamed of, when it shall he day?

21. We can say with good ground, that Antichrists teaching is but A mere
flourish, casting a mist before the Eyes, juggling.
beating of the Air, a slight of the Serpent which continually beguileth Eve.

22. Thus we know, that no soul comes into the world without sin, each
bringerh the Disharmony.
Turba with it; for if it were without sin, then it must also dwell in a body
wholly pure, and having no evil will in it, and in which is no Earthly
Disharmony.
Desire.

23. Now, body and soul are thus Seeking, or strife of the four Elements.
bound together, until the Turba finds the Or knit.
Limit of the body, and then it seeks the works of the body, as is above
mentioned.

The fifteenth Question. Or End.

How comes sin into the Soul? seeing it is the work and Creature of God.
1. AS it is mentioned before, so it is: the Turba with the Earthly Seeking, or
longing.
Desire come together into this world, and so the soul is strongly drawn by
two; viz. by the Verbum Domini.
Word of the Lord, which mediated, or interposed it self, which out of Love is
become Man; this draws the soul continually into the Kingdom of God, and
plainly shows the soul the Turba; so that the soul sees in Nature what
falsehood and sin is, and if it yield it self to be drawn, then it becomes
borne again, and so beommeth Gods Image.

2. Secondly, the Turba also mightily draws the soul with its band, and
continually brings the Earthly desire into it, especially in the youth; when
the Earthly Tree sticks full of green sprouting Essences and Poison: then
the Turba does so mightily insinuate it self, that many a soul is not freed
to Eternity.

3. In a thing which has its rise from two beginnings, being of equal weight,
one part will sink down, if weight be added to it, be it either good, or
evil that is added.

4. Sin makes not it self, but the will makes it, it comes from the
Imagination into the Spirit: for the Spirit enters into a thing, and is
infected by that thing, and so the Turba of that thing comes into the Spirit,
and first destroys the Image of God.

5. And the Turba proceeds further, and searches deeper, and so it finds
the Abyss, viz. the soul; and seeks in the soul, and so finds the
wrathful Fire, by which it mingleth it self with the thing, that is so
introduced into the Spirit, and thus at length sin is wholly borne: Now
therefore whatsoever desires to bring that which is outward into the Will,
that is sin.

6. The will ought to incline to nothing, but to meekness and Love, as if it
were a Nothing, or Dead: we should only desire to live to God, so that God may
work in us, and whatsoever we do besides; our will must be directed so, that
we do it to God.

7. But if we set our will upon the Covetousness, or earthly desire, viz.
Pride, Goods, Power, and Honor.
Essence, then we bring the Essence into the Spirit, and that takes
possession of our Heart: and then the Turba is borne, and the soul is
captivated by the thing.

8. And therefore we Answer; that no soul comes pure from the Mothers Or
body.
womb, be it begotten by holy or unholy Parents.

9. And is the Abyss and the Anger of God, and also the earthly world depend
wholly on God the Father; and yet cannot comprehend, and touch his Heart and
Spirit: so it is also with the Child in the Mothers womb, if it be begotten
by godly Parents, then each Principle Or has a part, or one part, or share in
it.
stands in its own part.

10. When the Turba takes the earthly body, then the Heaven takes the Spirit,
and the Majesty fills the Spirit, and then the soul is in God, it is free
from pain.

11. But while the soul remains in the Earthly Life, it is not free; because
the earthly Spirit does with its Imagination, always bring its Abominations
into it; and the Spirit must continually be in strife against the Earthly Life.

The sixteenth Question.
How is the Soul kept in such union, both in the Adamicall, and Regenerate
Body?
1. WE have mentioned before, that there are three Principles, which are all
three in the soul, already beforehand, and are in one another, as one thing:
and you must understand that the strife in the soul begins before, in the
seed, while it lies hidden in both Sexes, in the Man and Woman; when also the
Turba stirs up it self before, in that it drives the Essence of the seed
to a false Imagination, to a false Desire.

2. Although the Spirit tameth the body, yet it imagines, and this the Turba
causes in the seed, and no man can well deny, but that many times this
Imagination is offensive to him, and where there is a right Spirit, it wishes
it Excommunicated.
anathematised: And you must know, that the spirit of the soul sticks thus
in a miserable strait, and cannot be loosed, until the Turba takes the Body.

3. Now there is never any union between the outward, and the Regenerate Man;
the outward man would always devour the Regenerate, for they are in one
another, but each has its own Principle, so that the outward cannot
over-master the Inward, if the Spirit do but continue Or the Combat.
in strife.

4. They may very well depend on one another; for all three set forth Gods
works of wonder; if they continue in due Order, each keeping its own
Principle.

Note three bear rule in Man.
5. For the soul has the Government of the Fire, and it is the cause of the
life of all three: and the The Spirit of the Soul.
Spirit has the Government of the Light, in which the Noble heavenly Image
consists with the Divine Body: and the outward Spirit has the Government of
the Earthly Life, this should seek and manifest the Wonders, and the Inward
Spirit should give it understanding to do that, and the soul should manifest
the Abyss, viz. the highest secret) to The outward Spirit.
it.

6. The Soul is the Pearl, and the Spirit of the soul is the finder of the
Pearl, and the Earthly Spirit is the seeker: the Earthly body is the Mysterium.
Mystery, wherein the Arcanum.
secret of Greatest Or hiddennesse.
abstrusenesse is coucht: for the Deity has manifested it self in the
earthlinesse, viz. in a comprehensible Essence; and therefore now three Seekers
belong thereto.

7. But you must not suppose, that we are an Enemy to the outward life, for it
is most profitable to us, as to the Wonders of God: there is nothing more
profitable to the whole man, then to stand still in his threefold Life, and not
go back at all with the outward into the Invard, but with the Inward into the
outward.

8. For, the outward is a Beast, and belongs not to the Inward; but its
wonders which it has brought forth out of the Inward, and which it has opened
in the comprehensible Essence, they belong in their figure, (not in their
Essence) to the Inward: the Inward Spirit must receive these (which are Gods
works of Wonder,) for they shall be the joy of it for ever.

9. And thus we say, that the soul may be kept very well in the New Man, if
the Spirit of its Tincture, do but hinder its Seeking, or Desire.
Longing and Imagination: and although the outward Spirit be bestiall, yet the
Inward understanding [Spirit] is able to keep in, and tame the outward, for it
is Lord over it: But he that suffers the Bestiall Spirit to be Lord, he is a
Beast, and has also a Bestiall Image in the inward Figure, in the Tincture.

10. And he that lets the Fire-Spirit, viz. the Turba, be Lord, he is an
Substantial, or Devil incanrate.
Essential Devil, in the Inward Image: therefore here it is necessary, that
the outward Spirit power Viz. humility.
water into the fire, that it may hold that Or stern.
strong Spirit captive, and that seeing it will not be Gods Image, it may At
least.
remain a Beast in the Inward Image.

11. Now if we consider our selves in the Of the Old, and New man together.
union, the outward Spirit is very profitable to us, for many souls would
perish, if the Bestiall Spirit were not: which beholds the Fire captive, and
sets before the Fire-Spirit earthly bestiall Labor and Joy, wherein it may
buifie it self, till it be able by the Or works.
Wonders, in the Imagination, to discover somewhat of its Noble Image, that it
may seek it self again.

12. My beloved Children, who are borne Or of.
in God, I tell it you: it was not for nothing, that God breathed the outward
Spirit, ( viz. the outward Life,) into Adams nostrills: for great danger did
attend this Image.

13. God knew how it went with Lucifer, and also what the great Eternal Magia
or Desire.
Magic could do: yea Adam might have been a Devil: but the outward Glass
hindered that, for where Water is, it quenches the Fire.

14. Also many a soul by its wickedness would become a Devil in a Or the
twinkling of an Eye.
moment, if the outward life did not hinder it, so that the soul cannot wholly
inflame it self.

15. How many are there that are so full of poison, and Or malice, and
wickedness.
evil, that they do murder and commit villainy: but this their Fire has
water, or else they were past remedy: As ye see in gall which is a fiery
poison, but it is mingled with water, and so the violence of the fire is
allayed.

16. Thus it is also with the Inward Essence: the Spirit of this world has
wound it self into the Abyss of the soul, and in its source has killing
water, wherewith it often bedeweth the soul, when it would spit Fire.

17. Moreover, the outward Spirit could not have life without this Fire, seeing
it has fire in all Creatures, but this Fire is only the wrath of the Inward
fire.

18. The Inward fire consumes earth and stones, also the body and blood, yea,
even the Noble Image, if it be Or kindled.
inflamed in the Will: But there the water is a Medicine for it, which pulls
down its aspiring force; whereby it labors to get above the meekness of
God, as Lucifer did.

The seventeenth Question.
Whence, and wherefore is the Contrariety between the Spirit and the Flesh?
1. MY beloved friend; you know well, that fire and water are contrary: for the
fire is Life, and the water is its Death, and you see plainly, that when water
is poured upon the Fire, the source of the Fire goes out, and so the Fire is
dead.

2. And although in Man [the fire] is not wholly dead because of the Light,
which continually causes fire, yet there is an enmity; as there is an enmity
between God and Hell; and yet Hell, or the Fire of wrath is Gods.

3. And Gods Majesty would not be manifested, if his Anger were not, which
sharpneth the dark hiddennesse of Eternity, by the wrath of Nature, so that it
is changed into Fire, whence the high Light in the free Eternity is brought
forth, which makes a Majesty in the mild source.

4. And yet the Fire is the only cause, that there is a Or life, or working.
source in the Light, in the Meekness; for the Light proceeds from the
Glance of the fire, and has the source of the Fire in it self.

5. But the Will (as is mentioned before) sinketh down in the Anguish, even
into Death, and springs again afresh in the Liberty; and this is the Light
which has the Or property.
source of the Fire; but yet it has another Principle in it, for the Anguish
is become Love.

6. After this manner also it is in the Body, where the flesh striveth against
the Spirit: the Life of the outward flesh is a Glass of the most Inward fire
life, viz. of the life of the soul; and the life of the Spirit of the Soul,
with the Light of the Tincture, is the middlemost Life, and yet it is borne out
of the soul.

7. But understand our depth aright: the Spirit of the soul, wherein the
Divine Image consistech, arises in the fire, and is first of all, the will to
the Fire, but when the Or wrathful desire, and indignation of the fire.
wrath in the fire is sharpened and inflamed, then the Will comes into a great
anguish, like a dying, and sinketh down in it self, out of the wrath into the
Eternal Liberty; and yet there is no dying, but Or second.
another world thus comes out of the first.

8. For, then the Will springs up in the other world, as a sharpness out of
the Fire: yet it is without any such Or Aching property.
Anguish source in the Eternal Liberty: and it is a moving, a driving and an
Or feeling.
acknowledging of the Anguishing Nature; it has all the Or springing. virtues.
Essences, which in the first sharp fire-world are brought forth in the
Anguish; but they are like one, that goes out of Fire into water: and so the
Anguish of the fire is left in the water.

9. You must understand that this Life is the Life of the Spirit of the soul:
the soul is the Center of Nature, and the Spirit is the precious and noble
Image, which God created for his Image; herein stands the High, Or Kingly.
Royal, and precious Image of God: for, God is thus, he is comprehended in the
same source of Life.

10. The Spirit is not parted from the soul, no, as you see Fire and Light are
not parted, and yet are not one, they have a twofold Or Quality.
Source: the Fire is wrathful, the Light is Mild and Lovely: in the Light is
the Life, and in the Fire, the cause of the Life.

11. And thus without much seeking you may find, the cause of the Contrariety,
that is between the flesh and the Spirit: for, the inward Spirit has the Or
Gods body.
Divine Body from the meek Essentiality, and the outward Spirit has the Body
of the Glass, of the wrathful Fire, viz. the body of the Glass of the soul,
which would always awaken the Vehemence or fierceness.
wrathfulnesse, viz. the great Wonders which lie in the In the secret, or
hidden Mystery of Eternity.
Arcanum, in the Sternnesse, or fierceness. or strength.
eagerness of the soul; but that the inward Spirit of Love hinders it, lest
it should elevate it self, and inflame the soul, and so it would lose the The
habitation, or sweet taste.
fruition of Love and the Image, and the wrathfulnesse of the soul would
destroy it, and thus contrariety arises.

12. The Inward Spirit would be Master, for it tameth the outward, and so also
the outward would be Master, for it says, I have the Great Wonders, and the
Arcanum, thus it braggeth of the Mystery, and yet it is but a Glass of the
Mystery.

13. It is not the Essence of the Mystery, but a Seeking, or longing.
Desire, an incomprehensible Glass, in which the Mystery is beheld, but it
would be Master, seeing it has attained a Principle, and is a Life of it self,
but it is a fool in comparison of the Mystery.

14. Therefore beloved Brother, if you would seek the Mystery, seek it not in
the outward Spirit, you will be deceived, and attain nothing, but a glance of
the Mystery: enter in even to the Cross, then seek Gold and you will not be
deceived, you must seek in another world for the pure Child that is without
spot, in this world you find only the drossy Child, that is altogether
imperfect, but go about it in a right manner.

15. Go back from the Cross into the fourth form, and there you have Sol,
and Luna together, bring that in Anguish into Death, and bruise that composed
Magical body so long, till it become again, that which it was before the
Center in the Will; and then it becomes Desirous.
Magical and hungry after Nature.

16. It is a Or seeking. or Desire.
longing in the Eternal Longing, and would feign have a body, therefore give
it Sol, viz. the Soul; Or for a body.
that it may have a body, and then it will soon make a body according to the
soul; for the Will springs up in Paradise, with fair heavenly fruit without
blemish.

17. There you have the Noble Child, ye covetous gripers, we must indeed
tell this to you, seeing it is borne with it; but those only that are of our
Tribe will understand us.

18. For, we mean not here a Or similieude, figure, or Parable.
Glass or Heaven; but Gold wherewith you vaunt, which for so long a time has
been your Idoll-God: and your blind Or Cowes-eyes.
Owle-eyes are so quite put out, that you see less then before: But the
Children shall see, eat and be satisfied, that they may praise God.

19. We speak here wonderfully, yet we speak nothing but what we must speak:
Let none marvel, that he knows the Mystery, who has not learnt it from any
man; does not an herb grow without your Or direction.
Counsel, neither does it inquire for your At: yea the Mystery is grown
also without your Art, it has its own school; like the Apostles on the Day
of Pentecost, who spoke with many Languages and Tongues without premeditation
and Art, and so is this simplicity in like manner.

20. And this foretells thy Fall O Babell, That you may be warned of it.
that thou may know it: no wrath nor Anger will help you; the Star is
borne which leads the Magi.
wisemen out of the East-Country: but seek thou only where thou art, and find
thy self; and call the Wrangling, malice, and Tyranny.
Turba from thee, and then thou shall live with the Children, this we tell thee
in good earnest, there is no other Remedy: thy Anger is thy fire which will
destroy thy self.

21. Or do thou think that we are blind? if we did see nothing we would
still be silent; what pleasure would a lie be to God? yea we should be found in
the Turba, which searches through all humane Essences and works: or do we
this piece of service for Wages? is it our Or trade.
living? why do we not mind our bread only according to outward Reason?

But seeing it is our Day-labour, we must do what the Father will, for we
must give an account thereof at the evening, this we speak seriously, and in
good earnest.

23. Thus you may well understand the Contrariety of flesh, and Spirit, and
find very well, that two Spirits are in one another, one striving against the
other, for one desires God, the other desires bread; and both are profitable
and good.

24. But thou child of Man, let this be spoken to thee, lead thy life
circumspectly, and let the Spirit of thy soul be Master, and then thou will
have fought here a good fight, for this time is but short.

25. We all stand hene in the field and grow: let every one have a care, what
fruit he bears; for at the end of the Harvest every work shall be put into
its own Granary.

26. It is better to labor a little while with toil and care, in the
vineyard, and to wait for the great wages and Refreshment, then to be a King
here for a little time, and afterward to be a Lion, a Wolf, a Dog, a Cat, a
Toad, Serpent or worm; in Or shape.
figure.

27. O Child of Man! think upon this; he yet warned, we speak very
seriously, out of a wonderful Eye, ye shall very shortly find it by
experience; there is yet a little time; for the beginning has already found
the end: this is a little Rose out of the Beginning; see yet, and put
covetousness out of your Or sight.
Eyes, or else you shall wail and lament, and none will pity you; for, what a
man sows that he must also reap; what will Pomp and Honor avail, when it
leaves you?

28. Here you are very Potent, but afterward you shall be impotent; ye are
Gods, and yet ye run on headlong to the Devil; take pity on your own Life,
and on your fair heavenly Image.

29. Pray be the Children of God; and be not Devils: Let not the Hypocrites
keep you back by their Or Example.
flattery, they do it for their bellies, for their honors, and for moneys
sake, they are the servants of the Great Babell.

30. Examine your selves, ask your Conscience, whether it be in God? that will
blame you, and bid you drive the Hypocrites from you, and seek the clear
countenance of God, and look not through Or Spectacles.
a Glass.

31. God is even before you, he is in you; confess to him, come to him with
the lost Son; there is no other can take the Tu^ba from you, you cannot enter
but through Death into the other world, ^^^ther your Hypocrites can never come;
otherwise there is no forgiveness of sin; And though you should give All to
your Hypocrites, yet then you would be as much captivated in the Turba as you
were before.

32. It is no such matter, as that one should stand ready, and take away the
Turba from you, when you give God, fair words.
him good words, no, no, it is a Magical thing; you must be borne again, as
Christ says, or else you cannot come to God; do what you will, All Hypocrisy
is deceit.

33. If you would serve God, you must do it in the New man, the Earthly Adam
can do him no acceptable service, let him sing, roar, call, confess, pray,
cry, and do what ever he will, all is but fighting with a shadow, the will
must be in it, the Heart must wholly Resign it self up into it, else it is
but a fained babble, and a fable of Antichrists, wherewith the whole Earth is
filled.

34. The will is greater and more Powerful, then much loud cry; It is able to
destroy the Turba, and to enter into the Image of God, it has power to be the
child of God; it can throw down Mountains, and raise the Dead, if it be
borne in God, and if the Holy Ghost give it leave.

35. For a man must walk in Obedience in great humility, and only cast his
will into Gods will, that God may be both the will and the Deed in him: This is
the way to salvation, and to the Kingdom of Heaven, and no other; let the Pope
or Doctors preach otherwise, all is but lies, and mere Hypocritical juggling.

The eighteenth Question.
How does the Soul depart from the Body at the Death of a Man.
1. HEre we would have the world bidden for a Guest, especially Babell the
Whore, and see whether A child of Grace can be found in her.
she can be made a true child, for Death is a terrible Host, he casts the
proud Rider, and his Horse to the ground.

2. My beloved friend, this is a very Or deep.
hard Question, and needs the Eyes of all the three Principles to see it
well: they need not dye, that would enter in and behold this; they must be
poison to Death, and a pestilence to Hell; they must take Death captive if they
will see it, no man's understanding can otherwise find it out, except he come
into death himself, and then he will feel indeed what Death is; he shall
surely taste what it is, when one Principle ( viz. the life) perishes.

3. You understood before that all Things, or substances.
Essences are See the Book of the small six Points. Point 5. ver. 65.
Magical, and that one is always the Or Resemblance.
Glass of the other, and that in this Glass the Desire of the first Glass is
opened, and comes to be an Essence; and then also that the Turba is in every
Essence, which destroys all, [till it commeth] to the first Essence, and that
is alone and has no Destroyer.

4. For, there is nothing more; it cannot be broken, it is in it self, and
without it self, and goes whither soever it will: and thus it is all over in
one only place, for it is in the Abyss, where there is no place of Rest, it
must only rest in it self.

5. Now if all Essences have proceeded from one, then the beginning is also in
the last Essence; for the last is Or retired.
gone back into the first, and seeks the first, and finds it in it self,
and when it finds the first, it lets all the other go, and dwells in
the Limit, and there it can be without Or pain.
source.

6. For there is nothing that makes it a Or dies, or falls away.
source: It is it self the matter of the first Essence, and although it be
somewhat else, yet that is but the twig of it self, and its own will and
nothing else: for, there is nothing that can give it another will.

7. Thus we give you to understand what dying is: the beginning seeks the
Limit, and when it finds it, then it casts away the seeking, viz. the
Earthly Life, that shall be cast away, it must break off it self.

8. For, the beginning ( viz. the soul) continues in the Limit: and lets
the body perish, there is no complaining about it, neither does the soul
desire it any more: it must go also into its limit, viz. into the Wonders of
that which it has been.

9. For the Spirit of the soul grieveth not when the body Or dies, or falls
away.
perishes, but the Fire-Life grieveth, because the matter of the Fire, which
the fire has produced, that also perishes, but yet only in Essence.

10. The figure continues still in the will, for the will cannot be destroyed:
and thus the soul must continue in the will, and it takes the figure instead
of matter, and burns in the will; for the first glowing of the fire does not
pass away; but it is quite deprived of the matter of the Earthly Life, viz. of
the Substance, or dross.
Phur.

11. And thus the fire becomes weak, and passes into Darkness, except the
Spirit have heavenly Substantiality, the Glans of the Majesty; the glorified
body of Christ; and Adams bedy before he slept: Sophia's wedding Garment.
) Essentiality, viz. the Divine Body; and then the Fire ( viz. the true soul)
receives that mild body for a Or glorified body.
Sulphur; and so the soul burns in the Love-fire, and is quite gone out from
the first Viz. the Elementary fire of the outward Nature.
Fire-life.

12. It is now in Gods Principle: the first The fire of the wrath of the
outward Life.
wrathful Fire cannot touch it in Eternity, for it has received another
Source, and is truly borne again, and knows no more of the first Life, for
it is swallowed up in the Or Magic.
Magia.

13. The Turba remains in the Earthly Body; and is again become that which
it was before the body was, viz. a Nothing, a Magia, wherein all its Essences
stand in the Figure as in a Glass yet not bodily, but after the manner of
Eternity: as we know that all the Wonders before this world, stood in a
Mystery, viz. in the Virgin of wisdom, yet without substance.

14. Therefore we here understand, that this Mystery has been so manifested
in its parting, that it cannot be Or made one again.
extinguished in Eternity; but it remains Eternally in Distinction and
Partition; and is beheld in the Magic, in the parting in that manner, as it
formed it self here.

15. Thus we may perceive that the Or parting of the soul from the body.
Separation is, that the Turba has found the Limit of the Essence: for
sickness to death is nothing Else, but that the Turba has inflamed it self,
and would destroy the Essence: it is at the Limit, and will cast away that
which is introduced Or middlemost between the beginning* and the end.
between.

16. And this is also the cause that the body dies; the Turba thrusts it
self into the fire, and so the outward Life is extinguished; for it
withdraws the fire of the soul, and so it passes into its own Sky,
receptacle or subtility.
Ether, and is at its Limit.

17. And if the fire of the soul has not the Divine body in the Spirit, nor
in the Will in the Desire, then it is a dark fire, which burns in anguish
and great horror: for it has nothing but the first four forms of Nature in
Anguish.

18. And if the will be quite void of the power of humility; then there is no
sinking downwards or inwards, through Death into Life, but it is like a
Anxious, mad, senseless, giddy wheel.
tormentive hurrying wheel, which would continually get aloft, and yet it
goes downwards on the other side; it has the condition of Fire, but not the
burning of Fire.

19. For, the Turba is the exceeding strong Or Astringency, first Form.
harshnesse, and bitterness: and the bitterness continually seeks the 2.
Fire, and would evaporate it, but the Astringency holds it captive; so that it
is only an horrible 4. and 3.
Anguish, and continually turns in it self like a wheel, and imagines, but
finds nothing but it self: it draws it self into it self, and makes it
self pregnant: it eats it self, and is its own substance.

20. It has no other substance, but that which the Spirit of the soul
continually 3. and 4.
made in the outward life; viz. Covetousness, Pride, cursing, swearing,
reviling, backbiting, slandering, Or did, or wrought.
murders, hatred, Rage, or sur^inesse.
wrath, anger falsehood; this is its food, sport, and Wo^ke, or business.
pastimes for the Turba in the will takes the substance with it: Its works
follow it.

21. And although it has done some good, yet that is done only in Or
Hypocrisy.
in a glistering show and appearance; from an ambitious mind: and afterward
it continues thus, in its aspiring, and always endeavoring to climb up, it
always elevateth it self, it would continually be above the Meekness, and
yet it neither knows it, nor sees it: it is an uncessant elevation above
God, and yet an Eternal Depression; it seeks a ground, and there is none:
This is its Life.

22. Yet, if it had comprehended any purity of Love in its will (as many a one
that is converted at last in his end) then it thus sinketh into it self
through the Anguish: for the humble spark falls down through death into
Life, and then the Or pain.
source of the soul ends: yet it is a small twig budding forth into the
Kingdom of God.

23. It cannot sufficiently be described, what refining the soul has, and how
it is hindered and plagued by the Devil, ere it can get this spark into it
self. But this wise world will not believe this, it is too wise, and yet it is
so stark blind it understands Nothing, but hangs continually to the Letter:
O! that none might feel this by Experience, and we would gladly hold our
Peace.

24. We speak not here of any strange Or pain.
source, but only of that which is in the Turba and also of no other Power of
the Devil over the poor soul, but its own horror and Or wicked.
abominable suggestions, by which the Imagination of the soul is so tormented.

25. The condition of Hell is far otherwise then Babell teaches; she says
that the Devil whippeth.
beats and tormenteth the soul; but this is spoken in mere blindness: the
Devil is not at odds with his own Children; they must all do his will; the
anguish and horror of Hell plagueth every one of them sufficiently in their
own abominations; every one has his own Hell, there is nothing but his own
poison that apprehends him.

26. The four Forms of the Original of Nature, are the common plague which
every one feels according to his own Turba, but one far otherwise then
another: the Covetous has cold; the Angry Fire, the envious bitterness, the
proud an high aspiring, and yet an Eternal sinking and falling into the
Abyss: the Or blasphemer.
scorner swalloweth down the Turba of those abominations, which he here
belched forth: the false slandering heart has the fourth form, viz. the great
Or Aching.
Anguish.

27. For, the Turba stands in the Circle of the Fire, viz. in the heart of
the soul; and false speaking, lying and Idle words unfaithfulness, or jeering.
untruthes are an abomination, and gnawing, and make it curse it self.

28. A Potentate who has oppressed the poor, and consumed his Or labor.
sweat in Pride, he rides in the curses of the poor in the height of Fire;
for all the Or miseries.
necessities of the poor stick in him.

29. He has no Rest, his pride always climbeth up, he behaveth himself just
as he did here; he continually seeks, and yet wants all things; what he had
too much of, that he has too little of there, he continually desires to
devour his own Essence, but he has none; for he is Magical.

30. He has lost his Or right.
true Image, he has the Image as it were of a proud prancing Horse, or of what
else he has been delighted with, whatsoever he took with him in his will,
that is his Image; where his Heart is, there is his treasure also, and that to
Eternity.

31. But hearken friend, what the last Judgment will bring with it! then all
things shall pass through the Fire, and the floare shall be swept clean, and
every one shall have his own place; at this the very Devils themselves do
tremble.

The nineteenth Question.
How is the Soul Mortal, and how immortal?
1. A Thing which has an Eternal beginning, has also an Eternal End, and so
has the Essence of the soul.

2. As concerning the Image which God created, and which has a Temporal
beginning, that is borne out of the Eternal, and is placed in the Eternal
Essence without Or pain, or working property, or Nature.
source.

3. And where there is no e source there is also no Death, and though there be
a source (as there is a source in Heaven) yet it is but in one only will, and
that has its foundation in the Eternity: and as nothing is there that can
find it, so there is nothing that can get into it.

4. But where there is one will only, (as in God, who is All in All,) there is
nothing that can find the will, there is no Turba there, for the will desires
nothing but it self only, and its twigs, which all stand in one tree, in one
Essence; the Tree is its own beginning, and its own End.

5. The soul is come out of the Mouth of God and when the body dies it goes
again into the Mouth of God; It is the Essence in the Word, and the Deed in
the Will.

6. Now who will condemn that which he has in his own body; now the soul is
in the Divine body, it is hidden in God from all evil, and who can find it?
none but the Spirit of God, and one soul another, also the Communion of Angels.

7. But the wicked souls have lost their Image in the Limit* for f it is
entered into a Limit, and that Limit is the End of the Image: the Turba
destroys the first Image, and attracteth the Or works.
Essences of the will for an Image; and this is also immortal; for the
Eternal Nature dies not, because it had no beginning.

8. If the Eternal Nature in the fire of Anger should die, then also Gods
Majesty would be extinguished, and the Eternal something, would again become
an Eternal Nothing; and that cannot be, but whatsoever is from Eternity, that
continues Eternally.

9. The false soul cannot awaken any other source, but that only which stood
from Eternity in the Eye of Anger, viz. in the Center of Nature.

10. All things have been from Eternity, but essentially in the Essence, not in
the Substance of the essence, not substantial Spirits but Spirits Figurales
Spiritus.
in figure, without Corporality, they have been from Eternity as in a Magia,
one has swallowed up the other in the Magia.

11. And a third is come out of these two, according to the form of these two:
there has been a wrestling from Eternity, and a figured substance: the
Creation has placed all in the Wonders, so that now in Eternity, all things
stand thus in the Eternal Magia in the Wonders.

12. Note the condition of the wicked souls, of such Infants, as die in their
Mothers womb, and in innocence, before they commit sin actually.
Now if the wicked souls had brought no substance into their wills, then they
should have no pain, there would be no feeling but Magia: but the substance is
an Image, and that is in the Turba, and so there is a source that may be felt.

13. There is a dying, and yet no dying, but a will of dying, viz. an anguish
in that substance which was brought into the will.

14. And this is caused by the Longing that all things have after God; and yet
are not able to reach him, which causes anguish and sorrow for the wickedness
they have let into them: when the soul continually thinks, had thou not
done this, or that, then thou might have attained the Grace of God: and the
i evil substance causes the Eternal Despair.

15. And thus we say no soul is mortal, whether it be in God, or in Hell; and
its substance remains for ever to Gods Wonders.

The twentieth Question.
How does the Soul return to God again?
1. THis has been already sufficiently cleared; that it was Or breathed.
spoken out of the Mouth of God, and created by the Holy Ghost, in the Image of
God.

2. Now if it so continue, then, when it leaves this Earthly Life, it it is
already in the Mouth of God, for it is in the Divine Body, no Evil, pain, or
hurt can come at it.
Source can touch it.

The one and twentieth Question.
Whether goes the Soul when it departs from the body, be it saved, or not
saved.
1. HE that rightly understands the three Principles, need not ask this
Question: for, the soul departs not out at the Mouth, for it did not come in
at the Mouth! but it only leaves the Earthly Life; the Turba snatcheth away
the Earthly Life, and then the soul remains in its own Principle.

2. For, the body retains it not, no wood, no stone* can comprehend, enclose,
keep, or withold it.
retain it, it is thinner then the Air, and if it have the Divine Body, then
it goes strait as a Conqueror through the Turba, viz. through the Anger of
God, and quite through Death, and when it is through, then it is in Gods Or
substance.
Essence.

3. It remains in its Deeds, and
wonders and Essences, which it wrought here: It beholds the Majesty of God,
and the Angels face to fa^e.

4. Wheresoever it is, it is in the Abyssall world, where there is no End nor
Limit: whither should it go? where the carcass is there the Eagles gather
together: It is in Christ's flesh and Blood, with Christ its Shepherd.

5. Though it should go a thousand miles off, yet it were then in the same
place from whence it went; for, in God there is no Limit; near and far off
is all one.

6. It is as swift as a Thought, it is Magical, it dwells in its Wonders,
they are its House.

7. The Essentiality that is without, it is Paradise, a springing blossoming,
and growing of all manner of fair heavenly fruits; just as we have all kinds
of fruit here in this world, which we eat after an Earthly manner; so also
there are all manner of fruits in Paradise, which the soul may eat; they have
colors and virtues in the substance, and not like a thought: though they be as
thin and subtle as a Thought, but substantial, comprehensible, and palpable
to the soul, virtuall and sappy with the water of Life, and all this from the
heavenly substantiality.

8. For, the heavenly body of the soul is from the pure Element (whence the
four Elements are brought forth) and that gives flesh, and the Tincture
gives blood: the heavenly man has flesh and blood, and Paradise is the Power
of the substantiality, it is heavenly Earth, incomprehensible to our outward
Reason.

9. But we will again teach you another A. B. C. All in this world have not
Christ's flesh in them, hidden in the Old Adam, yea among very many, not one,
but the Regenerate, who are departed from their own will into Gods will, in
whom the Noble Grain of Mustard Seed is sown, out of which a Tree is grown.

10. Most souls depart from the body without Christ's body: yet they hang as by
a The small thread of Faith.
thread; and are at last in their Faith gotten into the will: these souls
indeed are in the Image in the Spirit, but not in Flesh.

11. Such as these wait for the last Day; when the Image, ( viz. the Body)
shall come forth out of the Grave, out of the first Image, for God will raise
it up by the voice of Christ: even that Image which Adam had in his Innocence,
which has been washed with Christ's Blood.

12. But the Earthly Body shall not touch it: that must come before the
Judgment in the Turba; but after the Sentence of the Judgment, the Turba
shall swallow it up, and the Or works.
Wonders [of it] shall only remain.

13. You must understand us aright: These souls that must wait till the the
last Day for their Bodies, they remain with their bodies in the still Rest,
till the last day, without feeling any Or Source.
pain; but in another Principle.

14. They have neither Darkness, nor Majesty in the Earth, but are at rest
without pain, in the Eternal still Liberty, without touching of the Body.

15. Yet they see their Or works.
Wonders, but they effect nothing in them, for they expect God and are in
Humility, fot they are sunk down through Death, and are in another world, yet
there is a great Gulf, or distance.
Space between them, and the holy souls that are in Christ's flesh and Blood;
but not a Principle, they are in one and the same Principle.

16. But a Spirit without a body has not that Or Power.
might, which the Spirit in the body has; therefore they rest: and are under
the Altar of God.

17. When the last Day shall come, then shall they come forth, and eat of the
Bread of God, and put on the Divine Body, as is mentioned in the Revelations of
John; Rev. 6.9, 10, 11.
where the souls under the Altar clothed in White say: Lord, when will thou
avenge our Blood? and it was answered them, that they should rest a little
while, till their brethren were accomplished which should be killed for the
witness of Jesus.

18. But the souls of the wicked have another place, viz. in the most the
innermost in the utter Darkness.
innermost, which also is the most uttermost of all Darkness; they dare not
go up and down, they remain merely with the body, in their Essence of
works.
substance, yet not in this world, neither do they touch the Earth.

19. It has indeed power enough over the Earth, it can open it without Essence
and feeling.
substance and perceptibility: But it has not the outward Principle; it has
not power enough over the outward Spirit; yet it can for a time make Show
juggling tricks.
Apparitions in the Or Spirit of the Air.
fydereall Spirit.

20. As many appear again in the Astrall Spirit, and seek Or Rest.
Abstinence, and make many afraid, with keeping a racket in houses, all which
they do by the Astrall Spirit till that be consumed; and then their Or Pomp,
and show.
tricks lie in the Darkness: and they expect the last Judgment.

21. Our Babell sath, it is the Devil, which goes up and down in the shape
of the soul; indeed the damned soul has enough of the Devil, but it is not
the very Devil, he is in the Abyss, and tormenteth the soul in the time of
the body willingly, in the Abyss of the soul.

22. Neither does he altogether want a cloak for his knavery, for he can put
on an outward cloak to seduce, or terrify men in.

23. But this complaint we have against Babell, that she is so extreme blind,
and has so little knowledge of God; she has cast away Magic and Philosophy,
and received the Antichrist: now she has lost her understanding; she has a
kind of Art still, but her understanding quite fails her, she has broken
the Glass and peereth through the holes of the Spectacles.

24. What shall we say? The world is blind-folded, it is led by a string, and
taken captive, and it sees it not, yet it were at liberty, if it did but see
it once: the snare wherewith it is bound is malicious Knavery: thou shall soon
be made to see; It is broad daylight, do but awake thou Keeper of Israel.

25. Thus my beloved friend, know that there is a difference of Places where
souls are; according to that whereinto the soul is entered; if it be Holy and
Regenerate, then it has a The body of Christ.
Body, which expects only the Or works.
Wonders of the body at the last Day; it has Conceived, or formed.
comprehended them already in the Will, but at the Day of Judgment it must
stand before the Judgment.

26. All souls good and had shall every one receive their Sentence and Reward:
The Holy shall be set in the presence of the wicked, that they may see and Or
taste.
feel the cause of their Or source.
pain.

27. If any should feign a peculiar Residence, or place where they should
consort or sit together, that contradicts the Rule of the Magia: Every soul is
in its own Country, and not bound to the place of the body, but it may be
where it will; wheresoever it is, it is, either in God, or in Darkness.

28. God is every where, and Darkness is every where, the Angels also are
every where, each in its own Principle, and in its own Or sour.
Property.

29. The Fiction of outward Reason, without the knowledge of the Principles is
Or a false Glass, a conceit.
as a fighting with a shadow: If I should ask a thousand times, and should
always be told somewhat from God himself, and yet were but in flesh and
blood, I should look upon it as Babell does; which supposes that the soul
flies into a Heaven, above the Stars; I know not that Heaven they speak of,
and I desire not to come there.

30. Heaven is indeed above; but there are the Angelical Ptincipalities and
Thrones: This Eye of the Skies Mansions, or Spheres.
Ether is our Principality, and Kingdom.

31. The same is with them above which is with us, but our Creation and Essence
is in our Ether: A soul may come to them if it earnestly desires, and the
Angels of God will lovingly entertain it.

32. For, the same Essence of God which is with us, is with them; this only is
the difference; that they have among them Angelical works, wholly, pure
without blemish, and we have the great wonders, and therefore they long to be
with us; and besides they are our servants, during the life of the body, and
withstand the Devil.

33. Now if the Angels be in this world, in the Holy Principle; whither then
shall the soul fly first might Babell think? perhaps into Pride as Luc^fer
did! O no! they continue in humility, and look What God death.
Gods Wonders, as Gods Spirit moves so do they.

The two and twentieth Question.
What does every Soul? does it rejoice till the last Judgment Day?
1. THis Question contains the exceeding joyful Gate of Glory, leading to
the knowledge of the Or Tr^umphant.
victorious Garland of the soul.

2. When a Darling-Sonne travelleth a far off into a strange Country, for
Art and Honor: he often thinks of home, and of the time, when he shall enjoy
his Parents and friends, he rejoices at the thought of that Day, and expects
it with inward joy and Longing: also he plyeth himself hard in his business,
that he may get Arts and skill, wherewith he may make his Parents, kindred, and
friends rejoice.

3. Think of this similitude, and take it into consideration: It is just so
with the soul: the souls without The body of Christ.
body have a great inward Joy; and wait for the last Day with great inward
Desire, when they shall again receive its fair and Holy Body with its Or
works. which it did here.
Wonders.

4. Also their Ornament is in their will, where they behold their works after
the manner of the Eternal Abyssall Magic, which they shall then first receive
at the last Day, in the Figure with the new body out of the Old.

5. Also we know and Or sully.
highly perceive, yet in the Spirit only, according to its knowledge; that the
blessed souls do rejoice in the labor which they took here, and exceedingly
recreate themselves in their wonders which they see Magically: for they that
have led many to Righteousness, they have their Reward in the Magia, in the
will before their Eyes.

6. They that have suffered much Persecution for the Truths sake, they see
their bright Or Crown of Victory.
Triumphant Garland; which at the last Day, they shall put on upon the New body.

7. They that have done much Good, they see that plainly shining in the will.

8. They who have been scorned, contemned, persecuted, and slain for Christ's
Doctrine, honor, and Truths sake, they see the Triumphant Victory, like one
that has overcome his Enemy in a fight, and then sets it forrh Triumphantly
to his Prince or King, and for which he has exceeding great Glory, when his
King receives him with great joy: and keeps him with him for his faithful
assitant.

9. We have no Pen that can write what exceeding joy is in them: only this we
know, that those for the most part, have put on the Divine Body in this world,
and so have greater perfection then the other: they expect the last Day with
great joy and Glory, when their works shall be presented to them, and set
before their Eyes in heavenly figures, and the wicked shall see them Or who
they have tyrannised over.
against whom they have kicked.

10. Every soul rejoices before the face of God, in great hope of that which
it shall receive again, for it knows its Reward, but without the body it
cannot receive it: for it has wrought its works in the Body, and therefore
its works follow it in the New body, and come to it again.

11. For, although the exceeding precious Holy souls have put on Christ's body
in this world, so that they stand in Heaven, viz. in the Image of God, yet all
their works were wrought in the Old Body, which was Gods Glass: and in the
Resurrection, they shall be represented in the true heavenly Figure, in Or Old
body.
that body.

12. For, the first Image which Adam was before the fall, is Regenerated in
Christ, and shall again with its Wonders be put upon the soul; and although
it had the Divine Body before, yet the Or works.
Wonders stand in the first Image.

13. But the Turba, with the outward Kingdom of the outward Source is gone,
for The first Image.
it was a Glass, and is now become a Wonder, it lives without Spirit as a
Wonder, and shall be put upon the soul in great Clarity, Transfiguration, or
brightness.
Glory, which it shall have from the Light of God: at which the holy souls do
exceedingly rejoice, and expect it with great longing.

14. You must know that every blessed soul trimmeth its Lamp, so that it
willingly meets its Bridegroom at the last Day: it always renews its
will, and thinks how it shall rejoice with all holy men and Angels, in its
new Body in the Wonders: there is a continual springing up of Joy in them,
when they think of that which is to come, each as it is virtues are.

15. And as their works have been different upon Earth, so also is their hope:
for, a Day-labourer, who has wrought much, rejoices at his wages; so also
here: there is a friendly Essence among them, and in them.

16. All the scorn and disgrace which was put upon them that were innocent, is
a great Triumphant Glory to them, in that they have suffered in Innocence, and
put on Patience in Hope; which they have still on, Death cannot take it away,
nor put it off, but the soul takes that with it which it has Or wrought.
conceived.

17. Its many hearty Prayers, wishes, and good deeds in love to its Neighbor,
are its food which it eareth, and joyfully enjoys, till its New Body shall
eat Paradisicall fruit.

18. But they which have put on the Divine Body here, they eat at Gods Table
without ceasing: yet the Paradisicall fruit belongs to the body of the
Wonders, which shall arise out of the Grave, and which was created in Paradise;
for it was made out of the Beginning, and it brings the End with the Or
works.
Wonders into the Beginning again.

19. But wonder not, nor think that we understand it so, though we seem to
speak of two bodies of the Holiest Saints; for they are not two, but one: But
consider, that Gods Essentiality fills all, and that is the Divine Body,
which is put upon the. The great Holy souls.
Holy souls, even in this life.

20. For they cast their will into Gods will, and so they receive the Divine
Body which fills all things: their will dwells in the Divine Body, and
eats of Gods Word, of Gods fruit, of Gods Or Power.
virtue, in the Divine Body; and Christ is in God; God is become Christ.

21. And so they Or are clothed with.
wear Christ's Body in God, and yet wait for their first Adamicall holy Body,
with the Viz. The works and deeds, which were done by the Element^ry Body,
during the whole l fe.
Wonders, which shall be put upon them with Paradisicall Or quality.
property.

22. For, Gods purpose must stand, he created the first Body Or in.
for Paradise, it should have continued there Eternally, and it must go
thither again: and the soul must remain upon the Cross of the Ternary in
the Mouth of God, whence it came: and yet the whole Person continues with Body
and soul in one another; but God fills All in All.

23. O! that we had but a humane Pen, and were able to write it in the Spirit
of your soul according to our knowledge: O! how many would then return out of
Sodom and Gomorrah, out of Babell, out of the Covetous, proud vale of Misery,
which notwithstanding is but Anguish and pain, full of fear, vexation and
horror.

24. And here we shall let you know, that you may deeply consider it: what is
the lamentable and miserable condition of the damned souls, and what they have
to expect, and but briefly, seeing the following Question does it at large.

25. Their expectation is like that of an imprisoned Malefactor, who
continually listneth (when any thing stirs) when the Executioner should
come, and execute Judgment, and give him his Reward: just so do they.

26. They have a false Conscience, which gnaweth them, their sins are set
continually before them: they also see their works Magically: they see all
their unrighteousness and vanities, their unmeasurable pride and haughtiness;
they see the oppression of the poor; their scorning and suppression of them.

27. Their false belief flies from them; their Hypocrisy was only a
deceitful Glass; it reached not the Heart of God; it stands visibly before
them in the Magic, viz. in their will: but when they search therein, they
stir up the Turba of the Fire, which will always consume the Glass, and
then they are in fear and horror.

28. For, they see and know, that all must be tried at the last Day, by the
Eternal fire of Gods Anger: and they feel very well that their works will
stay in the Fire.

29. The Devils also exceedingly Tremble, when they consider their fall: which
rests in Gods Judgment what he will do; of which the Holy Scripture tells
us plainly enough: especially the Judge, Christ himself.

30. Thus know, that the totally miserable condition of the damned is, that
when they should trim their Lamps, to meet their Bridegroom at his coming,
they tremble and smother all their works, which the Turba nevertheless sets
before their Eyes.

31. But now those souls which are damned in a high degree, are very
presumptuously bold, they reject God, and curse him, and are his Most malicious.
worst Enemies.

32. They hold their cause to be just, they oppose God with daring impudency,
and think, is there fire? so are we fire; is there Rising, boiling properties.
source? then we will climb up above God, and Heaven in the source of the
fire: what care we for humility, we will have the strength and might of the
fire, we will be above God and do Wonders by our Power.

33. We have the Root, God has but the Glance, let us be Lords, God shall be
servant, our The wrath of the Eternal Nature.
Mother is his life, we will overthrow his strong Tower at once.

34. They have the mind of Soldiers, that scale Forts and walls, and think
the City is theirs, though indeed they loose their lives and never get it.

35. You must understand, that Hell is against Heaven, and the Inhabitants
thereof against the Inhabitants of Heaven; and this in God is also a great
Wonder, all makes for his Glory.

The three and twentieth Question.
Whether do the Souls of the wicked, without difference, (for so long a time
before the Day of Judgment) feel any ease, or Refreshment?
1. A Thing which goes into an Eternal Entrance, is also in the Eternal End;
who can put any thing into his hand that is a far off, and not present where it
is to be done? he must give it only into his hand that is by, to receive it:
And that thing, which with its will is gone forth out of it self, can receive
nothing within it self, because it desirerh nothing within it self.

2. Thus it is with the wicked, in this world: he is gone with his will out of
himself into Covetousness, Pride and pleasure, into vices, gormandizing,
tippling and whoring, also into Gluttony: his will is continually bent to
despise the poor; in scorn and disgrace to plague the poor, and to tread him
down by Authority.

3. He has corrupted Judgment with lies and bribes, and continually swallowed
down unrighteousness as a Cow drinks water; all that has come from him
has been Or cruel.
bitter Anger, which he prosecuted as far as his power would reach: his will
has been mere wilfulness, he has done what he listed; he has danced after
the Devils own Pipe, and has wholly entered into Covetousness; he has
accounted his money and means, his Treasure; and his will has continually
entered into it.

4. He has never retired into himself, and sought after Love, much less
humility; he has esteemed the needy, as his footstool, he has crushed him
under without measure: he has counted it his Art and wit, when he has been
able thus to gripe and overreach the simple; and deprive him of his labor.

5. He has supposed, that he had found out the finest policy, who Had gotten
an Office.
could contrive his business so sure, that he might do what he listed, then
he thought himself very cunning, and that he had great Wisdom.

6. All this, yea, and much more he has conceived in his will, and therewith
the Image of the Spirit of the soul has been filled, and all this stands in
his figure; and when ever the body Or returns to Earth.
dies, then the Turba lays hold of this in the Spirit.

7. And then if the Spirit would feign enter into it self, the Turba goes
with it, and seeks the ground, viz. the Root of the soul, and so the fire
is but Inflamed.
kindled by it.

8. And you must know, that the souls of the wicked have no ease, their best
ease and joy is when they climb up in the will, in their Employment, or Office.
works which they did here, and continually desire to do them more still: it
grieveth them that they did not afflict the honest more then they did; their
will is just so as it was here.

9. They are Spirits of Pride, like the Devil, a Covetous devouring Spirit,
which devoureth their abominations which they committed here: their joy is
only to think how they will contemn God, and be their own Lords, this is
their recreation and refreshing, and no other.

10. For, how should they receive any other refreshing? when they dare not for
shame lift up their eyes to God, nor dare they fly to the Saints, whom they
have here scorned; they are ashamed to do that, for their falsehood continually
smites them on the face, and their malice and falsehood boyleth tip from
Eternity to Eternity.

11. When but the least thought of the last Day, comes into their minds,
then fear and horror stirs in them: they rather let that thought alone,
and recreate themselves in haughtiness.

12. And this is also a Wonder, and the greatest Wonder of All, that an Or an
Image of Love.
Angel should become such a furious Or mad senseless Image of Anger, and
wrath.
Devil: and so the Power of Gods Anger comes to be manifest in God: for God
has manifested himself according to both The Eye of Love, and the Eye of
wrath.
Eyes, in Love and Anger: and it is left free to Man, he may go into which of
them he will: God throws none into wrath, the soul casts it self into it.

13. But you must know, that the wrath has set its Or Jaws.
throat wide open, and draws mightily, and desires to devour All; for it is
the Covetousness, and the Pride insulting over humility.

14. And so also Love and Humility have opened their Mouth; and draw with all
their Powers, and would draw Man into Love, into Heaven.

15. Now into which of these the soul enters, in that it remains and
grows, whether in Love or in Anger; In that Tree it stands, and there is no
Deliverance in Eternity from thence: here in this Life the soul stands in a
Balance in the Angle, and may (though it have been evil) be borne again in
Love; but when the Angle breaks then it is gone: it is afterward in its own
Country, in its Principle.

16. Who shall break that which is Eternal, where no breaker can be found?
for it is its own Maker; whence then shall another Turba come, when a thing is
in the Eternity where no Limit is.

17. But that you may see for all this, that God wills not evil: He makes
his will known unto you; He sends you Prophets and teachers, and gives them
his Spirit, that they may give you warning: Now if you refuse to obey; then you
stay still willingly in the Anger, which is your Dwelling, or Prison.
wages and Kingdom.

18. God Sends you Cro^ses.
afflicts you, to break you off from your own will, from your voluptuous
proud, and dissolute Life! But if you go on, you shall hereafter surely taste
the hellish Dregs.

19. We teach you the Cross: and the Devil teaches you pleasure: Now you
may take which you will, you shall have it, be it Love, or wrath.

20. We labor for you, but you contemn us: what should we do more for you;
we are even your very slaves; if you will not accept us, be it at your peril,
and get you gone with that which is your own, and we will take that which is
ours, and so we are parted for ever.

21. We will nevertheless work in our Day-labour, and do what is commanded
us: at the Harvest we shall appear before one another, and then you will know
us, and do that to your selves there, which you have here done to us: we will
not hide this from you, but tell you what we see.

The four and twentieth Question.
Whether do men's wishes profit them any thing? or sensibly Help, or do them
good.
avail them, or no?
1. MY beloved friend, look upon the Rich man, and poor Lazarus, so you shall
find that there is a great Or Gulf. Luc. 16.20.
space between them and us, so that those that would reach them with their
prayers, and their will, cannot; neither can they come to us, there is a
Principle between.

Psalm. 49.8.14.
2. The Prayer and wish of the Righteous pierces into Heaven, and not into
Hell: the Scripture also tells you, out of Hell there is no Or deliverance.
Redemption; they lie in Hell as dead bones, they call, and no man hears
them; no praying avails them.

3. And though many men should pray for the damned souls, yet their Prayers
remain in their own Principle, and pass into Heaven, and not into Hell:
there is no calling back again out of Hell says the Scripture.

4. You know what Christ said to his seventy Disciples, when ye enter into an
House, greet the house, and if the Child of Peace be in that house, then your
greeting and wish shall rest upon it; if not; your wish returns to you
again: and so it is also here.

5. No good wish enters into Hell: But if the wicked leave behind him much
falsehood and deceit, so that the Hellish Torment is wished to him in the Grave,
such wishes come to the wicked soul, those wishes come to pass with them; for
that soul must swallow down its abominations which it committed here: and
that is its food which the living send after it.

6. But it is altogether unfit, and does not become the Children of God at all:
for thereby they sow into Hell, into the Anger of God: they had need beware
least they also reap that which they sow; most certainly, if they do not
recall themselves and repent, it will fall out no otherwise.

7. Furthermore, we give you to understand according to our knowledge in the
Spirit (not according to the weening and conceit of the outward Man, but
according to our Gift, that those souls (which as it were hang by a The thread
of Faith, which is small and weak.
thread, and but at last enter into Repentance, and so comprehend the Kingdom
of Heaven as it were by a thread, so that doubting and Faith are mixed) are in
such a condition, that a hearty Prayer and wish redoundeth to their profit, and
pierces into the poor captive soul, into its Condition, or property, or
misery.
source, if it be made with all Earnestness.

8. For, it is neither in Hell, nor in Heaven; but in the Gate, in the middle
source of the Principle, where fire and Light fever themselves, and is held by
its Turba, that always seeks Or to devour it.
the fire: But then this small twig which it has Or comprehended.
conceived, viz. the weak Faith deeply demerseth it self; and earnestly
reaches after the Mercy of God, and yields it self patiently, into the
Death of that sinking down; and so gets out from the Anguish, and sinketh
down from the Or source.
into the meekness of Heaven.

9. And although many a soul is held a Or tedious while.
sufficient while, yet the Anger cannot devour that small Faith, but must at
last let it go.

10. But I leave it to him, to try what this is, who wilfully presevereth in
sin till his End, and then first desires to be saved: and then the Priest,
or Minister.
forsooth must save him: he shall find it by woeful experience.

11. We say, that a man's hearty fervent prayer stands such a one in stead; for,
a zealous, earnest, faithful Prayer has power to break open the Gates of the
Deep, it breaks open a whole Principle, and seeks; and if there be any
thing there, that is capable of its will, that takes hold of it; viz. the
poor soul in its source of sin eceiveth the earnest, Divine will of its
loving Brother, and so is strengthened; and in its brothers Spirit and will, is
able to sink down out of the Anguish, through Death, and attain the Kingdom
of God.

12. But in its glorification it cannot avail it; for, it shines forth out of
its own Essence and will: The soul of a Neighbor goes no further then death
with it: (yet it is not the [neighbours] soul but the Spirit and will of his
soul that does so) and there the Anger parts, and then it is released from
the wrath; and then the Spirit enters again into its own soul.

13. In Popery much juggling has been invented about this, in saying Mass for
a soul, and that for money only: but this has been a great cheat of the Pope
of Babell; for there is earnestness required, to wrestle with the Anger of
God, and overcome it.

14. Yet we confess, and acknowledge readily that the Church of Christ has
great power to ransom such a soul; if with fervency and Earnestness it do
it: as it was done in the Primitive Church, when they had holy people, and Holy
Priest, who performed their Ministry in real Earnestness.

15. They indeed effected somewhat, but not in such a way as the Pope boasts
of, saying, that he has the Key, and that he can let out a soul with his Or
Pardon.
blessing when he will, if a man will but give him money: This is a lie.

16. If he be Holy, then he bears the Mysterium Magnum.
Great Mystery; and is a Shepherd of Christ [set] over his Lambs: but then
he must with the Congregation, in great earnestness, urge God in great
Humility, and so relieve the poor soul, not for money.

17. There is always covetousness in Money, and it never reaches the earnest
The first most inward Ground.
Principle; the Prayer of the Covetous goes into his Or Christ.
Hutch: we say, that all service which is done in the Church of Christ for
Money, belongs to Antichrist in Babell, for Or they set their hearts upon it.
their hearts depend upon it: It were better men gave them meat and drink, and
necessaries, but no money: and then they should not set their hearts so much
upon it.

18. What can a Spirit seek and find in the Mystery, when it self is not in
the Mystery? O! there is a great deceit in that, when it is Day, you will see
that it is so: ye are still in darkness, in the Mystery, so egregiously has
Babell blinded you.

19. And it only is (because you have regarded Art and Favor, and not the
Spirit God) therefore notorious delusions are seized upon you, so that you
believe the Spirits of lies, who speak Delusions in fine outside, seeming
holiness.
Hypocrisy; on these you depend, and stick to them, and cause Hypocrisy by
your Error: Observe well that the Revelations of John and Daniel tells you!
It is Day, the Reward will shortly follow.

20. Ye have Teachers now, that wholly Or cast to the ground.
suppress the Spirit of the Primitive Church; try them, and you shall find
them to be a crew of the Whores, Wolves, which at first sprung up in the
Primitive Church, when men slept; and these are they that will devour the
Whore themselves.

21. But try them, they are Wolves sent from the Malice, sin, and the Anger of
God, for the destruction of the world.
Turba; they must do it, God permits it so to come to pass, and will have it
so; that he may sweep out one besome with another: yet they are besomes, and
after the accomplishment of the Or workings.
Wonders of the Anger, they shall both be delivered to the Or punishment, or
calamity.
Turba together.

22. Let this Spirit tell you this, it is your own Prophet, he is borne out of
your Disputing, or contention.
Turba upon the Finishing of the sixth Seal.
Crown: Awake, or else your selves must be devoured one by another.

23. For, it is no stranger that consumes you, but your own Or sin, or
malice.
Turba, which is come to the Limit; O! boast not so much as you do of a golden
time, it is time of Wonders.

The five and twentieth Question.
What is the Hand of God, and the Bosom of Abraham?
1. IT has been sufficiently cleared already, that it is the Essential
Omnipresence of God; but in its own Principle: as the Rich man who was in
Hell, could not obtain that Abraham should send Lazarus to him, with one drop
of cold water to cool his tongue in those flames: Abraham said, there was a
great Gulf between them; that is, a whole Principle.

2. But the bosom of Abraham is to be understood thus: Abraham was the Father
of all the Faithful; and God gave him the Promise, that in his seed all people
should be blessed; this was to be understood of the Messia Chtist, who would
become man in the Or Believers.
Faithful, and as he became man in Abraham's seed, so also he would be borne
anew in the Children of the faithful, and bless them.

3. Now this is the Holy Christian Church, borne in Christ; and that is the
bosom of Abraham, for we are All one Body in Christ; and the Promise was made
to Abraham: He is the Patriarch, we are all borne in the same Promise, (we
mean [by] the New Birth in Christ) and are in the same bosom, which receives
us.

4. And when by earnest Repentance, we enter into the Promise of Abraham, then
we go into the bosom of Abraham, viz. Into the Promise that is made to us by
the Trinity.
into our Promise: and Christ is borne in us, in the bosom of Faith; this is
the fulfilling [of the Promise.]

5. And thus; in Humility; we are with Lazarus in the bosom of Abraham; for
Christ is Abraham: Christ was promised to Abraham, and now he has him, and we
also: and so we come into Abraham's bosom, and are his Children in the Promise,
and Christ is the fulfilling of it, and we in the fulfilling are in the bosom
of Abraham, and are the seed of Abraham, by Faith and Spirit.

6. Hear O ye blind Jews, open your Eyes: what was meant by Abraham's
Circumcision, nothing else, but that sin should be drowned in the blood and
death of Christ, who shed his blood for the Children of the Faith of Abraham,
and so [we] be regenerated in this blood, as in a heavenly Tincture.

7. Abraham and his Children drowned sin in their blood by Faith in Christ,
who should become Man in their blood; and now it is fulfilled: and therefore
God has set the seal of Faith That is in the Essence, or in the water.
in the substance; and now we must be, and are Regenerated in the true blood of
Christ.

8. The blood of Christ, takes away the Turba wholly from us: and so we, (
viz. the New Man out of the Old Adam) Or arise.
stand up in Christ's blood, and bear Christ's Image, Christ's flesh and blood in
us, in our Image; if we be Children of Abraham, and not Ismaels.

9. For, to Isaac belong the Goods of the Image, of the body of Christ: the
Circumcision is Ismaels, for he is conversant about works; but the Goods are
Isaacks: yet Ismaell shall dwell in Isaacks Tents at last: for Japhet shall
dwell in the Tents of Sem, but the Kingdom belongs to Sem.

10. We have the goods of Isaac not by the merit of works, but from Grace,
from the Love of God: we cannot attain them by works; but in Faith, in the
Will, in the Deed, and in entering [into the promised Inheritance.]

11. He that enters into an Inheritance, that is not his own by right of
Nature, he enters into it by the favor of the Or Giver.
Donor: why is a servant in the house angry, that his Lord is so bountiful to
give a stranger the Dominion.

12. We were strangers, and must work in his house; yet the Lord did promise
us in Paradise, that he would again freely out of Grace, give us his Kingdom:
He rejected Caines offering, but he gave the Kingdom of grace to Abell; for
Abell sought it in the Spirit, and Caine in the work.

13. Thus you understand, that Gods Kingdom is Magical; for, the earnest will
attaineth it, and not the Will in the Or work.
Essence, for that will remains in the Essence, but he that is at liberty, he
finds Eternity and the Kingdom of Grace therein, and the Promise also,
together with the Essence, and so the work dwells in the Will, and is the
wills household servant.

14. Thus you understand (if you have your fight) all the Old Testament; this
is the only ground; though comprised but in brief: If we write upon Moses, you
shall find it wholly there: and thus we have shown you the true ground of the
bosom of Abraham, and of the true Christian Religion.

15. He that teaches otherwise is of Babell; beware of him, he has not
Christ's Spirit: but he is Ismaell; and seeks but in his own conceit.

16. O! thou dear Christendom, do but open thine Eyes, or else it will no
more shine so clearly upon thee; go yet to Lazarus in the bosom of Abraham.

The six and twentieth Question.
Whether do the Souls of the Dead take care about Men, Children, friends, and
goods? And whether do they know, see, allow, or disallow their purposes, and
endeavors.
1. MY beloved friend: this Question is beyond the reach of all humane Reason,
and knowledge according to outward Reason; But seeing we are Abraham's Children,
we have also Abraham's Spirit in Christ: and as Abraham looked back upon the
Promise in Paradise, and then also forward unto the fulfilling of the Promise,
so that he saw in the whole Body of Christ, what was yet to be brought to pass
in the Or the time between both the beginning and the End.
middle: and saw Christ a far off; so also we.

2. Now seeing you do so vehemently long after the great Mysteries, and seek
them with so earnest a Desire, yet giving God the glory accounting your self
unworthy in your high Art, and so humble your self before God: therefore God
gives you them, by so mean and poor an Instrument, who esteems himself
much more unworthy of them; but yet would not willingly strive against his
will: and so you are the cause that this hand finds and attaineth them.

3. For, this hand knew nothing of the Mystery: It sought only for the Faith
of Abraham, but the understanding of Abraham was also given unto it, which you
have caused by your seeking.

4. Now have a care, that you also obtain the Spirit of Abraham, which has
written in the knowledge of this hand, we will impart it to you as a brother:
for we are not your Lord in this hidden thing, but your servant.

5. Know us aright, we are Lazarus, and you may be accounted Abraham in
comparison of us; you have labored much more then we; but we are fallen into
your Harvest: nor of merit, but by the Grace of the Giver: least any tongue
should boast in the sight of God, and say, this has my understanding done.

6. You propound a deep Question, Viz. in his outward Reason, or in the Old
Adam.
I understand it not: for if I should understand it, then I should dwell in the
separated soul, and must have the very same spirit, and knowledge of that
soul.

7. But now seeing we are one body in Christ, we have all of us Christ's Spitit;
therefore in Christ we all see out of one Spirit, and have one knowledge; for
he is become man in us, and all holy souls are our fellow members, all
begotten out of one: and we all have one will in Christ, in the true bosom of
Abraham.

8. And now we have obtained strength to reveal this hidden thing to you in
Christ; for our souls sees in their soul; not as if they came to us, but we
go to them: for they are in perfection, and we but In part, or in imperfection.
in part.

9. And now we are able to answer you, not from the reason of the outward
world; but from the Image in Christ, and from his and our Spirit.

10. You ask, whether the separated souls take care of humane matters, and
allow, or disallow them? Now this you must understand to be in three different
manners, concerning three several sorts of souls.

11. First, those souls, which yet have not attained Heaven, and so stick in
the source, in the Principle, in the Birth, those have yet the humane Essence
with the works in them: they diligently search out the cause of their Or stay
in that condition.
Retention.

12. And therefore many of them come again with the Astrall Spirit, and wander
up and down in their houses and places of abode, and appear in a humane
Shape, and desire this and that, and oftentimes take care about their wills or
Testaments, and also think to procure the blessing of the Saints, that they
may rest: and if their Earthly affairs do still stick in them, they take care
many times also about their Children and friends.

13. This condition of theirs continues so long, till they fall into their
Rest; and till their Astrall Spirit be consumed; then all such doings, care,
and perplexities are at an end, and rhey also have no more knowledge thereof,
but that they see them merely in the Wonders, in the Magic.

14. But it stirs not the Turba, neither seeks what is in this world: for,
it being once passed through Death from the Turba, it desires such things no
more; It also takes no further care: for care stirs up the Turba, and then
the will of the Soul should be forced to enter with its Spirit into earthly
things; but it had rather let such things alone, because it hardly got rid of
them before; It will no more entertain the Earthly will.

15. This is an Answer concerning this first sort, and we tell you plainly,
and in Truth; that this sort (after they are once received into Grace) take no
more care purposely about humane Earthly Or affairs.
matters: but it beholds the heavenly matters, which are brought to it by the
Spirit of man, and rejoices in them; but there is somewhat still behind,
which is this.

16. A living man has such Power, that he is able with his Spirit, to go into
Heaven to the separated souls, and stir them up about some Question by a
hearty Desire: but it must be earnest, it must be Faith, that can break open a
Principle.

17. And this we see in Samuel the Prophet, whom the Saul.
King of Israel raised up: that he might make his will known to him: though
this seem otherwise to some: of whom we may well say, that they are blind and
void of knowledge, for they speak but their own scholastic Fables, and
frame Opinions about that they have no knowledge of in the Spirit: and these
are Babell.

18. Now secondly, the other sort, which sink into Death without a Or the body
of Christ.
body, they are wholly in one, and the same place of the Principle, in which
the first sort are, which afterward did sink down in themselves: All these
take no evil affairs upon them, wherein the Turba sticks.

19. But when the honest souls which are alive, send them their works, with
their Spirit and will, they rejoice in them, and are so affable, that they
appear to men Magically in sleep, and show them good ways, and many times
reveal Arts which lie in In Arcano, in the most ^nward Mystery.
secret, viz. in the Abyss of the soul.

20. For, seeing the Earthly Spirit thrusts its Mystery before the soul,
and keeps the soul captive in that Mystery, therefore the Spirit of the
Soul cannot always attain the deepest secrets; but after the departure of
the body, the soul is naked, and that especially, if it be without a New body;
then it beholds it it self, and also its Wonders: and it can very well show
one that is living somewhat (if he be honest and have not stirred up the Turba)
in the sleeping Magia: for Dreams are wholly Magical, and the soul without a
Body is in the Magia of God.

21. Thus know that no soul separated from the body enters into any wicked
matter, except it be a damned soul, which indeed enters in Magically, and
has its joy therein, and teaches most notorious vile prancks in Dreams, for
it is a servant of the Devil.

22. And whatsoever a wicked man desires, that the Devil readily helps him
to; for he can do it better by the soul of a man then of himself, for he is
too crude, and Makes horror in the Magia.
terrifieth the Magia, so that the Elementary Spirit is astonished, and Or
raises up.
awakeneth the body.

23. Also you must know this, that all is done Magically in the will, without
Raising of the pain, or property.
awakening of the source: no soul rises with its Essences of its own accord
to please Man; unless man raise, and disturb it himself.

24. There are many villainies in Nigromancy, which can many times vex and
torment the Spirits of men; but it can do so to no soul, that is clothed
with Christ's Essentiality; for, that soul is free.

25. The third sort of separated souls, which are in Abraham's bosom, in
Christ, having the heavenly Essentiality, none can stir them, except they
will themselves, as when they bear a favor to a soul that is like
themselves: also they take no Earthly thing upon them, except it makes for the
Glory of God, and then they are restless to reveal something in a Magical
manner.

26. But they let no Turba into them; neither do they intercede with God for
us; but whatsoever comes to them they rejoice in it, with the Angels: for,
the Angels rejoice at a sinner that repents; then much more, the souls.

27. Why should they pray to God for us? it lies not in their Prayer; but in
man's entering into God; when he strongly turns his will to God, then Gods
Spitit helps him without Their praying, or intercession for us.
Prayers.

28. For, his Arms are stretched forth day and night to help Man; what need is
there then of their Prayers? It is the will of God that man should come to him.

29. Shall then a A separated soul of a Saint.
soul be so presumptuous as to make God so severe a Judge, as not to be
willing to receive a returning sinner? surely no true knowledge of God were in
this: But when they see the soul pierce in with its Spirit to God; it is great
joy to them that Gods Kingdom is enlarged.

30. The heavenly soul has Gods will: what God wills, that it wills also;
but it is Gods Spirit it self that will help the converted sinner.

31. The souls see well how Gods Spirit pierces into the soul, if the will
of the soul do but give way to it: there is no need of the Prayers of any Or
blessed ^ule.
Angel: they all wish that Gods Kingdom may come, and that Gods will be done:
but the Honor of Government they give to God.

32. That men in Popery have invocated great Saints that are dead: and that
they also have appeared to men, and wrought Or Miracles.
Wonders, we acknowledge it, and it is true: and although it be now taught
against, it is by those that are indeed quite ignorant in it: It has another
A. B. C. which all of them on both sides do not understand at all.

33. The Faith of one receives the Faith of another, the Faith of the living
took hold of the Faith of the Saints departed, and the Viz. the will that is
strong.
Faith has wrought Wonders.

34. Yea it is so powerful, that it can throw down Mountains! shall then the
pure Faith of the Saints in the Faith of the living be able to do nothing?
Indeed it could even Or break in pieces.
destroy the whole world, if God would but suffer it.

35. As he has permitted it to work so far sometimes, that the Heathen have
been converted by such means, when they have seen such Wonders wrought at the
Or departure.
Death of Saints.

36. Should not a soul in heaven be willing to put forth its Faith for the
glory of God, and the working of wonders for him? This is even done by the Holy
Ghost, who has wrought the Wonders by the Faith of both parties; and they are
only the Wonders of God, and of his Children-

37. But this is wholly cast to the ground, and now there is so learned a
School, that it contemns all Gods Or Miracles.
Wonders: but it is Babell, and not the Spirit of God; It is envious Pride;
They stand aloft and cry; Come ye all to me, here is Christ, here is the
Gospel: Indeed there is Pride, Covetousness, Ambition, and self, arrogating
malepertnesse, a lifting up of proud Babell.

38. It is even the old Antichrist, and they are young twigs sprung out of the
old Tree, and they have stirred up the Turba with their strong wrathful sap:
which Turba shall root up the whole Tree, for God has cursed it: it is wholly
evil, and wormeaten, it shall down.

39. For, there is a young Tree grown out of the Root, out of the old Root,
which shall discover what the old Tree has been in its Wonders.

40. Yet we would not upbraid any, but only speak of our Wonders: and say
that the servant shall enter into the House, and be free, for the time is at
hand, that he should eat with the Son, and be merry and rejoice with him.

41. Thus we answer this your Question summarily, that indeed, the Holy souls
do certainly know of our holy works, and approve of them, but they do not at
all regard false works: for, they dwell in another Principle, into which no
evil work can come, nay, they do not so, nor do they enquire after that
which belongs to the Devil: also they know nothing but that which reaches
to their Principle.

42. Children, Parents, friends, and strangers are all alike to them; for, in
Heaven we are all Brethren: They take no greater care of Parents, or Children
^^en they do of others, unless they serve God, and then their service of God
is acceptable and joyful to them; but they enter not into their The evil
which they do or suffer justly.
Turba.

43. For after the last Day, honest Parents shall know nothing of their
Children which are in Hell: Therefore it is sufficiently and plainly known to
us, that they now also take no care about wicked matters.

The seven and twentieth Question.
Whether do the Souls Or in Death.
departed, know and understand this, or that business and Art, whereof, while
they were in the body they had sufficient Skill.
1. THis Question is like the former: all their works appear to them in their
will after a Magical manner: they see them, but the figure of them, shall then
first be given them at the Day of Restoration; so that they shall be able
rightly to behold their works: for, they must first be tried by the Fire; and
whatsoever is false, the Uncleanness, or dross.
Turba of that must remain in the Fire, according to the words of The words of
Christ in Paul.
Christ.

2. But it is strange that men should ask whether they know Arts or no;
without Question they know all Arts, how deeply soever they are grounded: but
they dare not Or bring them into act.
awaken them, that they appear in Spirit: for, Arts are borne in the Center of
Nature, out of those Essences wherein the Wonders lie, which they sought in
this world, so far as they had the Mystery made known to them.

3. A soul that is without the Divine body, does not willingly enter into the
Mystery for Art, it stands still in its rest, it fears the Turba; It gives
God the glory.

4. But those souls that are highly enlightened, who have heavenly Essentiality
in their Spirit, They have all knowledge of heavenly things, and of whatsoever
lies hid in the Mystery: especially those who had acquaintance with the
Mystery in this Life: the other dive not in into the Mystery.

5. For, every one continues in his Or Employment.
calling; in that, which he delighted in here, although there be no such
working, yet they have their joy in it: for, in Heaven there is an humble
simple Childrens Life.

6. Why then should they search or care for Art, when the whole Mystery of God
stands open, God fills All in All: there is only a mere Wonder; they All
live in Wonders, and are all of them the Art of God: they have great knowledge;
but in a Paradisicall simple Childrens Life.

The eight and twentieth Question.
Whether has the Soul any more knowledge of Divine, Angelical, Earthly, and
Devilish things? and whether can it get more certain experience, and knowledge
of them, then it had in the body?
1. COncerning Divine and Angelical knowledge, certainly it has much more of
that: for, it is in the Principle of God: the Son sees very well what the
Father does in his House; and so likewise the soul sees what is in Heaven.

2. Their knowledge is different; for the highest knowledge is in the Majesty:
and therefore most souls must wait till the last Day, when they shall receive
their new Body.

3. But the highly enlightened souls, which are in the Divine body and Power:
they have superabundant understanding and knowledge of God, and also of the
Angels: for, they continue in the Wonders of God, till they shall bring their
own Wonders thither.

4. The souls that are without a body, are in Heaven, in God, as it were
Magically: they awaken no Wonders, but are under Gods Altar, and expect the
Wonders, at the Day of the Appearance.

5. They take no care about devilish matters, it belongs to the Angels to
strive with the Devils, and to defend man: No No holy soul.
soul imagines into Hell, it is Enmity to it.

The nine and twentieth Question.
What is the Souls Rest, Or Resurrection.
Awakening and Clarification, or transfiguration.
Glorification?
1. THis is already sufficiently cleared; their Rest is without Essence in the
stillnesse, where they are in Gods hand, and no Pain, or Turba.
source touches them, they have no feeling of any source, but they are as one
that lies in a sweet sleep, and rests very pleasingly.

2. Their glorification, in this mean time, is when they consider of the Joy
to come, then the Viz. the Spirit of the soul.
Spirit enters into the Majesty of God, and receives Joy, and Glorious
illustration.
Clarity: and so all this time they trim their Lamps, that they may the more
cheerfully.
readily receive their bridegroom in their New bodies.

3. There is a very sweet, Magical, Paradisicall joy in them: but Paradise is
not yet fully Stirring, or working.
manifested in them, with total perfection, for that belongs to the New
body, [which shall rise] out of the Earth.

4. The first body which God created, and Christ redeemed with his blood, that
will bring the Wonders with it, and enter again into Paradise, and be clothed
with the Majesty of God, and then the Tabernacle of God is with Men.

The thirtieth Question.
What is the Difference between the Resurrection of the flesh, and of the
Soul, both of the Living and of the Dead?
1. CHrist says concerning this, that there shall be a great difference:
therefore we direct you to the Scripture, for it shall come to pass just
according to the Holy Scripture.

2. Seeing that humane Reason cannot search, or find it out, how should I
answer you more then the Scripture speaks of? yet seeing you so earnestly
desire, and long to know these things, you even become the Finder in your
seeking, and I am but the Instrument.

3. And although it be declared and given to me, yet it is not a thing that
consists in my understanding, or knowing, but the knowing consists in the
Spirit of Christ: according to which this hand speaks of us, for it speaks
from two Persons, and two Persons say, not I, but we, and speaks of two, as a
Lord who speaks of his person, and of his Office, Authority, Power, or
Jurisdiction.
Dominion.

4. Thus also the Children and servants of God, ought not to say the knowledge
is mine, the understanding is mine, but give God the glory: and in their
manifestation of the Wonders of God, should speak of two, viz. of the Giver
and Receiver.

5. Neither should any understand this our manner of writing so, as if the hand
did glory, or boast it self of its humane Authority, and worthiness; though
indeed we are worthy in Christ: but as to the outward Man we will have no
honor or Renown, for the Renown is Gods.

6. We are Children of the Father, and must do as he will have us, and not
bury the Talent (which he gives us) in the Earth, for the Father will require
it with increase, and if there be no increase of it, he takes away that which
he has given, and gives it to him who has gained much: which would be a very
lamentable taking away from me; for me to know and enjoy God, and then to lose
him again; it were much better for me to lose the whole world, and the outward
Life, then God, and the Kingdom of Heaven.

7. Neither is it a light matter to be disobedient to God: see what was brought
upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram by Moses: we say the same shall come upon the
disobedient and scorners.

8. Indeed the scorner sees not his punishment instantly, but his Viz. h^s
perturbation, malice, and wickedness makes a figure of it.
Turba takes it in; if he has been a jeering scorner and Reviler, and now
would feign be delivered from his Or sin.
Turba, then he must bewail it in bitter lamentation, and sorrow in the sight
of God, or else he will carry his scorn with him into the Fire of Anger, and
then it will gnaw him for ever: we would have this spoken for a warning.

9. For, we shall here describe a very earnest matter, be not deceived, God is
not mocked: the wrathful Anger is in his Power, he has Heaven and Hell in his
Power, the last Judgment is an Severe.
earnest work.

10. And because we are to set down the Resurrection of the Dead, we must
write the manner of it; what it is, and by what power this world shall Or pass
away.
perish, and the Dead arise; it will be in earnest, account it no jesting
matter, we shall speak of the very ground of it.

11. Do not think it it is a Fable, it proceeds from the Disturbance or
confusion.
Turba, upon the Or when the measure of your sin is full.
Crown; the The Spirit of the awakened wickednesses.
Spirit of your own Turba declares this unto you: for, the End has found the
beginning: thus the Or works.
Essences of the whole world are brought to That they may be seen.
Light in the middle, and thence your Prophet arises, viz. from the Or works.
Wonders which you have wrought, and he speaks of the Destruction.

12. For, the Spirit of the Turba, shall not Govern, but the Spirit of Christ:
he has overcome Death, and taken the Turba captive: He leads Captivity
captive as a Conqueror.

13. But the Turba will execute Or Justice.
Judgment: for it is Gods servant in the Anger, not his Master but his
servant: therefore that Thunder which shall make the Earth to tremble, will
proceed out of the Mouth of God; which shall set the Elements and Firmament on
fire.

14. The last Judgment belongs to the Judge Christ, and the Holy Ghost: for,
here the Center of the Eternal Spirit will stir up it self, having also
divided it self into three Principles, whereof one is the Spirit of Anger, and
the other the Divine Spirit of Love, and the third is the Airy Spirit of the
outward world.

15. The last Or manifestation.
moving belongs to him; who according to the Deity is in the Mouth of Christ;
but according to the wrath he is in the Hellish Or property.
source of Anguish: and according to the Or works.
Wonders, he is in the Spirit of this world.

16. And as he was the Artificer, or framer, of all things.
Worke-master of all Essences, so also it is he that shall give every thing its
own Mansion, and gather every thing into its own Granary.

17. For, he has many helpers; viz. the Angels, they shall sever and part all
asunder, and then the Father, With the word of the Lord.
cum verbo Domini, pronounces the Sentence by the Mouth of Christ, and then
the world begins to burn, and every thing enters into its own Granary and
Reservatory.

18. For, the Reservatories will be diverse, not only two, viz. the two
Principles; yet in two Principles; but with much difference: every thing
according to its Or power.
virtue-

18. For, every work has its Magical Principle, wherein it is contained as a
peculiar Wonder, both in Heaven and Hell, every thing according to its Spirit,
as it has been good or evil, so will its form appear: and so also will its
virtue be; like the flowers of the field in their differences: And, in this
manner also shall the Glorification and joy of Man be all according to the his
works which he wrought here.
Essence which he brought forth here.

20. But we understand here the Essence of Faith, (which is the virtue in the
Essence of Love,) and not of the outward work: for, all shall be represented
in the figure, in the Wonders; and that both as to the beginning and
circumstances.

21. When the last Day shall begin to dawne, then the Deity manifests it
self once more (and that is the third time) in all Forms, in Love and Anger:
and then all things together at once shall be plainly laid open, and visibly
set forth in the sight of all Creatures, in this manner following.

22. The beginning of the Creation, in the Word Fiat, has enclosed this world
in it self, as a Model; and Or appointed.
founded the limit, wherein now the Wonders are contained, which also were
revealed in the middle, in the time, and brought to Essence, which were
foreseen from Eternity in the wisdom, in the Magia of God, and will be
together all in the Essence then, and then the End, finishing, or consummation
of all things.
limit is nigh at hand, and there will be no time of seeking more, for then all
is finished: whatsoever God had in his Eternal Counsel, he has conceived and
manifested in time.

23. Now here is the End of time, for then the beginning has found the end,
and the End is then the beginning, and passes again into that which it was
from Eternity.

24. But the Viz. the world, and every creature.
middle with the Viz. all that has been done in the world from the beginning
to the End.
Wonders which were manifested in the time, continues for evermore in the
beginning and in the End, as an Eternal middle, with its Wonders, viz. with
the Angels and men, and their Essences: as also the figures of all Creatures,
and all what ever has been Essential at any time: the Earth with its Metalls,
also stones, and all material substances, as Trees, and herbs: all these
stand in the Figure, in the middle, and in the Wonders, but quite void of such
Essences and life.

25. For, no Beast comes again, but its figure continues in the Magia; for,
it arose out of the Eternal Glass, so that now (when the outward Earthly
Glass breaks) it must remain in the Eternal as a Wonder, to Gods honor
and glory for evermore.

26. And these Essences belong all to Paradise: for, they shall be the Holy
Paradise wherein the heavenly Essences shall bear Essential palpable fruit.

27. And as here in this Life, we do account the fruits of the Earth,
(proceeding from its Essence,) as Inanimate* sensl^sse things.
dead things without Life, or sense.
understanding, so also the Bestiall and Earthly Image of this world shall
appear as a dead Essence, and so shall the Essence of all Creatures; they
shall remain as a shadow.

28. But Paradise has and bears fruit from the virtue of Eternal Life, that
is, from Gods Or Wonders.
Essences: Now all that which for the most part is hidden from us here; tstat
is enclosed in the word Fiat, in the beginning and End, and it lies therein as
a great Mystery.

29. But now the Spirit of the first Creation will move all the three
Principles: yet before that be brought to pass; the Word of God Forms it
self by the Spirit.
conceives it self with this Spirit; like an elevation, or manifestation of
the Deity.

30. For, the Spirit stirs the Turba of all Essences in all the three
Principles; and then whatever is in Heaven, Hell, or this world, will be
manifested in one hour.

31. For the Turba stirs up all Essences, and all creatures, and all
whatever is in Heaven and Hell, will be made visible, and every one shall see
the works of his own Heart, be they good or evil.

32. In this hour also the Judge Christ will appear, upon the Bow of the
Ternary as upon a Rainbow; according to the Principle of this world, it is a
natural Rainbow, but according to the Principle of God it is the Ternarie,
the Cross with a twofold Rainbow, having one part turned toward the
Internal Principle, that is, in the Abyss of the Anger, and there he sits
upon the Anger of God: this the Devils, and all wicked men shall see.

33. For, this Bow is included in all the three Principles, and this Judge
Christ sits upon, and in the Omnipotency of Eternity, above all that Or ever
had a Being.
is called Essence.

34. Then the Miserable horror of all Devils and wicked men will arise: and
they will houle, lament, yell, and cry, and say unto the wise Virgins, give us
some of your Oil. O! comfort us we entreat you, we beseech you teach us!
what we shall do? Give us some of your holiness that we may be able to stand
before the Angry Countenance of God; for the Eye of Hell stands wide open;
whither shall we fly from this Anger?

35. And the wise Virgins, viz. the Children of God, will say: away to your
Those that sell.
Merchants, and buy Oil for your selves; least there be not enough for us and
you: we have but enough for our selves; away, to your Hypocrites and Deceivers,
who have tickled your ears with Seeming holiness. and purity.
flattering [fine] dissimulation for your Money; there buy for your selves:
what? have you need of us now? Have not we been your fools? Away now with the
flourishing show of your deceit and hypocrisy, we will not make our selves
partakers with you; least we smart for it.

36. They shall then stand in great horror and trembling, yelling, and crying
to the Judge Christ: but his wrathful Eye Or by.
with their Turba, enters into the very Heart, piercing through Spirit and
flesh, through marrow and bones; for, the soul in the Turba by the moving of
God is stirred up already beforehand in the Wrathfulnesse.

37. And then they will fall to the ground for very Anguish, and some of them
shall bite or gnaw their blasphemous tongues, and the proud will say, O ye
Mountains fall on us, and ye Hills cover us from the Eye of this
wrathfulnesse: they will creep into the Caves, and clefts of the Rocks, and
endeavor to bury themselves in the Mountains: they would willingly kill
themselves, but there is no Death more; they will endeavor to bereave
themselves of Life with Weapons yet there is no dying, but Wrath and Anger left.

38. In this horror all the buildings in the world will fall down; for the
Earth will ttemble, as if it were shaken with Thunder, and the horror will be
in all living things; every thing according to its Property, or Condition.
Source; a Beast has no such source as the soul has, only it is afraid of
the Turba.

39. And in this elevation and Commotion, all waters will arise above the
height of all Mountains, so that there will be no Or respiration.
breathing upon the Earth, they will rise so high that they will be as it were
consumed: All things will be so comprehended in the Anger, in the Turba, that
there will be nothing but mere Anguish in the Elements.

40. All high Mountains and Rocks cleave asunder and tumble down; the That
is, those properties which are in the Firmament: or a Magic desire, as ver.
41. following.
Stars likewise fall to the Earth with their strong influence and virtue: All
this will be b^ought to pass in several days; for, as the world was created,
so it shall have its End: for, the Seeking, or earnest desire.
longing of the Earth in its Anguish, will draw the Stars to it, as it has
always done Or all this while.
in this time: so that the Earthly body has drawn the Desire, or longing.
seeking of the Stars to it.

41. For, the Stars are a Magical Desire, or longing.
seeking, which has awakened Life: therefore now when the Earth is awakened in
the great Turba, it will then become so thirsty and hungry, that it will draw
down the Stars to it, there will be such an Anguish upon the Earth.

42. But the Children of God shall lift up their Eyes and hands to Christ; for
joy that the Day of their Deliverance is at hand: for the The water.
Anguish does not touch them.

43. And in those days (but how many are appointed for it, are only known to
God, for in six days the world, and all its Hoasts were created; but it is now
hidden to us) the water will return again to its own place, and fill all the
Deepes in a more abundant manner then they were before.

44. For, now Death comes thereby: and in that hour, all Creatures, except
man, shall die: also all men that have crept into the Rocks and Mountains
shall come forth, but with anguish of their Conscience (although as yet the
Turba hindered so, that the horror was in Death;) for, the falling of the water
does captivate the Turba.

45. And then the voice of the Holy Ternarie, will put forth it self according
to all the three Principles, and say by the Mouth of Christ the Judge: Arise ye
Dead and come to Judgment.

46. This voice is the original, Eternal Spirit, which upholdeth every life,
and which also has always governed in all the three Principles: for, it is
that Spirit, whence the life of every thing has sprung, and in which it
consists to Eternity; It has been the life and motion of all things, in
which the beginning, and also the end of every life has stood, yes, even the
Eternity it self: for, it is from Eternity and the Creator of all things.

47. It has two Eternal beginnings, viz. one in the Fire, and one in the
Light: and the third beginning is become the Wherein the Eternal has been
beh^ld.
Glass of the Eternal, viz. the Spirit of this world; also it has been as a
Wonder in this world, and the Wonders have been made manifest by it: and it is
he to whom the last Judgment does belong, his moving is the last.

48. For, in the Creation he moved the Father; and in the Incarnation of the
Word* the Son, and now the last moving, and the Judgment is his: he will
reduce every thing to its Eternal abode; and this is done by the voice of the
word proceeding from the Mouth of Christ.

49. For, the Spirit goes forth in two Principles in God: that is, in the
Anger or Fire, he goes forth as the earnest wrath of the Fire-life; in the
light of the Love he goes forth as a flame of the Divine Majesty; and in the
Spirit of this world he goes forth as a Wonder of Life; and all this is
undeniable.

50. And if perhaps some person would arrogate such exceeding high Learning to
himself, as to gainesay it, to him we offer to demonstrate it, in every thing,
we will except nothing in this world: every thing will afford an evident
Testimony of it: let him come to us when he will: he ought not to put it off,
and say, we are mad: for if these few words will not satisfy him, we will so
evidence it to him, that he himself shall find and see who himself is: yes
though the Devil himself should burst for very Anger, yet we would set it
down plainly before his eyes.

51. Now seeing this Spirit has the word Fiat, (viz. Gods word,) and the
Center of Nature, whence it has its Eternal Original; and as the Spirit of
the Center has a twofold Effluence (the first being in the Fire, in the
Essences of the Original of Life, in the ground of the Original of the soul:
and the second in the light of the Fire, which is the second Or Property.
source, which buddeth afresh through Death, and is called the Kingdom of God;
where also in the Light it is a flame of Love, and in the Fire it is a flame of
Anger.)

52. And therefore it will break open the Gates of Death, for it shall raise
the Dead: and it has the word Fiat in it, and this Fiat is both in the soul,
and in the body also; and although the body have been long corrupted, yet the
Turba remains still in the Fiat with the Wonders of the body.

53. And now the four Elements must restore to the Fiat that Essence which
they have swallowed up: for Verbum Domini.
the word of the Lord is in it, but in its own Principle: Every thing must
Give, or yield up.
restore that which it has received, viz. the Earth, the body viz. the The
substance, or dross.
Phur^ and the water also its Essence, that is, The Light.
Sul; The Air, the sound, and voice of the words: and the Fire, the Essences
of the soul, for All things must be judged.

54. All the words which the Mouth has spoken, which the Air has received
into it, and Which Air.
has served for the making of the words, these the Air shall again Or
represent.
bring forth: for it is the Glass of the Eternal Spirit: the Spirit sees
them in the Glass.

55. And so man shall be Judged according to his heart, mind, and thoughts;
for, the Turba is in all malice or wickedness; which is contrary to Love: here
will be no making of excuse; for every one will accuse himself, his own Turba
will accuse him.

56. And thus, (you must understand) the Spirit which is All in All, will raise
up every Life which has been immortal, and (by the Fiat) give it to the body;
for the Fiat draws the body to the soul: and all its deeds and Wonders with
it, yea, all that it has done in this life by word or Deed: all that has
reached the The most inward and deepest ground.
Abyss of the soul, must come forth.

57. For, in the still Eternity there shall be no Tu^ba more; and therefore
Every Essence shall be Tried, washed, cleansed, or purged.
refined by the Fire, and the Sin and wickedness.
Turba shall remain in the Fire, and all whatever is evil and capable of the
Turba (unless it were washed away in the water of life, by the conversion of
the soul here in this life,) must remain in the Fire.

58. Now, if any man have sown much in the Fire, he shall suffer loss: as the
Scripture tells us, that the works of the wicked shall remain in the fire,
and he shall suffer loss.

59. But you must understand us aright; the body which has been here upon
Earth; that evil corruptible body which has devoured the Noble and excellent
Image of Paradise: shall come, and stand forth with its precious Image in it:
It must give an account of the Image of God.

60. Now blessed are they that have Christ's Spirit, they have their first Image
in the word Fiat; which must restore it again to the soul, and that in the
Adamicall Body.

61. But they that have not Christ's Spirit shall stand forth in the evil body:
but their soul shall have lost their true Image, and they shall have such an
Image in the Spirit of the Soul, us their wills have been here: as their daily
lust has been, so shall their Image be.

62. And in that hour also the wrathful Fiat of the Darkness shall bring
forth the Devils; who shall then receive their wages and lodging: at the
hearing of which they tremble.

63. Thus all the Dead, both good and evil shall arise, every one in his The
transitory, and Eternal body.
twofold body, and shall have the soul with the Spirit in the body.

64. One shall have the outward Earthly Life in four Copies; it may be body,
by the sense.
Life, and therein a bestiall Image in the Spirit of the Soul; and in the
Inward Image he shall have the Essentiality of the wrathful Anger.

65. Another shall have the outward body, and Christ's Image therein, and the
Divine Spirit of Love shall shine in the Spirit of his soul; which body the
word Fiat cloatheth again with the true, and pure Adamicall Image.

66. For, the pure Image has been hidden in God, in the Word which became Man:
and now when the Soul comes to the Limit, it obtains that again, and also
the fair and excellent See the book of the three Principles, chapter 12. ver. 53.
Virgin of the Wisdom of God.

67. For, the noble Image was destroyed in Adam when the woman was taken out of
him, so that he retained only the Tincture of the Fire; and the woman had the
Tincture of the Spirit: but In the Resurrection.
now both return to them wholly again.

68. For, the woman shall receive the Tincture of the Fire, in the Divine Fire,
so that she shall be as Adam was, neither Man nor woman: but a Virgin full of
Chastity, without the Form, or distinction.
shape or members of Man or woman.

69. And then they shall no more say, thou art my husband, or thou art my wife,
but they are brethren: indeed there shall some remaining tokens of the
differences be in the Divine Magical Wonders, but none will regard that: for,
they are all of them merely the Children of God, living the life of Children
in the delighting sport of love.

70. All this shall be done before the Sentence, for, the trial will be the
first, and the sentence the last Day of Judgment: and those that are then
alive shall not dye; but shall be presented with the other by the voice of God
before the Or Righteousness.
Judgment of God.

71. The word Fiat shall bring all thither, and all shall be presented in their
own Order by the Fiat, as first, Emperors and Kings, and then their Subjects
over whom they reigned, Princes, Noblemen, Governors, Magistrates, and
Superiors, every one in his Or Calling.
Condition.

72. And here, all those that have taken upon them to be Christ's Shepherds
without The Divine calling, or true Jus Divinum.
the calling of God, shall stand in the midst of their flock of sheep, and give
an account of their Doings, or works and teaching.
course of Life and Doctrine: and whether they have been Christ's Shepherds,
and have fed the Sheep, or no, or whether they have been For livings, or Money,
as Hirelings.
servants, or Ministers to their own Bellyes? And here the Spirit will make
inquiry into their calling, and try, whether they have entered into the
sheepfold by his Election and Power, or by man's favor without the Spirit and
Election of God.

73. For the Judge will say unto them, now give an account of your life,
works, words, deeds, and ways: there the Turba of every one will declare what
he has been: for now all things shall appear in the Figure, within them and
without them, so that there shall be no Or lying.
denial, for the Spirit Of the Judge.
by the Turba, proves the soul, Spirit, and Flesh; here all will be
manifested.

74. Kings and Princes shall be constrained to give an account of their
Subjects, how they have ruled and protected them, what kind of Government they
have used, why they have taken away the lives of many by Tyranny, and why they
have shed innocent blood, also why they have made war for their
Covetousness, and their Pleasures sake?

75. In like manner all other Superiors will be called to an account, why they
have intruded themselves into Office, and made themselves Or Magistrates.
Lords over the simple, and have afflicted, oppressed, and squeezed them, and
why they have taken away their sweat, and spent it in Pride?

76. Here the root whence they came, and from which they are grown, will be
enquired after, whether they bear the Or stamp.
Ordinance of God, and whether they have their Original in the Heavenly Fiat,
or in the Hellish Fiat from the Anger? There every one must give an account of
his Or State.
Condition; whether he has thrust himself into Office out of Covetousness
and Pride, and made himself a Magistrate, or whether his Government be
ordained of God.

77. Therefore ye Rulers and Potentates of the world, look to it, and see
whether you be the Ordinance of God? and are placed in the Right, Divine Order?
Have a care how you deal with the distressed inferior: for, now he stands
before your Eyes, and blames you, saying, that you have been the cause of all
his sins, and wickedness.

78. For, there one will cry out and accuse the other, saying, that he has
caused me to commit such ludenesse, and will curse him: the Inferior his
Superiors, and the Superiors their Superiors: Also the Prince will accuse
his false Counselors, and his Counselors the Priests, because they did not
reprove their Courses; but soothed and flattered them for Ambition, and honor
sake.

79. How will you be able to stand, ye Or Universities.
high Schools, and Doctors: even all of you who have set up your selves in
Christ's stead, and have so proudly Or disputed.
wrangled about Christ's Cup, also about Christ's Doctrine and Glory: that you
have provoked and put on the Princes of your Land (who are the Ordinance of
God) to war and bloodshed; for a few Terms of Art.
words sake, which you your selves have Or Contrived.
forged.

80. Where is Christ's teaching and Spirit of Love, who said, Love one another,
for thereby shall they know that ye are my Disciples? Where is your Love: look
upon your bloody instigations, wherewith you have encouraged men to battle, and
have lead the world astray from Love and Or Concord.
Unanimity.

81. Ye have made Rents and Divisions: so that Kings have been at variance and
enmity for your Pride sake; in that you have wrested the words of Christ, and
have not regarded whether you have had Christ's Spirit, and Or meaning.
Will or no: and therefore you above all others shall give an heavy account;
for you have known the will of the Lord, and have not done it, you have run
and thrust your selves into Christ's Office, merely to get profit, favor and
Honor: you have not regarded the Spirit of God: therefore the Spirit calls
you Babell; a confusion of all those that live.

82. You have set the whole world at ods, and though you should teach them
Love, you have taught them Contention and strife, so that one brother has
hated and persecuted another for your Opinions, Doctrine^, which you have set
down for Orthodox.
fables sake; O! how is the name of Christ Reproched, or scandal^sed for your
disputations sake.
blasphemed for your contentions sake: whether will you betake your selves, and
where will you abide? when this shall be set before your Eyes, and the whole
world cry woe, woe, woe to you.

83. Also here the Angels who are the Reapers shall divide all into two Herds,
and place the Or Righteous.
Honest at the Right hand, and the wicked at the left, viz. at the Eye of
Anger; for, the Principle of Light is here called the Right hand, and the
Principle of Fire the Left.

84. And thus the Tribunal or seat of Judgment will be set: All the great
Shepherds whom God has sent forth for a Light to the world, who have reproved
and taught, as the Patriarchs who taught of the Promise of Christ, shall be
placed with the Prophets and Apostles, at the Right hand of the Judgment: and
Moses, and all Teachers of the And Lawgivers.
Law, at the left hand of the Judgment.

85. For, Moses and Elias, and all those exceeding precious teachers of the
Law, bear the fiery Sword, and require Gods Justice, and they at the Right
hand Gods Mercy.

86. And in this hour is the very last Day, when the Judge shall say, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Beginning:
for, I was hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, and in Prison, and you have
administered to me.

87. And to the wicked company: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, I know you
not; for I have been hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, and in Prison, and you
administered not to me.

88. And then they will excuse themselves before the presence of the Judge, and
say, we knew thee not Lord; but he shall say, being you have not done this to
my poor Children, you have not done it to me.

89. And here the Spirit of God will manifest himself forthwith in all the
three Principles, and stir up the Or Ground.
Center of Nature, so that it shall burn in the fire of Anger: for all, both
Heaven, Earth, and the Firmament, will be set on Fire together.

90. And the Turba will swallow up the Earthly world in the Fire, and restore
it to that which it was before the Creation: only the Viz. All whatsoever
grew, was borne, made, or done, by word or Deed, from the beginning of the
world to the End.
Wonders remain still in two Principles; the third Principle does vanish quite
away, all but the Wonders, which shall be brought into the beginning.

91. And then the Earthly Life, and the Earthly Body will fall away, and the
Fire will consume them.

92. And the Glorious bright Paradisicall Body of the Righteous shall pass
through the Fire, with its own Wonders, which shall follow it, and whatsoever
is false shall remain in the Fire.

93. And so they shall be carried through the Fire, in the twinkling of an Eye:
and the fire comprehends them not; for, as little as the fire can retain the
light or Wind, so little can The fire of Wrath.
it retain the Light of the Holy men: for they can dwell in the Fire, without
feeling any pain.

94. Then instantly, by the kindling of the Fire, the Divine Majesty and
Paradisicall Life is made ready, and thither they enter as Children, and live
Eternally with their Father in one Love, in a simple Childe-like Life; and this
is a Communion of Saints together.

95. There is no Day, or Night there; for the Sun passes away, and the
Stars pass away, but their Or operations.
Wonders remain apparently in the Great See in the small six points what the
Magia is.
Magia to the glory of God: thus they shall pass away.

96. The wicked also must go into the Fire, and their Earthly Life will also
fall away, and their Or Vizard.
monstrous Image will appear in the Spirit, according to the shape of all
hideous abominable Beasts, like the Devils.

97. For they dwell in one and the same Principle, and Lucifer is their great
Prince, whom indeed they served here, though they depended on their Hypocrites,
for a false Paradise.

98. Thus my beloved friend, you have a brief description, and Declaration of
the last Judgment Day: for whatsoever is of this world shall pass away.

99. The Earth, and all stony Rocks, and Elements will melt away, and that
only will remain which God would have; and for the sake of which he has
created this word.

100. Both the good and the evil were clearly God has foreseen the Good
according to his Love, (according to which he is called God) and according to
his wrath, or Nature, (according to which he is called an Angry, Jealous God,
and a consuming Fire) he has foreseen the evil: but not ordained it.
foreseen in Eternity, and were only made Essential in this world, that they
might be a Wonder; and hereafter they remain so to Eternity.

The one and thirtieth Question.
What kind of New glorified Bodies shall the Holy Souls have?
1. THis has been already sufficiently declared; for, as every one shall be
clothed with the power of Love, Righteousness, and Purity, and as his
excellent works of Faith have been, so shall he gloriously shine.

2. Yet there will be very much difference: for the works of many will all
remain in the Fire, and he himself will hardly escape; he will not shine as
the Viz. the great Saints.
Saints.

3. For, (as the Scripture says) they shall excel one another as the Stars
of Heaven: But there will be no Or envying.
grudging, but every one will rejoice at the Excellency of the other; for
there is no other light there then God, filling All in All.

4. And so every one as his Or Virtue.
Power is capable of the Light, shall receive the brightness of the Majesty of
God: for after this Life there will be no bettering, but every thing remains
as it returns home.

5. For, there the Judge Christ will deliver up the Kingdom to his Father; and
then we shall no more need any Teachers and Guides: But he is our King and
Brother; there is no commanding more; but we are with him as a child with the
Father: whatsoever we do, it is good; for all falsehood is done away.

The two and thirtieth Question.
What shall the Form, Condition, Joy, and Glory of the Soul be, in the Life
to come?
1. HEre we must consider Paradise; for, this outward world with its fruits and
colors has been a Figure of Paradise: for, Paradise was Or within us.
in us; and the outward Spirit bereaved us of it, and drew us into it self;
for, when Adam lusted after it, his own lust took him captive.

2. But we shall now enter into it again, and Eternally solace our selves in
the excellent beautiful flourishing of all manner of flowers, and Forms, both
of Trees, and Plants, and all kind of Fruits; but they will not be so Earthly
gross and palpable.

3. For, then our bodies shall not be so; how then can that Essence be so? all
things there will be Angelical: the Fruits are more clear, subtle,
transparent, bright, and shining.
pure and fine, then are now in the outward Elements, for they make no impurity
when we have eaten them.

4. We shall have no stomach or intrailes, which we shall need to fill, as we
do here, this devouring stomach; but all there, is in Power, we shall eat in
the Mouth and not receive into the body: we shall need no teeth to chew
withal, there is mere Power; and yet in a true Natural form and manner with
shining colors.

5. And so the Kingdom of Heaven consists not in eating and drinking, but in
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, singing and sporting with the works of Gods
Wonders and the Loveliness of Paradise.

6. We shall lead a life like children, who rejoice and are very merry in their
Sports; for there will be no sadness in our hearts, or fear of any thing: but
a delightful Play, sport, or exercise.
Recreation with the Angels.

7. This world will be no more thought upon or regarded, for all Earthly
knowledge and cogitations, shall remain in the Turba, of the Earthly Life, in
the Fire.

8. We shall have no knowledge more of our Parents, Children, or friends, who
are in Hell.

9. We shall all know one another among our selves by Name; though the Earthly
Name shall remain in the Turba: we shall have a Name according to our first
Name, in the Language of Angels; which here in this life we do not understand:
In the Language of Nature we understand somewhat of it, but here we have no
tongue to speak it with.

10. None shall say to another, thou art my Husband, thou art my wife, thou art
my Daughter, thou art my son, my servant, or my handmayde, all are alike
there: we are all Children: there is neither Husband, nor wife, neither
child, servant or maid, but all are free; every one is all: There is but one
Sex, viz. Heavenly Virgins full of Modesty, Chastity and Purity.

11. All of us together are Gods Spouse, and he is our Husband; He sows his
power into us, and we bring him forth praise and Glory.

12. There is such a kind of dancing and singing, as Children use when they
hold hands, and sing and dance a Round.

13. All Arts will be no account: But you must know that they who have Enjoyed
the great hidden Wisdom, understanding, and Art.
had the Mystery, and to whom that has been revealed; they shall have far
greater Wisdom and knowledge then others, and excel others much.

14. Indeed not in Teaching, and ordering, or coaction.
Doctrine and Discipline, but their wisdom will begin all manner of Exercise
in the heavenly Mystery, to the stirring up of Joy: for as Children flock
together when one begins a sport; so also here.

15. Little Children are our Schoolemasters till evil stir in them, and so
they embrace the Turba Magna, but they bring their sport from the Mothers
womb, which is a Remnant of Paradise: but all the rest is gone till we shall
receive it again.

16. A King is of no more value there then a Beggar: if he have governed well,
then his virtue follows him, and he shall have the praise thereof in the
Majesty; for he will obtain an excellent glorification, like a Shepherd over
his flock.

17. But if he have been evil, and yet at last turned and entered in as by a
The thread of Faith at the last gasp.
thread; then his Kingly works remain in the Fire: and he will be accounted
of In the Kingdom of Heaven.
here, then a Beggar who has been honest; nay, he will not be so glorious as
he.

18. Every one will be known by his works, what he has been, when they shall
set forth their Merchandise in the heavenly Magia, as Children do in their
sport.

19. And yet you must know that it shall not be a Kingdom of Sport; in we than
shall speak of the Wonders and wisdom of God, and of the great Mysteries of
the Heavenly Magia: the The song of Miriam, Moses sister.
song of the Persecutour, plaguer or oppressor.
great Hunter will continue there to the disgrace of the Devil, and to the
praise of God.

20. We shall have some knowledge of Hell, but see nothing of it save only in
the Magia, in the Mystery; for the Devils must dwell in the Darkness: the
wrathful fire which is in them is their Light, they have eyes of Fire to see
with all, all Fire besides is gone, for, the Majesty has Or allayed it.
swallowed it up that it may burn in Love.

21. Though indeed there is fire in the Center from which the Majesty arises;
but this will not be allowed to the Devils; they shall be thrust out into
Darkness, where there is howling and gnashing of Teeth, indeed more More frost
then fire.
cold then heat.

The three and thirtieth Question.
What kind of matter shall our bodies have in the Life to come?
1. MY beloved friend, this is a mighty Or strong.
hard Question; the outward man must let it alone, and not meddle with it at
all, for he is not worthy of it.

2. You know, that God is become Man, and has taken our Flesh and blood, and
soul upon him: Now Christ said, Joh. 8.23.
I am from above: Joh. 3.13.
None goes into Heaven but the Son of Man which is come from Heaven, and is
in Heaven.

3. Do you understand this, that he said, he is in Heaven? He spoke not only
of his Deity, that is, of the Word; but of the Son of Man, even of that Word
which was flesh; and this we are now to consider of: for, in that Flesh and
Blood we must live Eternally, and we must have Christ's body, if we will subsist
in God.

4. Yet we know of no other body that we have, but our Job. 19.26, 27.
own body, growing out of the Old Body, as a sprout grows from a kernel:
and such a Body Adam had in the Creation; but he was captivated by the Or by
the working property of this procreated world of four Elements.
Kingdom of this world, and so became Earthly; this was his Fall; and this
caused God to take a part of Adam, and make a woman of it, as we have written
at large in our Of the threefold Life.
third Book.

5. Now we know well that Adam was a chaste Virgin before his sleep, and
before Eve was made, but afterward became a Man, That is a beastiall animal
mortal man.
having Deformity like a beast, of which we are yet ashamed at this very day in
the sight of God, because we have Earthly bestiall members for propagation.

6. Now Adam had the Virgin of Divine Wisdom in him, but when he fell, then
it continued immovable in its own Principle, and Adam Or forsook it.
departed from it.

7. But know that Christ became Man in that Virgin [which was] in the Earthly
Mary; for the word of the Lord brought it with it into the body of Mary.

8. And here you must understand, that Christ became Flesh in the water of
Eternal Life; (which flesh the whole Deity fills;) and also in the
Substance, or properties.
Essences of the Earthly Mary.

9. But Mary was blessed with the Heavenly Virgin, and so Christ became man in
a pure vessel, and the Earthly man clave to him.

10. For, because of the soul which he was to receive from From the soul of
Mary.
Mary, he must therefore receive Mary's Flesh, yet in the blessing, in the
Heavenly Virgin only.

11. The Tincture of the blood in the heavenly Virgin was heavenly: for, the
The Earthly Tincture, or substantial virtue.
Earthly had not been able to pass, through the wrath of God, and through
Death, much less had it had power to rise out of the grave.

12. That word which became Flesh had the water of Eternal Life, which did
proceed from the Divine Majesty, and yet it was in Mary's blood: and here for
further information we direct you to our third Book; where it is described at
large.

13. And thus we tell you, we shall have a body consisting of Flesh and blood,
such a body as Christ had; for Christ by his Incarnation is Or borne.
become Man in us.

14. When we are borne anew of water, and of the Spirit, then in Christ's
Spirit, we are borne anew of Christ's flesh and blood, we put on Christ.

15. Christ becomes borne in the converted sinner, and he in Christ becomes
the Child of God, this is the body we shall have in Heaven.

16. No gross beastiall flesh, as we have in the Old Adam, but subtle flesh
and blood, such flesh as can pass through wood, and stone, they remaining
whole still; as Christ came in to his Disciples the door being shut: It is
such a body as has no Turba or fragility, Hell cannot retain it, it is like
Eternity: and yet it is real flesh and blood, which our heavenly hands shall
touch, and feel, and take hold of, also a visible Body as that is, which we
have here in this world.

17. Now pray consider; how is it possible that such a body as we carry about
us here, can be Comprehend, or receive.
capable of the Divine Majesty? sure it must be such a body, as is like the
Majesty, that the Majesty can shine forth from it, out of the Tincture and
water of Eternal Life.

18. Here indeed we are as it were Or not intelligitable.
dumb, to the apprehension of Reason, yet we are well enough understood by our
Brethren: this belongs to the Such as love God, and are borne of him.
Children. A Wolf desires to fill his mouth with such a piece of flesh as
will fill his belly; we speak not of such flesh, but such as Christ has given
us in his Testament, and left for a Remembrance, and as an Earnest that he will
remain for ever with us; we in him and he in us.

19. Therefore we say, that we shall have the Divine Body and Christ's body
which fills Heaven: we shall not remain in that which is his Creature: but
be joined one to another as members, brethren and Children.

20. There is but one Life in us all; there is nothing mortal, All proceed
from the Eternal one; there is nothing that has had any beginning but the
Wonders only, one Essentiality is come out of the Eternal: we are as Gods: we
are true Children of God, proceeding from his Essences in body and soul.

The four and thirtieth Question.
What is the miserable and horrible Estate of the Damned?
1. IT is sufficiently declared already: for, Gods wrath in the Darkness is
their dwelling Place: their Light is that which shines from their fiery Eyes,
like the glimmering of a flash of fire; they have no Light at all but that; for
they dwell in that which is As in utmost, or utter darkness.
most uttermost: and so ascend in haughtiness above the Thrones like strong
Champions: and yet they have different qualifications among them, as their
Spirits differ.

2. For, a Dog does like a Dog, a Wolf like a Wolf, and so a Horse, a Foul,
a Toade, a Serpent, every one in their kind: yet they are all more speedy and
swift then thoughts.

3. They have their joy in their abominations, and their chiefest joy is to
scorn God, in that they are fiery Spirits, and God a Spirit of Light.

4. Their boast is always of their strong, fiery might, they are as a Dragon
that spitteth fire: they seek destruction and find abominations.

5. They have also fruit growing out of their own Principle, as the
abominations of their wills are.

6. They have a sort like such as play with fireworkes, as Rockets, and Balls
of fire, also spitting fire out of their mouths, Jesting, jeering, scoffing,
and deriding in strange Apish gestures of face, and body.
fooling, tumbling, and juggling, is their passe-time; though indeed there is no
time; nor no fear of any other Torment, after the last Judgment Day! but
their whole life is a continual fear, horror, terror and Lamentation: every
one has his work, (which he did here while he lived) in the Figure: which
awakeneth the Turba there, and so he rides in the Fire.

7. The soul has no feeling of it; because it self is Fire, but the Turba
does plague it with those Abominations which it introduced; there is an
Eternal despairing in them, and therefore they are Gods Enemies.

8. To blaspheme God is their chiefest Power: they devour Hellish brimstone
and Abominations, for their fruits are a kind of stuff that is outwardly
fair, but inwardly mere Strong Abominations malice, or wickedness.
wrathfulnesse: such Hypocrites as they have been upon Earth, such bread does
their Heaven afford them to eat.

9. They are at Liberty and not shut up at all, they may descend as deep as
they will, for the Abyss and darkness is every where, and yet they are but in
their first place: the deeper they desire to throw themselves, the deeper they
fall, and yet they find no end, or bottom.

10. Their Their time not the time of Man.
number is not the number of any humane time, their Refocillation.
breath is a mere stink of Fire and Brimstone: when they consider themselves,
in their Abominations, that they were once Angels and now Devils, then
presently the gnawing worm arises, which biteth and tormenteth them.

11. To what end should their wickednesses be described? they are evil
unclean Beasts, that which they practiced on Earth, that follows them, and
that they desire to do there also, they drink down abomination and
wickedness without measure.

12. Their Or Dominion.
Government is no way better to be known then in the Antichristian Or Beast.
horse and scornful men, who rave with cursing and blaspheming: yet this is
but a Shadow, or Resemblance.
Glass of the hellish Abominations: we will not mention them any further, for
they are not worth the speaking of.

The five and thirtieth Question.
What is the Enochian Life; and how long is it to continue?
1. THis is also above humane Reason; no outward Reason can comprehend it but
seeing The Enochian life is brought forth.
it is borne, it must be made manifest: For there are such Mysteries couched in
it as the world is not able to conceive, neither ought we to mention them all,
for they have their Bounds, or appointed time.
limit how far they shall be mentioned: for in Time, or Age.
this, Or Wonders.
Miracles are yet to be done upon the Earth; for which cause, our speech is
taken away, and we must hold our peace in silence.

2. Indeed we may declare what kind of life it is, or whether Enoch is gone,
as also Elias and Moses: it is no Fiction, we declare only what is given us
here, we must not mention any further, we must not be believe Reason, for it
is a fool herein.

3. But we may well speak something of it, for the time is Or come.
borne, for Or prophecy.
Enoch to speak, and Or the Sword.
Elias to work again; which Babell shall find by experience: for Moses has
Or Beams, or Rays which with their light shall contend with darkness.
horns, and yet he is a patient Lamb.

4. O how will thou rejoice if thou do get into Moses his Flock, for he has
a good Message: Rejoice O heaven, and skip for joy O Earth! for Enoch is in the
Field and keeps his Flock.

5. What does Elias desire? for he is clothed with a white Garment! he was
with Christ on the Mount, and spoke of the consummation of man's Redemption; he
spoke also of the entering into Paradise, and of the final deliverance from Or
driver.
the Hunter.

6. He that is borne blind sees nothing: How can a lame man get the prize? or
a deaf man distinguish Languages? does not the Sun shine daily, and yet the
Moale remains blind? shall Babell come to see? we know she is a scorner, and
therefore she must be blind though the Sun shine clearly to her.

7. How can he hehold two worlds, that always lives but in one? or is it not
Art and wit, that has understanding able to search out the deep Gates? yet Art
and wit.
they pass away, as a wind which brings forth nothing, though it makes a
boasting noise: and so does Babell.

8. When we will speak of the Enochian Life; we must look into the Scripture,
and see who Enoch was, and what life he led: and then we may soon find where
he is, and what his taking up or Translation was.

9. You know that the Genesis 5.18.
Scripture says his Fathers name was See the Mysterium magnum, chapter 30. ver.
19, 20.
JARED; if you understood the Language of Nature, you had the whole ground
already.

10. And En^ch begat Methus^lah, who attained the highest age of Man, and after
he had begotten him he continued in a Divine Life, till the Lord took him away
into his own Principle.

11. But we must not understand it, as if he were wholly perfect in the Light
of the Divine Majesty, and should not appear at the day of Judgment. Indeed
he is in God without Death or want of any thing; yes, he is in Gods Love, yet
but in the birth of the Divine Principle, for he had also Adams flesh.

12. And you know well, that the outward Kingdom with the Earthly flesh,
belongs to the Turba; and although it be clear, that he had the body of the
Wonders of God, in the outward body, in which Divine body of the Wonders, he
was taken away into the Mystery, so that the outward body was as it were
swallowed up by the Mystery.

13. Yet, now the Mystery must give up all whatever it has devoured: as you
know, that at the end, the outward body must appear with all its Substance, or
Essences.
works before the Judgment: and thus the Turba is in the outward body with
the Wonders, which shall be made manifest and tried in the Fire.

14. Now then if Enoch be thus taken up, both body and soul (with both the
bodies) then the outward body is in the In the outward secret hiddennesse.
Mysterium, and the Inward body in the In the inward secret hiddennesse.
Arcanum, an heavenly Mystery, and so he lives in two Mysteries, being
invisible and incomprehensible to the outward world: and thus we give you to
understand, that Paradise is yet present and unperished; though seeming to be
as it were devoured by the curse of God, and it lies yet as a Mystery, in the
curse, incorrupt.

15. For, we are able to say with good ground in Truth, that Paradise is still
upon the Earth; yet we are not in it, but Enoch is in it, and yet he has the
body of the Turba in the Mystery, and in the Heavenly i Mystery he has the
Divine body, Or Arcanum.
a Paradisicall Body which is capable of Paradise: and thus he is as a Wonder,
and is a Prophet in the Crown at the Or End.
Limit of the Wonders.

16. For, you know that the Scripture says: that after he had begotten
Methusalah, viz. the Man of the greatest Age, he continued afterward in a
Divine Life, and this has a deep meaning.

17. Methusalah signifies the end of the Wonders of this world: and Enoch
remaining in his Divine Life three hundred years after the birth of
Methusalah, signifies the manifestation of the Wonders, and a plain
Ministry, viz. a preaching of Righteousness; whereby the Turba of every one
shall be shown him, and the End of the Wonders of this world shall be
declared, viz. the vengeance of God; and his Reward to the good.

18. And the time after Enoch (wherein Methusalah lived to the Viz. the end of
an Age, or Seculum.
Number of the Crown) when Enoch and his preaching was taken up, does signify
that the Enochian Light which shined in his time, will enter again into its
Principle, and seek out the Earthly body which Enoch had, and will find that
the Turba is in it still; and then there will be no further seeking, for the
Turba is found in the Limit, and works to the Fire and Judgment.

19. And thus the end of the world is as the dregs, and it works in the
Turba, to the blowing up of the Fire, and the Judgment: for the outward world
was produced out of the Turba, and took its beginning in the Turba, and the
Turba is its propriety, thus the beginning seeks the end again in the wrath.

20. And as this world was corporeal in the wrath; so the Spirit will have the
beginning at the end again in the wrath, for the Beginning and the End is one;
also you plainly perceive, that in the Beginning the Turba devoured Adam, and
brought him into the Anger: and murdered Abel.

21. Therefore O ye Elect, let none of you desire to live to the end of the
time, after Enochs taking up; but behold when Enoch preaches then the Sun
shines, and then go out from Babell, it is a golden time: but your Turba is
the cause that Enoch shall be taken up.

22. Enoch is not gone out of this world, he is entered into the Repository.
Mystery in the Wonders; for he is Gods Preacher; and after the Turba has
overcome the world, he must be silent till the six Seals have ended their
Wonders, and till the Angels of the Turba have poured out their Viols, then the
Or works.
Wonders of the Anger are finished.

23. Then Enoch comes out of the Mystery again, and enters into the
Ministerium, or Office of teaching, or preaching.
Ministry, and relates what has been done, and punishes the world because of
the Malice, or wickedness.
Turba, for suffering Or sins.
Abominations to enter into them, without resisting.

24. And after that the world is fat and wanton in the golden years, and Or
becomes.
seeks Sodom and Gomorrah again, then also its Turba will become fat and
wanton, and seek the wrath and the Limit, then the golden days are done, and
will be devoured by the Turba; and then Methusalah the oldest man dies, and
instantly the Deluge of Fire approaches: consider it, for it will be in
earnest.

25. We do not say that you shall feel Enoch with your Hands, no! Enoch did
not preach from the Spirit of the Earthly Life, but from that which was a
Prophet, which brought the outward man into the Principle: and so you shall not
feel the outward Enoch, but you shall hear the Prophet which speaks from
Enoch, from the Mystery.

26. Babell does mock, and scorn at this, and contemns Or Prophecy
Enoch for a while, and then Enoch calls Preaching, or Teaching.
Noah, but they call him old fool, for preaching so of the downfall of Babell.

27. But Noah goes into the other world through the Simplicity, or humility.
water, and calls Or Miracles.
Moses with his Wonders, and he comes: for he has the Wonders of God!

28. For he is passed through Death, and brought his body through Death, when
the Turba desired to consume it, and the Devil contended for it, and would
have the Corruption, or transitorinesse.
Turba which was in Moses, because he had been an angry man, and carried the Or
destroyer.
Turba in him.

29. But it was old the Devil that the Turba in the Fire did not belong to
him, for it belonged to the Majesty of God, and contained the Wonders; and the
Turba in the Darkness of the wrath only belonged to him: who is without the
City, he must not dwell in the City, in the Principle, but without it.

30. For God did not create him Or for.
in the Fire: let him remain therefore in his own awakened Fire-Life: he has
nothing to do with Moses his body; for his Wonders in the Anger, belong not to
his The Devil.
Turba, he is a very outcast, a castaway.

31. Also Moses his body is passed through Death; his unfadable Body which had
the Wonders, has swallowed up that which was Earthly in the Turba, and yet not
consumed it to putrefaction, but it also is in the Mystery: and his Anger
sharpness, or severity.
Turba which killed the firstborn in Egypt; drowned Pharaoh in the water;
slew them that worshipped the Calfe; and swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
into the Earth, continued in Moses death.
Death.

32. For when he dyed, then his Spirit and soul departed Or from the Anger and
severity, and passed into Innocence* and so was but an Instrument of Gods
Anger, in true Resignation, and not in selfehood.
from the Turba: and he remained in the Wonders, in the Mystery.

33. And now he is become a Lamb, and puts his works amongst the goods of
Isaac and Sem, as a Mystery of God in his deeds of Wonder: but the house is
Isaacks: and all dwell in the Tents of Sem, in his Kingdom: take notice of
this both Jews and Christians.

34, Now therefore seeing Moses is gone with Righteousness from the strife of
the Turba, and of the Devil, into the Mystery: and yet has his first
unfadable body on him (which though it be delivered from the Turba, must yet be
tried in the Fire at the end of the Days) and therefore his Prophet is in the
Mystery.

35. And since he is become a Lamb, after the Turba; he has sent his people
many Prophets to preach the Mystery: as indeed there are not only Laws and
works contained in the Mystery, but also the Lamb Christ: into whom he is
also entered, and has brought his Or the Jews.
Law to be a servant in the Or household.
Family of the Lamb; that so his Wonders may be in the sheepfold of the Lamb.

36. This Moses calls to Or Prophecy.
Enoch, seeing that he also is in the Mystery: and is clothed with the white
Garment, which he got of the Lamb in the other world; and Moses comes to help
him with the Lambs deeds of Wonder, because they call Noah fool, who teaches
only as an honest man without Wonders.

37. Babell is not able to endure Noah's doings of simple teaching without Pomp
and Covetousness.
this, for so her Pomp and Pride will be taken away: she sets her self
against Or Miracles.
Moses, and Or Prophecy.
Enoch, and persecuteth them, she would murder them; but Moses is already
dead, and Enoch is taken up, and neither of them is in the outward life with
her: she says come on now! where is Enoch and Moses? show us their Wonders!
but she is blind and cannot see them: and so she raveth against Moses and
Enoch, and falls into Contention.

38. Then Moses calls for Or the Sword, or vengeance.
Elias, who went out of this world in the Divine Fire, into the Abyss of the
Principle with body and soul: who also dwells in the Principle with mighty
Power: Now when he comes and perceives the cry, that Destroyed Christendom.
Babell is in the Fire; then he kindles the Turba, so that the great Fire
burns, which consumes flesh and blood, also stones and the Elements: then
Babell must drink her last Or the very Dregs.
draught.

39. After this Or the Prophets that preach in the Name of the Lord, and lead
a pious life.
Enoch has peace a while, and then is the golden Age, till my The Children of
God.
beloved grows voluptuous and wanton, having fatted her Turba, so that it
seeks the Limit; and then comes the End of all time.

40. Do not wonder at it; we will stay in the mean time with In simplicity.
Noah till Miracles.
Moses and Or vengeance, or destruction.
Elias come: then all the Children of God will find it true.

41. Yet it will remain hidden to the wicked, till the Turba devour them; for
they look upon this, as the Jews did upon Christ, and the first world upon
Noah: what does the Mystery profit a scorner? he looks after nothing but
eating and drinking; and takes care how to satisfy his haughty mind, that
he may ride with Pomp in Babell.

42. Thus my beloved friend, we have given you a short Hint of the Enochian
Life, and what his Office and condition is, also of Moses and Elias: as a wise
man consider further of it; for we dare not speak otherwise thereof: our
understanding and will is driven into such a phrase, neither have we leave in
this place at this time, to write more at large, or more fundamentally in
plain words.

43. But if God shall please to grant, that we may write somewhat upon the
first, and also upon the second Book of Moses, somewhat more should be
revealed: for the Names of the Fathers before the Flood which are there set
down, belong all to the Mystery, and they contain great Wonders in them:
when it is Day, you shall clearly know the whole course of the world in it.

The six and thirtieth Question.
What is the Soul of the Messiah, or Christ?
1. WE have sufficiently cleared this in our third Book; of the threefold life
of man: but because every one that reads this has not that; and in regard of
the Question it self, we must answer somewhat the more here, and therefore I
set this down: for you ask in the following Question about Christ's Spirit,
which was readily obedient, or submissive.
willing, and which he commended to his Father.

2. Here the Or Mankind.
Old and sick Adam shall be comfortablely refreshed, he shall have a Or Cure
for Death.
Medicine against Death, and be Or made alive.
quickened again: for his Mother shall bring forth a young son, to live in her
bosom, and he shall exceedingly rejoice in him.

3. If we would consider the soul of Christ, we need only seek and find our
selves: for Christ's soul is a humane soul, conceived in Mary the Viz. the
Eternal wisdom of God: and the outward humanity: that is, God and Man.
twofold Virgin.

4. Yet we do not acknowledge the outward mortal Life in Mary for a pure
Virgin: for, that which is mortal has the Anger and the Turba which
corrupts all Purity, so that no pure Virgin is borne of Eve, but are all
daughters of her.

5. And Eve her self was but half a Virgin, for Adam was the other half,
according to the two Tinctures, in which man saw himself to be wholly a
Virgin in pure Love, and so saw God through himself, that is, through the
Creature he saw the Original, which produced those two out of it self.

6. And thus also in one The whole and not divided person, as Adam was before
he slept.
whole person, there is one pure Love and Chastity: for it seeks no other
Conjunction, it self is the Conjunction of both Tinctures, viz. the Tincture
of the soul, and the Tincture of the Spirit; and its power was such that it
could bring forth a Spirit out of the fiery Tincture, which is [said to be] a
soul and Spirit.

7. Which Adam Exti^guished, or put out.
lost, when he suffered the Earthly Life to take him captive, and therefore he
must be divided, and a woman be made out of him, which must set her Love,
Longing delight, or lust.
Desire, and Imagination upon the Adamicall fiery Tincture: if she would be
pregnant with a Soul.

8. Thus none can say, that Eve was a pure and chaste Virgin before the
contaction of Adam: for as soon as Adam did awake from sleep, he saw her
standing by him, and did presently set his Fancy, or Desire; or lusted after
her.
Imagination upon her, and took her to him and said; this is flesh of my
flesh, and bone of my bone: she shall be called Woman, because she is taken
from Man.

9. And the (Eve) instantly set her Imagination upon Adam, and so both were
mutually kindled with the Desire of each other.

10. Where is now the pure Chastity and Modesty? is it not bestiall? is not the
outward Image become a Beast? as is to be seen plain enough in his Will and
Or doings.
Essence, that he does like a Beast, yea, more foolishly, for he has Reason,
and yet runs on against Reason, as if he were void of sense.

11. But that he might be restored, and the Image reduced into Unity, that word
which spoke the soul out of the Mouth of God, and did breath it from the
Holy Ghost into the Image, is become Man, and is entered into the Earthly Image,
that is, into the Turba of Destruction.

12. And you know very well, that the word has the water of Eternal Life, and
the Fire, the Deity, and out of the Fire [it hath] the Tincture of the Deity,
and in the Tincture, the Spirit of God, which proceeds from the Mouth of God;
and in the proceeding forth the Or Luster.
glance of the Majesty is made manifest in the operation of the Spirit.

13. This word which is in the Virgin of the wisdom of God, and encompassed
with the Wonders of Eternity, is now in humility of great Love toward our
Image which was lost in Adam, come again into us, and is in Mary (understand
the Earthly Mary, yet in the Benediction) become Man.

14. The Benediction was, that the soul of Mary was adorned with the heavenly
Virgin of the wisdom of God, which Adam had lost; therefore the Angel called
her blessed of all Women.

15. No woman from Adam to that Time was ever clothed with the heavenly
Virgin but this Mary: therefore by the blessing she became chaste and full of
Purity: for the Holy Ghost goes not into that which is Earthly, he mixeth
himself not with the Similitude, or Resemblance.
Glass, for it cannot be that the Glass should be as the Life it self.

16. Understand our high and precious depth thus; The soul of Man proceeds
from God, and is from the Eternal; and the body of man is but a Glass of the
Eternal, and so God clothed the soul of Mary with the Divine Virgin, in the
Principle of the soul; not in the Earthly flesh; as if she had been deified:
no! she must die as well as all other people.

17. And in this Virgin, Gods word, out of the Heart of God the Father assumed
the seed of the Woman, viz. the seed of the soul, and the seed of the first
Image, which for so long a time stood hidden in the Mystery.

18. But now at length, the Life of God entered into it, and did make it a whole
Image again: for, the water of Eternal life proceeding from the Heart of God,
mingled with the water of the Spirit of the soul: for the Spirit takes its
Original from the water, and the soul is Fire.

19. Thus the word received the Tincture of the soul, and the Holy Ghost the
Tincture of the Spirit viz. the Tincture of the water: and both became one
soul: and yet the Creature was still distinguished from Gods Spirit, though
Gods Spirit dwelt therein: and of Gods water and Tincture, and of the seed of
Mary, from her Tincture and water, in the high benediction, a flesh and blood
was produced, so that an Heavenly Man in the Earthly was incarnate at once.

20. So that it may be said; this is the Son of the Woman; viz. the very
bodily and natural Son of Mary, with soul and body, with flesh and blood,
and all that belongs unto Man: and also the very Son of God, which was
borne from Eternity out of Gods Eternal Essence, ere the foundation of the
world was laid; who stood both in the Majesty of the Holy Ternary, and also in
the Or womb.
body of Mary at once.

21. And the soul of Christ does belong half to the Principle of this world,
and half to the Holy Ghost: for, the sou^e of Christ used the Spirit of the
Air and Stars, with the virtue of the Elements; and also the Word of God and
the Divine food; for such a man Adam was in his Innocence.

22. Thus God has regenerated us in Christ; and so we are regenerated in
Christ out of Gods word and Spirit, by the water of Eternal Life, and so we
are Gods Children in Christ: and if we resign our selves up to Christ,
departing from our Reason and will, then we put on Christ's body, and our will
and Spirit lives from Christ, who is in us and we in him.

23. Hence you may understand what the Temptation of Christ was, viz. The
Regenerate man was to endure Adams Temptation [to trie] whether his soul could
stand steadfast in God: and therefore he was proved in the Tu^ba [to trie]
whether he could stand steadfast in three Principles, and rule over the outward
Life: and therefore food was withdrawn from the outward Life and the Inward
must over power the outward, and eat of the word of the Lord, and uphold the
outwa^d in its own Power, and full Omnipotency, and also keep Death captive,
that it might not be able to destroy the outward Life: this must needs be a
hard Combat*

24. And the other two Temptations were these, viz. he was tempted [to trie]
whether man would live in Or complete.
full obedience, and suffer God to work in him; or whether he would exalt
himself again, and be free from God, as Lucifer did? therefore the Devil
must tempt him, because this man was to possess his Royal Throne.

25. The Devil complained that he could not stand, because the Mother of
wrathfulnesse did draw him too hard, and therefore he was permitted to try
this man, and to set before him that which was set before himself; and if this
man stood, then he should judge the Devil, who was found to be a liar.

26. For he full tried him in the second and third temptation, whether he would
ascend on high, in his own power, as himself had done, and so stirred up the
Anger: or whether he would put his trust and affiance in God only, and live to
him both in will and deed; as a child in obedience to the Father, and this he
urged upon him, just so long as Adam stood in the Temptation, before he fell
asleep.

27. And now we also must always be so tempted and proved: and we are able to
get the victory in Christ who has overcome: for his soul is our soul, and
his flesh is our flesh, if we trust in him, and give up our selves wholly to
him as Christ gave up himself to his Father.

28. And thus my beloved friend, you understand what Christ's soul and body is;
viz. that it is our soul and body if we cleave to God; but if we do not,
then we are parted; and in the outward life, we belong to the Spirit of this
world, viz. to the lost and perished Adam; and in the soul we belong to the
Devil in the Anger of God: but look for these things more at large in our
other writings; where you shall find the whole ground of Heaven, and of this
world.

The seven and thirtieth Question.
What is the Spirit of Christ which was Or obedient*
willing, and which he commended into his Fathers hands?
1. THis is that great and excellent Treasure, Gem, or Pearl.
Jewel: and we exceedingly rejoice that we know it, so that we are able to
know our selves what we are; and it is more worth to us then all the world: for
it is that Pearl, of which Christ said, that one sold all that he had and
bought that Pearl.

2. For it is more profitable to man then the whole world; it is more precious
then the Sun, for the Or the Philosophers stone.
Noble stone of the wise men lies therein; it has the heavenly and Earthly
Great Mystery.
Mysterium Magnum: and therein nothing in this world to be compared to it, but
Or trusting in God; and enduring whatsoever he lays upon us.
sincere simplicity, which is quiet, and brings forth, or stirs up no
Turba: and that has the Jewel hidden in it.

3. As Gold lies couched in the stone and is safe: if a Or spoyler.
Robber commerh not with the Earthly Turba, and destroys it: and yet he
himself gets nothing by it: so self Reason is a Robber in the That is, in
the Cabinet where the Pearl lies.
Mystery.

4. Therefore we may say upon good ground, that a simple Layman, or Idiot.
plain man, who simply without multiplicity of science, depends on God; has
the Mysterium Magnum, better and surer, yea less decayed, then a high learned
Or Father.
Doctor, who soareth aloft in Reason, and Or disputes and wrangleth about it.
spoyleth the Jewel, and Or respect of persons.
sets it in Babell: this saying will not be well relished, yet that is
nothing to us, we must speak the Truth without x partiality.

5. Now when we speak of Christ's Spirit, Reason thinks it is the soul, or
else the Spirit of the outward Life, which consists in the virtue and
operation of the Stars and Elements, but it is not so; It is somewhat else
wherein the Image of God consists: the outward Spirit belongs not to the
Deity, but to the Wonders.

6. We have spoken somewhat of it already: but because this Question does put
us in mind of it again; mentioning that when he dyed, he commended it to his
Father; therefore we must a little say how that was done.

7. You sufficiently perceive in what manner the soul is the Centrum Naturae.
Center of Nature, the Original of Life, and mobility, viz. Gods Fire: which
should be continually converted into the Eternal will of God, wherein it is
originally borne from the Magical Desire, and is a great Secret come out of
the Eternal Nothing, wherein all things are contained, even the Deity with all
the three Principles, and every Thing, Essence, or substance.
Being that can be named.

8. And you perceive that the Light and Spirit of the Air proceed from the
fire, and also that the fire does again draw the Spirit, of the Air into it
self, and so always blows it self up; and so with the Light, Air, and Or
property.
source of the Fire it is its own Life.

9. And further, we have said somewhat of the Noble Tincture which arises in
the Light, in which the meekness of the Light consists, and it comes forth
from the Anguish which is as a mortifying, and springs forth afresh through
the mortifying Anguish, as a life having another Or Source.
property, where the property of the fire is a kind of Tincture, like the
driving forth of a Spirit; and yet it is desiring, and thereby it attracteth
the virtue of the Light into it self, and makes it an Essence, viz. water.

10. And therein are two Forms: One according to the source of Fire which is
red, and therein the virtue, viz. Sulphur; And the other (which is like a thin
meekness, yet having Essentiality,) is water: which the desiring Tincture
contracteth together into one, and changes it into Blood.

11. Now the Original in the Blood, viz. Fire (which is a warmth, that is, a
Tincture) is a Life; and in the virtue of the Tincture, the thin water of the
Life proceeds, one The outward.
virtue proceeding forth from The inward.
another; and the virtue does always reassume that which goes forth: and that
which is gone forth is free from the Fire, and also from the virtue, for it is
gone forth, and yet it arose from the virtue.

12. And this is the true Spirit which is borne out of the soul, wherein the
Image of God, and the Divine virgin of Gods wisdom consists: for all
understanding and knowledge lies in this Spirit; it has the senses, and the
noble life which uniteth it self with God, this Spirit is so subtle that it
can and may enter into God.

13. If this Spirit resigneth it self up to God, and casts away the
ostentation and Reason, su^tlety, or w^.
cunning of the fire of its own soul, then it attaineth the Image of God, the
Divine body: for it puts its will into God, and dwells in God with Power:
thus it is clothed with the Divine Essentiality, and is without this world in
the Life of God.

14. But seeing this Spirit arises first out of the Center of Nature, that is,
out of the Life of Fire, (although it is not the life of the Fire, but the
Spirit of it, and the Life of the Fire stands originally in the Abyss, in
the source of Gods Anger) therefore Christ did not commend this Spirit of his
to the fires owns life, but into the hands of his Father.

15. His hands are the Love-Desire, wherewith he embraces our Spirit, when we
enter into him, and commend our selves to him.

16. For, when his body was to dye on the Cross; and his soul was to pass
through Hell, through the Anger of God; there the Devils waited, and thought
with themselves, we will surely keep the soul in our Turba in the Fire; and
then Christ commended the Spirit into the Love of God.

17. And so the soul of Christ with the Spirit came into Gods hand, being
encompassed with the Fire of Anger and Death: and Death would have held it
there, but Death was destroyed and confounded.

18. For, Death smothered the outward [Spirit] viz. the outward Life, and then
thought, now surely the soul must remain in the Turba: but there was one,
stronger in the soul; viz. the word of God: which took death captive, and
destroyed the Anger, and quenched the wrath with the Love in the Spirit of
Christ.

19. It was a poison to Hell, for the Love of God to come into it, and smother
it in the soul also a Plague, Death and Destruction to Death; Death must now
suffer an Eternal Life to grow in it.

20. Thus the Spirit of Christ took the Devil captive, and drove him out of
the Fire of the soul, and cast him into Darkness: and shut him up under
darkness, out from the Fire of the soul, and out from Gods Fire; into the
wrathful harshnesse and bitterness in cold: there let him warm himself
least he freeze with cold.

21. Consider the first four Forms of Nature, and you will understand what
the Devils Mansion is: for, before Christ [came] he kept the soul captive in
the Turba, with the Fire; and although he had not the Spirit of the soul, yet
he had the root of it in the Turba: but then he was commanded to cease; and he
was thrown out, and driven into Darkness, and thus his malice was destroyed
by Christ's descending into Hell, and Christ became his Judge.

22. Thus we have in brief described what the Spirit of Christ, and our Spirit
is; viz. not the outward Spirit, but the Spirit of the soul; not the soul it
self, but the Spirit of its Life.

23. As, in God, the Holy Ternary, is distinct, being three Persons in one
Essence, and yet but one only God; where the Son has the Spirit, viz. the
Life, issuing forth from the Heart and mouth; and the Heart is the flame of
Love; and the Father the Fountain, or Property.
source of Anger, which is made meek, by the Son, in the Love, so that in
God there is but one only will and Essence.

24. Thus it is also in Man, and no otherwise, no not in the least tittle:
whatsoever God in Christ is, that we also are in Christ, in God; his true
Children: Therefore let us also commend our Spirit into his hands, and so we
may be able to pass through Death into Life, into God, with Christ.

25. Therefore be not led about, and gulled with Ra^^les, fool^eries Bables,
shells, or outside shows, Imitation, or mimick tricks.
toys and trifles as hitherto ye have been in Babell: where this and that has
been Or pratled.
disputed about the soul, and its Spirit, one this way, and another that way;
there is no ground among them, but mere Fiction and Opinion.

26. Understanding is borne in God; not in the Schools from Art: yet we
despise it not; for if Art be borne in God, it is a tenfold Mystery, for it
always attaineth the Or perfection.
tenth Number in Or wit.
Reason, much better then a Or simple. Layman.
plain Man; for it can of many Numbers make Sum, or Total.
one.

27. But it is not in man's own power, no, one must enter in by the Cross as
well as the other, let him be a Doctor, or a Or Layick.
mean Man: Gods secrets will admit no Doctors but Discipulus.
Scholars into them: yet a Learned Discipulus.
Scholar may reach very far.

28. Had but this hand the High Art, and also those high gifts, then you
should see more from it: But God will have it as it is: It is indeed his
pleasure to make thc wisdom of this world foolishness, and to give his Power
to the weak: that all All life, or Creatures.
may bow down before him, and acknowledge that he only is the Lord that does
whatsoever he will.

The eight and thirtieth Question.
What are the things that shall come to pass at the End of the world?
1. BEloved friend, it is not fit for me to Answer this your Question, neither
is it in my own power, and besides it is not fit for any to ask it: for it is
the secret Counsel of God: let none endeavor to be equal with God, and to
foreknow all things.

2. Our knowledge consists in the Spirit and will of God, when that moves,
then it goes forward in the Heavenly Mag^a, and enters into the Wonders of
the Earthly: and then the Prophet is borne, for he stands upon the Or at the
end of a time, or Age.
Crown, and speaks Magically of the Beginning of the Wonders, and their
Turba; and shows how they shall come to an End, and be destroyed, and brought
again into the first.

3. For, all Prophets speak from the Turba, they discover that which is false,
and declare what is better, which enters into the will of God.

4. Therefore, be pleased not to urge us with this Question; for, we shall be
captivated in the Turba by it: you may understand enough in all the Questions,
what is to done hereafter, we have hinted it to you clearly enough.

5. We dare not speak any otherwise then Or by way of similitude, or in
Parables.
in a Magical manner of things to come: because the Wonders to come are all
seen in the Turba; now when the Spirit sees them, then it declares clearly
and plainly how the Turba is laden with evil, or good.

6. But behold all things are mixed: for God is become Man, and sets his Mercy
every where in the Anger, and hinders Perdition; therefore the Prophet must
speak magically, and not in express and plain terms: for it often comes
to pass, that though a thing be evil in its Or work.
Essence, yet there As at Ninivie, in Jonas his time.
soon grows a sprout out from the wickedness which destroys the Or
keeps back vengeance.
Turba, and causes a Conversion.

7. Therefore God admonishes you to subdue the firmamentall Heaven and to
oppose it; and so the evil which the firmamentall Heaven pours forth, is
many times turned into that which is better.

8. Otherwise if all should of necessity come to pass, as the firmamentall
^eaven does hold forth, then we needed no teaching: for that would be a sure
constant and perpetual Callender.

9. You know well, what Daniel, Ezekiel, and David say in their Prophesies;
especially the Revelation of Jesus Christ: In them lies all that shall
hereafter come to pass; and they also spoke In mystical terms, which outward
Reason could not comprehend.
Magically of things to come.

10. But in our writings you have them more clearly, for the time is now
nearer at end; and therefore it appears the more plainly what shall be done
at the end.

11. And be pleased to repair to our other writings, and there you shall find
enough of this: for the wicked world is not worthy of an open, plain and
manifest discovery; because thereby the great Secret, which belongs only to
the Children of God, would be Or stirred.
defiled: for God will not have us cast Pearls before Swine, but give them to
the Children for their Delight: and do you so with this also.

12. There is no need that the Mystery should lie under worldly Protection:
that is a folly; and God is dishonored by it, as if he were not able to
protect it.

13. You should not look for the Mysteries among the mighty, and Or pin your
Faith upon their sleeves, and look for a Religion from them.
confide in them more then in others, for the Persecution.
Turba presently enters in with a Law, and so the Spirit of God, is as it were
bound, and so an antichrist is brought forth.

14. Look upon Israel; when they rejected Samuel and their Judges, and
thought, that if their Doctrine were but under a worldly Arm, and that they
had but a King then they would keep their Law: but it is known how they did:
did not their Kings bring in the Idolatry.
Turba and make Calves to be worshipped, and compel the people to adore their
Idols; this is mentioned out of my affection, and good will.

15. But we give you no particular resolution of this Question, you shall
find enough of it in the other Questions, and we dare write no plain.

The nine and thirtieth Question.
What, and where is Paradise with the Inhabitants thereof?
.1 WE have also hinted in the Enochian Life, that it is in this world, yet as
it were swallowed up in the Mystery, but it is not altered in it self, it is
only withdrawn from our sight, and our Property, or sense.
Source; for if our Eyes were opened we should see it.

2. Yes, God in his Ternary is with us: how then should Paradise be lost? we
have lost its Property or working.
source and fruit in the outward Life: as the Devil lost God, when he wilfully
exalted himself as an haughty Spirit, and would be Lord; so it is with us.

3. When Adam did eat of the Earthly fruit of good and evil, then he also
gat an Earthly Life, good and evil, and was driven out of the fair Garden of
Paradise, (where heavenly fruit did grow) into this Earthly Life.

4. Many have written wonderful strangely of Paradise, but now the Image of
their blindness is manifested as clear as the Day: yet we contemn them not,
for they were Seekers: Every Or Seculum.
Age has had its Seekers, who have sought the Or hidden Mysteri^.
Mysterium; but it has been a long time very dark in Babell.

5. Now for these two hundred years it has begun to be manifest, in which
time the fall of Antichrist has discovered it self, and men have begun to
storm Babell on one side, but her strong Or Bulw^rke.
Tower stands fast still; indeed the Whore has been somewhat discovered, yet
her Worldly Authority.
Beast has but grown the more lusty.

6. Therefore there is yet a wonderful time near at hand, wherein all things
shall be altered: many great Mountains and Hills shall be made plain: and a
Fountain shall flow out of Zion, wherein the afflicted and distressed shall
drink and be refreshed.

7. And they shall be guided to the fresh pasture by one only Crook, and the
Shepherd shall rejoice with the sheep, that God is so gracious.

8. At that time Silver and Gold shall be as common as in Solomon's time; and
his Wisdom shall govern the whole Earth: this is a Wonder.

The fortieth Question.
Whether is Paradise mutable, and what shall it be afterward?
1. AS little as God is Mutable.
alterable, so little is Paradise Mutable.
alterable: for it is a part of the Deity: and when this outward Dominion shall
pass away; in the very place where the world now stands there will be mere
Paradise: for the Earth will be of an heavenly Essentiality, so that we shall
be able to dwell any where, and be able to pass through and through it.

2. At the last Day we shall not ascend above the Locus unversi.
place of this world, but make our abode here in our own Native Country, and
go into our home, in another world, in another Principle, of another Or source.
Property.

3, For, there will be no cold, or heat any more, also no night: we shall be
able every where to pass quite through the heavenly Earth without
interruption, and then it will be Paradise, and the Tabernacle of God with Man:
for it is written, Behold I make all things New, a New Heaven, and a New Earth,
and the Old shall be no more remembered.

4. This Earth will be like a Crystaline Sea; and all the Wonders of the world
will be seen Or through and through transparently.
wholly perspicuously: and the Or Glance, or Luster.
brightness of God shall be the light thereof: and the Holy Jerusalem, the
Great City of God shall be therein, where they shall offer up the calves of
their lips; there shall the bright City of God with the Wonders and Wisdom be
established; and the Temple of God, the New Jerusalem shall be prepared upon
the New Earth, which is adorned from the Power and Wonders of God.

5. All what ever the Prophets have written shall be there fulfilled; for Gods
word and Wonders shall flourish afresh upon the New Earth, as grass.

6. There is no Death any more, also no fear no sorrow, no sickness; no
Superior, but only Christ, who will dwell with us: we shall have one
Communion with the Angels, we shall have fruit grow according to our desire
and wish.

7. There will be no old Age: but one of a hundred years will be as a
newborn child; and we shall live in mere delightful Love.

8. All what ever is joyful will be sought after: and there the will of all
will be bent, to make one another rejoice.

9. We shall lead an Holy Priestly Life, and we shall all speak of Gods
wisdom and Eternal Wonders: for, the Divine Magia has infinite and
innumerable Wonders; the more that is sought, the more there is in it; and this
is the increasing of the will of God.

10. To this end God has made himself manifest, in [his] Images, viz. in
Angels and Men, that so he might have joy in himself, and eternally rejoice
with the essences of his Life.

Hallelu-jah.

11. Thus my beloved friend, we have set you down according to our gifts; a
round Answer to your Questions: and we exhort you as a brother not
contemptuously to despise us, in respect of our simple speech and Or
unlearnednesse.
incongruity.

12. For we are not borne of Art, but of simplicity, and we speak great things
in simple words: take this as a singular gift from God, you shall find more
in it then in the best Artificial Eloquent Orators.
Eloquence of the highest Art: except they also have their birth from this
School; and then we will prescribe nothing to such, but acknowledge them for
our loving Brethren in Christ, with whom we have assured hope to rejoice
eternally in the heavenly School: of which we here have attained a little
fore-taste.

13. Yet our knowledge here is but in part, when we shall attain Or the total.
perfection, then we will say what God is, and can do. AMEN.

A short Summary Appendix OF THE SOUL, The Image of the soul, and of the
TURBA, which is the Destroyer of the Image.
Written, by the same Author I. B.
In a Short Summary Appendix, of which in the other writings of this Author is
written fundamentally, and at large.
.1 THE soul is an Eye in the Eternal Abyss, a similitude of Eternity, a
perfect figure and Image of the first Principle: and resembles God the Father
in his Person, as to the Eternal Nature.

2. The Essence and substance of it, (merely and purely, as it is in it self)
is first, the wheel of Nature, as to the first four 1. Astringent. 2. Bitter.
3. Fire. 4. Anguish.

Forms.

3. For, the Word of the Lord, Or formed, or fashioned, or created.
comprised the soul, by the Eternal Fiat in the Eternal will of the Father,
in the Center of the Eternal Nature: and opened it with the Holy Ghost, or
blew it up like a fire (which lay hid in the Eternity, and wherein all forms
of the eternal Nature stood from Eternity:) and The soul, or the forms.
is alone known in the wisdom, in the Divine Magia as a figure, or Image
without substance.

4. Yet that Or being.
thing has not been substantial, but Essential, and has been known in the
Principle, in the flash, where the fire arises; But the shadow of it has
(from Eternity in a figurative Image,) figured it self in the Desiring will of
God; and has stood Or in the presence of the Ternary.
before the Ternary of God in the Magia in the wisdom of God, as a similitude
of the Holy Trinity: in which, God has manifested himself as in a Glass.

5. The substance and Image of the soul, may be resembled to the Earth, having
a fair flower growing out of it, and also to the fire and Light: as we see
that Earth is a Ground, foundation, or soil, or the Mother of that which
grows upon it.
Center, but no Life; yet it is Essential: and a fair flower grows out of
it, which is not like Earth, neither has it the smell and taste of the Earth,
much less the figure of it: and yet the Earth is the Mother of the flower.

6. And so the soul also shone.
appeared out of the Eternal Center of Nature, out of the Eternal Essence,
with the word Fiat in the will of God; and was held in the Fiat, so that it
shone.
appeared as a fiery Eye, and similitude of the first Principle in a creaturely
form, and substance.

7. And from this Eye went the Glance of its Fire, as Light does from fire: and
in this Glance of its own Fire, the Eternal Image (which is in the wisdom of
God) was seen and conceived by the will of the Heart of God in the second
Principle: that is, by the word Fiat of the second Principle, in the Love and
Power of the Holy Trinity, whence the Holy Ghost proceeds.

8. And thus the soul was a whole similitude and Image of the Holy Trinity:
here we must take the soul for the Center of Nature, and its fiery Life for
the first Principle: but the sprout, or the Image of the soul, which is a
similitude of God, buddeth forth from the soul, as a flower from the Earth,
and is comprised by the Holy Ghost; for it is his Mansion.

9. Now if the soul put its Imagination out from it self, (we mean out from
its Or property.
source of fire) into the Light of God, then it receives the Light, as the
Moon does the glance of the Sun: and so its Image is in the Majesty of God,
and the soul, in the Light of God, and its fiery Property is changed into
meekness and fervent Love, and then it is known to be the child of God.

10. But seeing the soul is Essential, and its own substance a Desire; it is
plain that it consists in two Fiats, one of them is its corporeal propriety,
and the other is the second Principle, proceeding from Gods will which is in
the soul, in which God desires to have The soul.
it his Image and similitude.

11. To which End Gods desiring, is as a Fiat in the Center of the soul, and
continually draws the will of the soul toward the Heart of God: for the
Lust, pleasure, will, or desire.
Longing of God would have the soul: and on the contrary the Center in the
power of the Fire would have it.

12. For, the life of the soul has its original in the Fire, and that makes
the striving for the Image of the soul: and which of these two Forms whether
it be the Fire, or meekness of Love that overcommeth, that will be the quality
of the soul, and as the quality of the will of the soul is: such an Image
will the soul have.

13. And we must know, that if the will of the soul change it self, then its
Form will be also changed: for if the Quality, or property.
source of the soul be fiery, then it has also a fiery Image.

14. But if the soul turn its Imagination into the Center, into the strong Or
harshnes.
Astringency and bitterness, then its fair Image is also captivated in the
dark astrengency; and infected with the Astringent wrath.

15. And then this wrath is a Turba, which possesses the Image, and destroys
the similitude of God: for in God there is Love, Light, and meekness: but in
this Image there is Darkness, astringency and bitterness, and the Essential
Quality, or property.
source is fire, proceeding from the Essences of wrath; and then this Image
belongs not to the Kingdom of God, so long as it continues in this Quality,
condition, or property.
source and form in the Darkness.

16. Fire is a further similitude of the soul: the soul is an Essential
Fire, and the flash of the Fire is the Life of it: The soul resembles a
Globe, or an Eye of Fire.

17. The burning Fire in the source signifies the first Principle, and the
Life, yet the Fire is not the Life: but the Spirit of the source which arises
from the Fire, and goes forth from the firelike Air, that is the true Spirit
of the source of the Life of the Fire, which continually blows the fire up
again, and makes it burn.

18. Now the fire shines, and gives Light out of the source, and dwells in
the source where it shines: and the source comprehends not the Light, and
this signifies the second Principle, wherein God dwells.

19. For we know that the Or Virtue.
Power is in the Light, and not in the Fire, the fire only gives Essences to
the Light, and the Life, or the Light produces meekness and substantiality,
viz. water.

20. Now we understand, that there is a Or amiable, Loving.
meek Life in the Light, without Or pain.
source, and yet it self is an insensible Or pain.
source, it is nothing but a Longing, or desire of Love.

21. Which Source we account a Tincture, in which the budding and blossoming
has its Original, yet the Fire is the cause of it, and the meekness is a
cause of the substantiality: for the Desire of Love in the Light attracteth it,
and keeps it, so that it becomes a substance, but the Desire of Fire
consumes the substantiality.

22. Also we must conceive that, (as the soul is purely and alone in the
Center) it is an Essential Fire in the Eye of Eternity, and yet that Eye
desires a figure and Image of the wisdom of God.

23. And the Image is in its desire, in its Imagination, for the Verbum fiat.
word Fiat has comprehended it, that it might be a similitude of the Eternal
wisdom of God, wherein he dwells, and wherein he may manifest himself by
his Spirit, and what ever has been in his Eternal Counsel.

24. Thus the Majesty of God flameth in the Image, in the Essential Fire, if
the Essential Fire puts its desire into the Majesty, but if not, then the
Image is Void, or empty.
raw and naked without God, and the Tincture is false.

25. For the Image is in the Tincture, and has its original in the Tincture,
in the Light, not in the source of the Fire: and as the Heart or word of God
has its Original in the Light of the Majesty, in the Eternal Tincture of the
fire of the Father, so has the Image of the soul,

26. Indeed the Image dwells in the fire of the soul, as Light dwells in
the Fire, but it has another Principle, as the Light is such a source as is
different from Fire.

27. And so the true Image of God dwells in the Light of the Fire of the
soul; which Light the fiery soul must create in the fountain of the Love of
God, in the Majesty, by putting and yiedling its Imagination into it.

28. And if the soul do not so, but puts its Imagination into it self,
into its wrathful form of the source of the fire, and not into the fountain
of Love, into the Light of God, then its own source of Sternesse, sharpness,
or eagerness.
fourcnesse, astringency, and bitterness rises up: and the Image of God
becomes a Turba, and swalloweth up the similitude of God in the wrath.

29. And then the Astringent Fiat in the fiery Essence of the soul, figureth
for the soul an Image, of the Imagination that is in its will: whatsoever the
Essential fire of the soul desires, that will be figured in the soul; viz.
Earthly Figures: that which the will of the Heart casts it self into, that
Image the Fiat of the soul will make: that is, as far as the third
Principle, and the Spirit of the Stars and Elements has power.

30. So that if the will of the soul do cast it self into the Kingdom of
this world, then the outward Kingdom has power to bring its Imagination into
the inward Principle, and if the inward Fiat perceive that in the fire of the
soul, then it becomes pregnant with it, and keeps it.

31. And then the soul has the Image of a Beast in the third Principle, and
that cannot be destroyed for ever, except the will of the soul return again
out of the earthly Lust, and pierce into the Love of God again, and then it
gets the Image of God again: which may be done only in this life, while
the soul is Essentially in its Ground, or soil, or bed of Earth.
Either, in the growing of its Tree: but after this Life it cannot be done.

32. Thus you may understand what the soul, Spirit, Image, and Turba are the
soul dwells in it self, and is an Essential Fire, and its Image stands
in it self, in the Imagination in the Light of the soul, if it cleave to God,
if not, then it is in Anxiety in the wrath of darkness, and is an Vizard, or
Monster.
abominable Image, or an Image of the Devil.

33. The Turba of the soul which destroys the Divine Image, is the
Essential wrathfulnesse, and it is caused by the Imagination, or false Love,
and Or Imaging.
Representation: and therefore all lies in the Imagination, the Image
consists in that which we suffer to come into our Desire.

34. It is very necessary for us to strive continually against the Earthly
Reason of flesh and blood; and to yield the Spirit of our wills into the mercy
and Love of God, and always cast our selves into the will of God, and not
count Earthly Or profit.
goods and pleasure our treasure, setting our desire upon it: which will
destroy the Image: for it is a Turba of the Image of God; and brings Earthly
properties into the Image.

35. Or to conclude.
To sum up all: Christ said, where your treasure is there will your Heart be
also, according to which God will judge the secrets of Mankind, and sever the
clean from the unclean; and give that which is false to the Turba of the Fire
to be devoured, and bring the Holy thing (which is entered into God) into his
Kingdom. AMEN.

THE CLAVIS, OR KEY. OR, An Exposition of some principal Matters, and words in
the writings of JACOB BEHMEN.

Very useful for the better apprehending, and understanding of this Book.

Written in the Germane Language, in March, and April, ANNO. 1624.

BY JACOB BEHMEN. Also called, Teutonicus Philosophus.

Printed in the year. 1647.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER Of these writings.
1. IT is written: the Natural man Understands, or receives not.
perceives not the things of the Spirit, nor the Mystery of the Kingdom of
God, they foolishness unto him, neither can be know them: therefore I admonish
and exhort the Christian Lover of Mysteries, if he will study these High
writings, and read, search, and understand them, that he do not read them
outwardly only, with sharp speculation and meditation: for in so doing, he
shall remain in the outward Imaginary Ground only, and obtain no more then a
Or feigned shadow of them.
counterfeited color of them.

2. For a man's own Reason without the Light of God, cannot come into the
Ground [of them,] it is impossible; let his wit be never so high and subtle,
it apprehends but as it were the shadow of it in a Glass.

3. For, Christ says, without me you can do nothing: and he is the Light of
the world: and the Life of men.

4. Now if any would search the Divine Ground, that is, the Divine Or
manifestation.
Revelation; he must first consider with himself, for what end he desires to
know sucb things; whether he desires to practice that which he might obtain;
and bestow it to the glory of God, and the welfare of his neighbor: also
whether he desires to die to Earthlinesse, and to his own will; and to live
in that which he seeks and desires, and to be one Spirit with it.

5. If he have not a purpose, that if God should reveal himself and his
mysteries to him; he would be one Spirit, and have one will with him, and
wholly resign and yield himself up to him; that Gods Spirit might do what he
pleases, with him and by him, and that God might be his knowledge, will, and
Or working.
deed: he is not yet fit for such knowledge and understanding.

6. For, there are many that seek Mysteries and hidden knowledge, merely that
they might be respected, and highly esteemed the world; and for their own
gain and profit: but they attain not this ground, where the Spirit searches
all things, even the deep things of God: as it is written.

7. It must be a totally resigned and yielded will, in which God himself
searches and works, and which continually pierces into God, in yiedling and
resigned Humility, seeking nothing but his Eternal Native Country, and to do
his neighbor service with it: and then it may be attained: and he must begin
with effectual Repentance and amendment, and with prayer that his
understanding might be opened from within; for, then the inward will bring it
self into the outward.

8. But when he reads such writings and yet cannot understand them, he must
not presently throw them away, and think it is impossible to understand them:
no, but he must turn his mind to God, beseeching him for Grace and
understanding, and read again, and then he shall see more and more in them,
till at length he be drawn by the Power of God into the very depth it self,
and so come into the supernatural and super-sensuall ground, viz. into the
Eternal unity of God; where he shall hear unspeakable and effectual words
of God which shall bring him back and outward again (by the Divine Effluence)
to the very grossest and meanest matter of the Earth, and then back and inwards
to God again: then the Spirit of God searches all things with him, and by
him, and so he is rightly taught and driven by God.

9. But since the Lovers desire a Clavis, or Key of my writings, I am ready and
willing to pleasure them in it, and will set down a short Description of the
Ground of those strange words, some of which are taken from Nature and Ex sensu.
sense; and some are the words of strange Artists, or Mystical Authors.
Misters; which I have tried according to sense, and found them good and fit.

10. Reason will stumble, when it sees Heathenish terms, and words used in
the Explanation of Natural things, supposing we should use none but Scripture
phrase (or words borrowed from the Bible:) but such words will not always ply
and square themselves to the fundamental exposition of the Properties of
Nature, neither can a man express the ground with them: Also the wise Heathen,
and Jews have hidden the deep ground of Nature under such words, as having
well understood that the knowledge of Nature is not for every one, but it
belongs to those only, whom God Naturally inclined to it.
by Nature has chosen for it.

11. But none need stumble at it: for, when God reveals his Mysteries to any
man; he then also brings him into a Mind and faculty how to express them; as
God knows to be most necessary and profitable in every Or Seculum.
Age, for the setting of the confused Tongues, and Opinions upon the true
ground again; Men must not think that it comes by chance, and is done by
humane Reason.

12. The Or manifestations.
Revelations of Divine things are opened by the Inward ground of the Spiritual
world, and brought into visible forms; just as the Creator will manifest them.

13. I will write but a short description of the Divine Or Revelation.
Manifestation, yet as much as I can comprehend in brief, and expound the
strange words for the better understanding of our Books; and set down here
the sum of those writings, or a Moddell, or Epitome of them, for the
consideration and help of Beginners: The further Exposition of The Divine
Manifestation, or Revelation.
it is to be found in the other Books.

JACOB BEHMEN.

THE CLAVIS, OR KEY. OR, An Exposition of some principal Words, and Matters.
How God is to be considered, without Nature, and Creature.
14. MOSES says: the Lord our God is but one only God. In another place is
said; of him, through him, and in him are all things: in another, am not I he
that fills all things? And in another: through his Word are all things made,
that are made: therefore we may say that he is the Original of all things. He
is the Eternal unmeasurable unity.

15. For example: when I think what would be in the place of this world, if
the four Elements and the starry Firmament, and also Nature it self should
perish and cease to be; so that no Nature or Creature were to be found any
more: I find there would remain this Eternal Unity from which Nature and
Creature have received their Original.

16. So likewise, when I think with my self what is many hundred thousand miles
above the starry Firmament: Or what is in that place where no Creature is. I
find the Eternal unchangeable unity is there; which is that only good, which
has nothing either before or after it, that can add any thing to it, or take
any thing away from it, or from which this unity could have its Original: The
is neither ground, time, nor place, but there is the only Eternal God: or
that only Good, which a man cannot express.

A further Consideration, How this one God is Threefold.
17. The Holy Scripture shows us that this only God is Or Triune.
Threfold: viz. one only threefold Essence, having three manner of workings,
and yet is but one only Essence: as may be seen in the outflowne Power and
virtue which is in all things, if any do but observe it: but it is especially
represented to us in Fire, Light, and Air: which are three several subsistent
Forms.
sorts of workings, and yet but in one only ground and substance.

18. And as we see that Fire Light and Air arise from a Candle, (though the
Candle be none of the three but a cause of them) so likewise the Eternal unity
is the cause and ground of the Eternal Trinity, 1. Father. 2. Son. 3. Holy
Ghost.

which manifests it self from the unity, and brings forth it self in
first Desire or will, Secondly, pleasure or Delight, Thirdly, proceeding or
outgoing.

19. The Desire or will is the Father; that is, the stirring, or manifestation
of the unity, whereby the unity wills or desires it self.

20. The Pleasure or Delight is the Son; and is, that which the will wills
and desires, viz. his Love and pleasure, as may be seen, at the Baptism of
our Lord Jesus Christ, when the Father witnessed, saying: This is my Or Love.
beloved Son in whom I Have pleasure.
am well pleased hear ye him.

21. The Delight is the Or impr^ssure of the will.
compressure in the will, whereby the will in the unity brings it self into
a place and working, wherewith the; will wills and works: and it is the Or
perception.
feelingnesse and virtue of the will.

22. The will is the Father; that is, the stirring desire: and the Delight is
the Son, that is, the virtue and the working in the will, with which the will
works: and the Holy Ghost is the proceeding will through the Delight of the
virtue; that is, a Life of the will, and of the virtue and delight.

23. Thus there are three sorts of workings in the Eternal Unity, viz. the
unity is the will and desire of it self; the Delight is the working substance
of the will, and an Eternal joy of feelingnesse in the will; and the Holy
Ghost is the proceeding of the Power: the similitude of which may be seen be
seen in a Or herb.
Plant.

24. The Or Loadstone.
Magnet; viz. the Essential Desire of Nature, (that is, the will of the Desire
of Nature) Or forms.
compresseth it self into an Ens, or substance, to become a Plant, and in this
compression of the Desire becomes feeling, that is, working, and in that
working the Power and virtue arises, wherein the Magneticall Desire of Nature
( viz. the outflowne will of God) works in a Natural way.

25. In this working feelingnesse, the Magneticall desiring will is elevated
and made joyful, and goes forth from the working Power and virtue, and hence
comes the growing and smell of the Or forms.
Plant: and thus we see a representation of the Trinity of God in all
Vegetables, and animate things.
growing and living things.

26. If there were not such a desiring feelingnesse, and outgoing, working of
the Trinity in the Eternal unity, the unity were but an Eternal stillness; a
Nothing; and there would be no Nature, nor any Color shape or figure: likewise
there would be nothing in this world, without this threefold working, no, there
could be no world at all.

Of the Eternal word of God.
27. The Holy Scripture says: God has made all things by his Eternal word;
also it says: That word is God, John 1. which we understand thus.

28. The word is nothing else but the Or out-speaking.
out-breathing will, from the Power and virtue: a various dividing of the Power
into a multitude of Powers; a distributing and outflowing of the unity, whence
knowledge arises.

29. For in one only Substance, wherein there is no variation, or Division;
but is only one, there can be no knowledge; and if there were knowledge, it
could know but one thing, viz. it self: but if it part it self, then the
dividing will goes into multitude and variety, and each parting works in it
self.

30. Yet because Unity cannot be divided and parted asunder, therefore the
separating consists and remains in the outh-breathing will in the unity;
and the separation of the breathing gives the different variety: whereby the
Eternal Father.
will, together with the Son.
Delight and Holy Ghost.
proceeding, enters into the Or Science.
knowledge, or understanding of infinite Forms, viz. into an Eternal
perceptible working sensual Or Science.
knowledge of the Powers: where always in the Division of the will in the
separation, one sense or form of the will sees, feels, tastes, smells,
and hears the other; and yet it is but one sensual working; viz. the great
joyous band of Love, and the most pleasant only Eternal Essence, or substance.
Being.

Of the Holy Name JEHOVA.
31. The Ancient Rabins among the Jews have partly understood it: for they
have said, that this Name is the Highest, and most Holy Name of God; Or Jehova
is the sensual Name of the working Deity.
by which they understand the working Deity in Sense: and it is true, for, in
this working sense, lies the true life of all things in time and Eternity, in
the ground and Abyss; and it is God himself; viz. the Divine working
perceivingnesse, feelingnesse, Finding, Knowledge.
Invention, Science, and Love; that is, the true understanding in the working
unity, from which the five senses of the true Life do spring.

32. Each Letter in this Name intimates to us, a peculiar virtue and working:
that is, a Difference, or d^stinction.
Form in the working Power.

J. 33. For I. is the Effluence of the Eternal indivisible Unity; or, the
sweet gracefulness of the ground of the Divine I, I-hood, self, or selfenesse.
somethingnesse.

E. 34. E is a threefold I: where the Trinity shuts it self up in the
Unity: for the I goes into E and joyneth IE, which is an out-breathing of the
Unity in it self.

H. 35. H is the word, or Or speaking.
breathing of the Trinity of God.

O. 36. O is the Circumference, or, the Son of God, through which the IE, and
the H or breathing, out-speaketh: from the compressed Delight of the Power and
virtue.

V. 37. V is the joyful Effluence from the Or speaking.
breathing; that is; the proceeding Spirit of God.

A. 38. A is that which is proceeded from the power and virtue, viz. the
wisdom; a Subject of the Trinity; wherein the Trinity works, and wherein the
Trinity is also manifest.

39. This Name is nothing else but an out-speaking, or expression of the
Threefold working of the Holy Trinity in the unity of God: Read further of this
in the Exposition of the Table of the three Principles of the Divine
Manifestation.

Of the Divine Wisdom.
40. The Holy Scripture says; the wisdom is the breathing of the Divine
Power; a ray and breath of the Almighty; also it says: God has made all
things by his wisdom; which we understand as follows.

41. The Wisdom is the outflowen word of the Divine Power, virtue, Knowledge
and holiness: a Subject and Resemblance of the infinite and unsearchable
Unity: a Substance wherein the Holy Ghost works, forms, and modelleth; I
mean, he forms, and modelleth the Divine understanding in the Wisdom: for
the Wisdom is the passive, and the Spirit of God is the Active, or Life in
her, as the soul in the Body.

42. The wisdom is the Great Mystery of the Divine Nature, for in her the
Powers, Colors and virtues are made manifest, in her is the variation of the
power and virtue: viz. the understanding: she is the Divine understanding: that
is the Divine Or Contemplation.
vision, wherein the Unity is manifest.

43. She is the true Divine Chaos, wherein all things lie; viz. a Divine
Imagination, in which the Forms, Or Images.
Idea's of Angels and souls have been seen from Eternity, in a Divine Type and
resemblance; yet not then as Creatures, but in a resemblance, as when a man
beholds his face in a Glass: therefore the Angelical and humane Idea did
flow forth from the wisdom, and was formed into an Image, as Moses says, God
created Man in his Image: that is, he created the body, and breathed into it
the breath of the Divine Effluence, of Divine Knowledge, from all the Three
Principles of the Divine Manifestation.

Of the Or Great Mystery.
Mysterium Magnum.
44. The Mysterium Magnum is a subject of the wisdom, where the breathing
word, or the working willing Power of the Divine understanding noweth forth
through the wisdom: wherein also the unity of God together flows out, to its
manifestation.

45. For in the Mysterium Magnum the Eternal Nature arises; and two Essences,
or Beings.
substances and wills are always understood to be in the Mysterium Magnum: the
first c substance is the unity of God, that is, the Divine Power and virtue,
the outflowing wisdom.

46. The second substance is the separable will, which arises through the
breathing and outspeaking word; which will, has not its ground in the unity,
but in the Mobility of the Effluence, and out-breathing, which brings it
self into one will, and into a Desire to Nature: viz. into the Properties as
far as Fire and Light: in the Fire the Natural Life is understood, and in
the Light; the Holy Life, that is; a manifestation of the unity, whereby the
unity becomes a Love Fire, or Light.

47. And in this place or working; God calls himself a loving merciful God,
according to the sharpened fiery burning Love of the unity: and an Angry d
Jealous God, Or zealous.
according to the fiery ground, according to the Eternal Nature.

48. The Mysterium Magnum is that Chaos, out of which, Light and Darkness;
that is; the foundation of Heaven and Hell, is flowne from Eternity, and made
manifest: for, that foundation which we now call Hell, (being a Principle of
it self) is the ground and cause of the Fire in the Eternal Nature; which
fire, in God is only a burning Love: and where God is not manifested in a
thing, according to the unity: there is an Anguishing painful burning fire.

49. This burning Fire is but a manifestation of the Life, and of the Divine
Love: by which the Divine Love, ( viz. the unity) Or over inflameth.
kindles up, and sharpneth it self; for the fiery working, of the Power of
God.

50. This ground is called Mysterium Magnum, or a Chaos, because, good and
evil arises out of it: viz. Light and Darkness, Life and Death, Joy and
grief, Salvation and Damnation.

51. For it is the ground of souls and Angels, and of all Eternal Creatures,
as well evil as good; it is a ground of Heaven and Hell, also of the visible
world, and all that is therein: therein have lain all thing in one only
ground: as an Image lies hid in a piece of wood before the Artificer does
carve it out and fashion it.

52. Yet we cannot say, that the spiritual world has had any beginning, but
has been manifested from Eternity out of that Chaos: for, the Light has shone
from Eternity in the Darkness, and the Darkness has not comprehended it; as
Day and Night are in one another; and are two though in one.

53. I must write distinctly, as if it had had a beginning for the better
consideration and apprehension; of the Divine ground of the Divine
Manifestation: and the better to distinguish Nature from the Or Divinity.
Deity, also for the better understanding, from whence evil and good are come;
and what the Or Essence of all Essences is.
Being of all Beings is.

Of the Centrum.
Center of the Eternal Nature.
54. By the word Centrum.
Center, we understand the first beginning to Nature, viz. the most Inward
ground, wherein, the Or own arisen.
self raised will brings it self, by a reception, into Ihood, or I-nesse,
or owne-nesse.
somethingnesse: viz. into a Natural working; for Nature is but a Tool and
Instrument of God, which Gods Power and virtue works with; and yet it has
its own Or Mobility.
Motion, from the out-flowne will of God: thus the Center is the Point or
ground of the own receivingnesse to somethingnesse: from whence something
comes to be, and from thence the seven Properties proceed.

Of the Eternal Nature, and its seven Properties.
55. Nature is nothing but the Properties of the receivingnesse of the own
arisen Desire: which Desire arises in the Or separation.
variation of the Breathing Word, (that is, of the Breathing Power and virtue)
wherein the Properties bring themselves into substance: and this substance is
called a Natural substance, and is not God himself.

56. For, though God dwells Or thoroughly inhabiteth, or Totaliter.
through and through Nature, yet Nature comprehends him but so far, as the
unity of God yields it self into, and communicates it self with a Natural
Substance, and makes it self substantial, viz. a substance of Light; which
works by it self in Nature, and pierces and penetrateth Nature: or else the
unity of God is incomprehensible to Nature, that is, to the desirous
Receivingnesse.

57. Nature Or consists.
arises in the outflowne word of the Divine perception and knowledge: and it
is a continual framing and forming of Scienees and perception: whatsoever the
Word works by the Wisdom, that nature frames and forms into Properties:
Nature is like a Carpenter, who builds a House which the mind figured and
contrived before in it self; so it is here also to be understood.

58. Whatsoever the Eternal mind Or moddelleth.
figureth in the Eternal wisdom of God in the Divine Power; and brings into
an Idea, that, Nature frames into a Property.

59. Nature in its first ground consists in seven Properties: and these seven
divide themselves into infinite.

The first Property. 60. The first Property is the Desire which causes and
makes Or Astringency.
harshnesse, sharpness, hardness, cold, and substance.

The second Property. 61. The second Property is the stirring, or Attraction of
the Desire it makes Or pricking.
stinging, breaking, and dividing of the hardness: it cutteth asunder the
attracted desire, and brings it into multiplicity and variety; It is a ground
of the bitter pain, and also the true Root of Life: it is the Faber, or Smith.
Vulcan that strikes fire.

The third Property. 62. The third Property is the perceivingnesse and
feelingnesse in the breaking of the harsh hardness: and it is the ground of
Anguish, and of the Natural will; wherein the Eternal will desires to be
manifested; that is, it will be a Fire or Light ( viz. a flash, or shining,)
wherein the Powers, colors and virtues of the wisdom, may appear: in these
three first Properties consists the Foundation of Anger, and of Hell, and of
all that is Grimme, fierce, cruel, odious, or evil.
wrathful.

The fourth Property. 63. The fourth Property is the Fire, in which the Unity
appears, and is seen in the Light, that is in a burning Love: and the wrath
in the Operation, or property.
Essence of Fire.

The fifth Property. 64. The fifth Property is the Light, with its virtue of
Love, in, and with which, the Unity works in a Natural substance.

The sixth Property. 65. The sixth Property is the sound voice, or Natural
understanding, wherein the five senses work spiritually, that is, in an
understanding Natural Life.

The seventh Property. 66. The seventh Property is the Subject, or the
Compass, conclusion, comprising, or continent.
Contence of the other six Properties; in which they work, as the Life does in
the flesh: and this seventh Property is rightly and truly called the Ground or
place of Nature, wherein the Properties stand in one only Ground.

The first SUBSTANCE in the seven Properties.
67. We must always understand two Substances in the seven Properties: we
understand the first, according to the Abyss of these Properties, to be the
Divine Essence, or substance.
Being; that is, the Divine will with the outflowing Unity or God, which
together flows forth through Nature, and brings it self into
Receivingnesse to sharpness, that the Eternal Love may become working and
sensible thereby, and that it may have something which is passive, wherein it
may manifest it self, and be known, of which also it might be desired and
beloved again: viz. the Or painful.
Aching passive Nature, which in the Love is changed into an Eternal
Joyfulnesse: and when the Love in the Fire manifests it self in the Light,
then it over-flameth Nature, as the Sun a Plant, and the Fire A red hot Iron.
Iron.

The second SUBSTANCE.
68. The second Substance is Natures own Substance, which is painful.
Aching and Passive, and is the Tool and Instrument of the Agent: for where no
passivenesse is, there is also no desire of Deliverance, or something better;
and where there is no desire of something better, there a thing rests within
it self.

69. And therefore the Eternal unity brings it self by its Effluence and
separation into Nature, that it may have an object, in which it may manifest it
self, and that it may love something, and be again beloved by something; that
so there may be a perceiving, or sensible working and will.

* ^ An Explanation of * the seven Properties of Nature.
. The first Property.
70. THe first Property a desirousnesse; like that of a Or Lodestone.
Magnet; viz. the Compression of the will; the will desires to be something,
and yet it has nothing of which it may make something to it self: and
therefore it brings it self into a Receivingnesse of it self, and
compresseth it self to something: and that something is nothing but a
Magneticall Hunger, a harshnesse, like a hardness, whence even hardness,
cold, and substance arises.

71. This compressure or Attraction overshadoweth it self, and makes it self
a Darkness: which is indeed the Ground of the Eternal and temporary
Darkness: At the beginning of the world, Salt, stones, and bones, and all such
things were produced by this sharpness.

^. The second Property.
72. The second Property of the Eternal Nature arises from the first, and it
is the drawing or Motion in the sharpness: for, the Magnet makes hardness;
but the motion breaks the hardness again, and is a continual strife in it
self.

73. For, that which the Desire compresseth and makes something, the motion
cutteth asunder and divides, so that it comes into forms and Images:
between these two Properties arises the bitter Or pain.
woe: that is, the sting of perceivingnesse, and feelingnesse.

74. For when there is a Motion in the sharpness, then the property is Or
painful.
Aching, and this is also the cause of feelingnesse and pain: for, if there
were no sharpness and motion, there would be no feelingnesse this motion is
also a ground of the Air in the visible world, which is manifested by the
Fire; as shall be mentioned hereafter.

75. Thus we understand that the Desire is the ground of somethingnesse, so
that something may come out of Nothing: and thus we may also conceive that the
Desire has been the Beginning of this world, by which God has brought all
things into substance and being: for the Desire is that by which God said Or
Fiat.
Let there be. The Desire is that Be it, which has made something, where
nothing was, but only a Spirit: it has made the Mysterium Magnum (which is
spiritual,) visible and substantial, as we may see by the Elements, Stars
and other Creatures.

76. The second Property, (that is the Or stirring.
Motion) was in the beginning of this world the Separator, or Divider in the
Powers and virtues, by which the Creator, viz. the will of God brought all
things out of the Mysterum Magnum into form: for it is the outflowne moveable
word, by which the supernatural God made all things and brought them into
form, figure, and Or Images.
shape.

^ The third Property.
77. The third Property of the Eternal Nature is the Anguish viz. that Or
Velle.
Will which has brought it self into the receivingnesse to Nature and
somethingnesse: when the own will stands in the sharp motion, then it
comes into Anguish, that is, into feelingnesse: for, without Nature it is not
Or feeling.
feelable, but in the moveable sharpness it becomes feeling.

78. And this feelingnesse is the cause of the Fire, and also of the mind and
Senses: for the own Natural will is made volatile by it, and seeks Rest:
and thus the separation of the will goes out from it self; and pierces
through the Properties, from whence the taste arises, so that one Property
tastes and feels the other.

79. It is also the ground and cause of the Senses, in that one property
penetrateth into the other, and kindles the other, so that the will knows
whence the passivenesse comes: for, if feelingnesse were not, the will could
know nothing of the Properties, for it were merely alone: and thus the Will
receives Nature into it by feeling the sharp motion in it self.

80. This motion is in it self like a turning wheel; not that there is such a
turning and winding; but it is so in the Properties; for, the Desire attracteth
into it self, and the Motion thrusts forwards out of it self; and so the
will being in this anguish, can neither get inwards nor outward, and yet is
drawn both out of it self, and into it self; and so it remains in such a
form, manner, or condition.
Posture, as will into it self and out of it self, (that is, over it self
and under it self;) and yet can go no whither, but is an Anguish: and the
true foundation of Hell, and of Gods Anger; for this Anguish stands in the
dark sharp Motion.

81. In the Creation of the world, the Sulphur-Spirit, with the matter of the
Sulphurious Or property.
Nature was produced out of this ground: which Sulphur-Spirit is the Natural
Life of the earthly and Elementary Creatures.

82. The wise Heathen have in some measure understood this ground, for they
say, that in {sulphur}
Sulphur,
Mercury, and {nitre}
Sal, all things in this world consist: wherein they have not looked upon the
Matter only but upon the Spirit, from which such matter proceeds: for the
ground of it consists not in Salt, Quicksilver, Spiritual corporality.
and Brimstone, they mean not so, but they mean the Spirit of such
Properties, in that every thing indeed consists, The word, or speaking.
whatsoever lives grows, and has being in this world, whether it be
spiritual, or material. The gross palpable corporality.


83. For they understand by Salt, the sharp Magneticall desire of Nature, and
by Mercury, they mean the Motion, and separation of Nature, by which every
thing is Or marked with its own Image, or shape.
figured with its own signature: and by Sulphur they mean the perceiving
[sensible] Desiring vegetable l fe.
willing, and growing Life.

84. For in the Sulphur-Spirit, wherein the fiery Life burns, the Oil lies,
and the Quintessence lies in the Oil viz. the fiery Mercury, which is the
true Life of Nature; and which is an Effluence from the word of the Divine
Power and motion, wherein the ground of Heaven is understood: and in the
Quintessence there lies the Tincture, viz. the Paradisicall ground, the
outflowne word of the Divine Power and virtue, wherein the Properties lie in
Temperature, or Harmony.
equality.

85. Thus, by the third Property of Nature which is the Anguish, we mean the
sharpness and painfulness of the fire, viz. the burning and consuming: for
when the will is put into such a sharpness, it will always consume the cause
of that sharpness; for it always Or throngeth after.
striveth to get to the unity of God again, which is the Rest; and the unity
thrusts it self with its Effluence to this Motion and sharpness: and so
there is a continual conjoyning for the manifestation of the Divine will: as
we always find in these three, ( v^z. in Salt, Brimstone and Oil;) an
Heavenly in the Earthly: and whosoever does but truly understand it, and
considers the Spirit, shall find it so.

86. For the soul of a thing lies in the sharpness; and the true life of the
sensual Nature and property lies in the Motion; and the powerful Spirit
which arises from the Tincture, lies in the Oil of the Sulphur: Thus an
Heavenly always lies hidden in the Earthly: for the invisible Viz. the Light
and dark world: Gods Love and wrath.
spiritual world came forth with and in the Creation.

The fourth Property
87. The fourth Property of the Eternal Nature is the Spiritual Fire, wherein
the Light; that is, the unity, is made manifest: for the Shining, or Luster or
brightness.
Glance of the fire, arises and proceeds from the outflowne unity, which
has incorporated and united it self with the Natural Desire: and the burning
property of fire, viz. the Heat proceeds from the sharp devouringnesse of the
first three Properties, which comes to be so as follows.

88. The Eternal unity (which I also in some of my writings, call the Liberty)
is the soft and still tranquillity, being amiable, and as a soft comfortable
ease, and it cannot be expressed how soft a tranquillity there is without Nature
in the unity of God: But the three Properties (in order) to Nature are sharp,
painful, and horrible.

89. In these three painful Properties the outflowne will consists, and is
produced by the word or Divine Breathing; and the unity also is therein,
therefore the Will longs Earnestly for the unity, and the unity longs for
the feelingnesse, viz. for the fiery ground: thus the one longs to get into
the other; and when this Longing is, there is as it were a Scrashing.
cracking noise or flash of Lightning, as when we rub steel and a stone
together, or power water into fire; this we speak by way of similitude.

90. In that Flash the unity feels the feelingnesse, and the will receives
the soft tranquil unity: and so the unity becomes a shining Glance of Fire,
and the fire becomes a burning Love; for it receives Or Entity.
the Ens, and power from the soft unity: in this kindling, the darkness of the
Magneticall compressure is pierced through with the Light, so that it is no
more known or discerned, although it remains in it self Eternally in the
compressure.

91. Now two Eternal Principles arise here, viz. the Darkness, harshnesse,
sharpness, and pain dwelling in it self: and the feeling power and virtue of
the unity in the Light: upon which the Scripture says, that God, (that is, the
Eternal unity) dwells in a Light to which none can Or approach.
come.

92. For so the Eternal uity of God manifests it self through the
Spiritual Fire, in the Light: and this Light is called Majesty; and God, (that
is the Supernatural unity) is the Power and virtue of it.

93. For the Spirit of this Fire receives Ens [or vertue] to shine, from the
unity, or else this fiery Or Spirit.
ground would be but a painful, horrible hunger, and pricking desire: and it
is so indeed, when the will breaks it self off from the unity, and will
live, after its own desire, as the Devils have done, and the false soul still
does.

94. And thus you may here perceive two Principles, the first, is the ground of
the burning of the Fire, viz. the sharp moving perceivable painful darkness
in it self: and the second is the Light of the Fire, wherein the unity comes
into mobility and Joy: for, the Fire is an object of the great Love of Gods
unity.

95. For, so the Eternal Delight becomes perceiveable, and this perceiving
of the unity is called Love, and is a Burning or Life, in the unity of God: and
according to this burning of Love, God calls himself a merciful loving God:
for the unity of God loves and pierces through the Akeing.
painful will of the Fire: (which at the beginning, arose in the breathing of
the word, or outgoing of the Divine Delight) and changes it into great Joy.

96. And in this fiery will of the Eternal Nature stands the soul of Man,
and also the Angels: this is their ground and Center: therefore, if any soul
break it self off from the Light and Love of God, and enters into its own
Natural Desire; then the ground of this darkness and painful Or source.
property will be manifest in it: and this is the hellish Fire, and the Anger
of God, when it is made manifest, as may be seen in Lucifer: and whatsoever
can be thought to have a Being Or every where.
any where in the Creature, the same is likewise without the Creature every
where: for, the Creature is nothing else but an Image and Figure of the
separable and various power, and virtue of the universal Being.

97 Now understand aright what the ground of Fire is, viz. Cold, from the
Compressure and heat from the Anguish, and the Motion is the Or striker of
fire.
Vulcan: in these three the Fire consists; but the shining of the Light
arises and proceeds from the conjunction of the unity in the ground of Fire;
and yet the whole ground is but the outflowne will.

98. Therefore in Fire and Light consists the Life of all things, ( viz. in
the will thereof) let them be Or inanimate, or dumb.
insensible, vegetable or rational things, every thing as the Fire has its
ground, either from the Eternal, as the soul, or from the temporary, as
Astrall Elementary things: for the Eternal is one Fire, and the Temporary is
an other: as shall be shown hereafter.

The fifth Property.
99. Now the fifth Property is the Fire of Love, or the The Power, and
Light-world.
world of Power and Light; which in the darkness dwells in it self, and the
darkness comprehends it not, as it is written John 1 chap. The Light shines
in the darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not: also, the word is in
the Light, and in the word is the true understanding Life of Man, viz. the true
Spirit.

100. But this Fire is the true soul of Man, viz. the true Spirit which God
breathed into Man for a creaturely Life.

101 You must understand, in the spiritual fire of the will the true desirous
soul out of the Eternal ground; and in the Power and virtue of the Light, the
true understanding Spirit, in which the unity of God dwells and is manifest:
as our Lord Christ says, the Kingdom of God is within you; and Paul says; Ye
are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, who dwells in you; This is the place of the
Divine inhabiting, and Revelation.

102. Also the soul comes to be damned thus, when the fiery will breaks it
self off from the Love and unity of God, and enters into its own Natural
Propriety, that is, into its evil properties: this ought further to be
considered.

103. O Zion, observe this ground, and thou art freed from Babell.

104. The second Principle ( viz. the Angelical world and the Thrones) is
meant by the fifth Property: for it is the motion of the unity, wherein all the
Properties of the fiery Nature burn in Love.

105 An Example or similitude of this Or thing.
ground, may be seen in a Candle that is Lighted, the Properties lie in one
another in the Candle, and none of them is more manifested then another till
the Candle be lighted, and then we find, Fire, Oil, Light, Air and water,
from the Air: all the four Elements become manifest in it, which lay hidden
before in one only Ground.

106. And so likewise it must be conceived to be in the Eternal Ground: for
the temporary substance is flowne forth from the Eternal: therefore they are
both of the same quality, but with this difference, that one is Eternal and
the other transitory, one Spiritual and the other corporeal.

107. When the Spiritual Fire and Light shall be kindled, (which has indeed
burned from Eternity [in it self,] then shall also the Mystery of the Divine
Power and knowledge be always made manifest therein: for all the Properties of
the Eternal Nature become spiritual in the Fire, and yet Nature remains as
it is, inwardly in it self; and the going forth of the will becomes
Spiritual.

108. For, in the sissing or noise.
crack or flash of the Fire the dark receivingnesse is consumed, and in that
consuming, the pure bright fire-Spirit, which is pierced through with the
Glance of the Light, goes forth: in which going forth, we find three several
Properties.

109. The first is the going upwards of the fiery will, the second is the going
downwards, or sinking, of the watery Spirit, viz. the Meekness; and the third
is the going out forwards, of the oily Spirit, in the midst, in the Center of
the fiery Spirit of the will; which oily Spirit, is the Ens of the unity of
God; which is become a substance in the desire of Nature: yet all is but Spirit
and Power; but so it appears in the figure of the Manifestation, not as if
there were any severing or division, but it appears so in the Manifestation.

110. This threefold manifestation is according to the Trinity; for the Center
wherein it is, is the only God according to his manifestation: the fiery
flaming Spirit of Love is that which goes upwards, and the meekness which
proceeds from the Love is that which goes downwards, and in the midst there
is the Center [ Or
of] the circumference, which is the Father, or whole God according to his
manifestation.

111. And as this is to be known in the Divine manifestation, so it is also in
the Eternal Nature, according to Natures property: for Nature is but a
Picture, representation, or shadow.
Resemblance of the Deity.

112. Nature may be further considered thus; the flash of the Original of
fire, is a crack, and salnitrous ground, whence Nature goes forth into
infinite divisions, that is, into multitudes or varieties of Powers and
virtues; from which the multitude of Angels and Spirits, and their colors and
operations proceeded, also the four Elements, in the Beginning of time.

113. For, the Temperament, or harmony.
temperature of fire and Light is the holy Element, viz. the motion in the
Light of the unity; and from this salnitrous ground (we mean spiritual not
earthly salnitre) the four Elements proceed, viz. in the Compressure, or
impressure, in every place where that word is used following.
compressure of the fiery Mercury, Earth and stones are produced; and in the
Quintessence of the fiery Mercury, the fire and Heaven; and in the Motion or
going forth, the Air; and in the disruption or rending of the Desire by the
fire, the water is produced.

114. The fiery Mercury is a dry water, that has brought forth Metals and
stones; but the broken or divided Mercury has brought forth wet water, by the
Mortification in the Fire: and the compressure has brought the gross rawnesse
into the Earth, which is a gross salnitrous Saturnine Mercury.

115. By the word Mercury, you must understand here in the Spirit, always the
outflowne Natural working word of God, which has been the Separator, Divider,
and former of every substance; and by the word Saturn we mean the compressure.

116. In the fifth Property, (that is, in the Light) the Eternal unity is
substantial; that is, an holy Spiritual Fire, an holy Light, an holy Air,
which is nothing else but Spirit, also an holy water which is the outflowing
Love of the unity of God, and an Ternarium Sanctum.
holy Earth which is all-powerfull virtue and working.

117 This fifth Property is the true spiritual Angelical world of the Divine
joy, which is hidden in this visible world.

The sixth Property.
118. The sixth Property of the Eternal Nature, is the sound, noise, voice, or
understanding: for when the Fire flasheth, all the Properties together sound:
the Fire is the mouth of the Essence, the Light is the Spirit, and the sound is
the understanding, wherein all the Properties understand one another.

119. According to the Manifestation of the holy Trinity, by the effluence of
the unity, this sound or voice, is the Divine working word, viz. the
understanding in the Eternal Nature, by which the supernatural knowledge
manifests it self: but according to Nature and Creature, this sound or voice
is the knowledge of God, wherein the Natural understanding knows God: for
the Natural understanding is a platform, Resemblance, and Effluence from the
Divine understanding.

120. The five Senses lie in the Natural understanding, in a Spiritual
manner, and in the second Property, ( viz. in the motion in the fiery Mercury)
they lie in a Natural manner.

121. The sixth Property gives understanding, in the voice or sound, viz. in
the Articulation.
speaking of the word: and the second property of Nature is the producer, and
also the House, Tool, or Instrument of the speech or voice: in the second
Property the Power and virtue is painful, but in the sixth Property it is
joyful and pleasant, and the difference between the second and sixth Property
is in Light and darkness, which are in one another, as fire and Light, there
is no more difference between them.

The seventh Property.
122. The seventh Property is the substance, that is, the subjectum or house of
the other six, in which they all are substantially as the soul in the body: by
this we understand especially, as to the Light-world, the Paradise or budding
of the working Power.

123. For every Property, makes unto it self a Subject, or Or resemblance.
Object by its own Effluence, and in the seventh all the Properties are in a
temperature, as in one only Substance: and as they all did proceed from the
unity, so they all return again into one ground.

124. And though rhey work in different kinds and manners, yet here there is
but one only substance, whose power and virtue is called Tincture, that is an
holy penetrating, growing, or springing Bud.

125. Not that the seventh Property is the Tincture, but it is the Corpus, aut
Substantia.
Body of it: the Power and virtue of the Fire and Light is the Tincture Or with.
in the substantial Body: but the seventh Property is the substance which the
Tincture penetrateth and sanctifies: we mean that it is thus according to the
power and virtue of the Divine manifestation: but as it is a Property of
Nature, it is the substance of the attracted desire of all properties.

126. It is especially to be observed, that always, the First and the seventh
Property are accounted for one: and the second and sixth: also the third and
fifth: and the fourth is only the dividing Mark or Or Lim^t.
bound.

127. For, according to the manifestation of the Trinity of God there are but
three Properties of Nature: the first is the Desire which belongs to God the
Father, yet it is only a Spirit, but in the seventh Property the Desire is
substantial.

128. The second is the Divine power and virtue, and belongs to God the
Son; in the second Number it is only a Spirit, but in the sixth it is the
substantial Power and virtue.

129. The third belongs to the Holy Ghost, and in the beginning of the third
Property it is only a fiery Spirit, but in the fifth Property the great Love is
manifested therein.

130. Thus the Effluence of the Divine Manifestation, as to the three
Properties in the first Principle before the Light Appearet.
, is Natural; but in the second Principle in the Light it is spiritual.

131. Now these are the seven Properties in one only Ground: and all seven are
equally Eternal without beginning, none of them can be accounted the first,
second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or last; for they are equally Eternal
without beginning, and have also one Eternal beginning from the unity of God.

132. We must represent this in a typical way, that it may be understood how
the one is borne out of the other, the better to conceive what the Creator is,
and what the Life and Substance of this world is.

Of the third Principle: viz. The visible world, whence that proceeded: and
what The Creator is.
33. THis visible world is sprung from the Spiritual world before mentioned:
viz. from the outflowne Divine Power and virtue, and it is a Subject or Object
resembling the Spiritual world: the spiritual world is the Inward ground of
the visible world; the visible subsisteth in the Spiritual.

134. The visible world is only an Effluence of the seven Properties, for it
proceeded out of the six working Properties, but in the seventh, (that is in
Paradise,) it is in Rest: and that is the Eternal Sabbath of Rest, wherein the
Divine Power and virtue rests,

135. Moses says; God created Heaven and Earth, and all Creatures, in six
Days, and rested on the seventh Day, and also commanded Or to rest on it.
it to be kept for a Rest.

136. The understanding lies hidden and secret in those words: could not he
have made all his works in one Day? neither can we properly say there was any
day before the Sun was, for in the Or depth, or vast firmament above the Moon.
Deep there is but one Day [in all.]

137. But the understanding lies hidden in those words, he understands by
each days working: the Creation, or Manifestation of the seven Properties: for
he says, In the Beginning God created Heaven and Earth.

The first Day.
138. In the FIRST Motion; the Magneticall Desire compressed and compacted the
fiery and watery Mercury with the other Properties; and then the grossness
separated it self from the Spiritual Nature: and the fiery became Metals and
stones, and partly Salnitre, that is Earth: and the watery became water: then
the fiery Mercury of the working became clean, and Moses calls it Heaven;
and the Scripture says, God dwells in Heaven: for this fiery Mercury is the
Power and virtue of the Firmament, viz. an Image and resemblance of the
Spiritual world, in which God is manifested.

139. When this was done, God said, Let there be Light, then the Inward thrust
it self forth through the fiery Heaven, from which a shining power and virtue
arose in the fiery Mercury, and that was the Light of the outward Nature in the
Properties, wherein the Or growing.
vegetable Life consists.

The second Day.
140. In the SECOND Days work, God separated the watery and fiery Mercury
from one another, and called me fiery the Firmament * ^ The * seven Forms of
Spirits, mentioned, REVELA. cap. 1.
.. The First. form Harsh Desiring will. 1. Darke-world. a similitude of it is
a Candle... Second. Bitter or stinging... Third. Anguish, till the flash of
Fire.. Fourth. Fire Dark-fire. Light fire.
2. Fire-world a similitude of it is the fire of a Candle... Fifth. Light or
Love, whence the watet of Eternal Life flows 3. Light-world a similitude of
it is the Light of a Candle... Sixth. Noise, sound, or Mercury... Seventh.
Substance or Nature.

The First Principle. Dark or Fire of Wrath Light or Fire of Love The second
Principle. The Dark-world; hence God the Father is called an Angry, zealous,
Jealous God and a Consuming Fire. The Light world; hence God the Son, the
word the Heart of God, is called a Loving and Merciful God.

The third Principle. This world of four Elements, which is produced out of
the two Inward Worlds, and is a Glass of them; wherein Light and Darkness,
Good and Evil are mixed, it is not Eternal but has a beginning and an End.

This Table belongs to the Clavis, at the End of the 132. verse.

of Heaven, which came out of the midst of the waters, viz. of Mercury, whence
arose the Male and Female Sex.
kind, in the Spirit of the outward world: that is, the Male in the fiery
Mercury, and the Female in the watery.

141. This Separation was made all over in every thing, to the end that the
fiery Mercury should desire and long for the watery, and the watery for the
fiery; that so there might be a Desire of Love betwixt them in the Light of
Nature; from which the Conjunction arises: therefore the fiery Mercuy, viz.
the outflowne word separated it self according both to the fiery and to the
watery nature of the Light, and thence comes both the Male and Female kind in
all things both Animals and vegetables.

The third Day.
142. In the THIRD Days work, the fiery and watery Mercury entered again into
Conjunction or mixture, and embraced on) another, wherein the Salnitre ( viz.
the Separator in the Earth-brought forth Grass, Plants, and Trees: and that
was the first Generation or production between Male and Female.

The fourth Day.
143. In the FOURTH Days work, the fiery Mercury brought forth its fruit,
viz. the fifth Essence, an higher power or virtue of Life, then the four
Elements: and yet it is in the Elements, of it the Stars are made.

144. For, as the compression of the Desire brought the Earth into a Or lamp.
Mass, the compression entering into it self; so the fiery Mercury thrust it
self outward by the Compressure, and has enclosed the place of this world
with the Or constellations.
Stars and starry Heaven.

The fifth Day.
145. In the FIFTH Days work the The Spirit of the world.
Spiritus Mundi, that is, the Anima Macrocosmi.
soul of the great world, opened it self in the fifth Essence, (we mean the
Life of the fiery and watery Mercury,) therein God created all Beasts, fishes,
fowls, and worms, every one from its peculiar property of the divided Mercury.

146. Here we see how the Eternal Principles have moved themselves according
to Evil and Good, as to all the seven Properties, and their Effluence and
mixture; for there are evil and good Creatures created, every thing as the
Mercury, (that is, the Seperator) has figured and Or Imaged.
framed himself into an Ens, as may be seen in the evil and good Creatures:
And yet every kind of Life has its Original in the Light of Nature; that is,
in the Love of Nature: from which it is that all Creatures in their kind or
Property, love one another according to this outflowne Love.

The sixth Day.
147. In the SIXTH Days work, God created Man; for in the sixth Day the
understanding of Life opened it self out of the fiery Mercury, that is, out of
the Inward Ground.

148. God created him in his likeness out of all the three Principles, and
made him an Image, and breathed into him the understanding fiery Mercury,
according to both the Inward and outward Ground, (that is, according to time
and Eternity,) and so he became a living understanding soul: and in this
Ground of the soul, the Manifestation of the Divine Holiness did move, ( viz.
the living outflowing word of God) together with the Eternal knowing Idea,
which was known from Eternity in the Divine Wisdom, as a Subject or form of
the Divine Imagination.

149. This Or Image.
Idea becomes Endued, or invested.
clothed with the Substance of the heavenly world, and so it becomes an
understanding Spirit and Temple of God; an Image of the Divine Or Contemplation.
vision, which Spirit is given to the soul for a Spouse: as fire and Light are
espoused together, so it is here also to be understood.

150. This Divine Ground budded and pierced through soul and body; and this
was the true Paradise in Man, which he lost by sin, when the ground of the
dark world with the false Desire gat the upper hand and Dominion in him.

The seventh Day.
51. In the SEVENTH Day God rested from all his works which he had made, says
Moses: yet God needs no Rest; for he has wrought from Eternity, and he is a
mere working Power and virtue; therefore the meaning and understanding here
lies hidden in the Word, for Moses says he has commanded [us] to Rest on the
seventh Day.

152. The seventh Day was the true Paradise, (understand it spiritually,) that
is, the Tincture of the Divine Power and virtue, which is a temperament: this
pierced through all the Properties, and wrought in the seventh, that is, in the
substance of all the other.

153. The Tincture pierced through the Earth, and through all Elements, and
tinctured All; and then Paradise was on Earth, and in Man: for evil was
hidden; as the Night is hidden in the Day, so the Or grim, fierceness.
wrath of Nature as also hidden in the first Principle, till the fall of Man,
and then the Divine working, with the Tincture,m fled into their own
Principle, viz. into the Inward Ground of the Light-world.

154. For, the Or retired.
wrath did rise aloft, and got the predominancy, and that is the Curse, (where
it is said) God cursed the Earth; for his cursing is to leave off and fly from
his working: as when Gods Power and virtue in a thing works with the Life and
Spirit of the thing, and afterward withdraws it self with its working; then
the thing is cursed, for it works in its own will and not in Gods will.

Of the Spiritus Mundi, and of the four Elements.
155. We may very well observe and consider the hidden spiritual world by the
visible world: for, we see that Fire Or Water.
Light and Air are continually begotten in the deep of this world, and that
there is no Rest or cessation from this begetting, and that it has been so
from the beginning of the world, and yet men can find no cause of it in the
outward world, or tell what the ground of it should be: but Reason says, God
has so created it, and therefore it continues so: which indeed is true in it
self; but Reason knows not the Creator which does thus create without
ceasing: that is, the true Distinguisher, or divider.
Archaeus or Seperator, which is an Efluence out of the Invisible world, viz.
the outflowne word of God; which I mean and understand by the word fiery
Mercury.

156. For what the invisible world is, in a spiritual working, where Light and
darkness are in one another, and yet the one not comprehending the other: that
the visible world is, in a substantial working; whatsoever powers and and
virtues in the outflowne word, are to be Or conceived.
understood in the Inward Spiritual world, the same we understand also in the
visible world, in the Stars and Elements, yet in another Principle of a more
holy Kind quality, or condition.
Nature.

157. The four Elements do flow from the Archaeus of the Inward ground; that
is, from the four properties of the Eternal Nature; and were in the beginning
of time so outbreathed from the Inward ground, and compressed and formed into a
working substance and Life: and therefore the outward world is called a
Principle, and is a subject of the Inward world, that is, a Tool and
Instrument of the Inward Artificer or workman.
Master, which Artificer or workman.
Master is the Word and Or virtue.
power of God.

158. And, as the Inward Divine world has in it an Or Intellectual.
understanding Life from the Effluence of the Divine knowledge; whereby the
Angels and souls are meant: so likewise the outward world has a Rational
Life in it, consisting in the outflowne powers and virtues of the Inward world;
which outward [Rationall] Life has no higher understanding, and can reach no
further then that thing wherein it dwells, viz. the Stars and four Elements.

159. The Spiritus Mundi is hidden in the four Elements, as the soul is in
the body; and is nothing else but an Effluence and working power proceeding
from the Sun and Stars; its dwelling wherein it works is spiritual
encompassed with the four Elemenrs.



Species, kind or property.
form of the Eternal Nature, and consists in a fiery Nature, like a dry
kind of water source, which is understood to be the ground of all Metal and
stones, for they were created of that.

162. I call it the fiery Mercury in the Spirit of this world, for it is the
mover of all things, and the Separator of the Powers and virtues, a former of
all shapes, a ground of the outward Life, as to the Motion and sensibility.

viz. seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting, and smelling, and is the the true
Essential Life, whereby the fire, (that is, the fourth form) is made manifest.

164. The ancient wise men have called these three properties Sulphur Mercurius
and Sal, as to their Materials which were produced thereby in the four
Elements, into which this Spirit does coagulate or make it self Substantial.

165. The four Elements lie also in this ground, and are nothing different or
several from it: they are only the manifestation of this spiritual ground,
and are as a dwelling place of the Spirit in which this Spirit works.

166. The Earth is the grossest effluence from this subtle Spirit; after the
Earth the water is the second; after the water the Air is the third, and after
the Air the Fire is the fourth: all these proceed from one only Ground: viz.
from the Spiritus mundi, which has its root in the Inward world.

167. But Reason will say; to what End has the Creator made this
manifestation? I answer, there is no other cause, but that the spiritual world
might thereby bring it self into a visible form or Image, that the Inward
powers and virtues might have a form and Image: now that this might be, the
spiritual substance must needs bring it self into a material ground wherein
it may so figure and form it self, and there must be such a separation as that
this separated being might continually long for tht first Ground again, viz.
the Inward for the outward, and the outward for the Inward.

168. So also the four Elements, which are nothing else Inwardly but one only
Ground, must one long for the other, and desire one another and seek the
inward Ground in one another.

169. For the Inward Element in them is divided, and the four Elements are but
the Properties of that divided Element; and that causes the great anxiety and
desire betwixt them, they will continually [to get] into the first ground
again, that is into that one Element, in which they may Rest; of which the
Scripture speaks, saying; Every Creature groaneth with us and earnestly
longs to be delivered from the vanity, which it is subject unto against its
will.

170. In this Anxiety and desire, the Effluence of the Divine power and virtue,
by the working of Nature is together also formed and brought into figures, to
the Eternal Glory and contemplation of Angels and Men, and all Eternal
Creatures: as we may see clearly, in all living things, and also in
vegetables; how the Divine power and virtue Fashioneth.
imprinteth and forms it self.

171. For there is not any thing substantial in this world wherein the Image
resemblance and form of the Inward spiritual world does not stand: whether it
be according to the Or grimnesse.
wrath of the Inward Ground, or according to the good virtue: and yet in the
most Or Poisonous.
venomous virtue or quality, in the Inward Ground, many times there lies the
greatest virtue out of the Inward world.

172. But where there is a dark Life; (that is, a Dark Oil) in a thing;
there is little to be expected from it; for it is the foundation of the wrath,
viz. a false, bad Poison, to be utterly rejected.

173. Yet where Life consists in Or pain.
venom, and has a Light or brightness shining in the Oil ( viz. in the fifth
Essence) therein Heaven is manifested in Hell, and a great virtue lies hidden
in it: this is understood by those that are ours.

174. The whole visible world is a mere spermaticall working Ground; Every Or
Substance.
thing has an Inclination and longing toward another, the uppermost toward
the undermost, and the undermost toward the uppermost, for they are separated
one from the other; and in this hunger, they embrace one another in the Desire.

175. As we may know by the Earth, which is so very hungry after the [influence
and virtue of the] Stars, and the Spiritus Mundi, (viz. after the Spirit from
whence it proceeded in the beginning) that it has no Rest, for hunger: and
this hunger of the Earth consumes Bodies, that the Spirit may be parted again
from the gross Elementary Or Property.
condition, and return into its Separator, Divider or salnitrous virtue.
Archaeus again.

176. Also we see in this hunger, the Impregnation of the Archaeus (that is, of
the Seperator) how the undermost Archaeus of the Earth attracteth the uttermost
subtle Archaeus from the Constellations above the Earth: where this compacted
ground from the uppermost Archaeus, longs for its ground again and puts
it self forth toward the uppermost: in which putting forth, the growing of
Metals, Plants and Trees, has its Original.

177. For, the Archaeus of the Earth becomes thereby exceeding joyful,
because it tastes and feels its first ground in it self again: and in this
Joy all things Or grow.
spring out of the Earth: yes, therein also the growing of Animals consists,
viz. in a continual Conjunction of the Heavenly and Earthly, in which the
Divine power and virtue also works as may be known by the Tincture of the
Vegetables in their Inward Ground.

178. Therefore Man, who is so noble an Image, having his ground in time and
Eternity; should well consider himself, and not run headlong in such
blindness, seeking his Native Country afar off from himself, when it is
within himself, though covered with the grossness of the Elements by their
strife.

179. Now when the strife of the Elements cease, by the Death of the gross
body, then the Spiritual Man will be made manifest whether he be borne in and
to Light or Darkness; which of these [two] bears the sway and has the
dominion in him, the Spiritual man has his being in it Eternally, whether it
be in the foundation of Gods Anger, or in his Love.

180. For, the outward visible Man is not now the Image of God, it is nothing
but an Image of the Archaeus; that is, a house [or huske] of the Spiritual
Man, in which the spiritual Man grows; as Gold does in the Or drossie stone
or Oar.
gross stone, and a Plant from the wild Earth: as the Scripture says; as we
have a Natural Body, so we have also a Spiritual Body: such as the Natural
is such is also the Spiritual.

181. The outward gross Body of the four Elements shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, but that which is borne out of that one Element, viz. out of
the Divine Manifestation and working.

182. For, this of the Flesh and of the will of man is not it: but that which
is wrought by the heavenly Archaeus in this gross Body, unto which this gross
[body] is a house Tool and Instrument.

183. But when the Crust is taken away, then it shall appear wherefore we have
here been called Men; and yet some of us have scarce been beasts, may some far
worse then Beasts.

184. For, we should rightly consider what the Spirit of the outward world is,
it is a house husk, and Instrument of the Inward Spiritual world which is
hidden therein, and works through it, and so brings it self into figures
and Images.

185. And thus humane Reason is but a Or dwelling.
house of the true understanding of the Divine knowledge: none should trust so
much in his Reason and sharp wit, for it is but the Constellation of the
outward Stars; and does rather seduce him then lead him to the unity of God.

186. Reason must wholly yield it self up to God, that the Inward Archaeus may
be revealed, and this shall work and bring forth a true Spiritual
understanding ground, uniforme with God, in which Gods Spirit will be revealed,
and will bring the understanding to God: and then, in this Ground, the Spirit
searches through all things, even the deep things of Or of the Deity.
God, as St. Paul says.

187. I thought good to set this down thus briefly for the Lovers, Of
Mysteries.
for their further consideration,

Now follows a short explication, or Formula, or Model.
Description of the Divine Manifestation.
188. God is the Eternal, Immense Incomprehensible unity which manifests it
self in it self from Eternity in Eternity by the Trinity; and is Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, in a threefold working, as is before mentioned.

189. The first Effluence and manifestation of this Trinity is the Eternal
word, or outspeaking of the Divine power and virtue.

190. The first outspoken Substance from that Power is the Divine wisdom;
which is a substance wherein the Power works.

191. Out of the wisdom flows the Power and virtue of outbreathing, and
goes into separability and forming; and therein the Divine Power is manifest
in its virtue.

102. These separable Powers and virtues bring themselves into receivingnesse,
to their own perceivingnesse; and out of the perceivingnesse arises own
self-will and Desire: this own Will is the Ground of the Eternal Nature, and
it brings it self, with the Desire into the Properties as far as Fire.

193. In the Desire is the Original of Darkness: and in the Fire the Eternal
unity is made manifest with the Light, in the fiery Nature.

194. Out of this fiery Property and the property of the Light, the Angels and
souls have their Original; which is a Divine Manifestation.

195. The Power and virtue of Fire and Light is called Tincture; and the Motion
of this virtue is called the holy and Pure Element.

196. The Darkness becomes substantial in it self: and the Light becomes
also substantial in the fiery Desire: these two make two Principles: viz. Gods
Anger in the Darkness, and Gods Love in the Light, each of them works in it
self, and there is only such a difference between them as between Day and
Night, and yet both of them have but one only Ground, and the one is always a
cause of the other, and that the other becomes manifest and known in it, as
Light from fire.

197. The visible world is the third Principle, that is, the third Ground and
beginning; this is outbreathed out of the Inward Ground, ( viz. out of both the
first Principles) and brought into the Nature and form of a Creature.

198. The Inward Eternal working is hidden in the visible world, and it is in
every thing and through every thing, yet not to be comprehened by any thing in
the things own Power; the outward Powers and virtues are but the passive and
the house, in which the Inward do work.

199. The common Creatures.
All the other worldly Creatures are but the Substance of the outward world;
but Man; who is created both out of Time and Eternity, out of the Being of all
Beings, and made an Image of the Divine Manifestation.

200. The Eternal Manifestation of the Divine Light is called the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Habitation of the Holy Angels and Souls.

201. The fiery Darkness is called Hell, or Gods Anger, wherein the Devils
dwell, together with the damned souls.

202. In the place of this world Heaven and Hell are present every where; but
according to the Inward Ground.

203. Inwardly, the Divine working is manifest in Gods Children; But in the
wicked, the working of the painful darkness.

204. The place of the Eternal Paradise is hidden in this world, in the Inward
Ground: but manifest in the Inward man, in which Gods Power and virtue works.

205. There shall perish of this world only the four Elements together with
the Starry Heaven; and the Earthly Creatures; viz. the outward gross Life of
all things.

206. The Inward Power and virtue of every substance remains Eternally.

Another Exposition of The Great Mystery.
the Mysterium Magnum.
207. God has manifested the Mysterium Magnum out of the Power and virtue of
his word; in which Mysterium Magnum the whole Creation has lain essentially
without forming, in Temperamento; and by which he has outspoken the Spiritual
formings in Separability [or variety]: in which formings, the Sciences of the
Powers and virtues in the Desire, (that is, in the Fiat,) have stood: wherein
every Science in the Desire to Manifestation, has brought it self into a
Corporeal Substance.

208. Such a Mysterium Magnum lye^h also in Man, ( viz. in the Image of God:
and is the Essential word of the Power of God, according to Time and Eternity,
by which the Living word of God outspeaketh, or expresses it self either in
Love or Anger, or in Fancy; all things as the Mysterium stands in a moveable
Desire to Evil or Good: according to that saying: such as the people is, such
a God they also have.

209. For, in whatsoever properties the Mysterium in Man is awakened, such a
word also utters it self from his powers: as we plainly see that nothing
else but vanity is uttered by the wicked.

Praise the Lord all ye his works. Halelu-jah. SCIENTZ.
OF THE WORD SCIENCE.
210. THe Word Science is not so taken by me as men understand the word
Scientia in the Latin Tongue, for I understand therein even the true Ground
according to Sense, which both in the Latin and all other Languages is missed
and neglected by Ignorance: for every word in its Impressure forming and
Expression, gives the true understanding, of what that thing is that is so
called.

211. You understand by Science some skill or knowledge: in which you say true,
but do not fully express the meaning.

212. Science is the Root to the understanding, as to the Cogitation,
consideration, or, Reasoning.
Sensibility: it is the Root to the Center of the Or forming.
Impressure of Nothing into something: as when the will of the Abyss
attracteth it self into it self, to a Center of the Impressure ( viz. to the
word) then arises the true understanding.

213. The will is in the Separability of the Science, and there separateth it
self out from the Impressed Compaction; and men first of all understand the
Essence in that which is separated, in which the Separability impresseth it
self into a Substance.

214. For ESSENTZ.
Essence is a substantial power and virtue, but Science is a moving flitting
one, like the Senses; it is indeed the Root of the Senses.

215. Yet in the understanding, in which it is called Science, it is not the
sensing, but a cause of the sensing, in that manner as when the Understanding
impresseth it self in the Mind, there must first be a cause which must give
the Mind, from which the understanding flows forth into its Contemplation:
Now this Science is the Root to the fiery Mind, and it is in brief the Root of
all Spiritual beginnings, it is the true Root of Souls and proceeds through
every Life, for it is the Ground from whence Life comes.

216. I could not give it any other better Name, this does so wholly accord and
agree in the sense: for the Science is the cause that the Divine Abyssall Will
compacteth and impresseth it self into Nature, to the separable [various]
intelligible and perceivable Life of understanding and difference: for the
Impressure of the Science, (whereby the will attracteth it into it self) the
Natural Life arises and the word of every Life Originally.

217. The distinction or separation out of the Fire, is to be understood as
follows. The Eternal Science in the Will of the Father draws the Will
(which is called Father) into it self, and shuts it self into a Center of
the Divine Generation of the Trinity, and by the Science speaks it self
forth into a word of understanding; and in the speaking is the Separation in
the Science: and in every Separation there is the Desire to the Impressure of
the Or outspeaking.
Expression, the Impressure is Essential, and is called Divine Essence.

218. From this essence the word Or outspeaking.
expresses it self in the second Separation (that is, of Nature) and in that
expression, (wherein the Natural will separateth it self in its Center, into
a sensing,) the Separation out of the fiery One Copy has Essence.
Science is understood; for thence comes the Soul and all Angelical Spirits.

219. The third Separation is according to the outward Nature of the expressed
formed word, wherein the Bestiall Science lies, as may be seen in the Treatise
of the Election of Grace, which has a Accute, or sublime.
sharp understanding, and is one of the Cleerest of our Writings.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE OF THE BOOKS WRITTEN, By JACOB BEHMEN.
1. ANno 1612. He wrote the first Book called Aurora, the Rising of the Sun,
and he being accused as Author thereof, this Book was laid up by the
Magistrate at Gorlitz, at Court: and command given him that he should
henceforth (being a simple Layman) refrain writing of books, which did not
belong to his profession and condition. Whereupon he did refrain for seven
years, but afterward being stirred up again by the Holy Spirit of God, and
also being encouraged thereto by the entreaty and desires of some people that
feared God, he betook himself to his pen again, and proceeded in writing and
perfected, with good leisure and deliberation, the rest which follow, viz. 2.
Anno 1619. The second Book. Of the Three Principles, together with an appendix
of the Threefold life of Man. 3. Anno 1620. A Book of the Threefold life of
Man. 4. An Answer to the 40 Questions of the Soul, propounded by Doctor
Balthazar Walter, in the first chapter of it is an Exposition of the Turned
Eye, or Philosophic Globe, withal an addition concerning the Soul, the Image
of the Soul, and the Turba or destroyeresse of the Image. 5. Three Books. The
first, of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. The second of the Suffering, Death,
and Resurrection of Christ. The third of the Tree of Faith. 6. A Book of Six
Points. 7. A Book of the Heavenly and Earthly Mysterium. 8. A Book of the Last
Times to P.K. 9. Anno 1621. A Book De Signatura Rerum, or the Signature of all
things. 10. A Consolatory Book of the four Complexions. 11. An Apology to
Balthazar Tilken in two parts. 12. A consideration upon Esaias Steefells Book.
13. Anno 1622. A Book of true Repentance. 14. A Book of true Resignation. 15.
A Book of Regeneration. 16. Anno 1623. A Book of Predestination and Election
of God, at the end of it is written this following Treatise, viz. 17. A short
Compendium of Repentance. 18. The Mysterium Magnum upon Genesis. 19. Anno 1624.
A Table of the Principles, or a Key of his writings to G. F. and I. H. 20. A
little Book of the Supersensuall Life. (21) A little Book of Divine
Contemplation. 22. A Book of the two Testaments of Christ, viz. Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord. 23. A Dialogue between the enlightened and the
unenlightned Soul. 24. An Apology upon the Book of true Repentance, directed
against a Pasquill of the principal Minister of Gorlitz, called Gregory
Rickter. (25) A Book of 177. Theosophick Questions. 26. An Epitome of the
Mysterium Magnum. (27.) The Holy Weeks, or the Prayer-Booke. 28. A Table of the
Divine Manifestation, or an Exposition of the Threefold World to I. S. V. S.
and A. V. F. In these two that follow, the date is not set down.
29. A Book of the Errors of the Sects of Ezechiel Meths to A. P. A. or an
Apology to Esaias Steefell. 30. A Book of The last Judgment. Further.
31. Certain Letters to Diverse Persons, written at diverse times with certain
Key's for some hidden words. The Books which the Author finished not, are
marked with this sign. ()
The faults escaped in Printing.
PReface verse 9. line 4. read * Divine Essence, fol. 2. l. 23. for as r. viz.
l. 32. for how r. that, f. 3. l. 8. r. u transparent. l. 24. r. * Forms. f.
14. l. 27. r. but o not. f. 15. l. 18. r. the p Eternity, that q f. 16. l. 29.
r. viz. the eye. l. marg. 18. r. viz. Turbae f. 17. l. 43. r. there for then:
f. 18. l. 30. for chimney r. furnace, f. 22. l. 9. for ye, r. we. f. 25. l. 11.
for where: r. there. f. 27. l. 11. for fire, r. fire. f. 33. l. 22. r. can g
find: l. 24. r. the * l God head: f. 34. l. 17. r. wisdom: for the Element
gives not Divine wit [Reason or understanding;] but, f. 45. marg. l. 19. r. t
appears or, f. 70. marg. l. 19. r. doake or hollow. f. 59. marg. l. 1. r.
that Spirit, f. 60. marg. l. 3. r. c workmaster, f. 63. l. 16. r. nothing; that
can give it any thing; but, f. 56. l. 31. r. (wherein, f. 68. marg. l. 12. r.
forth. f. 69. l. 24. r. Tree, Or as, f. 72. l. 5. unless. f. 80. l. 24. r. a
desire, l. 25. r. b, l. 26. r. c, f. 83. l. 25* r. which holds, f. 89. l. for
s, r. 1, f. 90. l. 32. r. and i bitterness. l. 33. r. k for i, l. 35. r. I for
k, l. 40. r. m for l, l. 41. n for m, l. 42. o for n, and p for o f. 93. l. 16.
r. one thing has swallowed up another, f. 94. marg. l. 10. r. and works, f.
95. l. 1. r. without it, is, f. 99. l. 6. for them, r. then, f. 105. l. 17. r.
Gift,) l. 43. r. soul, f. 106. marg. l. 7. r. m or Chist. l. 39. r. Spirit of,
f. 107. l. 3. r. whores wolves, f. 110. l. 21. r. soul, f. 114. l. 3. r. not
see them; f. 122. l. 1. r. the life, f. 124. l. 36. r. the a Calling, f. 127.
l. 39. r. this world, f. 130. l. 2. r. of no, l. 20. be no more, f. 143. 1. 25.
r. and there is, l. 36. r and t. l. 38. r. u partiality, f. 146. l. 30 for
those r. these* f. 147. l. 20. r. to be done, f. 148. l. 7. r. an end, f. 154.
l. 39. r. l sournesse. Preface to the Clavis, verse 9. marg. r. ex sensu, end
shutz, f. 2. l. 20. r. first in, f. 10. l. 1. for ^ put ^.


