SEVERAL Treatises: OF Jacob Behme Not printed in English before, according to
the CATALOGUE here following, viz. I. A Book of the Great Six Points: As also A
Small Book of other Six Points. II. The, 177, Theosophick Questions: The First
Thirteen, Answered. III. Of the Earthly and of the Heavenly Mystery. IV. The
Holy-Week, or a Prayer Book. V. Of Divine Vision.


To which are annexed the EXPOSITION Of the TABLE of the Three Principles.

Also an EPISTLE Of the Knowledge of God, and of All Things.

And of the True and False Light.

With a Table of the Revelation of the Divine secret Mystery.

Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

LONDON, Printed for L. Lloyd at the Castle in Cornhill, 1661.

THE PREFACE To the ENGLISH READER.
SEveral of the Writings of this Author Jacob Behme have been published in his
native Tongue the German, and were so loved and desired, at the first notice of
them, about the year 1612. by some noble, virtuous and learned Persons, who
procured Transcripts out of the Library at Gerlity, where the Primate Gregory
Rickter had commanded it to be kept, that it should no more come to the Authors
hands again: that beyond his expectation they wrote to him, to know whether he
were the Author of them; and upon his Answer in return, they ceased not to
solicit him to further writing, according to his high knowledge in the deepest
Mysteries; which he performed from the year, 1619. to, 1624. in which year he
departed this mortal life.

For, it appears by the History of his life, and in the Catalogue printed at
the end of his Book in Answer to the forty Questions of the Soul; that he wrote
to the number of Thirty One several Treaties, whereof some have been studied by
persons of Learning, some Ministers as well as others, in Muscovia, Sweden,
Poland, Denmark, the Netherlands, Germany, France, Spain, Italy, even in the
City of Rome; and ^^ry many in England, with good satisfaction to their thirsty
Souls, concerning true Religion and the way to salvation, and Twenty One of
them have been formerly printed in the English tongue.

To some yet there remains still the complaint, that they are hard to be
understood; though those that have diligently perused his Books, have attained
very satisfactory reso^^tions to their destres in most deep and difficult,
Divine and Natural Mysteries; and they that account them most obscure, are such
as cast their eyes only superficially, here and there upon some part of them,
but those that have gotten a Taste and relish of his illuminated spirit of
Understanding, appearing in his writings, are very eager after any thing of his
that remains yet unpublished, for whose satisfaction therefore here in this
present Volum are Five more pieces of his, besides Three other that were
printed formerly, but not from so exact Copies as now; and besides, a Table
belonging to the Epistle concerning the true and false Light, not printed
before.

They are all of very high worth. The This is the Si^th Book ^n the Catalogue
of his writings.
FIRST is called An Exposition of the Great Six Points, containing the
knowledge of the Greatest Mysteries in Eternity; and how they may be
apprehended in the things of this outward visible world; more deeply, and yet
more particularly, then in his other writings: Especially, how Darkness in the
eternal Original, does co-work to the Manifestation of the Eternal Light and
Glory in Heaven; and yet in Hell is the eternal Torment, and consuming Fire of
the wrath of God, where, the Devil and his Angels, Rev. 20.10.
together with the Beast and false Prophet, and all the wicked shall be
tormented for ever and ever.

Also, how we may in this life, while we live in flesh and blood, dep^rt from
the Tree of Darkness into the Tree of Light, but after this life, how there is
no possibility to change our capacity we leave this outward world in: And this
so convincingly, that any that is desirous, may know how to enter infallibly
into the exercise and participation of the Tree of Eternal Life; in which
consideration, we may see, how this whole world is a Looking-Glass of the Two
eternal beginningless worlds; both the Light and the Dark world in one another
as One: The Four Elements being Fire, Air, Water, and Earth: In Heaven these
are substantially, Love, Humility, Patience, and Meekness; and in Hell they are
also substantially, Wrath, Pride, Envy and Covetousness; and so all things else
that are contained in the Four Elements, and dwell or grow therein, are also
according to the manner of Eternity, in the Two Eternal Worlds.

The other is a Small Book of Six Points also, wherein are matters of highest
depth, and of the greatest Concernment to mankind to be known fundamentally, as
he has written of them.

For First, As the outward man is constituted of Blood and Water, by which his
outward life is fed and preserved; so the Soul has in the outward Blood and
Water, an Eternal which belongs to the eternal life; and therefore was the
Blood and Water which flowed out of the Side of our blessed Lord and Savior
when he was pierced with a Spear, as he hung upon the Cross; so effectual, to
the healing of the Breach made in Adams Side in his st^ep, when it was become
not good for Man to be alone; and all the frailty of Mortal Man afterward,
which will also bring forth his Resurrection at the Last Day.

Secondly, It Treats succinctly and summarily concerning Election and
Predestination of Good and of Evil, wherein is shown, how by the eternal power
of God, that is, through Christ in us, we may in this life, come out from evil
with our Souls, into the eternal Election of Grace and Predestination to life,
which is the Love and Mercy of God: or else by rejecting and forsaking the
Drawing of that Power within us, cast our selves into the Eternal
Predestination of Condemnation and Perdition, into the darkness and Death,
which is the wrath and Anger of God.

Thirdly, It intimates, how Sin is Sin, by showing how it is the life in the
manifestation of the Power of the dark world, contrary to the constitution and
creation of the Creature, which was created in and for the Light, by the
exorbitant rising up of Self-Nature the Fire, to be predominant over divine
Nature the Light, in the Self of the Creature.

Fourthly, How Christ will at the Last Day, deliver up the K^^^dom to the
Father, when he has put all dominion under the Foot stool of Christ, then
shall Christ deliver up his kingdo^^ who is now Lord of All, to the Father, and
God shall be All in All, outwardly, and visibly, as he is now but inwardly,
hiddenly and invisibly to us in this Co^ruptible world.

Fifthly, What the eternal Magia, or Desire, is, which makes, frames and
imageth, both in the dark world and in the light world, according to the
Quality of Each; for as the Thoughts are framed in the Mind, so is every thing
figured in its own substance, in its own world. Therefore our hearts and minds
being an infinite Treasury of good and bad, we should preserve the Good
thoughts, which are Gods, not our Own, and suppress the Evil, which are the
Devils and ours, since the heavy fall of Adam; and NOT bring forth the
unfruitful works of Darkness, but as learned Scribes of the kingdom of heaven
bring forth out of the good treasure of our Hearts Good things both old and
new, even the words and works, which declare us indeed the children of Light,
which shall be our joyful fruit and harvest, and kingdom of heaven for
evermore in Paradise: when all our own, that is, our Evil Thoughts shall
perish, and we be saved, as it were, through fire, or else our evil thoughts,
words, and works, shall be our evil treasure and kingdom of Perdition, where
our Works shall burn with us for ever, also.

Sixthly, It says in brief, what the Mysterium Magnum, or great Mystery is,
which is, that which is resembled to us in this visible world, wherein all
things belonging to darkness or light, are hidden and manifested in the eternal
substantial wisdom, in which also all things both evil and good are eternally
resident as in ONE world together: though they must for ever be invisible,
incomprehensible and incommunicable, the one to the other; as Day and Night,
Heaven and Hell, are so, the one being the Love and Light, the other the Wrath
and Fire of the One only Spirit, the Wonderful and Incomprehensible GOD.

The SECOND Book contained in this Treatise, is the Answer to the 177
Questions, called Theosophick, because they are of such divine matters, as are
collected out of the Eternal Ground of the holy Scriptures, and belonging to
the mysteries of the divine Wisdom, whose glimps and footsteps only are hinted
at in the Holy Bible: There are but Thirteen of these Questions here answered,
and a piece of the Fifteenth to the fifth verse, though in his Preface to that
Book, the Author says, they are all at large to be found in his other
writings, in this but briefly and summarily, as if this book had been finished
by him, though no more then here is printed is yet come to our knowledge.

In this Treatise especially we may find, how in the Eternal Darkness and
Light, there has Eternally been a transaction, as it were of Wonders and
Powers, in a real representation and working, in each world by it self, and in
respect of one to the other, both conducing to the Eternal infinite Glory and
praise of the Unity in Trinity, of the Omnipotent. Omnipresent God; whose
Eternal Blessedness had never any Beginning, nor ever can have End.

Herein also we may be helped to understand undeniably, how any are a sweet
savor to God; of life unto life in them that are saved, and a savor of Death
unto Death in them that Perish: though these two things seem very inconsistent
with the Divine Unity and Goodness in the appehension of our Mortal Reason.

The THIRD Book hinteth, how the Heavenly and Earthly Mystery may be seen
distinctly manifested together in this outward world, which is a Looking-Glass
of the Eternal Great Mystery; wherein both the Heavenly Divine, and Hellish
wrathful Mysteries are represented in the visible things of this world, which
has had a Beginning: and we may thereby be furnished with Skill, to go out of
the Earthly Corruptible and Hellish Mystery, with our souls, into the Heavenly
and Blessed.

It also lays down some Grounds of discovering the Times of the Great
Separation of Good and Evil, and the Manner of it, when these Mysteries now
visibly mixed, shall no more continue so, but all that has been wrought and
produced in each of them, shall go into and remain in its Eternal Habitation in
its own world; and then the Creature be quite delivered from Bondage, and
brought into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: Matt. 25. from the, 3^,
verse to the en^.
When the Goats shall be divided from the Sheep, they to the Left hand, and
these to the Right; and to the Goats shall be said, Go ye Cursed into
Everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: and to the Sheep, Come
ye Blessed of my Father inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world.

Here every one may consider in himself his Inclination, Desire, Propensity,
Condition, and whole employment of his Thoughts, Words, and Actions, whether he
be a Goat or a Sheep, he may in this life transmute and change his desires, and
then all his powers in Soul and Body will follow, with joy that he is a Sheep,
fit for the Table of the Lord at the great Supper of the Wedding of the Lamb,
at the Last Day; and this pledge of Gods love, that Better Part once
participated in this Life, will be impossible to be taken from him: Or else, if
he continue to be an unruly Goat, and will not be changed or renewed in the
Spirit of his Mind, to be a Meek Lamb of Christ; but will remain stubborn,
wilful and careless, following the Vanity, Bent, Tendency, Liking and Lust of
the outward flesh, wherein, as in a Lodging, dwells Sin and the Devil, he will
be fit only for the Table of Devils, and to be tormented with him in his
Kingdom in Eternal Damnation: This consideration will be very easy to him
that reads this Book, and exercises himself in what is written therein.

The This is the 27. Book in the Catalogue.
FOURTH, is after the manner of a Common Prayer Book, in such a Way and Form,
as that is used in the Lutheran Churches, as at the end of the small Germane
Bibles, are Set Prayers for Every Day in the Week, both for Morning and
Evening; also pieces of Scripture appointed to be read, called Epistles and
Gospels, because most of them were first taken out of the Epistles of the
Apostles, and the Histories of Christ, called the Four Evangelists; and those
according to the occasion are appropriated to the Days of the Year: and they
have other spiritual Psalms and Hymns made by Luther, and other Holy Men: The
Author also intended this of his for the help of Beginners in the Exercise of
Divine Meditations and Prayers, out of the deep Treasury of (...) knowledge:
Not to set a form to be unvaried, or to tie up others in the use of those only,
but that their minds might thereby be opened to raise its Desires up to God; and
so get strength to make larger, or shorter or other Prayers, as the Spirit of
God in every one should stir and move in the Good desires of their souls, at
all times, and upon all occasions continually.

In this Treatise he had consideration of the Internal Eternal Powers of the
Days of the week, beginning on Monday, and ending on Sunday the seventh from
thence, according to the Seven Forms of the Eternal Nature, or the Seven
Spirits before the Throne of God; he would have expounded in them by way of
Medition and Desires, the Ten Commandments, the Belief, and the Lords Prayer,
as also the several Epistles and Gospels, and the wonderful Mysteries
contained in the Scriptures belonging to them. As in the second Commandment he
has followed the way of the Lutheran Catechism, which as in the Romish Liturgy
leaves out that which is our Second, according to Calvin's Reformation, and
truly agreeable with the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, out of which it was taken,
however in their Second, which is our Third, that we should not take the Name
of the Lord our God in vain; he shows the true ground of Not making Images,
and so abusing Gods Name and Word in our evil wicked and false Imaginations or
Thoughts and Words, which are the Subtilest Images of all, but the Author being
bred up his whole life among Lutherans, it could not well be expected he should
so much vary form the usual form of their Catechism, so he help them as he
has done, to stir up in themselves, by the innate Grace or Word of God, the
true power of Prayer.

The This is the 21 Book in the Catalogue.
FIFTH Book is concerning the Divine Vision, or the true Sight or Discerning of
Divine Things, thereby to distinguish what is Divine, and what is Natural in
all things. For as God is Eternally the same, the Light and Love is himself and
so called by Gods own Spirit; and the Anger is His, which is darkness, Nature,
and a consuming Fire: so his Creation is flowed forth from himself; and endued
or qualified with the same Harmony, Concord, Agreement, and true balanced
Temper in all Things Qualities and Properties, by his Law, Ordinance, and
Appointment, as is always in himself; and this is a creaturely Manifestation
of what is in HIM from Eternity to Eternity.

And therein Man's Outward Reason is answered to many Objections argued, about
Gods Dispensations in this world, wherein men may discern what is Divine and
Good, and the Cause why Reason sees Little or Nothing of God, either in the
Things or Actings among Men in the world, and yet how we may consider and find
GODS Being and working in all things, and what is contrary to him and his Will,
that so he may be rightly Obeyed by us, and the Devil, Our Adversary may be
certainly vanquished by Gods strength in US.

The The 19. in Catalogue.
OTHER Piece is a Table of the Three Principles Expounded at large, and is one
of the Keys to the understanding of his Writings, as himself calls it, which I
have newly englished from Two very correct Copies.

The One of the Epistles which with the Clavis is the third in the Catalogue.
EPISTLE of the True and False Light was printed among his other Epistles in
English before, but till of Late the Table belonging to it of the Revelation or
Manifestation of the Divine secret Mystery, came not to my view, but was upon
my desire sent me in Manuscript from Holland, neither can I hear that it was
ever all of it printed in any Language before, but is properly belonging to
that Epistle, they both illustrating and expounding the One the Other: and I
have willingly translated that whole Letter of his, anew, and annexed it here,
that it may further us to discern what the true and false light is, in these
times of so many Lights as are arisen and held forth among us.

I know nothing wherein I can better employ that Talent which God has given me
to Use, which I must not hide in a Napkin, or bury in the Earth; for it will be
required of me with increase. Neither know I otherwise so well to improve it,
as in that which I publish of this Authors Writings for the benefit of Others.

But in all things I find Evil so present with me, and so ready to spring up in
my heart among the Good that the Eternal Word continually works there; that I
have Still cause to account my self one of the unworthiest of the Children of
men.

John Sparrow.

Errata in the Printing these Eight Pieces of Jacob Behme Great Six Points.
PAge 1. line 33. read the willings Life. p. 2. l. 7. margin for * r. p. 3. l.
29. r. the son or Heart. p. 4. l. 14. r. as a wheel, l. 16. and yet is. p. 6.
l. 32. r. beyond or Besides. p. 8. l. 28. r. is as it were. p. 10. l. 35. r.
world. p. 21. l. 39. r. Spirit, Life. p. 26. l. 2. f. Men r. Man. p. 28. l. 8.
f. and r. or. p. 30. l. 14. f. Fires r. First. p. 33. l. 32. r. be Set before.
p. 39. l. 2. r. it ought. l. 7. r. without besides. p. 45. l. 6. r. out, or l.
44. r. It finds. p. 48. l. 18. r. is lowly. p. 49. l. 28. r. to Substance,
Margin. l. 2. r.. or effect. p. 61. l. 21. r. then could. p. 66. l. 11. f.
that. r. the. p. 69. l 24. f. is. r. it. p. 74. l. 24. f. have. r. hear. p. 79.
l. 7. r. you seek in self Tabernacle.

Small Six Points P. 8. l. 30. r. that proceeds. 117 Questions.

P. 3 l. 6. r. without or Besides. p. 31. marg. l. 6. r. Light and Glory. l.
14. r. excuse: especiallyl those. p. 37. l. 14. and 15. f. Twine-ness r.
Twin-ness. p. 40. l. 21. r. beneficence. p. 50. l. 30. f. * r. p. 52. l. 7. r.
Enemicitious anxiety and p. 57. l. 26. r. Throne. p. 60. l. mar. 3. r. 12. 9.
p. 69. l 34. r. wrestleth. l. 35. r. will. p. 65 l. 5 r. Spirits, forth. p. 67.
l. 1 r. Image-like. p. 74. l. 24. r. partakes of all.

The Heavenly and Earthly Mystery.

P. 5. l. 21. r. where then. p. 6. l. 38. r. yet unawakable. p. 9. l. 4. put
out therefore. p. 11. l. 10. r. from o^ Out. l. 20. r. others Characters. p.
13. l. 3. r. those were Children.

The Prayer Book.

P. 3. l. 14. r. power of. p. 6. l. 28. f. the. r. this. p 8. l. 29. r. Shell
or Bark. p. 10. l. 17. f. he. r. it. p. 11. l. 5. r. out-breathing. p. 21. l.
24. r. knew not, p. 29. l. 17. r. fierce wrath. p. 44. l. 6. r. wholly and. p.
46. l. 18 f, in. r. on.

Divine Vision.

P. 5. l. 1. r. desirous: For, p. 6. l. 40. r. within) out. p. 8. l. 12. r.
arise from. p. 12. l 22. r Imaged. p 26. l. 37. r. the Planets. p. 31. l. 38.
r. without besides. p. 35. margin. l. 1. r. The Word. l. 14 f. and. r. an. l.
26. r. of Divine.

Explanation of the Table of the Three Principles.

Title. l. 10. r. without or besides. p. 2. l. 28. r. the visible. p. 13. l,
30. f Principles r. Properties. p. 16. l. 25 r. water is the.

Epistle of the True and False Light.

P. 3. l. 33. r. III. Principles. p. 8. l. 29. r. or wicked.

The Sixth Book of the Author.

Being a High and Deep searching out of the Great SIX Points AN Open Gate of
all Arcana, or hidden Secrets of the Life; wherein the Causes of ALL and Every
Being Substance or Thing, become known, and may be apprehended.

Written in the Germane Tongue, Anno 1620.

BY Jacob Behme THE Teutonick Philosopher.

And is the High and Deep Ground of the Great Mystery.

MYSTERII MAGNI.

Of the Being of all Beings, or Substance of all Substances.

And of the Three Worlds.

Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for L. Lloyd at the Castle in Cornhill, 1661.

The SIX POINTS.
The First, and Second Chapter.

I. Point. Of the first Sprouting of the Three Principles: what kind of Tree or
Life each of them generateth in and out of it self, and how men should seek
find and know the Ground of Nature.

The Third Chapter.

II. Point. Of the Mixed Tree of Evil and Good: or the Life of the Three
Principles in one another, how they unite agree and co-work together.

The Fourth Chapter.

III. Point. Of the Original of Contrariety in the Sprout; in that the Life
becomes striving in it self.

The Fifth, and Sixth Chapter.

IV. Point. How the Holy and Good Tree of Eternal Life, springs through and
forth out of all the Sprouts of the Three Principles, and is apprehended by
none of them.

The Seventh, and Eighth Chapter.

V. Point. Of the Tree and Sprout of the Life of Perdition; how a Life
perishes; that is, how it passes out of the source or quality of Love and
Joy, into the source or quality of Misery; which is opposite to all other Lives.

The Ninth, and Tenth Chapter.

VI. Point. Of the Life of Darkness, wherein the Devils dwell; what kind of
Birth or Geniture and source or Quality it has.

The PREFACE To the READER.
1. WE have written this work, not for the unreasonable Beasts, who have
outwardly the form of a Man, but in their Image and spirit, are Evil and Wild
Beasts, which thing reveals or discovers and shows it self in their
Property or Conditions.

2. But for the Image of Man, for those which Grow or spring forth out of the
Beastial Image, with a humane Image, which belongs to Gods Kingdom; who would
fain live and Grow in the humane Image, in the right true Man.

3. Who many times, and often, are hindered by the opposite contrarious Life,
and so stick in the Mixed Life; and pant after the birth of the Holy Life: for
those, are these writings written.

4. And we advise them, not to look upon it as impossible to apprehend, and to
know such secret hidden Arcana: and we offer that to them to consider and
Conceive of, in a Similitude.

5. NOTE.
For Instance; There stood a Life; which was sprouted out of All and Every
Life; and was mixed, but there grew another Life in that, out of Every Life,
and that though it was grown out of All and Every Life, yet it was free from
All and Every other life, and yet stood also in All Original properties,
conditions, qualities or sources of the Life.
Essences of the Life.

6. And that other New Life, became enlightened with the Light, and that only in
it self; so that it could see all and every other Life; and yet the other Lives
could not behold nor apprehend the New Life.

7. Just thus is every one, who out of the Mixed Life Evil and Good i^ become
born again in and out of God: that very New Image born or generated in the Life
of God, beholds all and every Natural Life, and Nothing is strange or hard to
it; for it beholds only its Root out of which it is sprouted or Grown.

8. As we may apprehend, by observing How a fair flower or blossom grows out
of the wild Earth; which is not like the Earth, yet with its fair beauty,
de^lareth the Ability or potentiality of the Earth, and how it is Mixed with
Good and Evil.

9. Thus also is Every Man, who becomes born or generated out of the Wild
Condition and property, to the right Image of God again.

10. For those now, who are in the sprouting, and drive forth toward the fair
Lilly in the Kingdom of God, and stand in the Birth; is this Book written; that
they should strengthen their Their heavenly properties.
Essences therein, and spring or sprout in the Life of God, and grow and bear
fruit in the Tree of Paradise.

11. And seeing all the Children of God grow in this Tree, and Every of them is
a Branch in that Tree; therefore we would have our Sap, Smell, Savor and
Essences imparted to our fellow-branches and sprouts in our Tree wherein we all
stand, and out of which we all sprout and Grow: that our Tree of Paradise might
be great, and we rejoice one among another.

12. And that one sprout and branch may continually help to cover or shelter
the other from the Storm: we give this to all the Children of this Sprout in
this Tree, friendly to ponder of; and commit and commend our selves, into their
Love and sprouting.

The First Point.
The First Chapter.
Of the first Sprout and Life out of the First Principle. So to ponder and
Consider it; as if it stood alone and were not Mixed with the other: what its
Ability or potentiality might be. Not to think in such a manner, Note.
as if it were thus only in a Figure or Creature: but that Men may learn to
search and fathom the Center of Nature, and learn to distinguish the Divine
Being or substance from Nature.
The First Text.

1. WE see and find, that Every Life is Essential; and find also, that it
stands in a Will, for, the will, is the driving forth of the Essences.

2. And thus we are to conceive, as if a hidden Fire lay in the willing, where
the will continually lifts it self up toward the fire, and and would awaken
and kindle that.

3. For we understand, that every Will, without the awakening of the fiery
Essences, is an Inability, as it were inanimate or Mute without Life, wherein
is no feeling, understanding or substantiality.

4. For it is only like a Shadow without Substance; for it has no Of its own
in it self.
driver, but it sinketh down and suffers it self to be driven and lead as a
Dead thing or Substance; as is to be apprehended in a Shadow, which becomes As
a Thought is drawn or pourtrayed in the Mind.
lead about without Essence.

5. Thus, an unessential will is an inanimate or Mute being or substance;
without comprehension and Life; and yet is a Figure, in the Abyssal Eternal
Nothing; for it cleaves or adhereth to Corporeal Things.

6. Now as the Will without Essence is inanimate without being or Substance, so
in the Essence it is a being or Substance and Image, according to the Essences,
which becomes Imaged according to the Essences: for the willing Life becomes
generated out of the Essences.

7. Thus, the Life is the Son of the Essences and the will wherein the Life's
figure stands, is the Father of the Essences, for no Essence can exist
without willing; for in the willing, the Desiring becomes Originated, in which
the Essences originally arise.

8. Seeing then, the first will, is an Abyss, to be esteemed as an Eternal
Nothing; therefore we apprehend it to be like a Looking-Glass, in which one
sees his own Image like a Life, and yet is no Life, but a Figure of the Life,
and of the Image to the Life.

9. Thus we apprehend the Eternal Abyss without and beyond Nature to be like a
Looking-Glass, for it is like an AVGE. An Eye.
AVGE Eye, which there sees, and yet brings nothing into the Seeing,
wherewith it sees; for the seeing is without being or substance, whereas yet
it becomes generated out of being or substance, viz: out of the Essential
being or Substance.

10. Thus, it is apprehensible to us, that the Eternal Abyss without or beyond
Nature, is a Will, like an Eye, wherein Nature lies hidden, like an hidden
fire that burns not, which there, is, and is not.

11. It is not a Spirit, but a Figure, representation, or portraiture.
form of a Spirit, like the Or a Glimmering Shadow like a Thought, or Shape,
Reflection or Aspect in a well glazed or clear Looking-Glass.
Shimmering Glimps or Reflection in the Looking-Glass, where all manner of forms
of a Spirit is seen in the shimmering Glimps, reflection, or Looking Glass.

12. And yet there is nothing which the Eye or Looking-Glass sees; but its
seeing is in it self; for there is nothing before it, which is deeper there.

13. It is like a Looking-Glass, which is a retainer of the Aspect of Nature,
yet it does not comprehend Nature, neither does Nature comprehend the
shimmering Glimps or Reflection in the Looking-Glass; and thus the one is free
from the other; and yet the Looking-Glass is really the retainer or preserver
of the Image.

14. It compriseth the Image, and yet is impotent in respect of the shimmering
Glimps or Reflection, for it cannot retain the shimmering Glimps or Reflection:
for if the Image departs away from the Looking-Glass; then is the
Looking-Glass a mere Glass; and the Glance Shadow or Reflection is a Nothing;
and yet all Forms of Nature lie hidden therein as it were Nothing and yet is
truly and Entally or really, but not Essentially.

15. Thus we are to apprehend and understand concerning the Eternal wisdom of
God, which thus Note.
resembles an Eternal Eye without Being or Substance: it is the Abyss and yet
sees all; all has stood hidden in it from Eternity, whence it has its
seeing; But it is not Essential: As the Glance shadow or Reflection in the
Looking-Glass is not Essential, and yet that receives, catches, or compriseth
that which appears before it.

16. And then secondly, as concerning the Eternal willing which is also without
being or Substance, we are in like manner to understand concerning the Spirit
of God, for No Seeing is without Spirit, also no Spirit without Seeing.

17. And understand thus, that the Seeing appears out of the Spirit, which is
its Eye or Looking-Glass, wherein the will is revealed or manifest; for the
Seeing makes a will.

18. Thus, the Abyss of the Deep, without Number, knows to find no Ground
nor limit, and therefore its Looking-Glass goes into it self, and makes a
Ground in it self, that is, a Will.

19. Thus, the Looking-Glass of the Eternal Eye appears in the willing, and
Generateth to it self an Eternal Ground in it self, that is, its Center or
heart, out of which the seeing continually arises from Eternity: and thereby
the will becomes stirring and driving forth, viz: of whatsoever the Center
Generateth.

20. For, it all becomes catched or comprehended in the willing, and is a
Being or Substance, which Eternally arises in the Eternal Abyss in it self;
and enters into it self, and makes the Center in it self; receives catches
or Compriseth it self in it self, but goes with that which is comprised out of
it self forth, and reveals or Manifests it self in the Glance Shadow or
Reflection of the Eye, and so appears out of the being or substance, in it
self, and out of it self.

21. It is its own, yet in respect of Nature it is as a Nothing: understand, in
respect of the Comprehensible or palpable being or substance, as a Man may say;
whereas yet it is ALL, and all originally arises from thence.

22. Note.
And we understand here, the Eternal Being or Substance of the Deity, with the
Abyssal Wisdom: for, the Eternal will which catches or compriseth the Eye;
viz: the Looking-Glass wherein the Eternal Seeing stands, viz: the Wisdom; is
the Father.

23. And the Eternal Comprised or catched, in the Wisdom; where the Catching or
Comprising, in it self compriseth a Ground or Center, out of the Abyss into a
Ground, is the Form or Heart; for it is the Word of Life, or its
Substantiality, wherein the Will with the Glance or Reflection appears.

24. And the Entering into it self to the Center of the Ground; is the Spirit:
for it is the finder, which there finds continually from Eternity, where
nothing is; and that goes again from the Center of the Ground Forth, and
seeks in the willing, and then the Looking-Glass of the Eye, viz. the Fathers
and Sons Wisdom becomes Manifest: and thus the Wisdom stands before the
Spirit of God Which spirit.
which the Abyss manifests in Or her, viz; the wisdom.
it.

25. For, its virtue wherein the Colors of the Or Works.
Wonders appear becomes manifest out of the Father of the Eternal willing,
through the Center of his heart or ground with the out-going Spirit.

26. For The Eternal Wisdom.
it is the outspoken, which the Father speaks forth out of the Center of the
Heart with or by the Holy Spirit, and stands in the divine Formings and
Images, in the Sight of the Eye of the Holy Trinity of God: yet as a Virgin
without generating.

27. It generateth not the Colors which appear in it, and stand manifest in
the Ground and Being or Substance; But All is together an Eternal Magia, and
dwells with the Center of the Heart, in it self; and with the Spirit out of
the Center it goes forth out of it self, and manifests it self in the Eye of
the Virgin-like Wisdom in infinitum Endlesly.

28. For, as the Being or Substance of the Deity, has no ground, out of which
it arises or proceeds: so also the will-Spirit has no ground, wherein it
might Rest, where there might be any place or limit; but it is called Isa. 9.6.
Wonderful, and its Word or Heart from which it goes forth, is called the
Eternal Power of the Deity; and the will which generateth the Heart or power in
it self, is called Eternal Council.

29. Thus is the Being or Substance of the Deity, in all places and Regions,
the Deep of the Abyss, as a Wheel or Ezekiel. 1.15. to the 23.
Eye, where the Beginning always has the End, and there is no place found,
for it is it self the place of all Beings or Substances, and the fullness of all
things and is apprehended or seen of Nothing.

30. For, it is an Eye in it self, as Ezekiel has seen such a thing in a
Figure, in the introducing his will-spirit into God, where his spiritual figure
became introduced into the wisdom of God, with or by the Spirit of God; and
there he attained the Vision, and otherwise that cannot be.

The Second Text.

31. THus we understand, that the Divine Being or Substance in the Trinity
dwells in the Abyss in it self, yet generateth to it self a Ground in it
self, viz: the Eternal Word or Heart, which is the Center or Limit of Rest in
the Deity, where yet there is nothing understood concerning or as to the
Substantiality, but concerning or as to a Threefold Spirit, where always the
one is the Cause of the Birth of the other.

32. And yet that very Threefold Spirit is not measurable or circumscriptive,
divisible or fathomable; for there is no place found for it, and it is in like
manner as the Abbysse of Eternity, which generateth it self in it self into a
Ground.

33. And there can be no Place or Space conceivable or found, where the Spirit
of the Trinity is not Present, even in all things or substances, but hidden to
the Thing or Substance, dwelling in it self, as a Substance, that equally or
alike at once fills all, and yet dwells not in Substance, but it self has
a Substance in it self; as we may find by the Bysse or Ground and Abyss, how
they both are to be understood as to one another.

34. Thus we understand the Eternity: I. First, How it has been, before the
times of the Creation of this world: II. Secondly, we understand further, what
the Divine Being or Substance is in it self without and beyond a Principle.
III. Thirdly, what the Eternal Beginning in the Abyss is, and the Eternal End
in its own Bysse or Ground generated in it self: viz: the Center to the Word,
which word is the Center it self: IV. Fourthly, And yet the Eternal Geniture or
Birth of the Word in the Will in the Looking-Glass of the Eternal Wisdom, viz:
in the Virgin without generating or bringing forth; is continually effected or
produced from Eternity to Eternity.

35. In this Virgin of the Wisdom of God, is the Eternal Principle, as a hidden
Fire, which becomes thus apprehended as in a Looking-Glass, in its Colors;
and has been known from Eternity to Eternity in the Figure; and also thus
becomes known in all Eternity in the Eternal Original in the Wisdom.

36. And in that Looking-Glass, where the Principle out of the Eternal Abyss
becomes opened; is the Substance of the Three Principles according to the
substance of the Holy Trinity, become seen, with its wonders, as in an Abyssall
Deep; and that from Eternity.

37. And now it is to be understood thus; that the First Principle, in the
Original is See the small six Points. Verse. 65. the word Magical.
Magical: for it becomes generated in the desiring in the willing, from
thence then to generate its seeking or Longing and contrary opposite will.

38. And seeing then in the first and second Principle it is only understood as
a spirit, without comprehensible or palpable being or substance: therefore the
seeking or Longing is further, to generate the Third Principle; where the
Spirit of the Principles might rest, and manifest it self therein in Similitude.

39. And although each Principle has its Center, yet the first Principle
stands in the Magical source or quality, and its Center is Fire, which cannot
subsist without Substance, and therefore its hunger and desiring is after
Substance.

40. And it is to be understood concerning or as to the first Principle, if we
speak merely of One, though it is not One alone: that the Abyssal will in the
Center of the Abyss, as wherein the Eternal Word continually becomes
generated from Eternity, is, desirous; for the Will desires the Center or
Heart.

41. Secondly it desires that the Heart might be manifest, for in the Abyss
there is no manifestation or revelation: but an Eternal Nothing; a stilness or
vacuum without Being or Substance or Colors and Virtues.

42. But in this desiring, Colors powers and virtues come to be, and yet is
thus only hidden in it self; and if it should Eternally not be manifested, then
there would be no Light, Luster Bright Glance or Majesty, but a Threefold
Spirit in it self, which would be without source or quality of any Being or
Substance.

43. And thus, is the Substance of the Deepest Deity without beyond or besides
Nature.

44. And further: the Eternal Will of the Deity, desires to manifest it self
out of its own Bysse or Ground in the Light of the Majesty.

45. Where then, the first will of the Father to the Son, and to the Light of
the Majesty is apprehended to be desirous; and that in two ways; the First
way, to the Center of the Word, the Second to the Light of the Manifestation or
Revelation.

46. For every desiring is attractive, though in the Abyss there is Nothing
which there can be drawn, yet therefore the Desiring draws it self, and
impregnateth the Second willing of the Father, which Imagines to the Light of
the Majesty, out of the Center of his word or Heart.

47. And now is the Heart impregnated with the Light, and the first will
impregnated with Nature: and yet thus there would be no manifestation, if the
Principle were not generated.

48. For, the Father generateth the first Principle out of the first willing,
viz: Nature; which in the Fire, comes to the highest Perfection.

49. And then he generateth the second Principle, in and out of the second
willing to the Word; in that it desires the Manifestation or Revelation of the
Word in the Light of the Majesty, where the Fire of the Second Principle in the
Light of the Majesty is a fulfilling of the Second willing, viz. Meekness:
which is set opposite to the fire of the first Principle, and quenches its
fierce wrath, and is put into an Essential Substance, as into an Eternal Life;
Where the Fire is hidden in the Light, and gives the Light its Power,
Strength, and Might, so that it is together an Eternal Band, and one without
the other would not be.

Hitherto of the highest divine Mystery, how and what God is without and
beyond Nature.

Now follows.

Of the First Principle in it Self, what it is only and alone in it Self.

50. HEre the Desiring is to be considered of: For every Desiring is attractive
of that which is in the desirous willing.

51. Yet now God desires only Light, viz: the Glance out of his Heart, that it
may appear in the Wisdom: and so the Total God as in himself, together with
the outgoing Spirit out of it self, may be manifested in the virgin of his
Wisdom; and that there be an Eternal perfect Joy, longing, or delight and
fulfilling in The outgoing Spirit.
it.

52. And this now can be no otherwise generated then through the fire, where
the will becomes put into the deepest sharpness of the Omnipotency, in that it
becomes Consuming in the Fire; On the contrary, the Light is a Meekness of
Genetrix of the Omnisubstantiality.

53. Yet now the fire must have a Genetriae to its Original and Life, and so
now in a twofold Life, and in two sources or qualities; and they are rightly
called two Principles; whereas yet it is but one only, but of a twofold source
or quality in One substance, and in respect of the sources or Qualities is
accounted Two Substances, as is to be perceived by the Fire and Light.

54. Therefore we now consider of the Desiring and find that it is a stern
strong attraction, as an Eternal listing up and moving, for it attracteth it
Self in it self, and impregnateth it self, so that out of the Thin or Rare
Liberty, where nothing is, a Darkness comes to be; For, the desirous will, by
the intraction becomes thick or dense and full; whereas yet this also is
nothing else, but Darkness.

55. Now, the first Will, wills to be free from the Darkness, for it desires
Light, and yet cannot thus attain it, for the greater the desiring is after the
Liberty, the greater will the attraction be, and the Sting of the Essences
which arise originally in the drawing.

56. Thus, the will draws the More in it self and its impregnation becomes
but the Greater, and yet the Darkness cannot comprehend the Center of the Word
or Heart of the Number Three or Trinity, for that Center is a degree deeper in
it self, and yet is a Band.

57. But the first Will, wherein the Impregnation of Nature originally arises,
is yet deeper then the Center of the Word, for it originally arises out of the
Eternal Abyss or Nothing: And thus the Center of the Heart is shut up in the
Midst, where the first Will of the Father labors to the Fires Birth or
Geniture.

58. Thus now we are to apprehend, that in the strong or stern attraction,
there is a very stern strong Substance and Being, where then the substantiality
existeth originally from Eternity.

59. For, the drawing gives Sting, and the attracted gives hardness, or
Matter; out of the Nothing a Substance and Substantiality: The sting of the
drawing dwells now in that very Substantiality, it stabbeth and breaks; and
all this from the desirous willing which draws.

60. Thus now here we are to apprehend, Two forms of Nature, viz: the harsh or
astringent, that is, the desiring, and then the sting, and that makes in the
desiring, a stabbing and breaking, whence the feeling originally arises, that
is, bitter, which is the second form of Nature, a cause and original of the
Essences in Nature.

61. Now seeing the first Will is not satiated with this, nor put into Rest;
but therewith becomes fet into a much greater anguish: For it desires the
Liberty in the Light, and yet also there is no glance in the Liberty; Now
therefore it is wrapped up in terrible anguish, and lifts up the desiring so
very much after the Liberty, that the anguish, as a dying or sinking down
through Death, introduces its willing into the Liberty out of the breaking
stabbing and powerful attracting.

62. Thus understand the willing here in two ways; one which climeth up in the
fierce wrathfulness, to the generating of the fierce wrathful fire: The other
which Imagines or longs after the Center of the Word, which out of the
Anguish, as through a dying sinketh down into the free Life, and thus brings
a Life out of the Anguish source or quality with it self, into the Liberty, so
that the Eternal Abyss becomes apprehended to be a Life, and out of the
Nothing becomes an Eternal Life.

63. Seeing then the first progress or passing of the willing climeth up to the
fires Birth, therefore we apprehend it to be the first Nature, viz: the Fathers
Nature in the fierce wrathful anger.

64. And the second entrance of the willing into the Liberty into the Center of
the Heart, we apprehend to be the Divine Nature, to be the Life in the Light in
the power of the Deity.

65. Thus it is apprehensible to us, what the first Will to the fire works
and acts, viz: stern or strong, harsh, bitter, and great Anguish, which is
the third Form of Nature.

66. For the Anguish is at were the Center where the Life and the Will
Eternally existeth originally; for the Will, wills to be free from the great
Anguish and yet may not; It wills to flee and yet becomes withheld by the
harshnesse, and the greater the Will to the fleeing is, the greater is the
bitter Sting of the Essences and Multiplicity.

67. Seeing then it cannot flee, also not clime up aloft, therefore it becomes
whirling as a Wheel: And there the Essences become mixed, and the Multiplicity
of the Essences come into a mixed willing, which is justly called the Eternal
Mind, where the Multiplicity with the Innumerable Beings or Substances, lie,
in a Mind, where continually out of one Essence may again a Will Exist,
according to the property of that Essence out of which the Eternal Wonders
originally arise.

78. Seeing then the great and strong Mind of the anguish form, thus goes as
a wheel in it self, and continually breaks the strong attraction, and with
the sting brings it into the multiplicity of Essences; and yet in the anguish
again compriseth it in the Wheel again into ONE, as into a Mind, therefore is
the Anguish life now Generated, viz. Nature, where there is a stirring, driving
fleeing and holding, as also a feeling tasting and hearing.

69. And yet is not a right life; but merely a Nature-Life, without a
Principle, for it has no sprouting or vegetation, but is as a senselesness or
Madness, where somewhat goes whirling in it self as a Wheel, where indeed
there is a Band of Life, but without understanding and apprehension; for it
knows not it self.

70. Now we are further to search, concerning the Second willing of the
Eternal Father, which is called GOD, that in the Center of its heart desires
the Light and the manifestation of the Trinity in the Wisdom.

71. That very Will is appointed or set opposite to the Center of Nature for
out of Nature, must the Glance of the Majesty originally Exist; and so now that
very second Will in the Word of Life, has the Liberty in it self; and the
Anguish-will in the sharpness of Nature, desires the Liberty, that the Liberty
might be manifest in the anguish of the fierce wrathful Mind.

72. From whence then also, the anguish existeth; that the first Will, wills
to be free from the dark harshness or astringency, and the Liberty desires the
Revelation or Manifestation; for it cannot find it self in it self, without the
sharpness of the source or quality; for the Will of the Liberty which is called
Father, desires to Manifest it self.

73. And that it cannot do without properties, and therefore it is desirous of
the properties which originally arise in the Anguish in the Essences in the
fire; thereby to manifest its Wonders, Power, and Colors; which without Nature
cannot be.

74. Thus, the first Will which is called Father, and is it self the Liberty,
desires Nature, and Nature desires, with great Romans 8.2^.
groaning, panting and longing, the Liberty; that it may be released from the
Anguish source or quality.

75. And it conceives or receives the Liberty in its sharp fierce wrath in
the Imagination, whence it skreeketh as a flash, for it is a skreek of Joy,
that it is become released from the anguish source.

76. And in the skreek exist Two Substances, a dead one and a living one, to be
understood thus.

77. The Will, which is called Father, which has the Liberty in it self,
generateth it self thus in Nature, that it might be capable to receive Nature,
and that it might be the Omnipotency of Nature: The skreek of its Nature is a
kindling of the fire.

78. For when the dark anguish, viz: the very severe earnest stern Substance,
attaineth the Liberty in it self, then it changes it self in the Skreek, in
the Liberty, into a flash, and the flash apprehends the Liberty, viz: the
Meekness; and there 1 Cor. 15.55, 56.
the sting of Death becomes broken, and in Nature, the second Will of the
Father goes up, which he had framed to himself to be Nature in the
Looking-glass of Wisdo^e, viz: his Love heart, that is the desiring of Love,
and the Kingdom of Joy.

79. For in the Fathers Will the fire thus becomes generated, to which the
second Will gives the power of Meekness and Love, and the fire takes the Love
source or quality into its Essence, and that is now its food, so that it
burns; and gives forth out of the Consumingness, out of the Skreek, the
Triumphing or Exulting.
Spirit of the Kingdom of Joy.

80. And here the Holy Spirit, which in the original, before or as to Nature is
the Fathers Will-Spirit, becomes manifest, and Conceives here the Power of
the Wonders: And thus goes from the Father, viz: out of the first Will to
Nature, out of the second willing in Nature, out of the fire, viz: out of the
Skreek of the Kingdom of Joy, into the source or quality of Love, forth into
the Substantiality of Meekness.

81. For, the Meekness is then also become desirous, of the fires property, and
the desiring draws the Meekness of Joy into it self; and that is now, John
4.14.
the water of Eternal Life, which the fire drinks, and gives forth from it
the Light of the Majesty.

82. And in the Light now dwells the Will of the Father, and of the Son,
and the Holy Spirit is the Life therein, which opens now the power of the
meek Substantiality in the Light, which is, viz: Colors, Wonders and Virtues.

83. And that is called the Virgin-like Wisdom: For it is NO Genetrix, also it
self opens nothing; only the Holy Spirit is the opening of its Wonders.

84. It is his Garment and fair beauteous Ornament, and has in it, the
Wonders, Colors, and Virtues of the divine World; and is the house of the Holy
Trinity, and the Ornament of the Divine and Angelical Worlds.

85. In its colors and virtues, the Holy Spirit has the Quire of Angels, as
also discovers all Wonders of Created Things: Which all have become
discovered from Eternity in the Wisdom: Without Substance indeed; but yet in
the Wisdom as in the Looking-glass, according to their Figures; which Figures
in the Fathers Mobility, are passed into Essence, and into a Creature, all
according to the Wonders of the Wisdom.

86. Now concerning the second Substance, where Nature in the Skreek par^eth it
self into two Substances as is mentioned above, viz; one, the Will of the
Father in the fire, that is in the fire world, and out of the Fathers second
framed or generated willing in it self; in the Majestic Light-world.

87. The second Substance, viz. the house of the Skreek in it self, in death in
the darkness of the Enimicitious source or quality; which Also must stand; that
in that anguish, there be an Eternal Romans 8.22.
panting or longing, to be loosed from the source or quality.

88. For, that panting or longing makes the first willing to Nature Eternally
desirous, to come to help its Substance, whence then also in the Fathers
willing the Mercifulness originally arises, which enters with the Liberty
into the Anguish; but cannot continue in the Anguish, but goes in the fire,
forth into the Love source or quality.

89. His second willing, viz: his heart, goes forth in him as a well spring or
fountain of Love and Mercifulness, from whence the Mercifulness has its
original, so that there is a pity upon the Misery and Calamity and a
fellow-suffering or compassion; And then the Fathers Will which yet is free,
manifests it self in the fierce wrath of Nature, so that the fierce
wrathfulness becomes meekened.

90. But nevertheless, as to one part, the Anxious wheel of the fierce wrath
continues to it self; for in the Skreek a Mortifying is affected; not through
still death, but a Mortal Life, which is like the worst or bases^ thing or
substance like a water of separation or Aqua fortis, or Poison in it self; for
such a thing must be, if the Center of Nature be to subsist Eternally.

91. And on the other Part, the Life goes out from Death, and so Death must
thus be a cause of the Life; Else if no such venomous poisonous fierce wrathful
source or quality were; the fire could not become generated, and no fire,
sharpness, and Essence, could be, and then also there would be no Light, also
no finding of the Life.

92. The first Will, which is called Father, finds it self thus in Wonders;
and the second Will, which is called Son, finds it self thus in Power;
Moreover thus also the Kingdom of Joy arises; for if there were no Woe, there
would be also no Kingdom of Joy, But this is the Kingdom of Joy that the Life
becomes released out of the Anguish; though indeed the Life only thus arises.

93. Therefore the Creatures have poison for their Life, viz: a Gall; The Gall
is a Cause that there is a Mobility, so that the Life arises; for it causes
the fire in the Heart; and the fire is the right Life.

94. But it is not the figure of the Life, out of the fire life existeth the
right Spirit, which goes forth from the fire into the light, which is free
from the fire: As the Air, which yet arises from the fire, is free from the
fire.

95. For, the right Spirit, or the Spirit in Man, which becomes generated out
of the Souls fire, that has its property in the Light of Life which burns
out from the fire; for it existeth out of Death, it goes forth out from the
dying: The enimicitious source or quality, is gone from it and remaining in the
fire, and furthermore under the fire in the cause of the fire, viz: in the
fierce wrathful Or Anger.
Death.

96 Thus is the fierce wrathful Death a Root of Life: And here, O, Men,
consider your Death; also Christ's Death, who has generated us again out of the
Dying, through the fire of God; for out of the dying the fire-life becomes
generated, that which can go out from the Dying, that is released from Death,
and the fierce wrathful source.

97. That is now its Kingdom of joy, when no fierce wrathful source more is in
it; it is gone from it, and is remained in the in dying, in the dark world.

98. And thus the Life out of Death attaineth the Eternal Liberty: Wherein
there is no fear or terror more; for in the Life, the terror or Skreek is
broken.

99. The right Life is a power of Joy: A Continual well-doing, for there is no
source quality or pain in it, but only a desire, which has all properties of
the source quality or pain.

100. And yet the source quality or pain cannot list it self up therein, so
that it might kindle its properties therein, for the Light and the Liberty
hinders that.

Note, The souls fire uniteth or is one in it self with the Eternal Nature,
viz: With the Principle, for it is from its original one and the same with it;
or co-united with it.

The right Spirit or Souls-Spirit, is the Image, and is one Spirit with God.

The Images Corporeity, is, with the heavenly Substantiality totally one; It is
the Body of the Word, wherein the Believers, or faithful, live, and shall live,
Eternally.

Further of the First Point.
The Second Chapter. Concerning the property of the Principle: What the
Principle is, or what they all Three are.
1. THat is a Principle, when a Life and Mobility finds it self where none
is; the fire is a Principle with its Property, and the Light is also a
Principle with its Property: For it becomes generated out of the fire, and yet
is not of the fires property.

2. It has also its own Life in it self, but the Fire is Cause thereof, and
the fierce wrathful anguish is a cause of Both, viz: of the Light and
Fire-world.

3. But Note.
the will to the Anguish, which causes the Anguish-Nature; which is called
Father; that a Man cannot search out or fathom, we search and fathom only this,
how it introduces it self into the highest Perfection into the Substance of
the Holy Trinity; and how it manifests it self in Three Principles, and how
the Essence and the source or quality originally existeth; what Essence is,
from which the Life with the Senses or Thoughts originally Exist; and the
Wonder of all Beings or Substances.

4. Thus we apprehend the Third Principle, viz: the source or quality of this
world, with the Stars and Elements, to be a creature framed out of the
Wonders of the Eternal Or Wisdom.
Substantiality: The Third Principle manifests Both the first.

5. Note.
Though indeed, each of them is manifest in it self: Yet nevertheless, the
Eternal Substance, in its wonders, which have become discovered in the Wisdom,
would manifest it self in such a property: viz: according to the ground of
Eternity, according to the fierce wrathful and the Love-source or quality, and
has created all into a Creaturely and figured Substance, according to the
Eternal Original; evil and Good.

6. As it is before our Eyes, that in this world there is Evil and Good, of
which yet the Devils are a great cause, who in the Creation in their Fall have
more vehemently moved the fierce wrathful Matrix in the fierce wrath.

7. In which, God, according to the property of the fierce wrath, has moved
yet more exceedingly, to thrust them forth out of the Light into the Death of
the fierce wrathfulness: Whence also the Heavenly Substantiality became
together Or kindled by the Pride of the Devil.
Moved, so that very much, is become shut up, together in the Earthly
Substantiality, that has stood free in the Liberty.

8. As we apprehend by the Gold and its Tincture, which is free from the
Earthly Substance; for it subsisteth in the Fire, and in all sources qualities
or conditions, no source or quality can overpower it, but only Gods Will; and
somewhat must often be done, for the sake of the worlds unworthiness.

9. And when we rightly consider, the Creating of this World, and the Spirit of
the Third Principle; viz: take before us the Spirit of the Great World with the
Stars and Elements; then we find the Eternal Worlds property, and as it were
mixed, as a great Wonder, whereby God the highest Good would manifest the
Eternal Wonders which stand in secret, and bring them into substance.

10. We find Evil and Good, and we find in all things the Center of Nature,
viz: the Anguish Chamber: especially we find the Spirit of the Great World in
two Sources or Qualities, in Heat and Cold: By the Cold we apprehend the Center
of the harsh sharp fierce wrath; by the Heat, the Principle in the fire; yet
they have but One original out of another.

11. The Fire comes out of the fierce wrath of the Cold: The Cold out of the
Center of Nature; out of the harsh astringent sharp anguish, where the harsh
astringency draws so very strongly in it self, and makes Substantiality.

12. As is to be apprehended: That in the Moving of the Father, in the
Creation, it has made Earth and Stones, whereas there was no Substance or
Matter for it, but only its own Substance, which, in both the Principles, viz:
in the Light World, and in the Deaths World, in both the Desires, was become
Generated.

13. That which in the Moving attained the fierce wrath, that was together
Created for the Globe of the Earth; and therefore Men find therein Many sorts
of Evil and of Good.

14. And it comes often to pass, that Man can out of the Worst of all, make
that which is Best; while the Center of Nature is therein; if a Man bring it
into the fire; the pure child of the Eternal Substantiality, may be brought out
of it; when it becomes free from death; as is to be seen in Gold.

15. Though indeed in this World we cannot reach to attain the Eternal fire;
and therefore also we can bring forth nothing out of this Principle, out of
defect, wanting the Eternal fire, which we cannot attain but only in the
Imagination, through which a Man has might and power, to bring the Life out of
Death; and to bring it into divine Substantiality; which can be done only in
Man, that which is without or beyond Man, belongs to God: and remains to
the Renovation in the End of this Time.

Now You are to understand, the Substance, and the Property, of the
Principles: Thus.

16. THe first Principle stands in the fire of the willing, and is the Cause
of both the other, also of the life and understanding, and a preservation of
Nature; as also of all Properties of the Father.

17. The Second Principle, stands in the Light: viz: in the Fire of the
desire; this desire makes Substance, out of the Property of the first
Principle.

18. The First and Second Principle is Father and Son; in the Eternity: One
dwells in the other, and yet retains its property; there is no mixture in
the Essence, only the one conceives the other in the Desire, and the Light
dwells in the desire of the Fire, so that the Fires property gives its
desire into the Light, and the Light into the Fire.

19. Thus, it is one Substance, not two, but two Properties, whereof the one is
not the other; nor can be, Eternally.

20. As the Spirits Property cannot be the Fire and Light, and yet goes forth
from the Fire out of the Light; and could not subsist alone either from the
Fire or from the Light singly: The Fire could not alone give it, also not the
Light, but both give it. It is the Life of Both, and all this is but one
Substance or being; but Three Properties, whereof one is not the other, as is
to be seen in Fire Light and Air.

21. The Third Principle has just those Properties, it has also Fire, Light,
and Spirit, that is, Air, and is as to all Circumstances, like the Eternal
Substance.

22. Yet begins, and goes forth from the Eternity, it is a Manifestation of
the Eternal, an awakening of the Eternal, an Image, and Similitude of the
Eternal.

23. It is not the Eternal, but is become a Substance in the Eternal Desire;
the Desire has manifested it self and brought it self into a Substance like
the Eternal.

Objection.

24. Reason says. God has made this World out of Nothing.

Answer.

Indeed there was no Substance or Matter for it, that was outwardly palpable;
but there was such a Form or Condition, in the Eternal Power in the willing.

25. The Creation of this World is effected by or with an awakening of the
Spirit of the willing, the inward Will which also stands within, in it self,
that has stirred up its own Nature, viz: the Center, which is desirous of that
which is out of it self, viz: of the Light, which is pressing forth out of the
Center.

26. Thus has the Center, out of it self, comprised a Substance in the
desiring, that is, it has comprised or made to it self a Substance in its
Imagination in the desire, and has together also comprehended the Lights being
or substance: It has comprehended the Eternal, with the beginning.

27. Therefore, must the Substance in this world, together with the Figure, go
again into the Eternal, for they are in the Eternal together comprised or
Comprehended.

28. But whatsoever became made or comprised out of the beginning in the
desire, that goes again into its Ether; viz: into the Nothing, only and
barely into the Looking-glass of the Imagination, again: And is not of or from
the Eternal; but is, and belongs to, the Eternal Magia, in the desiring: As
a fire devoureth and consumes a Substance whereof nothing remains, but it
becomes again that which it was, when it was yet no Substance.

29. Thus you are to understand what this Worlds Substance is: Viz: a
Coagulated Vapor or Cloud out of the Eternal Ether; which thus has a
Completion or product like the Eternal.

30. It shuts it self up into a Center of a Substance and in the End consumes
it self again, and goes into the Eternal Magia, and is but for a while, a
Wonder, viz: a Manifestation or Revelation of the Eternal, whereby, the
Eternal, which is manifest in it self, also manifests it self out of it
self; and sheddeth forth its Imagination; and thus renews whatsoever with the
Moving in the desiring became comprehended or Made; that so the End could go
again into the beginning.

31. For, Nothing can enter into the Liberty of the Eternal, unless it be
like the Eternal, and subsisteth in the Will-Fire, and be as subtle as the
Lights Substantiality, that is, as a Fire, which can dwell in a Substance,
wherein the Light can dwell, and bring its shining Luster forth through it;
that does not become comprehended by the Center of Nature, though indeed it be
the property of Nature: Yet it is an Eternal one.

32. Therefore, understand, that all, whatsoever has become generated in this
world, which has a Substance, which has sprung forth out of the Eternal
Substance, that inheriteth not the Eternal, only its Figure remains in a
Magical manner, standing in the Eternal Mystery: For it is in the original,
together with the Creation, gone forth out of the Eternal.

33. But its body, and total Substance of the source or quality, passes away,
as a Vapor or Cloud consumes it self; for it is out of the beginning, and
goes into the End.

34. But that which arises out of the Eternal Substance, out of the Eternal
Lights Substantiality; cannot pass away; that only of it passes away, which
out of the beginning is entered into the Eternal; viz: the outward Flesh,
which through the Imagination, was in Man, introduced, into the Eternal; that
must consume it self as a Vapor.

35. But whatsoever out of the Eternal Imagination, becomes introduced again
into the Eternal, that remains standing Eternally: And whatsoever, becomes
generated forth out of the Eternal, viz: out of the Eternal Nature; is in Man
the Soul, that remains Eternally; for it is originally arisen out of the
Eternal.

36. But whatsoever becomes generated out of the Eternal Center of the fierce
wrath, that may enter into its Renovation if it will.

37. As, the Eternal Nature of the Substance of this World renews it self,
and leaves or forsakes whatsoever it had made in the Beginning, and reteineth
only the Magical Image, which it introduced out of the Eternal willing into
the outward, with the Word Fiat, in the Creating: So may Man also renew
whatsoever he Makes; if he forsake the Earthly, then he may renew whatsoever
he has generated out of the Eternal; but if it be not renewed, then it
remains in the Source or Quality, of the Torment.

38. For, all whatsoever does not become, or is not alike, to or with the
Love-fire.
Fire Light and Water, cannot subsist in the Liberty, but remains in the
source or painful quality of that which it has awakened or made in it self,
understand, out of the Center of Nature, whatsoever it has introduced into the
willing of the Liberty.

39. Thus will that be to it a painful source or quality and a Gnawing or
opposite will, which it self has generated to it self out of its own Nature;
wherewith it has made to it self, the Liberty to be dark, so that the Light
cannot shine through, and that becomes its Darkness.

40. For, where the Will is dark, there also is the Substance of the willing,
viz: its Body, dark, and where the Will is in a pure source or quality, there
also is the body in that source or quality: And for that cause, the children of
the Light, and of the Liberty, will be severed from the children of the
Darkness in the Anxious source or quality, each into its Principle.

41. Furthermore, each Principle generateth its own Life, according to its
Property; viz: the fire is the limit of Separation, which Vergnug et.
satiateth the Two Eternal Principles, viz: the Dark and Light World; to the
Darkness it gives its sting and the woe; and to the Light, its perceptibility
and Life.

42. Thus also, has the Third Principle, two properties, viz: Heat and Cold,
the Heat is the Principle, and gives its sting and woe to the Cold, to the
Light it gives the Life and perceptibility: The Light again gives its
substance to the fire, so that it becomes friendly united therewith.

43. The Cold gives also its property and substance to the fire, and the fire
breaks it to pieces, and makes out of the Substance thereof, the Death and a
dying; and therefore there is an Enmity between Heat and Cold, and they never
become one.

44. But this they attain in their Enmity; that to them the Life sprouteth
through death; for out of Heat and Cold comes the Sprout of the Third
Principle, wherein we live outwardly; out of the Cold comes fruit out of the
Earth, as also the Body of all Creatures, and in the Elements the Substance.

45. From the Heat in its contention, comes the Life in the Body of all
Creatures and Vegetables; as also in the Deep of the Elements, it gives the
Spirit of the Great World in Many varieties of Figures; and where the Cold
makes substance, there the Heat makes a Spirit therein.

46. Thus is the Substance always in the wrestling, that the Wonders of the
Eternal World, may become manifested in the fragility or Transitoriness: And
that the Eternal Model in the Wisdom of God, may bring it self into figures,
and that the same Model, in the Eternal Magia, may stand Eternally to Gods Or
Works of Wonder.
Wonders in the Mystery; and to the Joy of Angels and Men.

47. Indeed not in the Substance, but in the Mystery, in the Magia, like a
Shadow of the Substance; that it might Eternally be apprehended or known, what
God has wrought, and what he can and is able to do.

48. Note.
For, after the Breaking of this World, there remains only the Eternal in
the Substance; viz: Eternal Spirits with the Eternal Substantiality of their
Bodies, together with the here made Wonders, which in the figure stand
Magically, in which the Spirits shall apprehend Gods deeds of Wonder and Mighty
power.

49. The Principles with their Wonders are thus to be conceived or considered,
Viz: they all Three are no other then the One only God in his deeds of wonder,
who has according to the property of his Nature manifested himself with or by
this World; and thus we are to understand a Threefold Substance, viz: Three
Worlds one in another.

50. Note.
One the First is the fire-world, which arises from the Center of Nature, and
Nature from the desirous willing, which in the Eternal Liberty arises in the
Abyss, of which we have no knowledge.

51. The other the Second is the Light World, which dwells in the Liberty in
the Abyss without or beyond Nature, but proceeds forth from the fire world;
it conceives its Life and perceptibility from the fire; it dwells in the
fire, and the fire comprehends it not, and that is the Middle-world.

52. The fire gives in the Center of Nature, for its Kindling, the Dark world;
but is in its Kindling in it self, the Light-world, where it severeth it self
into the Light; and lets the Center be in the Darkness; for it is only a
source in it self, and a cause of the Life.

53. It has Creatures, but they are of the same fierce or wrathful Essence;
they feel no woe or pain; The Light would be To them no Woe.
their Woe or pain.

54. But the fallen Devils who in the Principle were created in the
Light-world, to them the Darkness is a Pain, and the Fire a Might or Strength
and force, for it is their right Life, though indeed according to the ability
of the Multitude of Properties of the Center of Nature, according to the
Essence thereof.

55. The Third World is the outward, wherein we dwell according to the outward
body, together with the outward Works and Substance, which have been Created
out of the Dark and Light-world, and therefore it is evil and fierce
wrathful, also good and Lovely or amiable.

56. Of this property Adam should not Eat, nor Imagine Or according to it.
thereinto. But the Three Worlds should stand in him in Order, that none might
comprehend the other, as in God himself.

57. For Adam was created out of all the Three Worlds, a total entire Image,
and Similitude of God; but seeing he did eat of Evil and Good, and brought the
outward into the Middle, Now must the outward break off from the Middle, and
that is done in the separation, where the outward, must go again into its
Ether, and the Middlemost continues standing.

58. Thus now if any see a right Man standing, he may say, here I see Three
Worlds stand, but Not go, for the outward World moves it self with or by the
outward Body: But yet the outward Body has no Might or power to move or stir
the Light-world.

50. It has only so introduced it self into the Light World, from whence, the
The Light world.
same is become extinguished in Man; and, it self notwithstanding is remained
to be only the Dark world in it self: And the Light world to stand unmovable
in it: That stands in it as it were hidden.

60. But, if he be a right Man out of the New birth, then it stands in him,
as the Light shines through the water, and makes it moveable and desirous of
the Essence, so that the Essence sprouteth: so also does the New-Man in the
Light.

61. And as a Man cannot move or stir the Glance or Luster of the Sun, no
more can he also Move or stir the Eternal Light, viz: the Light world: It
stands still and shines through, all, whatsoever is capable of it:
Whatsoever is thin rare or Note.
Transparent as a Nothing; just as the Water and Fire is so, whereas yet all is
Substantial, but in respect of the outward as a Nothing.

62. Thus has each Principle, its sprout or vegetation out of it self, and
that must be else all would be Nothing.

63. Viz: the Fires Principle is the Root, and it Sprouteth in its Root; it
has in its property, harsh, bitter, fierce and Anguish, these Sprout in their
own property, in Poison and Death, and the Anxious Stern Life, that in it self
gives Darkness, and in respect of the sternnesse a drawing; Its properties
make {sulphur} tartar
Sulphur Mercurius and Sal.

64. Though indeed the fires property makes not Sul in Sulphur; but the Will
of the Liberty makes the Sul in the Phur, in that the Principle goes Or into
the Liberty.
forward: But whatsoever goes into its own property, that is only Phur viz
Sternness; with the other forms of the Center.

65. Note.
This, Phur, is the Chiefest cause to Life and to the Substance of all things,
though indeed it be evil in it self, yet it is to the Life, and to the
Manifestation of the Life, the most profitable of all.

66. For, No Life could be without these properties, and this Principle
groundeth or foundeth it self in the inward and outward World, in the inward as
it were imperceptibly, in the outward perceptible with or by its fierce wrath.

67. The Second Principle has also its sprout or vegetation, out of it self,
for the fire Springs up in the Light with its own property in a desire of
Love and Kingdom of Joy, and therefore also is the fires-Essence and property
in the Light, totally changed, so that out of Anguish and Woe, a Love desire
comes to be, out of the stinging and raving, a friendly sensible convincing
understanding.

68. Note.
For the Light kindles the Essences with the Love source or quality, so that
they give forth a sprout or vegetation out of themselves in the property of the
Spirit, viz: a friendly willing, courtesy, virtue, honesty and Piety, Patience
in suffering, hope to be released or redeemed from Evil, Continually in desire
and Longing delight, speaking and disco^rsing of Gods Deeds of wonder, ringing
forth, singing and rejoicing in the Works and Wonders of God, always freely
would fain be well-doing, stopping and hindering evil malice and wickedness;
would always fain draw its neighbor with Love, into the Light-world; fleeing
from Evil, always damping and kissing the Evil affections with patience, in
hope to be released from them, and rejoicing in the Hope thereof, though the
Eyes see it not, and outward Reason know it not, always pressing forth out of
Evil, and introducing the desire into the divine Substance, and always would
fain Eat of Gods Bread.

69. These properties, the New Man who is born or generated again from the
Light world, brings forth; these are his fruits, which the Light world in
him, Note.
so altogether hiddenly to the Old Adam, continually generateth, and
continually kills or mortifyeth the Old Adam of this world, continually lies
in strife with Him, which must thus follow after the new Man.

70. Yet as a Lazy Ass, which must bear the Sack, his Master always lashing
and goading him forward; Thus does the New Man to the Old, it compels him,
that he must do that which he would fain not do, that which concerns the
Pleasure and Jollity and Joy of this world would be more acceptable to the Old
Ass, but he must thus be Servant.

71. The Second Principle has its sprout or vegetation, and gives its Fruit
in the Third Principle in General, universally, viz: in the Spirit of the
Great World, so that the outward and inward Turba becomes hindered or
prevented.

72. It presses or penetrateth through, and gives fruitfulness; It preventeth
and hinders the fierce wrath of the Stars, and breaks the Constellation
of the Spirits and also of the Firmamentall Heaven, it withstandeth the fierce
wrath of the Devils, and the designs and assaults of evil and Malicious
wicked men; yet so far only as some are found to be Holy or Saints, who are
worthy and capable of it.

73. And the Third Principle has also its sprout or vegetation; Therein, out
of the inward, were generated and Created the Stars and Elements, which in
this Place together with the Sun are called the Third Principle.

74. For the Inward two Worlds, viz: the Fire and Light World; have manifested
themselves with or by the Third Principle; and all is Mixed one with another,
Good and Evil, Love and Enmity, Life and Death.

75. There is in all and every Life, the Death, and the Fire; Also on the
contrary a desire of Love, all according to the Inward Worlds property; and
there grow two sorts of Fruits out of them, Evil and Good, also every Fruit
has both properties.

76. Also they show themselves in all and every Life in this World; so that
always the Anger and Evil source Striveth with the Love; there every property
seeks and brings forth fruit.

77. What the Good makes, that the Evil destroys, and what the Evil
makes, that the Good destroys: there is a constant war and Contention; for
both the Inward Principles properties are stirring in the outward, each
brings and works fruit in the inward Kingdom; each will be Lord.

78. The Cold, viz: the Exit out of the inward Center out of the fierce wrath
of the Death will be Lord, and continually shut up in Death, it always
awakeneth the Sting of Death.

79. And the Heat, viz: the Exit out of the right Fire, will also be Lord; it
will Suppress and Consume all, and will be always rough without a Body: It is
a Spirit and desires only the Spirits Life, it gives the Sting to the Cold,
for it kills or mortifyeth it often, so that it must loose or forsake its
right, and give up it self to the Heat.

80. The Sun, viz: the Light, will also have right and be Lord; it overcomes
the Heat and Cold; for it makes in its Light, meekness, water, and introduces
in the Glance of Light, a meek Spirit, viz: the Air, although, the Fire gives
the strength of the Wind; and the Sun the Meek and Gentle Spirit which is
justly called Air; It is indeed one, but has two properties, One according to
the Fire, viz: a Terrible lifting up, and the other according to the Light,
viz: a Meek Life.

81. Thus the outward Principle, is only a Continual Warring and Contention; a
building and a breaking, what the Sun, viz: the Light builds, that the Cold
destroys, and the fire consumes it altogether.

82. In this strife rises up its sprouting or vegetation, in mere strife and
discord; the One draws out of the Earth its fruitfulness; the other breaks
and devoureth it again; It makes in all living Creatures, Evil Malignity,
Curstness, and strife.

83. For, every Beast and every Life in this World except Man, is only a fru^^
of the Third Principle, and has only the Life of the Third Principle; both its
spirit and body are only the same, and all what^^^ver stirs and moves it
self in this World.

84. And Man, with his visible Body and Spirit, in Flesh and Blood, is also
only the fruit of that same Substance and Nothing Else at all.

85. Therefore seeing also, he has the two inward Worlds in himself, which
gives the true Understanding Thoughts Senses and Mind; which also in this time
of the Earthly and Elementary Body, lie together one with another in strife;
therefore he should do well to look to it, which World he makes to be Lord in
him; for the same will Eternally be Lord in him.

86. This Time he can break, and Not further: When the outward Breaks, then
all stands in the Ether.

87. The Mind is Free, and is the Angle and has the Understanding; it may go
in whither it will, and may incline to either of the Principles, which it will,
into which Ether soever it Enters, there it is Eternally.

88. And thus we understand the Ground of the Three Principles: Like the Tongue
of the Scales or Balance.
Beam of a Balance.

I. The First Principle, What God and the Eternity is and can do. II. And what
kind of Sprout or Vegetation, each of them, gives out of it self out of its
property. III. And how a Man shall search out the Ground of Nature.
And thus the First Head or Part or Point is finished.
The Second Point.
The Third Chapter. Concerning the Mixed Tree of Evil and Good; or concerning
the Life of the Three Principles one in another; how that uniteth it self and
accords.
1. Note.
IN Gods Kingdom, viz: in the Light World, there is no More, but one Principle
rightly known: For, the light has the Dominion; and the other sources or
qualities and properties, are all secret as a Mystery, for they must all serve
the Light, and give their willing up into the Light, and therefore the fierce
wrathful Essence in the Light becomes changed into a Desire of Light and of
Love in Meekness.

2. Though indeed the properties, viz: harsh, bitter, Anguish, and the bitter
woe in the Fire, continue Eternally even in the Light World, yet none of them
is manifest in its property; but they are all of them together only thus a
Cause of the Life, of the Mobility and Joy.

3. That which in the Dark World is a woe, that is in the Light World a
well-doing Munificence; and that which in the Dark is a stinging and hating
enmity, that is in the Light a rising leaping Joy; And that which in the Dark
is a Fear Terror and Trembling, that is in the Light an Exulting and
Triumphing of Joy, a ringing forth and singing: And that could not be, if in
the Original there were not such an Earnest Eager severe source or quality.

4. Therefore is the Dark World, the Light Worlds ground and original, and the
anxious Evil must be an Original of the Good, and is all Gods; yet the Note.
Light World is only called God.

5. And the Principle between the Light World and the Dark World, is called
Gods anger and fierce wrath: And, if that be awakened (as by the Devil, and
all evil or wicked men it is) they then become forsaken of the Light and fall
into the Dark World.

6. The Dark World is called Death, Hell, the Abyss, and a Sting of Death,
Despair, Self-enmity, and Lamentation; a life of Malice, Wickedness and
Falsehood: in which the Truth and the Light is denied and not apprehended or
discerned, wherein the Devils dwell and the Damned Souls; also the hellish
Worms, which the Deaths Fiat, in the moving of the All-substantial Lord, has
figured.

7. For, Hell has in the Darkness, the Greatest Constellation of the Most
Severe eager Power, in that all is Loud sounding as a Great Noise; that which
ringeth in the Light, that knocks rumbleth or Thumpeth in the dark, as is to
be apprehended in those things that Men use to strike upon, that they give a
ringing sound; for the ringing is not the Substance; as a Bell which men
ring-out, that is it self no Sound, but only a hardness, and a cause of the
ringing sound.

8. The Bell conceives or receives the stroke, viz: the knocking, and from
the hard knocking the ringing sound goes forth; the cause is this; that there
is in the Matter of the Bell a Substance, that together in the Creation, in the
Moving of the All-being or All-substantiall God, became shut up in the
hardness; as is to be perceived by us in the Metalline Tincture, if men would
not be so mad and blind.

9. Thus, we apprehend, that in Hell in the Abyss, there are many and sundry
sorts of Spirits, not Devils only but many Hellish Worms, according to their
Constellation and property, not, Or having.
with understanding; As in this World, there are unreasonable Beasts, Toads,
and Serpents, etc.

10. For, all would be Creaturely, and is gone into a Substance, so that thus
the Anger-Looking-Glass also shows its Wonders and manifests it self.

11. Indeed there is no perception of woe in the Hellish Worms, for they are
of the same Essence and property; it is their Life, and is a Substance; which
stands hidden to the outward World, only the Spirit of God which in all the
Three Principles is it self the source or quality according to the property of
each of them; he knows it, and manisesteth it to whom he will.

12. Now then if we will say, how the Principles unite in one another; then we
must set the fire, viz: the highest strength in the Middle, that gives to each
Principle a well-pleasing Life, and a Spirit which it desires.

13. Therefore there is no strife in the Principles, for the fire is the Life
of all Principles, that is the cause of the Life, not the Life it Self.

14. To the Abyss it gives its woe, viz: the sting, so that Death finds it
self in a Life, else the Abyss were a still vacuum: It gives its fierce wrath
to it, so that out of the Abysses Life, mobility arises, else it were a still
void Eternity and a Nothing.

15. And to the Light World the Fire gives also its Essence, else there would
be no perception or Light therein, and all were but ONE, yet without the fire,
a Nothing, viz: an A Vge.
Eye of Wonders, which apprehended n^ it self, wherein there were no
understanding, but an Eternal Arcanum or hiddenness, where no seeking or
production could be.

16. To the Third Principle, viz: to the Kingdom of this World the fire gives
also its Essence and source or quality, whence all and every Life and Substance
becomes stirring, all perception or sensibility or Cogitability, and
whatsoever shall come to be Somewhat, must have Fire; there springs nothing
out of the Earth without the fires Essence: It is a cause of all the Three
Principles, and all whatsoever can be named.

17. Thus, the fire makes an union of all the Three Principles, and is in Each
of them the cause of the Substance; no Principle striveth against the other,
but the Essence of each desires only its own, and is always in strife; if
that were not, all would be a still void Nothing: Each Principle gives to the
other its power and form or condition, and there is a Continual League or
Peace between them.

18. The Dark World has the Great pain and Anguish, which the fire causes, so
that the Will pants or longs after the Liberty, and the Liberty pants
after the Note.
Manifestation, viz: after the Essences, and gives it self into the fierce
wrath, that it might manifest it self; and so brings it self into Fire, so
that out of the fierce wrath and the Liberty, a fire arises, and so gives it
self, to the fierce wrath, to be devoured, viz: into Death; but goes out of
the Death with the assumed Essences forth into its own, viz: into a World and
source or quality of its own, and dwells in it self, unapprehended by Death
and the Dark World, and is a Light in it self.

19. Thus is Death and the fierce wrath a Mother of the Fire also a cause of
the Light-world, moreover a cause of all Substances of the Third Principle: A
Cause of all Essences in all and every Life: How will then one Principle strive
against the other? Seeing continually the one vehemently desires the other.

20. For, the Angelical Light-world, and this outward visible World, must have
the Dark Deaths Essence, to its life or source and quality; It is a continual
hunger after it.

21. Only this is it: Each Principle makes the source according to its own
property, it gives to the Evil its good, and uniteth it self therewith; and
makes of Three, one: So that there is no strife or repugnancy between the
Principles: But in the Essence is the strife; that must be, else all would be a
Nothing.

22. Only we are to consider; whence Enmity arises. God has Created in each
Principle Creatures out of the substance and property of the Principle, therein
to continue, if they continue not therein, but lead or introduce another
through their Imagination into themselves into their property, then that is an
Enmity and pain.

23. As the Devil and fallen Man, who are both of them gone out of the
Light-world: The Devil into the Abyss of the strong fierce wrathful Might or
power; of or out of Pride: and Men into this World into the Mystery of Much
Skill and Knowledge, viz: into the Wonders.

24. Now Man has necessity and strife, that he might go out again, and this
World into which he is gone, holds him, for it will have him, and if he goes
out with might at any time, it becomes enraged with him, assaulteth him, and
will not suffer him in it self.

25. Hence it comes, that the Children of this World, hate and are at enmity,
do plague vex worry beat, kill, and drive the Children of Light from them, for
the Spirit of this World, drives them to it: To which also the Devil helps,
for he knows, that this World stands upon the Abyss, and that he shall get
the Children of this World in the breaking of this Mystery into his Kingdom:
And therefore he banisheth or drives the Children of God, from the Children of
this World, that they bring not the Children of this world also along with them
into the Light-world.

26. But, if Man had been created to this World, he would let him well be at
peace; but he would fain continually possess his Royal Seat, which he had, and
was thrust out from it, and though he may by no means attain it, yet he cannot
afford that to the Children that should possess it.

27. This is therefore now highly to be considered by Man and not to be so
blind, that though indeed Man is Entered into the Mystery of this World, he
should not so eagerly as a prisoner, even enter into the Earthly seeking or
Malady of the Shutting up of Death; but should be an Apprehender and Skillful
Knower of the Mystery, and not the Devils Owl and Fool: And should with the
Imagination constantly go forth again into the Light-world, to which he was
Created: That the Light might give him its Glance or Luster, that he might know
himself, and see the outward Mystery; and then he is a Man.

28. But if Not; then he is a Fool, and an Ape or Mimick of the Light-world, as
an Ape will be Wit^y or full of Tricks, and play with every thing and Imitate
Every thing; thus it is also with the Earthly Man, which is nothing Else, but
an Ape.

29. His Juggling tricks with the Light-world, when he presses not thereinto
with Earnestness, but plays only therewith; that the Devil derides, and
holds him for a Fool: And so he is: He is a Beast-Man; so long as with his
willing he hangs to the outward, and accounts this Worlds good for his
Treasure: He is but a Man with this Worlds Substance, and not with the
Substance of the divine Light world; and he gives his Body to this World, that
is, to the Earth; and his Soul to the Abyss of the Dark-world.

30. Thus understand, The Tree of the three Principles, agrees very well, one
in another, but the Creatures Not, for the Creatures of Each Principle desire
not those of the other, and therefore also there is a fast Sluice or Lock Bar,
Cliffe, or Gulf.
enclosure between them, so that one cannot nor shall not see the other.

31. Only the Devils Envy, striveth against Mankind, for, they have possessed
his Seat: Therefore; all the stresse lies in this: O, Man, seek thy self; see
what thou art: Have a Care and beware of the Devil.

Thus much concerning the Second Point: How the Three Principles can agree and
unite one with the other.
The Third Point.
The Fourth Chapter. Of the Original of Contrariety in the Sprout or
Vegetation, in that the Life is Striving in it Self.
1. A Thing that is ONE, that has only One willing, it striveth not against it
self: But where there are many willings in one thing, there they are striving,
for every one will go its conceived and apprehended Way.

2. But if one be Lord of the other, so that it has full power over the other,
so that it can break it, or subdue it when it will not be obedient, there the
Multiplicity of a Thing, subsisteth in one Substance, for the Multiplicity of
the willing, gives it self altogether in obedience to its Lord.

3. Thus also it is in the Contrariety of the Life: For, the Life stands in
Many willings, every Essence may produce a willing, and does produce it also;
For Harsh Astringency, Bitter, Anguish and Soureness, are each of them Contrary
Sources; each of which has its property, and altogether contrary against one
another.

4. Also the Fire is an Enemy to all the other, for it sets every Source in
great anguish, so that there is great Contrariety between them, the one always
being at Enmity with the other; as is to be seen in Heat and Cold, also in
Water and Fire, in Life and Death.

5. In like manner, the Life of Man is at Enmity with it Self: One form of
disposition is at Enmity with the other in all Creatures; Unless that the form
or Condition of the Life get a Meek amiable Lord, under whose subjection it
must be, which can break its authority and willing.

6. That is the Light of Life, that is the Lord of all Forms or Constitutions,
it can subdue them all, they must all give up their willing to the Light and
they do it also readily, for the Light gives them meekness and power, so that
its stern harsh bitter anxious form, becomes altogether charged into
amiableness, they give up their Willings altogether to the Light of Life; and
the Light gives them Meekness.

7. Thus the Multiplicity becomes changed into one, into One willing and that
is called the Mind, and is the Wellspring where the one only will can create
out of it, Evil and Good; which is done through Imagination, or through
Representation of a Thing, that is Evil, or Good: And so is the property of
that Thing, capable of the same property in the Life.

8. The Life's property catches or receives the property of the Thing
Represented, be it either a Word or a Work, and kindles it self therewith in
it self: And also the other forms of the Life therewith; so that they begin to
qualify or operate, and every property burns in its source or quality, to
Love or Anger, all according to the Represented Substance; whatsoever the
Imagination caught or captivated, that it introduces into the Mind.

9. Now therefore if the Mind thus kindles it self in a Form or Conditon, so
it kindles the whole Spirit and Body; and brings instantly its Imagination
into the innermost Fire of the Soul, and awakeneth the Innermost Center of
Nature.

10. Which if it becomes Kindled, in the fierce Wrath or Love, then (...)
^^eiveth or Comprehends it self in all the seven Forms of Nature; (...)
catch and grasp after the Souls willing-Spirit, wherein the Noble Image
stands, wherein God opens himself.

11. And so they bring their kindled Fire thereinto, as in Fire is to be seen,
in what Matter soever the same burns, such a shining Luster also it gives
forth, as in flaming Brimstone is to be apprehended, compared with the flaming
wood, and so in many other things: Thus we understand by this, that as the
source quality and property is which the Fire gets, such also in the Light,
and the power of the Light.

12. Since then our Noble Image of God, stands in the Light of Life in the
Souls fire: Therefore it is highly apprehensible to us; how the Souls Will
Spirit destroys the Noble Image, and becomes kindled in the f^^^e wrathful
source or quality also often in the Love source or quality.

13. We see also herein our great danger, and Misery, and do underderstand,
wherefore Christ has taught us Patience Love and Meekness; viz: that the Souls
fire kindle not it self in fierce wrath, nor give others cause, that they
kindle their Souls fire in fierce wrath; that Gods Kingdom be not hindered.

14. And herein, we apprehend our hard and heavy Fall, in that Adam has
introduced Earthly Matter into our Souls fire, which burns, so often as but
one source or quality in the Center becomes awakened in the fierce wrathful
property.

15. And so we see, how thus we lie in Gods fierce wrath between Anger and
Love, captive in great Danger. And offer this highly to be apprehended.

16. Ye know how we have mentioned above, and often in all our Books, how, out
of the fire, the Light goes; viz: another Principle, and yet it has the fires
property and power, for the fires Center gives it to the Lights Center.

17. And, how the Light is also desirous, and has a Matrix of a Shining or
Longing Seeking, which impregnateth it self in the desiring, with the power of
the Light, viz: with the Meekness of the Light, in this impregnation stands
the Substance of the Light, that is, in the pure Love of the divine Substance.

18. Also it is intimated, how the Fire draws that Substance into it self,
and uses it to its Lights Essence, and devoureth it into it self, but gives
forth out of the Essence another Spirit, which is not Fire: For, the Fire
gives forth out of the Essence another Spirit, which is not Fire: For, the
Fire gives forth two Spirits. 1. One fierce wrathful consuming out of the
fierce wrath, viz: of the Fires Matters property. 2. One Air-Spirit which is of
the Lights Meeknesses property.

19. And we are to ponder in what matter the first Essence burns: In what it
has kindled it self, in Love, or Evil and Malice, that is, in the Earthly, or
Divine desire: And Note.
such a fire it is, it gives also such a Love-fire.
Light Fire out of it self, and also such a Spirit out of the Light (...)

20. Now if the first Fires Matter be good, wherein the Fire burne^^, then has
the second Light Fire also a good property favor and so^^^^ or quality, and
gives forth also a good powerful lovely amiable Light, and out of the Lights
Center a Good powerful Spirit, this is the Similitude of God, The Noble Image.

21. But if the first Fire in its Essence, be Evil, and burns in an Evil
Matter then also is the Life's Light a false source or quality, and a dim
dusky shining, as is to be seen in a brimstone Light; and that same desirous
Center of the Light, also brings forth out of its property, such a Matter
into its Fire, and that Fire gives also forth such a Spirit out of it self.

22. And now it is apprehensible, what Spirit may attain the Liberty of God or
not, for whatsoever Soules-Spirit or Image has the dim dusky dark property
in it self, that cannot be capable of the Clear Light of Or the Spirit.
God: Also, if it has the fierce wrathful property in it self, it cannot
unite it self with the Meekness of God, and with its qualifying or Operating.

23. For the fierce wrath is Enmity against the Love and Meekness, Love lets
not the fierce wrath into it self; and so now they are separated, the Love
thrusts the fierce wrath away from it self: And that desires no more the
Love property.

24. For, as soon as the Fire gives forth the Spirit out of it self, then it
is perfect, and severeth it self in its own property, whether it be a
Light-Spirit, or a dark fierce wrathful Brimstone Spirit, in that same
Essence, from whence it is gone forth, it desires to be again, for it is its
property, whether it be in Love, or Enmity to the Love.

25. Thus now we understand what Spirit or Soul, lives in the source or
quality of Enmity, and how the Enmity originateth or raises up it self, so
that a Life is at Enmity with it self; viz: out of the f^st Matter to the Life's
Light.

26. The cause stands in the Wheel of Nature, in the Seven Spirits or Forms,
which have each of them its property, and in which property soever, the Mind
becomes kindled, such a property the Souls Fire together with the willing
Spirit gets, which then also suddenly labors after Substance and doing,
how it may fall to work upon that which the will Spirit is impregnated with.

27. Now it is therefore necessary to break the Or first
Earthly willings power, and to slay the Old Evil Adam, and bring his will
Spirit with compulsion authority or power out of the Evil or wickedness: For
here in this Time it may be done, while the Third Principle, together with the
Water, which gives Meekness, cleaves to the Center of the Inward World or
Nature, and as it were, holds it captive in its source or quality.

28. But when the Souls Will-Spirit, viz: the Inward Lights Center, br^^keth
off from the outward, and continues alone, then the Souls Spirit continues in
its property.

29. For, there is little Remedy, imlesse, the Will-Spirit have in the time of
the outward Life turned it self about into Gods Love, and reached or attained
that as a Sparkle in the Inward Center; and then somewhat may be done.

30. But in what source quality or pain, and irksome tediousness that is done
the Sparkle of Love experimenteth well enough: Which there is to break the dark
fierce wrathful Death, it is Purgatory, or purging Fire enough to it; in what
kind of Enmity the Life stands, in terror and anguish, till it can in the
Sparkle sink down into the Liberty of God: He experimenteth very well, who so
nakedly with small Light departs from this World: Which the present too too
wise World holds for a jesting Matter, but what kind of apprehension or
knowledge they have, shows it self by the Deed.

31. Thus we understand also the Devils Fall, who was an Angel, how he has
Imagined into the Center of the first property again, and sought great Strength
and Power or Might, as the present World does great Might and Honor, and
despises the Light of Love.

32. Though indeed he supposed the Light would thus have burned to or for him,
and the Pride and State of the World supposes also that the Light of God
should Shine or illustrate.
burn in their Pomp, and he would yet kindle himself further, that so he might
powerfully domineer over all Thrones; and over the Substance of the Deity in
the Meekness; which proved to be his Fall: As shall also be done to the present
World.

33. Therefore let every Man learn thereby, to beware of Pride or State and
Covetousness; for the Fall came to the Devil from Pride or State and
Covetousness, so that he kindled the Center of the dark World in him, and
therefore he was thrust out of the Light World, into the Dark World.

34. Note.
Thus it goes also with all Men, who pass away from Meekness and Humility
into fierce Wrath Pride and State, Covetousness; and Envy; they Imagine
altogether into the Center of the Dark Nature, as into the original of Nature,
and draw themselves into the dark Fire of the Anguish-source or quality, where
the Noble Image becomes introduced into other sources or qualities, so that it
must stand in Anguish and Enmity, where Always one form of Life, is at Enmity
with the Other.

35. And we also see properly from this; how only the Kingdom of God stands
in the bright clear Light in the Liberty, in Love and Meekness; for that is the
white bright Lights property: As is to be ^een in the outward Substance, when a
lovely soft sweet Matter is cast into the outward Fire, which, yet is but the
fierce wrath of the Inward Fire; that so also a Lovely Light and Savor
proceeds from it.

36. Much more is this done in the Spirit-Fire, to which no palpable or outward
Substance belongs, but where the Seven Spirits of Nature make a fire in
themselves, which is only a source or quality and property of fire.

37. As even the Dark and Light World stand in such a Spiritual property: As
also the Inward Man, which is out of the Eternal, and goes into the Eternal:
He has plainly the Two Worlds in him, into which property he turns in,
himself, into that World also he becomes introduced, and of that Worlds
property he will Eternally be, and enjoy either a true source or quality out of
the Light-world of Meekness, or an Enimicitious odious hateful source or
quality out of the Dark world.

38. Here, he sprouteth and grows in the Middle World, between the Light and
Dark-world, one may give himself into which he will, which Essence gets the
dominion in him, either fierce wrath; or Meekness that he conceives or
catches, and that cleaves to him, and leads him, gives him disposition and
willing, and uniteth it self totally with him; and thereinto Man introduces
the Spiritual Man, viz: the Image, which God Created out his own Substance out
of all the Three Principles.

39. Therefore it is absolutely necessay; Take thy Cross upon thee! Enter in
Patience into a Meek life! do not what the dark Center of the fierce wrath
provokes thee to, nor the fullness plenty pleasure and voluptuousness of the
World: But break both their wills.

40. Also do not heat stir or provoke any to anger, for if thou do
wrongfully or walk falsely or wickedly, then thou vexest angerest or entagest
thy Brother, and hinderest the Kingdom of God.

41. Thou should be a bringer or leader into the Kingdom of God, and kindle
thy Brother, with thy Love and Meekness, that he may see Gods Substance or
Being in thee as in a Looking-glass, and so also lay hold on thee, with his
Imagination.

42. If thou do so, then thou bring thy Soul, thy work and thy Neighbor
or Brother into the Kingdom of God; and increasest the Kingdom of Heaven with
or as to its Wonders.

43. This has God taught us saying: Matthew. 5.39. Luke 6.29.
When any strikes thee on one cheek, then turn to him also the other: When any
takes away thy Cloak, do not hinder him of thy Coat also, that he may have a
Looking Glass in thee, and enter into himself, and seeing thy meekness
apprehend and know that thou art Gods Child, and that Gods Spirit leads or
drives thee, that so also he may learn from thee, and enter into himself, and
search himself.

44. But if thou withstand and opposest him with disdain and churlishness,
then his churlishness becomes the more kindled, and in the End he supposes he
does right to thee: But othewise he must of ^^^^ity apprehend he does thee
wrong.

45. Seeing then Gods Love withstandeth all Evil Men, a^^ that the Conscience
does often dehort from Evil: Therefore then also (...) Meekness and Patience
presses into his Evil Conscience, and does indict or charge the Conscience in
it self at or before Gods Light in the Anger; and so thereby many an Evil Man
goes out from his wickedness; and Enters into himself and searches himself;
and then Gods Spirit puts him in Mind, of thy Patience, and sets it
before his Eyes, and so he is drawn thereby into Repentance and Abstinence from
Evil.

4^ NOT so to be understood, NOTE.
that one should not defend himself from a Murderer or Thief, that resolves
to Murder and Steal.

47. But, thus a Man should often, where he sees, that any is so greedy and
eager upon unrighteousness, Openly let his false Light with a good Light be
before his Eyes, and readily and out of Good will offer him the Christian
richly loving Mind, that he may perceive it practically in the power of the
Deed, that it is done out of Gods Love-Zeal, and that the Love, and Gods Will,
is more to him then Earthly Matters or Substance, and that he purposely will
not, consent or yield that any thing violent rigid or Evil should be done.

48. But that he may see, that the Children of God do love more Gods Love, and
more cleave to it, then to all temporal Goods, and that Gods Children are not
at home in this World, but only Pilgrims and Strangers, who would fain leave
all this World, that they may but inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

49. All this, God sets before the Evil doer in the Lises Light, and
warns him thereby to Conversion again: But will he not, then the Anger of God
makes hellish fire out of it, and in the End gneweth him, to see if yet he,
will, know himself, and so repent and a mend.

50. But if he stay and hardens himself in the Evil and Wickedness, then he
is a total Evil Tree, Sprouted and grown in the Anger of God, and belongs,
in the Abyss in the Dark Anguish World, to the Dark God Lucifer; and there he
must devour his own abominations.

Thus much concerning the Third Point.
The Fourth Point.
The Fifth Chapter. How the Holy and Good Tree of the Eternal Life Sprouteth
through, and grows forth, out of all the Sprouts of the Three Principles, and
is comprehended by none of them.
1. A Thing that dwells in it self, can be comprehended by Nothing; for it
dwells in Nothing; there is Nothing before it, that can comprehend it; and it
is also free from that Thing which is without or beyond it.

2. Thus the divine Power and Light dwells in it self, is comprised or
comprehended in Nothing, Nothing touches, unless it be of the property
thereof: It is every where in Nature, yet Nature touches it not, viz: the
outward Nature of this World.

3. It shines therein, as the Sun in the Elements: The Sun shines in the
Elements: The Sun shines in the Water, also in the Fire, and through the Air,
and is not comprehended or held by any of them, it gives all Things or
Substances power and virtue; it makes the Essential Spirit lovely and richly
Joyful: It draws with its power the Essence out of the Earth, also the
Substance of the Essence, which gives out of the Essence a Body.

4. What the Sun does in the Third Principle, in that it changes all and Every
Enimicitious Essence, and source or quality into Meekness; that does Gods
Light in the Forms of the Eternal Nature.

5. It shines the Forms, and out of the Forms; that is, it kinldeth the
Forms or Nature, so that they all get the Lights willing, and unite themselves
and wholly give up themselves to the Light: they sink down out of their own
Essence, and become as the if they had no might or power in themselves, and
desire only the Lights Power and Might; thus the Light takes their power and
might into it self; and shines out of that same power: And thus all sources of
Nature come to the Light: And the Light is one Will with Nature, and the Light
remains Lord.

6. Else, if the Wills in the seen forms of Nature, would be Lord, then there
would be a Schism or Rent and an Eternal Enmity, for one form continually is
at Enmity with the other, every one lifts up it self, from whence comes the
Contrariety or opposition, that, a Creature is so Evil Angry and Enimcitious,
that often the Life is striving in it Self.

7. As we now apprehend and know, that the Light in the stern Life of Nature
comes to help the properties of the Essences; so that a frollick cheerful
Life existeth, and so changes it self into the Light: So is the Life of the
dark fierce wrathfulness Enemy to the Light, for it cannot conceive or
apprehend the Light.

8. John 1.5.
The Eternal Light shines through the Darkness, and that cannot comprehend
it, for the Multitude of WillS the dark Nature, are all shut or locked up in
Death, the Light shines not in it, but through it, it sees conceives or
receives not the Light.

9. Nevertheless the Light is in the Dark World, but it fills not the
Darkness, and therefore the Essences of the dark World continue to be an
Enimicitious Poison and Death, wherein the Essence it self is at Enmity to it.

10. And this there are Three Principles one in another, none comprehends the
other, and the Etertnall Light, becomes Comprehended by Nothing, unless or the
Desire.
it fall into Death, and give its Essence freely and willingly into the Fire of
Nature, and go with its Essential willing forth out of it self into the Light,
and give it self totally home to the Light, and desire to will or do nothing,
but give its willing up home to the Light, that the Light may be its willing.

11. And Note.
thus the Light conceives or recelveth it, and it also the Light; Thus is the
Evil Will given up into the Light, and the Light gives its power into the
Evilnesse or Malignity, and makes out of the Malice or Malignity a friendly
good willing, which is only a love-desiring: For, the Meekness of the Light,
has totally incorporated it self with the Enimicitous willing.

12. Thus now is Gods Will done, and the Evil becomes charged into the Good,
and Gods Love shines out from his anger and fierce wrath, Note.
and no fierce wrath is known or apprehended in Gods Eternal Nature.

13. For as the Eternal Light, the Eternal Power-Tree, shines through all the
Three Principles, uncomprehended by any of them; for so long as a Substance is
without or beyond Gods willing, understand the total Lights willing, so long
it is only One, and dwells in it self; and comprehends Nothing of God; but
if it uniteth it self into God and lets its will break and sink down; then
it is a Spirit, or one Spirit, in and with God: And God shines out of that
very Substance.

14. And understand also, why the Wicked Malicious Souls, and the Devils, do
not apprehend nor see God: Which is, because they unite not their will into
God: The Will of the Soul.
It will be Lord it self: Thus it continues without God, only in it Self, and
God also continues in himself, and thus one dwells in the other, and knows
nothing of the other: For the One turns the Back to the other, and sees not
the others face or Countenance.

15. Also, the Light World knows Nothing of the Devils, and the Devils
nothing of the Light World, but only this, that they were once therein, and
they Image or Represent it before them, as one that sees it in the
Imagination, whereas yet the Light World no more gives it self into their
Imagination, neither do they Imagine after or according to it, for it
terrifieth them, also they are ashamed about it.

16. Thus also it is to be understood concerning the outward World; Gods Light
shines through and through, but is only comprehended by that which does unite
and appropriate it self thereunto.

17. Therefore seeing this World, is as it were Mute or Dumb in respect of God,
and without understanding, therefore it continues in its own willing, and
brings its own Spirit into it self.

18. Although, God has given a Nature-God, viz: the Sun, to it, whereinto all
Things or Substances should cast their willing and desire; whatsoever is in
this World and does not so, that continues to be in it self a great Evil or
Malignity and is its own Enmity.

19. And therefore is this World acknowledged for a Principle Of its own, in
that it has a Nature-God of its own: So to resemble it, viz: the Sun, and yet
really the Light of the Deity shines through all through and through.

20. The Light of the Sun takes Essence from Gods Fire, and Gods Fire from
Gods Light: And thus the Light of the Sun, gives the same power to the
Elements; and they give it to the Creatures, also to the Vegetables of the
Earth.

21. And all whatsoever is of a Good property, does thus conceive or receive
Gods Power for an Aspect or Influence, through the Looking-glass of Wisdom,
from whence it has its vegetation and life.

22. For God stands present with all things or Substances, but all things o^
^ubstances do not conceive or receive him into its Essence: But as in a
Looking-glass of the Aspect in the Sun's power and virtue.

23. For the Sun proceeds forth out of the Eighth Number: VIII. Number Read
of the ^0. Forms of Fire in the 40. Questions, the 1. Chapter.
Its root out of which it receives its shining, is the Eternal Fire; but its
Corpus or Body, stands in this World; its desiring is totally inclined and
bent into this World, and therefore it shines in the World: But its first Root
stands in the first World in the Fire of God.

24. This World gives Substance to its desiring, and it gives its power to
the Substance, and thus fills all Things or Substances of this World, as Gods
Light does the divine Light-world.

25. And if Gods Fire should burn no More, then the Sun would be extinguished,
and also the divine Light-world, for Gods Fire gives them both, Essence, and
is a Principle of them Both; and if the Dark-world were not, both these would
not be, for the Dark-world gives or affords the cause to Gods Fire.

26. Thus also must the Three Worlds be one in another, for Nothing can subsist
without a Ground: The Dark World is the Ground of Nature; and the Eternal
Abyssall Will, which is called Father, is the Ground of the Dark-world; as is
before Mentioned: And the Light-world is hidden in the Dark-world, also the
Dark-world in the Light-world.

27. And it is to be understood thus, This World is in the Anger of God, as it
were shut up in Death, for the Anger Springs up in this Worlds Substance: If
that were not so, then might this Worlds Substance well be capable of Gods
Light.

28. The Sun is not Gods Light, for it shines not totally in the divine
Essence, but in the Elementary Essence; but it has Gods Fire to its Root, and
yet becomes filled with this Worlds Substance.

29. For it is desirous: viz: a Magical Seeking; and conceives or receives,
in its Imagination and Seeking, the power of the Stars and Elements, and out
of that it shines: And though Gods Fire is the Root, yet it belongs not to
Gods Kingdom.

30. Herein a Man may understand also: How the Devil is the poorest Creature,
for he cannot stir the least leaf or spile of Grass, unless the Anger be
therein: For the Light and the Power and Virtue of this World is against him,
he goes with his willing not into the Lights property, also he cannot.

31. He stands Backwards in respect of the Light of the Sun, in his Figure
and Property, therefore the Suns Light is not profitable to him; And all
whatsoever sprouteth or grows in the Suns power, which uniteth it self with
the Sun, that he hates and is at Enmity with; His Will goes not readily
thereinto.

Further of the Fourth Point.
The Sixth Chapter. How the Inward is Manifested in the Outward: Of the Three
Worlds: In what Manner, God dwells in all Things or Substances: How the whole
World might be a Mere Sun: What, Man is: And wherein God beholds Himself.
1. If we would Consider all this, and go out of the Inward Worlds, into the
Outward, into this visible World: Then we should find, that the Substance of
the outward World is proceeded out of the Inward; viz: out of the Imagination
or desiring of the Inward Worlds; and that in the outward World are found the
properties of both the Inward Worlds.

2. Also we find that the Will of both the Properties are stirring and manifest
in the outward World: And then how the Good, viz: the Substance which is
proceeded out of the Light-world, is totally shut up together in the Anger and
Death; And how the Divine Power makes all stirring, so that all grows forth,
out of and through, the fierce wrath of Death.

3. For, the Earthly Tincture, has no Communion, with the heavenly in the
Light-world; yet we find another Tincture in the Earth, which has Communion
with the Heavenly; viz: in the Precious Costly Metals: And yet is together shut
up.

4. And understand the Moving and the Fiat of both the Eternal Worlds, thus,
The Dark and Light-world, have each of them Longed after Substance; and where
God once moves Himself, the one World without the other could not be moved.

5. For, the Dark-world holds or has in it, the first Center, of Nature, and
the Light-world, the second Center, viz: the Heart of God, or the Word of the
Power of the Deity; and the one World is not severed from the other.

6. Whereby it is to be apprehended, in what danger we stand: And ought to be
considered, whither we will cast or incline our willing; for if we cast our
selves into the Earthly Seeking, then it captivateth us: And then the Source or
Quality of the Abyss is our Lord, and the Sun our temporal God.

7. But if we cast or incline our selves with our willing, into the World
without or beyond this World; then the Light World catches hold of our
willing, and God becomes our Lord; and we leave the Earthly Life to this
World; and take along with us what is come into us, viz: into Adam: Out of the
Light-world, that together with the willing which becomes Or one and the same.
one Spirit with God, is brought forth out of this World.

8. Reason says: Where are then the Three Worlds; It would needs straight have
a separation of them asunder, as if one were without or distant from the Other,
or stood above the other; which yet cannot possibly be: Else the Eternal
Abyssall Substance must never it self asunder.

9. But how can that sever it self asunder, which is in Nothing? which has no
place? which it self is All? Most certainly that cannot come into particular or
partition which has no Ground; that suffers not it self to be conceived,
which dwells in it self; and possesses it self: Yet it goes out from it
self, and Manifests it self out of it self.

10. It makes a thing out of it self, which in it self is but a Will, in it
self it is a Spirit, but it makes out of it self a Form of a Spirit; and the
Form Makes a Substance, according to the property of the Spirit: Even as this
World is a Substance and the Inward Spirit possesses the same.

11. It is in all places, yet the place comprehends it Not, but it
comprehends the Place, the Place knows Nothing of it, yet feels it; it is
the Power and the Spirit in the Place, its Will goes through the Substance;
and the Substance has no Eyes to see it.

12. But it is, the seeing, of the Place, and is it self no Place, or Space,
but makes to it self an Abyssall Space where there is no measure or
circumscription; it is all, yet like to a Nothing; compared with the outward;
what it gives forth out of it self, that also it possesses: It does not enter
into it, but is there BEFOREHAND; before the Substance receives the Place in.

13. The Place comprehends but a Glance of its willing; as one sees his form
in a Looking-glass, but does not comprehend it or lay hold of it: Or as the
Sunshine in the Water is not comprehended; yet the Water feels it, and
conceives or receives the Glance or Reflection; or as the Earth conceives or
receives Power from the Sun, so that it brings forth Fruit: Thus God
dwells in all Things or Substances and presses through all, and yet is
comprehended by Nothing.

14. And as we understand, that the Earth has a great hunger and desire after
the Suns Power and Light, in which it attracteth the Suns Power and light to it
self; and is capable thereof; which without the desiring could not be: In like
manner the Outward Substance hungereth after the Inward; for the Outward Form
arises from the Inward.

15. Thus the outward Substance conceives or receives, the Inward Form into
it self, as a Glance or Power: For the Inward Spirit, cannot receive the
outward Substance, for it dwells not in the outward; but possesses it self
in it self in the Inward; yet the Spirits Form together with the
Looking-glass, receives the outward Substance; as the Water does the Glance
or Luster of the Sun.

16. But we are not to think, that the Inward is far from the Outward, as the
body of the Sun, from the Water; though indeed that is not so neither, the Sun
is not far from the Water; For the Water has the Suns property and
Substance; else the Water would not catch the Sun's Glance or Luster; though
really the Sun is a Corpus or Body, yet the Sun is also in the Water, but not
Manifested: The Corpus or Body makes the Sun Manifest in the Water.

17. And we are to know, that this World would be a mere Sun, and the place of
the Sun would be every where, if God would but kindle and Manifest, it; for
Every Substance in this World receives the Glance of the Sun, there is in all
a Looking-glass, so that it may receive the power and form of the Sun, in all
animate and inanimate things in all the four Elements, and their Essence and
Substance.

18. Thus in like manner, it has also such a form in the Inward Light-world:
It dwells in the outward; and the outward receives power from it: It
sprouteth in the outward Power; and the outward knows nothing thereof; it
only feels the power, but the Inward it cannot see or Behold: Only in its
Life's Looking-glass, it conceives the Glance thereof: For, the Inward power,
makes in the Outward Form a similitude according to it self.

19. But Man, is the Inward and also the outward World, and moreover the Cause
of the Inward World in himself; and so far as belongs to him of the Dark
world; he is all the Three Worlds; and if he continues standing in like order
or Equal Harmony, so that he introduces not one World into the other: Then he
is Gods similitude or likeness.

20. Note.
He should introduce the form, viz: the Looking-glass of the Light-world, into
the outward, also into the Most inward Dark-world, and bring the power of the
middle or Light-world into the Looking-glass, and then he is capable of the
divine Light: For the Substance conceives or apprehends not the Light, but
the power of the Light; but the Looking-glass of the power apprehends or
catches the Light, as the Water does the Sun: For the Water is as a clear
Looking-glass in comparison of the Earth.

21. But now if the Water be mixed with Earth, then it receives not the Sun's
Light: So also, the humane Spirit or Soul receives not Gods Light, unless it
continue pure and sets its desire in or upon the pure, viz: into the Light;
for whatsoever the Life Desires, longs or seeks after.
imagines after, that it receives.

22. The Life of Man is the Form of both the inward Worlds. If the Life
desires Sulphur in it self; then is the Phur out of the Sul, its darkening:
but if it desires Sul alone, then it receives the Lights power, and in the
power, the Light with its property.

23. For, in Phur, viz: in the fierce wrathful Nature, the Life cannot
continue clear as a Looking-glass; but very well in Sul, for the Life of Man,
is a true real Looking-glass of the Note.
Deity; wherein God beholds himself; He gives his Glance and Power into the
Humane Looking-glass; and finds himself in Man, as also in Angels, and in
the Forms or Beauties of Heaven.

24. The Light-worlds Essence is his finding, or Revelation, and the
Dark-worlds Essence is his loosing: He sees not himself in the Dark-world; for
it has no Looking-glass which would be capable of the Light; all whatsoever
Or is of like Mind In Condition or quality of the Dark-world.
Imagines according to the Dark-worlds Essence and Property, that receives
the Dark-worlds Property; and Loses Gods Looking-glass.

25. It becomes filled with dark fierce wrath; as a Man mixeth Water with
Earth, and then the Sun cannot shine in it, and that very Water, loses the
Sun's Looking-glass; and the Water must again sink down from the Earth, Else
it never becomes a Looking-glass of the Sun any more, but is captivated in
the fierce wrathful Earth.

26. Thus it goes also with the Humane Life; while it Imagines after or
according to Gods Spirit, so it conceives or receives Gods Power and Light,
and apprehends God; but when it imagines after or according to Earthliness
or according to the Dark-worlds Property; then it conceives or receives the
Essence of the Earthliness and Dark-world, and fills it self with the same.

27. And then is the Life's Looking Glass, shut up in the darkness; and
loses the Looking-glass of the Deity, and must be born anew: As we know that
Adam has thus made the pure Looking-glass Earthly, and has lost Gods Power
and Light; which Christ the Son of God has restored again, and broke open
the Earthly Darkness, and has with power and authority, introduced the
Looking Glass of the Deity.

28. Thus we know, how the Holy Tree Sprouteth through all, and forth out of
all Substances, and yet is comprehended by No Substance, but merely in the
Looking-glass of the Clearness or purity, viz: in the pure Life of Man; which
Life, desires that Tree, and it can become compreprehended or apprehended, in
no Dark Life.

This now is thus the Fourth Point.
The Fifth Point.
The Seventh Chapter. How a Life in this Tree may Perish: How it p^sseth out of
the Source or Quality of Love and Joy, into a Source or Quality of Misery,
which is contrary to all other.
1. Every Life, is a Clear Glass Glance Reflection.
Glimpse and Looking Glass, and appears like a Flash of a terrible Aspect or
twinkling; but when the Flash catches or receives the Light, then it
changes it self into a Meekness, and lets the terror sink down; for the
Skreek or terror uniteth it self into the Light, and thus the Light shines
out of the terrible Flash; for the Flash is the Lights Essence, it is the Fire
thereof.

2. The Flash, contains in it the Center of Nature; for, the fourth Form of
Nature is the Flash; and there the Life arises, which in the steady Fire, as
in the Principle, comes to Perfection; but becomes set in the Light, viz: in
another source or quality.

3. But now, the Original of the Imagination is in the first Form of Nature,
viz: in the desirous harsh astringency; which brings its Form quite through
the Dark-world, even into the Fire; for the first desire goes through all
Forms, also it makes all Forms, and drives it self on, into the Fire, even
into the Principle.

4. And there is the Separation- limit, of the Spirit; where it becomes
generated; which is now free; it may enter back again, with its Imagination,
into its Mother the Dark-world; or sink down forward into the Fires anguish,
and spring and grow forth in the Light, how it will; it stands in its choice
or Election; into which it gives up it self, there it must be; for its Fire
must have Substance, that it may have to Consume.

5. Will the Spirit now Eat of its first Mother the harshnesse, that is, will
it give to its Fire the fierce wrathful Substance in the Center, for food; or
the Lights Substance in the Light-world; it stands all in its might and
power, whatsoever its Fire embraces or Conceives, in that property it burns.

6. In the dark property, it burns in the dark harsh strong or stern source
or quality, and sees in it self only a Flash; it has only the Looking-glass
of the Darkness, and sees in the Darkness.

7. And in the Lights property, it catches or receives the Meekness of the
Light, in which the Light-fire burns; and sees in the Light-world.

8. All is nigh unto the Spirit, but it may not see in any other Worlds
property, but only in that wherein its Fire burns: That World alone is the
Spirit capable of; it sees not in the other World, for it has no Eyes to do
it, it continues to be an Eternal hiddenness to it.

9. If it have been in another World, and is gone out from thence, and has
given it self up into another Fire; as the Devils did, who have indeed a
knowledge of the Light-world, but no Experimental perception or Seeing or
beholding thereof, the Light world is near unto them, and yet they know it not.

10. Thus now is to be known, the Life's perdition; which is done in the
Principle, there is the Or Tongue of the Balance.
Angle, there the Will may cast or incline it self whither it will; will it
into the Multiplicity, to be its own Lord; then it can no otherwise apprehend
the Multiplicity, but in the dark, stern, harshnesse or astringency, in the
Dark-world.

11. But will it into the Nothing into the Liberty; then must it give up it
self into the Fire, and then it sinketh down into the Death of the Principle,
and so it Sprouteth out of the Fires anguish, forth into the Light: For,
whenever it yeildeth up it self, then the Eternal Will brings it to
Nature, which is God the Father, in it self, forth through the Fire.

12. For with the giving in, it falls home, to the first willing to Nature:
And that brings it with the second willing which is its Heart or Son, forth
out of the Anguish of Nature; and sets it with the Sons Will in the
Liberty without or beyond the Fire-source or quality; and there, it gets for
the Multiplicity, the The All which is in the Abyss, where nothing is yet
Manifested, but is the power of All things.
ALL; not to its own Glory Authority or Power, but to Gods Glory and Power; God
is in it, its willing and doing.

13. But whatsoever will be Lord in the Fire, that goes into its own Or
dwelling.
Number, in its own Substance which it self is: And whatsoever gives up its
power, that gives up also its Fire-burning; and falls home to that, which is
a cause of the Fire, viz: to the Eternal willing of God.

14. And thus, in the Liberty, it is fallen without or beyond its
source-or-quality-Fire, and the Liberty kindles its Fire: And now it is become
a Light to it, and a Clear Looking Glass; for it has given up it self into
the Liberty, viz: into God; And thus its Fire is a shining and Glance of GODS
Majesty.

15. But that which will not, do so; but will it self be Lord, that continues
its own; and that can^^^ ^^^ng it self higher in its own Forms, then to the
Fire; moreover (...) the ^lash; for there can no Clear bright Fire burn in it;
for it has in (...) self no clear or bright Substance for the Fire: The Center
of Nature has nothing in it self, out of which a clear shining brightness may
Exist; but ^n the Liberty, without or beyond Nature; is a cause of the shining
or brightness.

16. Whatsoever gives it self up into Nature, but desires not the property of
Nature, but the Liberty; that becomes in its Flash of Life, kindled with the
Liberty; in that manner, as the Second Principle has kindled it self from
Eternity.

17. Thus we understand how a Life perishes, how it introduces it self into
anguish and the painful source or quality in the darkness; viz: when it will
be its own Lord, and desires the Multiplicity; when it will not give it Self
up into Death; and then it cannot reach or attain any other World.

18. For every Life, existeth in the Anguish source in Nature; and has no
Light in it self, unless it enters into that which causes Nature; there it
receives or conceives the Light.

19. For, all whatsoever is in Nature, is dark and in Anguish; as is to be
known in this World; if the Sun should be taken away, then all would be mere
anguish and Darkness: And therefore has God moved himself, that he might give
a Light to this World, that the outward Life might stand in the Light.

20. But concerning the inward Life of Souls, it has another manner or Form,
the outward cannot attain this inward Life; and if the Souls-fire has not Gods
Light, then also cannot the Souls-will enter into Gods Light, it must continue
in the Darkness of the Eternal Nature.

21. Outward Reason supposes, when the outward Eyes Sees a thing, that is
all, there is no other Seeing More; indeed it is bad enough when the Poor Soul
borrows the outward Looking-glass, and must make shift to help it self only
with that; But where will its seeing remain when the outward Looking-glass
breaks; wherewith will it then see? With the anxious Fire-flash in the
Abomination in the darkness? It can see no other where.

22. Therefore it often comes to pass, that when the poor captive Soul
discovers or descrieth it self in the inward Root, and thinks what will
follow, when the outward Looking Glass breaks, that it is horribly terrified
and precipitateth, or casts the body into Anguish and doubting.

23. For, it can no where discover, where its Eternal Rest should be; but it
finds, that it is in it self in mere unquietness, moreover in darkness; and
has the outward Looking-glass, only, as it were, borrowed.

24. For while the Soul, sticks in this outward Body, it may indeed make a
shift to help it self, with the Sun-Looking-Glasse, for the Sun has in its
Root, the inward Fire; viz: the Principle of the Father.

25. From that very Fire, it gets a Glance or Looking-glass; which is a
cause of the Essence of the Body; so that it can in this Earthly transitory
Life; be in Joy: But when the outward Looking-glass breaks, then that is out
or extinguished, and the Souls fire goes into the house of Sadness or Sorrow,
viz: into the Center of the Darkness.

26. The Soul has in the Time of the outward Body, Three Looking-Glasses or
Eyes, of all the Three Worlds, and into which Looking-glass, it inclines or
turns in it self; out of that it sees; but it has no more but one as to the
right of Nature; that is, the Fire-Flash, viz: the fourth Form of the
Dark-world; in the Place, where the Principle arises; where the two inward
Worlds sever themselves, one into the Darkness, the other into the Light; there
is its Eternal Original.

27. Into which World now it introduces its willing, in that same it receives
also the Substance, viz: a Spiritual Body; for that very Substance, becomes,
to the Souls-Fire, a Food or Matter of its burning.

28. And therefore has God introduced the Soul into Flesh and Blood, that it
might not so easily, be capable of the fierce wrathful Substance; also it has
its Joy the while in the Sun's Looking-glass, and rejoices it self in the
Sydereall Essence.

29. And 1. The Light-world stands in its right Fire, viz: in the first
Principle, presented to it. 2. The Dark-world in the Fire- Root. But 3. the
outward Elementary World in the Starres-sources or quality; where between,
moves the Great Mystery of the Soules-Fire: In which World now it uniteth and
gives up it self; from the same it gets Substance in its Imagination.

30. But seeing, with Adam, it has turned it self into the Spirit of this
World, and brought its Imagination thereinto, therefore now its highest desire
stands in the Sun's and Starre's source or quality, and draws with the
same, the Spirit of the outward World, with its Substance of the four Elements
constantly, into it self, and has its greatest Joy therein; in which it is a
Guest in a strange Lodging; for the Abyss stands under it, and it is in
great Danger.

31. Now says outward Reason: Has God indeed Created it in Flesh and Blood in
this outward World? What hurt may that do it?

32. This Reason, knows no more of the Original of the Soul, then a Cow does
of a New Barn-Door, which looks at it, and supposes it to be somewhat
strange: And so also the outward Reason, supposes the Inward World to be some
strange thing.

33. In finds or perceives it self, in the outward World, and hunteth after
that which the outward World has; and yet it finds in it self the Inward
World, which continually Or charge.
complains against the Soul before Gods anger: Moreover it finds also the
Light-world, whereinto, the Inward desires of the So^ls Principle, look back.

34. It finds indeed the longing after God, but the outward World Wichret.
hinders that, and covers it; so that the desire after Gods World, may not
kindle the Fire in it self: For if that were done, then would the Light-World
become Manifest ^n the first Principle; and the Noble Image of God would become
Manifest.

35. The Devil also hinders this; who possesses the Root of this World in
the Souls-Fire, and sets always Evil Earthly Things Matters or Doings.
Substantiality before the Soul; or stirs indeed, the Root in the Center of
Nature, in the fierce wrath, so that the poor Soul, either kindles it self in
the Anger-fire in the Evil poison source or quality; or else kindles it self
in the Anguish and doubting of Gods Love: And there he has gotten the Day or
the Game.

36. And sets before the Soul outward Might or Potency, Authority and
Honor, also the Glance Luster and Pomp of the outward World, and there the
Soul biteth at that, and Tickleth it self therein with or by Imagination: And
yet it cannot rightly enjoy the same, for it is, only, a borrowed
Looking-glass.

37. Thus the poor Soul becomes drawn away from Gods Light, and sinketh
always into perdition, viz: into the dark House of Misery, in the Dark-world:
And that Adam procured and Cook't, for us, when he introduced his delight or
Lust into the Earthliness: And thus now the poor Soul Swimmeth in the Earthly
Flesh and Blood, and Continually eats of the Tempting Tree of Evil and Good,
and is vehemently drawn by both; and the Serpents Monster sticks in the
Midst, in the Source or Quality of the fierce wrath; and Continually blows
up, the Anger and the fierce wrath.

38. And then can the Noble Lilly-Twig or Branch, no way recover it self or
draw breath; also often not know it self; it becomes often times overwhelmed
with the fierce wrath of Evil or Malignity; so that it is as if it were quite
perished; and it were also perished, if the Looking-glass of the Deity, did
not stand presented to it, wherein the willing-Spirit of the poor captive Soul
may draw breath and recover it self again, and generate therein again.

39. For, NOTE.
in the Looking-glass of the Light-world, stands the becoming Man or
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, presented to the Souls Spirit: And the Word that
became Man, stands in the Sound, and is stirring; the Souls-Spirit CAN
therein draw breath or recover it self and new generate it self, else it were
often past help with the poor Soul, when it did plunge or drown it self in the
Anger, and in the poison, of the Dark-world.

40. Thus we understand in the Ground, what the perishing or Perdition of the
Noble Tree, viz: of Gods Im^ge, is; namely this, viz:

41. The whole Man is in its Substance, the Three Worlds: The Souls Center,
viz: the Root of the Souls-Fire, holds in it, the First Principle, viz: the
right Fire-world. And the Noble Image, viz: the Tree of the Divine Sprout or
Vegetation, which becomes Generated out of the Soules-Fire; and grows forth
through the fierce wrathful Death into the Liberty, viz: into the Light-world;
holds in it, the Light-world.

42. And the Body, which in the Beginning was created out of the Mixed
Substance, which came to be, in the Creation, out of the Light-Dark-and
Fire-world: Or contains.
Holds in it the outward World, viz: the Mixed Principle.

43. The right Soul is the Spirit of these Three Worlds, as Gods Spirit is the
Spirit of these Three Worlds; in the Dark-world it is fierce wrathful, stern,
and an Earnest Severe Source or property, and is called Gods Anger.

44. In the Light-world, it is lovely, meek, and richly Joyous, it is the
Spirit out of Gods Heart, viz: the Holy Spirit.

45. And in the outward World, it is the Spirit of the Air, as also of the
Fire, and of the Water; it lets it self be used as Man will, all to or for
the Great Wonders.

46. Thus is man as to the Person, the Great Mystery of the Three Worlds, into
which he enters, in that, he works fruit, and the same is Lord in Him, and
the same World, becomes Manifest, in him.

47. The other Two continue hidden; as the Fire lies hidden in the Wood, so
the Light, or the Light world, continues hidden in the fierce wrathful Dark
world, as also in the Malignity, viz: in the Seeking Malady of the Inward
World, in the Outward.

48. But if the Light-world in Man may not be manifested, so that, it become
Lord, then the Soul continues in the breaking or Corruption of outward World,
merely in the Dark-world; for there it can no more be, that the Light-world
should be kindled, there is no Looking-glass more to or for the Light,
therein, that could stand presented to the Soul.

49. NOTE.
The Heart of God is not manifested therein, also Eternally cannot be; for, the
Dark-world must be; else the Light would not be manifested; but here in this Or
Time.
World it may be.

50. If a Soul as it were be plunged or drowned in the deepest Abyss, and
sticks in the fierce Wrath of God; yet there stands presented to it in the
outward Light of the Sun, the Lights Looking Glass, wherein the divine Power
manifests it self, as also the Looking-glass of the becoming Man or
Incarnation of Christ, which in the inward Dark-world is not known in Eternity.

51. Our total teaching or Doctrine is; how man should kindle the Light-world
in him: When this becomes kindled, so that Gods Light Shines in the
Soul-Spirit, then the whole Body has Light, as Christ says: Matthew. 6.22. Luke
11.34.
If the Eye be Light, then is the whole Body Light: He understands, the Souls
Eye.

52. If the fierce wrath of the Dark-world be kindled, then is the Body and
Soul, dark, and has only a Glimpse or Glance from the Sun.

53. If the divine Light be kindled, then it burns in Love and Meekness.

54. If the fierce wrath of the Dark-world be kindled, then it burns in
Stinging Biting Envy and hatred in fierce wrathful Anger; and flies out in
the outward Looking-glass of the Sun's Light, into Pride and State, and will
always go above the Source or Quality of Love, and there follows Scorn and
despising of the Meekness, also of all whatsoever is Lovely.

55. Note.
Here should Man prove himself, and try what World is Lord in him: If he
finds that Anger, fierce Wrath, Envy, Falsehood, Lying, and Deceit, is his
desire; and also Pride, State, Covetousness, and continual greediness of
Honor, and outward Pleasure and Voluptuousness, so that it is only a constant
seeking after Wantonness, and Unchastity, then may he very easily make
Register, Account, and Inventary, and certainly know, that he, with the Anger,
fierce Wrath, Envy, Lying and Deceit, burns in the Dark, viz: in the
Dark-worlds Fire.

56. For that very Fire, gives such Essence desire and willing; and the other
desire, viz: outward Pleasure and Voluptuousness, Pride State, seeking of
Honor, Covetousness, and Continual Wantonness, beastiall Desire, and
Unchastity, is the Fruit, which grows out of the Dark-world, into the outward
World; As the Love grows out of the Death; that is, where the Will-Spirit,
gives it self up into Gods Fire; and sinketh as it were down into Death, but
springs forth into Gods Kingdom, with a friendly desire always to do well.

57. So has the Will of Malice Malignity or Wickedness, given it self up into
Perdition, viz: into the fierce wrathful Strong or Stern Eternal Death, but
springs forth in this perished or corrupt World into the outward Nature, with
its Twigs or Branches, and bears such Fruit; by which every one should learn
to know himself.

58. He need only to search after his own property, to what his Will constantly
drives, in that Kingdom he stands; and is not a Man as he, holds and
gives forth, himself to be, but a Creature of the Dark-world, viz: a Covetous
Dog, a proud stately Bird, an unchaste Beast, a ^^erce wrathful Serpent, an
Envious Toad, full of Poison and venom; all these properties flow up in him,
and are his Wood or Fuel, out of which his Fire burns.

59. And now, when his outward Wood or Fuel, viz: the Substance of the four
Elements, is left in its dying: Then the inward poisonous evil source or
quality alone continues.

60. And what kind of Figure now should stand in such a property? No other,
then such as has been the strongest amongst these properties, that becomes
figured from the Hellish Fiat, in its Form: viz: a poisonous Serpent, Dog or
the like, or some other Beast: Into which property soever the Will-Spirit has
given up it self, that very property is hereafter the Souls Image, and this,
is, as to one part.

61. Note.
Further Man should prove or try himself in his desire; for every Man has
these Evil Properties in him; whether he find a constant desire in him to
mortify this Poison and Malignity; Whether he be Enemy to this: or whether he
have his joy in this, continually to bring this false Poison into work: viz: in
Pride or State, Covetousness; Envy, and Unchastity, in Lying, and Deceit.

62. Now if he finds in himself, that he has his Joy therein, and would
fain, continually bring it to Effect: Then he is no Man as he accounts
himself to be, but the Devil in a strange Form deceives him, so that he
supposes he is a Man but he bears not Gods, but the Serpents, Image; and is
only in the outward Kingdom a Similitude of a Man's Image, so long as he
continues in this Property, that this property is Supreme Lord.

63. But when he finds the strife in himself, so that his most inward Will,
continually, yea hourly, striveth against these Evil Properties, dampeth them,
and lets them not come to Substance, so that he would continually do well,
but finds that these Evil properties hinder him, that he cannot at all times
bring that to Effect, which he fain would; and finds the desire to Abstinence
and Repentance or Amendment; so that a constant enduring desire after Gods
Mercifulness flows up in him, so that he fain would do well if he could.

64. This Man may conceive and assuredly know, that Gods Fire glimmereth in
him, and continually Labors toward the Light, it would fain burn, and
always gives Essence to the Wiek or Flame, but becomes damped by the Evil
Fruit of this World, which Adam has introduced into us.

65. And so now when the outward Evil Body with its damp, breaks, so that it
can no more hinder the glimmering Wick: then the Divine Fire kindles it self
in its Essence, and the divine Image becomes figured again, according to the
strongest Source or Property, which Man has here brought into his desire;
according to his stronges^ Property.

66. But if he continues not in this before mentioned Conquest, but lets
the Strife sink and Fall, he may very dangerously and desperately perish.

67. Note.
The Third proof or trial is, that a Man know, in what Substance or Figure he
stands; if he finds that he has a constant desire Or according to God.
after God, and that his desire is so potent, that he can break the Evil
Essences, as often as a quality or Source becomes kindled, and turn it into
Meekness, that is, pass into Patience.

68. So that he Or is potent.
has the Command over his Substance or doings: And lets all go and fall,
whatsoever in this World shines and Glistereth; who, can, do good for Evil,
who is potent over all his outward Substance; be it Money or other Goods, to
give thereof to the Needy, and for Gods truth sake, to leave it or forsake it
all.

69. And willingly for Gods sake, to yield up himself into Misery, in assured
hope of that which is Eternal; to him, the divine Power flows up, so that he
may kindle the Light of the Kingdom of Joy therein, which there tastes what
God is; he is the surest, and bears the Noble Image, with heavenly
Substantiality NOTE.
IN himself, even in the Time of the outward Body.

70. And there is JESUS born out of the Virgin, and that Man Eternally dies
not, he lets, only, the outward Kingdom go from him, which in this time was
an opposition and hinderance to him, wherewith God has covered him; for God
will not Matthew. 7.6.
cast the Pearls before the Swine; they are hidden, in him.

71. That New Man stands not in this World, also the Devil knows him not,
only he is enraged at its Essence which withholdeth, in the Inward Center: For
it hinders him, that his Will, is not done.

72. Therefore he irritateth and provokes the Evil Beasts-Men against him,
that they plague him and persecute him, so that the true Humanity, Continues
Covered.

Further of the Fifth Point.
The Eighth Chapter. The right true humane Or Substance or the right
Substantial Man.
Essence is not Earthly, nor out of the Dark-world: But out of the Substance of
God.
1. IT is generated merely in the Light-world, it has 2 Cor. 6.14.
no Communion with the Dark or outward, Luke 6.26.
there is a Great Gulf Cliffe or Fort between, viz: Death.

2. Not in this sense, that the true Essence lies not in the outward Man, it
lies therein, for it was given to Adam in an Image.

3. But it is shut up and lies in Death, cannot qualify or operate, has also
no stirring or Moving in it self; unless it becomes stirring in the power of
the Deity, as it became Stirring in the Virgin Mary, through Gods Moving and
Entering in: There came the right Humane Essence to Life again.

4. So also in us, the right humane Essence becomes not stirring unless we,
become born out of God in Christ.

5. In the Baptism of Infants, the Word of the Deity Espouseth it self, and
lets it self in with them, viz: in the Covenant, and the first stirring in
this World is as an Ember or Tinder in Wood or Fuel, which begins to
Glimmer.

6. But, the Wiek, becomes often afterward darkened and put out or
extinguished. Also it is in Many not very capable, as to Or those who are.
what is begotten of totally wicked Or Parents.
Essence.

7. For, Christ said, Matthew. 19.14. Mark 10.14. Luke 18.16.
Suffer little Children to come to me; for of such is the Kingdom of God; Not
Dogs, Wolves, Toads, or Serpents, but Children, and those in whom the Essence
is not totally Devilish, whereas many are steeped or Baptized in the Anger of
God, of which the Parents are guilty: For Matthew. 7.16. Luke 6.43.
an Evil Tree, brings forth Evil Fruit, says Christ.

8. And although Matthew. 18.11. Luke 19.10.
He is come into this World, to save, or make blessed, that which is lost; yet
it lies in the Essence, as to what will suffer it self to be helped.

9. For, a Beast-Man may indeed attain the Image if he convert and suffer the
Word, which became Man, to draw him: If not then he continues in his own
beastiall Essence, an Evil Beast.

10. Yet also not in such a sense, as that the Baptism did lay the first
ground to the humane Essence; and were altogether the first Mother Ember or
Tynder of the divine Fire, No, that it is not: For a Child becomes from the
Essence of the Parents, a Spirit, as also Flesh and Blood, together with the
Espousall or uniting of the Constellation of the Spirit of the Great World,
Majoris Mundi, at that very Time.

11. When a Child in the Mothers ^ody or Womb has attained the Life, then
instantly glimmereth the Divine or Hellish Essence; out of the first proceeding
forth and Original.

12. NOTE.
And while there is any small Ember Wiek Glimpse or Tinder of the divine
Essence Stirring, the Child is capable to receive the Baptism: And though
indeed it should die, and should not be baptized, yet is the Mother Wiek
Glimpse or Tinder, in Gods Mystery, and glimmereth in Gods Kingdom, and
becomes kindled in Gods Fire, for it dies in the Mystery of the Father, and
glimmereth up, in the Mystery of the Son who became Man.

13. The Parents Baptism and Covenant is its Baptism, and Covenant: the
Atonement or Reconciliation is Effected in the humane Blood, in the right true
humane Or Substance
Essence; Gods Word or Heart, has given it self, into the enclosed shut up
dead humane Essence.

14. Not into the Earthly, not at all into the Earthly part; but into the
Heavenly Part, not into that part which Adam with his Imagination introduced;
which is Earth; but into that Part, which was given to Adam out of the
Angelical World; which he, with the Earthly Seeking Longing or Malady,
destroyed and poisoned; and therein the Seeking or Longing, became Earthly
Gross Beastiall Flesh.

15. That very part, has the right humane Essence; and in that very part is
God become Man; that very part has the Covenant.
Ground of the Angelical World; for it has its Original out of the
Angelical World.

16. But if, as Many times, wicked Parents wholly steep demerse and plunge
themselves into the Anger of God, and so beget Children: Then indeed, is, their
Seed shut up in Death, and has nothing of a right humane Essence in them,
which moves it self; but only that which the Constellation in the Spirit of
the Great World Majoris Mundi; has in it self.

17. NOTE.
And there indeed, is, the divine Power somewhat stirring, but the Angers power
is Set in Opposition, and it is very hard, yet it is very possible, for Gods
becoming Man or Incarnation, is set and presented to ALL Souls in the Life's
Light.

18. But the Baptism contains somewhat Else; Gods Essence, viz: the Water of
Eternal Life generated out of Gods Meekness; must stir, the right humane
Essence, with Adam shut up or included in Death; and must give in it self
there, as a New Life or a Living Essence: Gods Water Must baptize, the Holy
Ghost must be the Workmaster.

19. But I say, according to my knowledge, that the Water of the Eternal Life,
upon which the Holy Spirit Hovereth or Hatcheth.
moves, is hardly given in, to the poison of the fierce wrath and of Death;
where there is not an Essence of desire, within.

20. I say thus, that also a Child, as soon as it has the Life in the Mothers
body or Womb: So far as the divine Essence which stands in the heavenly
part, is stirring; is clearly Baptized by the Holy Spirit, and reaches or
attaineth the becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ.

21. For the Baptism stands not in the Preachers authority, that the Holy
Spirit should wait upon him; for the becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ
waits not upon Man's authority, but upon the Limit or Mark that God stuck or
set in his Covenant.

22. The Limit or Mark became blessed: Therefore Luke 1.42.
said the Angel to Mary: Thou art the Blessed among Women, the Limit or Mark
Stuck in her, that became blessed, and that blessed her also; when Gods Heart
made the Limit or Mark come stirring.

23. That same Limit or Mark reached back, even unto Adam, and forward even to
the Last Man, and when God became Man, then became the Limit or Mark, in the
heavenly Part, stirring, not in Mary alone, but also in Adam and Eve, and all
their Children, which have given themselves up into God; they became all
Blessed in the Limit or Mark.

24. For, that is the Covenant of Grace, which God instituted with Adam and
Eve, that very Covenant stood in all and every humane Essence, but not in the
Devilish.

25. But the Baptism is the Seal, that God hung or annexed to the Covenant, as
in the Old Testament, Circumcision was; God gives in the Baptism divine Water
to the humane, for an Earnest or Pledge, and Seal.

26. But the Covenant is plainly there before the Baptism, it is made in
Paradise, yea 1 Pet. 1.20. Ephesians. 1.4.
before the foundation of the World: As soon as a Soul in the Mothers body or
womb, is stirring, so that a Principle and a humane Soul is generated or born,
so instantly it is in the Covenant.

27. For Christ has given himself into Gods Fire into the Principle, and
fulfilled the Covenant, and is become the Or P^^^ne.
Earnest or Pledge of the Testament.

28. That same Pawn or Pledge waits upon no outward Ordinance, or upon the
outward Man's conceit; but as soon as a Soul is generated or born out of the
Principle, it is in the Prey of the Testament, so far as the divine Life in
the Soul, is stirring.

29. But not in the Wicked Souls, there must the Divine Life first be generated
or Born: Gods Anger devoureth Many a Soul, and that yet in the Essence ere it
attai^eth or reaches the Principle, and therefore because it is out of false
or wicked Essence, from the Evil Seed of the Parents.

Objection.

30. Reason says: What can a Child do to it, that the Parents are wicked?

Answer.

Yea also, what can God do to it? Stands it not in the power of the Parents
to beget a Child? What Can God do with it, that Whores and Whoremongers crawl
together?

31. Though indeed, the false or wicked Tree, does not thus alone arise out of
this Line or Lineage, but also in the Marriage: Is not Man Free? If he awaken
no Life; then his Seed continues an Or Ground of Substance and Life.
Essence.

32. Shall therefore God for the Child's innocence sake, cast the Pearls before
Swine? Does not the Kingdom of Heaven stand toward it? it may enter in, God
Or hinders it.
shuts it up from None.

33. But an Evil Man, is shut up in Body and Soul; why also not in the Seed?
The Seed is truly the Fruit of his Body: If a Man would reap good Wheat, a Man
must needs then sow Wheat; but if Thistle-seed be sown, then a Thistle grows
out of it: And must God then change that into Wheat?

34. Has not the Sower power to sow in his Field, what he will? Or will thou
say: What can the Thistle do to it, that it is a Thistle and pricketh? It ought
not to be among the Wheat; but it grows up together of it self.

35. God would indeed be at quiet, if no Thistle-Childe did grow, it is also
not his Ordinance, Luke 13.25, 38, 39.
but the Devil sows Weeds among the Wheat; viz: into Man's Mind: Why does Man
let him do that, and destroys himself, so, that his Essence becomes a
Thistle-seed, and bears Weeds for the Fire in the fierce Wrath of God.

36. Also it lies not all in the Seed; but in the Field or Soil: Many a Noble
Grain of Corn, perishes in the Evil Field's or Soyle's Essence.

37. The Heaven, with the Sun, gives to all Vegetables or Sprouts, Life and
Power; the Sun makes no Weed, also it desires none; but the Essence in the
Field or Soil; makes many somewhat Else; and destroys the Good: So also in
Man.

38. Many a Curse sticks, which one wishes to the other, when the other has
stirred up or provoked the Curse; and is capable of it, or Liable to it; as
indeed is common among wicked married people; who wish the Devil and Hell
Fire, to one another.

39. If they both be wicked, should not also their wicked Wills be done to
them, that they should beget wicked Children? There is not any Good in them,
how then should Good proceed from or out of them?

40. What can God do to this? Does he not set his Word and Teaching before
them, and makes their destruction known to them? If they will not regard it:
Then let them go whither they will: thus also is their Seed, and so, many a
Child is Generated or born a Thistle and Evil Beast: And is Baptized in the
Anger of God.

41. For, of what Essence the Souls Spirit is, into such an Essence it
receives also the divine Substance in the Covenant: One in the power of Light
in the Love, the other in the Power of the fierce Wrath in the Darkness.

42. The Covenant, together with the Baptism stands firm. Every Child i^
Baptized in the Covenant, the Spirit of God Baptiseth every one, if a Man keep
the Solemnity; yet according to the Childs Property.

43. Often, is the Father and Mother, as also the Baptiser wicked, and are only
Evil Beasts, also there is no earnest Sincerity, all lies with them in the
outward Pomp, Money and Riches; they do but despise the Mystery; and the Child
also is only of the Angers Or Property.
Essence; who shall then Baptize? None else but Gods Anger in his Covenant: And
therefore, because Men do but despise it.

44. Thus the Anger-Source or Quality receives the New Spirit, and works
powerfully in it: And brings forth Fruit into Perdition: As Saint Paul says
of the Supper and other Testament: That 1 Cor. 11.29.
the wicked receive it unto Judgment because he distinguishes not the Lords
Body, that is, that he distinguishes not the heavenly part of his Essence in
him: From the Earthly, and so puts his willing thereinto, and Offers it up
to God, but esteems all common, as an Ox devoureth the Stover.

45. Therefore the Anger of God flows up in him, so that he breaks not off,
his willing; from the Earthly; and enters not into Repentance from his Evil
or Wickedness; And therefore cannot his heavenly part become partaker of Gods
Body, while he cannot make the Essence of the heavenly Part, stirring.

46. Moreover, he has also no Mouth, to receive the Body of God, for the Mouth
lies shut up in Death; in like manner also the Earthly part receives Christ's
Body, but according to the Angers property, according to the Dark-worlds
property; for the Testament must stand firm.

47. In like manner also in the Baptism; as the Souls Essence is in Substance,
so also it enjoys Gods Covenant, better a total wicked Child should not be
baptized, and that a wicked Man in his Sins without conversion should not
touch Gods Testament; for it brings them BOTH, only power to Perdition.

48. For Gods Covenant becomes stirred, and that goes never away, without
Fruit: God works in his Covenant according to his Word; As the Soul is, which
stirs the Covenant; so is also the Medicine or Physic, in the Covenant, and
in such a Power, the Spirit of God works, in Love, and Anger.

49. For it is the Spirit of Every Life, and likeneth or appropriateth it self
to Every Life; it is, in Every Thing, like as the Things will and property is;
for one Property receives the other, what the Soul wills, that wills also,
the same, into which the Soul turns it self: It is all Magical, whatsoever
the Will of a Thing wills, that it receives.

50. A Toad takes only Poison to it self, when perhaps it sits in the best
Apothecaries Or sweetest Balsom.
Medicine: The like also does a Serpent; every Thing takes its own property
into it self.

51. And though it eat the Substance of a good Property; yet it Makes all in
it self, to its own Property: If a Toad eat Sugar, yet the same becomes Poison
in it: Even as the Devil was an Angel, but when he willed nothing that was
Good, then his heavenly Substance be came to him, hellish Poison; and his Evil
Will, continued Evil, at one time as at the other.

52. Thus is our Life highly to be considered, what we would do, or what we
purpose, we have Good and Evil in us, into which we frame our willing, the
Essence thereof becomes stirring in us; and such a Property we draw also, from
without, into us.

53. We have both Mysteries, the Divine, and the Devilish in us, from both the
Eternal Worlds and also from the outward World, what we make out of our
selves, that we are; what we awaken in us, that is stirring in us; if we lead
our selves to the Good, then Gods Spirit helps us.

54. But if we lead our selves to Evil, then Gods fierce Wrath and Anger
helps us: What we will, of that Property we get a Leader, and thereinto we
lead our selves; And yet it is not the Deities Will, that we perish; but his
Angers, and Our, Will.

55. And thus we understand the Fifth Point: How a Life perishes, and how out
of Good, an Evil Comes to be, and out of Evil a Good, when the Will
converteth or turns it self about.

The Sixth Point.
The Ninth Chapter. Of the Life of the Darkness, wherein the Devils dwell; what
kind of Birth or Geniture, and Source or Quality, it has.
1. THe Life of the Darkness, is against all and Every Life of the Light: For,
the Darkness, gives fierce wrathful and Enimicitious Essence, and the Life of
the Light, gives Love-Essence.

2. In the Darkness there is in the Essence, only a continual stinging and
breaking, where every Form of the Essence is at enmity with the other, an
Opposite or Contra^ous Substance; every of the Forms deny themselves to be
evil, and every one of them say to the other, that it is Evil, and contrary
to them, it is a cause of their unquietness and fierce wrathfulness.

3. Every one of them think in themselves, if the other Form were not, then
they should have rest, and yet Every one is Evil and false: whence it comes
to pass, that all whatsoever becomes generated or born out of the dark fierce
wrathful Property, is, lying, and continually lies against the other Forms,
saying, that they are Evil, and yet it is the cause thereof: It makes them
Evil with its poisonous Infection.

4. Thus are they all, and lying is their TrUth; John 8.44.
When they speak lies, then speak they from their own Forms and Properties,
and thus also are their Creatures: Therefore says Christ, The Devil is a Liar
and Murderer from the Beginning; for Every Form desires to Murder the other,
and yet there is no Murdering, but the greater the Strife is, the greater
their Murtherous Life comes to be.

5. Therefore it is called an Eternal Death and Enmity, where mere vain
contrariety or opposition Existeth; for there is nothing that can cease the
Strife, there is nothing can compel one only Form, the more it is resisted or
stopped, the greater the fierce wrathfulnesse becomes, like a Fire that a Man
blows up or compresseth, whereby it burns but the more.

6. So, the fierce wrathful Kingdom can be quenched by Nothing, but barely by
Gods Light or Love, whence it becomes totally soft meek or sweet, lovely, and
richly Joyful.

7. Note.
And that also can not be, for if the Dark Kingdom should be kindled with the
Light, the Light would have no root to its Nature and Property, there could be
no Fire Generated, there would also be no Light, also no Omnipotency, but All a
Nothing.

8. Therefore must the fierce wrathful Kingdom be, for it is a cause of the
Fire and Light-world, and is ALL of God, but is not all called or known to be
God; seeing the Dark-world has another Property.

9. And the Light-world is a Cause of the fierce Wrath, and Crack or Terror,
of the Dark Property: For the Darkness Skreeketh or is terrified before the
Light, and stands in Eternal terror, while the Light-world dwells in it,
it Quaketh or trembles Eternally before the Light, and yet cannot comprehend
it, but is only thus a cause of the Life and of the Mobility, and thus Note.
all must Serve to Gods Glory.

10. The Life of the Darkness has many Forms, it is not one sort of Property
alone; as is to be known in the Creatures of this World, where one is still
worse or Eviller then the other, and stands in another Source or Quality then
the other, which yet all Live in the Sun's Power and Light, whence they become
meekened.

11. But if that should be quenched, then would the Or Air.
Deep be fierce wrathful and stinging, Men should soon see the Dark-worlds
Property, how all Creatures would become so poisonous and Evil.

12. For all and Every Life, stands in Poison, and the Light only,
withstandeth the Poison, and yet is a cause that the Poison lives and
Verschmachtet.
fails not.

13. Therefore it is to be known that the Life of the Darkness is only a
fainted poison Life, like a dying Source or Quality, and yet there is no dying
there, for the Light-world, passes against the Looking-glass of the
Darkness, whence the Darkness Eternally stands in terror.

14. The dark Life is like a Skreek Terror or Crack; where the Flash or Crack
always climbeth up as if it would depart from the Life; and go forth aloft,
where Pride and State existeth, so that the Devil would always be above God,
it is his Property, his Life's Figure is so, and he can do no otherwise.

15. Just as Poison, rages and stingeth, as if it would tear it self forth
out of the Member, so is the Life of the Darkness; the Poisonous Essences make
such a Mind, and out of the Mind goes such a willing Spirit, there is such a
property therein.

16. And it stands especially, in Seven Forms, according to the Center of
Nature with the Principle thereof: As the Life of Joy stands in seven Forms
according to the right of Nature; so also does the Life of Sadness: That which
in the Light gives Joy, that in the Darkness gives Sadness.

17. Yet it is not to be thought, that the Life of the Darkness, thus sinketh
down in Misery, where it forgets it self, as if it did Grieve; There is no
Grieving, but what with us upon Earth is grieving according to this Worlds
Property; that in the Darkness is Might and Jollity and Mirth.
Joy, according to the Darknesses Property.

18. For the Grief or Sadness is a thing, which there sinketh down into Death,
and yet the Death and dying is Darknesses Life, as the Anguish is the Life of
the Poison; the Greater the Anguish is in the Poison, the stronger is the
Poison Life; as is to be perceived in the outward Poison.

19. We cannot say thus of the Devil, that he sits in Grief or sadness as
if he were in sad despair, there is no sad despair in him, but a Continual
Will, more to kindle the Poison Source or Quality, that his fierce Wrath may
become the greater, for he is its Strength, wherein he creates or frames his
willing to go above the Thrones, and to kindle them; he will in the Poison
Source or Quality be a mighty potent Lord: For it is the Strong and Great Life.

20. But the Light is to him his misery and despairing, that allayeth his Pomp;
at which he is terrified; for it is his right Poison, which paineth or
Tormenteth him; therefore, because he has lost it; and therefore now it
stands opposed to him; of which he is very much ashamed, that he is a
deformed Angel in a strange Image.

21. He would be content with Or the Angels.
the fierce wrathful Source, if the Light were not so near him, therefore is
the shame so great in him, that he gives it over, and always kindles the
more vehemently, his poisonous Source or Quality, so that his Figure always
becomes the more abominable, and that the Divine Image in him might NOT be
known.

22. Therefore, he bends his endeavors after that, whereby, and how he may
rave and rage against God, as if he were some strange thing, or were a strange
or foreign Power; as if he had a strange or Foreign Kingdom, whereas yet he
is poor, and the dark Kingdom is not his, but he is only a Prisoner or Captive
therein.

23. It is Gods Abyss, he the Devil, is but a Creature therein, he would be
Lord therein, yet is but a Jugler with the fierce wrathfulnesse, though indeed
he must do as the Qualities Property is: And is also a Wonder before the
strong or stern Might of the Eternity.

24. It is as a Sport or Scene, wherewith the strong or stern Might has its
effect or recreation, whereby it is distinguished what Evil or Good, is, Joy
or Sorrow, and that the Creatures in the Light-world, have cause to humble
themselves.

25. Though indeed God Created no Devil, also not Lucifer, for the Dark-world;
and this is the Enmity with Lucifer, that he has been an Angel, and that the
Light is so near him, that he is become a Castaway or Apostate.

26. Else, in the Creatures which have been Created in the Dark-world, there is
no Woe: For they are the fierce wrathful Property, and know Nothing of the
Light: Fierce wrathfulnesse is their Strength and Might; and enimicitiousness
is their Willing and Life.

27. The Eviller and more enimicitious a Creature in the Dark-world, is, the
greater is its might: As the Mighty or Potent Tyrants of this World, do often
make their Might in Malignity or Wickedness to be seen, so that men must fear
them: Or as the Tame Beasts are afraid of the Evil fierce wrathful wild ones,
just such a Property also it has in the Dark-world.

28. When we will rightly conceive of the Property of the Dark-world, let us
look but upon the Malignity Malice or Wickedness and Pride or State of this
World, which is a Type Prefiguration or Representat^on of it; for all Malignity
Malice Wickedness Falsehood and Pride or State, has its root from the
Dark-world; It is the Dark-worlds Property, be it apprehended or discerned
either in Men or Beasts, for this World stands upon the Ground of the
Dark-world.

29. The Dark-world gives to this World, Essence Willing and Property, and if
the Good were not created together, in it, then there would be no other Will or
Doing in this World, then is in the Dark-world.

30. But the Divine Power and the Sun' s Light hinders that, as is to be seen
among Men, and Beasts, what a biting Enmity, striking, proud stately Will, the
own self-will, is, where every Will would dominere over the other, and worry
and devour the other, and only lift up it self, also tread under, all, with
cunning subtilty fierce wrathful Malice Malignity and Falsehood, and make it
self Lord; thus also has the Dark-world such a property.

31. What all evil wicked malicious Men in this World do in their malice
wickedness and falsehood, that also the Devils do in the Dark-world; and what
the poisonous evil Worms and Beasts in their Malignity do, that do also the
other Creatures in the Dark-world.

32. Though indeed they are without such Bodies, yet they have such a Property
in their Spiritual Body, and though indeed they have Bodies, yet it is after a
spiritual manner, as the Devils have.

33. The Dark-worlds Birth or Geniture, Substance, Essence, and Dominion,
stands principally only in the first four Forms of Nature, viz: in the
anxious Source or Quality, in a very exceeding strong and mighty potent
Dominion, where all in the Essence is loud-sounding.

34. For, the Meekness is the Enmity, of the fierce wrathful Might or Power;
and indeed, the one is against the other: Else if they should be ONE, there
would also be but one only Source or Quality.

35. If also there were but one Will, there could not the Eternal Wonders
become Manifest; but the Manifold various Source or Quality makes the Eternal
Wonders revealed or Manifest.

36. For, the Eternity could not otherwise be manifested, nor come to
substance, but with the kindling, viz: in the harsh hard strong or stern
Attraction, wherein the Dark world stands; and wherein the Fire-world arises
originally, and the Light-world.

37. It is all but One only Substance, but it parts it self into three
Properties of Sources or Qualities; there is no Property rent asunder from the
other, but every one gives or affords the other, as is to be seen in Fire
and Light, as also in the Matter, out of which the Fire burns.

38. And it is not necessary for Man to search further, for he is himself the
Substance of all Substances, only thus far it is necessary for him to search;
therefore, because he has in his Creation turned himself away out of his
in-standing Order, or stated Ordinance, and introduced and awakened another
source or quality, in himself, to find, how he may again enter into his Eternal
Order or Ordinance and source or quality, and Regenerate himself again.

39. And then how he may again quench the fierce wrathful Source or Quality;
which is Stirring in him, seeing ALL is stirring in him, and that Evil and
Good draws him; therefore he should learn, how he may withstand the fierce
Wrath, and may walk and converse in Meekness in the Source or Quality of the
Light and of the Love.

40. Else, Man had had no Law, if he had not kindled himself in the Dark-worlds
Property, and walked or conversed according to the Property thereof, Else all
is free to him: NOTE.
Whatsoever he does in the Meekness and Love, that is FREE to him, and is his
own Substance.

41. It lies in No man's Name or Opinion, all, whatsoever is sprouted or grown
out of one only Root, that, is and belongs to one only Tree, it is one only
Fruit: unless it destroys it self, so that it changes the very Essence it
self.

42. So long as a thing continues in the Essence, out of which it is existed,
so long it has no Law, but when it departs out from thence into another
Source or Quality, then the first Source or Quality cleaves to it, and lies
with the other in strife, and now the Law pursues it, that it should enter
again into that which it was in the original, and be one not two: for one
only thing should drive on one only Dominion not two.

43. Man was created in the Dominion of the Love and Meekness, viz: in Gods
Substance, therein he was to continue: But seeing he has awakened to himself
yet another Dominion, viz: the fierce Wrath now he is in strife, and has Law
upon him, that he mortify and forsake the fierce Wrath, and be in One dominion
again.

44. If then both Dominions are become mighty in him, and that the fierce
wrathful Dominion has overpowered or vanquished the Love, then he must
totally dissolve in the Substance, and become new born or generated again out
of the first Root; and therefore he has in this Twofold Substance, Law upon
him, how he shall behave himself, and generate or bring forth a Will-Spirit to
the Eternal Dominion.

45. All this now stands in his Might, and Power; he may generate or bring
forth the fierce wrathful Spirit or the Love-Spirit; and according to that he
becomes separated, thither, into which World he belongs, for he separateth
himself; but the Law over him, continues so long as he stand in this Field or
Soil.

46. And then, when the Or Herb.
Weed separateth from this Field of the Body: Then it is in one Dominion again:
And there it shall continue Eternally, for hereafter there is nothing more that
can give it Law, for it is totally One only in its willing, either to do
Evil, or Good.

47. But in this outward Life, Man stands in Strife, and there Two Dominions
sway in him, of a twofold Source or Quality and Law: The one the divine, to
Love and Righteousness; Secondly, the other, the fierce wrathful one, in the
rising up of Pride and State, in the Fires Might, in the stern harsh hellish
Covetousness, Envy, Anger and Malice or Wickedness.

48. To which then the Spirit inclines uniteth or appropriateth it self, of
that Dominion it is: The other cleaves to it, and reproacheth it to its Face,
as a perjured Apostate, yet draws it, and would have it; thus the Life
sticks between both, in the Press, and is ever at odds with it self.

49. But when it departs away, and totally gives it self home to the fierce
Wrath, then the fierce Wrath, destroys the first Image according to God; but
if it cannot totally, because the divine Power hinders it, yet will the
fierce wrath, thrust the whole Man headlong and will cast Many headlong into
Despair in that anguish, so that he kills himself or puts himself to Death.

50. And thus the Soul falls with the Image, home to the fierce wrathful
Dark-world, and the Image is brought into a hellish Figure, into a Form or
Condition of its Property which it had here.

51. For, thus, it is also come to pass, with the Devils, who have lost their
first Image: Every Devil, has now his Image according to his Property,
according to the fierce Wraths Figure, according to its Source or Quality, like
as there are horrible Worms or Evil Beasts, and such a thing the lost Soul
also has to expect.

52. Outward Reason supposes, that Hell is far off from us; but it is near
us, every one carries it in himself, unless he kill the hellish Poison Note
how we can kill the Hellish Poison in our selves.
with Gods Power, and sprout out from thence as a new Twig or Branch, which the
hellish source or quality cannot comprehend or touch.

53. And although it be so indeed, that the hellish fierce wrath, is more known
in one place then in another, all according to the hellish Dominion; where the
upper dominion is mighty potent in several places, in the space or place of
this World: All according to the first kindling of King Lucifer, as in Many
places of the Earth.

54. As also in the deep between the Stars and the Earth, the Hellish
properties are to be discerned, there, above other places, where the inward
fierce Wrath reaches into the outward Principle; where then there are several
distinct dominions of Devils, as also of the other hellish Properties: Where
the fierce Wrath of God has so vehemently kindled it self, and now also
burns even until the Judgment of God.

55. NOTE.
Every Man, carries in this World, Heaven and Hell in himself, which Property
soever he awakeneth, that burns in him, and of that Fire the Soul is capable;
and so when the Body dies and departs, the Soul need not go away any
whither, but it will be cast home to the hellish dominion; whatsoever Property
it is of, those very Devils, which are of those Properties, wait upon it, and
take it into their Dominion even till the Judgment of God.

56. Though indeed they are bound to no Place, yet they belong to the same
Dominion, and that very source or quality, they have every where; whithersoever
they go away, yet they are in that same dominion and source or quality.

57. For, the Abyss has no Place neither Time nor Space; as it was before the
times of the World, where there was no Place; so it is and continues Eternally
in the Abyss.

58. And though indeed the Place of this World, was given to Lucifer for a
Kingdom, for he was created therein, yet he is now thrust out from Place and
Space, and dwells in the Abyss, where Eternally he can reach no place of the
Angellicall Kingdom, and yet is shut up in his Kingdom into the Abyss, where
then he must bear Eternal Reproach as a Captive Prisoner.

59. As men do to a Malefactor, which they put into a dark Hole or Dungeon,
from all things of this World; where he must be bereaved of all worldly Joy and
doings, and bear the reproach of his breaking Bounds: So it goes also with the
Devils, and all damned Souls, who lie Captive in the Dark Dungeon.

60. Also they desire not to go out, because of the Great reproach of their
abominable Form and Image; and then whithersoever they happen to go, yet
Eternally they enjoy no Good, there is no refreshment among them, but Psalm.
49.14.
lying in Hell, as the Dead, or Eternal hungry thirsty and fainting Ones, and
are only an Evil Poisonous Source or Quality.

61. All is opposite and contrary to them, they have only a thirst after
Anguish and Malice or Wickedness; that, they devour Eternally into themselves,
and generate Blasphemies against God, and heap them upon themselves; the more
abominable and horrible they can make their Figure Shape or Posture to be, the
more they like it and the lovelier it is to them.

62. Like Counterfeits Tumblers and Mummers that act fools play; who would
always fain be the Greatest Fools they can invent, and set themselves forth,
in the horriblest deformed manner that they can, and have their Jollity and Joy
therein, thus they do also Eternally in Hell; and therefore they begin their
Sport and Scene, upon Earth.

63. Note.
As a Tyrant has his Joy, when he can torment Men, and vapor or riot away
their Sweat in foolish strange uncouth apparel gestures postures and
behaviors, and make fools of themselves: So do also the Devils in Hell.

64. And the lascivious debauched Luxury in this World, in strange bravery and
insolent voluptuous Modes, new Fashions and Apish Gestures; are a right Type
prefiguration and representation of the Hellish World.

65. All strange uncouth behavior, Crisping and Curling, Roaring, and Ranting,
State, Lostiness, and Complement, which proud Courtly man contriveth and
inventeth, and cloatheth his foolish Himself.
Man therewith, whereby he will be distinguished from the true Children of God;
these are prefigurations of the hellish World.

66. For all his Trimmings and Dressings and Polishings, his flattering and
pranking complement, wherewith they withdraw themselves from humility and
lowliness, is all a hellish Looking-glass; for, the Devils pride, and State,
will be like none, it distinguishes or differenceth it self in this World.

67. And, Blind Man understands it not, how the Devil befools him and
betrayeth him, and thus only to deride and scorn God, he represents and
pourtrayeth his proud stately vizard; that, poor Man may do as he does and yet
supposes he is therewith finer braver and better then other Men, whereas, yet
we all originally arise and proceed out of one only Body and Spirit.

68. But in the presence of God, and his Angels, he is thereby known only for a
Devils Or Monster.
vizard, and is before the Heaven an Abomination: As Folly is, in respect of
Widome, only an abomination, so is also the flattering hypocritical Pride and
State, an abomination before God, and his Angels, and in respect of the Noble
Image: yet the World cleaves to this abomination; whereby it declares or
makes a show and triumph of the perished corrupted Earthly Garment or Image.

69. He that sees a proud stately Man, he sees the heavy Fall of Adam, a
prefiguration of the hellish World, a half Devil and half Man, to whom the
Devil has a continual access, for he is the Devils Servant in this World,
for the Devil drives or manageth his work with or by him.

70. And that, poor Man knows not, and so goes or enters into the Devils
Ministry or Service, to his Eternal reproach: He supposes he is brave
therewith and venerable or worshipful; but he is therewith in the presence of
God, as a Fool, who puts on strange Clothes, and takes the Beastiall Form
on himself.

Further of the Sixth Point.
The Tenth Chapter. Of the Four Elements of the Devil, and of the Dark-world;
how a Man may know them, in this outward World.
1. THe First Element of the Dark-world and of the Devil, is Pride or State,
the Second is Covetousness, the Third is Envy, the Fourth is Anger.

2. These Four Elements do always continually hatch or breed a young Son,
forth; which is called Falsehood: And that Son is also a real Son of that
perished corrupt Adam, which he has left behind him, for a Lord of the World.

3. Who is become King in the World, and has possessed the whole World, he
rules in all quarters in the Third Principle: He that rightly knows this
King, he knows the four Elements of the Devil.

4. For, in the Dark-world, these four Elements have the Total dominion in
Spirit and Body and in all that is called Substance.

5. And we clearly see herein, that this outward World stands upon the ground
of these four Elements, and receives inclination and propensity from them,
also source or quality, and willing.

6. For, the Son of those four Elements, rules upon Earth, he will have All
obedient under him, and has accordingly a fourfold Generation or Tribe of his
Subjects.

7. First, the Generation of Pride or State, that wills to be above all
other, and will liken or equal it self to none.

8. Secondly, the Generation of Covetousness, which wills to possess all
alone, and to compel all under it, it would have all: This Second Generation,
is the Son of the First; for Pride and State wills also to have all, that
it alone, may be All.

9. Thirdly, the Generation of Envy, which is the Son of Covetousness: When
it sees, that it cannot have All alone, then it stingeth like Poison,
affords none any thing, its Will in all things is, either to draw to it self,
and to possess it alone; or else to rage over it with an Evil willing.

10. The Fourth Generation is Anger, which is the Son of Envy; what it cannot
stab or sting with Evil willing, that it kindles in the Anger Fire, and
breaks it with authority and power, raises Wars and Murders, and would
break or destroy All; this generation would subdue all under it.

11. Thus th^se are the Four Elements of the Devil, which all Four, are in one
another as ONE, and one goes forth from the other, and they generate
continually the one the other, they arise originally from the Dark Nature, viz:
from harsh, bitter, anguish, and fire.

12. But seeing Gods Power is an Opposition to them, so that in this World they
have not full power, therefore they have generated to themselves a Sly Crafty
Subtle Son, with or by which they rule, which is called, Falsehood.

13. That takes the Garment or Cloak of the divine Colors upon it, that a Man
cannot know it, and will needs be called a Son of Truth Virtue and Honesty:
But is indeed cunningly Wicked, it speaks one thing and thinks another, and
does another: He carries tne Glance or Luster of God upon the Tongue, and the
Devils Power and Poison in the Heart.

14. This is King upon Earth, and Manageth two Kingdoms; the First is called
Perdition; the Second Babell; a Confusion and Jarring.

I. On to the First Kingdom of Perdition, this King has put on the Strength
and Might; and it is the Garment of that very Kingdom. II. On to the Second
Kingdom, Babell, he has put on a white Glistering Garment: That must be, to
it, in Gods stead.
15. With that the King Governs upon Earth, as if he were God: The People
worship and pray to that Garment, and under the Garment is the Man of Falsehood
or Wickedness and Deceit, and has his Mother the four Elments in himself,
viz: Pride, Covetousness, Envy, and Anger.

16. Thus the four Elements of the Devil rule under a Glistering Flattering
Hypocritical Mantle or Cloak, and Men tug and tear one another for that Cloak,
every one will put it on, but he that does put it on, he puts on Hell and
Gods Anger.

17. This Mantle or Cloak is honored instead of God, and yet is the Mantle or
Cloak which Gods Anger did put upon Adam and Eve, when the Devil betrayed and
seduced them, that they fell away from the Obedience of God.

18. And it is even the Cloak of which God has warned us, ever since the
beginning of the World, that we should not put it on; for the Devil is lodger
therein; when we do put it on, we draw in the Devil to his Lodging, and must
do what he will; for he is Host in that house, and rests in that Mantle.

19. Since he is Gods Prisoner or Captive, therefore he puts on to us his
Mantle, and sends us therewith toward Babell, in his Ministry and Service,
and there we must reproach God, for we have Gods Mantle on, and have the Devil
under it for a Lodger and a Guest.

20. Thus the Tongue gives God Good words, and the Heart has the Spirit of
the four Elements of the Fierce wrath, and so God becomes reproached by the
Devil, that God should thereby see, that he the Devil is Lord and King over
Men.

21. And Esteems Gods dominion in Man, to be only a Seeming Holy or
Hypocritical.
Glistering Mantle, wherein he the Devil is Man; and has clasped Man in his
Arms or Clutches.

22. Indeed he covers him over with the Mantle, and lets the Man call
himself Gods Child; but Man in this Mantle does only do his Will for him; so
that, all, whatsoever the Devil cannot, or dare not, do, in his Kingdom,
that Man does for him in his Ministry or Service.

23. The Devil dare not kill any Man, but that does Man readily for him to
please him: Also the Devil cannot use the Creatures of God, and yet Man
misuseth them readily to please him; thereby to reproach God.

24. He drives on therewith, Pride, and Covetousness, also Falsehood and
Malice or Wickedness, and mannageth and brings to pass, All, therewith,
whatsoever the Devil will have, and he Glistereth also therewith in seeming
Holiness and Hypocrisy, as if he were God.

25. Therefore is the outward Kingdom, become a continual Murdering Den of
Devils: And the false, supposed Man, who calls himself a Man, but is not,
promoteth the Murdering, and increases Gods anger, and kindles the
Dark-world in this outward, so that Gods anger continually burns in this
World.

26. Whereby Gods Kingdom becomes hindered, and the Devils Will to be done;
and so the Devil continues a Prince upon Earth, whereas otherwise, he could
bring nothing to pass upon Earth; thus the supposed Man is in the Service and
Ministry of him, and performs his Will.

27. Thus, Two Generations of Men dwell together upon Earth. First, upright
honest Men who Minister to, and serve, God in the Mantle of Humility Lowliness
and Misery, whom the Devil reproacheth, and plagueth them by the other
Generation; and brings all his Wonders to pass on them.

28. The Second Generation also calls it self Man, and goes also in the Form
of Man, but, it is an Evil Beast, it puts on the Garment of its King, who
is called Falsehood, and Lives in the Power of the Four Elements of its King,
viz: in Pride, Covetousness, Envy, and Anger.

29. Pride is the first Power or Virtue, it teareth the righteous honest Man's
bread out of his Mouth, and suppresseth the poor that it might satisfy it self.

30. It will not that any thing should be like or equal to it, it will be
alone the beautiful brave Child in the House, it has put on the glistering
flattering Mantle, it will be called honest or virtuous, Man shall honor it,
and bow himself before it; also he shall not liken or presume to compare
himself to it: It will be Lord.

31. It says: I am Chaste Modest and Virtuous in my behavior, but its heart is
the Covetousness, that is the Wolf, and devoureth the Labor and Sweat of the
Miserable.

32. It lifts it self up above all; it Or studieth.
searches and diveth daily into the Wonders of God, contriving how is might
Seem Wise Understanding and Holy.
flatter and play the Hypocrite: It shows it self Friendly Courteous and
Modest; as if it were a Virgin full of Modesty and Chastity, and yet is a
perfidious Whore, and hates in the heart all, Honesty Modesty.
Virtue Chastity and Righteousness.

33. It is a continual Enemy of Love and Humility, whatsoever is simple and
plain, it disesteemeth or despises that; and yet compels the Simple under
its yoke; It says to the upright honest Man, thou art My Dog, I will hunt thee
whither I list.

34. Thou art Silly and Foolish; I am Wise Prudent and Politic; and is it self
the Greatest Fool of all, it fools and jests away God and the Kingdom of
Heaven for a little whiles Lust of the Eye: It plungeth it self into Darkness,
and puts on the Mantle of Cumbering cares and irksomenesse.
Anguish.

35. The Second Power or Virtue of this King Falsehood, is Covetousness, that
draws all into it self, and darkeneth Prides Glistering Garment; it forces
Evil and Good one among another, to it; and con^tantly fills Pride or State,
full.

36. And when it has filled that, then it takes its Son Envy, and vexes
and tormenteth Pride, therewith; so that it has no rest or quietness in its
Glance or Luster: Envy Stingeth in the desirous Covetousness, as if it were Mad
and Senseless: It tormenteth and plagueth the Pride Day and Night, that it is
never at Rest.

37. The Covetousness is the right filthy durty swinish Beast; it desires more
then it may or Can devour, its Jaws stand open day and night; it suffers
not Man to Rest, and plagueth him always in its sordid baseness; so that man
hunteth after Earth, and after those things, which the Earth affords,
without, any Man's Covetousness; there belongs only Labor to it, and no
Covetousness.

38. Covetousness Plagueth it self, and is its own Enemy, for it fills it
Self with woe and disquietnesse, and darkeneth and obscureth Man's
understanding, that he cannot apprehend, that All comes from the Divine hand;
it makes Man's Light of Life, dark; it consumes the Body, and bereaveth it, of
divine Sense Perception and Glory.

39. It casts it into the Grave of Death, and brings it into the Temporal
and Eternal Death; it attracteth dark Substance or Matter into Man's Noble
Image, and Makes of an Angel a fierce wrathful Devil: It Creates or
awaketh the Turba over Soul and Body, and is the abominablest and ugliest Beast
in the Abyss of Hell, for it is the Cause of the Source or Quality and Pain or
Torment; without it, might no Source or Torment Exist.

40. It makes War and Strife, for it never lets it self have enough; or
never is satisfied: If it had the whole World, yet it would fain also have the
Abyss; for there is no place Born, Prepared, or Created.
generated for its Rest.

41. It builds Countries and Kingdoms, and breaks them also again, and
drives Man into mere weariness toil and unquietness; it is exactly the
Devils Heart and Will; for Pride is the fine brave Spirit, which sprouteth out
from Covetousness.

42. It is the fair brave Child, that there should possess Heaven, but
Covetousness has made it a Bastard, and has introduced it into Rev. 17.5.
Babell, into the Mother of the great Whoredom upon Earth: There Pride always
plays the Whore with Covetousness, and is but a Bastard in the presence of
God.

43. It cannot possess the Kingdom of Heaven, it makes or has its Kingdom
of Heaven upon Earth, it lies in Whoredom with the King Falsehood, which
takes all its Labor, and gives it to the Four Elements of the Devil in the
Dark-world, and thither must also Pride together with Covetousness follow
after, when the Anguish breaks the Covetous Sack.

44. It is indeed so very Religious Pious and Sincere, and yet takes its
Covetousness with it, into the Abyss, that yet the Pride may have its Joy
therein.

45. As a Fool in his Fools Coat, which toyleth and vexes himself, that he
might bring forth Folly, and please his Spectators, in that he is so senseless
a Fool: In like manner also Pride, and Covetousness, is Gods Fool; and the
Devils Jugler, who has his Joy therein, that he can make, of Gods Image, a
Fools Image.

46. The Third Power or Virtue is, Envy, in the Four Elements of the Devil, in
the Kingdom of Falsehood; that is a Sting, it rages and raveth, as an Evil
Poison; it Can remain no where, and has no place of its Rest.

47. Its Mother the Covetousness lets it have no Rest, it must continually
rage and rave; it must enter into that, in which, it was not generated; it is
the Mouth of Covetousness, a constant Liar and Defamer and Disgracer of
others, it stingeth into its Neighbors Heart, and wounds it.

48. It devoureth it self for very poisonous hunger, and yet never has enough;
it makes disquietnesse without limit or Measure; it is the greatest Poison;
and the Eye of Hell; the Devil sees Man therewith into Soul and Body, Nothing
is like to it.

49. It is no Fire, but the sting of the Fire; it is the Author of all Evil,
or mischief, and yet finds no Rest; the more it drives on, the more
senseless and mad it is, it is a tainted Poison; it needs no Substance, yet
it rages in the Substance.

50. It makes Man more then senslesly mad, so that he desires to rage and
rave against God; It is Hells and the Angers Essence; it makes of Love, the
greatest Enmity; it affords Nothing to any, and yet is it self a famished
Nothing.

51. This is the Devils Will-Spirit; that Man, which takes it into his
Lodging, he takes in the Devil together with Gods Anger; for it brings the
hellish Torment and Woe, it is the Eternal Enimicitious Plague and
disquietnesse, and destroys the Noble Image of God, for it is Gods, and All
Creatures, Enemy.

52. The Fourth Power or Virtue in the Four Elements in the Kingdom of
Falsehood of the Devils, is the Anger; the Malice or Wickedness, that is the
right hellish Fire; the Anger becomes generated between the Covetousness and
the Envy.

53. It is the Envies Fire and Life: That which the Envy cannot bring to pass,
that the Anger brings to pass; The Anger takes Body and Soul together, and
runs as a raging Devil, will murder and break or destroy all.

54. It runs against Walls and Forts: And though perhaps it bursteth it
self, yet it is so raging, like a Mad Dog, who bites worries and kills all;
it is so poisonous venomous and spiteful in its anger, that what it cannot
overpower, yet it poysoneth venometh or spiteth.

55. This is the Right Pod^gra.
Gout of the World, when Pride in its Hypocritical flattering Mantle cannot
g^t the Power and Authority by Subtilty and Falsehood; then it must afterward
set up the Fourth Power or virtue, which strikes with fists thereupon, and
raises Wars upon it.

56. O how frolic is the Devil, when his Four Elements thus rule; then he
supposes, he is yet Lord upon Earth, though indeed he is Captive; and yet the
Beast Men perform his office well, and so he therewith does but reproach Men,
that they are and do worse then he himself can do.

57. Thus, these are the four Elements of the Dark-world: in which the Devil
supposes to be a God; wherewith he rules upon Earth with his faithful Son
Falsehood; which first is the Smugge Kitlin, which before hand gives good
words, and yet watches continually upon the Mouse; if it can but once catch
it: O how brisk and Jocund it is, when it can bring the Roastmeat to the Devil.

58. With these Four Elements is Man surrounded, and has them in the false
Kings Land and Country, for his Lodging: They Shoot him at an hours to the
Heart, and would Murder his Noble Image.

59. He must continually be in Strife against these: For they are with and in
him, as in a Lodging: They stand always upon him: And would Murder his best
Jewel.

60. If but one of these Four Elements have power and Authority to qualify or
operate in Man; then that One kindles all the other, and instantly robs Man
of his Noble Image, and makes out of it, a vizard of the Devil.

61. And none can with truth say; who lets these Four Elements have power
and authority to qualify or operate; that he is a Man; for he qualifieth or
operateth in the Devils property, and is an Enemy of God.

62. And though perhaps the Devil cloateth him with the flattering
Hypocritical Mantle, so that he can give good words, and knows how to behave
himself finely, that a Man supposes he is a Child of God: yet for all that he
is no Man, so long as these four Elements, lead the upper dominion.

63. But he is a Devillized Man, half Devil and half Man, till he makes his
measure full; and then he is a Total Devil in Man's Form or Shape.

64. NOTE.
Therefore let every one learn to know what kind of Properties rule in him, if
he find that these four Elements or but one of them rule in him, then he has
time to draw into Battle against it, or else it will not be Good; he should not
dare to comfort himself with the Kingdom of Heaven.

65. Only let him not suffer the Devil to cast the flattering Hypocritical
Mantle about him, as is done now adays, when Men live in these four Elements,
and do but finely tickle themselves with the Sufferings of Christ, that must
be this wicked man's Cloak and Covering.

66. The deceitful Man might hold his dominion, if he did not thus tickle
himself, with Christ's Satisfaction: Oh, how the Glistering Hypocritical Mantle
of Christ will be pulled off from thee; and then Men will see the Whore of
Babell standing, with the four Powers or Virtues.

67. It is not only Comforting will do it, but hinder and resist the
deceitful Man, that he may not be Lord in the House; he must not have the
Dominion, but Rihhteousness, Love, Humility, and Chastity, and a continual
willing to do well.

68. Not, in Pride, Covetousness, Envy, and Anger; but in Humility, in
well-doing, with a good heart, not dissembling and giving good words, but in
DOING. It must be DOING.

69. Note.
To withstand the Devils willing, to be satisfied with a little, in patience to
shut up himself in hope upon God; to withstand the four Elements of the Devil,
and to take in 1. Humility. 2. Meekness. 3. Patience. 4. Love.

Gods four Elements, which are Humility, Meekness, Love or Mercifulness, and
Patience in Hope, these are Gods Elements; these a Man should awaken or stir
up in himself, and therewith continually strive against the 1. Pride. 2.
Covetousness. 3. Envy. 4. Anger.

Devils four Elements.

70. Man must here be in Strife against himself, if he will become a heavenly
Citizen, he must not be a Lazy Sluggish Sleeper, in Eating Drinking,
Gourmandizing and Drunkenness, only to fill his Belly, whence the Devils
Elements begin to Labor and bring forth fruit.
qualify or operate: But he must 1 Pet. 5.8.
be Temperate Sober and Watchful; as a Soldier that stands before his Enemy.

71. For Gods Anger striveth continually against him, he will have enough to
do with that, to defend himself: For, the Devil is his Enemy; his own
perished corrupt Flesh and Blood is his Enemy; Gods Anger is his Enemy, in
himself; and the whole World is his Enemy; Wheresoever he looks he sees
Enemies; All which, would rob him.

72. Therefore it is striving that must do it; NOT with Mouth and Sword, but
with Mind and Spirit, and not give over or leave off, though perhaps Body and
Soul should break to pieces; and so then must God yet continue to be the
Comfort of the Heart, as King David says; Psalm. 73.26.
When Body and Soul shall happen to break in sunder; then yet, thou art my God,
the Comfort of my heart and my Refuge.

73. And though a Man should see that the whole World were wicked, yet if he
does think to be a Child of God, he must still remain steadfast.

74. And though perhaps he should think, that he were alone, in this Path; and
that the whole World also should say to him; Thou art a Fool, and art Mad; yet
he should be, in the World, as if he were dead; and should have that said by
the Devil, who is his worst Enemy.

75. And he should depart no whither; but think or Consider, that in his
purpose he pleases God, and that God himself in him, is his purpose: That he
will deliver him from the Devil; and bring him into HIS Kingdom. AMEN.

THe 18. of April, 1639. The Second Translation of this Book into Low Dutch,
was finished, out of Three different Copies: One of which was by Herr Michael
von Endern, compared with Jacob Behme's own Copy, and found very Correct.

And Englished out of that Nether-dutch Copy, compared also, with a High Dutch
Copy, in September, 1657.

Den Oversetter: Den 27. February, 1638, Aen all Kinderen van de Edele. SOPHIA.
DEes Pen, was noyt so stout; in seven volle Jaren,
Dat sy dorst grijpen aen, dit diep gegront Gewas:
Om uyt't Hoogh-duyts, in ons Lief- Moeders-taal, te baren;
Maar, nu heeft Sy't vol-brach, in veert ien-dagen ras.
Daar voor, Zy't NIETS, tegen't geschapene; en Al; Zijnde, Alles, in Alles.
NIETS, en AL, en't Gonigh Goes ghepresen;
Door De Ecuwighe wijsheijt.
Sophias gheslacht; met Siel, Beeldt, Geest bereyt:
Het Guwigh EVEN; will ons, van't blindt ghesicht, ghenesen;
Dat wy doorts mogen, Sien, Gods groote Of, Verborgentheyt.
Heymlijkheyt.
SONNET. Op den In-hout, van dit Tractaat.
Op't I. en II. Cap. Het. I. Punct.
HOogh-Schools-vernuft, ghespits; u is wat Groots bevolen:
Ghy Soeckt, in d' Ickheyt; to geen, u steeds verborgen blijft.
Romt, siet dit Schoon GEWAS: tiids-perck u nu gerijft:
Hier is den diepsten Gront; waar gaat ghy langer dolen?
Van's werelds aenvang blijt, dit; Maar, niet aen de Gelatentheyt.
aen d' Ickheyt verholen:
Daar door't (...) Dat is; 666. L 30. A 1. T 300. E 5. I 10. N 50. O 70. S 200.
666.
Drie-Ses verstant; veel Over-spel bedrijft:
De Liefd is gansch verkout; ghy Zijt gheheel verstift:
Ach! 't Lichaam is als is, van't hooft tot in de solen.
Op't III. Cap. Het. II. Punct. Hier kont ghy Sien; hoe't quaat, Sich met het
Goet, verdraaght. Op't IV. Cap. Het. III. Punct. Oock Satan's Strijds-begin;
Sulckx, van ons, wort beklaaght. Op't V. en. VI. Cap. Het. IV. Punct. En hoe't
EVEN Euwigh Licht, door Wereldts-drie, Rompt dagen. Op't VII. en VIII. Cap. Het
V. Punct. Hoe't quaat, en't Goet, verd wijnt; en, 't Even, den strijdt behour.
Op't IX. en X. Cap. Het. VI. Punct. Sier hier, des duyvels Rijck; Seer duyster,
woest, en Rout; Sijn Elementenvser; den Mensch, belaas! Steeds plagen.
1. Hooveerdigheyt. 2. Gierigheyt. 3. Nijdigheyt. 4. Tooren.

Mede-Borger, van dees dry
-vermenghde, Wereldt.
Englished thus. The Translatour of Jacob Behme's Great Six Points into
Netherdutch. The 27. February, 1638. Dutch Style. 17. February, 1637. English
Style. To all the Children of the Noble SOPHIA.
THis Pen was not so bold to dare, for Space of seven whole years;
To take in hand this Curious, rare, deep grounded, BRANCH; but fears,
To bring it out of the Highdutch Phrase, into our Netherdutch.
Mother Tongue:
But has now finished that Race; in time, fourteen Days long:
For which; the GOD. Who is the Abyssall incomprehensibility, where Nothing
appears manifest or Revealed: And yet is All: For he is all in All; and by him,
and from him, and for him are all things.
NOTHING, and the ALL, the Only GOOD; be praised:
By The Eternal Wisdom.
Sophia's children; with all; Soul, Image, Spirit, raised:
O, that The Eternal ONE, would Cure, our blinded Eyes, and Sight;
That All might henceforth, See, most sure; Gods Hidden secret Treasure in our
Souls.
Mysteries aright.
Here follows another Sonnet translated out of the Netherdutch into English
A SONNET Upon the Contents of Jacob Behme's, Great Six Points.
The I. and II. Chapter. the I. Point.
REason of the Schools on Pinnacle! Great things here proffered are.
You Seek in the Tabernacl' of Self; they are hid, for all, that care.
Come see this fairest BRANCH or Sprout; the Pitch of Time requires;
Here is the deepest Ground, throughout; where? long, stray, your desires?
From the Worlds beginning, 't has remained; from But not from RESIGNATION or
Self-denial.
SELF; still, withdrawn, quite;
That the Understanding, is not gained; of the (...). that is, 666. L 30. A 1.
T 300. E 5. I 10. N 50. O 70. S 200. 666.
M.DCLXVI.
SIXES, THREE; aright.
Love is became quite cold, and Dead; ye are now stiff and chill;
The Body is as Ice, from the Head, along, down to the Heel.
The III. Chap. the II. Point. Herein you may see, how; Evil, does with the
Good unite. The IV. Chap. the III. Point. How Sathan's Strife, begins; and
will, be; by us, wailed quite. The V. and VI. Chap. the IV. Point. And how the
ONE Eternal Light: Through THREE Worlds; does appear. The VII. and VIII. Chap.
the V. Point. How, Evil; or Good; vanish quiet; and the One, keeps field,
in the Rear. The IX. and X. Chap. the VI. Point. See here; the Devils Kingdom;
and, how Dark, Wast, Cold, it is: His Elements * FOUR; how Each, to Man;
perpetual Torment is.
Your fellow Citizen of this Threefold
mixed World.
Gods Four Elements are.
1. Humility. 2. Meekness. 3. Patience. 4. Love.
The Outward Worlds Four Elements are.
1. Air. 2. Earth. 3. Water. 4. Fire.
* The Devils Four Elements are.
1. Pride 2. Covetousness. 3. Envy. 4. Anger.
A Brief Exposition or Small Book of these SIX Points. Viz. I. Of the Blood and
Water of the Soul. II. Of the Election of Grace, or Predestination of Good, and
of Evil. III. Of Sin; what Sin is, and how it is Sin. IV. How Christ
will deliver up the Kingdom to his Father. V. Of the Magia: what the Magia is,
and what the Magic Ground is. VI. Of the Mystery; what it is.


By Jacob Behme Otherwise the Teutonick Philosopher.

Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

London, Printed by M. S. for Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at the Castle
in Cornhill. 1661.

The Preface.
THe highly Precious Knowledge, is not attained unless the Soul have once
overcome in the Storm, and beat down the Devil, and so has attained, the
victorious Garland or Crown of Triumph, which the Most blessed Virgin Chastity
Sets upon it as a Badge of victory and a token that it has Overcome in its
Dear Champion Christ; for then this Wonderful knowledge rises up, yet with no
Perfection.

The First Point. Of the Blood and Water of the Soul.
1. ALL whatsoever is Substantial and palpable, is in or belonging to this
World. Now, since, the Soul is not a Substance or Being, in or of this World;
therefore its Blood and Water, is not a Substance, in, or of, this World.

2. Indeed, the Soul, together with its Blood and Water; is, in the outward
Blood and Water, but its Substance is Magical, for the Soul is even a Magic
Fire, and its Image or Form is generated in the Light, (in the power of its
Fire and Light,) out of the Magic Fire, and yet is a true Image in Flesh and
Blood; viz: in the Original thereof.

3. As, the Wisdom of God has a Substance; and yet the Wisdom it Self is no
Substance: So, the Soul together with its Image, has a Substance, and yet the
Soul is only a Magic Fire, but its Sustenance or Preservation is from its
Substance.

4. For, as Fire must have a Substance, if it must Burn, so the Magic Fire of
the Soul also, has Flesh, Blood, and Water; for no Blood could be, if the
Tincture of the Fire and Light, were not, in the Water, which is the Ens or
Life of the Wisdom; and that has in it all the Forms of Nature; and it is
the other or Second Magic Fire.

5. For it affords all Colors, and out of or from its Form, the Divine
Power goes forth in the Meek Substance of the Light, understand, according to
the Property of the Light: And according to the Property of the Fire, it is a
Sharpness of Transmutation or alteration, and can drive on every thing to its
highest Pitch or Degree, though it self, be no Corporeal.
living Spirit, but the highest ENS.

6. Thus also, it is Such an Ens in the Water; and drives forth therein, both
the Property of the Fire and of the Light, together with all Powers of Nature:
Where then it turns the Water into Blood, and this it does, both in the
inward and outward Water; viz: in the outward and inward Blood.

7. The inward Blood of the Divine Substance or Or Essence.
Substantiality, is also Magical, for the Magia makes it to be a Substance:
it is Spiritual Blood, and which cannot be touched or stirred, by the outward
Substance, but by the Imagination only: The inward Imagination drives on the
outward Will in the inward Blood; whence the Flesh and Blood of the Divine
Substantiality, Or perishes.
fades; and so the Noble Image of the Similitude of God, becomes Darkened or
Obscured.

8. The Flesh and Blood of the Soul, is, or Consists, in the highest Mystery;
for it is divine Substantiallity, and when the outward Flesh and Blood dies,
then it falls home to the highest Mystery, and the outward Mystery falls
home to the Inward.

9. And each Magic Fire, has its clarity or brightness, and darkness in it
self, for which things Sake, a Final day of Separation is appointed, wherein
all shall pass through the Fire, and be tried what is capable of it, and what
is not, and then every thing goes into its own Magia, and is afterward as it
was always from Eternity.

The Second Point. Of the Election of Grace, or Predestination, of Good, and of
Evil.
10. GOd alone is ALL, from Eternity: His Substance does part it self, into
Three Eternal Distinctions: One, is, the Fire-world, the other the Dark-world,
and the Third, the Light-world: And yet they are but one only Substance, one in
another, and yet the one is not the other.

11. These Three Distinctions, are alike Eternal and unmeasurable, and
included in no Time, nor Place; each Distinction includes it self in it Self in
a Substance, and its Source is also according to its Property, and in its
Source is also its Note.
Desire; viz: the Center of Nature.

12. And the Desire is its making, for it makes Substance where none is
before, and this in the Essence of the Desire according to the Desire of its
Property; and this together, is only a Magia, or a hunger after Substance.

13. Every Form makes Substance in its Desire, and every Form drives it self
forth out of the Looking-glass of its Glance or Luster, and has its Seeing or
Vision in its own Looking-glass, its Seeing is a Darkness to the Looking
Glass of the other, its Form is hidden to the Eye of the Other; but in the
Feeling is a difference or Distinction.

14. For, every Form takes its Feeling, from the Original of the First Three
Forms in Nature, viz: from the Harshnesse, Bitterness, and Anguish, and in
these Three there is no pain in themselves, but the Fire makes pain in them,
and the Light makes it to be Meekness again.

15. The true Life, stands in the Fire, therein is the Tongue Style or Cock
of the Beam of a pair of Scales.
Angle between, tending both to Light and Darkness; The Angle is the Desire;
whatsoever it fills it self with, to that Fire the desire belongs, and the
Light thereof, shines out of that Fire, and that Light is the Representation
or seeing or discerning of that Life, and the introduced Substance in the
Desire, is the Wood or Fuel of that Fire, from which that Fire burneth-forth,
whether it be harsh or soft, and that also is either its Kingdom of Heaven or
of Hell.

16. The Humane Life is the Angle between Or Love-Fire.
Light and Darkness, to which soever it gives up uniteth or inclines it
self, in that it burns; if it gives it self up into the Desire of Or the
Coveting of Earthly things.
Essence, then it burns in the anguish, in the Fire of the Darkness.

17. But if it gives it self up into the Nullity or Nothing, then it is
Desirelesse or free from Desiring, and falls home to the Light-fire, and then
it can burn in no Source or pain, for it drives up no Substance, in its Fire,
out of which Fire can burn forth, now seeing there is no Source, or pain in it,
therefore the Life also cannot be capable of any Source, or pain, for there is
none in it; And thus it is fallen home to the first Magia, which is, God in his
Ternary Triplicity Threenesse Trinity.
Liberty.

18. Now, when the Life is generated, it has all the Three Worlds in it; And
to what World the Life inclines or appropriateth it Self, it is maintained and
preserved by that, and kindled in the Fire thereof.

19. For, when the Life kindles it self, it becomes drawn by all the Three
Worlds, and they stand in the wrestling in the Essence, viz: in the first
kindled Fire; and which Essence soever the Life in its desire draws in and
receives, its Fire, burns.

20. If the first Essence, in which the Life kindled it self, be good, then is
that Fire also pleasant and good, but if it be Evil and Dark, from a wrathful
or fierce property, then is that also, a wrathful or fierce Fire; and has
again such a Desire; according to the Property of the Fire.

21. For, every Imagination desires only Substance in its likeness, wherein it
does exist.

22. The Life of Man in this Time, is like a Wheel, where very Suddenly, that
which is undermost becomes uppermost, and kindles it self in every Substance,
and defiles it self with every Substance, yet its Bath or Laver, is the Moving
of the Heart of God, a Water of Meekness, and out of that, it may in its
Fire-Life, drive forth the Substance. Gods Election or Predestination, stands
not in the first Essence.

23. For, the first Essence, is only the Mystery or toward Life, and
belongs properly to the first Life, togetner with the kindling in the
Mystery thereof, out of which it is proceeded, whether it be a totally
wrathful or fierce Essence, or a Mixed, or an Essence of Light, according to
the Light World.

24. Out of whatsoever Property, the Light arises, out of that also burns
the Light of its Life, and that Life, has no Election or Predestination, no
Judgment passes upon it, for it stands in its own proper Original, and
drives on its Judgment in it self, it separateth it self from all other
Sources, for it burns only in its own Source; in its own Magick-Fire.

25. The Election or Predestination passes upon that which is introduced:
Whether it belong to the Light or to the Darkness; for, of whatsoever property
it is, according to that also is the Will of its Life; It becomes known
whether it be of the fierce wrathful Essence, or of the Meek Love-Essence; And
so long as it burns in the One Fire, it is left or forsaken of the other; and
the Election or Predestination of that Fire wherein it burns, passes upon
that Life; for that wills to have it, it is of its own property.

26. But if that Fire-will, viz: the flying or moving Angle, casts or swayeth
it self into the other Fire, and kindles it self therein, then it may kindle
the whole Life with that Fire, if it abide in that Fire.

27. And then that Life is Regenerated, either as to the Dark-world, or as to
the Light world, in which soever, the Will kindles it self. And upon that
passes another Election or Predestination: And that is the cause, why God
causes us to be taught, and so does the Devil also; each of them wills that
the Will of the Life should converse and kindle it self, in his Fire. And then
the One Mystery takes hold of, or receives the Other.

The Third Point. Of Sin. What Sin is. And how it is Sin.
28. A Thing which is but only ONE, has neither Commandment nor Law; but if it
mixeth it self with another, then there are two Substances or Essences in One,
and there are also two Wills, one whereof, runs contrary to the other, and
thence arises Enmity.

29. Thus, we are to consider and Conceive, of the Enmity against God, God is
simply One, and Good, without any Source, and although, every Source is in HIM,
yet not Manifested; for the Good has swallowed up the Evil or that which is
Contrary, into it self; and keeps it in the Good by Compulsion, in
Subjection, as a Captive, where the Evil must be a cause of the Life and of
the Light, yet, not Manifested; but the Good slays or Mortifyeth the Evil,
that it self in the Evil, may dwell in it self, without Source or Perception.

30. The Love and the Enmity, is but One only Thing, yet each of them dwells
in it Self, and that makes Two things: Death is the Partition Wall between
them both; and yet there is no Death but this, that the Good dies from the
Evil; as the Light is Dead to the Source of the Fire, and feels the Fire no
more.

31. Now, thus we may in the Humane Life, fathom or search out, Sin, for, the
Life is Singly One and Good, but if there be another Source therein then what
is Good, then, that, is an Enmity against God, for God dwells in the Highest
or pretiousest Life of Man.

32. Now, no unfathomable thing, can dwell in that which is fathomable; for as
soon as the right Life awakeneth the Source in it Self; that is not like unto
the Abyss wherein there is no Source: And so immediately the One separateth it
self from the Other.

33. For, the Note.
Good, or the Light, is as a Nullity or Nothing; but if Somewhat comes into
it, then that Somewhat is another thing then that Nullity or Nothing; for that
Somewhat dwells in it self in the Source, for where there is Somewhat, there
must be a Source which makes and preserves that Somewhat.

34. Thus, we are to consider, of Love and Enmity; Love has One only Source
and Will, it desires only its like and not Multiplicity, for the Good is
singly ONE, but the source or Quality is Manifold; and, whatsoever humane Will,
desires much, that, fill^th that One in it Self wherein God dwells; with the
Source of Multiplicity.

35. For, the Somewhat is dark, and darkneth the Light of Life; and the One is
Light, for it loves it self, and there is no desire after any thing More.

36. And thus must the Will of the Life be tending and endeavoring into the
One, viz: into the Good, and then it remains in one only Source, but if it
Imagines in or after another Source, it is pregnant or in travel with that
thing which it lusts or longs after.

37. And if then, that thing be without an Eternal and Ground and Foundation,
and in a Frail Corruptible Root, then it self seeks a Root to uphold it, that
it self may remain; for all Life subsisteth in the Magic Fire, and thereupon
every Substance must have a Fire wherein it Self burns.

38. And then that Thing must make to it self a Substance according to its
Desire, that its Fire may have food to feed upon; Now, no Fire-Source, can
Subsist in the Note.
Free-fire or Fire of the Liberty; for it reaches not that because that is
ONE, of, or by, it Self.

39. Whatsoever would Subsist in God, must empty it Self of its own Will, it
must have no Fire burning in Self, but the Fire of God, or the Divine Fire,
Note.
must be its Fire; Its Self will must be united in to God; so that the Will of
God, and the Will and Spirit of Man, may be but One, and the Same.

40. For that which is one is not at Enmity, for it has but one only Will;
whithersoever it goes, or whatsoever it does, that is all one with it.

41. One only Will has but one only Imagination, and yet the Imaginat^on
makes or desires that which is only like it self. And thus we are to
understand Concerning the Contrary or Opposite Will.

42. God dwells in ALL, and there is NOTHING that Comprehends him, unless
it be one with him; and if it departs out of that One, then does it depart
out from God, into it Self, and is somewhat else besides God; Note.
and that Divides or Separateth it Self. And hence the Law does exist, that it
must either go again out of it Self, into that One, or else be separated from
that One.

43. Thus; It may be known, what Sin is, or How it is Sin: viz: the Humane
Will which separateth it self from God into its own Selfnesse, and awakeneth
its own self, and burns in its own Source; and so that Self Lust and Desire.
own Fire, is thus, not capable of the Divine Longing and Desire.
divine Fire.

44. For, all that the Will enters into, and will have as its own, that is a
strange Thing or Substance in the One only Will of God; for the Will of God, is
All things, and Man's own Will is Nothing; but if it be in God, ALL, is its own,
also.

45. Thus we know, The Desire of Lust to be Sin: For it Lusts, and so
departs out of One into Many, and introduces Much into the One: It wills
to possess as its own, and yet should be at Liberty and without Willing; By the
Desire, Substance is sought, and in the Substance the Desire kindles the Fire.

46. Now every Fire burns out of the Property of its Substance: and then is
the Separation and Enmity generated. For, Christ said. Math. 12.30. Luke 11.23.
He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me
scatters abroad; for he gathers without him, and whatsoever is not in him,
is without God.

47. Thus we perceive that Covetousness is Sin: For it is a Desire Extra
Deum.
without God, and we see also that Pride is Sin, for it will be its own and
separateth it self from God, viz: from the Only One.

48. For, whosoever will be in God, must walk in HIM; in his Will; For, seeing
we are, in God, but One in Many Members; therefore it is against and Contrary
to God, when one Member withdraws it self from the Other, and Makes it self
a Sole and only Lord; and so there be two Lords, and the One Severeth it self
from the Other.

49. Therefore all is Sin, and a Contrary Opposite Will, whatsoever the
Desire possesses as its own, for it self only, be it meat or drink, if the
Will imagines or sets it self therein, then it fills it self therewith,
and kindles the Fire thereof, and so another Fire burns in the first, which
is a Contrary Opposite Will, and an Error.

50. Therefore, there must a new will grow out of this Opposite Will, that so
it may give up it self again into that One only Union, and the Contrary
Opposite Will must be broken and slain.

51. And here, we are to Consider of the John 1.14.
Word, God, which became Man, and that if a Man set his desire therein, he
departs out of the Source, out of his own Fire, and becomes Regenerated a
new in the Word, and so the Will, that is thus departed, dwells in God, and
the first Will dwells in the Desire, in the Earthlinesse and Multiplicity.

52. And so the Multiplicity must Corrupt with the Body, and dye from the Will
that is departed; and the Will that is departed, is then known to be a new
Birth; for it reassumes all again into it self, in that One; but not with its
own Self desire, but with its own Love which is united with and in God; so
that, God, is 1 Cor. 15.28.
all in all, and his Will is the Will of all things; for one only Will
subsisteth in God.

53. And thus we find, that the Evil Note. Romans 8.28.
must be serviceable to the Good unto Life; if the Will departs out again
from it Self into the Good; for, the Wrath and Fierceness must become the Fire
of Life.

54. But the Will of the Life must be set in Strife, against it Self, for it
must fly from the Wrath, and not will it; it must not will that Desire, which
yet will and also must have its Fire: Therefore is it said, Joh. 3.3, 5, 7.
We must be regenerated in the Will.

55. Every Will-Spirit, that continues in the Desire of its Fire-Life ( viz:
in the Fierceness or Wrath of the Wood or Fuel for the Fire) or enters
thereinto, and possesses the Earthly; it is so long, separated from God, as it
possesses that Estranged heterogene thing, viz: the Earthlinesse.

56. Complexions.
And thus we come to know how superfluity of meat and drink, works or
brings forth Sin; for, the pure Will which proceeds out of the Fire-Life,
is drowned and captivated in the Desire; so that it becomes impotent in the
Strife; for the Fire-Source, viz: the Desire holds it captive and fills it
with distemper or Longing; so that the Will Imagines in the Desire.

57. The Will, as also that Desire, in or toward Meat and Drink is Earthly,
and Separated from God; but that Will which flies from the Earthly Desire,
burns in the inward Fire, and is Divine.

58. That Will which flees away from the Earthly Desire existeth not out of
the Earthly Fire, No, it is the Will of the Souls Fire, which is taken Captive
and Covered with the Earthly Desire, that will not continue in the Earthly
Desire, but it will be, in its One, in God, from whence it Sprang in the
beginning.

59. But if it be held captive in the Earthly Desire, then it is shut up in
Death, and suffers the Anguish of the Source or Torment. And thus it is to be
understood, concerning Sin.

The Fourth Point. How 1 Cor. 5.24.
Christ will deliver up the Kingdom to his Father.
60. IN the Creation of the World, and of all Things or Substances, the Father
moved himself according to his Property, viz: with the Center of Nature, with
the Dark and Fire-world; which remained in the Motion and Regiment or Dominion,
till the Father moved himself according to his heart, and according to the
Light-world, and, that, God, became Man, and then the Love of the Light, did
overcome the Fathers fierce wrathful angry Property, and so the Father did
rule in the Son with the L^^^.

61. And then the Son held his Regiment or Dominion in those that clave unto
God, and the Holy Ghost, that proceeds from the Father; did draw Men into the
Light of Love, by the Son, to God the Father.

62. But in the End, the Holy Ghost moves himself, in the Fathers and also in
the Sons Property, and both Properties become at once alike Stirring and
Moving, and the Spirit of the Father opens or unshutteth it self, in the
Fire, and in the Light, and also in the Wrath or Fierceness of the Dark-world,
and there the Regiment or Dominion falls home to the Father; for the Holy
Ghost, must always reign Eternally, and be an Eternal Opener in the Light-
and also in the Dark-world.

63. For the two Worlds must Stand still, and the Holy Ghost which proceeds
from the Father, and the Son, drives on the Rule and Dominion in the two
Worlds, according to each Worlds Source and Property.

64. He alone will be the Revealer of the Wonders. And thus the Eternal Rule
Dominion and Government, becomes given or Cor. 15.24, 28.
delivered up to the Father (who is ALL) which Rule, he drives on, with or by
the Spirit.

The Fifth Point. Of the Magia; what the Magia is, and what the Magic Ground is.
65. THe Magia is the Mother of the Eternity, of the Substance of all
Substances; for it makes it self, and is understood Or to be the Desire.
in the Desire.

66. It is in it self, no other then a Will, and that Will is the Mysterium
Magnum, the Great Mystery of all Wonders and Secrets, and yet it drives forth
it Self, through the Imagination of the desiring Hunger, into Substance.

67. It is the Original of Nature, its desire makes a Impression or Imaging
in a Thing.
Representation, this Representation is no other then the Will of the Desire,
yet the Desire makes in the Will, such a Substance as the Will in it self, is.

68. The true Magia is no Substance, but the desiring Spirit of Substance; it
is an un-substantiall Mutrix, and reveals or manifests it self, in the
Substance.

69. The Magia is a Spirit, and the Substance is its Body: And yet both of them
are but one, as Body and Soul is but one only Person.

70. The Magia is the greatest hidden Secret, for it is above Nature, it makes
Nature according to the Form of its Will; It is the Mystery of the Number Three
or Trinity; understand; the Will in the Desire to the Heart of God.

71. It is the Fountain in the Divine Wisdom, viz: a Desire in the Number
Three; in which the Eternal Wonder of the Number Three, desires to reveal it
self, with or by Nature; and it is that Desire, which introduces it Self into
the Dark-Nature, and by Nature, to Fire, and by Fire, through Death, or through
the fierce Wrath, into the Light of the Majesty.

72. It is not the Majesty, but the Desire in the Majesty, it is the Desire of
the Divine Power, not the Power it self, but the hunger or the desiring in the
Power, it is not the Omnipotency, but the Driveresse in the Power and Might,
or Introducer into the Power and Might, the Heart of God is the Power, and the
Holy Ghost is the Opening of that Power.

37. Yet it is the Desire in the Power, and also in the introducing or driving
Spirit, For it has in it the Fiat; whatsoever the Will-Spirit opens in it,
that it drives into a Substance through the harsh Astringency which is the
Fiat; all according to the Model of the Will; As the Will does Model it in
the Wisdom, so the desiring Magia receives it, in; for it has in its
Property, the Imagination; as a Longing Lubet Lust or Delight.

74. The Imagination, is soft and pliable; and resembles the Water; but the
Desire, is rough and dry, like to hunger; it makes that which is pliable to
be hard, and so finds it self in all things; for it is the greatest Substance
in the Deity. It drives the Abyss into the Bysse or the Bottomless into a
Ground, and the Nothing into Something.

75. In the Magia, do lie, all the Forms of the Substance of all Substances, it
is a Mother in all the Three Worlds, and makes every thing according to the
Model of its Will; it is not the Understanding, but it is the Creatrix or
Maker according to the Understanding, and Suffers it self to be used either to
Good or to Evil.

76. All whatsoever the Will does Model in the Witz. Inspective or
Scientificall Faculty.
Ingenium, Wit, or Inventive Faculty of the Mind, if the Will of the
Understanding enters in along with it, that, is by the Magia made into a
Substance, and serves those that Love God, in The Divine Substance.
Gods Substance; for it makes in the Understanding Divine Substance, and
receives it from or out of, the Imagination, that is out of the Meekness of
the Light.

77. It is that which makes divine Flesh; and the Understanding, is from or
proceeds out of the Wisdom, for it is a knower or discerner of the Powers
Colors and Virtues; the Understanding leads the true and right Spirit with a
Bridle, for the Spirit is volatile and fleeting, and the Understanding is its
Fire.

78. The Spirit is not backsliding or departing away, so as to backslide or
depart from the Understanding, but it is the very Will of the Understanding;
but the Senses or Thoughts in the Understanding, they are fleeing forth or
volatile and backsliding or departing away.

79. For, the Senses or Thoughts are the Flash out of the Fire-Spirit, and they
bring into it in the Light, the Flame of the Majesty, and in the Darkness they
introduce the Flash of the Terror, like a fierce wrathful flash of Fire.

80. The Senses or Thoughts are of so subtle a Spirit, that they do enter into
all Substances, and force all Substances into them, but the Understanding
tries all in its Fire, it rejects the Evil, and reteineth the Good; And
then it receives the Magia its Mother, and brings it into a Substance.

81. The Magia is the Mother to Nature, and the Understanding is the Mother
proceeding forth out of Nature, the Magia leads into a fierce wrathful Fire,
and the Understanding leads its own Mother the Magia, out of the fierce
wrathful Fire into its own Love-Fire or Meekness.
Fire.

82. For, the Understanding is the Or Fire of the Power.
Power-Fire, and the Magia is the Burning-Fire, and yet is not to be understood
that it is Fire, but the Potentia possibility or Mother to the Fire; The Fire
is called Principium or a Principle; and the Magia is called Desire.

83. By the Magia are all things accomplished, both Good and Evil, its own
Working is Negromantia, and yet it parts it self forth into all Properties; in
the Good it is Good; and in the Evil it is Evil; It serves the Children of
God to bring them to his Kingdom; and it Serves the Witches to bring them to
the Kingdom of the Devil; for the Understanding can make thereof what it
will; It, is without Understanding, yet it Comprehends ALL, for it is the
Comprehension of ALL Things.

84. No Man can express its Depth or Profundity: For from Eternity it is a
Foundation or Ground and Preserver or Upholder of all Things, it is a
School-Mistresse.
Mistress of Philosophy and likewise a Mother thereof.

85. Yet Philosophy leads its Mother the Magia according to its own
Pleasure: As the Divine Power, viz: the Word or Heart of God; does bring the
severe Father into Meekness; so does Philosophy, viz: the Understanding bring
its Mother, into a Meek Divine Source.

86. The Magia is the Book of all Scholars: All that will learn, must first
learn in the Magia, whether it be a high or low Art; The very Ploughman in the
Field must go into the Magic School if he will till his Ground aright.

87. The Magia is the Best Theologia. Divinity.
Theology, for, in it the true Faith, is both grounded and found; and he is
foolish that reproacheth it, for he knows it not, and reproacheth God and
himself, and is rather a Juggler then an understanding Theologus Divine.
Theologist.

88. Like one that fights before a Looking-glass, but knows not what he
fights with, for he fights without the Looking-glass, so the ungodly
Theologist also looks upon the Magia, through Looking-glass as by a Glimpse,
and understands nothing of the Power, for it is Divine; and he is Ungodly and
also Devilish; according to the Property of each Principle. In Brief. The
Magia is the Acting in the Will-Spirit; or the performance in the Spirit of the
Will.

The Sixth Point. Of the Mystery. What it is.
89. THe Mystery is no other then the Magick-Will, which yet sticks in the
Desire, It may Image it self in the Looking-glass of the Wisdom, how it will:
And as it Imageth it self in the Tincture, so it is comprehended in the Magia,
and brought into a Substance.

90. The Mysterium Magnum, or Great Mystery, is no other then the Hiddenness
of the Deity, together with the Substance of All Substances; out of which
Continually One Mystery proceeds after another; and every Mystery is the
Looking-glass and Representation of the Other: And it is the Greatest Wonder
of Eternity, wherein ALL is included, and from Eternity made known in the
Looking-glass of Wisdom. And there is Nothing comes to pass, which is not
known from Eternity, in the Looking-glass of Wisdom.

91. But you must understand this, according to the Property of the Looking
Glass, according to All the Forms of Nature; viz: according to Light and
Darkness, according to the Comprehensibility and Incomprehensibility,
according to Love and Wrath, viz: according to Fire and Light, as is clearly
mentioned in other Places.

92. The Magus has Power in that Mystery to deal according to his own
pleasure, and can make what he will.

93. But he must be armed in that Substance which he will make; for else, he
will be thrust out as a Stranger, and be delivered up to the Spirits thereof
into their Power, to do with him according to their Desire: Of which in this
place, no more is to be mentioned, because of the Turba.

FINIS.
A Consideration of the Divine REVELATION.

in A Hundred Seventy Seven THEOSOPHICK Questions.

Begun and Answered to the 13. and the 15. Question to the 5. verse, and no
further, in High Dutch, Anno. 1624.

By a Lover of Christ and his Children, for the better Consideration, what Man
is, out of a right true Theosophick Ground.

Viz: by Jacob Behme Otherwise the Teutonick Philosopher.

Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

London, Printed by M. S. for Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at the Castle
in Cornhill. 1661.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
1. IT is written: 1 Cor. 2.10.14.
The Natural Man, perceives nothing of the Spirit of God, it is foolishness
unto him, and he cannot apprehend it: And on the other side, it is also
written, The Spirit searches all things, even the Deeps of the Deity, 1 Cor.
2.10, 14.

2. If now Mr Wiseling, without the divine Light, will apply himself to these
Questions, and to expound them, he will not be able to do it; and besides,
will dare to account it a Sin, to Question so very high things: seeing
himself cannot understand them.

3. To him we say, that he should let them stand, and leave them, to those, to
whom the Spirit of God, (who searches all things, by and through, Man's Spirit)
will give it, while it is yet an incomprehensibility to him, and by him, is
thought impossible.

4. But to those, who have a Love to JESUS, we say, that it is very well and
easy to be searched and understood, and is no impossible thing; For in a True
Christian, CHRIST dwells, Col. 2.3.
In whom all the Treasures of hidden Wisdom are Manifest: And such a one
knows it, in the Spirit of Christ only, and not in own self Nature and
Ability.

5. As therefore, we have clearly Expounded these Questions in a little Book by
it self, indeed very Summarily and briefly: And yet in our other Books, very
Largely Copiously and sufficiently: And Commit the Reader of this, into the
Revelation of JESUS CHRIST.

Here follow the 177.
Hundred Seventy Seven THEOSOPHICK Questions.
1. Question. What is God, Or distinct from.
without Nature and Creature in himself? 2. Question. What is the Abyss of All
Things, where there is no Creature; viz: the Unsearchable Nothing? 3. Question.
What is Gods Love and Anger? How is he an angry God; whereas he himself is the
unchangeable Love? 4. Question. What was there, Col. 1.17.
before the Angels and the Creation was? 5. Question. What is the Ground and
the Substance, out of which the Romans 11.36. Col. 1.16.
Angels are become Created? What was that very Power, in the Word of God; which
became flowen forth and Creaturely? 6. Question. what art the Office, and the
Actings of the Angels, and why did Gods Power introduce it self into Imagings?
7. Question. What moved Lucifer, that he Lusted against God, and turned himself
away from the Good? 8. Question. How was it possible that an Angel could
become a Devil? Or what is a Devil? In what Essence or Substance does he
stand after the Fall? 9. Question. Seeing God is Omnipotent, why did he not
withstand Lucifer but let it come to pass that he became a Devil? 10.
Question. What has the Devil desired, upon which he is departed away from
Gods Love? 11. Question. What has been the Strife between Rev. 12.7.
Michael and the Dragon? What is Michael and the Dragon? Or how is the
vanquishing and thrusting out, effected? 12. Question. How or which way is it,
that Men should consider and conceive of Gods Eternal Council in the Divine
Vision or beholding? Seeing 1 Cor. 2.10.
the Spirit searches all things, even the Deeps of the Deity, as Saint Paul
says concerning it, 1 Cor. 2.10. whereas yet it stands not in the Creatures
ability, and yet is possible, for a Man, really to understand this Ground of
the deep Unity? 13 Question. How is the thrusting out of Lucifer and of the
Dragon Effected, whither is he become Rev. 12.9.
thrust out, that he can be without God? Whereas God Ier. 23.24.
fills all things; Or what is the foundation of Hell where he dwells? 14.
Question. What is Lucifers Office in Hell, This Question is not answered.
with his Legions? 15. Question. Has the foundation of Hell received a
Temporary beginning: Or has it been from Etenity? This is answered but to the
5. verse.
Or how may it subsist Eternally, or not? 16. Question. Why has God poured
forth such fierce Wrath, wherein an Eternal Rev. 17.8, 11.
Perdition will be? 17. Question. Whereas God is and remains Eternally
undivided: What then is his working in the Place of Hell? Is there indeed a
Certain place of Hell or Not? 18. Question. Where is the place of Heaven,
wherein the Angels dwell? How is it distinguished from Hell? Also whither is it
a Certain Place? And how is that to be understood. 19. Question. What are the
Col. 1.16. Ephesians. 6.12.
Dominions, or Thrones, and Princes of Angels, Evil, and Good, in the
Invisible World? How may a Man understand the Spiritual World of Eternity in
the Visible? Whither also are they divided asunder by Space and Place? Or what
is the inward Foundation. 20. Question. Out of what is the Visible World
Created? Seeing the Scripture says, Jon 1.3. See the Three Principles. Chapter 22.
verse. 11.
God has made all things by his Word, Job. 1.3.? How is that to be understood?
21. Question. Whereas Genesis 1.25. Mysterium Magnum chapter 61. ver. 63. and 68.
God and his Word are only Good: Out of what then is stowen forth, the Evil
in this Worlds Substance; as venomous poisonous worms or Creeping things,
Beasts Herbs or Weeds, and Trees; as also in the Earth and other Things? 22.
Question. Mist. Magnum chapter 29. ver. 67.
Why must Strife and Opposite willing, be in Nature? 23. Question. Divine
Vision chapter 1. ver. 22.
What is the Ground of the Four Elements? How is the division effected, that out
of One, Four, are come to Be? 24. Question. Wherefore, and to what use and
benefit, were the Genesis 1.14. to the 10.
Stars Created? 25. Question. What is the Ground of the Temporal Genesis 1.2.
to the 6.
Nature- Light, and of the Darkness? Out of what did they exist? 26. Question.
What is the Genesis 1.6.7.
Created Heaven, out of the Midst of the Waters? And what is the Separation of
the Waters above the Firmament, from the Waters beneath the Firmament? 27.
Question. What is the Ground of the Masculine and Feminine Kind, in this worlds
Substance? Whence has the Conjunction and Desire existed? Whether might it not
be done in one Ground, without dividing? 28. Question. What are the Principles
in the Spirit of this World: Of the Superior, and Inferior, Substance? 29.
Question. What is the Sperme or Seed of the Generation of all Things? 30.
Question. What is the distinction or difference of the Sperme or Seed, between
the Metals Stones and Vegetables; viz: Herbs, Trees, and Mineral Earths? 31.
Question. How is the Conjunction of the Feminine and Masculine Kind Effected;
whence their Seed and growing exist. 32. Question. What is the Tincture in the
Spermatick Kind or Species; whence the Growing and Luster Exist? 33. Question.
Out of what, are all Creatures of the Mortal Life, become Sprouted and
Created? 34. Question. What was the Archaeus and Separator of their Kind or
Species and Property, which has formed and still at this day does form, them?
35. Question. What are the Six days work of the Creation; and the Sabbath? 36.
Question. What is the difference or distinction of the Mortal Creatures? And
what is their Chaos wherein every Generation or Species lives, and wherein
they are become distinguished one from another? 37. Question. To what End, and
wherefore, did the Mortal Creatures, come to be? 38. Question. Out of what,
Genesis 2.7. to the 22.
as to the Body, did Man, become Created? 39. Question. What was * the
breathing in, whence Man is become a living Soul? 40. Question. What is the
Immortal Life in Man, viz: the Soul? And what is the Spirit of Man, and the
outward Life in this World, in him? 41. Question. What is the Idea, or Express
reflex Genesis 1.26.
Image of God in Man; wherein God works and dwells? 42. Question. What was
See the 40. Questions of the Soul. Quest. 39. 40. Also Myster. Magnum, chapter 25.
ver. 16. And the 14. Epistle ver. 14. quere the Epistle in English.
Paradise wherein God Created Man? Is it alterable and a Creature? Or does it
stand in the Eternal Ground? 43. Question. Why did God in the Beginning Create
but ONE Man? And not instantly a Man and Wife at once, as other Species are?
44. Question. Whether was the first Man in such a habit of Condition Created to
Eternal Life; or to change or alteration. 45. Question. What manner of Image
was Adam before his Eve, in what Form and Condition was he, when he was neither
Man nor Wife, but both? 46. Question. Whether had, Adam, before his Eve, Genesis
2. from the 7. to the 22.
also Masculine Members, and such Bones, Stomach, Guts, Entrails, Teeth, and
also such things as we now have? 47. Question. If Adam also had been thus, as
we are now: How was it possible that he should stand in such a Manner, in
impassibility and incorruptibility? 48. Question. Had Adams Eating and Drinking
been after a Paradisicall Manner, without care and necessity or want, if he had
stood out the Trial or Proba? 49. Question. Whether also should Adam have
Eaten such Fruit in Paradise, as the Heavenly Food, after this Time, shall be?
Or whereinto should he have Eaten? Where should that have remained: Or what
would have become of it? Seeing all Substances of this World are earthly and
transitory; and he only was an Eternal Heavenly Image, and needed not the
Vanity? 50. Question. Whether also did The four Elements govern Adam in his
Innocence; or but ONE only in the Equality of the four Elements; also whether
did he feel Heat and Cold, before he fell? 51. Question. Whether also should
any thing have been able to kill him, or destroy him? 52. Question. What should
Adams State and Condition upon Earth have been? What should he have done, if he
had Continued in Paradise? 53. Question. What was the Earth with its Fruits
before the Curse, when it was called Paradise? Genesis 3.17.
54. Question. Whether also should it have been possible, that the propagation
should be effected, without Man and Wife; being Luke 20.3^.36.
in the Resurrection from the Dead, they shall be neither Man nor Wife; but as
the Angels of God in Heaven? Math. 22.30. 55. Question. How should it have been
possible, that a Man and Wife, should have remained Eternally? Or whether would
God have altered and changed this Creature Man? Seeing, in the Eternal Life,
they shall be like the Angels? Whether also, Adam in the beginning, became
Created in that very angelical Imaging, or in another Imaging, that shall rise
again, and live Eternally. 56. Question. What were the Trees in Paradise; which
were Genesis 2.9.
amiable to behold and good to be eaten of. 57. Question. What was Genesis 2.9.
the Tree of Life, and also the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; each in
its Power Essence and Property? 58. Question. Wherefore did God Create these
Trees; seeing he knew well, that Man would lay hold on them; and so hurt
himself thereby? 59. Question. Why did God Genesis 2.17.
forbid Man these Tree? What i^ the Cause thereof? 60. Question. Why should Man
Genesis 1.26.
rule over all the living Creatures or Beast of the Earth; how should that have
been and to what End? 61. Question. Why did God say, Genesis 2.18.
It is not good for Man to be alone? whereas yet in the beginning, Genesis 1.31.
he beheld all his Works that he had made; and said, they are very Good: But
concerning Man only he said: It is not good that this Man should be alone: why
was it not Good? 62. Question. Why did Genesis 2.21. to the 24.
God suffer or cause a deep Sleep to fall upon Adam: when he built or framed a
Wife out of his Rib? What does that Signify? 63. Question. How became the Wife
or Woman, made out of Adam? What does the Rib out of his Side, signify, out of
which God made the Wife or Woman, as Moses writes? 64. Question. Whether also
did Eve receive a Soul and Spirit, from Adams Soul and Spirit, or a New strange
One especially and severally given from God. 65. Question. How was the dividing
of Adam into the Wife or Woman; effected? 66. Question. Why Genesis 2.23.
did Adam take his Eve, instantly to him, and say: That she was his Flesh? How
could he know her? 67. Question. What was the Serpent on the tree of the
Knowledge of Good and Evil, which seduced Eve? Genesis 3.1.
68. Question. Why did the Serpent persuade Eve and Not Adam, to Lust after the
Fruit? What was the Fruit, on which they both did Eat Death? 69. Question. What
was the Sin, Genesis 3.6.
and how is it become a Sin: So that it is Enmity against God? 70. Question.
Why did not God hinder that, See the Answer to the 9. Question.
that it should not be done or Committed? Seeing he had Genesis 2.17.
forbidden it to them? 71. Question. How Genesis 3.7.
did Adam's and Eye's Eyes, become opened; so that they saw that they were
Naked, which they did not know before? 72. Question. What was Genesis 3.8.
Adam and Eves Shame; that they hid themselves by the Trees of Paradise? Whence
came the Fear and the Terror. 73. Question. How did Adam and Eve in the Fall,
really Genesis 3.3.
dye away from the Kingdom of Heaven and Paradise; and yet lived Naturally as
to this World? 74. Question. What was Genesis 3.8. See the Mysterium Magnum, chap.
33. ver. 11. to the 16. Three Principles, chap. 17. ver. 91.
the Voice of God, in the Word, when the Day became Cool? How did God call Adam
again: How is that to be understood? 75. Question. What is Genesis 3.15.
the Seed of the Woman or Wife, and the Crushing or treading upon the Serpent;
what did God speak or breath into them again; was it only an Outward Promising,
or an Jam. 1.21.
incorporating of the Operative or Effectual Grace? 76. Question. What is the
Genesis 3.17. See Myster. Magnum. chapter 25. ver. 38. Three Principles, chap. 20.
ver. 40.
Curse of the Earth? And what is Effected thereby? 77. Question. How did Adam
and Eve become Genesis 3.24.
thrust out of Paradise into this World? And what was the Cherubine with the
Naked Sword before Paradise? 78. Question. Why did the Genesis 4.8. See the Three
Principles, chapter 20. ver. 45. and 84.
first Man born of Woman, become a Murderer? 79. Question. What was Genesis 4.3,
4.
Cain and Abels Sacrifice? Mysterium Magnum. chapter 26. ver. 44.
Wherefore did they Offer Sacrifice? What did they thereby Effect? 80.
Question. Why was Cains Murder Committed because of the Sacrifice; what was
the Ground of that? Mysterium Magnum, chapter 27. ver. 41.
And what Manner of Type or prefiguration, are these two Brothers? 81.
Question. In what Grace did the first World, Mysterium Magnum, chapter 28. ver. 4.
to the 25.
without Law, become saved? What was their Justification? 82. Question. Whether
did Cain become Damned in respect of his sins? Mysterium Magnum, chapter 29. ver.
57, 54.
What was his doubting or despairing of Grace? 83. Question. Why did Genesis 4.15.
Mysterium Magnum, chapter 29.
God Make a Mark upon Cain: And say, Whosoever slays Cain, his blood shall be
avenged sevenfold. 84. Question. Wherefore Genesis 4.2^
said Lamech, one of Cains posterity, to his Wives Zilla and Ada: Lamech shall
be avenged Seventy times Seven times; what does that signify? 85. Question.
What was the Genesis 6. from 1. to the 8.
Greatest Sin of the first World? 86. Question. Genesis 5.22, 23, 24. Hebr.
11.5. Luke 9.30, 31. See the 35. Question, in the forty Questions of the Soul.
What it the Enochien Life? Where has Enoch remained; or what has become of
him as also Moses and Elias? 87. Question. Genesis 7.10. Mysterium Magnum, chapter 34.
ver. 37.
What did the Deluge or Flood for Sin, signify? 88. Question. What signifies
Genesis 9.21, 22, 25.
Noah's Drunkenness? Upon which he Cursed his Son Ham? 89. Question. What is
Genesis 11.2, 4, 9. Mysterium Magnum, chapter 35. and 36.
the Tower at Babell; and wherefore did the Languages there become altered or
changed? 90. Question. What was the Covenant of Genesis 17.5, ^.
Abraham concerning the Blessing, together with the Circumcision? What does
that signify? 91. Question. What manner of Figure is Genesis 19.13.24.25.
Mysterium Magnum, chapter 43.
the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha? How was that Effected? 92. Question.
Wherefore did Genesis 19.26. Mysterium Magnum, chapter 44. ver. 28, etc.
Lots Wife become a Pillar of Salt? How is that to be understood? 93. Question.
Wherefore did Genesis 19. from 30. to the 38. Mysterium Magnum, chapter 44. ver, 3.
and 36, etc.
Lots Daughters lie with their Father: And beforehand made him drunk; that they
might be impregnate or with child of their Father: Whence two mighty Nations
existed? What does this Figure signify? 94. Question. What Exodus 2.3. to the
10.
does Moses's figure signify; that he must be taken out of the Lake of Water
and be preserved for so great an Office? 95. Question. Why did Exodus 3.2. Acts
7.30.
the Lord appear to Moses in the Bush after a Fire-flaming manner, when he
Elected and Chose him? 96. Question. Exodus 7. chapter to the 13.
Out of what Power, did Moses do his Wonders before Pharaoh? What does this
Figure signify? 97. Question. What manner of Figure, is Exodus 13.
the bringing forth of the Children of Israel out of Egypt? 98. Question. Why
Exodus 24.18. chapter 34.28. Deuteronomy. 9.9.
must Moses remain forty days upon Mount Sinai; when God gave him the Law? 99.
Question. What is Romans 13.9, 10.
the Law in one Total Sum? 100. Question. What were the Heb. 9. etc.
Sacrifices of Moses? How did Sin become over thrown and reconciled through
these Sacrifices? 101. Question. What is the ground of the Prophetical
Prophesying? By what Knowledge and Spirit did 2. Pet. 1.19.20, 21.
the Prophets in the Old Testament Prophecy. 102. Question. What, is, John
1.41.
Christ, of whom the Prophets in the Old Testament Prophesied? 103. Question.
What was Mal. 4.6. Luke 1.13, 15, 16, 24, 36, 63.
John the Baptist, the Forerunner of Christ? 104. Question. What Luke 1.26, 27.
manner of Virgin, was Mary, (in which God became Man) ere She became
impregnate or with Child? 105. Question. Luke 1.27.
Wherefore must Mary, beforehand, be betrothed to old Joseph; ere She became
impregnate of the Holy Ghost? 106. Question. How is, God, viz: the word, John
1.14.
become Flesh? What has he assumed from Man? 107. Question. Wherefore would
Math. 1.21, 23. Luke 1.31.
God become Man? Could he not forgive Man his Sins, without becoming Man?
108. Question. How was the Uniting of the Deity and Humanity in this becoming
Man? 109. Question. How did Christ become born of Mary, to this World, without
prejudice to her Isai. 7.14. Math. 1.23.
Virginity? How could She after the Birth remain still a Virgin? 110. Question.
Why did Christ Converse, Luke 3.23.
thirty years upon Earth before he entered upon his Office? Why did Luke 2.52.
He increase in Age and Grace with God and Man: Seeing he is God himself; and
needs no increasing? 111. Question. Why Mark. 1.9.
did Christ suffer himself, to be Baptized by John with Water: whereas he
himself was both the Baptism and Baptiser, which should baptize with the Holy
Ghost? 112. Question. Wherefore must Christ Math. 4.2.
after his Baptism, be forty days Tempted in the Wilderness? What is that,
that a God-Man should be Tempted? And why must the Devil Tempt him, before he
Math. 4.1. and 23. John 2.11.
began his Works of Wonder or Miracles? 113. Question. How John 3.13.
was Christ in Heaven and also on Earth both at once. 114. Question. Why did
Christ upon Earth Math. 13.34.
teach before the people, concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, in Similitudes or
Mark 4.13, 33.34. Mysterium Magnum, chapter 46. ver. 31.
Parables? 115. Question. Why has not Christ himself described his Gospel with
Letters in writing: But only Taught and left it afterward to his Apostles to
write it down? 116. Question. Why must it be the very Mark 10.33. Math. 27.1,
41.
High Priests, and Scribes or Scripture learned, (who taught the People) that
must speak against or contradict Christ; and would readily mock him and condemn
him continually to death? Why must not the worldly Magistracy do it; or the
Common people? What does that signify? 117. Question. Why must there be such a
way and process observed toward Christ, Mat. 26.67. chapter 27.26. to the 34.
with Mockings reproaching derision or scorn and scourging before his Passion?
Why did God suffer that to be so done? 118. Question. Why must the very
Teachers of the Law, bring Christ to the judgment, and yet must be put to
Death, by the Math. 27.2.
Heathenish Magistracy? What does that signify? 119. Question. Why must Christ
suffer and Mat. 27.50.
dye? Was God to do it for such a Revenge sake; that he might atone and
reconcile or appease himself? could he not otherwise forgive Sins? 120.
Question. What is the Figure of the Two Murderers: Luke 23.33.
which were hanged on a Cross, on Each side of Christ? And why must Christ dye
on a wooden Cross and Not otherwise? 121. Question. How Heb. 2.14. Phil. 2.8.
did Christ slay Death on the Cross, with his dying? How came that to pass?
122. Question. Why must Christ Ioh. 19.31, 34 and 20.25. Col. 2.14.
be nailed to the Cross? And why Must his Side be opened with a Spear: out of
which Blood and Water ran? How do these signify in the Figure? 123. Question.
Why must Christ Math. 27. from 39. to the 50.
be reproached on the Cross? 124. Question. Whether also, was the divine Power
Ioh. 19.34.
in the Blood, which Christ shed or poured unto the Earth? 125. Question. Why
did Math. 27.51. Three Principles, chapter 25. ver. 44, 45.
the Earth Tremble, when Christ hung on the Cross? 126. Question. What did
Luke 23.46. See the 37. Question, of the forty Questions of the Soul.
the Darkness signify, which at that time came over all Nature? 127.
Question. Wherefore did Christ in his Death Luke 23.44. Mysterium Magnum, chapter
23. ver. 3.
commend his Soul, into his Fathers Hand? What is that Hand of God? 128.
Question. Why did some Luke 23.48.
Convert and turn again when they saw what was done, at the dying of Christ:
and the High Priests not? Why must they be blind and hardened to this work?
129. Question. What was Acts 2.27, 31 Heb. 2.14.
Christ's going to Hell; where he overcame Death and the Devil? 130. Question.
How did (...) 1 Pet. 3.19.20.
preach to the Spirits; which in the Ti^^ ^oah, believed not? 131. Question.
(...) ^hrists Rest in the Math. 27.63, 64. chapter 28.1. Luke 24.1.7.
Grave signify: (...) lie forty hours in the Grave? 132. Question. (...) must
M^th. 27.64, 65, 66.
Christ's Grave be guarded with W ^^ ^rs? What does that signify; that the Hi^h
Priests would resist or oppose Gods Power and Might, and would keep Christ in
the Grave? 133. Question. Why did the Evangelist say, that Math. 28.2. to the 9.
the Angel removed the Great Stone from the door or Mouth of the Grave? Could
not Christ have risen else, out of the Grave? 134. Question. What is the Power
of Christ's Resurrection through the Death? How Col. 2.14, 15.
did he make a triumphant show of Death on his Body? What was it then that he
did with it. 135. Question. What manner of Rev. 3, 8.
Door, has Christ, through Death, in our humanity opened, in the Anger and
Righteousness of God: whereby we may enter into God? How is that done? 136.
Question. What does the Pilgrimage Luke 24. from the 13. to the 31. verse.
Journey of the two Disciples from Jerusalem to Emaus signify: where they
complained in anxiety for their Master; and yet Christ walked among them, and
enquired of them and taught them: And yet they knew him not? 137. Question. Why
did Christ after his Resurrection first appear to Mark 16.9, 10, 11. John
20.14. to the 19.
a Woman and not to the Disciples 138. Question. Why did Christ Luke 24.42.
Joh. 20.19, 26.
after his Resurrection, eat of the broyled Fish with his Disciples: And
Entered into them through a shut door; and taught them? 139. Question. Why did
not Christ after his Resurrection show himself to Every one: But to some only?
140. Question. Why did Christ, Act. 1.2, 3. Three Principles chapter 25. from the
75. ver. to the 98.
after his Resurrection Converse forty days upon Earth, before he went or was
taken up to Heaven? What does that signify? 141. Question. What is Math.
24.51. Mark 16.19. Act. 1.9. Three Principles, chapter 25. from 98. verse to the
end.
Christ's going or Ascension to Heaven: That he did visibly ascend? Whither is
he arrived, and where is he now at present? 142. Question. What signify Acts
1.11.
the Two Men in shining Garments, who said; ye Men of Galilee, why look ye up
after him: this JESUS who is taken from you to Heaven will come again, as ye
have seen him Ascend or go to Heaven? Acts 1.11. 143. Question. Three
Principles chapter 26. verse 1, 2. thence to the 13.
Why must Acts 2.1. His Ascension was forty Days after his Resurrection or the
Passover or Easter: And ten Days after his Ascension, to the Day of
Pentecost, which was (...), quinquagessuna dies, the fiftieth day, or seven
weeks day, or the Morrow after the seventh Sabbath, which was called the Feast
of Weeks or First Fruits. Math. 26.2. Mark 14.1, 2. ^uke 22.1. John 13.1. the
Passover was the fourteenth day of the first Month. Exodus 12.1^. Levit. 23.5.
Numb. 28.16. in the Month Abib. Exodus 13.4.23.15. and 34.18. the Feast of the
first Fruits of thy Labors thou have sown in the field. Exodus 23.16. the feast
of weeks. Exodus 34.22. And from the Morrow after the Sabbath of the Passover
you shall count Seven Sabbaths that is seven times seven which is forty nine,
and the Morrow after makes fifty days. Levit. 23.15, 16. Numb. 28.26. The
Feast of Weeks. Deuteronomy. 16.9.
the Disciples of Christ, yet wait ten Days from his Ascension; for the
sending of the Holy Ghost? Why was not that done Instantly? 144. Question. What
is this; that the Disciples must Luke 24.49. Ioh. 15.26. Acts 1.4.
wait and Continue together, till the Holy Ghost came? 145. Question. What is
the Feast of Acts 2.1. to the 4.
Pentecost? How was the shedding or pouring forth of the Holy Ghost Effected?
And how did the bands of the Tongues of the Lords Disciples become unloosed?
146. Question. How is the difference or distinction of Languages among them, to
be understood: That they have at one instant Spoken all Languages at once in
one sense; so that People of Acts 2.5. to the 14.
all Nations understood them? 147. Question. What does this Joel. 2.28. Act.
2.17, 18.
shedding forth of the Holy Ghost, out of Christ's Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension to Heaven, profit or benefit us? How may that be also effected in us?
148. Question. What is the Romans 2.27, 29. and 7.6.
Litteral Word, and the 2 Cor. 3.6.
Living Word, Christ; in this shedding forth, one with the other: How became
they distinguished; seeing all did not hear the Holy Ghost Teach from the Mouth
of the Apostles: for Acts 2.13.
one sort of them said: They are full of sweet Wine; these heard indeed
Mans-word, but not Christ teaching in his Phil. 3.10.
Resurrection? 149. Question. How does Christ himself Teach presentially, in
the Office of Preaching: And yet sits at the right hand of the Power of God?
Or among whom does Christ Teach; what is a John 10.2.
Shepherd or Pastor, in the Spirit of Christ: And a Teacher of the 2 Cor. 3.6.
Letter without the Spirit of Christ: Each in his Office? 150. Question. Math.
18.18, 19, 20.
What is the Office of the Keys? Math. 18.18. John 20.22, 23. How may they
become rightly used? Or who is worthy or fit for this Office of the Keys: and
Capable thereof? How i^ this to be understood? Whether is Christ himself in the
Office, or whether is he himself the Office? Or whether has he freely given it
to Man, so that he may, without Christ's Spirit, forgive Sins? Or how is it
done? 151. Question. What is Christ's Testament, together with the Luke 22.19,
20. 1 Cor. 11.20. to the 29. and 34. See the Treatise of the Two Testaments of
Christ.
Last Supper, with Bread and Wine: How is Christ really enjoyed? John 7.51. to
the 66. The two Testaments
What manner of Flesh and Blood is it? And what is the Mouth to eat it with?
152. Question. What is the place in Man, wherein Christ's Flesh and Blood
Continues; as he himself says: John 6.56.
Whosoever eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood; he continues in me and I in
him. John 6.56. Also, John 6.53.
If you do not eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood: then ye
have no Life in you? John 6.53. 153. Question. How is, Man, and how does he
become, John 15.5. The two Testaments.
a Branch on the Vine-Stock of Christ? How does Christ dwell in him, and yet
sit at the Right Hand of God in Heaven; Also how can he sit at the right Hand
of God, in Man, and yet the outward Man, not be he? 154. Question. What manner
of Christian is a 1 Cor. 4.20. Iam. 1.21, 22. The two Testaments. 1. Ioh. 3.18.
Titulary Christian in Name only, without or out of Christ: who only Comfort
himself; and imputes Christ's Merits to himself, and yet is unregenerate of the
Spirit of Christ; and Lives Beastially? Whether also does he in such working
or doing belong unto Christ? Or what does he receive in Christ's Supper? 155.
Question. Whether also, may Christ's Ioh. 6.56. The two Testaments.
Flesh and Blood become enjoyed by Believers, without or out of the
Testamentory Ordinance and Observation? Or how may that be done? 156. Question.
Why has Christ ordained and instituted this Testament, and said: So often as we
do it, The two Testaments.
we should do it, in his remembrance. 1 Cor. 11.25. To what profit and benefit
is it done with Bread and Wine; and not without? Or whether may it also become
enjoyed or participated, without Bread and Wine? 157. Question. Whether is the
true Testamentary enjoyment or participation, The two Testaments.
bound merely to the Apostolical practice and Observation? Or whether also Men
have power or authority, to alter and change this Ordinance, as is done now
adays? 158. Question. Whether also is the Testament powerful in the altered
or changed Ordinance or Not? 159. Question. See the 5. chapter concerning the
Supper.
What do the Learned, when they reproach one another, about Christ's Testaments,
and the precious Covenant of Grace: And disgrace one another, and give one
another up to the Devil, about it? Whether do they also manage the Office of
Christ; whether is that right or wrong: whether also is this done as a Minister
of Christ? Or whom do they serve thereby? 160. Question. See the Theosophical
Epistle.
Which is the very Mark of a right Christian, upon Earth: whereby Men may
distinguish him from a Titulary-Christian? 161. Question. What is properly a
Christian, within and without? How is he a 1 Cor. 6.19.
Temple of the Holy Ghost, in which the Kingdom of God is inwardly revealed or
Manifested? How does he walk and Phil. 3.20.
converse in Heaven and upon Earth, both at once? 162. Question. What is the
John 4.3.
Antichrist upon Earth under Christianity? 163. Question. What is Rev. 16.19.
and 17.5. and 18.10. to the 22. and 19.20. and 17.1. to the 16. and 19.2.
Babell or Babylon; the Beast; and the Whore in the Apocalips or Revelations?
164. Question. What is the Ruin of the Beast; and how is it Effected, that the
Seven-headed Beast, should become cast into the Abyss? 165. Question. How does
Christ then take in the Kingdom, when this Beast becomes slain? 166.
Question. What is the true New Mat. 19.28.
Regeneration in the Spirit of Christ? Is it done in this time or after this
Time? 167. Question. What is the Rev. 13.14,
dying of a True Christian? What, of him, dies? 168. Question. What is the
dying of the Wicked: in that it is called an Rev. 20.14, 15.
Eternal Dying? 169. Question. Whither goes the Soul, See the 21. Question of
the forty Questions of the Soul.
when it parts from the Body; be it blessed, or not? 170. Question. What are
the Doings and Life of Souls, See the 22. Question of 40. Questions.
till the Last Judgment Day? 171. Question. What is the Jude 6. John 12.48.
Question 30. in the forty Questions.
Last Judgment, or how is it Effected? 172. Question. How is the John 11.24. 1
Cor. 15.52. in thirty Question.
Resurrection of the Dead Effected? What Rises again? 173. Question. How does
1 John 2.17. 2 Pet. 3.10, 13. In the 30. Question.
this World pass away or vanish? And what does remain thereof afterward? 174.
Question. What shall be after this Worlds Time: 1 Cor. 15.24. to the 28.
When God shall be all in all; when the Dominions shall cease, 1 Cor. 15.24,
28. 175. Question. Question the 3^. and 34. in the 40. Questions.
What will the Holy or Saints, and Damned; each of them do and leave undone?
176. Question. See the 40. Question.
Where shall Hell and also the Eternal Habitation of the Holy or Saints, be?
177. Question. What shall be the Eternal Jude 24.
Joy of the Holy or Saints, and the Eternal pain or Rev. 14.11.
Torment of the Wicked: Or also may there be any alteration Effected?
A Treatise or Consideration of or Concerning the Divine Revelation or
Manifestation.

Showing What, God, Nature, and Creature, as also Heaven Hell and the World;
together with all Creatures, are: Whence all things in Nature, have received
their Original: And for what, God has Created them: and of what profit and
Benefit they are. Especially of MAN. What Adam, and Christ, is. Deduced Through
the whole process and Course of the World: To the End, and into Eternity; and
set down in

177. Questions for the better Consideration or Meditation upon what Man is,
out of the right true Theosophick Ground.
An Exposition of The First Question. What is God o^ distinct from Nature and
Creature. Observe. The unsearchable God in Himself, manifests himself to be
known in Nature and Creature. All Goodness in Nature is the Manifestation of
what he is in himself in his Eternal Love, Joy, Mercy, Meekness, Right and
Glory of Heaven. And all Contrariety, Opposition, Adversity, Misery and Evil in
Nature is the Manifestation of his Eternal Wrath Anger Fury Darkness and the
Lake of Consuming Fire and Brimstone of Hell, which is his Nature in it self
separate or distinct from his Love which is God himself. And these are knowable
and discernable by us in the Love and Anger, Light and Darkness, Joy and
Sorrow, Prosperity and Adversity, Ease and Pain, Pleasure and Torment: In this
visible World in this Mortal and Transitory Life. For the Invisible Things of
him, that is, his Eternal Power and Deity, are clearly seen by the Creation of
the World, to the intent that all should be without Excuse, that do not learn
to know him thereby. See Romans 1.19, 20.
without Nature and Creature in himself? Note

Answer.
GOd is the Eternal Unity, viz: the Immense or unmeasurable Good, which has
nothing after it nor before it, which can give afford or bring in somewhat to
it, or that can Move it: Without all Inclinations and Properties: Which without
original of time, in it self, is but only ONE, viz: a mere Clearness Purity or
Stilness without Stirring: which has no where any space or place, nor needs
any for its habitation.

2. But is, without the World, and in the World, equally alike both at once:
and it is deeper then a Thought can cast it self: Yes, if one should for an
hundred thousand years together, speak forth the Numbers of its greatness and
depth, yet he would not have so much as begun, to have expressed its depth; for
it is the Endlesness or Infinity.

3. All whatsoever can be Numbered or Measured, is Natural and Or Imaginable.
Imagible; but the Unity of God, cannot be expressed; for it is equally alike
through and through all at once: And it is therefore called, and apprehended to
be, the Good, because it is the Eternal Meekness, and the highest beneficence
or well-doing in the perceptibility or inventibility of Nature and Creature:
viz: the perceptible or inventible sweet Love.

4. For the Unity, viz: the Good, flows forth from it self; and introduces
it self, with Out-flowing, into Willing and Moving.

5. There the Unity loves or thoroughly inhabiteth, the Desiring; or Moving;
and the Desiring or Moving; perceives the Meekness of the Unity: Viz: the
ground of the Love in the Unity; concerning which, Moses says; 1 Cor. 8.4.
The Lord our God is one only God, and no other.

6. And the matter is not so, as Reason supposes; that God dwells only above
the Stars without or beyond the Place of this World: There is no place
prepared for him, wherein he dwells apart: But only his Revelation or
Manifestation, is distinguishable.

7. He is through, with, and in us; and wheresoever, he, in a Life, becomes
moveable with his Love; there is God in his working Manifest or Revealed: That
is, his Love, viz: the Unity, is there flowing forth, desirous and perceptible
or inventible; there God has made himself a place, viz: in the Ground of the
Soul; in the Eternal IDEA, or Object or Representation of the Eternal
desiring in the Love; wherein the Love wills and perceives or finds it
self; as in the Angels, and blessed Souls, is to be understood,

The Second Question. What is the Abyss of all things, where there is no
Creature; viz: the Abyssall Nothing?
Answer.
1. IT is a habitation of Gods Unity: For, the opening, or the Something of the
Nothing, is GOD himself: The Opening is the Unity; viz* an Eternal Life and
desiring, a Mere Velleity or Willing: Which yet has nothing, that it can
desire, but only it self; therefore is the Will a mere desirous Love-longing
Delight; viz: an E^it of it self, to its perceptibility or inventibility.

2. The Will, is first, the Eternal Father of the Bysse or Ground: And
secondly, the perceptibility or inventibility of the Love, is the Eternal
Son, which the Will in it self generateth to a perceptible or inventible
Love-power: And Thirdly, the E^it of the desirous perceptible Love, is the
Spirit, of the divine Life.

3. And thus is the Eternal Unity, a Threefold, unmeasurable unbeginning Life:
Which stands in mere desiring, in conceiving and comprehending and finding of
it self; and in an Eternal Exit of it self.

4. And that which is gone forth, from the Will, from the Love, and from the
Life, the same is the Wisdom of God: Viz: the Divine Vision Contemplability
and Joy of the Unity of God: where by the Love introduces it self, into
Powers, Colors, Wonders, and Virtues, Eternally.

5. In this Opening Life of the Divine Unity, five Clear and Loud-sounding
Senses, become understood, in the perceptibility of the Love of the Life; viz:
A. E. I. O. V. Wherein the divine desiring and working, stands; the same
brings it self into an out-breathing, or out-speaking, to the divisibility or
distinguibility, and to the Understanding, of the ONE only Trinity, whereby the
Eternal Life, finds or perceives and understands it self.

6. The Trinity manifests or reveals it self out of the Unity, with a
Threefold breathing or Speaking; so that this Threefold breathing or Speaking;
after a threefold manner or kind, enters into it self, to a self ownnesse:
And this Threefold Sense, is called with its Sensual Name: JEHOVA.

7. For the Unity, viz: the I. goes into it self, into a Threefold Substance;
which is called IE: and that IE, is the Father: Which brings it self, with
its breathing or speaking Will into HO; that is, into a Comprehension Formation
or Concep^ion of the Love: And in the HO, the Word of all Powers becomes
un^erstood: for it makes a Circumference, or Surrounding, of it self, viz: the
Eternal Somewhat or Something: Whence the Love-longing o^ Delight, goes
forth: Whose Exit is the Spirit; which comprehends conceives or forms it
self into V A: For the V, is the Spirit; viz: the Exit; and A, is the Wisdom,
wherein the Spirit Comprehends or forms it self into a working Life.

8. And then is this Threefold breathing or Speaking Life, in it self. IAH: For
the incomprehended Longing Delight, is the Or Circumference. Or Eternal.
; viz: the AVGE, or Eye of the one only Seeing, a pure or clear Seeing: And
the IAH, is the Threefold Entrance of it self; that is, to the perceptibility
or inventibility of the desiring, which opens it self, through the Eternal
Breathing or Speaking.

9. The Opening, viz: the property in the Sense of the perceptible or
inventible opening; is called, ADONAI: And it is Six Powers, out of which the
Great Mystery, (...).
Mysterium Magnum, that is, the High Name (...).
Tetragrammaton, flows, out of which ALL Substances, the visible, and
invisible, are flowen forth; and come into form and Images.

10. In the Word (...)
ADONAI; that is, in these Six Powers do lie the Six Properties of the
Eternal Nature; (that is, of the Natural Life), out of which the Angels and
Souls, according to to the inwardnesse of their IDEA, are flowen sorth;
together with the Six Days of the Creation of this World: Which with the
Seeing Life, which imageth it self in the Midst of the Substance; like the The
Eye, the Circumference, the heart of God.
; became shut in, for the quiet Rest, wherein the Six Powers stand and Rest, in
the Still Love, that is, in the Eternal Unity: And yet with their own
Self-working, without ceasing, do will, and go forth.

11. And that is Sol.
, the Seventh Day; in which God rested from all his Works, and Eternally does
rest; that is, the Six Powers (viz: First, the Desirousnesse; Secondly, the
Mobility; Thirdly, the Perceptibility; Fourthly, the Fire or Life; Fifthly, the
Light or the Love; Sixthly, the Sound or Distinguibility, or Understanding;) do
rest in that, from whence they do exist (viz: in the, in the place of God)
wherein the Eternal Love is signified; viz: the Unity, or the somewhat of the
Unity; which is the Eternal Sabbath of all things, from the Good Substance.

12. Thus, we understand; First; that the Eternal Nothing, without all
beginning, is a clear pure Or Glimmering like a Looking-Glass.
shining; viz: the Eye of the Eternal Seeing: For in the fame, viz: in the
Nothing all things do see: And being the Somewhat, is existed from this
Seeing; therefore, the Nothing, viz: the Eternal Unity, sees through ALL;
unhindered.

13. And Secondly, we understand further: That God himself is the Seeing and
the Finding of the Nothing: And it is therefore called a Nothing; (though
clearly it is GOD himself) because, that it is incomprehensible and
inexpressible, or Ineffable.

The Third Question. What is Gods Love and Anger? How is he an angry Jealous or
Zealous God; Seeing he himself is the unchangeable Love? How may Love and Anger
be ONE only Thing?
Answer.
1. THough we may here be hard to be understood by the Reader: Yet he may
understand all, in the divine Power, and Calling upon God; if it be in right
earnest sincerity with him.

2. The Reader must know, that all things consist in IAH and NEIN; [in Yea and
Nay. 2 Cor. 1.18, 19, 20. Affirmation and Negation.
Yes, and No.] be it Divine Diabolical Earthly; or whatsoever can be Named.

3. The ONE ( viz: the IAH) is mere Power and Life; and it is the Truth of God,
or GOD himself: This would, in it self, be unknowable, or unapprehensible, and
in it would be no Joy, nor triumphant exultation nor perceptibility or
inventibility without the NEIN, or No.

4. The NEIN or No, is an Object or representation, of the IAH, or of the
Truth, that the Truth may be manifest, and that there be somewhat, wherein a
Contrary is, and whatsoever, can be Loved; wherein the Eternal Love is working
perceptible and desirous.

5. And yet we cannot say that the IAH, is separated from the NEIN, or, No, and
are TWO things one besides the other: But they are only ONE thing; and yet
sever themselves into two Or Principia.
beginnings and make two Or Contra.
Centers, wherein each of them works and wills in it self.

6. As the Day in the Night, and the Night in the Day, are two Centers, and yet
unsevered, but only with the Will and Desire, they are severed: For they have a
twofold Fire in them: As first, the Day, the Heat, unclosing, and the second
the Night, the Cold, enclosing; and yet this together, but One Fire; and
neither of them both, without the other, would be Manifest or Working.

7. For, the Cold, is the Root of the Heat and the Heat, is the Cause that the
Cold, is perceptible: Without these two, which yet stand continually in Strife,
all things would be a Nothing; and would stand still without Moving

8. Thus also is to be apprehended concerning the Eternal Unity, of the Divine
Power: If the Eternal Will, did not it self flow forth from it self, and
introduce it self into receptibility, then there would be no form, nor
distinction; but all Powers would be nothing else but one only Power: Also
then, there could not possibly be any Knowledge or Understanding; for the
Understanding arises in the distinguibility of the Multiplicity, where one
Property sees proves or tries and wills the other: In like manner also the
Joy stands therein.

9. And yet if there must exist a receptibility, then there must be an own
desire to the perceptibility of it self; viz: a self-will to the receptibility,
which is not, not wills like unto the one only Will; for the one only Will,
wills nothing Else, but the one only Good, which it self is; it wills no
other then it self, in the likeness.

10. But the out-flowen Will, wills the unlikeness, that it may be
distinguished from the likeness; and be its own Somewhat; that there may be
somewhat, which the Eternal Seeing can see and perceive or find.

11. And out of the own Will existeth the NEIN, or No. For it brings it self
into ownness, that is, into the receptibility of it Self: It wills to be
Somewhat and likeneth not it self to the Unity.

12. For, the Unity is an Out-flowing IAH, which Eternally stands thus, in
the Speaking or Breathing forth, of it self; and it is an unperceptibility or
uninventibility; for it has nothing wherein it may find it self, but only in
the receptibility of the departed Will; viz: in the NEIN, or No, which is an
Object or Or Reflex-Image.
Representation of the IAH, wherein the IAH becomes Manifest or Revealed, and
wherein it has somewhat, that it can desire.

13. For, the ONE, has nothing in it self, that it can desire; unless it
DOUBLETH it self, so that it becomes TWO: Also it cannot find or perceive it
self in the Unity; but in the Duality or Twinenesse, it perceives or finds
it self: Understand the Ground aright, thus.

14. The Separated Will is gone forth out from the likeness of the Eternal
Desiring; and yet also it has nothing that it can desire; but only it self:
Yet seeing it is a somewhat in respect of the UNITY, which is like a NOTHING
and yet is ALL: Therefore it brings it self, into a desire of it self, and
desires it self and also the Unity, out of which it is flowen forth.

15. It desires the Unity, to the perceptible Love, longing; that the Unity
may be perceptible in it: And, it self it desires, to the Moving,
Apprehending, and Understanding; that in the Unity, may be a divisibility, that
Powers might exist.

16. And although the Power has no Ground nor beginning, yet so there does
become distinctions in the receptibility; out of which Nature does exist.

17. This out-flowen Will, brings it self into a desire; and the Desire, is
Magneticall, that is INtracting: And the Unity is OUT-flowing; and now it is a
Contrary; that is IAH, and NEIN: for the OUT-flowing has no Ground; but the
In-drawing, makes Ground.

18. The Nothing does will, OUT from it self; that it might be manifested; and
the Somewhat does will, IN to it self, that it may be perceptible or inventible
in the Nothing, that the Unity in it may be perceptible; yet thus, the OUT and
IN is an unlikenesse.

19. And the NEIN or No, is therefore called a NEIN or No, because it is an
Inturned desire, that is INwards shutting IN, or INcluding.

20. And the IAH is therefore called IAH: Because that it is an Eternal Exit
Emanation or OUT-going, and the Ground of all Beings or Substances; viz: the
Clear Sounding Truth; for it has no NEIN or No, before it self, but the NEIN,
or No: existeth first, in the OUT-flown Will of the receptibility.

21. This OUT-flown desirous Will is INtracting: And Comprehends Conceives
or forms it self, In it self; whence come Forms or Conditions, and
Properties.

22. The First Property is Sharpness, whence comes, Hardness, Cold, Dryness,
and Darkness: for the Attractiveness, overshadoweth it self; and this is the
true Ground of the Eternal and Temporal Darkness: And the Hardness and the
Sharpness, is the Ground to the Perceptibility or Inventibility.

23. The Second Property, is the Moving in the Attracting: This is a cause of
the division or separating.

24. The Third Property, is the true finding or perception, between the
Hardness and the Moving; Wherein the Will perceives or finds it self: For
it finds it self in a Great Sharpness, like a great Anguish, in respect of
the Unity, so to Speak.

25. The Fourth Property, is the Fire, viz: the Flash of the Glance, that
existeth from the great Joining together of the great anxious Sharpness and of
the Unity; for the Unity is Meek and Still; and the Moveable hard Sharpness, is
Terrible; viz: a Ground of the painfulness.

26. Thus it is a S^reek or Terror in the Joining together: And in this
Terror the Unity becomes comprehended or conceived, so that it becomes a
Flash or Glance, like an exulting Joy: For thus Joh. 1.5.
existeth the Light in the Midst of the Darkness; for the Unity becomes a
Light: And the receptibility of the desirous Will in the Properties, becomes a
Spirit-Fire; which takes its Source and Original out of the Astringent Cold
Sharpness, in the Moving and Perceptibility in the Darkness.

27. And this Being or Substance, is just like a terrible Consumptiblenesse;
and according to it, is God called, an Angry Zealous or Jealous God, and a
Consuming Fire: Not according to what he is in himself, without or beyond all
receptibility; but according to the Eternal F^re-Ground.

28. And in the Darkness is understood, the foundation of Hell, viz: a
forgetfulness of Good, which Joh. 1.5.
Darkness is totally hidden in the Light, as the Night in the day, as John
1.5. it is to be read.

29. Thus we see in the above mentioned Properties; Gods Anger; viz: the First
Property of the Intracting, is the NEIN or No: for that does not liken it self
with the IAH; viz: the Unity: For it makes in it self a Darkness, that is, an
extinguishing of the Good: Secondly, it makes in it self a Sharpness; viz:
the Ground of the Eternal Dying of the Gentleness of the Amiable or Meek
Unity; Thirdly, it makes in it self a Hardness; viz: the Eternal Death, like
an impotency: Fourthly, it makes in it self, in such hardness of Death, a
Continual perpetually enduring painful perceptibility: Fifthly, it Makes in
it self a perceptible Fire-source.

30. And in these Properties, Gods Anger and the Hellish Fire becomes
understood: And it is therefore called Hell or a Hollownesse. or Concavity.
Hole, because it is a hiddenness or shutting in.

31. Also it is therefore called an Enmity against God, because it is painful;
and the Unity of God, a clear soft gentleness: and this is one against the
other, like Fire and Water; whence also in the Substance of this World, Fire
and Water, have taken their original.

32. In this kindling of the out-flown Will, is now the fifth Property, the
perceptibility of the Unity of God, viz: the Love; which in the Fire, becomes
Moveable and desirous; and Makes in the Fire, that is, in the painfulnesse,
another Principle; viz: a Great Love fire; For it is the Cause and the Ground
of the Light, so that in the Fires Essence, the Light Springs up.

33. It is the Love-power in the Light, for thus the Unity brings it self
into Moving and perceptibility, that the Eternal power may be perceptible; and
a willing, desire, and divisibility, therein; Else would the Unity be an
Eternal Stillness and unperceptibility.

34. This Love and this Light, dwells in the Fire, and penetrateth or
presses through this Fire, so that the Essence of the Fire becomes changed
into the highest Joy; and no fierce Wrath more becomes apprehended or known;
but a clear Love-tast or relish, of the divine perceptibility: For, thus the
Eternal Unity inflameth it self every where all over, so that it is a Love,
and that there be somewhat, that may be beloved: Note.
For if the Love of the Unity, did not stand in the Fire-burning Kind or
Manner, then would it not be Operative; and there would be no Joy, or Moving,
in the Unity.

35. Thus now Men may understand in the Fires Essence; Gods Anger; and in the
Love-perceptibility, that is, in the perceptible Unity, the divine Love fire,
these make TWO Centers, in ONE only Ground; that is, a twofold Fire.

36. First, the Anger-Fire, in the out-flown Will of the Receptibility, is a
Ground of the Eternal Nature; out of which the Angels and the Souls of Men
have received their Ground; and that is Called the Great Mystery, Mysterium
Magnum: Out of which Eternal Nature; this visible World also, is Sprung and
Created, viz: an Object Representation or Reflection of the inwardness.

37. Secondly; and the Center of the Love is the IAH, viz: the Fire-flaming
Speaking or Breathing: Which is called Gods Word: Viz: the Speaking or
Breathing of the Unity of God; the Foundation of the Power: In this is the true
Holy Ghost, understood, in the efflux of the Love-Speaking, viz: the Moving, or
the Life, of the Love.

38. Also, thus is the Angelical, as also the Souls, Spirit, therein
understood, in which God is Manifest or revealed, and dwells; but the Ground
of Souls and of Angels, according to their Nature, is understood in the
Eternal Nature-fire: Note the difference between the Deity and Nature.
For the clear Deity becomes not Creaturely: For it is an Eternal Unity; but
it dwells through and through Nature: As Fire gloweth or shines through and
through the Iron.

39. And at this Place, we understand the Potentiality.
possibility of Angels and of Souls; if they loose the Love-Fire, so as they
separate away from the divine Unity; and enter into own self desire; then the
Anger-fire burns in them; and that is then their right and proper Life.

40. But if the divine Love-fire, burns in their Centrall-fire, then is their
Fire-life, a meet Joy, and a meek well doing or benificence; and the Fire of
God, and the Fire of Nature, Stands in them in In Concordance Harmony or
Temperature
ONE only Ground.

41. In this Fifth Property, the Glory and Majesty of God, becomes manifest or
revealed, viz: a Light of Love: Of which the Scripture says: 1 Timothy 6.16.
God dwells in a Light, that none can come unto; signifying; that no Eternal
Creature at all, is become generated, out of the Centrall fire of the Love; for
it is the holiest Fire of all, and God in his Ternary or Trinity it self.

42. Note.
And out of this Holy Fire, is out-flown, the IAH; viz: a Beam of the
perceptible Unity; the same is the highly precious Name, JESUS, which redeemeth
or releaseth the poor Soul from the Anger-fire, again, and did in the assuming
of the humanity, in the departed Centrall Anger-fire (Gods Anger), give in it
self into the Soul, and kindled it again with the Love fire, and UNITED it with
GOD. Note.
O ye Men, observe this.

43. Thus now understand the right foundation; In God there is no Anger, it is
mere and clear Love: Only in the foundation, through which the Love becomes
Moveable, is the Anger-fire; but in God it is no other, then a CAUSE of the Joy
and of the Power: And in the CENTER of the Anger-fire, it is the Greatest
terriblest darkness, pain and source or Torment: And these two are in one
another as Day and Night, where none of both, may comprehend the one the other:
But the one dwells in the other, and they make two Principles; viz: two
Eternal Beginnings.

44. The First Beginning is the Kingdom of Gods Love; and the Second
Beginning, is called the Kingdom of Gods Anger, viz: the foundation of Hell,
in which the outcast or rejected Spirits, dwell.

45. The Foundation of the Kingdom of God, is mere pure IAH; viz: powers of
the separable Word: And the Foundation of the Anger of God, is mere NEIN, or
No, from whence the LIE Existeth: Whereupon said Christ; that Joh. 8.44.
the Devil was a father of Lies: For his foundation is mere NEIN, or No; and a
Contradiction or gainsaying of the Truth, viz: the IAH.

46. The Sixth Property, in the out flown Will, is the Sound, Voice,
Understanding, Discourse, or the Distinctions, viz: the true Understanding; and
stands in both Centrall Fires alike at once.

47. In the Center of the own receptibility of the Natural Fire, without
co-working of the Holy Fire; if these two Fires are become separated, as is to
be apprehended in the Devils and Damned Souls, there is NOTE.
no Understanding; but only fraudulent Cheating Subtilty Craft and
Sharp-wittedness or Acuteness: viz: a trying or Probation, of the foundation of
Nature; a mere misusing of the Powers of Nature; whence Treachery or Deceit,
base cunning Surmisings, Folly, Sottishness, and Or Voluptuousness.
Wanton-lightness, do exist.

48. In this Sixth Power, stand the holy Names, viz: the divine Powers, in the
opening of the Unity, in the working and desiring; and they stand in both the
Fires alike at once; viz: in the Fire of the Natural Mobility, and in the Fire
of the Flame of Love.

49. And here stands the Wonder-doing Word, in its working; for the Great
Name of God, Tetragrammaton; is here the Center of the Wonders of God, which
works in both the Centrall Fires; which the Evil Spirits in their
transmutation according to the Center of the Nature of the Fire, do misuse.

50. And the Ground of the whole Cabala and Magia, is comprehended in this
ground, for it is the working Powers, where the unperceptible co-worketh in the
perceptible.

51. And at this place, lies the Law of Moses, before it; not to misuse it,
upon pain of Eternal punishment; as is to be seen, in Exodus 20. Exodus 20.
from 1. to the 18. especially 2, 3, and 7.
for those that are OURS, enough is here said; and for the Wicked, there is a
strong Lock or Bar before it.

52. The Seventh Property of the out-spoken desirous Will, is the
Substantiality, in which all Powers lie in the Substance and working, viz: a
subject of all Powers; whence the Visible World is Existed: and through the
Moving of the Wonder-doing-Name, is flowen forth, and gone into divisibility,
and formability.

53. Whereupon there is in all Beings or Substances of this World, both the
Centrall Fires, according to Gods Love and Anger, as is to be seen in the
Creatures; but the Holy Fire lies hidden to them; which the Curse, viz: the
Moving of the Anger of God with Sin holds shut up: Note Note.
as is to be seen by the Tincture; and yet through Gods permission, there is a
possible Entrance.

54. This out-flown Holy Fire, when it yet wrought together through the Earth;
was the Paradise: and it is so still indeed; but Man is thrust out from it; and
many a one seeks himself to death in this Fire; and yet finds it not;
unless he has before hand, found it in himself.

55. Understand us thus, in this Question of the Love and Anger of God; that
there is a twofold Fire, understood: as first a Love-Fire; where is mere clear
Light, and that is called Gods Love; viz: the perceptible Unity; and Secondly,
an Anger-Fire, from the receptibility of the out-flown Self- or own-will, where
through the Love-Fire becomes Manifest; which Anger-Fire, is a ground of the
Eternal Nature; and in the Center of its Inwardness, is called an Eternal
Darkness and Pain or Torment.

56. And yet BOTH these Fires are but ONE only Ground, and has been and
remained continually from Eternity in Eternity: But yet parts it self into
two Eternal Beginnings; as is to be Considered Conceived and pondered of, in
Fire and Light.

The Fourth Question. What was there, before the Angels, and the Creation were?
Answer.
1. THen was God, with the two Centrall Fires, with the great Power; viz: an
Eternal infinite generating or working of Wonders, Colors, and Virtues;
wherein, the Angels and Souls of Men, together with all Creatures of this
World, and of the inward Angelical Spiritual World, lay in an Idea, or in a
Spiritual imprinting Imaging or Modelling, wherein, God, from Eternity, has
seen all his Works.

2. In these Centrall Fires, was the The one Element, an Eternal Concordance
or Temper without strife or distemper. Note Note.
Element; and they were Both ONE Only Being or Substance; only distinguished
into two Principles, as viz: Fire and Light.

3. But, when the Centrall Fire of the own-self willing, Moved it self, and
introduced it self, into a greater desire to its visibility and formation; then
was the effusion or pouring out effected, which moved or stirred the Eternal
Will of God, according to both Fires, that the Note.
IDEA became Image like; to the praise of the Wonders of God.

4. And, in this Moving, is, the Hellish Foundation, Gods Anger, together,
broken forth; which God refused or rejected out of his working, and shut it up
in the Darkness: and there it stands, yet to this Day as hungry Jaws, full
of desire after the Creation, and wills also to be Creaturely and Formal o^
figurate.
Imagely.

5. And this is the Ground and the Cause, that the Throne Prince Lucifer turned
himself away from the Love of God even into the Centrall Fire of the Anger, in
which he supposed or intended to Domineer over the Meek Gentleness, and Love of
God; and yet for the sake of this, became rejected or thrust out from the
Centrall Love-fire, and lost his Throne in the Light, and Now possesses the
Hell; and so do also the Damned Souls.

6. The Hellish Foundation, in the Curse of Gods Anger, is a Center of the
visible World, and the same is called SATAN, of whom Christ says, that Rev.
12.9.
he deceives or seduceth the whole World, and is understood in the Kingdom of
Darkness, where Hot and Cold are in Strife; enough for those that are Ours.

The Fifth Question. What was the Ground and Substance, out of which the Angels
were Created? What was that Power in the Word of God, which did flow out, and
became NOTE.
Creaturall.
Answer.
1. THe Scripture says of God; Psalm 104.4. Thou make thy Ministers, to be
Winds, Psalm. 104.4. Heb. 1.7.
and thy Angels to be Fire-flames; Heb. 1.7. In these words lies the whole
Understanding; for with the Word Ministers, is the Image like IDEA, viz: the
Spirit of the Angels, understood, out of the Place, or out of the Breathing or
Speaking of the divine Power and Might; out of the Holy Name of God.

2. And the Word Fire-flames: signifies, the Centrall Fire of the Eternal
Nature, wherein the Substance of the Creature, stands; viz: the own Will of
the Own self Substance.

This is to be understood as follows.

3. The IDEA, or the Express Image of God, has been a Form of the Divine
Names, in the Opening Name of God, wherein God, from Eternity has apprehended
or known All things; viz: an Imagination of the divine Will, where the Will of
the Abyss has Imaged or figured it self, into a Form; and yet it has been No
Creature; but only an IDEA: as an Image forms figureth or represents it
self, in a Looking-glass; thus has the Imagination, of the divine Power,
Imaged it self into the out-flown Name of God.

4. But, when God would have such an IDEA, in living Creatures, that is, in own
Self desiring, then he moved and severed the Centrall Fire of the Eternal
Nature, whereby the IDEA, is become manifest in the Fire; which is done through
the Breathing, Speaking, or IAH.

5. Thereto also, has the NEIN, viz. the out-flown Will of the own
receptibility, together Or figured.
Imaged it self in the IAH; NOTE.
that the Creature might stand in an Own Will; which own will is understood in
the Centrall Fire, that is, in the Properties to the Fire; in which the
Creaturall Life, stands.

6. For if this had not been, then should Lucifer, in own self will, not have
been able, to separate himself from the Good, and to fall: If he had had no own
will, then must Gods power be fallen: but thus, the Creature has broken it
self, off from the Good, and has willed to domineer in the Might and
Properties of the Centrall Fire: Viz: in the changing and Fantasy, into
which, he also came.

7. And therefore Christ calls him Joh. 8.44.
a Murderer and a Liar from the beginning; and that therefore, because the
NEIN or No, has gotten the Dominion in him, and so he is a mere Liar.

8. The Essence and Substance of the good Angels, is a power of the Central
Fire, and of the Centrall Light, wherein their Image stands: But the IDEA in
them, is a Figure of the Holy Name of God; viz: of the Wonder-doing Word.

9. And now, as the divine Names are many, and without Number, so also there is
a distinction among the IDEA's: viz: one Power has a working different from
the other: Although it be clear, that in God they are all one, yet indeed, they
are distinct in the Efflux, that is, in the Wisdom, in respect of the
Manifestation or Revelation and the Wonders; thus there is also a difference or
distinction of Angelical IDEA's, in the Powers; and the one has always a
greater Power and Might then the other; also other Virtue.

10. As the Stars in the Firmament are distinct or different, so are the
Angels also, that there may be a Harmony; viz: a Joy and Knowledge or
Apprehension, of the divine Powers.

11. Their right foundation stands in the Thrones of the Powers of God, and
in such Thrones of the Powers, they are every where, Ministers: For, out of the
Thrones, that is out of the holy out-flown Names of God, out of the Eternal
Unity, is the IDEA Sprung or Sprouted: Upon which there are distinctions and
dominions among them.

12. Though it be clear that they are all of them Ministers of God, yet every
Throne has its Offices and Legions, with Several Particular Names according
to those very Thrones and Powers: Whereupon, there are among them Prince
Angels; all according to the propert^ of every Throne; such a power as the
Throne has, such also is the Prince-Angel; the other are Ministers: Not
slaves, but consent or bear a part in the Harmony of the Throne; all to the
praise of the Great God.

13. The whole Deep, within and without the World, is full of such Thrones and
Dominions: Yet not in the Four Elements; but in the pure Element of the Inward
Fire and Light: They possess another Principle; viz: another World: Which
indeed is together in this World, but, in another Quality, in another Chaos.

14. Understand the foundation of the Angels, thus; they are out of the Essence
of both the inward Eternal Centrall Fires: Their Powers, are the Great
out-flowing Names of God; all of them, sprung forth out of the IAH, and brought
into the NEIN or No, that Powers should become Manifest: Thus there must be an
Object Representation or Reflection, in which a distinction might be.

15. The Name IACHIEL, is the distinguishing of the IDEA of the Virtues, out of
which flows ELIEL and the Holy Names, according to the divine Property, which
are Many: Which all of them flow out of the Den Gottlichen.
Divine Senses, or Thoughts, to note or hint it only, to the Reader.

16. But the Names of the Prince-Angel, which in the In sensu.
Sense, bear or carry the R. T. or S. the power of them, stands in the
strength of the Might of the Fire, out of the High Name Tetragrammaton: and
they are the Princes over the Constellations or Astrum, and over the Elements:
For they have their dwelling in the Inward Element, out of which the Four
Elements are flown and do yet flow.

17. Though indeed there are yet also, outwarder Princes, which dwell in the
Four Elements, and are called Starre-Spirits ( viz: Ascendents,) which have
their propriety also in the World; but not like the Inward; for, they have
another Chaos of an outwarder Kind or Manner; of which here nothing further is
to be mentioned, in respect of the abuse and Misbelief or Exodus 20.3.
Superstition.

18. If we would Consider or conceive, and very rightly understand, the Powers
and Virtues of the Angels, and not cleave to Images; as Foolish Reason always
does, Note, Note.
then let us but consider the Spirits of the Letters, in what sense and power,
Every one stands: and accordingly let us Consider the joining together of
those Spirits of the Letters, from whence the Word, or Understanding, existeth;
and so we have the whole Groun^ with Affirmation and Negation.
IAH and NEIN, their whole Foundation.

19. And as now, the Words with the Spirits of the Letters, are distinct or
different, so is also, their distinction, in the Creaturall Image-like Kind or
Manner; as also the Humane Kingdom or Dominion is so, and all whatsoever is
called Creature, they are altogether nothing else, but divine Sensus.
Senses or Thoughts, out of both the Centrall Fires; like the Joined Words of
the divine Powers.

20. For, as the whole (...). etc.
Alpha-bet, is the whole understanding of all Things or Substances, so is Gods
Word the only and sole understanding of All things: and the Angels are its
Letters.

21. The Prince-Angels signify the Letters; viz: the Thrones; and the
Ministeriall-Angels signify, the Joining of the Sense or Sensuum. The Joining
of Letters into Words and of Words into Matter, Sense, or into a Sentence.
Senses, which suffer themselves to be used to the Harmony of the divine
Understanding, to the praise of God.

22. As in the Letters, do lie the authority or force and the power to the
distinction of the Sense or * Senses, so also lies the Great Power in the
Throne-Angels: The other are as the Joining together of Letters to the
distinction, and are Joynt-powers: as the Tree is, in its Branches, so is also
their Order and Government to be understood: For all Generations in the Four
Elements, stand in such a form: Every generation has also its Supremes, which
all together are a Figure of the inward Spiritual World.

23. If Man were not so very much shut into the NEIN, or No, that he could
understand what manner of Powers he carries in his Mouth, what manner of
authority or force stands therein, he would highly exult and Triumph therein;
but he cannot understand that, because of the Curse which lies before it, for
he would Misuse it.

24. He carries the Might and Strength of all things, moving in his Mouth: If
he had the Faith, that he were able to Image this Power, so he should have the
ground of all secret Mysteries, and should be able to do Wonders or Miracles,
like the Angels; this the Scripture also testifies; Math. 17.20. chapter 21.21.
If ye had Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed, then ye might be able to say to
the Mountain, cast thy self into the Sea; also Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.8. Note,
Note.
The Word is near thee, viz: in thy Mouth and in thy Heart.

25. And this is as above mentioned, for those that are Ours to understand, and
further not; in respect of the Misusing it: there lies a fast Seal before it,
that None unworthy should understand it; it is also Note.
forbidden to write plainly and openly hereof: but the Time is born or
generated, that the same shall stand open, yet only to the Worthy; enough here.

The Sixth Question. What is the Office and Doing of the Angels? And why, does
the Power of God bring it self into Imagings or Figures.
Answer.
1. AS we, Men, upon Earth, rule all things; viz: the whole apprehensibility,
through the distinction of Words; so does God, viz: the Eternal Or Mind, see
Trismigistus in his Poimander.
Mind of the ONE only Power, also work and rule^ with such Image-like Words, in
the Wisdom.

2. The Angels are mere Imaged Powers of the Word of God; for Man's Mind is an
Express or reflex Image or Antitype of the Eternal Power of God.

3. For all Sinnen. Notions Positions or Propositions.
Senses or Meanings or N^^ions come out of the Mind, and out of the Senses
Meanings or Notions, come right Thoughts, it viz: a Conclusion or Imagination;
from whence Longing Lust or Delight existeth; which Longing goes into a Being
or Substance, from whence, the perceptible Desire, and out of that, the Work,
springs; thus also is God, in like manner, the Eternal Mind; that is, the
Understanding; and yet there would be no distinction therein, Note.
if he did not flow out from himself.

4. His out-flowings, are the Powers; as in Man the Senses or Thoughts, and the
Powers, bring themselves into an Imagination; wherein stands the Angelical
IDEA: and the Imagination brings it self into Longing, to the perceptibility;
the same is IAH: and the Longing, brings it self into desire, and that is the
ground of the receptibility; viz: the NEIN or No: and the Desire brings it
self into Properties, to and till Fire; out of which the Light Springs; thus
these Properties of the desire, are divine Thoughts; in two Centers to be
understood, viz: in the IAH, and the NEIN or No.

5. The IAH, is divine, and the NEIN or No, is own selfness of Nature; viz: the
perceptibility of the desire; this desire of the perce^^^bility is become a
work or figures; viz: Angels: Which are no ^^her then Gods Thoughts, according
to Love and Anger; viz: a Manifestation or Revelation, of his Mind and Will.

6. Not that there are Thoughts in God! but, in his out-flown desirous Will;
which introduces it self into Fire and Light, to, perceptibility.

7. And now as a Man with his Senses and Thoughts, governs the World and all
things or Substances; so God, viz: the Eternal Unity, rules all things
through the Management and doings of the Angels; only the Power and the Work,
is Gods: They are his Work-Instruments, wherewith he delights himself, and
moves: Whereby and wherewith, he manifests or reveals the Eternal Powers
and Wonders, and introduces them into a Love sport or Scene.

8. They are all of them, no other then strings in the Great Harmony of the
divine Kingdom of Joy, in Sounds, Songs, and ringings forth of Powers: and are
all of them Laborers and Performers of the Wonders of God; viz: Formers of the
Powers of the holy Names of God.

As we, Men, in our Mouth, do make, the Powers of the Senses or Thoughts Image
like and formal in Articulate sounding Words, so is their labor also, a mere
Imaging of the divine Powers, and Forms.

10. For, that which they will and desire, that becomes through their
Imagination, brought into Imagings and Forms, which forms are mere IDEA's:
after the manner as the NOTE.
divine powers, before the Creation of the Angels have Imaged themselves in
such IDEA's: Thus also is their Imaging or Figuring accordingly.

11. And herein stands the Holy Cabala of the Changing or variation, and the
Great Joy; wherein the Divine Wisdom and Skill becomes Imaged and formed,
through the Spirits of the Centrall Fire and Light: and there is such a Joy and
Knowledge therein, that they Eternally bow and humble themselves for great Joy
and Knowledge, before such Highness: That the NEIN or No, may not get the
Dominion in them, and that they may not be bereaved of such Honor and Glory.

12. Their feeding is a Creating or In-drawing desire of the Unity of God;
whence their Centrall Fire, gets the Balsam, that the fierce Wrath may not
awake: and thereupon they also Eternally live in resigned Humility: that the
NEIN or No may not elevate it self, as was done among the Devils; and the Fall
of Lucifer stands for a Looking-glass, to them.

13. Understand us now rightly Thus; the whole Creation of the inward and
outward World ( viz: in the pure Element, and in the four Elements) is a mere
clear Imaging and formation of the divine Powers: Yet according to BOTH the
Centrall Fires, viz: in IAH and NEIN or No: It is no other then one Efflux,
gone, out of, one another, to the very Grossest Matter or Compaction of Earth
and Stones.

14. For, the visible World, is no other then the out-flown Word with both the
Centrall Fires, which have again made to themselves a Ob^^^^ Representation
subject with or of the outward Elementary Fire; wherein the outward Creatures
live.

15. The more inwardly men can come into the power of a Thing, the nearer they
come to the Deity, as is to be understood in the Metals, Vegetables, as also
in all Animals: For the most outward are the four Elements, the Second next
after them, is the Astrall Body, the Third, is the Quintessentia or
first-Essence; ( viz: the Ground of the out-flown Holy Element): The Fourth is
the Tincture; viz: the highest Power of the out-flown Word; wherein, both the
inward Centrall Fires Lie, in One only Subjectum.
Subject, and after these, is the pure clear GOD, understood

16. Yet if we would once awake from the Adamicall Sleep, and once look about
us, then we might indeed see Wonders; if the Earth were not so dearly beloved
by us, then we might well see the Heaven: Enough to be understood by those that
are Ours.

17. Thus, this is the Conclusion concerning the Angels doings, that they are
Tools or Vtensils.
Implements or Instruments of the divine Joy-Kingdome; and Members and Branches
of the great Tree of the Divine Names, whereupon the Heavenly fruits Grow: and
they have their Nutriment, from the Sap of their Trees; viz: Every Angel, from
his Throne: and as the Throne, (understand, the Name of God) is; so is also the
Office of the Angels thereof; yet the whole Tree, is GOD.

18. The wise Heathens, have understood that Subjectum oder Objectum.
Subject ( viz: the Object Representation Reflection or Antitype of such
Thrones,) and have honored them for Gods; yet they Missed the true ground of
the Inwardness: But among the Christians it is altogether silent Mute or Or
unknown.
Dumb; except to some few, to whom God has Manifested or revealed it; who have
kept it hidden in a Parabolicall Manner.

The Seventh Question. What did Move Lucifer; that he Lusted against God; and
turned himself away from the Good?
Answer.
1. THe own receptibility, (viz: the NEIN or No,) did move him; the out-flown
Will in the Centrall Fire of the Eternal Nature, is the cause thereof that did
lift it self up aloft, and did desire, to Image or figure the divine Power in
the Fires-might.

2. He did desire to prove or try the Properties of the Eternal Nature, and
would not stand in the Resignation; but would Domineere, in and with the Holy
Name of the Throne.

3. Yet, the cause which did move him to such a Desire, was the Throne in which
he was a Prince; and indeed also remains Eternally therein, according to his
Property of the Fires-Might, yet according to the Holy Name of the Power, he is
not remained therein; but according to the Darkness.

4. When the Moving to the Creating of the Angels was Or Effected.
acted, then the out-flown Will of the own receptibility did elevate it Self,
and the Properties stood in great working, and did will to be Creaturall.

5. In these Properties did the Creaturely Will of Lucifer create; when he did
apprehend the Omnipotence therein, and found the Wonder-doing Power in himself;
thus did his Creaturall Will elevate it self according to the Fires-Might and
abused or Misused the Holy Name, As in Exodus 20.7.
in himself; and willed not to remain or abide in the Resignation; but would
domineer over the Thrones, and did break himself off from the Unity.

6. He did will to Domineer with the NEIN, or No; over the IAH; (for the NEIN,
or No, elevated it self in him) and did despise the IAH: Being, the Might or
Potentiality to the Separability and Formability or variability stood in the
NEIN or No; therefore would the Creaturall Will domineer in the NEIN or No,
(that is, in the changing or transmutation, and did break it self off from the
Unity of God, and went into the receptibility of the Properties.

7. And instantly the Properties in him became revealed or Manifested; viz: the
Cold-Fire; also, the sharp, sour, hard, bitter, Or Stabbing.
stinging, enimicitious and painfulness or Torment of the Fire: Thus became he
an Enemy of all Love, Humility and Meek gentleness; for, the foundation, Gods
Anger, catched the false Will.

The Eighth Question. How could an Angel possibly come to be a Devil? Or,
what is a Devil? In what Essence or Substance does he stand after the Fall.
Answer.
1. IT is not to be so understood, that the Holy Name, in which Lucifer was a
Throne Angel, did in him become a Devil! Much less; the Centrall Love-fire,
( viz: the power of the Light;) NO, that cannot be.

2. For, when Lucifer brought his Desire, into own Self Might or Potentiality,
then he brake himself off from the Will of God, and thereupon the Holy Name
severed it self from him, and the Light, in his Fire-Life, in him went OUT:
For, he brake himself off, from the Unity; which is a Balsam of the Fire,
wherein the Fire conceives its glance of the Light.

3. Thus abode or remained in him no other then the NEIN or No; an Image
Creature; and the IAH, Or withdrew.
departed from him; for the NEIN or NO, severed it self from the IAH, into own
self willing, and would not be under the IAH; that is, under the divine
speaking or breathing of the Unity; but would be its own speaking or breathing.

4. Thus he remained a mere cold, sharp, hard, pointed, bitter, stinging,
poisonous, anxious, painful, Fires-Essence; wherein the Centrall Fire,
stands in mere Strife, Hunger and Thirst, and can attain no refreshing.

5. For, if Lucifer would become an Angel again, then he must create again, out
of the Unity and Love of God; and such his Fire-Life must become killed with
the Love; and be changed into Humility; and this the NOTE, NOTE.
Hellish foundation in the Devils, will not do, also it can no more do it;
there is in them all, no Longing, Inclination, or Desire any more, to Humility
or Repentance.

"6. Their whole Life is no other, then the hellish foundation, a Source
Quality or Torment of the Anger of God, a mere venom poison and stink, a dying
Source or Torment; whenever they hear say, of Love and Humility, then they
fly from it, for the Love is the Death of their false Life.

7. They have indeed an Eternal Sorrow, for their lost Inheritance: viz: for
the Good: Yet they can have no belief, that they might receive Grace; but their
belief is an Eternal doubting or despair.

8. They are severed off from God, therefore they Curse and shun, the Power and
will of God: That is to them an As the Water is an Intolerable thing to the
Fire.
Intolerable thing, for, if they did become touched with the holy Power of
God, then that would force or defloure them; for it kills the own Will; and
that, the own will wills not; for it would loose its Might and Power.

9. Thus has Lucifer, who was a Throne Prince, forsaken the Holy Name in him,
and the own Will, has elevated it self aloft: Viz: the Creature: understand,
the Centrall Fire-Life according to the Properties of the Eternal Nature.

10. Thus he has trifled away the divine Express Reflex Image, viz: the
IDEA'S, so that the same is become inanimate or dumb, and void of working, and
is like a dried withered Tree, without divine power, a figure without motion:
Whereupon he is Eternally ashamed, that in him stands an Angelical Character
or impresse; and yet this is no more in an Angelical Kind or Manner of
Condition and form: He has Totally Lost the Image of God: And is become Note.
alike in form to the venomous poisonous Worms and Beasts, whose Life stands
in venom or Poison.

11. Such an unformedness or ill-favored deformity have the Devils gotten; all
according to their several Properties; for, their Properties are totally
distinct and different; all according to the Foundation of the Hellish Essence:
And they have also their Princely Dominions among them; all according to the
Properties; as there are Pride-Devils, Covetousness-Devils, Witch-Devils, and
the like, very many others; viz: a Contrary or Opposite, against the Wisdom
and Truth of God.

12. Every divine Good power, has, in the Hellish Foundation, (that is, in the
NEIN or No,) a Contrary; that the IAH, ( viz: the Truth) might be known; and
thus the Darkness, ( viz: the Foundation of Gods Anger) is together become
Imagely.

13. But yet it may be asked: How is it possible that out of Beauteous bright
Angel, a horrible fierce wrathful Devil, is come to be? Answer: This is done
through the two Eternal Centrall Fires, in which, the Will in the Properties
stands: When the ONE separateth from the OTHER, then it is already done: This
is done also among Men, which Or is the perdition of a Good Man.
destroys a Good Man.

The Ninth Question. Being GOD is Omnipotent, why did he not Or prevent.
, withstand Lucifer; but suffered that to be done?
Answer.
1. WHen Fire and Light is once severed asunder; then there is a great Enmity
one against the other: as Water and Fire are the one Enemy to the other, and
neither of them both desires the one the other any more; for the one is the
Death of the other: But so long as they stand in one only vegetable Life, in
one only Ground together, so long, they have Love one to another, and stand in
great Joy, together; thus also it is to be conceived, of the Devil, and of
God! God desires, the Devil no more; and the Devil also desires, God no
more.

2. But if it be asked, why did not God prevent him the Motion? It is Answered:
God did give him his Love, and so hindered him in it; as he also hindered Adam:
But the Centrall Fire-will, viz: Gods Anger, would not be hindered; that
severed it self, into its own kind or Manner, in him.

3. Here distinction is to be made between Gods Love and Anger: They are indeed
both called God: But God, in as much as he is the Eternal GOOD, is not the
Anger; the Anger has another Principle: In the Love-fire indeed they are ONE;
but in the separation they are TWO: and seeing they are BOTH Eternal, without
beginning: Therefore they have also an Eternal Will, wherein the one cannot
kill the other; but each continues in it self, Eternally; they are no other
but a twofold Power, and they are two Centers; yet come originally out of the
Unity, out of one only Ground.

4. Therefore, when I say of Gods Love; it is Omnipotent, above all and in all:
That is done according to the Will of the IAH; viz: according to the Light: and
if the NEIN or No, gives the Will, thereto; then the IAH, changes the NEIN or
No, into its Power and Love; and yet they remain two Centrall Wills one in
another; yet in One only Ground, in One only Love and Desire: Else would not
the Angry God be Omnipotent, if the Love had him solely in its Omnipotency: and
Exodus 20.3. 1 Cor. 8.4.
there is no other but One only God, yet the Love would not be Manifest, and
there would be no Love known; without the Anger.

5. Note.
Therefore, the Love yields it self up to the Anger-fire, that it may be a
Love-Fire: But if the Anger severeth it self off from the Love, into own
receptibility; that, does not, the Love, hinder with force; else it would
follow, that God would be at Odds in himself.

6. Thus is the NEIN or No, ( viz: Gods Anger) in the fallen Angels, gone into
a separating off from the Love; viz: into an own self Kingdom: and that is
also a Wonder, and Moreover, Good; so that the other Angels have a
Looking-glass, and that the own Will Elevate not it self: Also that there be
an Eternal Joy and praising of God, that they live not in such Fires-Essence,
and thereupon do the more turn their desire into the Unity of God, and remain
standing in the resignation and Note.
Humility; that is, in the divine * Harmony.

7. When now here it is said of the Will of Gods Anger, that the same has
broken it self off from the Love, and would be Image-like, that must not be
understood as without or beyond the Creature: It was (...) strange Will, which
would not together be Imagely in the Apostate An^els, but the Angry God, in the
Imaged Creature, which was before Image-like: Else their whole place or space,
had been an Apostasy: Which yet that it is not so, appears by this, that they
were thrust out of their Thrones.

8. Men must not lay the fault of the Fall upon God: The Imaged Power only in
the Creature according to the NEIN or No, that has trifled it away, and is
become a Lie: Not God but the Creature: Note, Note.
Not the unimaged Power of the Anger, wherein the Love burns; but the Throne,
according to the receptibility and Selfhood; and as their King and Prince did;
so did his Legions also.

9. For, when Gods Anger hardens a Creature, NOTE, NOTE.
there does not then enter a strange fierce-Wrath into it which hardens it,
but its own fierce-Wrath does that, upon which a Sentence or Judgment may
pass upon it: Also if God did compel it to Evil, then there might not any
Sentence or Judgment pass upon it; for so it would do no other then what God
would have: But thus it does what God would NOT have it do, and therefore it
falls into Judgment or Condemnation.

10. Reason speaks very much concerning God, and of his Omnipotency: But it
understands little, of God and of his Substance, what and how it is; It
severeth the Soul totally off from God; as if it were a sundry Being or
Substance apart; and it knows not what an Angel, or Soul, is: and that is
the greatest hurt, and cause of the blindness; wherefore Men contend, dispute,
and never at all, come to the foundation.

The Tenth Question. What did the Devil Desire, whereupon he is departed away
from Gods Love?
Answer.
1. HE desired to be an Artist: He saw the Creation, and understood the Ground,
wherein he would be an own self God; and rule with the Centrall-Fires Might, in
all things; and Or Figure.
Image himself with all things; also image himself in all Forms, that he might
be what he would; and not what the Creator would: as indeed this is still to
this day their greatest Joy, that they can transmute themselves, and bring
themselves into many Images; and thus Atchieve or make Fancy.

2. He would be a Fool; and such a one he is become; but he knew not how it
would be, if the Light should extinguish to him: Adam also knew not how it
would be, when he should feel Heat and Cold, when also the Centrall Fire,
together with the Properties should awake in him; and that he should fall out
of the likeness or accord, and loose the Centrall Light-Fire; this Adam knew
not.

3. The Devil would be a Lord in the NEIN or No; and possess another
Principle; viz: the Might of the Separation or distinction, in the Ground of
the figurable Imaging: The Subjection pleased him not, but the Highness; and
despised the Humility and Sweet Meek Gentleness, ( viz: the Love and the
Truth, and would not be in the Unity, but in the Multiplicity.

4. He would work with his own Name, (that is, with the Centrall Fires Power)
and with Gods Name of his own Throne, he did set the NEIN above the IAH; thus
he became an Enemy of God, and a Liar, and Murderer of the Good Imaging of the
good Power; he desired to destroy, whatsoever the Works of God Imaged or
figured; that he might set his working there.

5. The Magic Ground of the Omnipotency pleased him, for which he elevated
himself, and spoke against or gainsaid the IAH; being the same in his Center
was not a Fires-working; and that he saw, that the IAH ( viz: the Efflux of the
Unity) in the Fires-Center, introduced it self into a Light, and working-Love;
therefore he supposed that the Fires-Nature, was stronger and more, then the
Meek Gentleness of the Unity; viz: the Imaged Name in the Opening Unity: which
he intended to bring into his Fires-Might, as he pleased; and to such a Will,
God had not Created him.

6. Therefore seeing he forsook Gods Ordinance or appointment; so then the holy
opening Name of God severed it self from him; and Continued in the Unity; and
Lucifer continued in the Properties of the Centrall Fire; dwelling in himself;
and yet stood in his Princely Throne, wherein the Holy Name of God, had Or
figured.
Imaged it self into a Throne: And was no more an Angel, with his Legions; but
a horrible vizard-Image, of Abomination, and a Monster.

7. For, when the Light extinguished to him, then became the Darkness, and the
Cold sharpness of the Fierceness, in him Manifest or Revealed; and he became
instantly, an Enemy of God and of all Angelical Hoasts.

The Eleventh Question. What was Rev. 12.7, 8, 9.
the Strife between Michael and the Dragon? What is Michael and what is the
Dragon? And how is the vanquishing and thrusting out Effected?
Answer.
1. MICHAEL is the highest Name of the Divine Figure of this Throne, in which
Lucifer was a Prince: It is that which severeth it self off from the NEIN or
No; that is, from the Lie; in which Name and Power, Lucifer should co-work with
God; it has been the Might and Power of the strong Love of God; in this
Throne; and continues so Eternally: Also he is himself the Throne; according
to the divine Figure in the Eternity: Not as a Creature; but as a Figure of the
Power of God in the Opening, or in the Moving of the Eternity.

2. Which Name afterward, when the Unity did yet once move, with or through
the Efflux JESUS, did become ordained for Man: For the sake of this, the Devil
became an Enemy of Men, because they shall possess his Throne; and thereupon he
desires to have Men in his Kingdom.

3. But yet the DRAGON, is the Hellish foundation in its Revelation or
Manifestation, in which Lucifer with his Legions, had Imaged himself, which
foundation, had with the Throne-Prince Lucifer, Elevated it self; viz: the
Centrall-Fire-Kingdome, according to the receptibility; which also is no
Creation or Creature, but the Figure of Gods Anger; according to the Kind or
Manner of the severing off, or departing away, of the Unity and Love.

4. It is the own Will of the Might of the Anger; this Men cannot well Speak or
Express with Image-like words: Also, it is the fierce Wrath, a Source or
Quality, of Heat, Cold, Hardness, Sharpness, Sting, Bitter, Anguish, and Woe or
Torment, viz: the perceptibility, the first Principle, a mere Hunger and
Thirst, a desire of Vanity and Lies, a Stink of Poison, and Deaths Quality
Source or Torment.

5. This Fire, is like a Brimstone-Fire, which burns in stink and poison;
for, it is the dying Source Quality or Torment of Death; viz: the Death and
Hell, which became Manifest or Revealed in Lucifers Fall or Apostasy.

6. But SATAN, Reve. 12.9.
which seduceth the whole world, as Christ says; that is now, this false Will
of the ownness; the first Principle; viz: the will of Hell, a Ground of Lies
and Contradictions and Gain-sayings; a leading off from the Good; an universal
Spirit of the hellish foundation; and yet it is no Created thing or Creature;
but it is the false Mind, in the Hellish Foundation; viz: the hellish Skill or
Knowledge.

7. And although it has in like manner, Devils, of such Properties and Names,
which are also Princes in their Legions; for they have Or figured
Imaged themselves in the hellish Property.

8. This Ground is their Life, and that holds them captive in it self, and as
the Properties of the hellish Foundation are manifold, so also are such Princes
under them; ruling in the same Properties.

9. Thus also BELIAL, is the Source of false Lust or wicked Longing, to
uncleanness and inordinateness.

10. BEELZEBUB, is a Source of Idol-Gods, and of false Imaging.

11. ASMODUS, is a Spirit of fury or (...) Distractedness.
Senseless Madness; and so forth: Which all of them are Qualities of the
Hellish foundation: Where indeed there are also such Creaturall Spirits in the
Hellish Foundation.

12. But LUCIFER, is the Pride or Stateliness, viz; the Source of climbing up.

13. All these Properties are also in Man awakened after the Fall, when he
turned himself away from God; and they have Imaged formed or figured themselves
by or with Man.

14. The same is Rev. 12.^.
the Dragon, the old Serpent, with wh^^^ MICHAEL, viz: the Figure of the divine
Power, has striven, and thrust out him together with his Legions, from the
Holy Name; and in Man Striveth the Name JESUS, against this Dragon.

15. This Strife is no Creaturall Image-like being Thing or Substance; indeed
it has gone forth, against the Image-like Kingdom of the false Lye-Spirits,
which would rule and domineer in the divine Name: It is a Strife between IAH
and NEIN or No, between the Image-like Anger and the Image-like Love; between
the first and second Principle.

16. In this Strife, must the divine Character of the IDEA overcome, if Viz:
the Character of the Eternal IDEA, in which, Man is foreseen or Elected in
Jesus Christ, before the foundation of the World.
it will be an Angel: In this strife is Adam fallen: And in this Strife, did the
Name JESUS, in the received or assumed humanity, in the Wilderness Maintain the
Battle or Strife against this DRAGON (where he was tempted forty days); and at
last, in Death, totally overcame him.

17. This Strife, was with Moses on Mount Sinai, in the Fathers Property in the
Fire; when he stayed there forty Days; where Israel was Tempted, to try,
whether they would or could stand, in the Fathers Property.

18. But being that might not be, then Israel fell away, and Made an Idol-God,
(viz: the Golden Calfe,) upon which the Tables of the Law were broken, thereby
signifying, that the humane Will of the ownhood, could not overcome or prevail
against the Foundation of the Anger; that must be no otherwise then put to
Death, and through Death, be introduced again into the Holy Name.

19. Whereupon CHRIST must dye, and bring the Will of Man quite through Death,
through Hell, and through this Foundation; For, the own receptibility of the
own Will, may not subsist in God: For if (...) Will be to subsist in God, then
it must be imperceptible and unpassive, that it my dwell in the Fire, and yet
not be comprehended by the Fire.

20. As the Sun in the Elements, penetrateth or presses through and through
all, and kindles it self in the Elements; and yet its Light indeed continues
to it self: Or as the Fire Gloweth or Blaseth through and through Iron, and yet
it becomes not Iron: But the Iron is only an Object or Subject, wherein the
Fire Elevateth it self, and inflameth it self, so very clear must also the Will
be, which Gods Unity is to possess, that in it there be no receptibility.

21. For, as soon as it passes into receptibility, then such a DRAGON, viz:
the Hellish Foundation, existeth in it: It must press clearly through the
Anger-fire, and only over inflame it self in the Fire, without receptibility;
so then there continues two clear in one only Ground, viz: the Fire, and the
Light; in the Fire, the Nature, viz: the Motion; and in the Light the Spirit of
the willing; viz: the true power of the Unity of God.

22. Thus may Love and Anger, stand in one only Ground unsevered, and be
totally one only thing; as men are thus to consider and conceive of God and of
the holy Angels.

23. Now understand this Question thus, that the power of the Anger, the IAH,
and NEIN or No, Gods Love, and the Imaged formed or figured Anger of the
Eternal Nature of the Centrall Fires-will, have striven one with another: In
which Will, Lucifer with his Angels sat, and would be a Lord; and also was a
Cause, that this Centrall Fire-will, Imaged or figured it self, into a DEN of
the Dragon; that is, into a hellish foundation: This God permitted, that he
might punish the fallen Angel, and hold him captive therein; to stop or hinder
him, that he should not disturb the Creation More or further.

The Twelfth Question. How are Men to consider or conceive the Or Eternal.
peculiar Council of God, in the Divine Vision or View; Being the Spirit
searches all things, Iah, or Yes, even the Depth of the Deity? as St. Paul
says; and yet this stands not in Man's ability, that is; in the Creature; and
yet is possible! How may a Man really understand this Ground of the Deep Unity?
Answer.
1. COurteous Reader, this Question is therefore added here, because the
unenlightened Mind, hold it for unpossible, to be able to know such hidden
secret Mysteries; in regard it cannot apprehend them, and thereupon,
reproacheth and ascribes it to the Devil: Therefore, we will for the Sake of
the Love of our Neighbor, a little expound it: To try, if Men will become
seeing and understand the Deep Sense.

2. Reason runs in mere Imagibility, after a Creaturall Manner and Kind, and
supposes: That God has in his Trinity Consulted what he would Make, and how
it must and should go with it, or what should become of it, upon which, it
will conclude or determine the fall of Lucifer and of Adam, even in a certain
limit; that God has so ordained in his predestinate purpose.

Note Note what the Council of God is.
3. But Reasons mere thinking, is not the Ground; God needs not, Consult with
himself about any thing; for he himself is the Council; the high out-flowing
Names of the Powers, ( viz: the Wonder-doing Word) is the Council of God.

4. There is also no manner of predestinate purpose concerning any thing; For,
the Original of all things Lies in the IDEA, in an Eternal Imaging; not like
an Imaged Substance or formed figured thing; but in a perpetual constant
enduring Imaging, where Gods Love and Anger ( viz: the two Centrall Fires of
the Powers) stand in a continual Love-wrestling: There, in such wrestling of
the Powers, the Wonder-doing Word, Imageth it self in Figures; which are mere
Objects Representations or reflex Images, of the holy Names and Powers, and
they are called the IDEA.

5. On the other side, the Powers of the Eternal Nature, also Image
themselves, according to the Kind and Manner of the Forms to the Fire: viz: in
a Dark, Sharp, Hard, Fierce, Wrathful, prickly, Stinging, Bitter, Anxious,
Fiery, and Cold, Manner or Kind, which are Note.
not Creaturall; but an Imaging of the Powers in the NEIN or No; that is, in
Gods Anger: And yet are continually pressed or penetrated through and through,
with the IAH, and with the Centrall Light, and changed into a Love-Sport or
Scene; after the Manner and Kind, as out of an Evil thing a good thing, out of
a Spoken by way of Similitude.
Damned Soul or Angel, a Good Holy Angel comes to be.

6. Such Imaging of the IDEA, has indeed been from Eternity, where the Spirit
of God has seen all things aforehand, what there should and could come to be,
when such Imagings should be brought into a Creaturely Manner and Kind! yet it
comes not from a divine Consultation or Determination of the Holy Name; but
that existeth in the out-flown Free Will, according to both the Centrall-Fires
of the Power; where the Powers do Do form or make and figure.
Create and Image themselves.

7. The Own Will Imageth it self in the NEIN or No; viz: in the fierce
wrathful Fires kind: And the IAH, or Or outbreathing.
out-speaking of the Unity, Imageth it self in the Light; and both these
Figures stand in one only, Ground, in one another.

8. In the IAH, stands the Holy Name of God: And in the NEIN or No, stands
the Name of Gods Anger: And there, the IAH, in the Name of the Divine Love,
wresteth with the NEIN or No, (that is; with the own out-flown Wills of the own
receptibility) for the Victory; and yet it is no other then a Love-Sport or
Scene.

9. For, the Light presses through the Imaging of the Darkness, whereby the
Imaging is set into a richly Joyful Triumph; and thus there is an Eternal
overcoming of the DRAGON in Gods Anger; and yet it is no other then a Sport or
Scene of both the Centrall Fire-wills; and here is the predestinate Purpose of
God, which the Scripture speaks of; and yet it stands in the Own Will.

10. God, in as much, as he is, and is called God; has need of No Figure; but
the Powers are necessary for the Overcoming or Victory.

11. And here is also the Ground of the Devil: [shewing] how the own Will;
viz: the NEIN or No; has striven, in an Image-like Manner or Kind, against
the IAH; and is departed away from the IAH, and has severed it self off, into
own-self-Moving; and is become a Devil, viz: an Enemy against the IAH, and is
entered into own Image-like Dominion.

12. In this Ground we also rightly see, how MICHAEL has striven against this
DRAGON, and the Imaged false Will; in which false Will, yet, in the beginning,
the IAH, viz. the Holy Name, was, when it, or The Imaged false Will.
they, were Angels: But the own Will of the Centrall Fires own selfe's
receptibility, severed it self from the IAH, in it self, and therefore by the
IAH, in the Name MICHAEL, it became thrust out.

13. This, is also to be shown in the Scripture, by the Prophet Or Micaiah.
Micha, and also by King Saul, 1. Sam. 16.14, 15, 16, 23.
Where an Evil Spirit from the Lord was Entered into Saul: 1 King. 22.8, 11,
23, 24, 25.
And also into the Prophet Zedechia and his Companions: 1 King. 22.20, 21, 22.
Also, the Lord said; Who will persuade Ahab, that he go up, and fall at Ramoth
Gilead: And the one said this and the other that; then went a Spirit forth and
Entered before the Lord; and said: I will persuade him: The Lord said to him,
wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and will be a false Spirit in the
Mouth of all his Prophets: He said, thou will persuade him and prevail, go
forth and do so!

14. That very Lord, was the Anger of God, which burned over Israel; as is to
be shown in many places of the Scripture; especially, in Moses and in the
Prophets; that he threatened them in his Fires-Might, that he would devour them!

15. Thus we now understand in this Ground, rightly, that such pouring forth of
Gods Anger, comes out of such a foundation; for, in the Holy Name of God, viz:
in the Center of the Light, there is no Anger-Will; but mere 1 John 4.8, 16.
Love, which is God himself.

16. But in the NEIN or No; that is, in the Fires-Might; exist such beams of
Anger; and those are the Evil Spirits, with Saul, and in the false Prophets;
and also in the Strife of Babell, in the Sects, in regard of the Note, Note.
Opinions in Religion, wherein Men do not merely purely or sincerely love God,
and cleave only to him; but, will do no other then run on in Art and Reason;
and thereupon, do rise up, such Fountains or Sources of Error from such
Contentious Spirits, and forth, out of the fiery Soul; which is broken or
sprung forth out of this Ground of the Eternal Centrall Fire, and come into a
Creature.

17. These Sources or Qualities, are mere evil Spirits, from the Lord, of Gods
Anger, broken forth or Sprung from the own Will of own self receptibility, and
are right HERETICS, HERETICS
viz: out-s^ewed, outcast or Reprobat Spirits; as they call themselves one
among another; whereby men see, that they also, nothing else but strive for the
Victory of the Patrons or Opinions.
Images, and would continually overcome the Holy Name, viz: the out-flown Word
of God, in the Letters, for they nothing else but strive about the Letters;
after that way and Manner, as the inward Strife is, and comes to pass, between
the IAH, and NEIN, or No; that is, between the two Eternal Principles.

18. And in this Strife, has the holy Name JESUS sunk it self down into the
Humanity, that it may overpower this Source of the DRAGON and of Gods Anger,
and Release or Redeem Poor Man, from the Will of the NEIN or No; and so now he
rules, in this Strife, over all his Enemies, viz: Hebr. 2.14.
Over Sin, over Death, the Devil, and over Hell; as the Scripture says, 1
Cor. 15.25 26, 54, 55, 56, 57.
till these his Enemies, which all of them are Enemies of the Kingly and
Prince^y Throne of MICHAEL, because they are become thrust out of it, be laid
under his feet for a footstool, and this Dominion and Imaging, in this Throne
cease.

19. Hereby to those that are OURS, and have their Thoughts or Senses and
Apprehensions enlightened from God, enough is shown, and we intend this in
Love; It is the highest Gate, which God opens or unlocketh to us for the very
Last: For those that can understand it; but for the Scorners, so long as they
are such, we have not written; and we seal it, with the Eternal Will; so that
this shall be understood by no S^orner: Amen.

20. But, how man may understand this depth of the Deity, and search all
things, as St. Paul, says of it, that 1 Cor. 2.10.
the Spirit searches all things, even the Depth of the Deity; and that the
Rational Natural Man, in own-self ability, apprehends Nothing, viz: the own
Will; and yet that this is apprehensible in Man; understand it as follows.

21. Man ia an Image of the Substance of all Substances, a right express Image
of God; according to Love and Anger; viz: First; the Soul is the Eternal
Centrall Fire; of the own willing; for out of that, Note.
must all Creatures come; but not out of the clear pur^ God.

22. And Secondly: The Spirit of the S^ul, is the Centrall Fire of the Light,
out of the Eternal IDEA, broke forth or Sprung from the Power of God; and it
is Supernatural; whereupon, it is also 1 Cor. 6.19.
The Temple of the Holy Spirit, in which Christ dwells, and feeds the Soul
with his Flesh and Blood, viz: with divine and humane viz: Christus or the
Anointing.
B^lsam; in which the Death and the Anger of God, is become broken: Whereupon
then such divine Balsam continues in the Spirit of the Soul, substantially, as
Christ says: Joh. 6.56.
Whosoever eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, he continues in me, and I in
him.

23. But Thirdly: The outward Body, is out of the outward World, out of the
four Elements, and out of the Astrum or Cons^e^^^^^ons: Which outward Dominion,
rules the outward Life; after which outward Dominion, the Adamicall Soul has
Longed or Lust^^: and for the sake thereof, is broken off, from the Unity of
God, an^ (...) into the Dominion of this World, where the Will in it self,
^ecame cap^^ve by the DRAGON of Gods Anger, and turned into a Monster; where
the true Spirit disappeared, when the Light of God Extingu^shed to it, and the
IDEA became Dumb or Inanimate and U^operative or worklesse.

24. Which Spirit, the IDEA, JESUS, viz: an Efflux from the divine Unity, came
to help relieve or assist; and introduced the Light of the Love, into the poor
Soul.

25. Now, when this Name JESUS; which is called Christ, when he assumed the
Humanity, ^ndrew, into the poor turned away or apostate Soul; and pressed
through and through it, with the Beams of Gods Unity; then became the Eternal
IDEA, viz: the right Spirit; in such Balsam of the Love, moveable again; thus
the Light shines again in the Darkness of the Soul; and the NEIN or No,
becomes united with the IAH; where Michael in the Strife, stands against or
resists, the Dragon; viz: the Name o^ the Anger, in Christ JESU.

26. In this Light, the Soul sees again into its ^athers or Native Country,
which it had at first; viz: into its original, out of which it is Sprouted;
f^r, the Name of GOD is in it, and works in the Spirit: Where it stands in
the viewing or Vision of God; and may thoroughly search out all things; yet n t
in own-self Motion and willing: But when the Name of God in the Moving,
enters into it self, then it looks upon the forming of the Wonder-doing
NAME; it sees and hears what God speaks in it.

27. NOTE.
No Image like Speaking or discourse; but operative in the Understanding; as
the Prophets have spoken; and yet this is incomprehensible to the outward
Reason; of which Saint Paul says; Phil. 3.20.
Our Conversation is in Heaven; and yet, says also, That a Thorn or Sting was
given him in the Flesh, that Satan's Angel or Messenger; viz: a Source Quality
or Torment from the Spirit of Seduction of Lust) should buffet him or strike
him with fists.

28. Understand this rightly thus; that a Man sees such hidden secret
Mysteries in the Spirit of Col. 2.2, 3.
CHRIST; wherein all Treasures of Wisdom Lyo; as the Scripture testifies
throughout. And thus Men are to unsterstand rightly, what the Eternal Council
of God, is! And then also, how Man May come to such Vision or viewing; and we
have here only shown the Possibility; but the Way or Process, how he may
attain thereto, we have largely or copiously enough, described, in the other
Books.

The Thirteenth Question. How is the Thrusting out of the Dragon; and of the
Legions of Lucifer; effected? Whither is he thrust, that he can be without God?
Seeing God fills all things! Or what is the Foundation of Hell where he
dwells.
Answer.
1. THe Rev. 12.9.
Thrusting out of the DRAGON, was, the false Apostate, off-turned, Image-like,
Will, of the own receptibility; in which off-turned Will, LUCIFER, together
with his Angels, has Imaged Figured or Formed himself.

2. The Dragon is the hellish Foundation; and the rejected or reprobate
Spirits, are the Natural Imaged Properties of the Hellish Foundation: For,
when they brake off themselves from the holy Name of God, from the Being or
Substance of the Unity of God; and totally Imaged themselves, in the NEIN or
No; that is; in the LIE; then they became such.

3. The Thrusting out is, Effected, by or Through the Name, of the holy Power
of Lucifers.
his Throne; which he has had; he is, with his Legions, become thrust out of
his Throne; that is; out of his dwelling or Habitation; and became instantly,
shut or locked up by the Darkness, and apprehended or captivated by the fierce
Wrath of the hellish Foundation.

4. Thus he is severed off from Gods Holiness, and dwells under the Firmament
and upon the Earth, between Time and Eternity; as a Prince of Darkness, in the
fierce Wrath of God.

5. His Princely Dominion is in the highest; in several distinctness; as also
in the Elements in all Quarters and Places, after the Manner and Kind of the
Four Elements, according to Of the Spirits.
their Properties: for their Properties are Manifold, and they have in all the
four Elements, Habitations, every Generation or Tribe among them in their
likeness.

6. Yet Men must rightly understand it, thus; they have not the Elements in
possession, according to the Good property of them: No, but only the out flown
fierce Wrath, out of the Eternal fierce Wrath of the hellish Foundation.

7. For, there are always, two Kingdoms in the Four Elements, understood;
First; according to Gods out poured Love; and secondly according to his Anger:
Yet they dwell only in the part of the Anger; and are locked up in the Eternal
Night, and are not able to touch the Good Power of the Elements.

8. But whatsoever flows out of the Astrum or Constellations, and Imageth it
self together into Substance, therein they can indeed dwell; with which
Substance, WITCHCRAFT is Querie the other place.
performed.

9. There are indeed some Powers, in which, the holy Power of the Centrall Fire
of the Light, is together flown forth; which are totally contrary to the
Hellish Foundation: But in Man, there is Evil and Good together, and the Good
holds the Evil captive, and press^th through and through the same, so that
it can have no full Effect therein, unless it be so, [that Man's Will, with its
authority and power, do change the same, or that it become changed per Turbam
Magnam by the Great Turba, that a Moving of the fierce Wrath comes into a
Thing; so that the Moving of the Evil, exceeds the Good.

10. Their Habitation is a Den of Lies; a Throat or Jaws of Eternal
Perdition, an Imaging of Fancy, with a false Light, wherein this Den, through
their Imagination, Imageth to it self a Light out of the Centrall Fire; which
stands in no Or Principle.
Ground, and touches not the Majesty of God: Which as soon as ever the Name of
God therein became broken or Misused, did e^tinguish; as is to be understood of
Witchcraft.

11. This Extruded or Thrust out Dragon, or Throat and Jaws of the Hellish
Foundation, is Not it self, the Centrall Fire of the Eternal Nature; but a
receptibility of it self; viz: an Efflux from the Fire: As the Smoke and the
Fire are two Substances, and yet come out of one only Ground; thus The Dragon.
it is but a Substance of fierce-wrath; as the Smoke which proceeds from the
Fire.

12. Therefore it is totally severed asunder from God, as the Smoke from the
Fire; and yet receives or conceives from the Centrall Fire of the Eternal
Nature; Power and Strength; for therein stands its Life; but its Will and
Longing or Lust, resembles it self, to the Smoke out of the Fire.

13. For its Nature-Fire, in its Creaturall Essence, is burning; but in the
Substance of God, it is One Temperament with the Centrall Love-Fire of the
Light: The cause of the Fire is changed into the Light; but in the Den of the
Dragon, or Throat and Jaws of the Hellish Foundation, there are the Properties
in their operation Manifest.

14. NOTE.
The Hellish and the Heavenly Foundation, are to one another, as Day and Night,
and they are near together: yet the one comprehends not the other, also the
one sees not the other, in its Essence; for whatsoever in God is a
Love-burning, the same is in the Hell, an Anger-burning.

15. This Hellish Den presents it self, sometime, in several places, through
the Elements: Especially in the Earth, as also in the upper Dominion or Region,
where the Fire-Darts or Thunder Bolts, are discerned, partly from great Cold,
partly from great Heat; Especially in Great Wildernesses or Deserts, and where
there are Great Or Concaves
Clests in the Earth, wherein, the highly Damned Spirits do inbabit or dwell,
as also the Highly Damned Souls of Men, where the Evil Spirits themselves do
tremble, and are horribly terrified; for it is the Burning Hole or Hell.

16. Otherwise, their right Foundation at present is not totally Manifest; and
they must expect yet a greater Judgment: The SUN and the Water, holds or
keeps their Dominion yet Hidden, That it cannot totally become manifest: Till
AT the Day of Judgment: But only, in the Properties, in themselves, it is
Manifest; therefore the Devils themselves do Tremble, and are horribly
terrified, at or FOR the Day of Judgment.

17. Understand this rightly thus: God, in the Foundation of Hell is a Nothing:
For, in that, he is not flowing forth, according to his Love; he is, indeed;
yet in himself, as to the Hellish Foundation, he is a Nothing, according to the
Love.

18. Thus also the Hell, in God, is a Nothing: It is indeed; yet the Light
apprehends it not: They are one to the other, as Death and Life; each lives
and wills in it self; and both of them, are, as Something and Nothing.

19. God, in the Light, is a Something, and in the Hell, a Nothing: For the
Eternal Unity is only a Substance and Power, in the Light; and the Lie, is
only in its own self receptibility, a Substance and Power.

20. Therefore do the Devils stand in so Great Shame and Reproach; because
they are so near God, and yet cannot possibly attain him, and this is also
their Anguish-Source: Pain or Torment.

The Fourteenth Question. What is the Office of the Devil in Hell?
[No Answer here.]

The Fifteenth Question. Has the Foundation of Hell taken a temporal
Beginning, or has it been from Eternity? Or how, may it subsist Eternally; or
Not?
Answer.
1. THe Foundation, has been always from Eternity; yet not in such
Manifestation or Revelation: For, Gods Anger has indeed been from Eternity;
but not as an Anger, not Image-like or out-flown: but as the Fire lies hid in
Wood, or in a Stone; till it be awakened.

2. The Awakening or Kindling, or the Den of the Dragon, did in the Fall of
Lucifer take its beginning; viz: in the Created or Creature; where the own
Will, (viz: the NEIN or No; turned it self away from the IAH.

3. Yet, being such an awakened Ground is broak forth or sprung out of the
Eternal Foundation, and has an Eternal Will, therefore this Foundation
cannot possibly pass away or cease; unless the Creation totally cease and
become Nothing, and that the Eternal Nature, in own-self receptibility,
Extinguish: and if that should come to be done, then would also the Skill
Knowledge and perceptibility, as also the Kingdom of Joy and Triumph
Extinguish.

4. Which cannot possibly be: For, there must be, TWO Eternal Beginnings or
Principles, one in another, that the ONE in the OTHER may become known and
perceptible; and that the Holy Angels and Souls, together with all heavenly
Creatures, may praise God, and exult or Triumph, for or because of the Good,
that they do not dwell in the Evil, and must NOT NEEDS, be Evil.

5. It must The Author Jacob Behme, wrote no further here, that is yet come to
hand, but these 15. and all the rest of the 177. Questions, and many more, are
answered at Large in his other Writings; in them is set down satisfactorily,
the ground to answer whatsoever CAN be asked.

The Translation into Low Dutch, was begun in the Middle of October, 1639. and
finished the last of that Month.



Meditatie des Over-setters, over het on-vol-eyndighen van dit heerlijcke
Tractaat; van de 177. Vraghen.
GHy eeuwigh Niets, en Al, ach! Eenigh Eeuwigh Wesen,
Ghy geeft ons swacke Eeu, even laaf-dronck, om genesen:
Laas! Adam Kranck en Oudt, Snackt naar dees Medicyn:
Ey! in den Laatsten noot, u trost laat hem by Zijn.
Den aenvangh Soeckt het eyndt, den tijd will haast verloopen,
Wy hebben goedt noch geldt, om Oly ons te Koopen:
Den bruydigom nu Komt, ey! Siet! ons Lamp gaat uyt,
Vyt Zions Soete Stroom, laaft Here, u Lieve Bruyt.
Ach! Siele Zij^ ghetroost, ghy Klaaght, ick weet u reden,
'T is, om, des Authors draat, te vroegh is af-ghesneden:
Maar, so ghy well bedenckt, sijn naar-ghelaten Schat,
Ghy vindt, naar Christ, geen Eeuw, die so veel heeft ghehadt.
Ich weet, u dorstigh heart, wenst dees fonteyn te Smaacken:
Doch, 't uyterlick vernuft, Kan hier niet toe-gheraacken:
Maar, even ghelaten gheeft, die met God inqualeert,
Wordt vande Ickheyt niet, belet noch gheturbeert:
Die in ghelatentheyt, Sich worpt in Gods ebermen,
Met den verlooren Soon, valt hy in's Vaders ermen:
Die geeft hem't Bruylofs Kleedt, en set hem aen Sij^ dis,
En deelt hem alles me, 't geen in Sijn wooningh is.
Ach! Ghy belust ghemoet, hoe garen Soude ghy weten,
Al 't geen hier wordt gevraaght, en voor u Zijn Secreten.
Maar, volght des Auteurs Raat, en worpt u in Gods Will,
Treedt in gelatentheyt, houdt u den Geest Gods still:
Hy, die de diepten Gods, door-soeckt, sal u verklaren,
'T Geen onse Auteurs Pen, voor-nam te openbaren:
Geen diept 'en is so diep, geen hooght 'en is so hoogh,
Die niet bereyckt en wordt, van't Al-door-siende oogh.
Al-heeft Gods diepe Geest, dit instrument versieten,
Daar-door en heeft dien Geest, het weten niet vergeten:
Hy weet, in wie hy will, 't geen yeders Eeuw is nur,
Door 't quaadts in-ons, alleen, Sijn weten wordt gestuc:
Maar, is it dat Christi Geest, in u magh ruymt verkrijgen,
Al-'t geen u dan is nut, Sal hy u niet ver swijgen:
So wijt de Geest Gods gaat, so verd' wilt hem naar-gaan,
En daar by stille staat, wilt daar oock blijven staan.
Op 't uyterlijck vernuft, wilt u gans niet vertrouwen,
Nock op't Subtyl begrijp, u fundament niet houwen:
'T is well even edel dingh, als 't met Gods will ver-eent,
Wanneer't, gelijck de Here, tot 't laaghst sich verkleent.
Maar, so 't in eygen will, met Lucifer, will vliegen,
So sal't Sijn eygen nest, verraden en bedriegen:
D^ar heeft den moord-geest haast, in Cain, d'overhandt,
En dan drijft Esauws nijt, den Jacob uyt het landt.
Siet! is u Geest belust, tot dese diepe gronden,
So geeft het gauw besluyt, geen ruympt tot Kloecke vonden:
'T Heeft 't eeuwigh goedt behaaght, door dit Slecht instrument,
Te maacken onse Eeuw, Gods heymlijckheydt bekent.
Al-is sijn's levens- draat, voor-ons, te vroegh gebroocken;
Dien Geest blijft even-wel, die door hem heeft gesproocken:
Gods Tempels-deur staat op, Sijn heymlickheyt hy Siet,
Die uyt de yetsheyt gaat, en falt geheel in 't niet.
Oock heeft des Auteurs pen, meest al dees hooge vragen,
So hier, en daar, vol-daan, dies ons niet staat te Klagen:
Sijn werck, door-Leest mec vlijt, so vindt ghy't al, en mere,
Doch, laat u Oogh-Wit Zijn, tot Gods Lof, prijs en eer.
Mede-Borger in de dry vermenghde-Wereldt.

EYNDE.
This Nether-dutch Meditation is in English thus.
In English thus. A Meditation upon the Not finishing this Glorious Treatise of
all Jacob Behme's Answers, to the 177. Theosophick Questions.
Eternal Nothing and yet All! thou Substance only One!
Giv'st our weak Age, a Cordial reviving Potion:
For which, the Sick Old Adam gasps; Medicine Spiritual;
Lord! in his last breath, streights and grasps; give him thy Comforts all.
Now the Beginning Seeks the End, the Time will soon be run,
We have no Money, nor to vend, to buy us Oil; undone
We are; the Bridegroom Comes, we see 't, our Lamp is going out:
Of Sions living, Streams, and Sweet; to thy dear Bride pour out.
My Soul be of good cheer! you sigh and grieve I know; and why?
Because the Authors Thread of Life, is cut so suddenly:
But if you do consider well, his Treasure left behind;
No Age, since Christ's, that Books can tell; by far, so much, did find:
O thirsty Heart, thou fain would taste, the inward Fountain Spring;
All outward Reason; though thou have, it; cannot thither bring;
But a Resigned meek Spirit; which, with and in God, does Act:
Cannot be hindered from its pitch; though Self, and Hell, Compact.
He that in Resignation; into Gods Mercy, casts
Himself, humbly; with the Lost Son; to his Fathers Arms he hasts:
Who puts him the Wedding Garment on; him at his Table Sets;
Who then partakes all, thereon; and all in's house, he gets.
O dearest longing Mind! how bent, and eager ar't to know?
All, that in these Questions, is Meant; these Secrets, highly Low?
This Authors Council but observe; sink down into Gods Will;
Deny thy self; and God to serve; to his Spirit in thee, hold still.
Then that which Searches, all the Deeps o'th Deity; will tell,
What ere our Authors, Pen; that sleeps; intended to Reveal.
There is no Depth, so Deep, can be; no height at all so high:
But easily, we, in us, may See, with that All-seeing Eye.
Although Gods deepest Spirit, has, worn out, this Instrument:
'T has not thereby forgot the Path, or knowledge from us rent;
It knows, in whom it will; even, what, for every Age is fit;
But, evil Thoughts in us, are that, which stops this knowing it.
But if the Sp'rit of Christ, may get, a place to work in thee,
All that is profitable; it, shall not concealed be;
Then just as Gods Spirit does go, so far, go after it;
And where it stands Still; also, stand thou then Still; with it.
On outward Reason, do not thou, at all, in the least, rely!
Nor unto Sublime Wit, do bow, that thy Foundation lie
Thereon! though Noble thing it is, united with Gods Will;
And like the Lord; descends to this; the Emptiest Heart to fill,
But if, in own-self, will, 't be pressed; to fly, with Lucifer;
So 't will betray its Towering Nest; and ruin it for Ever:
And there the Murdering Spirit, has then, in Cain the upper-hand;
And Esau's Envy, does so; when, 't drives Jacob, out o'th Land.
But does thy Spirit long to reach, after these Searchings deep?
Then give no way, for Lust, to teach; its, wise conceits, to keep:
'T has pleased the Most Eternal Good, by this slight Instrument;
To make his Mysteries our Food; and known; to our Content.
Though his wished Thread of Life; from us, has too too soon been broken:
The Sp'rit in us, remains still thus; which so, by him, has Spoken.
Gods Temple Door, in the Soul; stands Oap; his Mysteries, he sees;
Who out from Something, bends his Skope; and into the Nothing, flees.
The Authors Pen, also; has, Most, yes, all, these Questions high,
Here and there Satisfide; none lost; that plaint, thou may lay by.
His Works read through, with diligence; you will find All, and More
Then here is asked; in deepest Sense; Aim to praise God therefore.
Thy fellow-Citizen of the Threefold- mixt-World.

END.
A Fundamental Instruction Concerning the Earthly and Concerning the Heavenly
MYSTERY.

How they Two stand in one another; and how in the Earthly the Heavenly
becomes Manifested or Revealed.

Comprised in Nine Texts.

By Jacob Behme.

Otherwise called the Teutonick Philosopher.

Written the 8. May 1620. in High Dutch.

Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

London, Printed by M.S. for Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at the Castle
in Cornhill. 1661.

A brief Summary of the Earthly Mystery and of the Heavenly Mystery.
How they stand in one another, and how in the Earthly, the Heavenly becomes
Manifested or Revealed.

Wherein then you shall see, Babell the Great City upon Earth, stand with its
Forms and Wonders; and wherefore or out of what, Babell is generated: Where
Antichrist will stand quite Naked.

A total Wonderful Revelation or Manifestation taken out of the Highest
Secret Arcanum.

Herein will stand totally revealed, what the Turba of All Substances or
Things, is.

Written for the Children of God, which by such warning will Rev. 18.1^
flee out of Burning Babel, and become generated the Children of God out of the
Turba; all very Earnestly and Faithfully given forth, from the Knowledge of the
Great Mystery, Mysterium Magnum.

The First Text.
1. THe Abyss, is an Eternal Nothing, and yet makes an Eternal Beginning,
viz: a Or Instinct.
Seeking.

2. For the Nothing, is a seeking after somewhat: And there Yet is Nothing that
affords Somewhat, but the Seeking is it self the affording or giving, of all
that, which yet is a Nothing: Viz: merely a desirous Seeking.

3. And that, is the Eternal Original of the Magia, which makes in it self,
where Nothing is; it makes out of Nothing Somewhat; and that only in it self,
and yet there that Seeking is also a Nothing, no other then merely a Will.

4. It has Nothing: And there is also Nothing, that can give it somewhat, and
has also no place, where it can find or Or repose it self.
lay it self away.

The Second Text.
5. NOW therefore seeing there is thus a Seeking in the Nothing, it makes it
self the Will to Somewhat, and that Will is a Spirit, and like a Thought: And
that goes forth out of the Seeking, and is the Seeker of the Seeking; for it
finds its Mother, which is the Seeking.

6. And then is that Will, a Magus in its Mother; for, it has found Somewhat
in the Nothing; viz: its Mother; and seeing then it has found its Mother, so
now it has a place for its Habitation.

7. And herein understand, how the Will is a Spirit, and some other thing then
the desirous Seeking: For the Will is an imperceptible and unapprehensible
Life, but the Seeking becomes found by the Will, and is in the Will a
Substance or Being.

8. And then it becomes known or apprehended, that the Seeking is a Magia, and
the willing a Magus; and that the Will is greater then its Mother that gives
affords or generateth it; for it is Lord in the Mother; and the Mother
becomes known to be Dumb silent or inoperative, and, the Will to be a Life,
without Original.

9. And there yet the Seeking is a cause of the willing; but without
apprehension and understanding; and the Will is the understanding of the
Seeking.

10. Thus we give you in brief to consider; Nature and the Spirit of Nature;
what there has been from Eternity, without Or Understanding.
Original: and thus we find, that the Will, viz: the Spirit has no place for
its Rest: But the Seeking is its own place; and the Will is a BAND to it, and
yet is not apprehended.

The Third Text.
11. THus then seeing the Eternal Will is free from the Seeking, and yet the
Seeking is not free from the Will, for the Will rules over the Seeking,
therefore we apprehend the Will to be the Eternal Omnipotence; for it has
Nothing that is like it.

12. And the Seeking is indeed a Moving, of the drawing or desiring, but
without understanding; and it has a Life but without Ingenium or Wit: Now the
Will rules the Life of the Seeking: and does therewith, what it will; and
though it does Somewhat, yet the same is not apprehended, till that same
Substance manifests or reveals it self by or through the Will; and then it
becomes apprehended, what the Will has made.

13. And thus we apprehend the Eternal Will-Spirit, to be God, and the Moving
Life of the Seeking to be Nature; for there is nothing sooner, and they are
both without beginning, and the one is continually a cause of the other; and an
Eternal Band: And thus, the Eternall-Will-Spirit, is an Eternal knowing of
the Abyss; and the Life of the Seeking, an Eternal knowing of the willing.

The Fourth Text.
14. THus then the seeking is a desiring, and the same desiring is a Life,
therefore that same desirous Life, goes in the Seeking, forward; and is
continually impregnated with the Seeking.

15. And the desiring is a strong or stern attracting, and yet has Nothing but
it self: viz: the Eternity without Ground: Now that which is draws magically,
viz: its own desiring to a Substance.

16. For, now the Will takes where Nothing is, it is a Lord and possesses the
same, and yet it self is no Substance, and yet rules in the Substance; and the
Substance makes it desirous, viz: of Substance.

17. And because then it becomes in it self desirous, therefore it is
Magical, and impregnateth it self: viz: with Spirit, without Substance; for it
is in the Original no other then Spirit: thus it Makes in its Imagination,
only Spirit, and becomes pregnant of the Spirit; viz: the Eternal
Skilfulnesse of the Abyss, in the Omnipotence of the Life, without Substance.

18. And then being it is pregnant, therefore the generating goes into it
self, and dwells in it self: For the Essence of the other Life, cannot
comprehend this impregnation, and be the sustainer thereof; and therefore must
the impregnation enter into it self, and be its own sustainer; viz: a Son, in
the Eternal Spirit.

19. And being this impregnation has no Substance, therefore it self is a
Voice or Sound, viz: a Word of the Spirit, and continues in the Original of
the Spirit: For otherwise it has no Seat or Place of possession, but only in
the Original of the Spirit.

20. And in this Word, there is yet a will, which there will go forth into a
Substance, and that Will is the Life of the Original Will, the same goes forth
out of the impregnation, viz: from the Mouth of the Will, forth, into the Life
of the Magia; that is, into Nature; and opens the unintelligent life of the
Magia, so that the same is a Mystery, in which, an Understanding lies,
Essentially; and thus gets an Essential Spirit.

21. Whereas, every Essence, is a secret Arcanum or a Mystery of a whole
Substance; and is thus a Comprehension, ( viz: an Abyssall Wonder of Eternity)
where many lives, without Number, become Generated; and yet is together as it
were but one only Substance.

22. And the Threefold Spirit without Substance, is the Master and Possessour
thereof; and there yet it possesses not the Nature-Substance; for it dwells
in it self.

23. The Word, is its Center, or place of possession; and it stands in the
Midst like a Heart.

24. And the Spirit of the Word, which existeth in the first Eternal Will,
opens the Wonders of the Essential Life; so that there are two Mysteries:
One in the Spirit-Life, and one in the Essentiall-Life.

25. And the Spirit-Life, is known, to be GOD: And also is rightly so called.

26. And the Essential Life, to be the Nature-Life; which would have no
understanding, if the Spirit, or the Spirit-Life, were not desirous.

27. In which desiring the Note.
divine Substance, viz: the Eternal Word or Heart of God; is continually and
from Eternity generated.

28. From which, the desirous Will, Eternally goes forth, viz: the Spirit
thereof, into the Nature-Life: and opens therein the Mystery out of the
Essences and in the Essences, so that there are two Lives, and also two
Substances; out of, and in one only Eternal Abyssall Original.

29. And thus we apprehend, what GOD, and NATURE, is, how BOTH of them are from
Eternity without any Ground and Beginning: For it is a continual Eternally
enduring beginning, it begins it self continually and from Eternity, in
Eternity, wherein there is no Number; for it is the ABYSS.

The Fifth Text.
30. THus then seeing TWO Substances have been from Eternity: Therefore we
cannot say, that the one stands next or besides the other, and apprehends
or frames it self so, that the one comprehends the other: And yet we cannot
say, that the one stands without the other; and that there is a sundring from
being ONE: No.

31. But thus we apprehend it, that the Spirit-Life, in it self, stands
turned inwards, and the Nature-Life stands out from it self, turned forward
before, it self; Where they together, we liken it to a Round Wheel The
Philophique Globe in the 40. Questions of the Soul unparted and whole.
Globe or Sphere, which goes on all sides, as the Ezekiel. 1.15. to the 26. ver.
Wheel in Ezekiel intimates; and the Spirit Life is a total fullness of the
Nature-Life, and yet is not Comprehended by the Nature-Life.

32. And these are two Principles, in one only Original, where each has its
Mystery and its working; for the Nature-Life works to the Fire, and the
Spirit-Life to the Light of the Brightness and Glory.

33. Where then we understand, in the Fire, the fierceness of the Confirming
of the Substantiality of Nature; and in the Light, the generating of the Water,
which bereaveth the Fire of the Power and Authority; as before in the In the
40. Questions of the Soul the Answer to the 1. Question.
Questions has been Declared.

34. And thus to us is apprehensible; that it is one only substantiality of
Nature, like Water and Fire together; which thus stand as it were mingled one
in another; where then it gives a Light Blew or Azure Color: Like the flash
of Fire.

35. Where it has the form or resemblance, like a Or Rubie.
Cherubin or Rubie and Crystal, Mingled in one only Substance, or like.
Yellow White Red Blew mingled in a dark Water, where it is like, New in Green.

36. Where yet each has or retains its Clarity and shines, and the Water
thus only preventeth its Fire, so that there is no Consuming there, but thus
they are, one only Eternal Substance, in two Mysteries, one in another, and
yet a distinction of two Principles, viz: of a twofold Life.

37. And thus we understand herein, the Substance of all Substances; and that
it is a Magic Substance; where a Will, can create it self, into an Essential
Life, and so pass into a Birth or Geniture, and, in the Great Mystery, awaken
a Source, (especially in the Original of the Fire;) which was not manifested
or revealed before, but lay hidden in the Mystery, as a Luster in the
Multiplicity of Colors.

38. As we have a Looking-glass of this, in the Devils and all Maligninity:
And thus also apprehend, whence all things, Evil and Good, Exist; Viz: from
the Imagination in the Great Mystery, where a wonderful Essential Life,
generateth it self.

39. As we have a sufficient instance, to apprehend it by, in the Creatures of
this World; viz: where the divine Life, has once moved or awakened the
Nature-Life; how the same has generated such wonderful Creatures out of the
Essential Mystery, whereby then is understood, how every Essence is come to
be a Mystery, that is, to a Life.

40. Also again is understood, that thus in the Great Mystery, there is a
Magical Seeking, so that the seeking of every Essence, thus makes a
Looking-glass again, to behold apprehend and know it self in the
Looking-glass.

41. And there then it comprehends the Seeking (understand the
Looking-glass) and brings it into its Imagination, and finds that the same
is not its Life.

42. Where then the Strife existeth, and the Loathing, so that the Seeking,
wills to cast away the Looking-glass; and yet cannot.

43. Thus then the Seeking, seeks the limit or utmost extent, of the
Beginning; and goes out from the Looking Glass; and then is the
Looking-glass Broaken; and the Breaking is a Turba; viz: a dying of the
Received Conceived or Formed Life.
Comprehenaed Life.

44. And it is highly apprehensible, to us, how the Imagination of the Eternal
Nature, has the Turba, thus together in the Seeking, in the Mystery; yet
anawakeable, unless, the Creature, ( viz: the Looking-glass of the Eternity;)
do it self awken it; viz; the fierce Wrath, which in the Eternity lies hid in
the Mystery.

45. And we see here, when the Eternal Nature once moved or awakened it self
with the Creating, that the fierce Wrath became together aawakened, and also
manifested or revealed it self in Creatures. As Men find there are Evil
Beasts, also Evil Herbs or weeds, and Evil Trees, as also Worms or Creeping
things, as Toads, Serpents, and the Like; as to which the Eternal Nature has
a Loathing.

46. And the Malignity and Poison, is only nourished or sustained in its own
Essence; and for this things sake also, the Eternal Nature seeks the Extent
or Limit of the Malignity, and wills to leave or forsake it.

47. Where then it falls into the Turba, that is, into the Dying: and yet is
no dying, but a spewing out even into the Mystery: Where the Malignity with
its Life shall stand apart; viz: in a Darkness.

48. For Nature leaves or forsakes it, and shuts it out, so that it stands
thus in it self as in Evil Poisonous Venomous Fierce Wrathful Mystery; and
is it self its own Magia, viz: a Seeking of the Poisonous Anguish.

Tht Sixth Text.
49. When we consider our selves and apprehend thus, then we find the Strife
of all and Every Thing or Substance, that the one is continually the Loathing
of the other, and is the others Enemy.

50. For every Will desires a purity without Turba, in the other Thing or
Substance, and yet has the Turba in it Self, and it is also the loathing of
the other.

51. And there goes the Might of the greatest, over the least, and holds the
same in Subjection, except it escapes from it; else the strong rules over the
weak.

52. Thus also the weak runs on, and seeks the utmost limit of the Driver
or Oppressor, and wills to be Romans 8.21.22.
released from the Compulsion: and so utmost limit of all Creatures is sought,
which stands, hidden in the Mystery.

53. And thus, and from hence, existeth all the Power and Authority of this
World, in that Continually the one rules over the other, and it was not in the
beginning Commanded or Ordained by the highest Good, but is grown out of the
Turba.

54. Whereas Nature afterward has acknowledged the same for its Essence,
which is become generated out of it, and has given Laws to it, thus further to
generate it self in the conceived or Ordered Constituted o^ Contrived.
framed Government.

55. Where this Birth or Geniture, is thus then climbed to Kingly Government,
and further has thus sought the Abyss; viz: the ONE, till it is become
Monarchy, that is, Empire; and there yet it is in the climbing up, and will be
One only, and not Many, and though it is in Many, yet will the first Source or
Quality, from which all is generated, rule over all; and will be Lord alone
over all Governments.

56. And whereas the Seeking, was one only Government in the Beginning, and yet
has parted it self in time according to the Essences, into Many: So, the
Multiplicity, seeks the One again, and it is certainly generated or born, in
the Sixth Number of the Crown; that is in the Sixth Thousand Year, in the Figure,
not at the End.

57. But in the Hour of the Day, wherein the Creation of the Wonders became
quite finished: That is; wherein the Wonders of the Turba stand at the End, A
Herre Sir. Master. Lord. Prince. King. or Emperor.
Lord is born or generated, who governs the whole World: Yet by or through
Many Offices.

58. And there shall be sought, the Self-usurped or grown Magistracy, and the
Driver or Oppressor and Persecuter: For, the smallest or least, which is lying
under, is also run to the utmost limit, and Now all severeth or dissolveth it
self; for it is the highest pitch or limit, and there is no stopping or
recalling.

59. Thus also the Turba, viz: the fierce Wrath of all Creatures, becomes
sought, for the is also, with the Loathing of the Creatures, run to the limit,
and now becomes Manifest or Revealed: Viz: at the limit, in the Midst, of the
Number of the Crowns, in the Sixth Thousand Year, a little Over, and not under,
in the Day and Hour, when the Creation, in the Mystery became perfect and
finished; and became set, in the Mystery, as a Looking-glass of Eternity, in
the Wonders.

60. That is, on the Sixth Day beyond Midday or Noon, there, stands the
Mystery with the Wonders Open or Revealed; and it becomes seen and known;
where then the Purity shall drive out, or drive away, the Turba, for a Time,
till the Beginning passes into the End; and then is the Mystery a Wonder in
Figures.

The Seventh Text.
SEeing then, in the Mystery of the Eternal Nature, Such a hidden secret
Arca^^^ has la^, from which all Creatures, Evil and Good, have become
Generated and Created; therefore; therefore we appreprehend it to be a Magic
Substance, where the one Magia has continually through Lust or Longing,
awakened the other, and brought it into Substance: Viz: that Every thing has
exalted it self, and brought it self into the highest Authority.

62. For, the Spirit of God is no Maker of the Evil in Nature, but an Opener
and Seeker of the Good.

63. Thus has the Evil it self, as through a Magic Seeking, continually,
together sought and sound it self in the Mystery, and i^ together become
opened, without or besides GODS purpose or Predestination, the fierce Wrath is
a Severity, and rules over the weak or simple.

64. Thus all is grown out of its own Tree, without premeditation or
fore-though, for the first Opener, viz: God, has not ordained the Evil or
Malignity, to the Government, but Reason, or the Ingentiam Wi^ or subtle
Policy, that was to open the Wonders, and be a Conductresse of the Life.

65. And here, meets us, the Great Secrecy which has, from Eternity, lain
in the Mystery; viz: the Mystery with its Colors, which are Four; and the
Fifth is not peculiarly belonging to the Mystery of Nature; but it is the
Mystery of the ^eity; which shines in the Mystery of Nature as a Life of the
Light.

66. And The Black Color, belongeht not to the Mystery; but it is the vail,
viz: a darkness wherein all lies.
these are the Colors where in all Lies, viz: Blew, Red, Green, Yellow; and
the Fifth, the White, is GODS own, and yet also has its Glimpse Glance or
Luster in Nature.

67. Yet it is the Fifth Essence or Quintessence, a pure undefilled Child; as
is to be observed in Gold and Silver, as also in a white clear Christ^^ine
Stone, which color also subsisteth in the Fire; for the Fire is the proof or
Trial of all Colors in which non^ subsist in the Fire but the white, being
the same is a Glance of Gods Majesty.

68. This Alphabet of the Language of Nature, lies in the Black Color hidden
among them all, for the Black color belongs not to the Number of the
Colors; the same is Mystery and Incomprehensible, but only to those to whom
the Language of Nature becomes opened by the Spirit of God.
Also, we find herein, the Tree of the Tongues or Languages; that is of the
Speeches, together with the Four Alphabets, the One or First, Marked with the
Characters of the Mystery, wherein the Language of Nature lies; which is the
Root in all Languages, and yet in the Out-birth of the Multiplicity of the Many
Languages, is not apprehended, but only of its own Children; which
understanding, the Mystery it self, gives; for the same, is, a Wonder of God.

69. The Second Alphabet, is the Hebrew, which opens the Mystery, and names
the Tree, with its Branches and Sprouts.

70. The Third, is the Greek, which names the Tree with the Fruit and
Ornament, which first rightly Expresses or Speaks forth the Ingenium Wit or
Knowledge.

71. And the Fourth is the Latin, wherewith many People Nations and Languages
help themselves; which Expresses or Speaketh-forth the Tree with its Powers
and Virtues.

72. And the Fifth is GODS Spirit, which is the Opener of all Alphabets; and
that Alphabet, no Man can teach, unless it open it self, in Man's Spirit.

73. Thus these Alphabets, Exist, from the Colors of the great Mystery, and
part themselves, further, forth, in Number into Seventy and Seven Languages or
Pronunciations: Whereas yet we apprehend or account no More then Five, for the
Head or Chief Languages or Pronunciations: and Seventy two, for the Wonders,
wherein Babell is understood; viz: a Mouth of a Confused, Substance, or Thing.

74. Where Reason has forsaken its Conducter, and would go alone, and Climb
up into the Mystery; as is to be apprehended by the Genesis 10. from 8. to the 15.
and the 11. chapter.
Children of Nimrod at the Tower of Babell; when they were apostated or fallen
away from Gods Obedience, into own-self Reason, then they had lost their
Conductor, and did Confound Reason, so that they Conceived or Comprehended not,
their own Speech Language or Pronunciation.

75. And thus grew many Languages, viz: Seventy two, out of the Confused
Babell, and each entered into it self, and sought Wit or Arts, each in its own
self Reason and Evil or Malignity; for they had forsaken God, and were become
Heathens.

76. And he let them go on in their Wonders, for they would not cleave to him,
but would be a Sprout of their own; and their own Reason, which yet was mingled
with all Colors, should rule steer or lead them.

77. And then the Turba became generated, so that they were Genesis 11. from, 6.
to the, 10.
not of One Mind, for every one would live from out of their own Color; and
yet were not the right Chief Colors; but only its Evil Self-hatched Children,
who hatched or bred themselves forth in the Reason, and ran, without the right
Conductor, which had framed Created or set all in one only Tongue or Language,
and opened no More, then one only, one only Tree, with the Branches, and the
Power, together with the Fruit.

78. For the Four Alphabets, lie in one only Tree, and go out of one another,
but the Multiplicity of Speeches or Languages, must with the others, Characters
or Letters help themselves, as belonging to the Family, and yet also will be
their own, and sprout turn or grow, all of them against, or contrary, to the
Tree.

The Eighth Text.
79. THus we now see the Original of Two sorts of Religions, out of which,
Babell is Generated an Idoll-Goddesse, and that both to Heathens and Jews; for
Babell is in Both.

80. And they are Two Generations in One only; the one goes forward forth out
of its Reason, viz: out of the Nature-Life, and out of the Spirit; and seeks
to elevate it self, it makes it self, a Way, in its Substance or Being.

81. For its Will goes out of its own self-seeking, and seeks its Magia,
viz: a great Number, for its Government or Dominion, a Multiplicity, and goes
directly forward away out of it self; its Will continues in its Multiplicity,
and that is its Multiplicities God and Conductor.

82. And though the Free Will of God, opposes and rebukes them; yet the
Idoll-God does flatter or play the Hypocrite, with the Note what the Free Will
i^.
Free Will, viz: the Spirit of God, but with the Mouth only; and honors its
own Will, in the Number of the Multiplicity, for that will, is generated out of
its Treasure, that is out of its Magia.

83. It comprehends, not, the Free Will of God; and therefore it is Math.
16.17. John 3.6.
generated out of flesh and blood, out of its own self-Nature, and is a Child
of this World, and holds its Treasure for its beloved, thus it is now an
Hypocrite, and a Confounded Babell.

84. The Numbers of the Multiplicity, viz: its own Magia, Confounds it; in that
it goes out from one only Number, into Many; and then is the Multiplicity a
Confounded Babell, and its hypocritical Mouth, with which it gives good Words
to the Spirit of Unity, and promises much to it, is an Antichrist, and a Liar,
for it speaks one thing and does another.

85. Its heart is a seeking, and the Spirit of its heart, has turned it self
into the seeking; thus then is the Magus of the Multiplicity, a stout proud
stately Covetous Malignant Devourer, and a Spirit out of the desirous
Multiplicity; and is a false Idol-God.

86. He cleaves not to the Free Will of Nature, which has the Might of the
Wonders in its power or authority; and he has no understanding in the Divine
Mystery; for he cleaves not with his Will, to that Spirit.

87. Else if his Will were turned into the Liberty, then would the Spirit of
God open his Magic Mystery, and his Wonders and Works, would, with his Will,
stand in God; but whereas they only go out from it self, so then the Beginning
seeks the End, and the Middle-most is the Turba; for it stands not in the
Free Will of God; but it grows out of it self; and Elevateth it self like a
proud stout Tree.

88. And whereas, then, God is but ONE only in the Will, and is ONE only in the
Eternal Desire, that is, in the Eternal Magia; so that the Seeking of the
Eternal Magia, thus only gives up it self into the Eternal Will, and frames
or Creates its Life therein; so is the Will of the Out-birth as an apostate
perjured Whore; for it is a Genetrix of Falsehood, and cleaves not to the
Free Will.

89. And herein we understand an Apostasy, as that of Lucifer, who is a Cause
of all that, who has made the Magia, of Nature, to be eagerly Seeking or
Longing after Falsehood.

90. Note.
And thus herein, two Eternal Lives, become generated; viz: one in the Will of
God, and the other in the Will of the Devil and in the Will of the fierce
Wrathfulness; and that is Babell, together with the Antichrist upon Earth.

91. All whatsoever goes out from the Will of God into its own Will, that
belongs to Babell: This you see by Jews and Heathens, as also by all People
and Nations, the Heathens remain standing in their own Magia.

92. But those that went out from the Seeking of Perdition, into the Light of
Nature, though they knew not God; and yet lived in the purity, those Children
of the Free Will; and in them has the Spirit of the Liberty, in the Mystery
opened great Wonders, as is to be seen in their Wisdom they have left behind
them.

93. But the other, who lived only out of their Magic Will, out of Flesh and
Blood; their Will was drowned in the Turba, and, the Source or Quality of the
Turba climbed up in their Will, and gave them a Spirit according to the
Essences of their Covetousness, and fierce Wrath; and that seeks only of the
Number of the Multiplicity, viz: Dominions and Kingdoms.

94. And when the Turba, could not go forward by Power and Authority, then it
became enraged with Wrath, and began Strife and Fighting; and from thence Exist
Wars, viz: out of Pride, Stateliness, Covetousness and Multiplicity; and this
belongs with its Number, into the Mystery of the fierce Wrath.

95. In like manner also were the Jews; God revealed himself to them, yet they
clave also to two Wills: viz: as to one part, to the Commandment, with their
Will directed into Gods Will; as the first Patriarchs and all the honest good
People of Israel.

96. The other acted with their Hands, the Works of the Law, and clave with
their Will, to their poisonous Magia, viz: to Covetousness, and sought nothing
Else but the Numbers of the Multiplicity.

97. Their Mouth was a Jew, and the Heart a Babylonish Whore, an Hypocrite and
Antichrist; with good words, and a false covetous Heart.

98. And thus in Christendom, and with all People and Nations, is the
Babylonish Whore together with Antichrist, sitting, and there, in one only
People, two Kingdoms, dwell at once; and they let themselves not mix, in the
inward Spirit, so that they become one, Dan. 2.43.
as Lime and Iron mingle not.

99. They do indeed mingle themselves, according to the outward Body: But
their Spirits are of two sorts of Tribes or Generations, as the Prophet Daniel
says. Daniel 2. from 40. to the 45. verse.

100. Therefore, whosoever will know the Antichrist, let them seek him only
thus, they will find him in every House; but the worst of all is the Crowned
Whore, and her Godmothers, who elevate her out of the Baptism of Whoredom,
that they also may live in Number of the Multiplicity, viz: the Cryers, who
lead from the one Will of God into Many Wills; that they alone may inherit the
Number of the Multiplicity, and may stuff of fatten Earthly Bellies.

101. And the other part belonging to the Free Will of God, goes forth with
the Magic Will hereof out of it self, into the Liberty; viz: into the one only
incomprehensible Will of God, and it stands In the Philosophic Globe, in the
40. Questions of the Soul.
turned Backward in the Magic Figure.

102. The Life thereof seeks Bread, and goes forward, and its Will is not in
the Bread; but goes out of it self, out of the seeking, into God into one only
Number; these are the right Children of the Eternal M^gia.

103. For, Gods Spirit, dwells in their Will, and opens to them the
Eternal Wonders of God; and their Life's Spirit, opens the Wonders of this
World; and they are free from Babell and the Antichrist; though indeed they
should sit in the Bosom thereof; for the right true Image of God, stands in
the Spirit of the willing, which becomes generated out of the Spirit of the
Soul.

The Ninth Text.
104. WHereas then there are thus two Magia's in one another; so there are also
two Magi, which manage and drive them, viz: two Spirits; the one is Gods
Spirit, and the other the Spirit of Reason, into which the Devil insinuates
himself; and in the Spirit of God, the Love of the Unity stirs it self.

105. Note.
And Man cannot better try and prove himself, then by taking serious
Consideration: To what his Desire and Lust or Longing drives him: The same he
has for a Conductor, and its Child he is.

106. Nevertheless he has Now Might and Strength, that he can break and alter
that Will; for he is Magical, and has the Might or Ability: Yet it must be
Sincere or Earnest, for he must Tame or subdue the Starry Spirit, which rules
in him.

Note Note.
107. To this belongs a Temperate sober and quiet Life, with continual giving
up into the Will of God; for the taming or subduing of the Source or Quality of
the Stars, there is no Wisdom nor Art needful; but Sobriety or Temperance
of Life, with continual going out from the Influxes or Instigations of Evil
in Lusts and Passions.
Instigations; the Elements, continually dart into him the seeking of the
Stars, into the Will.

108. Therefore it is not so easy a thing, to become a Child of God; to that
belongs great Labor and Toil.

109. And yet the Antichrist dares call himself a Child of God; but Christ
says; Math. 7.21, 22, 23.
They shall not all come into the Kingdom of Heaven, that say LORD LORD; and
have not we Cast out Devils in thy Name, and done great works, but he faith to
them, away from me, ye stinking Goats, I know you not; you have done this out
of the false or wicked Magia, and are not become known in my Spirit and Will.

110. Ye are in your Spiritual Figure, Goats, Tyrants, Covetous, Proud
Stately, Voluptuous, ye have brought my Name on to your Tongue; but have
sacrificed your Heart to the Pleasures and Voluptuousness of the Flesh, and
are generated in the Turba, ye must be tried through the Fire; and so Each
Kingdom gets home its Fruit.

111. Therefore ye brave World, behold your self in these Writings; which have
set before you the Eternal Ground, and Consider further and deeper concerning
it, else you will become captivated in your Turba, and there you shall, with
your Substance, go through the Fire of God; and whatsoever is 1 Cor. 3.13, 14,
15.
a work without the Will of God, that shall remain in the Fire; but whatsoever
is generated in the Will of God, that shall stand to Gods Glory and deeds of
Wonder; and to the Eternal Joy, of the Image of Man.

112. Now Consider what thou do: For Babell stands already in the Flames;
and begins to Burn, there is no Quenching or Extinguishing, More, nor no
Remedy or Medicine, she is become known to be Evil, her Kingdom goes to the
End. Hal-le-lu-jah.

The 8, of May. 1620.
The Translation into the Nether-dutch was the second time made, 1642. in July,
out of Three written High Dutch Copies: Out of which Nether-dutch this was
translated into English Saturday 6. of February. 1657/8. Old Style.

And compared with a High Dutch Copy.

The Holy Week Or A PRAYER BOOK.

In which is mentioned the true Ground of Right Praying.

Set forth upon the entreaties and desires of his loving and good Friends, for
the daily Exercise of True Christianity in their Hearts, and Little Church, of
their Families.

In the Year, 1624. left unfinished.

By Jacob Behme Teutonicus Philosophus.

Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

London, Printed by M. S. for Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at the Castle
in Cornhill. 1661.

The brief Contents of this Prayer Book, for Every Day in the Week.
HOw Man should continually consider and call to mind his Employment Office or
Duty, his State Condition and Conversation; wherein God has set and ordained
him; and how he should Commit and Commend his Beginning, Middle and End of all
his Doings, to God; and Continually work all his Works, with, and IN God; just
as the Stock of the Tree, generateth its Branches with and IN the power of the
Root, and brings forth its Fruit upon them.

And how, in all his Beginnings, he should draw Power and Virtue to his Works
out of Gods Fountain or Wellspring, and thank his Creator for all Benefits.

Together with a hearty Consideration of the Suffering, Death, and Resurrection
of Jesus Christ; showing how, Man should continually bring his Souls hunger
and desire, through Christ's Death, in his Resurrection, into God, and press or
penetrate to the New Birth, that he may Pray in Spirit and in the Truth; and
that the Spirit of Christ may pray in and with him: and plead for him before
God.

Christ says, John 4.24.

God is a Spirit, and they that pray unto him or worship him, must pray unto
him or worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

The Preface of the Prayer Book To the Reader that Loves God. Concerning the
true Ground of the right Or Art.
Skill of Prayer. What Prayer is, and wherefore God commands us to Pray.
Dear Christian Reader.
1. RIght Praying, is not a mere Custom, that a Man needs only Speak or Say
the Words of Prayer; no; such speaking of words, without hearty Consideration
Attention or Devotion and divine Desire, is but an Outward thing; an outward
forming or framing of words.

2. The Mouth Imageth or contriveth its words of the Prayer, with the outward
Power, of the Constellations or Stars and Elements, and makes only a form or
figure of the willing, wherein there is no working Power: For Nothing pleases
God, unless what himself works, and does, with a thing.

2. For, God in the Prophet, complains of such outward Mouth-prayer, or
Lip-prayer, without Power; where he says: With their lips they draw near to
Me, but their Heart is far from Me. Isai 29.13.

4. Also, says Christ: Not all that say: LORD, LORD; shall come into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but they that do the Will of my Father in Heaven: Math.
7.21. And says further in another Place; Without ME ye can do nothing; John
15.5. He alone is the living Fountain, and the Throne of Grace, with and
through which, we, with Prayer can enter or press before and into God.

5. If we would pray aright, then we should, I. First: view and well consider
our selves, whither our Heart have Imaged or framed it self into another
Creature; and whether also such desire, which we, desire, to obtain of God, be
right: Or also, whether such desire, which we would bring to God in our Prayer,
be against the profit or benefit and Love of our Neighbor: Or whether, we
therein seek temporal Matters to abridge our Neighbor therein, and to draw
that which is his, to our selves: Or whether, we thereby desire a General
Common Love and Unity or Concord: Or whether, with such Praying we seek only
our own Profit and Gain, to our selves.

6. II. And Secondly: We should well Consider our selves; whether we also in
our Prayer, desire and Love any thing More or above the Mercy of God: Or
whether, whatsoever we desire of Temporal things, we desire them only and
alone from the divine hand and Co-working: Or whether we would, through our
Skill Art Subtilty Cunning and Wit draw it to our selves, and so only pray to
God for his Or permission
leave to have it; or whether, we rely upon our selves: or whether we would
obtain it through the divine co-working; that we may afterward say with a
cheerful heart: This God has bestowed or vouchsafed ME through his Fatherly
Care and Providence: I have only been the Hand and the Instrument: Or: whether
we will say; this I have brought to pass through my own Skill and
Understanding.

7. III. Thirdly: we should consider; what we would do with that, which we
pray for and desire from God: Whether we thereby only desire to have the Honor
and Highness of the World, for temporal Pleasure and Voluptuousness; or
whether, we would lay out that which God casts upon us with his Blessing
through our Prayer, to his Honor and the Love of our Neighbor; and give it to
him again: and whether we would also account our selves therein only to be
Laborers and Servants or Ministers in his Vineyard: as from whom, God will
require an account of his Gifts, how faithful we have been, therein.

8. IV. Fourthly: we should Consider; that in this World we have nothing for
our own: and that we our selves are not our own; but only, for a little while
in this World, are Laborers, and besides, strange Guests or Pilgrims, only
Officers of our God, over his Creation Workmanship and Creatures, and that
whatsoever we work in, and do, we do it not for our selves only, but for God
and our Neighbor.

9. And that we all are together but One in Christ our Savior; who himself is
IN us ALL: and in that respect, that we should have a General Common Love one
toward another, and desire 1 John 4.10, 11.
heartily to Love one another, as God in Christ our Savior has loved us: and
that we will heartily and readily impart the Gifts which God has given us
through our Prayer, whether they be Earthly or Heavenly, to our Fellow Members;
and hold together as the Tree in its Branches, or as the Earth with its Fruit
or Productions does; which willingly and readily gives up it self into all its
Fruits, and loves and bears them all.

10. V. Fifthly: we must Consider; that we, of and from our own power, cannot
rightly pray before God, as Christ says: Without Me ye can do nothing: Also
Saint Paul says; We know not what we should pray as we ought before God: But
the Holy Spirit it self pleads for us mightily with unspeakable Sighs, before
God, as it pleases him: Romans 8.26.

11. Therefore, when we will pray to God our Heavenly Father, then we must call
upon him, in the Name of his dear Son Jesus Christ, for the Illumination of
his holy Spirit; that he would forgive our Sins for his bitter Suffering and
dying sake, and give us that which is good and Blissfull.
happy for us; we should commit all whatsoever is Earthly to his Skill
Cognizance and Will, and not only with Empty breath and words enter before God,
when we would pray aright, and be heard: But with true right earnest sincere
Repentance, and Conversion from our false or wicked Conversation: We must go
forth from all Falsehood, Pride or State, Covetousness, Envy, Anger, and
Contrariety or Opposition; and totally give up our Heart and Soul, to God the
Holy Spirit; that he may be our Working of Repentance, and Power in the Prayer:
That he may include or comprehend our willing and desiring in himself, and
bring it into GOD; that we may, dye away in the Death of Christ from our false
or wicked vanity and desire, which is befallen us by inheritance, and in the
Spirit of Christ in us rise again and be born with a New Will Mind and
Obedience, toward God: and forth on, walk in such Power, in Righteousness and
Purity, with our Will and New Birth before God; as his Children; whom he has
dearly bought, through the Blood and Death of his well-beloved Son, and has
new regenerated them in his Spirit.

12. VI. Sixthly: Christian Loving Reader; thou ought well to consider; What
Prayer is; and why God Bids us to Pray; It is NOT such a thing, as when a Man
comes before a Worldly King or Lord, when he has misdemeaned himself toward
him, and Prays or Beggeth Grace and Pardon of him; and often times in heart
thinks much otherwise: NO; but it is a going forth out of our selves, that a
Man, out of all his powers with all whatsoever he is, and whatsoever he
possesses; give himself up to God.

13. Yea; with right true Prayer, he gives himself up to God, for a Propriety:
He comes with the Lost Luke 15.12.
Prodigal Son again to the Father into his first Native Country, and
Inheritance, out of which our first Father Adam has brought him.

14. He has no Natural right more to the heavenly Goods, he has with Adams
going forth lost them all, and with the Devils Whoredom consumed them in
Vanity: Whereupon now, he must in great Humility and Faith; in true Hope of the
promised Grace in his Son Jesus Christ, come with the Lost Son to God, and
account himself unworthy of all Heavenly Goods by a Natural right; and fall
down before God his Eternal Father; and pray to him for the promised Mercy, in
his Son Jesus Christ; that he will yet receive him again, as a hired Day-man
and Labourer, into his Vineyard; and will yet again give him heavenly Meat and
Drink for his Fainting Hungry and Thirsty Soul; that he might no more need,
with the Devils Swine, to Eat the Husks of Vanity Lying and Falsehood; and so
perish in unbelief without heavenly Power and Virtue.

15. He must set open the Mouth of his hungry and thirsty Soul, in his Prayer,
wide, toward the Grace and Mercy of God, with hearty sighing and turning into
the Grace, and totally and altogether give up himself to the Grace of God: And
then he will instantly hear in his Soul; that God will come to meet him with
his Grace, and give the Grace which he offers in Jesus Christ into his Soul:
So that the poor hungry Soul, will powerfully and substantially receive, in it
self, whatsoever it desires and prays for, from God: viz: the Flesh and
Blood, of Jesus Christ: Which is offered or presented to All hungry repenting
Souls, out of Grace.

16. He will rightly find in himself, how the Old Father of the Lost Prodigal
Son, comes to meet the poor Converted Repenting Soul; and with his Love-
falls about its Neck of its Essence of the Life, and embraces and kisseth it
with his Love, and takes it into his Arms; and in power says to it: This is
my beloved Son: This is my beloved Soul; Luke 15.24, 31.
which I had Lost: it was dead, and is become living again: Now slay the Lamb
Jesus Christ: It shall sit with me in my Power at my Table; and Eat with me at
my Supper or Meal prepared for me; of the true food of my Son Jesus Christ;
and shall Eternally rejoice it self with me.

17. And there will, the Seal Ring, viz: the dear and precious Testament of the
Covenant of God in the Blood of Jesus Christ, be put on to the Soul; and will
through the Covenant and Sealing be received again for a Child of God.

18. Therefore I say to the Christian Reader, that praying is not only a
Mouth-work or Lip-labor; as a Man comes before a Lord, and beggeth some
temporal thing of him; or for the forgiveness of his Guilt: God bids us to
pray not for outward imputed Grace only, but for the filial child-like
operative Grace; where the Holy Spirit in the Merits of Christ prays and
beggeth in our selves, whereby it makes the Grace in us powerful, and in such
working, also overthrows the Sin in us, and drowneth it in Christ's death,
destroys Hell, and brings forth the Gates of Eternal Life, viz: the
Satisfaction of Christ or his payment of our Debt in us, quite through Gods
Anger, and takes away the Devils might in us; and puts Christ on to us; so
that we in the Spirit and Merit of Christ Romans 8.15.
cry unto the Father of all Mercy and say; ABBA, loving Father.

19. For, we have not received a Servile or Spirit of Bondage.
flavish Spirit, that we should fear ag^in, but a filial or Spirit of Adoption.
child like Spirit, so that with joyful heart, and with all Confidence we may
pray to the Father, and he will give it unto us. Romans 8.15. Ephesians. 3.11 Gal.
4.6.

20. For the Giving and Receiving sake, God bids us to pray and beg; as
Christ says: My Father will give the Holy Spirit to them that pray and ask him
for it: Also: Ask and so ye shall receive, seek, and so ye shall find, knock
and so it will be opened unto you, Luke 11.9.13.

21. Every Prayer, which does not find and receive; is Cold and Lukewarm: and
sticks in a hinderance of temporal Earthly things: That is; the Soul does
not clearly draw near to God: It will not totally give it self up to God, but
hangs still to Earthly Love, which holds it captive, that it cannot reach
the City and Place of God.

22. If a Man would pray aright, then he must, turn himself, away, from all
Creatures, and with the Will and Mind clearly come before God: It must be in
such a Purpose and Earnest Resolution, as with the Publican in the Temple; and
as with the forlorn lost Son, which came thus to God.

23. And though Reason in Flesh and Blood says clearly No; thou will not be
heard; thy Sins are too great, or it is not time now, stay a while; do first
this, or that, thou shall have time and opportunity to do that hereafter: Or
else says: Why do thou pray, when thou can not come with thy desire to
God: Thou receivest no power into thee: Let not all this deceive thee: The
Power i^ in the inward Ground in the desire of the Will, and works with God:
Do but stand still and wait upon the Lord; it will at last well penetrate
through; so that thou will feel it in thy heart and thank and praise God.

24. Whosoever would pray aright, and with his desire attain Gods Power and
Spirit; must forgive all his Enemies heartily, and include them together in his
Prayer: and pray to God, that he will convert them also; and be reconciled with
them in his Love; that a Serpent might not continue in his heart, which should
hold him back, and tear the power of the Prayer from the Soul; as Christ says:
The Devil teareth the Word from their Hearts, that they believe not and so
become saved: Luke 8.12. Also: When thou will offer thy Gift upon the Altar,
and there rememberest that thy Brother has any thing against thee, then go
thy way first and reconcile thy self with thy Brother: And then come and offer
thy Gift: Math. 5.23, 24. Also in Our Father: Forgive us our Debts or
Trespasses as we forgive our Debtors that trespass against us; Math. 6.12.
That the Evil Enemy with the included Hate may not Sift or Tempt us, and
hinder us: and bring us into Doubt.

25. God requires a clear empty and Naked Soul in Prayer: And though indeed it
be surrounded with vanity, yet its Will should come clearly before God; that it
might begin to work in its Will; and afterward also daily mortify the Vanity
of the Flesh.

26. So very firmly must the Will of the Soul, together with the desire, be
directed to God, that it say with Jacob, when he wrestled with God the whole
night: LORD I will not let thee go unless thou bless me: Genesis 32.26.

27. And though the heart as it were faints staggereth and doub^eth, and all
manner of hindrances fall in, yet the Will must continue standing and firmly,
Image imprint or apprehend, the Grace; and resolve not to depart from it.

28. And though the Devil drives the Lust of the Flesh aloft, at which the
Soul is terrified, and thinks it is therefore cast out from God; yet the Will
should then hang to the Grace; as a Child to the Mothers Breast, and
Continually strive against the Devil; and his desire in Flesh and Blood; till
at last it prevails; and in the Spirit of Christ, overcomes the Devil, and
then afterward he will find and see great Wonders in himself, and will know
that it is true, that there is such great Joy in Heaven concerning a Converting
Soul, more then for Ninety Nine righteous which need not such repentance, Luke
15.

20. Therefore, whosoever will pray aright; must firmly Imagine or resolve,
that he will come to the Grace and Salvation and certainly attain that which he
prays for.

30. Therefore also his Prayer should be so directed, that it runs not
contrary to the Ordinance of God, but should think and resolve that in his
Prayer he will co-work with God: As the Wood of the Tree co-worketh with the
Trees power, so also should the desire only work with Gods Power: Else its
Prayer is only a working in the Shell or Bark of the right Life's Tree, for it
works therewith only outwardly in the Elements, and NOT inwardly in and with
God.

31. But he that prays aright, works inwardly with God; and generateth or
brings forth outwardly Good Fruits: as the Tree brings forth its power, and
lets it self be seen with the Power in the Fruit: and so also the true
divine Power in Man lets it self be seen outwardly with or by Good Works and
Virtues.

32. Else there is no Faith there, unless the Work follow: Else the Prayer is
but dissembling Hypocrisy: and makes only an outward form, and reaches not
the Place or City of God.

This I would not Conceal or forbear to intimate to my good Friends and fellow
Brethren in Christian Love out of my little Cabinet-Treasure, as a Christian
Information how a Man should be prepared to Pray.

And though I know, that they themselves stand, together with me, in such a
Work, and are capable and partakers of the Gift of the Holy Spirit; yet I would
in this and the following Prayers, somewhat refresh my self with them, and out
of my Power and Gift, declare, and impart, the Grace of God, to them, (as one
Light kindles another, so also one Gift of God, kindles the other) that we
might refresh our selves together in One Love, which is Christ in us all; and I
also thus enjoy of your divine Gift; that together may take growth into the
Praise of God, and bear much Fruit.

And would have these following Prayers written for Every day in the week
(wherein then a Man may therewith fit his particular State according to his
occasion) only for the Stirring up and awakening of the Good Gifts which
beforehand are in you all: Not to begin once more from the Ground and
Beginning of Christian Teaching, but for an Exercise and awakening.

And so I commend you all into the working Love of Jesus Christ, and my self
into your Brotherly and Christian Favor.

An Introduction. How a Man should prepare himself to such Order Ordinance and
Exercise, to right Praying.
Christian Loving Reader.
33. RIght Praying, is in right Earnest Sincerity; and it must be earnest, else
it avails nothing in the Presence of God: For if we will rightly Pray; then
we must think no otherwise, but that we stand before Gods clear and bright
Countenance, before the holy Trinity, and before the Quires of his holy Angels.

34. And that God in our Prayer proves our Soul, Spirit, and Heart; and
beholds our Will totally most inwardly, whether it be totally inclined to
him, whether the Will have totally given it self up to him.

35. And if that be so, then He touches the Will with the Power of his holy
Spirit, and rouseth it, that it may become rightly desirous and hungry after
the Grace; so that then he begins earnestly to go OUT from self and presses
or penetrateth INTO Gods Compassion Pity and Mercy.

36. For, in own- self Power, the Will is too too weak: but, when the Divine
Power touches it; then it becomes awakened; so that it becomes fiery and
rightly desirous; in which desire, God himself works: and then Man Speaks
rightly with God, and God speaks operatively with the Soul of that Man.

37. Such Speaking or Working is nothing else, but that, the poor Soul eats
of Gods Mercy, which he has turned to us again through the Death of Christ;
and quickneth or refreshes it self with the Balsame of divine Love in Christ,
wherein it becomes Strong against the Temptation or Assaults of the Devil.

38. For, the Divine Hearing is the Grace-Power, which God has in the Name
JESUS introduced into the Humanity again, and opened again to us ALL an Open
Gate to his hearing; whereby we can hear God Speak operatively in us, how he
inspeaketh or inspireth his Mercifulness into us, through that opened
Grace-Gate: and on the other side, the Soul speaks through the same open Gate
in it self with God: And becomes in such inspeaking or inspiration fed and
quickened from Gods out-speaking, also enlightened and renewed.

39. For it eats of the oui-breathing of God, that is become MAN; viz: the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, after that kind and way, as an Herb eats the Suns
Power and Virtue in it self, whence it is tinctured and balsamed and becomes
good, so that it grows and blossometh; so also the Soul from the divine Sun;
whence it becomes full of Light and powerful.

40. This now is the profit, fruit, and benefit; of right praying; which profit
or benefit, no outward Mouth, and no Will averted from God can attain, but only
the inverted, which totally gives it self up to God.

41. Now if any would have this done, then must the Will turn away from all
other Creatures and from all Earthly things and nakedly stand before God, that
the Work or Frame of the Creatures, or of whatsoever, it will pray for, from
God, in Temporal things; may only follow after, in the Flesh; and stand
behind the pure Will, that the pure Will, may bring the Necessities of the
Body before God, and that the Flesh it self, may NOT co-work with its Lust,
else it brings earthly Lust into the divine Soulish working.

42. Therefore, there belongs always, to right Earnest Praying, if we would
obtain any thing from God; a right true Repentance, and in-turned Humility: For
right Praying is a receiving of that which the Soul desires, concerning which
Christ says: From henceforth the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by force to themselves. Math. 11.12.

43. For which cause, I will set down a brief Form of a Confession or
Preparation; how a Man should prepare himself, when he will bring his short
Prayer and Requests before God.

44. For he may as well be heard in a short Prayer as with many words, if his
heart stand right in the presence of God; It needs not long Prayers or many
words, but only a Beleiving or faithful, repentant Soul; which with total
Earnestness, gives it self up into the Mercy of God into Gods Compassion: For
one only sigh works with God; if the Will stands nakedly or purely before
God; and has cast away from it the Earthly Garment, viz: the false or wicked
Lust: This for an Intimation to the Reader: and for a quickening stirring to
him.

45. For, there needs not to be used just such a Form of Confession, but the
Holy Spirit will well enough make a Form for him in the heart, when the Will,
in true earnest Sincerity turns it self to God.

46. Only for an Introduction, to every one who does not yet know, how a true
Prayer should be fitted, I will set down this Confession to direct his Soul
therewith; and I will commit the work of Confession together with the Praying,
to the Holy Spirit in every Soul; which is truly and rightly Earnest: He will
well enough make for him a Confession and Prayer; if any do but earnestly
sincerely and rightly come to the Gate where GOD the LORD, in Man Speaks
operatively: Then he will find it so.

A Confession and Right Acting or Working of Repentance before Gods Countenance.
47. O Deepest of all, Greatest, Unsearchable Holy God! Thou who, out of mere
Grace and Mercy, after the terrible apostasy of our first Parents, with thy
great Love and Mercy, in thy Son JESUS CHRIST, have manifested thy self in
our Humanity; and in him have made an open Gate of Grace again for us poor Men,
to thy Countenance; and abolished Sin and Death in his Blood; and call us
now to such Grace as a Merciful God; we poor Sinners now should only Convert
again and come to thee, and thou will quicken or refresh us. Math. 11.28.

48. I poor, unworthy sinful Man, come upon the invitation of thy Word, and
acknowledge to thee, that I am not worthy of such Grace, which thou offerest
us: For I Stick in the Slime of Vanity, and am Laden with vain Lusts of the
Flesh and own-self Will; my Sins have captivated and obscured me, so that I
neither taste nor see thy Grace in me; also I have no Right Trust or Confidence
nor Faith toward thee, and have totally given my self up, into the vanity of
the World and of the Flesh: and am compassed about therewith.

49. I have defiled my fair bright Garment, which thou have put on to me in the
Baptism, with the Lust of the Flesh; and lie in the Devils Net, captive in thy
fierce Wrath. Hell sets its Jaws wide open against me, and my Conscience
gnaweth me, thy Judgment stands always before me, and the Bands of Death
wait upon me.

50. I lie in the slime and mire of Sins and Vanity; so that also I neither
know my Sins nor can bewail them: For they have hidden me from thy
Countenance; and I have only yet a little sparkle of the living breath in me
through thy drawing which desires thy Grace.

51. And I come now before thee with the Lost Son, and the Publican in the
Temple, and fly to thy Mercy; and pray thee in my weak power, through the
Bitter Suffering and Dying of my Redeemer JESUS CHRIST; (whom thou have Set
before thee for a Grace-Throne, and offerest us thy Grace through his
Satisfaction), that thou would receive me yet again for thy Child and Heir,
in thy Son; and would awaken for me a right Earnest Repentance, also Sorrow
and Grief for my former committed Sins, in my Heart, that I may go out from
the wicked way or Conversation; and turn my heart totally and altogether to
THEE.

52. O Great God, strengthen I beseech thee my weak Faith in Me; rouse my heart
I pray thee, that it may acknowledge and bewail my manifold Sins: Touch thou
my poor Soul with thy Power, that it may acknowledge it self, that it stands
deviated and turned away from thee.

53. O thou Breath of the Mercifulness of God, do thou draw me to thee,
through my Redeemer Jesus Christ's Death and Resurrection, and abolish my Sins
in his Blood and Death; and make my poor Soul living in his Blood: and wash it
clean from its Sins, that its desire may press into thee, O thou Holy God!
and fetch Power out of thy Spring or Fountain of Grace.

54. Awake thou, I pray thee, in me, a right hunger and thirst after true
Repentance and Sorrow for my former committed Sins, that I may hate or be at
Enmity and angry against them, and turn my self to Thee.

55. O thou great deep of Mercy, I am afar off from thee, and cannot reach thee
in my weak Power, turn thee to me I beseech thee, and comprehend my desire into
thee, and kindle it O Lord, that I may taste thy Grace.

56. Forgive I pray thee my Trespasses and Sins, and heal my weakness,
bruise I pray thee my Heart and Soul, that I may acknowledge and humble my self
before thee: Be thou I pray thee my beginning to Conversion, and lead me upon
the right path, that I may walk with thee.

57. Give me, I pray thee, thy holy Spirit, in my Soul and Spirit, and
Sanctify me in thy Grace; As thy beloved Son Jesus Christ has engaged to
me; saying: My Father will give the holy Spirit to them that pray unto him for
it: Luke 11.13. Also Knock, and so it will be opened unto you. Math. 7.7. Luke
11.9.

58. Now come I, poor Sinner, upon the Invitation of thy Word; and take to me
thy Saying, in my Soul and Heart, and will not leave off from thee, unless thou
bless me, with JACOB.

59. And though indeed my Sins are many, yet thou art God, and the Eternal
Truth which cannot Lie, where thou have Spoken in the Prophet Isaiah: If we
Convert and Repent then we shall be snow-white, as wool, Isai. 1.18.

60. Upon thy Saying, I trust, and give my self totally and altogether up to
thee; and pray thee, receive me into Grace, and bring me to thy Children, who
walk in the way of the Living, and let me walk with them, and enter into thy
Commandment: give me a true humble and obedient Heart, that may always fear
before thy Anger and Sin no more.

61. O thou Wellspring or Fountain of all Grace, what shall I say before thee?
Or why should I flatter my self; and comfort my evil Will and Desire? I desire
no Comfort from thee in my earthly evil Will, but pray thee out of all my
power, which yet is in me; mortifi^ my Earthly Evil Will; and let it no more
live before thee: For it desires only hypocrisy dissembling or flattery and
own self Love, and is never sincerely upright before thee: It gives thee good
words, and pretends Truth, and yet is a Constant Liar before thee.

62. Give me only, thy Will, that I may will nothing without thee: Do thou
with thy Will, tread down my self evil Will to the ground; and let me in thy
Power co-will and act with thee.

63. O LORD, what shall I in my vanity pray for from thee? I pray for Nothing
from thee, but for the dying of my Savior JESUS CHRIST: That thou would put
me to Death in his Death, and make me living again in his Resurrection in him,
that I may no more walk or converse according to my Spirits Will in me, but in
him: That I may be his Temple and Dwelling House, that he may lead and conduct
me, so that without him I may be able to will or do nothing.

64. Unite thou, and bind me with him, so that I may be a fruitful Branch on
his Vine, and bear good Fruit in his Power; into thy Promise I sink my self
down totally and altogether: Be it done unto me according to thy Word and Will.
Amen.

A Thanksgiving and Prayer: When a Man after such Acting Repentance finds the
divine Power in himself.
65. O GOD, thou Wellspring or Fountain of Love and Mercy; I glorify and
praise thee in thy Truth: and Thank thee in my Heart; that thou presentest to
me thy Countenance again; and look upon me unworthy and Miserable Wretch,
with the Eyes of thy Mercy; and give me a Ray or Beam of Comfort, so that my
Soul CAN hope on Thee.

66. O thou Infinite Love of JESUS CHRIST, thou who have Broken Death in our
Humanity, and changed Gods Anger into Love, to thee I give up my self totally
and altogether: My Soul Laudeth and honors thee: It rejoices it self in thy
Power and Love, that thou art so Good and Gracious: My Spirit sporteth in thy
Power, and joyeth it self in thy Truth; All thy doing is right and Truth: Thou
rulest over Sin, and breakest the Power of Death: Thou hold the Might and
Power of Hell captive, and show us the Way of Life.

67. None is like thee O LORD: Who releasest the Captives out of the Pits and
Graves of Death; and refreshest the Miserable; Thou give them drink in their
Thirst, and give them Water of Eternal Life: Thou directest their Feet in
right Paths, and guidest them with thy Staff: The dry parched Places of the
Heart and of the Soul tho^ fattenest and bedewest with thy Rainy Showers, and
give them Water of Mercy.

68. Thou make them living in the Midst of Death; and set them up before
thee, so that they live before thee: Thou think on the Mercy and Covenant,
which thou have made with us through thy Blood and Death, and forgivest us our
Sins.

69. Thou pourest into us of thy Power, so that we acknowledge thee; and give
us Food of the Eternal Life; whereby we become quickened, and continually
hunger and thirst after thee: This now my Soul acknowledges, therefore it
praises thee and exalts thee in thy great Might and Glory.

70. O, thou Wellspring or Fountain of Divine Sweetness, comprehend or
receive my Soul into thee, and fill my Spirit with thy Love, and bind me to thy
Band, that I never more depart from thee: Strengthen I pray thee my weak Faith;
and give me an assured Hope and Confidence.

71. Cleanse I pray thee my Heart and Soul, and give me Chastity Modesty and
Purity in my Conscience; that I may be ashamed of Sin before thy Countenance;
and depart from it: Mortify I pray thee all Evil Lusts in me, that I may
cleave unto thee with clean and pure desire, and walk in thy Will.

72. Keep and Maintain me I pray thee in thy Power and acknowledgement, and
give me an humble Heart toward thee and my Neighbor: so that I may always
acknowledge and love thee: Help also that I may Love my Neighbor as my self;
through JESUS CHRIST Our Lord. AMEN.

A Prayer to the Great Fire-burning Love of God, showing how rightly to Pray
for it.
O, Thou Holy GOD, thou that dwell in a Light that None can c^^^ unto, but
only the Love of thy Son Jesus Christ, which thou have out of mere Grace,
poured into our Humanity in JESUS Christ: Wherewith thou have loved us poor Men
before the foundation of the World; And have through this Love redeemed us from
thy fierce Wrath, and from the power of Death and of Hell: and offerest us now
this Love through thy Son Jesus Christ, in thy Fire-flaming Spirit, that we
should pray unto thee for it: and thou will give it unto us.

74. I poor unworthy Man, acknowledge my self in^ (...) worthy of it: But
seeing thou have manifested or revealed (...) in our assumed Humanity; and
call therewith, the poor Luke 19.10. 1 John 4.2, 3. 2 John 7.
lost Sinners: And art* Come in the Flesh, so that thou will seek them in their
Sins and Miseries, and thereby deliver them from Sin and save them: as thy
Word teaches us this: Therefore come I, upon the invitation of thy Word; and
receive thy Word and truth in my Heart and Soul; and Comprehend it in me as thy
Free-Gift: and pray thee O thou Fire-flaming Love of God, in the Covenant of
JESUS CHRIST, freely given to us poor thirsty Souls, kindle also my poor Soul
with this Love, that it may attain a New Life and Will, and become delivered
out of its Prison and Captivity of thy Anger, and out of the Jaws of Death.

75. O, thou fiery Love of God, thou who have, in our Humanity, broken Death
and destroyed Hell, and brought forth, our Souls victory in Christ, through
Death: Thou who have at Acts 2.
the holy Pentecost moved in the Apostles Mouths and Hearts in fiery flames,
and kindled all thy Saints, and done thy Miracles or Works of Wonder by them:
Thou that love and preservest the whole World and all thy Creatures: To THEE
I come, and give my self wholly into thee.

76. O, thou great Fountain of God, Open thy self also in the Spirit of my
Inwardnesse, and kindle also in me the Fire of thy Love; so that my Spirit may
burn in thy Love, and acknowledge and praise thee therein.

77. O, thou great Holiness, through the Merits of my Savior JESUS CHRIST
through his Blood and Death I press, in me, to thee, and give my self up into
thy Flame: Through his Resurrection and Ascension or going to Heaven: I bring
my Will into thee, and give it up to thee totally and altogether: Do thou with
it how thou will: Do but deliver it from false or wicked Lust, and break its
power, that it may only look upon thee.

78. O, thou holy Power of God, thou who movest in and over Heaven and Earth;
and art NEAR unto ALL things, pour forth thy self also I pray thee IN me; that
I may become new born again in thee, and Sprout forth in thee, and work good
Fruits, as a Branch on the Vine JESUS CHRIST; to thy Eternal Praise and Glory.

79. O, thou Gate of the Holiness of God, shine I pray thee in thy Temple in
my Spirit, so that I may walk in thy Light; and always praise thee, and serve
thee in Righteousness and Holiness, as it is pleasing to thee; who art ONE
Eternal God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, highly praised in Eternity, AMEN.

Now follow the Prayers upon EVERY DAY in the WEEK, at Mornings Noones and
Evenings, showing how Man should be in Continual Exercise and Working.
80. CHRIST said to his Disciples, Watch and Pray, that ye fall not into
Temptation, Math. 26.41. And Saint Peter says: Your Adversary or Accuser the
Devil goet^^ ^b^ut as a Roaring Lion, and seeks whom he may devour: (...)
withstand steadfast in the Faith, in Prayer, and in Hope, that your heart may be
defended or preserved against such Darts of the Evil one or Wickedness, 1 Pet.
5.8, 9.

A Prayer on MONDAY. A short Prayer and Sigh, penetrating to God, when a Man
waketh Early, before he rises.
81. O Living God, who have made Heaven and Earth, my Eyes look upon thee, and
rejoice at thy Goodness that thou art so gracious, and have held thy hand over
me in this dark Night, and also, defended and kept me by thy holy Angels from
all hurt, and Mischief.

82. To thee thou living Source Quality or Fountain, I press; and Bless my
self with the Holy Cross, on which thou did worry Death, and brought Life to
us again, through the Blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, in the Name Of the Cross
of
of God the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, Amen.

A Prayer and Thanksgiving when and as Man rises.
I Thank thee O God, my heavenly Father, through JESUS CHRIST thy Dearly
beloved Son our Lord and Savior, for all Benefits, for thy Gracious
protection and defense, in that thou have held thy hand over me, and preserved
me this Night, from the Devils Subtlety and Treachery, and from all Evil.

84. And Commend now my Body and Soul to thee, and all that thou have given me,
and have set me therein, to be thy Servant or Minister into thy hand: Also all
my Senses Thoughts and Desires: Rule and Govern me I pray thee, this Day and
all times, with thy holy Spirit, and lead me in right Paths.

85. Gi^^ ^e thy Word in my heart, and teach me thy Truth, that I may speak
think or do, nothing but that which is right and Truth.

86. Defend me from Lying and all evil Wicked Men, which walk and converse in
Lying and deceit, that I may not follow after them, but bring forth thy Truth
in my heart, and walk in right paths.

87. Draw thou and put on to my Heart and Soul, the Garment of Salvation, and
the Cloak of Righteousness and Purity; and wash my heart with the Blood of the
Lamb JESUS CHRIST.

88. Let my Eyes behold thy way, that I may walk and converse therein; Give me
thy holy Angel that he may lead and conduct me, and protect me from the Devils
Suggestions or Representations and false or evil Net, that I may not suffer my
self to Lust after unrighteousness.

89. Give me Chaste and Modest Eyes; that no evil or false Lust awake in me:
and protect me from Anger and Cursing, that I may not misuse thy Name; but so
walk, as is most pleasing and acceptible to thee through JESUS CHRIST, thy
dearly beloved Son, our Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer when we dress our selves and wash.
O Eternal God, by this Garment I call to mind the Garment of Innocence of our
first Parents, when they needed no such clothing or Garment as this: which
Earthly Clothing or Garment took its beginning through Sin.

91. O Merciful God; thou have brought us again the fair bright Paradisicall
Garment, in thy Son JESUS CHRIST, put it I pray thee on to my Soul; seeing
the Earthly Body is not worthy of it: Till I shall once rise again out of the
Or Ashes.
Dust of the Earth: and then thou will totally cloth me upon, with the Clothes
or Garment of thy Power and Glory; this I believe and hope, according to thy
Word. And as I now wash me with outward Water, so O Dear God, wash also I pray
thee my Heart and Soul, with the Blood of the Lamb JESUS CHRIST, that I may be
pure and clean before thee, and be acceptable to thee as thy Bride: and embrace
Me in thy Arms as thy dearly beloved Bride, whom thou have Betrothed and
Married to thee, in the Faith and in the Love.

92. O, LORD Jesus Christ, put on to me I pray thee, the Garment of thy
Innocence, wherein thou in our Garment have taken upon thee the scorn of ALL
Men.

93. Thou have, O Lord JESUS CHRIST, laid off from thee our Earthly Clothes or
Garment, in thy Suffering and Dying; the Soldiers plucked them off from thee;
and have offered thy self naked and Bare to thy Eternal Father: and have
thereby obtained for us the pure Garment of Innocence; which our Father Adam
had on him, before his fall, Genesis 2.25.
when he knew that he was Naked.

94. O Dear Lord JESUS: Put it on again I pray thee to my poor Soul: Thou art
indeed therefore come into our Humanity, because thou will help us; and bestow
upon us the Garment of thy Power, receive I pray thee my Mind into thy Garment;
that the same may in that Garment enter before God thy Father; and pray unto
him.

95. O Lord JESUS CHRIST; I cannot without the Garment of thy Power and
Satisfaction, come before God: My Prayer can not otherwise ^^tain ^o reach the
City or Place of the Deity, unless thou ^^^^st, my Mind and Desire, upon, with
the Victory of thy resu^^^ction: Wherein alone with my Mind I can come to thy
^^^^^nly Father.

96. Therefore now thus I give thee my Mind and Will totally for thy own
propriety; Cloth thou it Lord JESU with thy Power, even as I at present cloth
the Body with Earthly Garments; and wash thou away all impurity from my Mind.

97. As I now wash my Face with Water, so wash thou also my Mind inwardly with
the Power of thy Grace, so that it may be ready and cheerful to behold thee,
and have a Loathing against all Falsehood or Wickedness, and Impurity of Lying,
Untruth, Pride, Covetousness, Envy, and Anger, and all whatsoever is against
God.

98. As I now wash with outward Water, so O Dear GOD, wash thou my Heart and
Soul I pray thee also with the Blood of the Lamb JESUS CHRIST, that I may be
pure before thee, and be acceptible to thee as thy Bride, embrace me in thy
Arms as thy Beloved Bride, which thou, in Faith and in Love, have Betrothed
and Espoused.

99. O God HOLY SPIRIT, let me walk and Converse in thy Power, and let thy Holy
Angels, which thou have appointed to me, Lead me, through JESUS CHRIST,
Crucified, Our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer when a Man will go about his Work or Labor and Calling or
Employment wherein God has set Every One.
100. ALmighty Eternal God, and Loving Father, Creator of Heaven and of
Earth; thou have Created ALL Things to thy Praise, and MAN to thy Express
Image: and set him to be a Lord and Ruler of thy Works, and have put all under
his hands.

101. I poor unworthy sinful Man, consider with my self the heavy Fall of our
first Parents, whereby thy Curse came upon this Work and upon the Earth; and I
consider with my self, how our first Parents are fallen out of Paradise into
this Curse; wherein now all of us must swim in Weariness Toil Incumberances
Cares and Necessities, and make our selves weary sick and faint, that we may
uphold and sustain our Lives, till at length we enter again into Dust and
Ashes, the Substance out of which we are proceeded: Where we are to Expect and
wait for thy true and real Promise, that thou will awaken and raise us up
again out of the Dust, in the Last Day; and form us into the fair Paradisicall
Image again.

102. This now I consider with my self, when I take in hand the Work Calling
and Employment, wherein thou have, by or through Nature, appointed or ordained
me: and pray thy Great Mercy, which thou, after this Heavy Fall and Apostasy,
have turned toward us again in the Grace of JESUS CHRIST; bless me I pray
thee in my Calling State Condition and Employment, and turn away thy Curse and
Anger from me through the Love of Jesus Christ; that the Evil Spirit may not
touch or sift me, in my Calling and Condition, and bring me into Falsehood, that
I may not at all, therein hurt deceive betray or wrong my Neighbor with Words
or Deed^, or desire that which I should not.

103. Give me I pray thee O Dear LORD, a ready Heart and Mind, that I may with
a Good Conscience without any false or wicked desire, also without Pride
Covetousness Envy and Anger, perform my work, and order my Condition according
to thy Will, and also rest satisfied with thy Grace with what thou give me;
and that with the Works and Labor of my hands in my Office Duty State and
Condition wherein thou have set me, I may NOT seek my own, only to serve my
self, and my own turn alone, but also my Neighbors benefit; also may come to
help the Miserable, and the Impotent, also the Weak Blind Simple and needy;
which are not gifted or furnished with understanding of thy Works of Wonder, to
manage them.

104. Help I pray thee O Loving GOD, that I may rightly know my self; that I,
in my State and Condition and Office or Employment, am but thy Servant or
Minister, and that all whatsoever I possess, comes from thy hand, and that I
in this World have nothing my own, but am only a Pilgrim and Sojournour upon
Earth: and thou O God the FATHER together with thy Son JESUS CHRIST, in the
Power of the HOLY SPIRIT, do thy self work drive manage and rule all, and
that all is thine alone, and not mine.

105. Give me I pray thee rightly to know, that all Men are proceeded from One,
and in that regard that all are my fellow Members Brethren and Sisters, as a
Tree in its Branches: So that I should Love them ALL.

106. As thou O Loving God, have loved us with One only or singular Love in
JESUS CHRIST, before the Foundation of the World, and yet love us with the
same Love: and have attoned or reconciled us all in one only Love; as to thy
Anger: So O Loving God, awaken and stir up I pray thee also that same Love in
ME, and kindle my Soul and Mind therewith, that I also may with and in THEE in
thy Love, love all my fellow Members, and readily and willingly serve and
minister to them: That thy Name in us all may be sanctified, and thy Will in us
be done, so that, we all in One Love may Eat and Drink thy Blessings.

107. And take from us the Evil, and the Heavy Guilt, viz: thy Curse and
Anger, that the Devils Envy and Covetousness may not Spring or flow up in us;
and introduce us into Vengeance and Malice.

108. That we also may heartily love one another, and forgive one another our
slips failings and infirmities, as thou daily forgivest us in thy Love in JESUS
CHRIST.

109. O LORD, prevent I pray thee the subtle Talons of the Devil; that he may
not Tempt us and bring our evil Inclinations aloft; whereby I may be drawn
into false or wicked Lusts.

110. Deliver me O Dear God, from all such Evil, through the Blood and Death of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and give me a Chearfull-Mind to manage thy wonders.

111. Help me so, that I may Work Will or Act nothing without thy Power, bring
my Life through thy Wonder-Works and Creature, into the Eternal Heavenly
working; in, into the Spiritual hidden Secret World; and let me here in thy
Works of Wonder, increase in Power and Knowledge, that also my in ward Ground,
may grow and increase in thy Wonder-Works in thy Power, to the Manifestation or
Revelation of the New Jerusalem in us, where thou, O True GOD, wilt work, will,
and be, all in all, in us.

112. Therefore give me I pray thee, constantly and continually to know this,
that I may have it for a token of remembrance to think upon in my Mind, and not
sin, nor break off my Mind from thee, and generate a false or wicked Image,
which lusts only after State, Pride, Covetousness, and self-Honour, and be
Damned with the Evil Spirits; but let me be One Spirit and Will with thee; and
Co-work with thee in the power of my Savior JESUS CHRIST, and of the HOLY
SPIRIT. Amen.

A Prayer on Monday at Noon or Midday or whenever such an attentive Thought
stirs; to consider ones State and Condition.
113. O God, Eternal FATHER, I thank thee and praise thee, that thou have
appointed and ordained me in this State and Condition; that thou have given me
Good Things, and means for Sustenance; (and set me among honest virtuous
People, whom I should serve and Minister to, and benefit with my Gifts) and
have endued me with Reason and Understanding, and Created me a rational Man,
so that I know thee, and that I am not a Dull Dead foolish ignorant Man, who
knows nothing of thee, and thanketh not thee for such benefits: But have
Created me from or out of the Light of the World; that I may with and in thy
Light, work or act and live, and show me all thy Wonders in thy Light.

114. I thank thee for this, that thou have created me to thy Express Image,
and set thy Wonders under my hand, that I may know them, and may enjoy my self
in the Works of thy Creation.

115. And I beseech thee O Eternal God; to give me Understanding and Wisdom,
that I may not abuse or misuse this thy Creation or Creature, but only and
solely, use it, for my necessity, for the Good of my Neighbor, my self, and
mine.

116. Give me I pray thee, to be thankful in all thy Gifts and Benefits; that
my Reason may not say; This is Mine I have purchased it: I will possess it
alone; I am thereby Noble, Glorious and Brave; and because of this, Honor and
Repute accrues unto me; all which, proceeds from the Devil and the Heavy
Fall of Adam.

117. O, Dear Lord CHRIST; help I pray thee, that I may always consider, thy
Humility, Lowliness, and temporal Poverty, and not permit my Mind, to lift up
it self, above the simple poor and needy, that my Soul may not break off it
self from them, that they in their misery may not sigh over me or against me,
and hinder me in my way to thee.

118. But help me, that I may Lay my Heart, with the simple, in the Dust, and
always acknowledge that I am nothing more then they, and that my State and all
that belongs to me are thine, and that I am a Minister or Servant concerning or
as to them.

119. O Great HOLY GOD; I pray thee, set open my inwardnesse to me, that I may
rightly know what I am: Unshut I pray thee in me what became enclosed and shut
up in Adam; Let me I pray thee see in the Inwardnesse of the Mind, and find thy
bright Morning-Starre in the Holy Name JESUS; which presents and offers it
self to us poor Men out of Grace; and will dwell in us, and powerfully work in
us.

120. Break thou O LORD, the hard door Posts of my receptibility of my own
willing, that his will may shine forth through me, and my Mind may find the
Beams of his Love-Fire.

121. Kindle thou I pray thee, my fiery Life of the Soulish Ground, with the
Beams of thy Light, so that I may endure before thee, and stand in thy Sight,
and so I pray thee, pour in thy Love and Meekness, into my Fire-life; that
thy Fire-Glance do not Consume and destroy me in regard of my, yet, remaining
impurity.

122. O thou Great Holy God; to thee I draw near now with my Mind, viz: with
thy, poured forth, Power and Virtue; which thou have formed into an Image of
thy Likeness according to thy Working, and I give my self to thee again to be
thy own.

123. Work thou in my Mind, as in thy Reflection or Representation, thy ^race,
how thou will; and keep my Mind with thy Power, as thy Instrument, so that IT
may neither will, nor act, without thee: Lead thou my Inclination with thy
Might and Strength; so that I may, in and with thee, rule over, Sin, Death,
the Devil, Hell, and the World.

124. Seeing, thou in the Beginning, in my Father Adam, have made me a Ruler
over all Creatures, and after the terrible Fall, have in JESUS CHRIST, brought
me thereinto again: So that I in JESUS CHRIST, should, with and in him, and He,
with and through me, rule over all his Enemies, till they all be laid for a
footstool under his and my feet; therefore I give up to thee my LORD JESUS, my
whole Mind and Soul, and all whatsoever I am: Rule thou in me over all my
Enemies; which are within me and without me.

125. Lay thou them for a footstool under thy feet, and lead my Mind being the
Express Image of God, in Gods Power; so that, IT, may as an Instrument of the
Holy Spirit, co-will and perform, with God, the Good Work, that thy High Name
Germanice. GOT.
GOD, may become again manifested therein, and that my Mind may again come to
the Communion of thy Holy Angels, whereto thou have ordained it, in the
beginning.

126. O Great GOD! my Mind is indeed a Beam of thy Omnipotency, Glory, and
Skilfulnesse; a Or Play-fellow.
Companion of the Divine Wisdom and Glory, a Handmaid or Ministresse of the
Majesty of the Unity of God, a Knoweresse of thy Manifestation or Revelation;
and a Figure of the Great Name of GOD, who has made the World and all things.

127. In its Essence, e're it became a Creature, stood, the formings of thy
Willing; which Formings thou O Great God, have brought into a Creaturely
Creation, and set the Noble Mind for a Ruleresse or Governess over it, where
thou, with thy Holy Name; in thy Power, would thy Self rule, through the
Mind.

128. O GOD! the Mind, has in Adam turned it self away from thee, and is
entered into own receptibility of its own Will, and has made it self, Dark,
Dry, Stinging, Enimicitious or Hateful, Hungry and Envious; and is become a
hellish Source Quality or Torment and Abomination before thee, like all evil
Spirits.

129. Which thou, O Groat God, with thy holiest Name of All, JESUS; have turned
to thee, and new generated to thee, again: Therefore I give it up to thee
willingly into thy sweet presented or offered Grace: And therewith forsake my
own Will and Nature-Right, and give it to thee for thy own; LORD JESUS, that I
may no more Be IT self, but that thou may be IT, according to thy, and thy
Eternal Fathers, good Will and Pleasure; that God may be All in All: One True
Real Tri-une Substance, Father Son and Holy Spirit, in the Heaven and upon
Earth, Working and Ruling All in All. AMEN.

A Prayer on Monday at Noon or Midday, to Consider the Quality and Property of
the Day; and to swing or cast ones self into the right-Noon or Midday of the
Inward Moone's heavenly Substance. Concerning the climbing up or Ascending of
the Mind.
130. O GOD, thou Infinite or Endless, Every where Glancing or
Super-Illustrious, Eternal, every where spread abroad, Shining Bright LIGHT;
thou have given the Light to the Outward World, from the breathing of thy
Might, through the Beams of thy Light, and rulest with the Sun and Moon in all
thy Works, in this Worlds Substance.

131. Thou generatest all and every temporary Life, through these Lights: All
whatsoever has Breath, works and Lives in these Lights; and praises thee
in thy Power: ALL Stars, take Light and shining from thy shed-forth Light:
Thou adornest the Earth with fair Herbs and Blossoms or Flowers, through
these Lights: And Cheerest therein, all whatsoever lives or Grows.

132. And therein, show to US Men, thy Glory: So that we know thy Power,
which is inwardly hidden; and see thereby, how thou have made thy Eternal Word
and working, visible; that we should thereby consider thy inward Spiritual
Kingdom, wherein thou dwell in secret, hiddenly, and fillest all thy
Creation, and thy self workest and do ALL in ALL.

133. The Heaven together with the Earth, recount, thy Honor Power and Great
Might; The Elements are a Reflection Representation or Object, of thy Wisdom;
where, thy Spirit with a Representation or Object, Sporteth or Acts a Scene,
before thee, and all things praise thee and rejoice themselves and are Glad IN
thy Power.

134. Above all this, have thou O Great God, made my Mind a Knoweresse and
Companion or Play-fellow, of thy Wisdom, that I should praise thee therein,
and help to promote, and Manage thy Wonder- Works: Thou have had thy good
Pleasure therein, that thou have subjected such power under me, and have given
me to work in all things, and Made ALL, to be, my own.

135. O Great God in CHRIST JESUS! where is now my Might and Glory? It is
indeed blind obscure and dark; bring me again I pray thee into my place of thy
Creation; that I may become seeing again in this Light; and know thy Wonders;
Lighten thou I pray thee again my Outward Sun- and Moonlight, that I in the
outward Substance may learn to know thy Inward Power.

136. O thou Infinite Endless, Every where lightening, Light of the Great
HIDDENNESSE; give me I pray thee thy Beams of thy hidden Glory, that I in my
Light may see the Light of thy Shining.

137. O thou Fire and Light of the Great INWARDNESSE, take pity and have mercy
upon my Misery, and help me out of this obscure darksome house, wherein I am
captived.

138. Give me I pray thee a true knowledge, again, of thy Substance, to which
thou have in the beginning Imaged Formed or Framed the Mind in Nature, and have
ordained or appointed the same, to the willing, of thy Figures and Creation.

139. Bring me I pray thee again in CHRIST my Savior, into my Glory which I
had: and though indeed the Body in this Time, is not worthy of it, seeing it is
become a stinking Carcass, yet through shine or enlighten I pray thee my Noble
MIND, being thy Express Image; and let it in CHRIST my Savior, dwell in
Heaven, in the Communion and Fellowship, of thy Holy Angels.

140. Place thou it in the Noon or Midday, of thy Wonders, for which thou have
Imaged Formed or Framed it, and Rule thou O Lord JESUS CHRIST, as with thy
Inheritance, therewith over All things: and help me that I may be humble, and
that I may not assume or usurp to my self, what thou do; but may look after
Thee, and that my desire may praise thee; and Continually live in thy Harmony,
and without thee, may desire, NOT to begin or Do any thing.

141. O LORD, thou holiest LIGHT of all, let my Mind I pray thee dwell in thy
Courts, that it may from thy Glance, which flows forth from thee, rejoice it
self, and Eternally no more depart from thee: but bring it again to the
Communion and Society of the holy Angels, whereto thou have ordained or
appointed it.

142. O holy Name IMMANUEL, IT is thine, do thou therewith what thou will!
AMEN.

A Prayer on Monday toward Evening, to Consider the Toylsomnesse of the Labor
of our hands in the Curse of Gods Anger. Concerning the Climbing down or
descending of the MIND.
143. O GOD! how miserable, full of Affliction Sorrow Cumberance and Care is
our [Life] Time; full of Anguish and Tribulation! when we suppose we stand
upright; and would rejoice in the work of our hands, then thou over-cloudest or
over shadowest us with thy fiery Wrath; and make us that we are anxious and
troubled.

144. We run up and down, and trouble our selves, and there is none that
pursues or hunteth us, but only thy Anger in Our Calamity and Corruption: We
consume our days, as Psalm. 90.9.
a Tale that is told, as a Discourse which will vanish, so pass our Days
away; and we are always in unquietness and disturbance: Unstable is our
Conversation: We rely upon our own Arm; and cleave to the work of our Hands,
and trust NOT totally to thee; therefore thou let us go away in our Anxiety
Perplexity and Torment.

145. We never Consider, that thou O God, THY self, do and workest ALL: for,
no Breath, can without Thee, stir it self: NOT the least Spile of Grass,
without Thee, can Crown the Earth.

146. All this we see, and yet build upon our Nothingnesse; upon our
handiwork, and trust not thee aright.

147. We gather together, and enjoy it not: A Stranger follows who also
vexes and perplexeth himself THEREIN, with Vanity, and there is no Number or
End of the Misery, which we promote and Manage.

148. O GOD! Consider I pray thee our Toil and Misery, and turn thy Anger and
Curse away from us; and let us run, to thy Limit or Goal, again, that we may
come again into our Inheritance, and rejoice our selves in thy Wonders.

149. Look I pray thee, on the Anxiety of our Minds, and the Contrivance of our
Will, and consider that we lie shut up in the substance of Dust.

150. Release us we pray thee, and raise us up. O LORD: And bring us home
again: For we are in a strange Country; with a strange Mother, which very much,
Scourges us in thy fierce Wrath, and lets us run on, in very hunger and
want of thy sweet Food.

151. We must with the Lost Prodigal Son, eat the Husks of Vanity: our
Garment is grown old, and full of Reproach and we stand in great shame before
thy Holiness; the driver of thy Anger leads us captive; when we suppose we
have apprehended thee, then, thou hidest thy Countenance from us, and let
us faint and Fail.

152. All this our own Will effects, in that we turn our selves away from
thee, into Vanity, and desire only transitory Matters; we swim, with our
Lust, therein, as the Fish, in the Water; and say always to our Soul: it has
no need or want: Whereas yet we stand upon the Abyss of Hell, and the fierce
wrathful Death, expects us every Moment: We walk all toward the Night; and
run toward our Graves, as a swift Messenger runs his Journey.

153. O Lord JESU: Continue we pray thee, with and in us, and teach us to
Consider, that our outward Life, upon which we so much trust, runs toward
the Evening, and to its End: So that it is very soon done with us: And teach us
to walk the right way: Be thou I pray thee with us on the Path of this
Pilgrimage, and lead us home to thee.

154. When our Night draws near, and that Death sets its Jaws so wide
open, after our Flesh and outward Life, and swalloweth us up, into it self, and
grindeth us to powder like Ashes: Then take us we pray thee into thy Power; and
let us be, as sweetest Bread, in the Essence of thy out flown or out-breathed
words of thy Mouth.

155. Help I pray thee my DEAR GOD, that I may continually think on this, that
My outward Life continually every Moment, goes on toward the Evening, toward
Dirt and Dung: That I always come nearer and nearer to the Night of Earth;
that the Course of my Life is only a Course to the Grave, where the Job 19.26.
Worms will Consume me.

156. O LORD: Whatsoever, is here an abomination, to me, into the very Jaws
thereof I must fall, and give my self up to it for ITS Food: And where then,
remains my Lust and Pleasure of Earthly things, which I exercise here in the
World? If all will become a reproach to me, why do I lift up my self in
Temporal LUST? seeing it cannot release me from the Reproach; Wherefore does
my Soul vex it self and is in anguish, and pants after ITS Enemy, which
leads it to the Dark night?

157. O GOD, teach me I pray thee to apprehend this, that I may turn my Heart
from the Toylsomeness of the Works of this World, to THEE; and not hold Death
to be my Life; so that I may Live in Continual Repentance, and that my Mind,
may throw or demerse it self, to or into THEE, and may work with Thee; so that
also my right Flesh created in Adam, may be Sanctified; and out of the Dust,
may be brought to the MIND again.

158. Release me I pray thee from the Gross Husk of the Earthly Flesh;
whereinto the Devil has brought his Poison, which is of no profit in thy
Kingdom, John 6. and generate in me again the heavenly Spiritual Body,
wherein is the Immortality, and wherein no evil or false or wicked LUST may
exist any more: and let me in CHRIST JESU, Rest in thee, till the Glorious
Coming again and Revelation or Manifestation of thy Glory. AMEN.

A Prayer, when Man in the Evening cease from his Work, and would go to
Sleep.
159. O GOD! thou Father of ALL GOOD, I thank thee through JESUS CHRIST thy
Dear Son, our LORD and Savior: For all thy Benefits! that thou have
graciously protected me this day, from all evil and hurt! and now I commend to
thee, my Work, into thy disposing, and fly, with my Mind, to thee; and give my
self up wholly and altogether into thy Holy working.

160. Work thou I pray thee, now, this Night and always, with thy Grace-power,
in me, and break in me the vain desire of false or evil working, wherein thy
Curse and fierce Wrath in my Flesh, desires, to co-work; as also, the Devils
introduced Lust, which stirs up my whole Mind to Lust of vanity: Destroy
THESE O Dear God! with thy Power, and kindle up in me, the Fire of thy pure
Love; and overthrow the false wicked LUST of Impurity and Uncleanness.

161. Withstand thou all evil Influences of the Constellations or Astrum, and
the Kindled Elements, and let me rest in thy Power, that my Mind may NOT be
introduced into false or wicked Desires and Inclinations.

162. O GREAT Holy God, into thy Grace and Mercifulness, I plunge my self
wholly and altogether: I pray thee let thy Good Angel be with me, that he may
keep off the fiery Streams or Darts of wickedness, that I may rest securely
in thy Power; through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen.

A Prayer, when we undresse and lie down to Rest.
163. O MERCIFUL GOD, I pray thee, do thou in me draw or pull off, the false
or wicked Garment of the Serpent; which my Father Adam and my Mother Eve have
drawn on to me through their false Lust: Wherein my poor Soul is clothed with
thy Anger, and stands in shame before thy holy Angels.

164. I pray thee strip thou my Mind and Soul Naked, that my Mind may become
undressed from such a Garment, and may stand clearly before thy Countenance;
but I pray thee yet cloth thou it with thy Power, and with the Garment of the
humanity of JESUS CHRIST, that it may converse again with the Holy Angels,
before THEE.

165. O Dear Lord JESUS CHRIST, I give up my Soul and Mind altogether barely
and Nakedly to Thee: draw thou off from me, the impure Garment: Wherein I stand
in Great Shame before Gods Holiness: But I pray thee cloth thou me with thy
Victory, and set me before thy Father again, as a New born Child, which thou
have washed in thy Blood, and whose evil Will THOU have put to death in thy
Death, and in thy Resurrection have new regenerated.

166. And kindle in this New Birth, thy Light; that I may walk in the Light,
and be and Continue a Branch in thee* AMEN.

A Thanksgiving of the Repentant Soul for the bitter Passion and Dying of JESUS
CHRIST.
167. O Most deep LOVE of God, in CHRIST JESU! I give thee Praise and Thanks,
that thou have delivered me out of the Fire Source or Quality of Torment or
painfulness; and have given thy self with thy Love and Grace into my
Fire-Source or Quality; and change^ me into a Love-fire and divine Light.

168. Thou have put thy Power and Might into my Essence in Body and Soul: and
given thy self to me for my own: Yea thou have purchased my self with thy
Grace, through the Treasure of thy most precious Blood, for thy own, for which
I thank thee in Eternity.

169. And I pray thee; thou Eternal shed-forth LOVE, In the Most Holy Name
JESUS, bring me I pray thee, when I shall have dyed away here, from the
Temporal Death, again, into My first Native Country, in which my Father Adam
in his Innocence dwelt, even in to PARADISE; and bury my Body and Soul, in the
divine Rest.

170. In the mean while, Grant, that I may daily enter into Repentance, and
into the going out from my Earthly Will, and also continue so, steadfastly, the
whole time of my Life, THEREIN, and that I may bear much Good fruit in THAT
Condition: Till thou introducest me, into the Rest, in my right Native Country,
in the true Land of Promise; wherein the Milk and Honey of the divine Power
flows. AMEN.

Here End the Authors Meditations and Prayers for Monday.
Ten Commandments for TUESDAY.

A Prayer.

Concerning Gods Righteousness, also his strong or Severe Commandment and Law,
what God requires of us; and how the same may become fulfilled.

Deduced from and Through the Ten Commandments And Creed or Faith, and set
forth Confession- and Prayer-wise.

An Earnest Looking-glass, well to be Considered.

The First Commandment.
God said upon Mount Sinai to Israel. I am the Lord thy God, etc. thou shall
have no other Gods besides me. Exodus 1.2. Deuteronomy. 5.6, 7. Also,

Thou shall Love the Lord thy God from thy whole Heart, from thy whole Soul,
and from thy whole Mind. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Math. 22.37. The Confession.
171. O Great HOLY GOD! thou have Made Man out of the Limus or Extract of the
Earth, wherein Paradise sprung forth, viz: thy Holy Power: a Glorious powerful
and fair bright Body without distemper and without fragility, a Likeness or
Equality of the Elements.

172. And have in-breathed into him out of thy Power, the Inward Psychicall or
Soulish, and outward Elementary Life, from the power of thy inward divine
Working and Knowledge or Skill, viz: the Great Name of Germanice GOTTES
GOD: and have given him a Will of his own, that he may be an Image according
to thy Wonder-deed, Might and Glory; and rule over all thy Creatures of this
World: also thou have given him the outward Life of all Operation or Working
with the Inward Soulish Life; through which thou rulest the World.

173. Thou have set him for a Regent or Governor over thy Works of Wonder, and
given him no Commandment nor Law, but this, that he should not bring himself
into own Lust and Willing, but should only Work and Will in thy Will, given to
HIM; in thy Power; and not bring himself into own receptibility, to Prove Try
or Experiment Good and Evil, that the fierce Wrath of the Fire, and the Might
or Power of the Darkness might not awake in him, and destroy the Noble Image,
and change it into the Sharpness of the Earth; but should only Will and work,
in thy Will, given to him, in thy Power.

174. But seeing our first Parents, through Satan's in Speaking of Lies; have
turned away from thy Willing, and brought themselves into own willing; and
against thy Commandment, proved Good and Evil, and suffered themselves to
Lust after the perceptibility and own receptibility: Whereby the Anger and
fierce Wrath awaked in them, and destroyed the heavenly Image, and turned it
into an Earthly Image, like the Beasts.

175. Therefore have thou, O HOLY GOD; given us thy Commandment and Law, and
set before us therein, the heavenly divine form of full Obedience, signifying
what we have been, and what we are in the Apostacy, become: And requirest of
us, that we in our Will should out of all Powers, or Faculties and Senses or
Thoughts, only cleave to thee, and work with thee alone.

176. Yea, thou requirest of us the Noble Talent.
Pledge, viz: the Soul, which thou have in-breathed out of the inward Power of
thy Name and Will; and willest; that the Soul, which is flowed forth from thy
Power, may alone continue in thy Name and Power, and Co-work with thee and it
self use no other strange Name Will nor Lust, but only and solely; of that out
of which it is flowed forth.

177. That it Totally cleave to its Center, and bring its desire only and
solely into thy Love, and with thy Love, with thee, rule over all thy Works,
and it self receive no own rule or dominion without thy Love and Co-working;
that it be thy Instrument, wherewith thou governest all Matters Things or
Substances of this World.

178. It should introduce its Trust into no other Power nor Might, also make
Nothing its own peculiar, also Image or form it self with Nothing: For it is a
Ray or Beam, of the Almighty; and should rule perfectly over all things as God
himself, and yet not in own self receptibility of its own Will, but in and with
God: and use the body for its Instrument, which should be a Manager of thy
Creatures: Thou have given all to him for a Sport or Scene and Joy, and
subjected it under him.

179. All this, O Great God! thou set before us in thy Commandments; and
requirest of us according to thy strong severe Righteousness and Eternal
Truth, upon pain of Eternal punishment, that whosoever keeps not all thy
Commandments and Laws and continues in thy Ordinance, he shall be Cursed, and
be Separated from thy Countenance, and not see thy Glory Eternally, nor come to
thy Rest.

180. O Great holy God! thou who art a Consuming Fire, what shall I, poor
miserable Man, who am full of disobedience of own Will and Lust, and have no
right Love or inclination toward thee, say before thee? What shall I answer
thee when thou set me before thy Judgment? and tryest my Heart and Soul?

181. O Dear God! I can do nothing: I stick in the slime or mire of vanity
even unto the inwardness of my Soul: thy Anger is burning in me: In me live all
Evil Beasts with their Lusts.

182. O LORD! my Lust in Soul and Body has Imaged it self into All Evil
Beasts or Vices.
them; and I am before thee a Worm and No Man: also I cannot with this Imaging
come before thy Countenance; much less to thy holy Name; viz: to the Center of
my Soul, out of which it is sprung forth.

183. I am ashamed in this Vizard before thy Countenance; and have no
Righteousness in Me, toward thee, I am become unfaithful to thee* and have
broken my self off from thy Will, and brought my self into own self Will.

184. And stand now before thy Countenance, as the Lost Prodigal Son; who is
become a keeper of Swine; and have lost the fair Garment of thy Power; and
every moment Eat, with the Devils Swine, the husks of vanity: and am not worthy
to be called thy Image and Similitude: For I cannot be obedient to thee out of
my own self powers or faculties; I am in my self, without thy Grace, only a
Source or Quality of thy fierce Wrath and Anger.

185. But yet I rejoice at thy great Mercifulness which thou out of thy Holy
Name out of which my Soul is flowed forth, have turned to us again: Yea thou
have opened the Gates of thy Eternal Unity, and po^red it, into my Soul, which
destroys thy Wrath, and breaks the Monster to pieces.

186. Yea thou have with this pouring-in of thy most Inward Holiness and
Sweetness, impressed and imprinted the Name JESUS in my Soul; which has
assumed or received my Soul and Humanity, and is become obedient to THEE, in my
stead; and has fulfilled or satisfied thy Commandments and strong severe Law,
with perfect Love and Obedience.

187. Therefore I come now with Thanksgiving to thee, O Holy God, and pray
thee, to make this thy bestowed Love of thy in-shed or poured Grace in me,
Great; that I may now in this New Grace-Love be obedient to thee, and fulfill
thy Commandments and Law, with the Obedience of JESUS CHRIST, with his Love:
My Lord JESUS has implanted me again into thy Name, out of which my Father
Adam had rooted me up.

188. Therefore I now come, in and with him, to THEE, and Comfort my self, that
I in him, in his in-dwelling and in-ruling Grace and Love, am and live in thy
Obedience: and that I in him, can rule over Sin, Death, the Devil, the
World, and all Creatures, and am become again, thy right express Image and
proper peculiar Portion, in him, my Lord and Savior, JESUS CHRIST.

189. O DEAR GOD, rule thou now, through this in-poured Love of thy Grace in
ME: and do with and in me how thou will: Only mortify daily, my evil
Creatures in my Flesh; and bind or unite thy self eternally with my Soul and
Mind, as thou have done in the Humanity of JESUS CHRIST.

190. I will readily leave my Evil Beast in the Flesh, to the Earth, till thy
bringing again and Restitution: Only cloth my Soul and Mind, and bring the
same into thy Obedience; that it may seek and honor no other Name, but only
the Holy Name JESUS, which in me, fulfilleth thy Commandments. AMEN.

The Note this is according to Luthers Catechism, the 2. otherwise the 3.
Commandment.
Second Commandment. Thou shall not misuse the Name of the Lord thy God, for
the Lord will not leave him unpunished that misuseth his Name.
191. O Dear GOD! This Commandment does rightly intimate to me and inform me;
how thou did pour in thy Holy Name into my Soul and Mind, yea it is sprouted
forth out of thy Name: and thou have given me authority and power, with thy
Name to rule over all things: That it should flow forth out of my Mouth,
through thy power and Virtue, and rule All: Yea I should with my Mouth and
Speaking-forth or Expression re-Image and form holy Figures and Images again.

192. Even as thou Eternal God, have Imaged and formed All, through thy
breathing or Speaking forth: So thou have also, given thy WORD with thy holy
Name, into my Soul and Mind; that I as a Form and Image of thy Will: should
also so speak forth, viz: thy Wonder-deeds.

193. That which thou O Great God, have Corporeally and Creaturely Imaged
through thy Word, I should Image that, in thy praise, and form it in thy
Wisdom; and Image or frame no strange Image in my Mouth against thy Creation
and Ordinance: But continue in thy working, and rule over all things with thy
Word in my Mouth and Heart, as the Scripture testifies: The Word is near thee,
viz: in thy Mouth and in thy Heart: Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.8. Also the Kingdom
of God is inwardly within you, Luke 17.22.

194. This thy Holy Word, wherewith, thou have made Heaven and Earth, have thou
given into our Mouth, that thou might through our Mouth, Create or Image thy
Praise.

195. But after Man had Introduced himself into own-self Lust, and had turned
his Will away from Thee, then he began, with his Mouth, to Image in thy Word,
Earthly and Hellish Figures in thy Wrath: viz: Cursing Swearing Lying Forms,
false wicked evil serpentine forms, to form Wolves Bears Lions Dogs Cats
Adders and Serpents, and all manner of poisonous venomous Beasts, and to Image
or form the Name of God thereinto, under the appearance of divine forming and
Truth, also into false wicked Sorcery Witchcraft and deceit, and therewith, to
cast up or produce, and honor, strange Images for Gods, and introduce and
Image thy Name into Images of Idol- Gods.

196. All this, thou set before us, in this Commandment, and requirest of
us, thy strong or severe righteousness, to Image thy Name in Holiness, to thy
Praise, and in thy Praise in Clearness Sincerity and Truth: and without thy
Will and Co-working, to make no form of Our words; but willest, that we should
Co-speak Will and Image, with thee; upon pain of Eternal Punishment; as thy
Command clearly sounds forth; Cursed be He that Keeps not all the Words of
this Law. Deuteronomy. 27.26.

197. O Great God! What shall I now here say before thee? How innumerable many
times, do we bring, thy Word and Power in Our Mouths, into false or wicked
Imaging, when we sw^ar by thy Name and Curse, and bring false or wicked Lust
thereinto, and make a Fair Flattering Hypocritical Image, upon our Lips, and
sell it to one another for Truth, persuading one another to believe it to be
so; and yet there is inwardly nothing but a Serpent, full of Lies and Poison:
and so we Image thy Word under a right appearance into a Serpent, and Devils
Image: Also we Curse by it, and so generate a living Figure of the Devil, and
of Hell.

198. Also we use thy Holy Name, to scornful reproach, and Image our false or
wicked Beasts, therein: all whatsoever we love in the World, be it as false or
wicked as it will, thereinto we Image thy Name, and Power, with our Mouth;
Also, in swearing; wherein we bring thy Might and Power on to the Tongue; also
into Sorcery or Witchcraft, Plagues or Torment, and Sicknesses, or Diseases:
Yea we Image it, into Hellish Figures, with our Mouth: Yea, Men further bring
thy Manifested or Revealed Word and Will, for the sake of their Belly, and
temporal Pleasure, and Pride, into a strange Image, which themselves know NOT:
Only that the Truth may Continue obscure, and that in this strange Image, they
themselves may be honored for Gods; they make Laws and Commandments, for
their own Honor, Pleasure, and Voluptuousness, and bind them with the Oath of
his Name: and yet none keeps the same, in his Heart.

199. O God! How much poisonous Anger and Malice of self-revenge do we bring
into thy Name? When we reproach and tread upon or oppress, one another, in our
Proud Stately Mind, with thy Name; and bring it into Tyrannical Power and
Authority: and do no other with thy Name, but as the Apostate Lucifer does.

200. All this thou set before us, in thy Commandment: For thou say: We
should not misuse thy Name, and this is called misusing, when we introduce it,
into false Expression or speaking forth, and Forming or Figuring.
Imaging.

201. O Great God! What shall I poor miserable sinful Man, say here before
thee? Thou requirest thy Name, from, and IN, ME, in Holiness, in thy praise:
Where shall I bestow all these Devils Images, which we poor Men, Image in our
This Body of the Outward Flesh and Blood.
Sinne-house, before thy Countenance? They are indeed mere abominations before
thee, for the sake of which, thy Law Curses me, and sentenceth me to Eternal
Death.

202. O Holy God! I have nothing wherewith I may come before thee, but only thy
Great Barmhertzigkeit.
Mercifulness, that thy Holy Word, according to thy Most inward Love is become
Man, and is come to help us, viz: thy first given Word; which has formed it
self in Our Life, that it may renew us again, and kill, all these Devils
Images, and release and deliver the poor Soul and Mind, from such Images of the
Serpent.

203. For which I thank thee in Eternity; and pray thee thou Eternal
Shed-abroad Love, in the Most Holy Name JESUS; Come, I beseech thee to help me!
and bring thy Word, that became Man, into my Soul and Mind, and continue in Me,
that I may continue in thee.

204. Awaken I pray thee in me, thy Fire of thy Great Love; kindle it O Lord,
that my Soul and Mind, may SEE these Evil Beasts, and kill them in thy Power,
through right and true Repentance: That I may Constantly, bring, and use, thy
Holy Name JESUS, in Me, to thy Praise and Thanksgiving, and no more generate in
thy Word, Evil Beasts, which belong to thy Judgment.

205. O thou living BREATH of God! I give my self wholly and altogether to be
thy own, work thou in me, what thou will. AMEN.

The The 3. according to Luthers Catechism, otherwise the 4. Commandment.
Third Commandment. Consider or Remember the Sabbath Day to Sanctify it: For
in Six Days the Lord Made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea and all that in them
is; and Rested the Seventh Day.
206. O DEAR GOD! This Commandment Intimates to me, my inward right divine
Rest in thy Love, and Power, that my Will should rest in thee, from its own
receptibility of its own willing, and thou Eternal God would, with thy
Power work in my Will.

207. Thou art the right Sabbath, in which all my Powers should work in an
Eternal Rest: and be and continue holy in THEE: O, alas, indeed it was the
True Paradise, wherein thou did set our first Parents; that they should
Sanctify thy Sabbath, viz: thy in dwelling operative power; that is, rightly
Love; and bring no strange Lust of false or wicked desire thereinto, and not
darken or obscure this Holy Sabbath of thy in-dwelling Power, with own desire,
and not bring the Serpents Lust or Falsehood and Wickedness, thereinto, but
Will, Work, and Live, with THEE, that thou alone in ME be the working willing
and doing.

208. O Dear God, indeed thou set before me in this Commandment, the
Figure, wherein I see thy Ordinance and Will: thou requirest, the ability from
me* that I should live in the Ordinance in thy Will, as thou have Created me in
Adam; but my Father Adam has turned his Will from thee, and introduced it into
own Lust and Desire, and brought such Paradisicall working in thy Rest, into a
fiery, enimicitious, proud, stately, covetous, Envious, and Angry, working,

209. And has unhallowed or profaned thine and his Sabbath, and brought the
Serpents false or wicked working and willing, thereinto: For which things sake,
thou have thrust him forth out of such Rest and Paradisicall working, and
Cursed his false or wicked working: For, while it works, with the Devil and
Hell, and runs on in mere unquietness, it is so long even an Enmity against
thy Holy Sabbath.

210. Thou set before us in this Commandment, how thou have wrought all
things in the Six Properties of the Eternal Nature, as the First I. the
Desirousnesse; the Second II. the Mobility; the Third III. the Perceptibility;
the Fourth IV. the Fire or Life; the, Fifth V. the Light or Love; the Sixth VI.
the Understanding or Knowledge of the Power: But yet have introduced it into
the Seventh VII. Property, viz: into thy Substantial Unity and Rest; wherein
all thy Works should Rest in thy Working Love, wherein thou would work with
thy Love: Which then was the right Paradise upon Earth, in the Elements,
wherein thy Shed-abroad Love had the Upper dominion in ALL.

211. But the Devil and Man has destroyed this, and for that cause have thou,
righteous God, Cursed the working of the own false or wicked Will, and
withdrawn thy Sabbath from it; so that now All things stand in mere
Unquietness, Misery Lamentation Necessity Stinging Breaking Murder Killing and
Contrary Willing.

212. This has my Father Adam devolved upon me by Inheritance, so that I now
work and run on, in thy Anger; and Continually Break and Unhallow or Profane
thy Sabbath in me, and Misuse thy Name, which has, together, with my Life,
given it self, into my working, and willing.

213. But since Man is become blind as to this Knowledge, therefore thou have
in thy Commandment, set before him, a Figure and Form, signifying to or for
what thou have Created him, and in what Order or Ordinance he stood: and
requirest of him, that he should in such Form or Ordinance, sanctify thy
Sabbath; and on the Seventh Day, stand still from all his working, to signify,
that THOU art the Sabbath, in whom all things Rest.

214. Also therewith thou set before us, the Eternal REST, wherein All and
Every thing, (which is flowed to the Eternal and out of the Eternal) should
rest in thy Sabbath; and have set thy Curse and Anger against whatsoever
keeps not thy Order or Ordinance: and does not rest, on thy Sabbath in THEE,
and alone works with thee.

215. O Eternal God! What shall I now here say before thee? My Conscience
witnesses against me, that we do not rightly sanctify thy Sabbath: For Men
therein exercise all wicked voluptuous vain and disorderly Life: It is
unhallowed or profaned, with vain pomp, and voluptuousness of the Flesh,
wherein the Devil in thy Anger, works in MANY, and keeps his Sabbath of
Contrary Sports Actions or Scenes.

216. We suffer our selves to be called and Invited by thy Word, and hold the
sound, which we hear, to be thy Sabbath; but the Soul and the Mind is not
regarded, we pass by, as the Deaf, that hear not THY Voice.

217. Thou call us into thy Sabbath; but the Soul has turned it self away
from thee; and works in own willing; in the Lust of the Devil, and rests
contented with the Name that it is thy Sabbath; but it will not hold still to
thee, and turn its Ears, and desire, to THEE, that thou may work in it.

218. The Devil has introduced his Sabbath into Mankind, and so blinded them,
that they know thy Sabbath no more; for which cause thou have also, thrust our
Father Adam and our Mother Eve, out of thy holy Sabbath; and yet have
introduced thy SABBATH, in the Name JESUS into the Humanity again, that it
should work in us again, and we in it, which destroys the Devils Sabbath of
Falsehood Lying and Vanity, and has brought us the Paradise again, that we
should now turn to thee; and receive this Sabbath, and give our selves totally
up into the working of thy Grace; and so thou will, O Eternal God in JESUS
CHRIST, erect a NEW Sabbath in us again, and make an abode or habitation in us,
and sanctify again thy Imaged Word, viz: our Mind and Soul, and set it in the
Eternal Sabbath, viz: in the Rest of thy Unity.

219. O Eternal God! I give up my Soul and Mind, to thee, into thy Holy and
New Sabbath JESUS CHRIST; and direct all my Power Willing and Thoughts toward
thee, take and lead me I pray thee, into thy New Sabbath; for I cannot in my
own power, attain it, if thou bring not me thereinto.

220. But since thou have in thy Son JESUS CHRIST bidden me to come; and thou will quicken or refresh me: Math. 11.28. Therefore I come upon thy inviting
Word, to thy Eternal Supper, of thy Eternal Covenant in CHRIST JESUS, and
pray thee, to sanctify my poor Soul, in the Sabbath of thy Son JESUS CHRIST,
and introduce it therein into the Eternal Rest, and give it again, the food of
thy true Sabbath, viz: his holy Flesh and Blood, that my Soul may again
sanctify thy Sabath, and that thou alone may work in it as in thy very
express reflex Image.

221. Do thou break in me I pray thee, the Devils Sabbath, and false or wicked
working, and give me an Obedient Heart, that continually hungereth after thy
Sabbath; And let thy Word in me keep the Sabbath; that my Soul may hear, what
thou in thy working, Speak in me, that it may be Obedient to thee, and that
I may set ALL my Trust and Confidence, in thee.

222. O thou Eternal Love of JESUS CHRIST! How Glorious is thy Sabbath in the
Soul, when it turns it Self to thee; so that thou penetratest and presses
through it with thy sweet Love, wherein the Paradise becomes unshut to it
again.

223. Let my Soul, I pray thee, continue Eternally in thy Sabbath, build up I
pray thee in me, again, thy New Jerusalem, viz: the City or Habitation of God:
Wherein thy Sabbath becomes sanctified: I give up my self wholly altogether
into thy Sabbath, only, deliver me I pray thee from Evil. AMEN

The The 4. according to Luthers Catechism, otherwise the 5. Command-
Fourth Commandment. Thou shall Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thou
may live Long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
224. O Eternal God! by our Bodily Parents, thou set before us, an Image
of our Eternal Father, and of our Eternal Mother.

225. For THOU art our FATHER, from whom we have received our Life; and thy
WORD is our MOTHER, who has generated us out of thy Creation, and formed us
according to the express Image of thy Manifestation or Revelation.

226. Our Soul and Mind, O God and Father, is thy Express Reflex Image: And
our Body is an Express reflex Image of thy out-flown Word: Which Word is our
Eternal Mother: In whose Body, we are given Suck, and are nourished: Whom we
should honor, and humble our selves before HER, and be obedient to her.

227. As we should honor our outward Corporeal Parents; so also our Eternal,
out of whose Mouth we are sprung forth.

228. O, Eternal Father, we are become disobedient unto thee, and have given
our selves up to a strange Mother into her Tuition: we have taken the World to
be Our Mother, and are become unfaithful to the inward Mother of thy Power in
thy Word.

229. And now we must suck into us, the Poison and Death from the strange
Mothers Breasts, yea she bears us now in her Body or Womb of Contrariety, and
Generateth and Consumes us again in thy fierce Wrath; and nourishes us, the
time of this whole outward Life, in mere Cumbersome Care, Misery, tedious
Weariness, and Necessity, in Suffering and Calamity: and holds us captive, so
that we cannot see our first Eternal Mother.

230. Our Soul lamenteth after her, but thy Anger holds us captive in it
self; so that we must serve and minister to the strange Mother.

231. O God! How long, will thou forget us in our Misery? Take us again I pray
thee to be thy Children, and generate us again in our Eternal Mother anew; and
give us an Obedient Will, that we Eternally never more depart from thee.

Give us also an Obedient Heart toward our Bodily Parents, that we may love
and honor them as THY Ordinance: seeing through them, thou Generatest, and
daily bring us up, to this World: Therefore, help us we pray thee, that we
may be obedient to thy Commandment.

O Dear God! Thou have of thy Grace, given us a New Mother, viz: thy Most holy
Word, in thy Love, and sent it into our Humanity, to generate us again, in thy
Eternal Power, to be thy Children and Heirs, and pourest into us again the
Divine Meekness.
MILK of thy holy Substance, thy Love: Draw us I pray thee, to it, and open in
us, the right Mouth of Faith; that we may continually hunger and thirst after
it; and be renewed in its Power.

For, the Old Body, from the Earthly Mother, avails not before THEE; it
cannot possess thy Kingdom; for that which is born of flesh and Blood, or of
the Will of Man, cannot attain the filiation, but that only, which is generated
of, or out of, GOD.

Therefore I pray thee, O Eternal Father, generate ME a New, I pray thee,
through the New Mother, of thy Grace and Mercy in JESUS CHRIST, and let me grow
and increase in HIM, to a living and holy fruit in thy Kingdom, that I
together with thy Holy Angel,, may be Eternally obedient to THEE; and Eternally
rejoice my self in THEE. AMEN.

At the End of the High Dutch Copy is noted these Books following of the
Author, that were not finished.

FIrst, This Prayer Book.

Secondly, The Aurora.

Thirdly, The Treatise, of divine Manifestation or Revelation: what, God,
Nature and Creature, also Heaven, Hell, and the World, together with all
Creatures, are: Deduced through the whole Process and Course of the World, to
the End, and in the Eternity, and set down in 177. Questions.

Fourthly, The Most highly precious Gates of Divine Vision. What the Mysterium
Magnum is: And how all, is, from, through, and in; God: How he is so near to
all things, and fills all in all.

These the Author of pious Memory, finished not; but in the 24. Sunday after
Trinity, 1624. daparted from this vain World: Speaking these his last words,
Nun fahre Ich hin ins Paradis.
Now go I hence into Paradise.


Lies buried at Gerlitz in the Churchyard, and upon the Grave was set a
wooden Cross with a Mystical Threefold Figure, of an Eagle, a Lion, and a
Lamb: The Superscription upon the Monument was this.

V. H. I. L. I. C. I. U. Vnsor. Heil. Im. Leben. Jesu. Christi. In. Vns. Our.
Salvation. is In. the Life. of Jesus. Christ. In. Us.

Born of GOD.

Dead in JHSUH.

Sealed with the HOLY-SPIRIT.

Rests here Jacob Behme of Old Scidenburg, A O. 1624. 18. November: About the
6th hour in the Morning, Sunday, in the 50. year of his Age, blessedly departed.

The Translatour into the Nether-dutch has this Postscript.

ANno 1641. 1. Julij that Translation was finished out of two written and
different Copies. Under one of the Copies is noted, by Herre Abraham van
Francken-bergh, as follows.

The Author Jacob Behme of Gerlitz, could not bring this little Prayer Book,
to an End: But dyed Anno 1624. buried Gerlitz, etc. as before. Under the other
Copy is noted by Herre Heynricus Prunius, as follows.

This I have written off from the Authors own blessed Manuscript, who is now
in Bliss: He proceeded no further, he would have gone through the Six Days of
the Week, and made the beginning on Monday, as here is to be seen, and would
have concluded it on the Seventh, that is, on the Sunday, in the true
Paradisical Sabbath. The Prayers from the Holy Ten Commandments, are the
beginning of Tuesday, he would have Expounded the whole Decalogue, Apostles
Creed, And Our Father, in such a Manner, by way of Confession and Prayer: But
he was continually hindered, as also of writing other Excellent Treatises:
Being by the Earnest-entreaty of several Friends that Loved God, put upon the
writing, sometime of one, sometime of another, Work. He also Intended, with the
permission of the divine Help to make an Exposition upon All the Epistles and
Gospels through the whole Year, but has begun nothing of it; because his time
was Interrupted and Cut off. A Brief Table of the Contents.
1. THe true Ground of the right Skill of Prayer: Very Edifyingly teaching to
understand what Praying is, and how Men should pray. verse, 1. to 32. 2. An
Introduction, to right Praying. verse, 33. to 46. 3. A Prayer and right acting
Repentance, before Gods Face. verse, 47. to 64. 4. A Thanksgiving and Prayer,
when a Man feels the divine Power and Virtue in himself. verse, 65. to 72. 5.
A Prayer to the Fire-burning Love of God: Showing how rightly to pray for it.
verse, 73. to 79
Prayers for the Days of the Week.
I. for Monday. verse, 80. 6. A short Prayer when we awake Early before we
rise. verse, 81. to 82. 7. A Prayer and Thanksgiving when we rise. verse, 83.
to 89. 8. A Prayer when we dress and wash. verse, 90. to 99. 9. A Prayer when
one would go to work and the Employment or Calling, in which God has set
every One. verse, 100. to 112. 10. A Prayer at Noon, to consider ones State and
Condition. verse, 113. to 129. 11. At Noon, to Consider the Quality of the Day,
of the ascending of the Mind. verse, 130. to 142. 12. At Evening, to consider
our weariness. Of the descending of the Mind. verse, 143. to 158. 13. When one
leaves off Labor and would go to sleep. verse, 159. to 162. 14. When one
undresseth and lies down to rest. verse, 163. to 166. 15. A Prayer of thanks,
for the bitter Passion and Dying of Jesus Christ. verse, 167. to 170.
II. For Tuesday.
16. A Meditation or Confession on the 1. Commandment, an Earnest
Looking-glass to be well Considered. verse, 171. to 190. 17. Upon the 2. else
3. Commandment. Of Gods Holy Name. 191. to 205. 18. On the 3. else 4.
Commandment. Of the right Sabbath day. verse, 206. to 224. 19. On the 4. else
5. Commandment: How we should honor our temporal, and Eternal Father and
Mother. verse, 225. to 232.
END.
The Highly precious Gate of the Divine Visibility of Contempl^^ility.
Vision Or Contemplation.

Showing what the Mysterium Magnum is.

And how ALL is from, through, and in, God.

Also How God is so near all things; and fills ALL.

Begun to be written in High Dutch Anno 1624. but lest unfinished.

By Jacob Behme Teutonicus Philosophus. Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

London, Printed by M.S. for Lodowick Lloyd, and (...) be sold at the Castle in
Cornhill. 1662.

The First Chapter. Of the Divine Visibility Vision or Contemplation: What God
is, and how Men shall know The Divine Substance.
his Substance by his Revelation or Manifestation.
Reason Says.
1. I Hear much spoken of God; that there is a God, who has Created all
things; also preserves and supporteth all things, but I have not yet seen any,
nor heard from any, who has seen God, or that could tell, where God is or
dwells, or how he is.

2. For if it looks upon, and Considers the Substance and Matters or Things
of this World, how it goes with the Virtuous and Honest as with the Evil and
Wicked, and bow all Things are Mortal and Corruptible; also that the Virtuous
and Honest sees no Deliverer, who releaseth him from the Anguish and
Contrariety or Opposition of the Evil and Wicked, and so must go with Anguish
in Misery to the Grave: Then it thinks, all things are thus done by Or mishap
or hap-hazard.
chance; there is no God, who takes pity on the Sufferers, seeing, he lets
them that hope in him stick in Misery, and therein go to the Grave; and that
Men have heard of none, who is come again out from Corruption, and has said
that he has been with God.

Answer.
3. Reason, is a Natural Life, whose ground stands in a Temporal Beginning
and End, and cannot come into the super-naturall ground wherein GOD is
understood.

4. For, though perhaps Reason looks thus upon it self in this World, and in
its Or Contemplation.
Visibility, finds no other ground, yet it perceives in it Self a desire
after a higher Ground wherein it might rest.

5. For it understands that it is proceeded out of a Super-naturall Ground,
and that there must be a GOD, who has brought it into a Life and Willing; and
is Or troubled or terrified.
astonished in it Self at its own willing, and judges it self in the willing
of Evil, for unrighteous.

6. Though indeed it does that unrighteousness, yet it complains against it
self, and is afraid of a Judgment, which it sees not: Which signifies, that
the hidden God who has brought himself into Nature, dwells in it, and
reproves it for its Evil ways, and that, the same, (hidden God) Or Cannot.
must not be the Nature of perceptibility; seeing Nature sees him not nor
apprehends him.

7. On the other side, the forsaken Reason, which in its apprehension is here
vexed with wrong or unrighteousness in Misery, finds a desire in it self, yet
more, to forsake it self, and gives it self willingly up to suffering.

8. But passes in its unrighteous Suffering, into a Hope, that, that which
has created it will take it from suffering, into it self, and desires to rest
in that, which is not Passive.
passible, and seeks Rest in that which it is not, in it self.

9. It desires the Dying of its self-hood or Or Ihood or Somethingness
somewhat, and yet desires not, to be a Nothing, but desires only to die away
from the source or torment; that it might rest in it self.

10. And therefore it gives it self up to the suffering, that the power of the
painfulness, should kill its suffering, and that it, in its Life, might through
the Death, of the dying of it self, in that it is a painful Life, enter into
the unpainfull and impassible.

11. In this a Man understands rightly, the hidden God, how he manifests or
reveals himself in the Mind of Man; and reproves the unrighteousness in the
Conscience, and draws the unrighteous suffering, by suffering, to himself.

12. And how the Reason-Life, viz: the Natural Life, must in the Suffering
have a desire come upon it, to turn it self again into that, out of which it is
gone forth, and how it must desire to hate it self; and to die away from the
Natural willing, that it might attain the Super-Naturall.

Reason Says.
13. Wherefore has God created a painful suffering Life? Might it not be in a
better state without Suffering and Torment, seeing he is the Ground and
Beginning of all Things, why does he permit the Contrary opposite willing? Why
does he not break and destroy the Evil: that only the Good may be in all
things?

Answer.
14. No-Thing without Contrariety or Opposition CAN become Manifest to it self;
for if it has Nothing, that is Contrary or Opposite to it, then it goes
continually forward OUT; and goes not. IN again, into it Self: But if it goes
not IN again into it self, viz: into that OUT of which it is originally gone
forth; then it knows Nothing of its Original.

15. If the Natural Life had no Contrariety or Opposition, and were without a
limit, then it would never ask or enquire after its Ground, out of which it is
proceeded, and so the hidden God would continue unknown or unapprehended by the
Natural Life.

16. Also, if there were no Contrariety or Opposition in the Natural Life,
then there would also be no perceptibi^ity nor willing or working, also neither
Understanding nor Knowledge or Skill, therein.

17. For, a thing that has but one Will, that, has no Divisibility or
Separability: For if it perceives not a Contrary or Opposite willing, which
causes it to the driving of the Motion: then it stands still.

18. For, ONE only thing knows no More but of ONE: And though it is in it
self GOOD, yet it knows neither of Evil nor of Good, for it has nothing in
it self that makes it perceptible.

19. Thus also, we may Philosophate concerning the Will of God, and say: That
if the hidden God, who is but ONE only Substance and Will, had not with his
Will brought forth himself OUT of himself, and brought forth himself out of the
Eternal knowledge or Skill in the Temperament, into divisibility of the
willing, and had not introduced that same divisibility into an inclusibility,
to a Natural and Creaturely Life, and that the same divisibility in the Life,
did not stand in strife: how would then, the hidden Will of God, which, in it
self, is but ONE only: Be manifested or Revealed to HIMSELF.

20. How can there be in ONE only Will a knowledge or apprehension of it self?
But if there be a divisibility in the ONE only Will, so that the divisibility
introduces it self into Centers, and own willing, so that in that which is
severed off or departed away, there is (an) own Will, and so in the ONE only
willing, unsearchable and innumerable willings Exist: As the Twigs or Branches
in a Tree; thus we see and understand that, in such a divisibility, every
severed off, or departed, Will, introduces it self into a Form of its own,
and, that the strife of the willing, is, about the Form; so that one Form in
the partibility, is not as the other, and yet ALL stands in ONE Ground.

21. For ONE only Will cannot break it self in pieces asunder, as the Mind
breaks not in pieces, when it divides it self into a willing of Evil or of
Good, but the Exit or OUT going of the Senses or Thoughts, only is IT, that
divides it self, into a willing of Evil and of Good, and the Mind continues
in it self Total or entire, and suffers, that a willing of Evil and of Good
Existeth or dwells in it.

Then says Reason.
22. What, is THAT good or profitable for? that, with the Good, there must be
an Evil.

Answer.
23. The Evil, or Or Opposition.
Contrary Opposite Will, causes the Good, viz: the Good Will, that it presses
again after its original, viz: after GOD, and that the Good, viz: the Good
Will, be desirous for a Thing that is only Good in it self, and has no Source
Quality or Torment, that desires Nothing; for it knows nothing better in it
self or for it self, after which it could Long.

24. Thus also can we Philosophate and say concerning the Eternal good Will of
God, that it can desire Nothing in it self; for it has nothing in it self or
before it self that can give it any thing, and therefore it brings it self
forth OUT of it self, into a Divisibility or Seperability, into Centers; so
that a Contrariety or Opposition existeth in the Efflux or out-flowing, viz: in
the out flown; so that the GOOD in the EVIL becomes perceptible working and
willing, that is to say, to will, to separate it self from the Evil, and again
to will to enter into the Eternal Will of God.

26. But seeing the OUT-flowing of the ONE only Eternal Willing of God,
continually goes forth out of it self to its Manifestation or Revelation, so
also the Good flows, viz: the divine Power, forth, out of the Eternal ONE,
with this very OUT-flowing, and goes not IN, to the Seperability to the
Centers of the Multiplicity.

26. Thus now the Perpetual Enduring Out-flowing of the Willing, causes the
Good in it self, with its Motion, so that, the Good longs after the standing
still again, and becomes desirous to press into the Eternal again, and in
this very pressing into it self, the ONE becomes Movable and desirable, and in
this very working, stands the Perceptibility, Knowledge and the Willing.

27. God, so far as he is called God, Can will nothing but himself, for he
has Nothing before or after him that he can will; but if he will any thing,
that very thing is flown OUT from him, and is an A Counter-part, Counter-pane,
Counter-draught, Copy, duplicate, Counter-portraiture or representation.
Object of himself: or a Reflection of himself; wherein the Eternal Will,
wills into its Somewhat: If now that Somewhat were only ONE, then the Will
therein would have no production.

28. And therefore has the Abyssall unsearchable Will, in the Beginning
divided it self, and Compressed it self into Substance, that it may work in
somewhat, as a Man has a NOTE.
Similitude thereof in the Mind of Man; if the Mind did not it self flow forth
out of it self, it would have no Thoughts or Senses; and if it should have no
Thoughts, then also it would have no knowledge of it self, also of no other
thing, and Could have no production or working.

29. But the Sensible or Cogitative flowing forth, OUT of the Mind (which is an
Object or Reflection of the Mind, wheein the Mind perceives it self) makes the
Mind willing or desirous, so that the Mind introduces the Senses or Thoughts
into Somewhat, viz: into a Center of a self-hood, wherein the Mind with the
Senses or Thoughts, works, and in the working reveals and sees or
contemplateth it self with the Senses or Thoughts.

30. If now in these Cen^ers of the Senses or Thoughts in the Object or
Representation of the Mind, there were no Contrary or Opposite, then were all
the Centers of the out-flown Senses or Thoughts only ONE, in ALL Centers of the
Senses or Thoughts; but ONE only Will; that did continually but ONE thing: How
then would the Wonders and power of the divine Wisdom, through the Mind,
(which is an Image of Divine Revelation) become known and brought into Figures.

31. But if there be a Contrary or Opposite, as Light and Darkness, therein,
then this contrary it self is opposite to that, and Ever, the one property
causes the other; so that this other introduces it self into desire, to will
to strive against that other, and to rule over the same: In which desire, the
Mind (and Thoughts) becomes introduced into a N^tur^ll and Creaturely ground,
to an own willing, viz: to an overruling in its somewhat, viz: with its Center
above all Centers, as viz: one Sense or Thought of the Mind above the other.

32. Hence Strife and Anguish, also Contrary or Opposite Willing in the Mind,
originally arises, so that the Total Mind is thereby caused to enter again
into a breaking or destroying of the Senses or Thoughts and of the
self-willings of the Senses or Thoughts, viz: of the Natural Centers: and to
will to sink down out of the torment and paining of the Contrary Opposite
willing, and striving, OUT of the Anguish, IN to the Eternal Rest, viz: IN to
God, OUT of which it is sprung forth.

33. And hence existeth Faith and Hope, so that the Anxious Mind hops a
deliverance, and Longs after its Original, again, viz: after God.

34. Thus also we should understand the divine Revelation or Manifestation; for
all things have their beginning out of the OUT-flowing of the divine Will,
whether it be Evil or Good, Love or Sorrow.

35. Whereas yet the Will of God is no Thing, neither Nature nor Creature,
wherein is no Pain Sorrow nor Contrary Opposite Will, but out of the
OUT-flowing of the Word, viz: through the OUT-going of the Abyssall Mind,
(which is the Wisdom of God, viz. the Great Mystery, Mysterium Magnum,
wherein the Eternal Understanding lies in the Temperament within out of which
is flown forth the Understanding and Knowledge.

36. And that OUT-flowing, is a beginning of the Willing, where the
Understanding has parted it self into forms, and so the forms, become, each
desirous, in it self, also to have an Object of its Like.

37. And that very desire has been an Inclusion or Comprehension to self-hood,
or Or own possession.
propertibility, that is: to a place, viz: to the Somewhat, and out of this
Somewhat, is the Great Mystery Mysterium Magnum, viz: the Non-Naturall Power,
become Substantial and Natural; and the Somewhat has enclosed or compressed
it self to an own Willing.

38. For, this own Will, is a Ground of its self-hood, and shuts it self in,
as a desirous Will, whence the Magnetic impression to sharpness and hardness
has taken its Original, and is a ground of darkness and of the painful
perception: Out of which, contrary opposite Will, anguish, and flying: ( viz:
Perceptibility), has its original.

39. And is a Ground of Nature, out of which, the multiplicity of Properties
comes, so that in such contrariety or opposition, ever, one Will is existed
out of the other, to sever it self from the pain, as viz: the Senses or
Thoughts, out of the Mind; where the Mind with the Thoughts, stands in
Anguish, working, willing, and breaking or destroying.

40. In this divine out-flowing, in which, the divine Power breaths forth it
self out of it self, and has introduced and brought it self into Nature and
Creature; is to be apprehended; in a twofold Manner; viz: First: The Eternal
understanding of the one only Good Will; which is a Or Temperament.
Temperature, and thus only introduces it self into a perceptibility and
working, to the Manifestation or Revelation of the Powers Colors and Virtues,
where the Powers and Virtues, appear in Seperability and formability, and the
Eternal Skill or Knowledge is revealed and come into apprehension.

41. Out of which then also, the Angelical, Soulish, and Creaturely, Ground,
is proceeded: as also the Thrones and Dominions, together with the visible
World.

42. And then Secondly, there is to be understood, the inceptive or beginning
Will, of Nature, viz: the Inclusibility or Comprehensibility of Centers, where
every Center, in the divisibility includes it self into a place to self-hood,
and self-willing; as an own-self Mystery or Mind: Out of which the unlikeness
or unequality of the willing, originally arises, showing how, in these two, a
Contrary does exist, for they are TWO in ONE only Substance.

43. As First; the Inward, from the original of the divine Power, desires
only an Object, Reflection or Representation, of its similitude or Equality,
viz: of the Good; wherein the Good divine OUT-flown Will might work, and
manifest it self: Then Secondly, the Self-generated own Natural Will, in the
place of the self-hood desires also a likeness of the Dark impression of the
Sharpness: That is, an Object: Through its own Inclusibility or
Compressibility, through which including it makes it self Material: and
desires Nothing Else, but only its own Corpore^ty as a Natural Ground.

44. In these TWO, now, is to be understood, the Good and Evil Will, in all
things, and it is herein rightly understood, how the inward Spiritual Ground
of all Substances, originally arises from the divine Power, and how all Bodies
of the visible perceptible or palpable Substance, originally arises from the
Desire of Nature.

45. Whereby we may clearly Observe, that as the own-self Natural Desire which
in the beginning had made all Material, and made it self an Object: viz: a
Similitude, wherein it works: Thus also the divine Ground and Will, with its
Love-Inclusibility, makes it self an Object and Spiritual Substance, wherein
the divine, holy, Will, works; and introduces the divine Power into Forms
and Separability, to the Manifestation of the divine Power and Glory.

46. And always, in this Worlds Substance, two in one are to be understood; as
First: One only divine and spiritual; and Secondly; an inceptive Natural
Temporal and Fragile or Corruptible, in own self-will; wherein two sorts of
Wills lie in One: viz: First, an inceptive Natural, wherein the Will is a self
Astrum of its own, and qualifieth or operateth, with or in all outward,
Elementary, and Or Aeriall.
Sydercall things.

47. And Secondly; An Eternal Spiritual Substance, which is an Inclusibility,
or included Substance, of the divine Will; wherewith, the divine Will also
makes to it self an Object or Substance; wherein it works; and these two
Substances, become understood, in two Principles: The ONE, divine, in a
Heavenly; and the OTHER temporal, in an Earthly.

48. And now as the Heavenly divine cleaves to the Earthly, so also the
Earthly to the Heavenly: and yet, neither, is, the other. For the Heavenly has
a Spiritual Substance, which is only a Substantial Power, and presses
through, the Earthly; and yet possesses its Principle, and gives power, to
the Earthly Substance, so that it also gets another new Will: and Longs
after the Heavenly.

49. Which Longing, is a Lust or strong Inclination, to go out from the vanity
of Nature; of which the Scripture says: Romans 8.22.
Romans 8.22. All Creatures long pant or groan together with us, Verse 20.
to be freed from the vanity, to which they are subjected, against their Will.

Understand it aright thus.
50. The OUT-gone Lust, or Longing of the divine Power, to Nature, out of which
Nature and own- self will, is existed; Longs or groaneth, to be freed from
the own-self Natural Will.

51. That Lust or Longing, is with the Impression or Compression of Nature,
laden Or against.
over and above its Will, for as much as God has brought it thereinto, which
shall at the End of this Time, be freed from the Loaded vanity of Nature: and
be brought into a Clear Cristaline Nature; and then it will be manifest,
wherefore, God has shut it up, into a Time, and subjected it, to suffer under
painfulnesse.

52. Viz: Therefore; that, through the Natural pain the Eternal Power might
become together, brought, into Forms Conditions or Shapes, and Seperability,
to Perceptibility: and that Creatures, viz: a Creaturely Life, in this time,
might become Manifest, therein, and so be a Play or Scene in the Object or
Representation, of the divine Wisdom.

53. For, through Folly, Wisdom becomes Manifest, therefore, because Folly
attributes Wisdom.
own ability to it self, and yet stands in a ground and beginning, and is
finite.

54. So the infinite Life thus becomes Manifest; through the Follies being
made a show of and exposed to open view in triumph: that therein Praise might
exist to the Honor of God, and that the Eternal stable Immovablenesse might
become known in the Mortal.

55. Thus, Reason becomes Answered, to its First Question, in that it
supposes all things are done by Guess.
Chance; and that there is NO God; seeing he suffers the Honest and Virtuous
to be in Pain Anguish, and Tribulation, and brings them in the End to the
Grave, as well as the wicked, so that it appears, as if God did not regard any
thing, or as if there were no God; being it neither sees knows nor
perceives Him.

56. Therefore, it is said to it, that it, in its own Life, is only an Object
of the right Life; and if it finds in it self no hunger nor desire after
that, from whence in the beginning it is existed, that in its Life it is only a
folly and a Or Looking-glass.
Play or Scene; wherein the Wisdom brings its Wonders to pass.

57. For Viz: Wisdom.
it, sees also in the wise according to the outward Nature, such a Folly, and
sees how God forsakes that very Folly of the Wise; that it must stand in
Shame and Reproach, before the own-self willed, foolish cunning suttlety, which
yet knows not its End.

58. Therefore the foolish Reason supposes; there is no Deliverer, and knows
not, how the wise Man in himself becomes delivered and released or freed from
the inherited Folly, through the Entering in of his own w^lling; in that, his
own Will, through the paining and Opposition of the wicked, enters into its
breaking, and, (into, its) willing-Nothing; and sinketh it self down again into
its first Original, viz: into Gods willing, and therein becomes New born or
Generated anew.

59. And that, God is not profited or served by the Gross Mortal Flesh, that
he should introduce deliverance into the beastiall own-self-willed Life; but
that to God.
him the matter lies in this that, the-own-self Will, should break, and sink
it self down into God again: and then the inward Good Substance becomes
enclosed and Comprised, in Gods willing, and on the Mortal Body, is so much
the more pain, laid, that, the own-self natural Will, may not enter again into
the own desire to self-hood, and lift up it self to be a Ruler over the inward
Ground, and so destroy the true Image, of God.

60. This the Earthly Reason understands not, for it knows not how God
dwells in it, and wha^ His. (Gods) Will, and Substance, is: It knows not
that God dwells through and through it; and is so near it; and that its Life
is but a folly of the Wisdom; through which (Life) the Wisdom manifests or
reveals it self, that it might be known what Wisdom is.

61. Its Will is gone out from God, into the self-hood; and boasts it self of
its own ability or power, and sees not how its ability is inceptive and
finite, that it is only a Looking-Glasse-Work, through which Looking Glass the
Wisdom for a season beholds it self in the foolishness of the Wise, and in
the End through such paining of the wicked, the folly, as to the wise,
breaks, in that they begin, to hate the frail corruptible foolish Life, and
to dye with the Reason, and to give the Will to God.

62. This, the Earthly Reason holds for a folly, especially when it once
sees, that God also, as to the wise forsakes their Earthly Folly; and lets
the Body of such folly: wherein the folly has beheld it self; without help, to
go to the Grave: Therefore it supposes that this Man, has received no
deliverance from God; for if, he has trusted him, then must, his Faith surely
have been false; else he had indeed delivered him in his Lifetime.

63. Also since it feels not its punishment instantly, it supposes there is
no more in Earnest Seriousness, and knows not, that the NOTE.
longer the more it incloseth or comprehends it self in folly, the stronger
will be the Source Quality or Torment of the Eternal pain, in it self: So that
when the Light of the outward Nature breaks from it, wherein it has for a
season Prided and strutted in self-hood, that then it stands in it self, in
darkness, so that its false wicked own-self desire, is a mere rough stinging
hard sharp and opposite Will.

64. It hops this Time upon an outward help, and brings it self into
pleasure of its Will, and holds that for its Kingdom of Heaven; but when the
outward Light extinguisheth in Death, so then it stands in Eternal despair,
and looks for no Deliverer more, either round about or in it self.

65. But the Wise 1 Cor. 3.18.
becomes to himself in this World, a Fool, and learneth to hate his folly;
(which the Reason accounts for Prudence and Cunning Ability and Parts) thus
must his Wisdom (which the World holds for Folly) be a Folly to Reason, at
which, it is scandalized.

66. And thus also God, in the Wise, hates the foolish Mortal Life, just as
the Wise hates it himself; that the true divine Life in him, with the
Understanding, might rule and govern.

67. And therefore with God there is no regard or trouble about the Mortal
Body of the Wise; for he compriseth or comprehends his divine Ens i^^^im in
his Spirit and Will, and leaves the Body of the Folly, with the foolish
departure, in its Grave; till the Last Day, till the Separation, of all and
every Substance.

68. And, that, the Reason understands not; and therefore it is foolish: Yet
a Man should be a Man, not according to the Folly, but according to Gods
Spirit: and judge what is divine, and not according to the Image-like or
Imaginary Reason.

69. For, it is written: whosoever Gal. 6.8. NOTE.
builds upon the Flesh; (viz: upon the Mortal Reason of own self-will) he
will of the Flesh inherit Perdition or Corruption.

70. But whosoever builds upon the Spirit (viz: upon the divine Will, and
sets his Will in the hope of divine Promise,) he will inherit from the
Spirit, the Eternal Life.

The Second Chapter, Of the Mind, Will, and Thoughts of the Humane Life; how
they have their Original from the Will of God: And how it is an Object or
Representation, viz: an Image of God in which God wills works and dwells.
Reason Says.
1. SEeing the Mind together with the Senses or Thoughts, is an Inceptive
natural Life, which stands in a Time and Fragility or Corruptibility; how
may it then in this Time be brought to the Super-sensuall divine Life? Or how
is the divine inhabitancy in this Life?

Answer.
2. The Life of Man is a form of the divine Will, and is come from the divine
in breathing, into the Created Image of Man: It is the Imaged Word of the
divine Skill and Knowledge, but yet is from the Opposite breathing of the
Devil, and of the fierce Wrath of the Temporal Nature, become poisoned, so
that the Life's Will, has immaged it self with the outward Earthly Object or
representation, of the Mortal Nature; and is come from its Temperature into
Separability of Properties.

3. Upon these Causes, it stands yet in the Earthly Image, and is now to be
considered in Three Principles: viz: in the first Principle according to its
true Original, it stands in the Out-going Will of God in the divine Skill
and Knowledge, which in the beginning was a Temperature, wherein the divine
Power did work Sensually.
sensibly; and therein is rightly, understood, a Paradise or working of divine
Power: as a Continually enduring, Imaging, of the divine Will.

4. Which Sprouting or Vegetation is understood in the Out going of the Good
Senses or Thoughts; whereby the divine Wisdom, Imageth it self figuredly in a
divine manner or kind, and by this Imaging, the divine understanding
Manifests or Reveals it self through the sensible or Cogitative Life's out
going: Whence it became rightly called an Image of God, in which the divine
Will manifested or revealed ^t self.

5. But when this Life, in the first Principle, from the fierce Wrath of the
Devil, was breathed upon, in its Image, so that the Devil, Spoke into it,
saying, it were profitable and good for it that the Out-going of the Senses or
Thoughts, out of the Life, did break off, from the Temperature; and did
introduce it self into own-self Image according to the Properties of the
Multiplicity, to prove or try, the unlikenesse dissimilitude or inequality,
viz: to find or perceive and know Evil and Good: Thus has the own self will
of the Life, willed thereinto, and brought the Senses or Thoughts viz: the
out-going Lust, thereinto, and introduced it self into the desire to
own-self-hood, and pressed or comprised it self into self-hood.

6. And then Instantly the Understanding of the Life, became manifested or
revealed in the Properties, and so Nature, has captivated it in the inequality
or dissimilitude, and brought its Dominion to be aloft, whence it is become
painful, and the inward divine Ground of the Good Will and Substance,
extinguished, that is, as to the Creature became worklesse.

7. For the Will of the Life, brake it self off therefrom, and went into the
Perceptibility, out of the UNITY, into the MULTIPLICITY, and strove against the
Unity, viz: the one only Eternal Rest, the Eternal GOOD.

8. When this was done; then the divine Ground ( viz: the Second Principle,
where the divine Power, with the out-breathing divine Will, had together.
Imprinted or Imaged it self in the Image-like or Imaginary Life, viz: in the
Object or Representation of God: Understand the Wisdom of God, viz: the
Substantial, Will of God) did disappear in the false Will; For, the cause of
the Motion of the holy Substance, had turned it self to the Earthlinesse, in
which, Evil and Good stands in Strife.

9. Understand it thus: The Eternal Abyss^ll Will of the Life, had turned it
self away from the divine Ens, and would domineer in Evil and Good: and
therefore is the Second Principle, viz: the Kingdom of God, extinguished, to
it; and in the stead thereof, is sprouted up, to it, the Third Principle in the
own self Imagibility, viz: the Source or Quality of the Constellations and of
the four Elements: Whence the Body is become Gross and beastiall, and the
Senses or Thoughts become false and Earthly.

10. Thus has the Life lost the Temperature, viz: the Eternal Rest, and has
with the own desire, made it self, dark painful stern or strong, hard and
rough, and is become a mere unquietness; and runs on now in the Earthly
Power into an Eternal Ground, and seeks rest in the Corruptibility or
Fragility, and yet finds none, for the Corruptibility or Fragility, is not
the Life's Similitude or Equality.

11. Therefore now, the Life swingeth it self above the Substance of this
World, and rules over the Mortal power of the Stars and Elements, as an own
self God of Nature, and is with this domineering become foolish and silly, so
that in this earthly Imaging and own self Reception, it cannot know or
apprehend its Ground and Original, wherein its Eternal Rest stood; for it
has brought it self out of the divine Ens into an Earthly (Ens), and set it
into a corruptible or fragile Substance; and, will rule, in that, which yet
breaks it, and (suddenly) as a smoke or vapor passes away.

12. And when that breaks, over which, it has ruled for a Time, then the
Life continues in its Contrariety or Opposition in the First Principle, in the
Darkness, and is nothing else but a perpetual enduring, unquenchable, painful
Fire Source or Quality, as the Devils are even such.

13. This Captivated Life, the Great Love of God is come to help again, and
instantly after such Apostasy, in breathed it self, again into the inward Ens,
viz: into the disappeared or quenched Substance of divine property; and given
to the Life for an Object or Representation, as a new fountain of divine Unity,
Love, and Rest, into the disappeared divine Ens, and opened it self therein,
out of which now it may create or frame the Life, and, quench its painfulness
and disquietnesse, in the Centers of the own self-hood.

14. Also, this New Fountain of divine Love and Unity, has with its OUT
flowing, in Christ incorporated it self, into the true Life of of all the Three
Principles of the humane Property, and is Entered in to the Image-like Senses,
or Imaginary Thoughts, viz: into the Natural Creaturely apostated, Image-like
or Imaginary Will of the Life, and assumed or received Humanity; and broken the
self-hood and own self-willing with the IN-flowing or Influence, of the sole
and only Love of God, viz: with the Eternal ONE: and inclined or turned in,
the Will of the Life, again, into the Eternal ONE, viz: into the Temperature:
Where then the Devils introduced Will became destroyed; and the painfulnesse of
the Life became brought into the true Rest.

15. And has broak open the enclosure, viz: the Death; and brought again the
Divine Sensible or Cogitative Paradisical Sprouting or Vegetation, with the
holy Senses or Thoughts and Working: and brought the holy Life, quite through
the Inclusion of the Death, and made Death, and the Devils-willing, a reproach.

16. And thus has powerfully demonstrated, how the Eternal ONE can mightily
rule over the MULTIPLICITY and own self-hood, that the Might of the Imagibility
may not be a God; but that the Might of the non-and super-Imagibility may rule
all: For the Imagibility is only an Object or Representation of the Un-Imagible
Will of God, wherethrough, the Will of God, works.

17. But seeing the Great Love of God in Christ, is thus come into the Earthly
Imaging to help the humane Life, and has made for us poor Men, in the Life of
the Humanity of Christ, an open Grace-Gate, to the divine IN-going or Entrance:
Therefore the matter now lies in this, that the Captivated Will of the Life,
in its Imagibility, forsake the Earthly, viz: the self-hood and own Will,
again, and only and solely, sink down it self, into this Incorporated Grace,
Romans 5.12, 18.
which pressed from ONE, viz: from the first Man, upon ALL.

18. And receive this Grace to it self, and in the Power of this Reception and
divine Union sink down it self with the forsaken or resigned Life's Will into
the Super-sensuall or Super-cogitative Hyperbyssall or Super-unsearchable,
Eternal ONE, viz: into the first Ground of the Life's beginning: and give it
self again into the Ground, out of which the Life is sprung forth; and so then
it is again in its first place, viz: in the Temperature, in the (true) Rest.

Reason says.
19. How can a Man do that: Being the Scripture says [ 1 Cor. 15. verse 45,
46. Genesis 1.26.] that the first Man is Made to a Natural Life; that he may rule
over all Creatures and Substances or Things of this World; therefore must the
Life, needs introduce the desire, into the Earthly Properties.

Answer.
20. The humane Life, is, Placed, put into or framed into.
set in an Object or reflex Image of the divine Will, in and with which, God
wills; and the Earthly Creatures are set in an Object or Representation of
the humane Life, in and with which, Man should Will: Man's willing should with
Gods willing, will, and rule, over all and Every Natural and Creaturely Life:
It should not stand in a Beastiall Essence, but in Divine.

21. Though indeed Man with the Life was Or framed into Nature.
set in Nature, yet his Nature was a Temperature, and his Life a house of the
divine Will.

22. But seeing now the Life must stand during this Time in the Earthly
Essence, and that it cannot be rid of it; therefore a Man should look to the
Threefold kind and Manner of the Life, according to the Three Principles; with
which, or what, Ground of the Life, Man casts himself into the Super-cogitative
Substance of God; and how that can and may be done.

23. Christ says; John 15. verse 5. Without me ye can do nothing; No Man can
of his own ability, attain or reach into the highest Ground, unless his
innermost Ground of the first Principle, as or according to the Life's
Imagibility, sink down into the Incorporated Grace of God, and according to
that Ground, in divine hope, stand still from own self-willing, and totally
with the willing give up it self to God, in such a way, as that its willing,
will speak no more according to this Ground, but only what God speaks and
wills through this Ground: and then it is at the highest Limit.

24. Now if it be possible that it may stand still for an hour or less, from
its own most inward Self-willing and Speaking: Then will the divine willing in
speak or inspire it: Through which in-speaking, Gods willing includes its
willing in it self; and in-speaketh or inspireth into the Image-like Natural
Essential outward Reason-Life: and dissolveth and enlighteneth the Earthly
Imaging of Reasons willing; so that instantly, the Super-cogitative, or
Super-sensuall divine Life and willing, Sprouteth or Vegetateth and
Incentrateth it self in the Reasons willing.

25. For, as little as the own-self willing of the Life, in the self-hood, and
the willing averse and Apostate from Gods Willing, in Nature may stand still
for the twinkling of an Eye, from its working, unless it sink it self down
beyond and without all Nature; so little also, may the Divine Speaking, in the
Life resigned or forsaken to the Ground or bottom, stand still from its working.

26. For, if the Life stand still from its own willing, then it stands in the
Abyss of Nature and Creature, in the Eternal OUT-speaking of God, and then
God speaks therein.

27. For, from Gods speaking, is the Life, gone-OUT and come into Body, and is
no other then an Image-like Will of God.

28. Now if it be so, that the own-self Imaging, and willing, stand still, then
the Divine Imaging and willing rises up, for that which is will-lesse or void
of willing, that is, with the Nothing, ONE and the SAME thing; and is without
and beyond or distinct from all Nature, which Abyss, is God himself.

29. Seeing then the Abyss, viz: God, is an Eternal Speaking, viz: an
OUT-breathing of himself, therefore also is the Abyss in-spoken to the
resigned or forsaken Life: For the breathing of the Abyss speaks through the
still-standing Ground of the Life.

30. For, the Life is existed out of the divine breathing, and is a Equality.
Similitude of the Divine breathing; therefore one Similitude embraces or
receives the other; as we understand in the Senses or Thoughts, which also are
such an Exit out-going from the breathing of the Mind, as the Mind is an out
going and Object from the divine Mind of divine Property.

31. NOTE. NOTE.
Now as God, has manifested himself, with his OUT-breathing of his Eternal
Wisdom Skill and Knowledge, with Nature and Creature, as also with the Inward
holy Life, with the Life of the Angels and Man, and Introduced his willing of
his Skill or Knowledge in Imaging, to the RE- out-speaking, through an Imaged
clear Kind or Manner: as also with Nature and its RE- out breathing of
Creatures of the visible World, and has continually made the outward which is
out-spoken from Nature, subject, to the inward Ground, so that the inward,
might rule through the outward Corporeal, and be a spirit of the outward; so
you are to know that also the inturned New born or generated Life of Man in
divine Power and Might can and should rule over the outward Reason-Life of the
Stars and Elements.

32. And if that be not done, viz: that the inward Eternal Life in Man, in
divine Power and Light, rule over the outward Earthly astrall Life, of the
Mortal Lust: and that the Will break the Earthly Lust, wherein the Serpent
Monster stands; then there is yet no New Birth or divine Will in such Life in
the working or Manifest; and such a Man: So long as he stands in the Earthly
Will alone, is no Child of Heaven.

33. For the divine Science or Or Root.
Skill, is through the Self Imaging of the Self-willing turned into an Earthly
beastiall property, and is, as to the Body, an Evil Beast, and as to the Will
an apostate false Will, which wills not with God; just after the manner of
the Devil, which stands thus in own self Imaging of the Sensitive or
Cogitative Knowledge or Skill.

34. In which regard, Christ says, Math. 12.30. Whosoever gathers not with
me; (that is whosoever wills acts or works not, with the incorporated
Grace of God, which God through Christ has manifested or revealed, offered or
presented, Note, Note.
but works through natural own-self-willing) he scatters or destroys,
not only the divine Ordinance, but he stroweth or casts also his work into
false or Evil Ground.

35. Behold a Similitude; for instance the Sun: When an Herb has not Sap, the
Beams of the Sun, whence it grows; burn it; but if it have Sap, the Sun
warmeth it: So also in the Life of the Essence in Man, if the same has not ENS
from Gods Meekness and Love; viz from the Eternal ONE, then it impresseth or
compresseth it self into a fierce wrathful fiery sharpness, so that the Mind
is totally Rough, Hungry Covetous Envious and Stinging, and such a False or
Evil Sense or Thought and Will goes also afterward out of the Life into the
Body, and into all its Substance or Matters and Work.

36. Thus such Fiery Covetous Envious Kind or Manner with the sharp Sense or
Thought of the Life scatters or breaks all that is Good; as also there is
danger in all that it has to do with: For it brings its poisonous Beams
thereinto; and will draw all to it self, and bring its poison thereinto, viz:
the hungry Covetousness.

37. But if it be so, that the fiery Life may Eat of divine Love: Then it is a
Similitude, of the Light, which, as it presses and goes forth from the Fire:
so also, presses the right Life, forth from the fiery kind of matter, with a
New Spirit and Willing of divine Love, in it, and is no more receiving, as the
Fires kind is, but giving.

38. For, the Love willing gives it self forth, as the Light out of the Fire,
which gives it self into all things, and works GOOD, in ALL.

39. If the Sun did shine no more in the Deep of the World; then would the
Spirit of the World, Spiritus Mundi, in the Sharpness of the Constellations or
Astrum, in the Sulphurous Mercureall kind in the Four Elements, be totally
stern, rough, dry, harsh, thick, dark and hard, and then all and every Life in
the Elements, would go to the Ground, and Men would soon see what Hell and
Gods Anger are.

40. Thus also in like manner: as the outward Man, is a Limus of the Outward
Elementary World, whose Life stands in the Suns and Stars power and
virtue; and the Body, as also the Earth, is a Coagulation of the Spirit of the
World; and if that, in the Nutriment, in the food, might not have the Suns
Light-love-power, it would become totally Evil Fiery and Mortal; and the
outward Life must to the Ground: Thus also in like manner, is the Soul a Limus
of the Spiritual inward World ex Mysterio Magno, out of the Great Mystery:
viz: out of the Exit or Object of divine Skill and Knowledge; which must take
its Nutriment out of the Great Mystery ex Mysterio Magno of divine Power and
Knowledge.

41. Is it so now, that it cannot have the ENS of divine Love for its Food, so
that it breaks it self off, from the Abyss, viz: from the Resignation or
forsakennesse, then it becomes also thus Sharp Fiery Dark Rough Stinging
Envyous, Enemicitious Opposite and a total disquieting of it self; and
brings it self into a Mortal dying fierce wrathful Source Quality or
Torment, which is its Damnation; wherein it perishes or corrupts; as the
Devil did and all wicked Men do.

42. But if it be so, that this Fire-Source or Quality may again attain divine
Love, viz: the Substantial Light of God; and receive the same into it self,
then this Soulish Fire-Source becomes changed into a Kingdom of Joy, into the
Praise of God.

43. But without Converted willing, if that, cannot stand still from its stern
Impression and Inclusion, it is NOT possible.

44. For, the Light of the Sun, cannot, in a Hard stone, thus work, as in
Metals Herbs and Trees, for the Water is therein included and Coagulated into
a hard Impression: So also it is to be understood concerning the False or Evil
own willing of the Soul, and divine Meekness; that the divine Meekness in such
Covetous Envious Fire-desire, brings no working to pass.

45. Whence Christ rightly says, John 6. verse, 51, and 53. What Life of Man
soever would not Eat the Bread that is come down from Heaven, to give life to
the World, that has no Life in it: Whereby he denotes the Substantial Love,
which God in him (viz: in Christ) through a New Fountain has manifested or
revealed for a quickening to the poor withered dried Soul; That Soul now which
would not eat thereof, cannot attain or reach the divine Light, and would be
without divine Life: As he calls himself the Light of the World, John 8.
verse 12. Also in Psalm 97.11. and Psalm 112.4. and 2 Peter 1.19. A Light that
shines in the Darkness, which changes the Darkness into Light.

The Third Chapter. Of the Natural Ground. How Nature is an Object or
Representation of divine Skill and Knowledge: whereby the Eternal Will with
the Abyssall Supernatural Knowledge, makes it self perceptible visible,
operative and Willing. And what the Mysterium Magnum is. How, all is from by
and in God: How God is so near all things and Jer. 23.24.
fills all. A Highly precious Gate: For the Reader that loves God, to be
well Considered of.
1. JOhn the First Chapter it is thus. John 1.1.
In the beginning was the WORD, and the WORD was with GOD, and GOD was the
WORD, Verse 2.
The same was in the Beginning with God. Verse 3.
All things were made by it, and without it was Nothing Made that was made.

2. The beginning of all and every Substance or thing is the Word, viz: the
out-breathing or Expression of Gods Substance, and God was the Eternal ONE
from Eternity, and continues the same also in Eternity; but the Word is the
Efflux or Out-flowing, of the divine willing or of the divine Knowledge.

3. As the Senses or Thoughts flow forth out of the Mind and yet the total
Mind is but ONE only: So also was the Eternal ONE, together, in the
out-flowing of the willing, and that is signified by this saying. In the
Beginning was the WORD.

4. For, the WORD, viz: the Efflux or out-flowing from the willing of GOD, was
the Eternal Beginning, and Continues so Eternally: For it is the
Manifestation or Revelation of the Eternal ONE; wherewith and whereby, the
divine Power becomes brought, into a knowledge of somewhat.

5. And understand by the WORD, the Manifestation or Revelation of Gods
willing: And by the Word GOD; (we understand) the hidden GOD, viz: the Eternal
ONE, out of which, the WORD Eternally Springs forth; thus the Efflux or
out-flowing of the divine ONE, is the WORD; and yet is GOD himself, viz: his
Manifestation or Revelation.

6. This Efflux flows out from God and the Out-flown, is the WISDOM, the
Beginning and Cause of all Powers Colors Virtues and Properties.

7. Out of this Manifestation or Revelation of the power wherein the willing of
the Eternal ONE beholds it self; flows forth the UNDERSTANDING and the
Knowledge of the SELF-HOOD, where the Eternal Will beholds it self in SELF,
and in the Wisdom introduces it self into Lust or Longing delight to a
Similitude and express reflex Image.

8. And this Express reflex Image, is the Great Mystery Mysterium Magnum,
viz: the Creator of all Substances or Things and Creatures, for it is the
Separatour in the Efflux of the Will, which makes the Will of the Eternal ONE
separable or divisible or distinguishable; It is the Seperability in the Will,
out of which, Powers and Properties, arise Originally.

9. These Powers, are again, an Efflux of themselves, wherein, every Power
introduces it self, into own self-Will, according to the virtue of that same
Power: Whence the MULTIPLICITY of Wills arises originally, and out of which
also, the Creaturely Life of the Eternal, has taken its Original, viz:
Angels and Souls.

10. And yet a Man NOTE.
cannot say, that herein a Nature or Creature is to be understood, but the
Eternal Imagibility of the divine Word and Will, where the Spirit of God, has
in such an Object or representation in the powers of the Wisdom in such
formings of Similitudes, played or sported with it self.

11. Like as the Mind of Man in the understanding with the Senses or Thoughts
introduces it self into an Object or representation of an Express or reflex
Image, and with the same, flows forth, and includes or compriseth it, in
Images, NOTE.
Which Images are the Thoughts of the Mind, wherein the will of the Mind
works; and thus with the Lust includes it self in a sharpness, viz: in a
Magneticall reception, out of which, Joy, and Sorrow, arises originally: Thus
also we are to apprehend concerning the Eternal Mind, of the perceptibility:
that the Exit or Out-going of the ONE only Will of God has introduced it self
through the WORD into Divisibility or Seperability, and the Seperability has
introduced it self into receptibility, viz: into own self Lust and desire, to
its Manifestation or Revelation of it self, out of the Unity into Multiplicity.

12. The DESIRE is the Ground and beginning of the Nature, of the Inventibility
or Perceptibility of the own self will, for therein is the Seperability of the
Unity brought into Receptibility, out of which the seperabilities of the Will
are brought into perceptibility of a self-hood, wherein the true Creaturely,
Perceptible, Angelical and Soulish Life, is understood.

13. For, the WILL of the Eternal ONE is unperceptible, without inclination to
any thing; for, it has nothing to which it can incline it self, but only in it
self; therefore thus it brings it self forth out of it self, and brings the
Efflux of its Unity into Multiplicity, and into Reception to SELF-HOOD, viz: to
a Place of a Nature out of which Properties arise originally.

14. For, every Property has its own Seperatour Divider and Maker in it self,
and is in it self, total or entire, according to the Property of the Eternal
UNITY.

15. Thus the Seperatour of every willing, brings again Properties out of it
self, whence the Infinite MULTIPLICITY existeth, and thereby the Eternal ONE
makes it self perceptible, not according to the Unity, but according to the
Efflux of the Unity.

16. Only the Efflux brings it self so far as even into the greatest
sharpness, with the Magneticall Receptibility even into Or firing.
the fiery, kind, in which (fiery kind), the Eternal ONE becomes Majestic
and a Light.

17. Thus the Eternal Power thereby becomes desirous and working, and is the
Original of the perceptible Life, where, in the Word of Power in the Efflux an
Eternal perceptible Life originally arises.

18. For, if the Life had no perceptibility, then it would have neither willing
nor working, but the pain makes it working, and willing, and the Light of such
kindling through the Fire, makes it a Kingd^^e of JOY: For it is a Salving
Unction or anointing, of the painfulnesse.

19. Out of this Eternal working of the Perceptibility and Cogitability or
Sensibility, where that very working has NOTE.
ever from Eternity, thus introduced it self into Nature, viz: into Properties,
is, the visible World with all its Host, sprung forth, and brought into a
Creature.

20. For, the Eternity of such working, to Fire, Light, and Darkness, has,
with the visible World, brought it self, into an Object or representation, and
appointed and ordained the Seperatour in all Powers of the out-flown Substance,
through the Desirability, for an Officer of Nature, with which the Eternal
Will rules makes forms and Imageth, all things.

21. Thus, we can by no means say, that Gods Substance is Somewhat afar off,
that possesses or has a several Space or Place, for the Abyss of Nature and
Creature, IS, God himself.

22. The visible World, with its Hoasts and Creatures is nothing Else, but the
OUT-FLOWN Word, which has introduced it self into Properties, where, in the
Properties, an own self-will, is existed.

23. And with the Receptibility of the willing, is the Creaturely Life existed,
which (Life) has in the beginning of this World, introduced it self into a
Receptibility to a Creaturely Ground: Which the Seperatour has divided,
according to the Property; and brought it into an own self-willing, according
to such Form.

24. So, also is, with the own self-willing of such desire, the Substance, viz:
the BODY; existed, of every Receptibility, out of its Similitude and Property,
whereby the Seperatour has marked signed, stamped or imprinted it self, and
made it self visible, as is to be apprehended, in all and every Life.

Of the Twofold Life in the Object or Representation of the divine willing.
25. In this Object of the divine willing we are to understand a Twofold Life:
viz: First an Eternal, and Secondly a Temporal Mortal.

Of the Eternal Life.
26. The Eternal, is in the Eternal, and arises Originally out of the
Eternal WORD, and stands in the Ground of the Eternal Spiritual World,
viz: in Mysterio Magno, in the Great Mystery of the divine Object or
Representation, and is the sensible cogitative understanding Life in the ground
of the Eternal Fire and Light.

27. The most inward Ground, is a Spark of the out-flown Will of God; through
the Eternal breathing of God, and is bound and tied to or with Gods Word, to
will nothing else, but only what the Eternal Will of God, wills through such
Efflux or Out-flowing.

28. It is nothing Else but a dwelling house of the divine Willing, whereby the
divine Will manifests or reveals it self, and is to no own self-hood of own
self willing, become manifested, but only to the Instrument of divine Willing,
whereby the same Will does effect or perform its Works of Wonder.

29. It is the Seperatour of the divine Willing, as an Instrument of God,
wherein the divine Will has Imaged it self to a Wonder-Worker of the
Omnipotency and Glory: Wherewith he will rule all things: In which regard,
also, the divine Understanding has been given to it.

Of the Temporal Mortal Life.
30. The other Life is an inceptive beginning Efflux of the Seperatour of all
Powers, and is called the Soul of the outward World, which Life in the
Out-flown Properties is become Creaturely, and is a Life of all Creatures of
the visible World, wherewith the Seperatour or Creator of this visible World,
Imageth it self, and makes a Similitude according to the Spiritual World,
wherein the Power of the Inward Spiritual World, together, Forms Imageth and
Beholds or Sees it self.

31. For, the Spiritual World of Fire Light and Darkness, stands, hidden in
the visible Elementary (World), and works through the visible World, and
Imageth it self through the Seperatour, with its Efflux in all things,
according to Every Things kind and property; as every thing is in property,
such a Property it receives also, from the Seperatour of the Inward Spiritual
Power.

32. The visible Substance receives not the Invisible to a Habituality.
possession and own self Might, so that the outward, might thereby be changed
into the inward: No that is not so; the inward Power only Imageth it self
therewith, as we understand in the Powers of Herbs Trees and Metals; that
their outward Spirit is only an Instrument of the inward Spirit, viz: of the
inward Power, whereby the inward Power Imageth it self in the outward Spirit.

Of the Threefold Spirit in the Powers of the Growing or Vegetable Things.
33. As then in such powers of Vegetables we understand Three sorts of Spirits,
in several distinct Centers, and yet only in One Body.

I. of the Outward Spirit.
34. The First and Outward Spirit, is the gross drossy Brimstone Salt and
MERCURIUS, which is a Substance of the four Elements, or of the Astrum or Or
Configurations of the Heavens.
Constellations, according to the property of the roughness of the Stars.

35. This makes the Body, and Impresseth or Compriseth it self into a
Substance, or draws the inward out of the Spiritual Seperatour to it self,
as also outwardly the Elements, and Coagulateth it self therewith, whence
instantly, the Marking (the Signature Seal or Impression) is performed.

36. That Imageth the visible Body, according to the Property of the Greatest
Power of the Spirit of the World Spiritus Mundi, viz: of the Constellation or
Configuration of the Stars, or Property of Planets, and now present kindled
Elements.

II. Of the Second Spirit or Quintessence Fifth Essence.
37. The Second Spirit, which has a Center of its own, that lies or
consists in the OIL of the Brimstone, which Men call the fifth Essence,
(Quintam Essentiam) viz: a Root of the four Elements.

38. This is the Meekening or Softening and Joy of the Gross painful
Brimstone- and Salt-Spirit; and takes its Nutriment; I. First, From within,
out of the Light of Nature, viz: from the Efflux of the Spiritual Meekness,
from the inward Spiritual Fire and Light: And II. Secondly; From without
(outwardly), it takes its Nutriment from the Stars, and from the subtle
Power of the Spirit of the World, Spiritus Mundi, and is the right cause of the
growing or vegetable Life, a Joy of Nature, as the Sun is in the Elements.

III. Of the Third Spirit; viz: the Tincture.
39. The Third Spirit is the TINCTURE, viz: an Object of the divine Great
Mystery Mysterii Magni, wherein all Powers lie in the Similitude or Equality,
and it is rightly called PARADISE or divine Longing or Lust.

40. That is a dwelling house of divine Power, a dwelling house of the Eternal
Soul, out of which all outward Power springs forth; after that Manner as the
Air out of the Fire.

41. For the Tincture is nothing Else, but a Spiritual Fire and Light; wherein
Fire and Light is ONE only Substance.

42. But seeing also, it has its Seperatour; viz: the out-flown divine Willing
to Manifestation or Revelation, in it self; so it is the highest Ground, out of
which the first Seperability or Divisibility of the Properties in the Substance
of this World; arises originally and belongs, according to its own self
Property, to the Eternity.

43. For, its Original is the Holy Power of God: and has an own self Center,
viz: the Most Inward Ground of the Creature; which indeed is hidden to the
Mortal Creature; in respect that Man, drives on a False Evil or Wicked Will,
against it: whence the Curse of the Earth in the fall of Man, existed.

44. Yet this high holy Ground in its own Center, presses together forth, and
flows out in the outward Power, as the Sun in the Elements.

45. But the Creature cannot touch the Center of this Power, unless it be done
by divine permission, Or viz: it is done.
as, in the New birth or Regeneration.

46. This Manifestation or Revelation a Man sees in all Living or Animal and
Vegetable things; all things stand in these Three Principles or Beginnings.

47. We see an Example in an Herb of the Earth, which has its nutriment from
within and from without, or inwardly and outwardly; viz: from the Earth, and
outwardly from the Sun and Stars, whereby the Spiritus of the Earth, together
with the outward, co-imageth.

48. When that sprouteth forth; that is done in such a Power, and then the
outward Separatour Marketh or Printeth it self from without, in the Herb, with
the Imaging and Form of the same, in the Brimstone Salt and Mercurius, for it
is the Herbs moving and perception, and makes it self corporeal.

49. When I see an Herb standing, then I may say with Truth, this is an Image
of the Spirit of the Earth; in which the upper Powers rejoice, and also hold it
for their Child; seeing the Spirit of the Earth is ONE SUBSTANCE with the upper
outward Powers.

50. And when the Herb is sprouted up, then it blossometh, then it marketh it
self with the blossom of the Oily Spirit with fair Colors, and with the
lovely smell of the blossom the Tincture Marketh or Imprinteth it self, viz:
the Third Ground.

51. Where then a Man understands, that the inward hidden Spirit of the
Element has opened it self, and brings it self therewith together into the
Imaging of the Fruit; for, the Earth has no such Smell nor Color, nor such
virtue, if the hidden power of divine Effluences did not manifest it self.

52. Thus also is to be seen in the Metals, which outwardly area Gross Body of
Brimstone Mercury and Salt, wherein the vegetation stands or consists, and
in their inward ground they are a clear bright Body wherein the incorporated
Light of Nature of the divine Efflux shines: In which Glance or Luster, a Man
understands the Tincture and great Power, how the hidden Power makes it self
visible.

53. Man cannot say of this Power, that it is Elementary, as also the Blossom
is not, the Elements are only a dwelling house and Object or Representation of
the Inward Power, a Cause of the Motion of the Tincture.

54. For, from the Tincture, goes the Power forth through the Motion of the
Gross Elementary Spirit, and brings it self thereby into a perceptibility,
viz: into Taste and Smell: For the Smell is nothing else; but the perceptibility
of the Tincture, through which the Efflux of divine Power Manifests or
Reveals it self: and thus receives perceptibility.

55. The Sharpness of the Smell is indeed Elementary, but the true power and
virtue IN the sharpness of the Smell is the Tincture, for the Motion of a thing
is not the highest ground of the Power, but that out of which the cause of the
Motion comes.

56. The Medicus, (Physician), uses a strong or well Smelling Herb for his
Medicaments or Medicines; but the Smell, viz: the Sharpness of the Smell, is
not the Cure, which Cures the Patient in his Sickness, but that is the Cure,
from whence such Balsam or Smell arises originally, viz: the Tincture, which
Imprinteth or Imageth it self in such Balsam.

57. Christ says: to the FIG TREE be thou withered: (Math. 21. verse 19.) But
the outward sounding humane word, viz: the Noise or Voice, was not the Power,
that it took effect; but that was the Power, out of which the Word Came: Else
if the outward humane Noise or Voice did it, then could other Men also do it.

58. So the like also is to be understood concerning Faith: the Confession and
Consent or Agreement concerning a Thing is not the right true Faith, much less
the Science or Knowledge; but that is the true Faith out of which the
Confession proceeds, viz: the opened Spirit of God, in the inward ground of
the Soul, which with the Confession imageth it self in the pronounced Word, and
makes it self visible in the outward, and works with the visible Elements of
the Body, and demonstrateth it self outwardly, so that a Man understands,
that Gods Spirit, in the Works of Faith, co-worketh.

59. Even as, it works with and through, the power of the Elementary World,
and makes it self visible through the Substance of this World with an Object
or Representation: so that all whatsoever I look upon, be it Evil or Good; yet
I can with truth say; here, by, or as to, this thing, the hidden Spirit of the
Seperatour of all Things or Substances, Imaged it self in a property, and has
here made to it self, an Object or Image according to its Efflux, either
according to Evil or God; all according to the properties of Nature, according
to Heat or Cold, according to harsh bitter sweet or sour, or howsoever it be.

60. Thus in all such Imaging, only outwardly, there is such an Elementary kind
or manner of thing, viz: such a Brimstone and Salt: But in the inward ground in
the Tincture it is Good and Profitable, and belongs to its Similitude for
Nutriment of the Life; which as to the Astrall and Elementary kind, stands in
all Properties according to its outward Ground.

61. Every thing, whether it be Herb Grass Tree Beast Fowl Fish Worm or
whatsoever it is, is profitable, and is gone forth out of the Seperatour of all
Substances or things, viz: out of the Word or divisible willing of God,
wherewith the Seperatour of Every Things property has made to it self a
Similitude or Image wherein it works.

62. For, this visible World, with all its Host and Substance, is nothing
Else, but only an Object or Representation of the Spiritual World, which is
hidden in this Material Elementary, as the Tincture in Herbs and Metals.

63. And as the Tincture with its virtue, co-imageth it self in all things with
its efflux, and makes it self visible; that Man in the Figure as also in the
Colors and Smell may see and know, what kind of Seperatour or Efflux of divine
willing in the Tincture, is flown forth ex Mysterio Magno, out of the Great
Mystery: Thus also a Man may know and apprehend, in and by the visible World,
the Sun Stars Elements Living Creatures, and all Created things, the inward
Ground, out of which it is sprung forth.

64. No thing or substance of a thing, is come from far to the place where it
is, but in or at that place where it grows, is its Ground.

65. The Elements have their cause in themselves, whence they Spring forth, so
also the Stars have their Chaos in themselves wherein they stand.

66. The Elements are nothing else, but an Image-like movable Substance of the
invisible unmovable: Thus also the Stars are an Efflux of the Properties of
the spiritual World according to the divisibility of the Seperatour: Whose
Ground is the WORD or the divisible Will of God.

67. The Substance and moving of the Elements, is Fire Air Water and Earth:
Wherein is thick and thin, or dense and rare, moist and dry, hard and soft or
pliable, these are set or put together in One Substance.

68. Not that every one is from a several original and proceeding or descent,
but they all come solely out of One only Ground; and that place whence they are
proceeded is over all or every where.

69. Only you are to think or consider, how in one place, there is somewhat
more kindling according to one property, effected, then in another; whence, the
Motion is become greater, and the matter is become more in such form and
substance, then in an other: As in the Matter of the Earth, as also in the
Water and Air is to be understood, how there is a difference in Each Pole or
Zenith, viz: in every place upon or above the Earth: Whence also are the
differences, of Position Seat or Posture and Virtues, as also of Governments
Dominions, Orders and Creatures.

70. But the distinguishing or differences of such Properties are all existed
out of the Great Mystery, ex Mysterio Magno: Through the once motion of the
power of all things or Substances, viz: when the Eternal Will of all
Substances had once moved, and brought forth it self out of the
imperceptibility into perceptibility and seperability or distinguibility of
variety of powers, and made the Eternal power working and willing: So that in
every Power there is an Object, viz: an own self desire, Existed.

71. That very own self desire in the Object of the Powers, has again brought
forth it self, into an Object, whence the desire of such Efflux, is become
sharp strong or stern and Gross and has coagulated and brought it self into
Matter.

72. And now as the Efflux of the inward Power out of Light and Darkness, out
of Sharp and Mild, out of the Fiery or Lights kind, has been; such also are
the Matters come to be: The further the Efflux of a power has stretched it
self, the more outward and gross is the Matter become, for there is ever one
Object or Representation gone out of the other even unto the Gross drossy
Earth.

73. But we must rightly deduce and explain the Ground of this Philosophy:
Whence hard and soft or pliant, have taken their Ground: Which we apprehend in
Metals; for every Matter which is hard, (as Metals and Stones, are, as also
Wood, Herbs, and such like;) has in it self a very Noble Tincture, and high
Spirit of Power.

74. As also is to be known or apprehended by the Bones of Creatures, how the
Noblest Tincture, according to the Power of the Light, viz: the Greatest
Sweetness; lies in the Marrow of the Bones, and on the other side in the Blood
only lies a fiery Tincture; viz: in the Brimstone Salt and Mercury.

This is to be understood thus.
75. God is the Eternal ONE, viz: the Greatest Meekness, so far as he is in
himself: Without or beyond or distinct from his Moving and Manifestation or
Revelation.

76. But his motion in that he is called a God in Trinity: viz: a Tri-une
Substance: Where a Man speaks of THREE and yet but of ONE: And where yet he
is called the Eternal Power and WORD; this is the Precious and highest Ground,
and thus to be considered and understood.

77. As the divine will, includes it self in a place to Self-hood, viz: to
Power, and works in it self, and yet through its working goes forth, and
Makes to it self an Object, viz: the WISDOM, through which, the Ground and
proceeding or descent of all things or Substances, is Sprung forth.

So also in like manner know this.
78. All whatsoever in the Substance of this World, is soft meek and thin,
that, is flowing forth, and giving forth it self, and the Ground and original
thereof, is according to the Unity of the Eternity, where the Unity perpetually
flows forth from it self; as a Man understands that in the Substance of
rarity or transparency, viz: in the Water and the Air there is no
perceptibility or pain: So far as that Substance is only and alone in it self.

79. But whatsoever is hard and impressing, as Bone Wood Herbs Metals Fire
Earth Stone and the like Matters, therein lies the Image of divine Power and
Motion, and it shuts it self up, with its Seperatour ( viz: the Effluence of
divine desire) as a Noble Jewel or Sparkle of divine Power, Or before or in
respect of, or from.
as to the Grossness or drossiness.

80. And it is therefore hard and fiery, in that it has its ground from the
divine Inclusion, viz: where the Eternal ONE introduces it self, into a
Ground of the Trinity, to the motion of the Power; and yet shuts it self up
before or from or as to the Efflux, viz: before or from or as to the
Introduction of the own self willing of Nature: And with the power of the
Unity, works, through Nature.

81. Thus also it is to be understood concerning the Noble TINCTURE; where it
is most of all shut up with the hardness; for the Unity lies in the Tincture.
therein, in a Mobility, viz: in a perceptibility of working: and therefore it
hides it self, but in the thin rarity or transparency, it lies not in such
perceptibility, but is alike equal indifferent or pliable, to all things.

82. As the Water and Air is like or pliable to all things, and is in all
Things: but the dry Water is the true Pearly Ground, wherein the Subtle virtue
or power of the working of the Unity, lies in the Center.

83. To OURS, who are worthy of this, hereby is signified, that they should,
not trouble themselves for the soft without the fiery kind, to seek the secret
hidden Arcanum therein.

Understand this hidden Secret Arcanum thus.
48. That soft and thin or dense and rare of the Unity, from whose Effluence it
arises originally out of the Great Mystery ex Mysterio Magno, and is nearest
or next to the Unity; and on the other side, that Noblest Ground of divine
Manifestation or Revelation in power and working, lies in the fiery hardness,
and is a dry Unity; viz: a Temperament, wherein again the divisibility of all
power lies.

85. For where the Power lies not in the Unity of one only willing; there the
Will is rent in sunder, and there is no great Power to be understood in that
Thing: Which ought well to be observed by the Medici, Phisicians, that they
should not look upon the Gross Drossie Spirits strength of Smell, and account
that for the right Balsam: Though indeed it is therein; yet the Tincture is
also therein very movable and flying forth, or fleeting, volatile.

86. The Spirit, of the strong Power in the Smell, must be brought into the
Temperament, viz: into the Unity, and not flee therefrom: Whereby a Man will
then, Cure, with the Salt, viz: the Fires sharpness, and gives the Patient,
Soul, without Spirit.

87. The Soul of such Balsam is divided asunder in the Properties, every one
gives it self, in its great Joy, in several, but yet in the dividing asunder
are of a Contrary or Opposite Will; they unite not the Life's Enmity, and
rending asunder; but they kindle the Life's rending asunder more.

88. Shut them or close them up, and make them One, or at Unity, that they may
all have one Will in the Love, and so ye have the Pearl of the whole World: To
provoke or stir up Wrath, makes Pride and Strife, which is to be apprehended
or known, in all things.

89. A Man Comfort a Captive Prisoner with his Releasment or Redemption,
till he sets or puts his Will into Hope, and so lays hold of himself,
with Patience, and so in the End his disquietness falls in Hope, into the
Temperament; and learneth in such Hope to be humble and lowly; and then if a
Man tells him of his Release or Redemption, then he rejoices himself.

90. Thus also the Phisicians, Medici, observe it, that is your Pearl, if you
can understand this, the sense is Internal and External.

The Fourth Chapter, Of the IN and OUT: How the Eternal Will of God, brings
it self OUT and in the perceptibility IN, and Again into the ONE. Whereby a Man
may understand, to what End, the Substance of this World, is Created, and to
what the Creaturely ground is profitable; also to what End, Joy and Sorrow,
has become manifested, and how God is so near unto all Things.
1. JOhn the First Chapter, verse 11, 12, 13. It is written. Verse 11.
HE (JESUS CHRIST) came Or unto.
into his own, and his own received him not: Verse 12.
But so many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Children of
God, which believe in his Name; Verse 13.
which are generated or born not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh; nor of
the Will of a Man, but of God, etc.

2. In these words lies the dear and precious Ground, of divine Manifestation
or Revelation: viz: the Eternal IN and OUT; for they speak of this, viz: how
the hidden divine Eternal Word, of divine Power of the UNITY, is proceeded
OUT, in the OUT-flown, Natural Creaturely Image-like WORD, viz: in the
HUMANITY, is come into his own; for the OUT-flown, Image-like Creaturely WORD,
is the Eternal Speaking-Words proper own.

3. And it is thereby clearly signified, that, his own, (viz: Apostate Averted
Image-like own self-will) has not received The Word.
HIM: Which own self Image-like Will was Existed out of an own self Ground,
viz: out of Flesh and Blood of own self Nature of Man and Wife; That is; in the
Seperatour of the OUT-flown Willing, where the Will has shut it self up into
own self-hood and would go OUT in own self Might and Power, and Rule: This
same, has not received the Eternal Word, which as an Efflux or OUT-flowing of
divine Grace, came again proceeding OUT, to the averted willing; for it would
be, and own self, Lord.

4. But what Will soever has Converted or turned it self about, so that it be
again in the divine Efflux or QUT-flowing, become generated a new: To that he
has given Might or Power to become Gods Child.

5. For, the Natural own self-will, cannot inherit the Filiation, but that
only which with the Unity Co-in-generateth, that is like, or equal, to all
things, in which, GOD himself, works and wills.

6. Wherein we clearly understand, how the INward Ground has turned it self
OUT, and made it self visible, and is an own self propriety of GOD, viz: an
OUT-flowing or Efflux of divine Power and Willing.

Thus far the Author wrote and no further.

A Brief Contents of this Book.
The First Chapter.
Of the Divine Vision or Aspect; what God is; and how a Man may know his
Substance in his Manifestation or Revelation. Reasons Argument. HOw, it seems
as if there were no God? Verse 1, and 2. Answer. What Reason is: Of its ability
and understanding, and how it seeks its Rest. From verse the 3. to the 12.
Argument. How God ought not to permit the striving Will; that the Good or
Temperature might be, in all things? Verse 13. Answer. How, without Strife
nothing can become Manifested or Revealed; and how the strife about the Forms
is concerning the Image? From verse 14. to the 21. Argument. Wherefore, the
Evil must be with the Good? Verse 22. Answer. How, the Evil procures or
causes the Good. God wills nothing, but what is gone out from him. Out of
what Faith and Hope exist. Where, Evil and Good, Love and Sorrow, begin. Of
the Ground, of the Angels, Souls, and visible World. How, all Creatures Groan
or long, to be freed from this vanity. The Wisdom becomes manifested through
Folly. From verse 23, to the 70.

The Second Chapter.
Of the Mind, of the Will, and of the Thoughts of the humane Life; how it has
its Original from the Will of God: And how it is an Object or reflex Image of
God, in which God wills works and dwells. Argument. HOw the Mind with the
Senses or Thoughts, (being an inceptive Natural Life, stand in a Time or
Fragility Corruptibility or Transitorinesse:) may in this Time be brought to
the Super sensual Super-cogitative Life? Or how is the divine inhabiting in
the Life? Verse 1. Answer. From whence the Life is come into a Created Image!
From whence the Life is become venomed or poisoned. How the Captivated Life is
helped again. How the Captive Will of the Life, can come into the rest. Verse
2. to the 18. Argument. Reason cannot apprehend, why Men cannot prevent it, but
that, the Life, the Desire, must Enter into the Earthly Properties. Verse 19.
Answer. How the Humane Life, in the beginning, was a Rest. How the same without
Christ can do nothing. How God, in the Will of the Life, Speaks or Works.
The Senses or Thoughts, are an Image of the Mind; and the Mind an Image of Gods
Mind. How Men may know, whether a Man be the Child of Heaven or no. Who it is,
that gathers not with Christ, but scatters. The kind or manner of the right
Life, or of the dear or beloved Will of the Life. From verse 20 to the 45.

The Third Chapter.
Of the Ground of Nature, how All is from through and in God: How God is near
all things and fills all. WHat has been the beginning of all Substances. A
resembling the Mind with the Eternal One. What is understood by the Words,
Word, and God. How, by the Mind of Man, the Eternal Mind is to be understood.
How the Life becomes willing and working. Out of what, the World and all its
hosts is sprung forth. The Abyss of Nature and Creature is God, and, near.
From verse 1. to the 24. Of the twofold Life in the reflex Image of the divine
willing. verse 25. Of Three sorts of Spirits in the powers of vegetable things.
Verse 33. 1. The outward Spirit, the Gross Brimstone Salt and Mercury. Verse
34. 2. The Fifth Essence; that lies in the Oil of the Brimstone. Verse 37. 3.
The Tincture: a reflex Image of the divine Mysterium Magnum Great Mystery.
Here begins a clear description of the Tincture, to the ^^nd of the Chapter for
the Learned Medici the Physicians. 39.

The Fourth Chapter,
Of the IN and OUT: How the Eternal Will of God brings it self OUT, and into
the perceptibility IN, and again into the ONE. This Chapter goes only to the
6. verse.

An Explanation or Exposition of The TABLE of the Three Principles of the
Divine Revelation.

Showing How God, is to be Considered how he is without Nature, in himself, and
then in Nature, according to the Three Principles.

Also, What Heaven and Hell, the World, Time, and Eternity are, together with
all Creatures? Out of what all is Existed. What the Visible and the Invisible
are.

By Jacob Behme Teutonicus Philosophus. Written in February, 1624. Englished by
JOHN SPARROW.

London, Printed by M. S. for Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at the Castle
in Cornhill. 1661.

An Explanation of the Scheme or Figure and of the Three Tables of the Divine
Revelation.
1. IN these Three Tables is explained and demonstrated: How the hidden God
has revealed or Manifested himself forth out of himself, by or through his
out-breathing or out speaking of his Power.

2. What Heaven, Hell, the World, Angels, Devils, and all Creatures, together
with all and every Substance and moving thing, is.

3. Fron whence Evil and Good, Light and Darkness, Life and Death, Friend and
Foe, hard and soft, originally Exist: And how the Change and alteration of all
and every Thing or Substance is effected, how the Good changes it self into an
Evil, and the Evil into a Good.

4. Also therein is set forth or represented, how all things, in the Ground out
of which they are originally Sprung forth, are good and profitable; and how all
Mobilities stand in, an inevitability.

5. And herewith especially are the Three Principles of the divine Revelation
or Manifestation demonstrated, and how they originally exist out of ONE Only
Ground, both as to Time and Eternity.

The First Principle.
6. That is to say, The First Principle, together with the Eternal Darkness;
viz: a receptibility of Properties, whence perceptibility, moving, and living,
originally Exist; which with its Ground reaches even to the Fire.

The Second Principle.
7. The Second Principle in the Light, together with the Angelical World or
Power-World; wherein the Efflux of the divine Power and Willing, Manifests or
Reveals it self, by the Magic Fire in the Light with the Fire-flaming Love;
by this, a Man understands the Kingdom of God.

The Third Principle.
8. The Third Principle, is the visible Elementary World, with its hoasts:
Which is an Efflux, out of the First and Second Principle; through the Moving
and out-breathing or out-speaking of the divine Power and Willing; wherein the
Spiritual World, according to Light and Darkness, is represented pourtrayed
or Imaged from; and come into a Creaturall Kind or Manner.

9. In the Scheme or Figure is demonstrated, what God is considered as distinct
from or without Nature and Creature, in himself.

The First Table.
10. In the first Table is demonstrated, the out-breathing or out-speaking of
the Divine Word through the Wisdom; How the breathing of divine Power makes
to it self an Object Representation or reflex Image; and how the Out-flown
Will, introduces it self into receptibility and especially into seven
Properties, to the Eternal Nature of Perceptibility and Operability; in which
Operability, the Eternal Will of God, is apprehended to be Natural, and a
Creator of the Substance; wherein especially the Angelical and Soulish Ground,
together with the Eternal Spiritual Fire and Light, is understood.

The Second Table.
11. In the Second Table, is understood, t visible World, viz: an Efflux of
that same inword Spiritual Power-world: Showing, how the Properties of the
Inward Ground have severed themselves, and introduced themselves again into an
Object Representation or reflex Image, out of which, the Stars, Elements, and
Creatures, have taken and gotten their original.

The Third Table.
12. In the Third Table, is Man understood, according to all the Three
Principles, as a reflex Image of God out of Eternity and Time, as to what he is
I. in Soul: in Spirit: And III. in Body: Also what he was in Paradise in the
first Creation; and what he is become through the Fall and Apostasy, through
the Spirit of Error: What the Poison of the Serpent in him, is; and how Christ
is come, to help and New generate him again: and what he is, in Christ, in the
New Regeneration.

The Explanation of the Scheme. ADONAI.
13. The Word Adonai, signifies the Opening, or self-motion of the Abyssall
Eternal Unity; and how the Eternal Generation, opening, and Exit, of the
Trinity of God, is, in it self.

14. The A: is a Threefold I which compriseth or forms it self* the letter
"A" as described in the accompanying text
Crosswise in it self; viz:* in a Beginning, IN-going, and OUT-going.

15. The D: is the the letter "D" drawn in two different ways as described in
the accompanying text
Motion of the Threefold I. viz: the Opening.

The O: is the the letter "O" drawn in two different ways as described in the
accompanying text
Circumference of the Threefold I. viz:* the Birth or Geniture of the Space or
Place of God in it self.

17. The N: is the the letter "N" as described in the accompanying text
Threefold Spirit, which goes forth out of the Circumference out of it self,
as a Threefold I.

18. This lower A, is the* the letter "A" as described in the accompanying text
Object Representation or reflex Image or the * working of the Threefold I. or
Spirit, whence originally, Motion, Power, Colors, and Virtue, Eternally Exist.

19. I, is the Substantial the letter "I" as described in the accompanying text
Efflux of the Threefold I, where the Trinity in the Unity flows forth: And
in this whole word ADONAI, Men understand, the Eternal Life of the Unity of
God.

The Explanation of the Word
Father.

20. The Word, Father; is the Eternal Beginning of the Working and willing, in
the Threefold I, of the Unity.

Son.

21. The Word Son, is that which is Effected or Wrought by the Power, viz:
the Inclusibility of the willing, whereinto the Threefold Spirit closes it
self; viz: a place of the divine Or Somewhat nesse.
I-hood or Selfnesse.

Spirit.

22. The word Spirit, is, the living out-going motion in the Comprised or
closed Power; as by Similitude a Man may understand in a Blossom or Flower: The
Opening or Working of the Sprout or Vegetation is the beginning: The power of
the working, is the Surrounding or Corporeal Inclusion of (...) Sprout or
Vegetation: And the Smell, which goes forth out of the Power, is the Motion or
the Sprouting out-going Joy-Life of the Power, out of which the Blossom
springs forth: Wherein a Man sees a Similitude, showing, how the Generation
of the divine Power; pourtrayeth it self off, or Imageth it self.

Power.

23. The word Power; signifies the out-breathing or out-speaking, out going,
intelligible perceptible Life; viz: the Ground and Source of the out-flowing
Skill or Knowledge of the distinguibility.

Colors.

24. The word Colors, signifies, the Subject, or Object Representation or
reflex Image of the Power; where the Distinguibility and Original of the
Sensible Life and Knowledge is understood, where an Eternal visibility
Originateth.

Will.

25. The Word Will, signifies, the Willing or the moving in the Opening Unity,
wherewith, the Unity wills it self into Trinity; viz: the Nothing, into its
own Or Heart.
Something, wherein the same has its working and willing,

Text. Lust.
Delight.

26. The word, Longing, Delight, signifies, the operative perceptibility of
the willing; viz: the Highest Ground of the Original Love, where the Will of
the Abyss perceives it self, in its Something, where it gives it self into
its something, viz: into its perception; and in the perceptibility, in its own
taste or relish works and wills.

Science.

27. The word Science, signifies, the operative perceptible Skill Knowledge
and Understanding, in the Love-Tast or Relish; a Root of the Five Senses, and
a Ground of the Eternal Life; out of which the Understanding Springs forth;
and the Eternal Unity Foundeth Searches or Groundeth it self therein.

Word.

28. The word, Word, signifies, how the Eternal Love of the perceptible
Unity, together with the Skill or Knowledge, Eternally speaks forth it self
into an Object Representation or reflex Image; the Word is the speaking or
breathing of the Willing out of the Power through the Understanding; it is the
Driving of Imaging of the ONE only Power into INFINITY of Multiplicity; viz:
the Creator of the Powers, out of the Eternal Power, into Virtues.

Wisdom.

29. The Word, Wisdom, is the Out flown word, viz: an Object Representation or
reflex Image of the divine Skill or Knowledge, of the divine willing; viz: the
Substantial Power of the Great Love of God, out of which all things have
received or conceived their Motion and possibility; a Ground of all the Three
Principles; Note, note ye wise men.
a Manifestation or Revelation of the Unity of God; a passive or passible
Substance of divine Operation; and Ground of all Humility, a Genetrite of all
Skill or Knowledge of the Creatures, and an Eternal House or Habitation of the
working Love of God; a Ray or Beam and Breath, of the Omnipotent Spirit.

Jehova.

30. The word Jehova, is the Most Holy Name of God, viz: the divine sensual
Life, the one only Good, wherein the Holy Trinity, together with the Glory and
Omnipotence, is understood; a Life of the Abyss, that is, of the Unity, which,
stands especially in the Eternal One only Love; and the Most Holy Name JESUS
is therein, understood, viz: the out-flowing I. a Ground and Source of the
speaking or breathing of the Unity of God, a formation of the Understanding:
For the Efflux of the Unity, brings it self with the I. into the the letter "E"
drawn as described in text
E. that is, into a vision or seeing of a Chaos, wherein the Great Mystery,
Mysterium Magnum, according to the divine manner and kind, is understood; and
it is a Threefold Speaking or Breathing of the Power.

IE. HO. VA.

31. The IE. is the Speaking or Breathing of the Unity. And the HO, is a
speaking or breathing of the IE. And the VA. is a speaking or breathing of the
HO; and yet it is but one only speaking or breathing: but it makes a Threefold
Exit, of Three Centers or Comprehensions: And we understand therein, how the
Threefold I. in the End closes it self in the A. viz: in a beginning to Nature.

Life.

32. Under that stands Life, which signifies, that this Threefold I.
breathing or Speaking, is a mere Life and Power.

Virtue.

33. And under that stands Virtue; and it signifies the unmeasurable Virtue
of this breathing or Speaking Life.

The Scheme or Figure.

34. In this Table or Scheme, is now rightly understood, what God is considered
as without or beyond Nature and Creature in Trinity, viz: in a Threefold
out-breathing or out-speaking of the Unity in it self: Concerning which a Man
cannot speak of any space or place of his Habitation, also of no Measurability
Circumscriptibility, or Partibility; for God is neither there nor yonder, but
equally alike every where at once, as a Man is to Consider and Conceive of the
Abyss, viz: of the Eternal Unity without and beyond Nature and Creature; but
thus HE is a working Power and Substance of the Unity.

35. But that really such Power and Virtue is understood therein, that a Man
may apprehend, in his Efflux of the World and Creatures, and whatsoever is
generated out of his Breathing or Speaking: And there is nothing in this Worlds
Substance, which does not give Testimony thereof, if Men would heed and observe
it.

The Explanation of the First Table. TETRAGRAMMATON. (...).

36. IN this Table is also represented, how the Holy Name of the Eternal
Power, together with the Knowledge and Skill, from Eternity, in Eternity,
introduces it self into Nature to Eternal Light and Darkness into
Properties: And how the Word of the out-breathing or out-speaking introduces
it self into a Subject or Object or reflex Image or Representation: Also how in
the reflex Image; Own self will, and receptibility of Properties existeth;
wherein a Man is always to understand two Substances; viz: I. Gods Own selfs
Efflux, and then II. the own self receptibility of the Properties in the
Free Will; in which receptibility, again a reflex Image of an outward or
External Manner or Kind, is understood, wherewith the Unity in its Efflux is
Continually outward or External: And thereby, the Eternal Love introduces it
self, into perceptibility, and a fire-flaming manner or kind, viz: into a
Working of divine Power.

Dark-World Light-World The First Principle. The Second Principle.

37. Above on the Top of the Table stands Dark-world, Gods Anger; and under
it the First Principle: And over against it; from the Fourth Number to the
Seventh stands the Light World Gods Love; and under that, the Second
Principle: All which, signifies; how the Out-flown Will, with the
receptibility of own self desire, incloseth and over-shaddoweth it self; and
with the Desire of Ihood or selfness introduces it self into Properties and
makes it self Darkness; where the Out-flown ONE, in the Darkness, through
the Fire in the Light, becomes manifest or revealed and perceptible; and is a
Cause of the Light, in which Light, Gods Love assumeth or receives a fiery
working, from the Fire of the Eternal Nature, and shines forth in the Fire
through the dark painful Receptibility; as a Light out of a Candle; or as the
Day in the Night; from whence also Day and Night have received their Name
Ground and Original in the Time: But in The Eternity.
that which is Eternal there is thus an Eternal Light and Darkness one in
another.

38. The Darkness is the Ground of Nature, and the Light is the Ground of the
Triumphing richly joyful divine Manifestation or Revelation: The Dark-World,
viz: the Ground of the Properties of own self desire and willing is called, the
First Principle; being it is a cause of the divine Manifestation or Revelation
Or as to.
according to the perceptibility, and also makes an own Kingdom in it self,
viz: a painful Source or Quality, according to which God calls himself,
Deuteronomy. 4.24. Heb. 12.29.
An Angry Zealous or Jealous God, and a Consuming Fire.

39. And the Light, which becomes manifest or revealed in the Fire, wherein
the Unity of the divine Efflux of the Love, is understood, is called the Second
Principle; viz: the divine Power-World, where Gods Love is a Love-Fire, and
Working Life therein: as it is written, 1 Timothy 6.16.
God dwells in a Light which none can come unto; for the power of the Unity
of God, works in the Light, and is God; and the fiery Kind or Quality in the
Light, is the Eternal Nature, wherein the Eternal Love of the Unity, loves
or perceives it self.

40. Under the First and Second Principle, stand in the Seven Spaces, Seven
Numbers, which signify the Seven Properties of the Eternal Nature, and under
them stands TINCTUR, distributed or severed into the Seven Spaces, which
signifies the divine Word in the Temperature or Likeness and Equality of the
seven Properties, wherein the Divine Powers lie in like or equal willing
working and Substance; viz: the out-flown Name of God, wherein the Great
Mystery of the divine power and working, together with the Characters of the
Letters in the distribution or sev^ration in the Seven Properties, is
understood.

TINCTUR.
41. For, the Word TINCTUR is the seperable Word, out of which the Seven
Properties flow forth.

T.

42. The T. is the Tau, or the opening of the Unity; the* the letter "T" drawn
as described
of the Threefold I. a ground of the Breathing or Speaking.

I.

43. The I. is the Efflux out of the Tau, or the Exit out of the Unity, viz:
the angle of the Life.

N.

44. The N. is the Efflux of the sounding Threefold Spirit.

C.

45. The C. is the Cutting asunder of the sounding, where the I. viz: the
Efflux of the Unity, severs it self again from the Darkness, and breaks the
receptibility of the own willing.

T.

46. The other T. under Number 5, is now the Holy Tau, or opening of the Glory;
where the Glory, in the fiery perceptibility, with the fiery Love, viz: with
Gods Kingdom opens it self; and signifies the great Might of the Light
Power.

V.

47. The V. now is the True Character of the Holy Spirit, with * the letter "V"
drawn as described
Three points, two above, signifying the Fire and Light, and the Third below;
signifying the Unity in the Love, viz: the Humility.

R.

41. With the R. R
the holy Fire and Light, is, comprised in a Operative Natural Substance: For
it signifies the Kingdom, viz: the The Royal Throne.
Throne; and herewith is signified; how the Holy Name, with the Out-flowing
Will, introduces it self in Mysterium Magnum into the Great Mystery, viz:
into the Eternal Mystery, out of which the visible World is sprung forth.

The Great Mystery of the Tinctur, or highest Ground of the Trinity of God.
T. is the Threefold I. signifying the Father.

I is the Generated I and i^ JESUS.

N. is the Threefold I. in the Spirit.

C. signifies CHRISTUS.

T. in the fifth Space, is the Father in Christ.

V. is the Spirit of Christ in the Word, which makes alive or quickens.

R. is the Kingly Throne, about which Darkness and Light, do strive, where
Satan and Christ, stand one against the other, viz: according to the
receptibility of the own self Will; Satan, viz: the Spirit of Error: And
according to the Unity, Christ: Where a Man understands Love and Anger in ONE
only Ground; but in a TWOFOLD Manifestation or Revelation. To be understood
here by those that are Ours, who belong to God, to others in this place, there
is a Or strong enclosure.
Bolt or Lock before it.

50. This Table in the Seven Spaces is the Ground of the Angels and Souls, viz:
Mysterium Magnum, the Great Mystery of the Transmutation, wherein all
Potentiality or Possibility Lies.

51. Above, according to the Seven Numbers, the Efflux of the One into Seven is
understood; the First Principle is to be understood to Fire, out of which the
Light becomes Manifest; and from Fire to Substance, is the Second Principle.

52. And downwards under every Property, is understood, what kind of Efflux,
comes out of every Property, in the Co-working of the other Properties: Not to
understand it so, that such an Efflux gives or affords an own self Property,
but all Seven give or afford it; but the first Form rules therein, and keeps
the upper dominion.

53. As at Number 1. there stands, Desire or Including; there a Man is to
understand, that the desire is Magneticall, and incloseth and darkeneth it
self: which also is a Ground of the Eternal and Temporal Darkness, and out
of this intracting comes Astringency hardness and Sharpness; and is a cause
of the fierceness; whence the Great Eternal Death originally Existeth: For
this Magnet draws the power into it self, and shuts it up into it self, so
that the working stands still; and enters into Impotency, as downwards
under Number 1. is to be seen.

54. Under Number 2. stands Science, or drawing, and that is the Second Form
to Nature, viz: the Motion of the Magnetic attraction, whence the
perceptibility of Nature originally existeth; and it is the Ground of all
Contraries; For Hard and Moving are Enemies, for the Moving breaks the Hard
again, and yet also gene^^^^^^ the Hard with the attracting.

55. Thus Two Substances orig^^^^^ (...) will of God; viz: the drawing of the
Magnetic Power, gives or affords Motion and Perceptibility, and that which
is drawn gives or affords Substance, wherein a Man understands the Cause
to Spirit and Body: viz: in the drawing of the perceptibility, Men understand,
the Spirit, and in that which is attracted, the Body, or the Cause to
Corporeity.

56. Now if this in-drawing and Substance cannot reach or attain the Light of
the Unity, whereby it may be Meekened or softened, then it continues in it
self a mere Enmity, and it is a Source or Quality of raging and climbing up,
out of which own Receptibility and Pride or State originateth; for the Will of
own Receptibility is false or wicked; and a Continual breaker or destroyer of
it self; that is of its Substance.

57. And Men understand, in these two Forms, viz: Desire and in-drawing; in
their out-flowing Properties; Gods Anger: and though indeed, they are the
Ground of the perceptible Life, yet if the Light shine therein, then they are
the Ground of the Kingdom of Joy, viz: an inward continual mobility of the
Unity of God, and a Ground of the Five Senses, out of which also the Creaturely
Life has taken its Beginning, wherein also its perdition stands so far as
it loses the Light; for it is the Source or Quality of the Hellish Anguish;
viz: the Cause of the Painfulness, and is also the Root of the Natural Life.

58. Under Number 3. stands in the third Space, the Third Form of Nature; and
is called Anguish; viz: a Spiritual Brimstone Source or Quality according to
the property; it takes its Ground out of the First and Second Form, viz: out
of the Magnetic desire, and out of the Motion of the drawing, where the
Out-flown Eternal Will, stands in such unquietness in Anguish.

59. The Anguish is a Cause of the Natural willing, of the Mind, and of the
Senses or Thoughts, and is the Life's Wheel: Viz: a Cause of the fiery or
fiering Life; For, if the out-flown Will of the Unity of God, stand in the
Anguish, then it pants or longs after the Unity again, viz: after the Rest,
and the Unity or Rest, pants or longs after the Motion or Revelation or
Manifestation.

60. And yet also there could in the Unity be no Manifestation or Revelation,
without Motion; and therefore the divine Will flows forth out of it self, and
the Divine Longing delight, introduces it self into the out-flown willing,
into the Desire and Motion, to a perceptibility; that it might find it self;
and so there remain TWO, in ONE Substance, viz: the perceptible divine Longing
delight; and the Cause of the perceptibility; wherein God calls himself, a
loving God, (...) to the ^^^^^^tible divine Love Longing: and an Angry God,
according to the Cause to perceptibility; viz: according to the Eternal Nature.

61. And thus we understand, in the Anguish, if the divine Light be not
manifest therein; the Hellish Fire, and an Eternal Or giving over or fainting
for fear.
dismaying and terror; where the own Will of Nature, continually stands in a
dying Source or Quality, and perpetually desires to sever it self from such
Original; which I therefore call the little Death, because it is the Eternal
dying Death; and yet in the Hardness, it is the Great still standing Death.

62. This Form; if it has not the Light, is the Fountain-Spring of the false
or wicked Mind; but if it finds the Light in it self; then it is the Source
Quality and Ground of the Sensible or Cogitative Mind; and the right root of
the Fire; as under Number 3. downwards is to be seen.

63. The Fourth Form; Number 4. is the Fire of the Eternal Nature; understand
a Spirituall-Lifes Fire; and that originateth out of the perpetual enduring
Conjunction, or Copulation of Hardness and of Moving; understand that the
painfulnesse originateth out of it; but the Fire Glance originateth out of the
Longing delight of the free-willing; where the Unity of the Longing d^light
becomes sharpened in the Properties, and so it shines as a flash, through the
perpetual enduring Conjunction of the Great Meekness of the Unity, and of the
fierceness and Motion of the Three First Principles: For it is in the Essence
of the Conjunction; as if a Man did strike Steel and a Stone together; whence
the Flash existeth.

64. This Flash is the true Natural and Creaturall Life of the Eternal
Creatures.
; for it is the Manifestation or Revelation of the divine Motion, and has the
Properties of Nature, and also the Manifestation or Revelation of the Unity of
the divine Efflux, in it self; now which soever of these two get the upper
dominion; in that, stands the Life: The Glance of the Fire, is the Light from
the Efflux of the Unity of God, and the Essence of the Fire, is the out-flown
Will, which has, with the desire, brought it self into such Properties.

65. Thus a Man understands, in the out-flown fiery Willing, the Angels and
Souls; and in the perceptible sharpened lights-power out of the Unity, a Man
understands the Spirit, wherein God becomes manifest, and understood, in a
Spiritual Substance: And in the Fire, two Kingdoms sever themselves; viz: the
Kingdom of Glory, from the Efflux of the Unity of God: And the Kingdom of the
Properties of Nature* ever^ one in it (...) yet they dwell in one another as
ONE.

66. The Kingdom of Nature is in it self; the Great Eternal Darkness; and
the Light, is the Kingdom of God; of which; John says, chapter 1. ver. 3. The
Light shines in the Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not, as Day
and Night dwell one in another: and neither of them is the other: thus out of
the Fires own self Property, comes the painful Life; and so if it breaks it
self off from the Eternal Light, and enters into the Object, reflex Image or
Representation, viz: into the property of self-hood: then is the Fire-life only
a Fantasy and folly; as the Devils are come to be such, and also the Damned
Souls are so: as under Number 4. downwards is to be seen.

The Fifth Property.
67. In the Fifth Property of Nature, now is understood, the Second Principle,
with its Ground, viz: the Substance of the Unity, in the Lights power; wherein
the out-flown Unity is a Fire-flaming Love, out of which the true understanding
Spirit originateth, with the Five Senses.

68. The First Three Forms are only Properties to Life; and the Fourth is the
Life it self; but the Fifth is the true Spirit; when the Fifth Property out of
the Fire becomes Manifest; then it dwells in all the other, and changes or
transmuteth them all into its sweet Love, that no painfulness or Enmity, is
apprehended any more in any of them; as the Day transmuteth the Night.

69. In the first Four Properties, the Life is like the Devils, but when the
Lights power, viz: the Second Principle, becomes Manifested in the Properties;
then it is an Angel, and lives in divine Power and holiness; as at the 5.
Number downwards is to be seen.

The Sixth Property.
70. The Sixth Property, is the Understanding, viz: the Noise or Sound, where
the Properties in the Light, stand all in the likeness or equality, then they
rejoice themselves, and then the power of the Five Senses becomes clear, and
all Properties rejoice themselves in the other, continually the one the other.

71. And thus the Love of the Unity brings it self into working willing
perception, finding and highness: And thus there is a Contrary in the Eternal
Nature, that Properties might originate, wherein the Love might become
apprehended, and that there might be something to be beloved, wherein the
Eternal Love of the Unity of God might have to work, wherein the praise of God
might be effected.

72. For, if the Life's Properties were become pressed or pierced through and
through, with the divine Love- flame, then they would praise the Great Love of
God, and give themselves all up again to the Unity of God; and this Joy and
apprehension could not become manifested or revealed in the Unity, if the
Eternal Will did not introduce it self into painful movable Properties.

The Seventh Property.
73. The Seventh Property is the Substance; wherein all the other are
Substantially; wherein they all work, as the Soul in the Body, wherein a Man
understands, the Natural Eternal Substantial Wisdom of God, viz: the Great
Mystery Mysterium Magnum, out of which the visible World with its Substance and
Creatures, is sprung forth.

74. Thus with or by this Table, a Man should understand the hidden Spiritual
World, viz: Gods Eternal Revelation or Manifestation, out of which the Angels
and the Souls of Men, have received their Original; Or by the means whereof.
whereupon they May change or transmute themselves into Evil or Good; For that
as to both lies in Angels and Souls Center.
their Center.

75. This Spiritual World is nothing else, but Gods Manifested or revealed
Word, and has been from Eternity: and Continues or remains also in
Eternity; for therein is Heaven, and Hell, understood.

The Explanation of the Second Table. MACROCOSMOS.
1. IN this Table a Man may understand, how the Invisible hidden Spiritual
World, has made it self visible; and has made to it self an Object, reflex
Image or representation, with the out-breathing or Out-speaking; whence the
Eternal Principles are flown forth, wherein the Powers are together become
Material; for, the outward Nature is no other but only an Efflux or reflex
Image or Object of the Eternal Nature.

Of the Four Elements.
2. The Four Elements originate from the first Four Properties of the Eternal
Nature.

I. the Earth.

3. Viz: the Earth and the Grossnesse of all and every Substance, from the dark
desire, where always the other Six Properties are together become Material,
as a Man may understand by the Metals and Powers or Plants, Evil and Good; but
the dark desire, has coagulated or gellied all together; as still at this very
day is done.

II. the Air.

4. The Air originateth from the Motion of the Magneticall impression through
the Fire, in the unshut Mercury, viz: the unshut Motion, out of which the Water
comes.

III. the Water.

5. The Water is the unshut Mercury, where the fiery kind of disposition is
killed: The Water the Wife or Female of the fiery Mercury, wherein it works;
whence Heat and Cold as also thick and thin or dense and rare, are in strife.

IV. the Fire.

6. The Fire existeth from the Spiritual Fire, of the inward Ground; the Cold,
Man understands in the Magnetic sharpness, viz: in the right root to the
Fire.

7. Over the Seven Properties above the Table, stands, the GROUND OF NATURE,
distributed in the Three first Forms: and in the Fourth and Fifth Form or
Properties, is the word PURE-ELEMENT, distributed; and in the Sixth and Seventh
Form is the word PARADISE distributed.

Ground of Nature.
8. With or by the word Ground of Nature, a Man is to understand the root of
the Four Elements; viz: the Four Causes of the Motion and Perceptibility.

Pure Element.

9. With or by the word Pure Element, Man is to understand, the Temperature,
and the Similitude or Equality of Nature and the Four Elements, where the Light
changes the Properties all of them into One only Will, wherein the Light also
works together in the Perceptible Movable, and Elementary Property: thus Men
may understand, how the Eternal Element, viz: the Motion of the divine Power,
has sharpened it self through the Ground of Nature, and manifested it self in
the Light: Which Pure Element, is the Motion of the Inward Spiritual World,
and is with the Creation of this World together flown forth into the Substance;
and becomes understood in the Quintessentia or Fifth Essence.

Paradise.

10. The word Paradise, in the Sixth and Seventh Property, signifies the
Spiritual Work or Effect, in the Light Substance, viz: a Sprouting, or
Spiritual Vegetation, which Spiritual growing, in the beginning of the world,
grew through all the Four Elements, and Imaged or propagated it self out from
the Earth, in all Fruits, and changed all Properties of the Fierceness into
the Temperature.

11. But when the Properties of the fierceness, with the Four Elements,
awakened through the averted or apostate desire and false or wicked Will of
Adam, and gat the dominion, then this Sprouting or Vegetation flew back, that
is, it remained standing in the Tincture of the inward Ground, and it is yet
still indeed in the Four Elements, but yet only in the inward Pure Element, and
cannot become attained, but only in the New Regeneration of the inward Man, and
in the Material Tincture, wherein the Paradisicall working is also totally
manifest, for those that are OURS to understand.

12. This Table, shows, from whence all Substances of this World are sprung,
and what the Creator is, viz: that the Creator is the Spiritual or divine
power-world, which the Unity, viz: the Eternal Will, has moved; which Will,
is God himself.

13. But the Seperatour or Divider, was the Out-flown Will out of the
Spiritual World, which in that Motion, is out-flown out of it self, and has
made to it self an Object or reflex Image for its working; where, in such
Motion, there is always flown forth one Object or reflex Image out of another,
even unto the most External Matter or Mass of the Earth.

14. And that was through the divine Motion, drawn into a Lump or Mass: and
that very attraction of the Motion, remains still so; and therefore all
Matters in the Deep, fall toward the Earth; and this is the Cause thereof,
that, the power of the Motion stands still thus, and will do, to the End of
the Time.

15. The seven Days and seven Planets, signify the seven Properties of the
Spiritual World; and the Three Principles in the Spirit of the World, Tria
Principia, in Spiritu Mundi, and in the Material inanimate, and in the living
Creatures, as, Salt Brimstone and Oil or Sal Sulpher and Mercurius, signify
the Ternary or Trinity of the Divine Manifestation or Revelation, as a
perpetual enduring Source Wellspring or Fountain, out of which all outward
Creatures flow, have flowen, and yet will flow forth to the End of this Time,
and the Seperatour is therein understood with or in the seven Properties.

16. And we see in this Table, what is flown forth out of the seven Properties,
and how the Spiritual Power has brought it self into a Material; as in the
Seven Spaces downwards in each of them is to be seen; wherein a Man may
understand out of what, Evil, and Good, in this World, is sprung forth.

The Explanation of the Third Table. MICROCOSMOS.
1. IN this Table is Man set forth or represented, as an Express or Reflex
Image of the Three Worlds, as to Soul, Spirit, and Body: What he was in the
beginning, as to his Creation, and what he became in the Fall through the
Spirit of Error or Seduction, and what he is become through the Spirit of
Christ in the New Regeneration: Which is a true real substantial Image, out
of the Three Principles of the divine Manifestation or Revelation, viz: out of
the out-flown Word of the divine Willing.

2. As to the Soul, Man is the Eternal Nature of the fiery or fiering kind of
disposition; as a Sparkle out of the Center out of which the Fire originateth;
and if this Ground cannot attain or reach the divine Light, then it is a
Darkness, from the Magnetic attracting desiring power.

3. But if it attain or reach the Light out from the Fire, so that this
Magnetic desire eats of the Out-flown Unity of Gods Love; then the true Good
Spirit Springs forth out of the Fire, as the Light shines or springs forth
out of the Candle.

4. This now is, two Principles, viz: in the Fire of the Eternal Nature, the
The First Principle.
Soul; and in the Light of the divine Power, the The Second Principle.
Spirit: But the The Third Principle.
Body is the Third Principle, as viz: a Substance of the visible World of the
Stars and Elements, out of the Seven Properties of Nature, made into an Image.

5. The Soul, has the Seven Properties of the inward spiritual World,
according to Nature; But the Souls Spirit is without properties, for it
stands without or beyond Nature, Note, note.
in the Unity of God: and yet becomes manifest through the Soulish fiery or
fiering Nature, in the stillness; for it is the true real express or reflex
Image of God, viz: an Idea, in which God himself works and dwells: so far
as the Soul brings its desire into God, and gives it self up to the Will of
God: But if, not, then is this Idea, viz: the Souls Spirit, dumb or mute and
Worklesse; and stands only as an Image in a Looking Glass, which disappears
or vanishes, and has no Substance; as besell Adam in the Fall.

6. But if, the Soul gives it self up to God; and introduces its Magnetic
hunger into Gods Love: Then the Soul draws divine Substance into it self,
viz: the Substantial Wisdom of God, and so its Idea or Spirit, becomes
Substantial in the Lights power, and attaineth divine Life: and then it is the
true Temple of God. wherein Gods Unity is manifest or revealed, and Operative.

7. Note. Note.
Yet if the Soul, introduces it self with the desire into it self: viz: into
own self-Love, and turns in with the desire, into the Seven Properties, to
prove them; and eats of the Lust or Longing delight, of the Properties; then
it lifts up it self, and makes it an ^^^estrum; viz: an Astrall Object or
reflex Image; which Evestrum, then instantly, hungereth after the vanity of
false or wicked Lust; as befell Lucifer and Adam, where the Evestrum of
Lucifer, Imaged it self, in the Fantasy, and the Evestrum of Adams Soul, in
the Or fiery.
Beastiall property of the outward World, whence the Soul became venomed or
poisoned; and instantly kindled the Body, which was from or out of the Limus of
the Earth, so that the Beastiall properties awakened in him, and lusted after
the Earthly Beastiall Food, viz: after Heat, Cold, Astringent, Bitter, Sweet,
and Sour, and introduced themselves with such Properties into an own self
Source or Fountain of such Lust: And did with the desire eat of Evil and Good:
Whence the Image of God, viz: the Idea, became dark and worklesse: and then the
right Spirit, viz: the operative Idea, became dumb or mute and dead; as an
Image in a Looking-glass, is dead.

8. Thus the Soul became separated from God; and stood in a Natural willing;
for Gods willing in the Spirit wrought no more, and the willing of the Evestrum
began, viz: the reflex Imaging of the dark and outward World; for the Holy Or
Angelical Substance.
Genius was changed.

TINCTUR.
9. IN this Table, Tin^^ure, stands above, distributed in the Seven
Properties: Which signifies the Likeness or Equality, of the Seven Properties
as to the Soul and the Body: And that in the First Man before the Fall, the
Properties to divisibility, and own receptibility, stood in like or equal
willing, and brought all their desires into the Unity of God; and so they were
a right true Paradise; for the Substantial Spirit together with the Unity of
God was manifested or revealed in them, and they were to work, through all
things, in Gods Love.

10. But the Devil would not endure that to them, but deceived the Seven
Properties of the Life, with false or wicked Lust, and persuaded them that it
was Good for them, and that they would be wise, if the Properties every one of
them did introduce themselves into own self receptibility according to their
kind, then would the Spirit taste and apprehend what Evil and Good is: But that
this cannot subsist in the Unity of God: that he did not tell them.

11. But when they introduced themselves, into their own self Lust, or Longing
Delight, then this Strife Opposition and Contrariety, awakened and rose up in
them; and all the Properties became Image-like in their self-hood: Thus; the
NOTE.
Unity, viz: the Element, became divided and rent asunder, and in the Strife
the Four Elements gat the dominion; and so instantly from without, the
unlikenesse or inequality, viz: Heat, Cold, and the Constellations with the
Seperability, with the working, fell into the Body: and the fierce Wrath of
God, according to the dark Worlds Property, fell into the Soul; whence came to
them according to the Soul, Terror, Anguish, Necessity, and Eternal Despair;
and in the Body awakened and rose up, Heat, Cold, Woe, Sickness, and the
Mortal Life.

12. Thus fell the Image of God, the whole Man, from his Rank and Order or
Ordinance, and became a Monster and Visard, and instantly the awakened
Properties began their dominion, with Envying, Murdering, Raging, Stabbing or
Stinging and Breaking or destroying: Out of Love, came Pride, and own
self-Love; out of the Desire, came Covetousness; out of Perceptibility, came
Envy; and out of the Fire-Life came a mere poisonous Anger, to be; thus came
the Foundation of Hell in the whole Man, to be Manifested or Revealed, and
Governed in Soul and Body.

13. This Hellish Foundation Now, is the Spirit of Error: wherein or for which
Man must have been Damned; if the divine Grace had not Instantly after such
falling away or Apostasy; in-spoken into him the Serpent-crusher, viz: the
Efflux of the divine Love, in the Holy Name JESUS, for a New Regeneration.

14. Which holy Name, in mere Mercy, in the highest humility, gave it self
forth into the humane Soul, and Body, and assumed the humanity, and broke the
power of this Devilish Spirit of Error, and killed the I-hood or self-hood or
somethingnesse of the Life's willing, and introduced the Properties again into
the Likeness or Equality, and united them through his Love, and brought them
into Gods Unity again; and there is the true Spirit, viz: the humane Idea and
express or reflex Image of God, become renewed, and filled or satiated with
divine Love-Substance; and the Humane Soul, has through the Soul and Spirit of
Christ, in such Love and divine Substance, gotten an open Gate to God again.

15. This now is pourtrayed in this Table: viz: what Adam was, before the Fall,
and what he became in the Fall, and how he became Redeemed again, and what his
New birth out of Christ's Spirit is; And it is delineated and set forth under
the word TINCTUR, in the seven Properties, in what Properties, the Soul has
the Center, and in what, the Spirit, and in what, the Body, for the Reader to
consider further of.

16. Under that, stand the Seven Days of the Week, signifying, that Man is the
very same.

17. The Table signifies, what Man is, from within internally, and from
without externally, both according to the first Good Adam, and then according
to the perished Corrupt Adam, and what he is become again in Christ; by which
Men may understand, how Evil, and Good, is in Man: and from what Property
Evil, and Good, in the Senses or Thoughts, and in the Mind, originate.

Satan.

18, With or by the Word Satan; whereby the Spirit of Error is signified; a
Creaturall Devil, is not understood, but the Source or Quality of this Spirit
of Error.

Christus.

19. With or by the Word Christus, or Christ, is understood: the New Man in the
Spirit of Christ, according to the Inwardnesse.

20. The other Spaces are to be understood, as in the other Tables, wherein a
Man may understand the Causes of the Transmutation; for the Reader to Consider
further of.

Written in February, 1624.
Translated into Nether-dutch from the 8, to the 13. of May, 1639. and
Corrected from several written Copies.

And the Translation into English finished the 18. March 1657/^: compared with
the Nether-dutch Translation and a High Dutch Copy.

A Brief Explanation of The Knowledge of GOD and of ALL THINGS.

Also of the True and False Light together with An annexed Table of the
Manifestation or Revelation of the Divine Secret Mystery By Jacob Behme
Teutonicus Philosophus.

11. November, 1623. Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

12. November 1623, in High Dutch the 42. Epistle Page 327. Nether-dutch 20.
page: 241. English 6. page: 83.

London, Printed by M. S. for Lodowick loyd, and are to be sold at the Castle
in Cornhill. 1661.

A Brief Intimation Concerning Knowledge, also of the False and True Light. To
Mr Godfrey Freuden Hammern, Dr, and Mr John Heusern, my Loving and Worthy
Friends. The Salutation of our Lord Jesus Christ, with his Entrance into and
Manifestation or Revelation in the Humanity, Work in us all with his Love.
1. IN Christ much beloved Sirs and Brethren. When God by his Grace, opens
the right and true understanding, so that we can apprehend or know the Express
Image of God (Man) what it is according to 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
Body Soul and Spirit: Then we apprehend and know that it is the Visible and
also the Invisible World viz: an Extract of all the Three Principles of the
Divine Substance.

2. Wherewith, the Hidden God, through the out-breathing and impression of his
seperable or distinguishable Power and Eternal Skill and Knowledge, has
represented himself in a visible Image: Through which he Forms and Imageth on
the same Substance, the Wonders of the out-spoken Word, wherein the Word of his
Power makes it self Substantial.

3. And so has by and with Man represented an Image of his speaking and
out-spoken substantial Word, wherein the divine Science or Root, with the
Seperability or Distinguibility of the Eternal Speaking, Lies.

4. Whence also the Understanding and Skill or Knowledge of all things, comes
to be in him, so that he can understand the Composition of Nature, as also its
Dissolution. For No Spirit rules searches or reaches Deeper, then into its
Mother out of which it is existed; and in the Ground whereof it stands in its
Center.

5. As we see by the Creatures of the Elements and Constellations or Astrum,
that their Understanding and Skill or Knowledge, is no higher, then their
Mother, wherein they Live; Every Life, according to the Kind and Manner of its
Mother, wherein it stands in the Seperability or Distinguibility of the
Out-spoken Word.

6. In which respect the humane Science, in the Center of its Understanding
receives or embraces Evil and Good, and compriseth compacteth or frames it
self in Evil and Good, and Makes it self Substantial therein, and so with
the Science or Root introduces it self into willing, desire, and Substance.

7. So that the Abyssall Will out of the Eternal Word of the Seperability or
Distinguibility, introduces it self in the Creaturely Word, viz: in the
Science of the Creaturely Soul, into an Ens and Substance, after that Kind and
Manner, as the Out-breathing of God with the Seperability or Distinguibility of
the Eternal willing, has introduced it self with the visible World into
Manifold Properties, viz: into Evil and Good, into Love and Enmity: That in
such a Contrary, the Substance may become seperable or distinct, formable,
perceptible and inventible: and that every thing in such Contrary may become
perceptible to it self.

8. For, in God All Substances are but one Substance, as viz: an Eternal ONE.
The Eternal, One Only GOOD; which Eternal One, without Seperability or
distinguibility would not be Manifested or Revealed to it self.

9. Therefore has the same out breathed out of it self, that a Multiplicity
and Seperability or Distinguibility, might-originate or exist: which
Seperability or Distinguibility, has introduced it self, into own self
willing, and into Properties: and the Properties into Desire, and the Desire
into Substance.

10. So that All things of the visible World, both Animate and Inanimate, might
originate or Exist, out of the Seperability or Distinguibility and
Impressibility of the out-speaking Word out of the Science of the Great Mystery
Mysterii Migni: Every thing, out of the Experience of the separated
distinguished Word.

11. Every thing has its Separation or distinction in it self. The Center of
every thing is Spirit, from the original of the Word. The Separation or
Distinction in the Thing is Own self Will, of its own self Impression or
Compaction; where every Spirit introduces it self into Substance, according to
its Essential desire.

12. The Formability of Bodies, existeth out of the Experience of the Willing,
where Every things Center, as a piece of the Out-spoken Word, re-out speaks
it self, and compriseth or frames it self into Seperability or
distinguibility, after the Kind and Manner of the Divine Speaking.

13. And so now if in this Out-speaking, there we^^ no divine or Free Will,
then the Speaking would have a Law, and would stand or be in or under
compulsion or subjection, and no desire or longing delight might exist: And
then the speaking were finite and inchoative, which it is not.

14. But it is a Breathing of the Abyss, and a Seperability or Distinguibility
of the Eternal Stillnesse, an out-parting or distributing of it self, where
the partibility stands again in its own self seperability or distinguibility,
in an own self willing, and is again an out-speaking of it self, out of which,
Nature and the Creaturely Life, has taken its Original.

15. And hence, in every thing, an own self Will is existed, so that every
thing, introduces it self, out of its own Experience into Form and Shape
Condition or Constitution, as also into: a Life and Working, as in its Center,
it stands in the universal Experience, viz: in Mysterio Magno, in the Great
Mystery, in the Mother of all Substances or Things.

16. As we see in or by the Earth: Which in the beginning of its Matter,
existed, out of the Seperability or distinguibility of the divine breathing,
after a Spiritual Kind or Manner. Where the Seperability or Distinguibility of
the Word with the Own self Will has comprised or compacted it self into Ens
and Substance, and with the Impressibility or Impression and Compaction,
introduced it self into perceptibility of Essence.

17. In which perceptibility, the Magnetic desire is existed, where the
properties of the seperable or distinguishable Walling, with the Desire, has
introduced it self into Bodies, according to and out of the Kind and Manner of
the III. Principle of Divine Manifestation or Revelation.

18. Out of which Original, the Earth has so manifold sorts of Bodies, Good
and Evil: As Earths, Salts, Sto^^s, and Metals, and such Bodies lie mi^t in
the Earth, for this very cause, that the III. Principles, stand in one another
as one Substance.

19. And they stand only in III. Distinctions and Center* viz: of Divine
Manifestation or Revelation: where every Center makes us own out-breathing,
Nature, and Substance, out of it self, and yet ALL originateth out of the
Eternal ONE.

I. Center.
20. And the I. Center, is the Out-breathing of the Abyss, viz: Gods Speaking:
the Impressibility or Compaction and divine perceptibility of it self, where
God brings himself into Trinity, and Generateth and speaks himself forth into
Power.

II. Center.
21. The II. Center or Out-speaking is the Out-spoken Substance of the divine
Power, and is called Gods Wisdom. Through that, the Eternal Word breaths it
self forth into Skill or Knowledge, viz: into Infinity of Multiplicity, and
brings the Multiplicity of Skill or Knowledge, into longing delight, and the
longing delight into Desire, and the Desire into Nature, and Strife, unto Fire.

22. Wherein the Strife in the painfulness in the Consumptibility of the Fire,
dies to its own self Nature right; and yet no Dying is understood; but thus
the Power brings it self into perceptibility, and through the Killing of the
Own Self desire of the Properties through the Dying of the Self-hood, through
the Fire forth into Light.

23. And there, in the Light, another or Second Principle, viz: the True Great
Mystery Mysterium Magnum, of divine Manifestation or Revelation is understood.
And in Fire, is the First Principle, viz: an Eternal Nature; understood; and
they are Two in One, as Fire and Light.

24. The Fire gives Soul and the Lights Power gives Spirit. And in this
Lights power, of the divine Out-speaking or Expression, through the
Manifestation or Revelation of the Fire (understand Spirit-Fi^e) is the Mother
of the Eternal Spirits, viz: Angels and Souls of Men, understood: As also the
Spiritual Angelical World, viz: the hidden inward power-World, which is a
Mother of the Heaven, of the Stars and Elements, viz: of the Outward World.

III. Center.
25. The III. Center is the Word Fiat, verbum Fiat, viz: the Natural Word of
God, out of the power of the I. and II. Principle, viz: a Seperator, Creator
and Maker of all Creatures, in the Inward and Outward World, according to their
Property.

26. That same Seperator or Speaker of the Seperability or distinguibility of
divine Power; has out-spoken it self out of it self, out of the I. and II.
Principle, viz: out of the Fiery and Light one; as also out of the Impression
or Compaction of the Over-shaddowing, viz: out of the Darkness: and with the
Seperability of the out-speaking impressed or compacted it self, and made it
self material, moreover moving and perceptible.

27. Out of which is Existed the III. Principle: viz: the Visible World, with
its Substance and Life, also the whole Creation of the visible World; which
Life and Substance is gone forth, out of the III. and I. Substance and Life;
viz: out of the Eternal Nature out of the Great Mystery Ex Mysterio Magno,
that is, out of I. Darkness, II. Fire, III. Light; viz: out of Love and Anger.

28. The Fire is called Anger, viz: a painfulnesse and Contrariety. And the
Light is called Love, viz: a giving or yiedling of it self. And the Darkness
is a Separation or Distinction of Knowledge or Apprehension and Skill: that it
might be understood, what Light and Life is, and what is Evil and painful.

29. For, there are Two Sorts of Fire to be understood and also Two Sorts of
Light. Viz:

I. Fire and Light.
According to the Dark Impression a Cold Fire and a false Light through the
Imagination of the Stern Impression: Which Light originateth only in the
Imagination, and has no true Ground.

II. Fire and Light.
30. The Second Fire, is a Hot Fire, and has a Fundamental true Light out of
the Original of the Divine willing, which brings it self forth with the
out-breathing together in Nature even into the Light through the Fire.

31. In this Twofold Fire, and Twofold Light, are Two Principles understood,
also Two Wills.

32. For, the false Light, existeth out of the Imagination, out of the own self
Will of Nature, viz: out of the Impression or Compaction of the Properties,
where the Properties prove one another* out of which, own self Longing or Lust,
existeth, and an Imagination, which, Nature Modelleth to it self in the Abyss
into own self desire; and desires in own self Might, without the Will of God,
to introduce it self into a Regiment or Dominion of its own self willing.

33. Where, this own self Will, will not be subject, to the Abyssall willing of
God, which originateth without besides and beyond Nature and Creature in the
Eternal ONE, in it self; also will not submit it self thereto, and will not be
one Will therewith; but Makes it self to be an own self Seperator or
Distinguisher and Creator.

34. It Creates to it self in it self a Science or Root, and parts or
divides it self from Gods willing; as is to be understood by or in the Devil,
as also in false or wicked Men: Whence the Thrusting out, from Gods Separation,
has followed upon them, so that, the Devil with his own self willing, must
continue a Seperatour of the Dark Impression or Compaction, wherein the Word
introduces it self into Nature and painfulness, to perceptibility: Viz: in the
Original of the Fire-Source; which yet cannot reach or attain the true Fire,
wherein, Gods Will introduces it self into the perceptible Life, and into
Nature; viz: into a Shining Light.

35. For the Seperatour of the Natural own self-hood has no right true Ens,
wherein its Light may be steadfast: For it Creates with its desire, not out of
the Eternal One, viz: out of Gods Meekness; but Creates it self into
Substance: Its Light originateth only in the own Substance of the Self-hood.

36. Therefore, there is a difference between Gods Light and the false Light,
For Gods Light originateth in the Eternal ONE, viz: in the Substance of divine
Geniture, and brings it self with Gods willing, into Nature and Substance. It
becomes impressed and brought through the divine Seperatour, into an Ens, and
John 1.5.
shines in that same Nature in the Darkness, John 1.5.

37. For, the impressed Science, is according to the impression, a Darkness:
But the divine Light illustrateth or shines through it, so that it is a fiery
Light: wherein Gods breathing or speaking is Manifested in Nature and Creature,
and stands in a perceptible Life. Whence Saint John Chapter the 1.4. says:
John 1.4.
The Life of Man was in it. And Christ says, John 8.12. John 8.12.
He is the Light of the World, that gives ^^^e to the World.

58. For, without this divine Light out of the Geniture of the divine Trinity,
is no steadfast true Light, but only a Light of Imagination, of the Natural
impression of own self Will.

39. Therefore should Man, viz: the Image of God, lift up the Eyes of the
Understanding (wherein Gods Light stands presented to him and desires to
shine into him:) And not be as a Beast, which stands not with its Seperatour
in the inward Ground in the Eternity: But only in the Form copied out or drawn
according to a Pattern or the Exscript which is in the out-spoken Word.

40. Which has only a Temporary Light in an inchoative and finite Seperatour,
wherein the Eternal Seperatour introduces it self into a Sport or Scene, and
introduces the divine Science into Images, like a Modelling or Copying of the
Great Mystery Mysterii Magni of the Spiritual World, where the Eternal
Principles according to Fire and Light co-sport or act a Scene in a
Premodelling.

41. And yet Man, only according to the outward palpable Body, stands in such
a premodelling, and with his Spiritual Body, is the true Substantial Word of
divine property, in which God Speaks and generateth his Word, where the
divine Science or Root distributeth or imparteth and impresseth it self, and
generateth it self into an Express Image of God.

42. In which Image God is manifest, and himself dwells and wills, after
the Kind and Manner of the Perceptibility and Creature: Therefore should Man
break his own self willing, and give himself up into Gods willing.

43. But he in whom the Own self Will of Man, will not do so; is therein more
void of understanding, and more hurtful to himself, then the wild Earth, which
yet holds still to its Seperatour, and lets that make thereof what it will.

44. For God has made all things in his Sport or Scene out of his
Out-speaking, through and in his Seperatour, also all hold still to him: Only
the false Light, makes, that the Seperatour, or Distinguisher of the Creature,
introduces it self into own self will, so that the Creature sets it self
against Gods willing.

45. Which False Light in Man has its Foundation from the Devils willing,
which with the introduction of his false or wicked desire, has made Man
Monstrous, so that he also has assumed a false or wicked Imagination, whereby
he has made the self desire in him, introduced from the Devil, substantial,
through his own self desire.

46. Whereby, in the humane Body, which was compacted out of the Li^^us of the
Earth in the divine FIAT, there is existed a Beastiall Seperatour, which has
manifested or revealed ^he property of All Beasts, whence so many Lusts,
Desires, and Wills are existed in Man.

47. Which False or Wicked Seperatour has lifted it self aloft, and gotten the
Dominion, and drawn all Principles to it, and has made out of the divine
Ordinance or Order, a Monster.

48. Which Monstrous Image, has with its Will and Desire wholly turned it self
away from Gods Will, and from the divine Light; whence the divine ENS of or
from the Holy Worlds Substance, vanished or disappeared, and so now, Man, thus,
remained to be only a Monster of Heaven; and became with his Seperatour a Be^st
of all ^easts, which from thenceforth ruled in and with all Beasts: In whom the
Spirit of the World, Spiritus Mundi, together with the Stars and Elements
has gotten the Dominion.

49. Yet now Man runs, and seeks again, his first true Native Country, for
he stands in this Property, in mere unquietness. Now he seeks in one
thing, suddenly in another; and supposes in this Monster he shall introduce
himself into rest, and yet runs on only in the false or wilked awakened
beastiall willing, which cannot reach or attain Gods willing.

50. He runs only in the false Light of his self-hood, which becomes
generated in his Imagination, with a Monstrous Seperatour, which makes him an
Earthly Mind, wherein the Constellation has its operation; and has the whole
visible World for his Enemy.

51. And stands as a Rose in a Bush of Thorns, which is continually
scratched and torn by the Thorns: and yet he could not be said to be a Rose,
if the divine Grace were not come to help him and had not in-spoken it self
again into his inward Ground, wherein the Love to the New Regeneration is
presented or tendered to him.

52. Therefore say I, it is highly necessary, for Man, to learn to know, what
he is, before he runs and seeks; for else his seeking is but a vexation,
wherewith he vexes himself in a false or wicked Seperatour or Distinguisher,
and yet can come to no Rest.

53. For, all those Earthly Wills, wherein he thinks to bring himself into
Rest, are only a Contrary Will or opposition against God, viz: the Eternal ONE.

54. For Romans 9.16.
it lies not in any ones self Willing going or running, faith Saint Paul; but
in the Mercy, viz: in the Grace, which is in-spoken into him.

55. For, Man without Grace, without God, is dead and blind, and cannot come to
any true Life, unless the Grace become awakened and reveal^d or manifested in
him.

56. Yet a^^ in these Earthly willings there can no awakening be effected, for
they cannot attain the Grace, much less awaken it; therefore must the whole
Man in Soul and Mind sink down into the Grace, and be a willing of Nothing,
which desires Nothing but only the Grace, that the Grace in him may become
living, and overflow drown or overwhelme and mortify his Will.

57. As the Sun breaks forth in from or out of the Night, and changes the
Night into Day, so also it is to be understood concerning Man; of which Christ
says, Math. 18.3.
Except ye Convert and become as Children, ye shall not see Gods Kingdom, viz.
the Divine Seperatour, from which, all things are Existed.

58. For, No Knowledge or Skill is right or Fundamental, unless it come out
of the true divine Science or Root, out of the Separation or Distinction of the
divine Speaking, whence, all things, have their Original.

59. If now such Skill and Knowledge would be attained to Exist in Man again;
then must the divine Seperatour stand in a Substance of its likeness, viz: in
a divine Ens, where the divine Word Speaks forth therein, and the divine
Light shines in that Speaking.

60. And then the humane Science, which in the beginning existed from the
speaking of the Word, may in that Light, see, not only it self, but also all
other Natural things, according or as to the Seperability or Distinguibility
of the Word; also may work after a Magical kind and manner in and with all
things, after a divine Kind Manner and Property.

61. For Man is blind in all the Works of God, and has no apprehension or
knowledge, unless, the Breathing or Speaking be revealed or manifested in its
inward Ground according to the Kind or Manner of the Speaking, out of which all
Substances or Things originate.

62. All Man's seeking, whereby he will find the ground of a thing, is blind,
and is performed only in a Shell, or Rind wherewith the the Essence of the Tree
is covered.

63. But if a true finding would be attained, then must the humane Science
enter into the property of the Thing, and be able to see the Seperatour or
Distinguisher thereof.

64. Therefore it is the Greatest Toil and Misery of Man, that they all run
and seek in blindness; and begin to seek at the Shell: Whereas all things are
outwardly figured, signifying what they are in their Ens and Substance: and the
Seperatour of all things, has visibly and formally there represented it self,
that so Man may know and apprehend the Creator and Creation or Creature.

65. For all Substances are but one only Substance, which has out breathed it
self out of it self, and made it self distinguishable as also formable and
figured: And there goes out of that Impression and Formation, one Center out
of another, as with every Impression and Formation of the Desire.

66. Where the separated and divided Will impresseth or compecteth it self into
a particular, and there existeth a Center, and in the Center a Seperatour or
Distinguisher or Creator of it self, viz: a Former of the re-out breathed
willing; as we see by the Earth, that every herb, has a Seperatour or
Distinguisher of its own in it self: Which makes it so, and severeth or
distinguishes it into Form.

67. And so now if Man, viz: the Image of God, in whom the divine Speaking
according to the divine Science or Root is manifest or revealed; will search
the Creatures, whether in the Animate or in the Inanimate, viz: in the
Vegetable or Metalline: Then he must before all things, attain the Grace of God
again, that the divine Light may give Light in his Science or Root, whereby he
may go through the Natural Light; and so all will become manifest or revealed
to him in his Understanding.

68. Else he runs in seeking as a blind Man who speaks of Colors, and yet
sees them not, nor knows what Colors are,

This, all States and Conditions of the World should Consider, that they all
run on blindly without the divine Light; only in the Sydereall Imagibility, in
that which the Constellation or Astrum Imageth in Reason.

69. For, Reason is nothing else but the humane Constellation, which is only an
Exscript Copy or Modelling, of all the Principles. It stands only in an
Imagibility; and not in the divine Science or Root.

70. But if the Divine Light becomes manifest or revealed therein, then also
begins, the divine Word out of the Eternal Skill or Knowledge to speak
therein. And so then is Reason a true house of divine Skill or Knowledge and
Revelation, and may then well and rightly be made use of. But without this, it
is no more but a Constellation of the visible World.

71. Therefore, to all Lovers of Arts and Sciences, whose Seperatour is an
Artist, of great Subtilenesse in them; it is signified, that they should Math.
6.33.
first seek God, and his Love and Grace, and wholly incorporate and give up
themselves, thereinto, Else, all their seeking is but a fighting with a
Shadow, as before a Looking Glass: and Nothing is found fundamentally: Except
one entrusteth somewhat into another Hand.

72. Which yet is strictly forbidden to the Children of God, in whom the Grace
is become manifested or revealed; that they should Math. 7.6.
not Cast the Little Pearl before Swine, upon pain of Eternal Punishment.

73. Only that they should show them she Light; and direct them how to attain
it, is freely granted to them.

74. But, to give the divine Seperatour into the Beastiall Hand, is forbidden,
unless one know the Way and the Will of the Person well.

75. In such an Intimation, beloved Sirs and Brethren, through the permission
of the divine Grace and Co working of this present Time I will a little
describe the Divine Mystery. How God has through his WORD, made himself
visible perceptible and inventible, as also Creaturall and Formal.

This I desire you to Consider further of: yet that it be done as is above
mentioned; Else, I shall be as silent or mute to you, and yet the blame or
fault not be mine.

76. God is neither Nature nor Creature, as to what he is in himself: Neither
this nor that, neither High nor Deep; He is the Abyss, and Bysse or Ground of
all Substances o^ Things. An Eternal ONE, wherein is no Ground nor Place: He
is to the Creature, in its ability, a NOTHING: And yet is through ALL.

77. Nature and Creature, is his Somewhat, wherewith he makes himself visible,
perceptible, and inventible, both according to the Eternity and Time.

78. All things are Existed through divine Imagination, and do yet stand in
such a Birth or Geniture, Condition or Regiment.

79. Also the Four Elements have such a Ground from the Imagination of the
Eternal ONE. Concerning which I will here set down a Table, how the one
unfoldeth or out-breatheth it self out of the other.

80. In the Annexed Table, is the Ground of All Secret Mysteries of divine
Manifestation or Revelation, described; to be considered of. The understanding
of which is not in Natures own self ability, without Gods Light: But to those,
who stand in the Light, it may well be understood; and without that it is
Childish.

81. As also, in my writings these things are declared sufficiently and
largely; and here only in brief comprised, and represented in a Scheme or
Figure.

82. Thus Sirs, I commend you to the Salutation of the Love of JESUS CHRIST,
who through his aspect and salutation, is himself the Key, to the understanding
of this Table.

Dated the 11. November, 1623. Jacob Behme.

A Catalogue of Jacob Behme's Books Printed in English.
In the same Order as the Numbers are, at the End of the 40. Questions of the
Soul, Printed 1647.

1. The Aurora, written anno 1612. 2. The Three Principles of the Divine
Substance, 1619. 3. The Threefold Life of Man, 1620. 4. The Answers to the 40,
Questions of the Soul. 5. Three Books. 1. The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. The
2. of the Suffering Death and Resurrection of Christ. 3. Of the Tree of Faith.
6. The Book of Six Points, the Great, and Small. Here Printed. 7. The Book of
the Heavenly and Earthly Mystery. Here Printed. 8. A Book of the Last Times, An
Epistle to Paul Keyme. 9. A Book De Signatura Rerum. 1621. 10. A Cons^latory
Book of the Four Complexions translated by Mr. Charles Hotham. 13. A Book of
true Repentance. These three are the Book called the way to Christ. 1622. 14. A
Book of true Resignation. These three are the Book called the way to Christ.
1622. 15. A Book of Regeneration. These three are the Book called the way to
Christ. 1622. 16. A Book of Predestination and Election, 1623. 17. A short
Compendium of Repentance. 18. An Exposition of Genesis, called the Mysterium
Magnum. 19. A Table of the Principles, or a Key of his Writings, being the
Epistle to Godfrey Freuden Hammern and John Hausern, here printed, Concerning
the Knowledge of God, and of All things, also of the True and False Light,
1624. 20. A Little Book of the Supersensual Life, Printed at the End of the Way
to Christ. 21 A Little Book of Divine Vision, here printed. 22. A Book of the
Two Testaments of Christ: viz: Baptism and the Supper. 23. A Dialogue between
the enlightened and unenlightened Soul, Printed at the end of the Way to
Christ. 25 A Book of the 177. Theosophick Questions, with Answers to Thirteen
of them, and the Fifteenth to the 6. verse, here printed. 26. An Epitome of the
Mysterium Magnum, printed at the End of the Book there called, A Brief Abstract
thereof. 27 The Holy-Week or the Prayer Book, here printed. 28. A Table of the
Divine Manifestation, or an Exposition of the Threefold World, here printed.
30. A Book of the Last Judgment, which is supposed to be the last Chapter of
the Book of the Three Principles. 31. Epistles, in Number 35. Printed in
English. Also, A Clavis or Key printed at the end of the 40. Questions.
Those with this Mark () were left by the Author unfinished.

These are to be sold by Lodowibk Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhill, London.


