THE Second, Fourth, and Seventh SATYRS OF Monsieur BOILEAU IMITATED, With some
other POEMS AND TRANSLATIONS Written upon several occasions.

-- ubi quid datur oti
Illudo chartis.
Hor. Sat. 4. Lib. Sermon. 1. LONDON: Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate, in
Holbourn; and H. Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball in Cornhill. 1696.

To MADAM MARIABELLA SEDGWYCK.
MADAM,
WERE the having received one Favor, Encouragement enough for the Person thus
obliged to beg another, and were the Singular Freeness, with which it was
conferred, Sufficient to let him hope that he should not ask in vain; then have
I no ordinary assurance, that a New Request will meet with success, who have
received from your hands more Favors and Greater then I had ever any reason to
Expect: of which I Shall only mention the Greatest your CONVERSATION. I am very
well satisfied that by one of that Obliging Temper for which Your Self are
remarkable, to ask New Favors may be looked upon as the best way of showing
our Esteem for past ones, and returns are not expected from one, whose Power is
so little, that he cannot make 'em Suitable; and his Acknowledgments so great
that he would not make them otherwise. Such Considerations as these, have been
the Occasion of this Bold Attempt, and made me presumptuously entertain some
thoughts, that what I had here wrote might not be altogether unacceptable to
You. This had I Dedicated to any other Person, I might then have reasonably
feared lest it should Suffer under that Patronage; whereas at present, I
believe, it will justly argue a point of Prudence in a Man, who mistrusts the
Sufficiency of his endeavors like me, to have recourse to one who is able to
maintain 'em like YOU. I must confess I have a great deal of Reason to fear you
will be too severe in your Sentiments of these Compositions; when You shall
give your self the Trouble to read 'em over: both because your Judgment's so
Great, and my Performances so Mean. The same apprehensions will those Pieces
more particularly that are Imitated from the French, raise in me; your
acquaintance with that Language being so intimate, and mine but just Sprung. So
that had I not Experienced your Candor, I had had no color for the Pretense
of this Epistle, which, if it meet with a kind Reception will be the greatest
Satisfaction in the world to,

Madam, Your most Obliged Humble Servant etc.

THE PREFACE.
THere are a thousand People perhaps (though I know no reason why half the Number
should concern themselves about me) will be so inquisitive as to ask who is the
Author, I presume, not out of any particular Curiosity they have to be
acquainted with the Person, but purely out of custom. However let 'em assure
themselves, that if I had had a mind they should know, I would have inserted my
name in the Title Page, to be seen the first thing that is looked upon, without
any more to do. Which when they find I have omitted they may conclude I had no
such design. If indeed I had the happiness of being known abroad, I mean
remarkably so, and upon a good account, I might then probably imagine that my
Name prefixed would be a considerable Addition to the Book, and a stamp
sufficient to make it current. But now if the Success it meets withal in the
World be not altogether answerable to my Expectations, I am with mankind but
just where I was before; and hug my self for my Prudence in not making my self
public, and following the General cry, seem the busiest Man in Railing against
it, as thinking that the safest way to prevent Discovery; like a cunning Rogue
that cries stop Theif the lowdest, because he himself would not fall under
suspicion.

But the greatest Kindness I propose to my self in this Concealment of my Name,
Is, not because I look upon what I have done to be any ways unaccountable, but
because I think it below a man that does not make it altogether his business,
to make it any Part of his Business, or at least to profess it as such: For if
I propose Poetry as a diversion only without any farther aim, I must not so
much as seem to desire to grow remarkable upon that account: which I must
unavoidably do, if I acknowledge what I have here writ to be mine. And though I
would do something of this Nature when I have nothing in the World else to do,
yet I am so far from desiring that it should be thought a part of my Study,
that I would not be known to have done any thing like this even for my
recreation. Though what K. Charles was pleased to say to Sir John Denham upon the
like occasion will excuse me too; which was that when men were Young and had
little else to do, it was very Allowable for them to vent the Overflowings of
their Fancy this way, but if they persisted in this course it would look as if
they minded not the way to any better Employment. And for that reason I take my
leave of all things of this Nature. And from hence too I hope it will evidently
appear, that I have no such mean thing as Honor in my Eye, unless you can
suppose that a man would retreat into a solitude on purpose to make himself
known to all the World; for though the Person's reputation whosoever he be, may
be as great whilst he remains unknown as when he is not so, yet he that runs at
Fame, will receive little Satisfaction from that praise which he cannot own due
to himself. For though I know that all these Commendations are conferred upon a
certain Person, that wrote such a certain Book, at such a certain time; yet so
long as I am not known to have done this, so long as I cannot digito monstrari
et dicier hic est: Jack a Nokes receives as much Honor from these performances
as I, and for that reason, shall Jack a Nokes receive as much disgrace if they
don't succeed. It Is the same thing if we view a fine Picture, we are apt to
judge it to be done by a Masterly stroke, but if we are ignorant that Kneller's
pencill drew the Piece, a sign post dawber may have the Reputation of it as
well as He. However if I will not tell you my name, yet I hope I may be allowed to
give you some character of my self. I am then ugly and illnatur'd enough for a
Wit, poor enough for a wit, whimsical enough for a wit, and have elder Brothers
enough for a wit; so here are the Signs at least, how short soever I may fall
of the thing; and though I say it, I can call my self Poet with as much
Authority, as a Scotch Pedlar calls himself Merchant, or a fellow that stroles
up and down with a Village Bag-pipe, write himself (if he can) Musician.

The second thing that perhaps these men may impertinently enquire into is why
I write? to whom I would answer were it worth my while, without pleading
Humor, interest or the like; that though I did not think there was any
deficiency in Poetry, I mean in the number of Poems not their composition; or
that there was any need of adding to the former, and for making amends for the
latter I was wholly incapable; yet I did this, that I might have some sort of
revenge at least upon those Fellows that had writ ill before me, by intruding
upon them as good as they brought: as Mr. D -- is may see in my Imitation of
the Fourth Satyr of Monsieur Boileau. The other two by all that I can learn
were never touched upon by any hand before.

Thus it is, and I cannot help it, my design to oblige the world is as little,
as my endeavors to do it are weak; and the hopes I entertain of receiving any
obligation from it less, than either. And a man may e'ne as well Expect to huff
a Critic into good Nature, as look for Favor at his hands by crying Mercy.
Especially since there are one sort of Critics that have bid me not Despair, a
sort of low spirited Villains who if they see me reeling will be sure to trip
up my heels, always pursuing a man the closer if they apprehend him timorous,
and like Cowards promise themselves a great deal of advantage by their
adversary's running away.

There are another sort whom I shall Endeavor to please as little as I desire
it, who think their Judgment is much better exerted in Damning than approving;
and consequently every thing that comes within their reach, receives its
sentence before hand; But these are men of distempered Palates that relish
nothing well; men of so weak a stomach, that if for interest or compliance, any
thing goes down with them, it shall be sure to come up again one time or other
without digestion.

There are a third sort who fix upon just what comes within the small Compass
of their Capacity; (resolved to be Critics let the World go how 'twill,) that
is whether this should be a Semicolon or a comma; and tell a man he does not
rightly understand the full extent of a Period, or that he cannot Spell because
the Press has taken the Liberty to put a letter out of its place; but these are
men whom I scorn to take Notice of, as much as they scorn not to take Notice of
every body else. But I don't pretend in so narrow a Compass as this to set down
all the different Species of Critics, who swarm in as Numerous Bodies as flies
produced by the heat of the Sun in a Summer season, and if I been't mistaken
they are a little like them to, for they taint every thing they settle upon: I
here heartily beg the Reader's pardon for trespassing upon his Patience by an
Harangue which he will tell me is nothing to the purpose, and therefore I shall
fore'stall him, and tell him so.

Now as to what more particularly concerns Monsieur Boileau, I know there is
scarce any one can be Ignorant what a Character that Gentleman has bore in the
World: and scarce any one, that has read him in his own Language, will take the
pains to Read him in mine, so that I apprehend my self under very
disadvantageous Circumstances, whilst I am to answer their Expectations who
have heard what he is, and theirs who know what he is: Upon this account
therefore my Imitating these three Satyrs, seems a harder task then I should
have pretended to meddle with, but my design at first was, that if after all,
they were not well Received, the mistakes I had made might at least provoke a
more Judicious pen, to set them out in a more agreeable dress: For the Failures
of our Precedents ar generally great encouragements for those that come after
them, to try whether they cannot come off with greater applause; as it is in the
undertaking of all new inventions and Stratagems, the first that set about 'em
usually break, others see their Errors and bring 'em to Perfection.

Monsieur Boileau's second Satyr is against Rhyme, and I would have You observe,
that as he ascribes it to Monsieur Moliere as one who writ well in rhyme, and
well without it; so I have made bold to use Mr. Dryden's name to Countenance my
Imitation of him; as one that writes the justest Number, and strictest Rhyme of
any man in England; and I Suppose no man without forfeiting his Judgment, will
dispute that he writes admirably well, when he is pleased to lay those
particular Ornaments aside; I need not wish that this Character came from more
commendable testimony, for the Greatest men in the Kingdom must allow it him; I
only beg his Pardon that I should presume to touch upon the Merits of so great
a Person, without having any of my own to give me some Tolerable grounds for
this Authority.

I have not observed Rhyme very strictly my self in these Satyrs, and in some
other Pieces, both because I do not think it altogether so Necessary in loose
familiar Compositions, as in stately Heroic Verse, and because the first thing
in the Book seems to Condemn it.

As for the other Poems they were writ upon several Occasions but never
distributed about to those on whom they were Wrote, nor Communicatid to any one
else, Excepting to the two Persons who have taken the pains to write
Commendatory Verses upon so ill a Subject, which I think I may with Modesty
admit of, not having discovered my Name, but, (as I instanced) to those two,
yet think it still a secret.

To my Ingenious Friend -- On the following POEMS.
Called to the Hill Apollo's blessed abode,
With joy we heard the Summons of the God;
With Equal strength pressed forward to the top:
Still your success urged on my eager hope.
But when I see Boileau and Thee combined,
His poignant wit to English vigor joined,
To lash the idle Fopperies of mankind:
Or when I read how sweetly you reveal
The pains, which some coy Beauty makes You feel:
Or find some Hero, whose Illustrious name
Your lines adorn, and give immortal fame.
Or view the vid. p. 48.
Goddess, who shall ever live
In those fair colors, which your Verses give:
Whose Matchless Face, and all perfections shine,
Less bright from Kneller's Skilful hand, than thine.
I only can admire, and now lay down
My claim toth' Muses, who are all thine own:
Nor can I blush to see my self outdone.
So the Spectatours at some noble race,
With ease at starting keep an equal pace:
But when the Flag provokes to greater Speed,
And the eager Jockey Spurs the generous Steed,
No more in vain the unequal race they Try;
But at a distance follow with the Eye.
Yours --

To His Ingenious Friend the Author of the following POEMS.
TOO well (I find) Prophetic Bards of old
The Destiny of Poets told.
No pains (they say) no Study can acquire
That Heavenly Spark of immaterial fire.
Which, Thyrsis, must like theirs, or Thine,
Be all infused, and all divine:
The Muse must have a birth as well as we,
And be co-twin with us, as 'twas with Thee.
Were it not thus ordained, why might not I
To the same pitch with others fly,
Till I had learnt to reach that noble height
To which thy soaring Muse extends her flight?
And sing with the same Art her praise
With which she other men's can raise?
But on the Earth my groveling Genius lies,
Friendship and merit cannot make it rise.
Whether thy hallowed verse shall I profane,
And take thy mighty name in vain?
Or in respectfull silence live, and see
All thy Friends wait upon thy dawn but me?
Sure sense of gratitude may teach
A way the muse's Hill to reach:
I find it now, and fain would silence break,
But weakness does the growing boldness check.
Yet Spite of weakness I will on, and tell
What charms do in thy numbers dwell:
How pleasingly thy softer touches do
The Fancy strike with something always new:
How Strength with beauty blended shines
Through all thy weighty Sterling lines.
How fitly all thy words thy thoughts express,
And Foreigners become Thy English dress.
Artfull Boileau with such a Genius writes,
As tickles us at once and bites:
In the Venusian's footsteps walking; fools,
Whom the morose Would lash, he ridicules.
Yet though he often does imitate,
Too mean he thinks it to translate,
So you his thoughts have always in your view,
And as his Master He, You him pursue.
These truths with pleasure all that know you see,
And joy to find that hopeful tree,
Whose early Youth such pleasing blossoms bore;
Now bears those ripened fruits which please 'em more.
All then from Phaebus's bounty we
Desire; shall Thyrsis, be for Thee.
That he with Kindly rays would make Thee bear,
And bless us with thy fruit another Year.
Censure and envious malice bravely scorn
Thy Muse is like Alcides born;
And so much Strength from her sire's vigor takes,
That in her cradle she can crush the Snakes.
Like that great Hero may she grow
His happiness, not dangers know,
And when e're death deprives the world of Thee
May Thine and her reward be immortality.
Yours --

The TABLE.
THE Second Satyr of Boileau imitated Page 1 The Fourth Satyr of Boileau p. 9
The Seventh Satyr of Boileau p. 21 Predestination. p. 29 Mohomet's Paradise an
Ode p. 32 On the Pope's Toe p. 35 To Dorinda from Voiture p. 36 The 50th Epig.
of Martial imitated p. 39 Song p. 41 To the Earl of Northampton p. 43 To a Lady
that drinks nothing but Water p. 46 To a Lady whose name was formerly Scroup
now Pitts, seeing her Picture in the Gallery at Hampton Court p. 48 To the
Seven Lords Justices p. 49 To a Lady that imposed silence upon him p. 51 An
Inscription upon a Letter Case p. 53 A Letter to a Gentleman who advised him to
make the Campaigne in Flanders p. 55 To Sylviana from Bedlam p. 60 To a Lady in
an undress p. 63 To Belinda sick of a Fever p. 65 To Dorinda from Voiture p.
68 To Dorinda Watering a Garden p. 71 A Song p. 72 To Cloris on her Dream p. 74
The Hue and Cry after a Heart p. 77 To a Friend in the Country that desired him
to send him the News p. 83 To His Highness the Duke of Gloucester on his
Installment p. 86 To Sylvia carrying Scaron's Novels to Church instead of a
Common Prayr Book p. 87 To D. Blackmore on his Prince Arthur. p. 89 The
Association p. 92 To a Lady that made Images in wax p. 94 To Belinda on her
Recovery from her Fever p. 96 To a Gentleman looking for his Spectacles whilst
they were on his nose p. 98 To a Lady whose smock sleeves were dirty from
Voiture p. 99 Phyllis and Acon translated p. 100 To Dorinda on Valentine's day
p. 101 The Snow-ball p. 102 The Eleventh Ode of Horace imitated p. 104 To a
Lady whom I hit as I was playing at Bowls p. 105 To a Lady who was almost
burnt to death whilst at prayers p. 107 Upon Belinda's having the Tooth-ack p.
108 Epig 22. lib 4. of Martial p. 111 To a Lady that wept for her little Dog
112 The Flatterrer p. 114 The young Lady's Waller p. 116 A Letter to a Friend
concerning an University Life p. 118
THE SECOND SATYR OF Monsieur BOILEAU, IMITATED.
Written to Mr. DRYDEN.
TELL me (Great Dryden) You, whose fertile brain,
Big with vast thought, produces without pain;
To whom alone Apollo does impart
His mighty treasures both of wit, and Art.
Such is Your Judgment too, that it can pierce
Through every different Species of Verse:
And soon determine with a transient view,
What is the Stamp it bares, and whether true.
Tell me I say how you with such great ease
Produce a rhyme to any thing you please.
Alas! That never puts you to a Stand
Observing still the motions of your hand:
And waiting the approaches of your Quill
To the Second verse, it is proper place 'twill fill.
But I with frantic fit for some great Crime
Am seizd, and barbarously condemned to Rhyme.
In vain I strive to conquer my hard Fate,
That makes me sink beneath its heavy weight.
In vain I Am thoughtful quite from Morn till Night,
When Black's the word I want, the Rhyme is White.
When some brisk Gallant I Would describe in Love,
My Muse still found for Rhyme grave Doctor D -- ve.
When I Would a Poet without fault set down,
Reason, says Dryden: Rhyme, will have it Cr -- n.
In fine whatever I Have a mind to say,
Still the quite contrary will come in the way.
At length by disappointments weary grown,
And sadly discomposed, I sit me down,
Resolved to think no more upon it; and curse
The Evil Genius that inspired me first.
But having Damned Apollo and my Muse
And sworn their aid hereafter to refuse:
Look! unexpected Rhyme comes pressing for my use.
And straight I rally up in spite of fate,
My almost smothered particles of heat,
Forgetting my rash vows, I to it again,
Looking that every other verse 'twill daign
To come, and make me not thus fret and fume in vain.
However if my nice Muse in raving fit
Would down at least with a flat Epithete,
Or so, as many another's often does.
I could with ease produce a Rhyme in the close.
If I would Phillis praise, that is gay and fair,
I Would rhyme immediately, She Is past compare.
Or if some object, that is extremely fine,
I Would cry, the Sun it self don't brighter shine.
And so when e're I spoke of lofty things,
Whether of mighty Beauty, mighty Kings,
Or what e're with it admiration brings:
With such fine words as these at random writ,
(Perhaps with full as little Art as Wit,)
And often with the Noun and Verb transposed,
Each verse with De -- is's fragments might be closed.
But while I waver in my choice of words,
I use not one but what some light affords
To what I would be understood to mean;
That bares some Stress; that is authentic, clean,
And would be wanted were it out again.
I hate a nauseous, dull, insipid phrase,
That Is only writ to fill a vacant place,
And manifestly shows that Sense is scarce.
So that though I the twenti'th time review
The Piece I Have made, I still should make it new.
Cursed be the Fool who first presumed to try
To limit thought, that should be always free:
And in such narrow bounds his words confine,
Making his Sense as Servil as his Rhyme.
Had this not been then I had held my tongue,
And all my Days slid quietly along,
Unenvied, unknown, I should Drink, Laugh, and Sing,
And cry God Bless our Nation our Church and our King.
And like a Prebend Fat with Holy Ease,
My cares at once should with my Business cease;
And I Would do nothing but just what I pleased.
Exempt from Frantic Whimseys all the day,
In sleep I Would pass the tedious Nights away;
No heats of Passion should my quiet Soul
Disturb, nor idle Fears my will control.
As for Ambition I would keep it low,
And set it bounds how far it were to go:
Shunning the import'nate presence of the great
I Would not at Court, to cringe to Fortune, wait.
Thus I Would been happy if my envious Stars,
Had not ordained, I should be damned to Verse.
But since a Phrenzy first began to seize
My Soul with this incurable Disease:
Since my Ill Genius over my Temples sat,
And fearing I should grow too fortunate,
Made me aim High, and Fondly Entertain
Big thoughts of writing in a Noble strain.
Since that unhappy moment, I confess
Iv'e Constant been toth' Drudgery of Verse.
Where going to revise a single clause
This Flat I find, this Dark; and Forty flaws
Make me blot out the piece I thought correct.
Which brought me through this Labor to reflect
On the uneasiness I here sustain,
And made me envy Even Ri -- r's vein.
Ah! happy D -- fie whose too fertile Muse,
Can every now and then with ease produce
Some mighty Works. And this in your defense
I needs must own, you write in Spite of Sense,
To Art I know you will not make pretense.
Be what they will, yet so far they succeed
That the great Author never stands in need
Of Bookseller to buy, or Fools to read.
And if his Verses do but End in Rhyme
To botch the middle up he thinks no Crime
For how that passes it is all one to him.
He Is doubly cursed then, whose Poetic Vein
Must be to Rules so servily constrained.
A fool enjoys the pleasure of his Muse,
Who the next thing that comes will never refuse,
As unacquainted with the pains to choose.
Ravished h' admires the product of his quill,
And hugs himself for having writ so well.
But the great Soul attempts to find in Vain
That vast Perfection which he makes his aim:
Always unsatisfied with what he has done,
Thinks this might best have ended, this begun.
And such and such Additions made it neat;
When all the World affirms it is complete.
And though all places loudly Speak his fame,
And for his Genius reverence his Name;
He wishes all the while it were his Lot,
That all his pieces might one single blot
Sustain, or else repents that e're he wrote.
YOU then that with this excellence abound,
And see how my poor Muse is run aground,
Tell me where the Art of Rhiming's to be found.
Or if Your great Endeavors chance to fail,
Instruct me, Dryden, not to Rhyme at all.
THE FOURTH SATYR OF Monsieur BOILEAU IMITATED.
HOw comes it (Will) that he of all Mankind,
Who most to perfect Phrenzy is inclined,
Should yet conceit he has the soundest mind?
All those whose conversation he has known,
And with theirs partially compared his own,
He bids take care of lower room and grate
In Bedlam, as their sure impending Fate.
Why here is a Pedant that for Twelve Years space
Has still Jog'd on in the same Trudging pace;
Has ransacked mothy volumes of the Dead,
And with dry Grecian wisdom stuffed his head:
Having from Adages extracted juice,
(A Chimicks labor for a Pedant's use)
Something upon occasion he will produce.
He firmly thinks there is nothing to be done,
Without the study through which he has run.
And swears the Stagarite can alone dispense
A System of sound reason and good sense:
Thus the Proud fool with others learning fraught
Would take it very kindly to be thought
A man of parts: I tell thee he is a Sot.
A Fop of Fashion is the next I meet,
Whose business it is all day to walk the street,
Of no misfortune Sensible but this
A ruffled Perruque, and a ruined Phiz.
Pulvill and Amber and a Spice of Fool
Make up his Essence, constitute the whole.
He Damns grave sots, and carps at all that is writ,
Thinks Ignorance in him is sign of wit,
And boasts the mighty Privilege he has
(As he is a Gentleman) to be an Ass.
Cries let the plodding Soul sit quiet down
In some Foundation rich with twenty pound.
Next here is a Biggot plump with lying still,
Presumes there are no bounds to curb his will.
With Saint-like look, demure, and seeming true
Hopes by's affected zeal to cheat Heaven too,
As unsuspected as he Shams the Crew.
And thinks his Power with his Interest joined
Is certainly enough to damn Mankind.
The next's a Libertine to whom is given
As little Faith as will to Merit Heaven;
He no constraint can bare, no Laws endure,
But what his Sovereign pleasures shall procure.
He holds that Hell and Furies, Feinds and flames
Are all but idle, Fond, invented names,
To frighten foolish antiquated Dames,
And quiet Children: Whilst with other cares
His noddle's filled, these are the least he fears:
And thinks the Pious man he sees in tears
Is mad belike: a Hundred more there are
Of whom we full as justly may despair.
But he that Searches into every mind
To know the various tempers of Mankind;
How they are disposed; and how they disagree
From one another as we daily see;
And what is the occasion often; would find I fear
His task on trial Something too severe.
In my opinion he might even as well
Pretend, by scanty Arithmetic to tell,
How many Doctor Br -- n and Cortex kill
Each Spring: or know how often pretty Miss
(Before she tastes what Matrimony is,)
To Fops and Fools and Coxcombs of the Town
Has sold her Maidenhead for half a Crown.
In short I Will tell you my opinion's this,
(Under their favor who were once called wise.)
Through this wide Orb where e're you cast your Eye,
You no such thing as Prudence will descry.
All men are Mad? It Is true all men I own
Are not to the same pitch of Frenzy grown;
For this they can allege in their defense
That one has more, the other Lesser Sense.
No one e're regular Methods here obeys,
But wanders on in Wild uncertain ways,
Wherever Ignorance is pleased to lead;
Observing still some beaten road to tread.
So He that travels through a Spacious wood,
Which above forty different paths divide,
May chance to lose his way without a guide.
Though you to this, and I to that, incline,
It Is the same Error that deludes Mankind.
And he that thinks he holds the surest way,
May chance to be deceived as much as they
Who wanting Council always went astray.
On wisdon each man strives (though never so dull)
To build; and with discretion plays the fool:
Whilst by appearance led to judge amiss,
He takes for Virtue what indeed is Vice.
To Him I speak that fain himself would know
He Is the most wise, who thinks he is not so.
Who others faults with favor passing by,
Looks on himself with a more piercing Eye;
Condemns that action cause too rash; and this
Through want of force seems to be done amiss.
Examins all with an impartial view.
But tell me who is to himself so true?
Who is there to find faults at home will strive?
Or if he does wont easily connive.
See thou the Miser how he huggs his Oar,
And starves himself in the midst of all his store?
But what does he this real Madness call?
It Is Prudence Sir, it is discretion all;
He thinks through this he honor may obtain,
And that all Happiness is placed in gain.
Now is it not wondrous strange a man should choose
To toil and sweat for that he never can use,
To treasure what he daily fears to lose?
Is not this frenzy? cries A hot brained Sot,
That Is finding means to lavish what was got
By stingy Father, once not worth a groat.
H' expends vast Sums, he knows not where nor how,
No nor with whom, nor does he care to know,
But as they lightly came, they lightly go.
And thus the generous, giddy Soul runs on
Till his estate is seized, and Fortunes gone.
Which of the two do you think's the greatest fool?
This has too large, that a too narrow Soul.
Two such extremes I never could approve,
And faith in me they equal pity move,
Cries prudent C -- s with his Box of Dice,
Now Sir ten thousand strong, and in a trice,
Shake the Honorable Fob the deal a sice.
And Seven or Eleven will suffice
To let him know whether he Lives or Dies.
Should now blind Fortune her dear favorite scorn;
And losing casts Succeed upon the turn;
With fury struck his Eyes to Heaven he would rear,
And fret, and fume, and stamp, and sweat, and swear;
Not quite forgetting too, in all his rage
(Which luck that raised it, only could assuage,)
To curse himself that he did first Engage.
He storms like one possessed: at whose complaints
Priest mumbles over his catalogue of Saints,
To cast the Devil out that entered there.
They bind him fast; for by his furious air
He seems as though from the race of Titans Sprung,
Resolved to end the war they had begun,
And quite expel the Thunderer from his Throne.
Let him however pursue his frantic whim,
Folly alone is Punnishment for him,
And great enough. Nay there are Errors too
Through which we are led by a deceitful clue;
Which whilst they Secret charms to us impart
Our Judgment, and our reason quite subvert.
Here Is S -- le now that coxcomb who in spite
Of niggard Nature and his Stars will write;
And though perhaps he Rimes, Sir, all the while
In hard Expression, and a Bombast Style,
Frames words unused; although there run a vein
Of fluid Nonsense through his lofty strain;
Nay though there is never a Youngster in Knipe's School
But finds him out, and laughs at the dull Fool.
Yet He is pleased, and modestly beleives
That if he with such noble fancy strives,
He shall come nearer to Parnassus Hill,
Than ever Dryden did or ever will.
But after all should some judicious Bard
Who'd taken resolution to be heard,
Make it appear how little beauty shines
How little strength through all his thundering Lines:
How flat his sense, how forced his Rhyme, and show
With what uneveness his numbers flow.
Would he not curse the day when he began
To know he erred? would he not curse the man
That told him truth, while yet with raptures seizd
His Soul was with delightful Error pleased?
A Biggot, otherwise a man of sense
And parts, (as I Am informed) not far from hence,
Was by a pleasing madness seized of late,
Which hovering o're's Enthusiastic pate,
He thought he frequently had used to hear
A Charming sound, just like the gentle air
Of Music, always chiming in his Ear.
Comes a Physician Sir in wondrous have
To give my Gentleman a single cast
Of's Office. With long industry and Art
Having successfully performed his part,
Come Sir ten Guineas are the least you will give;
Under my hands a man never better thrive.
The Biggot in a passion from his seat
Arose, and cried, cursed be thy damned receipt
Copied in some Infernal Scraul for thee,
To make the sad Experiment on me.
Still I Would been happy were it not for this,
A State of Error is a State of bliss.
Begone I say, and no entreaties move.
Nor can I the rough answer disapprove,
For since I must my sentiments declare,
Of all the great misfortunes that we bare,
Of all the Tyrant Ills we suffer here,
That very thing which grave men Reason call,
A noble guide, is much the worst of all.
Reason it is thou that do disturb our joy,
That never, never, but for Thee would cloy.
For if we are sated, and do change the Scene,
It Is because thou did rudely intervene.
When I would give a loose, you ready stand
Behind with an importunate demand,
And when I Am Eager bid me hold my hand:
Thou that harsh Governante whisperst in my Ear,
Cease to do this. And that creates my fear.
But for all that the dreaming Sots in vain
Over all our senses place Thee Sovereign.
In vain they make Thee a divinity,
And by thy favor think to mount the Sky.
It Is She say they that to us precepts gives,
By which we learn the conduct of our lives.
Certain I am, let them say what they please,
The greatest Fool enjoys the greatest ease.
THE SEVENTH SATYR OF Monsieur BOILEAU, IMITATED.
PRithy (dear Muse) let us change the usual strain.
For why in so Satirical a vein
(Though Coxcombs do abound) should we complain?
Since we are free methinks we should not choose
So Ill an Office, as it is to abuse.
He that writes thus and fain would witty seem,
Buys but contempt, not purchases esteem.
And the sharp jest at which the Reader grins,
Has made the Scoffing Poet rub his shins,
And often cry Damn it, let Him laugh that wins.
A tedious Panegyric dully writ,
Fears not the Censures of the men of Wit,
Disposed of in some corner of the Shop,
Or else translated to the Garret top,
Securely there amongst the Rubbish lies;
And now all harms but dust and worms defies.
But a keen Satyrist that is full of spite,
And by malicious talent taught to Bite;
Whilst he presumes his too facetious way
Of railing ever was allowed, and may;
All those that read him over, though they must
Acknowledge what is writ, is true, and just:
They Will damn the Writer, wish him doubly cursed.
What is too home, will grate the Ear I own,
And a too naked truth alarms the Town.
For there is never a one that views this glass,
But without Flattery must see his Face.
Therefore in vain these Methods we pursue,
Have we no famous Hero in our view,
Whose warlike Acts we may with praise extol,
And in eternal Verse his name enrol?
But I can this to others better teach
Than put in practice; it is above my reach;
My Flagging Muse durst never soar so high,
Unable all his Virtues to discry,
Unworthy to relate: in vain it seems
I bite my nails, and Scratch my pate for Rhimes,
With all the Raptures, Ecstasies and whims,
As Poets use when pregnant noddle teems.
In harsher strains I should be forced to sing,
Than Ya -- in praises a Victorious King.
But when I Would rail Iv'e all things at command,
And kind Apollo still assists my hand.
Rhyme, Verse, and matter I with ease produce,
While numerous words stand crowding for my use;
Suppose a perjured Villain I Would discribe,
Here Is Oats of's own accord, without a bribe,
The greatest of the whole forswearing tribe.
If of an Eminent Fool my Muse would treat,
Here Is B -- ry; if of as Eminent a cheat
Here' C -- by I Am sure will do the feat.
Or if you would have a dabler in Rhyme,
A trifler with the Muses and his time;
There Is D -- fie, R -- en -- ft, and G -- ld, and Cr -- n,
S -- le, D -- nn, R -- er, P -- is, and for one
I want, a Thousand I can write you down.
Having hit right I tacitly rejoice,
And hug my self for such a prudent choice.
In vain I try to stem the Furious tide
Of my hot Passion, and my rashness chide;
In vain this Fellows faults I would conceal
Because he is my Friend; nor His reveal
Because a worthy Seat he is used to fill;
My too impartial Muse would take it ill.
For whensoe're my raptures first begin
To sease my Soul, and I grow warm within.
I strictly all examine, sure to know
Whether all is Fish that comes to the net or no.
However of merit I am tender still,
And never that offend but against my will.
But every arrant Fop pulls down my Hate,
And may seem justly to deserve the Fate
That I intend him; whilst with vigorous course
Where're he taks his Flight I trace him close.
The deep mouthed Hound more warmly don't pursue
Nor with more speed, the full blown Dear at view.
Without time lost I can with greatest ease
Patch up a Rhyme to any words I please;
Sometimes I write with careless Air, and loose,
And cloth my Verse in an ill natured prose:
Observing measure, number I transgress,
And if in ought I do excel, it is this.
And for that reason resolution take,
Were Death here ready, and my life at stake,
Although propitious Heaven would kindly grant
A long and easy course, and free from want,
Prepair in the Country or in Town a Seat,
Where I might either private live or great;
That I hence forward quietly sat down,
In spite of Fops and Fools should hold my tongue.
Though all the World expected I should choose
The great reprieve with thanks; I would refuse;
Rich, poor, severe, or gay, what e're Disguise
My Temper bore, stll I would Satyrise.
Poor Soul cries one do thou not pity find,
That you are to furious transports thus inclined?
As thy sure fate this boiling ranchor Dread,
By some sour fumes of Melancholy bred.
Shun it I say, for fear that one of those
Whom you in Satyr have decreed to Expose,
Should some way take to cool thy raging blood,
And make thee write again if thou think good.
Pray tell me how? how did Lucilius write
And Horace too, both armed with equal spite?
When to unmask the lurking vice each page
Revenging virtues cause, did swell with rage,
Endeav'ring to discountenance the sinning age.
And what did Juvenal? was he hot or rash,
Because he kept all Rome within his lash?
He neither spared the men, nor feared their curse
But Spoke aloud, and yet fared never the worse.
Now what have I to fear pray all this while?
Who is it that knows my name? or who my style?
I write but little, nor intend to vie,
With F -- no; nor with emulation try,
Who writes the largest Volume He or I.
Sometimes (with much ado) whatever I Have writ
To a Friends view or so I can commit;
To one perhaps that is minded to be gay,
And seems to love a strain that runs this way.
Perhaps he Flatters, and with smiling air
Looks pleased, and laughs, when his too conscious Ear
Tells him that this himself may justly fear.
However from this I will not move an ace,
It Is here I mighty Satisfaction place;
I cannot speak well, nor can I hold my peace.
For if I ought ridiculous can find,
The bringing of it forth will ease my mind.
The impetuous torrent of my Soul must go,
And if beyond the banks its Waters flow,
On they will run whether I will or no.
PREDESTINATION.
WHy, Dick, should you whimper and whine at this Rate,
Or keep such a coil about you know not what?
Wipe your Eyes man, your tears will never mollify fate.
You abuse Madam Fortune and call her damnd whore,
Inconstant Bitch, Jade, and a thousand names more,
Than ever the Sophy or Grand Signior bore.
But it seems You are out: For she cannot be kinder
Though she would; since Fate's will does so shakle and bind her,
And with Praedestination ties her hands quite behind her.
Look where a poor Wit sits o'rerun with vermin,
While Clod pates, and Marr-alls, sleep at Church in their Ermin,
And Blockheadly Fools have their lacquey's and chairmen.
There Is a Sturdy old Britain who has been in the wars,
And thirty years stickled in National jars,
Yet has nothing to show for his pains, but his Scars.
Take a turn over the water, you will see some Min-heers,
That have drunk, slept, and cheated but one dozen years,
As greasy as chandlers, and as wealthy as Peers.
And now if you can show me what Obligation
Fortune has to be kind to these men or that Nation,
Unless you will confess it is all Praedestination.
But perhaps you are going among these Holl-anders,
And design to be one of those worthy Commanders,
That fight for their pay and Religion in Flanders.
Yet before you march off, y' had as good take advice
Of your Stars; for from them you may learn in a trice,
Whether Fate has ordained you shall perish or rise.
In her Power are all things and the better to show it,
She made Hewson a Coll'nel, and D -- fie a Poet,
Bid N -- on fight duels and Sir Novelty beaux it.
Some say time is swift but those men that mind him
(However he pretends that he never looks behind him,)
Will show you how Fate to one round has confind him.
They Will tell you long storys of causes, whose End,
If once they agree on the matter in hand,
(Whether Jove's pleased or no) must their motions attend.
Why then do we thus, (since 'twon't stand us in stead)
The approaching ill view, with more horror and dread,
Than a Welshman would see the blood drop from his head.
Bid adieu, my Friend, here to fond sighs and vain tears,
Keep your mirth to your self, send the Dutchmen your cares;
Since they have got all our coin, let 'em keep all our fears.
Mahomet's PARADISE. AN ODE.
'TWas nobly taught, and like the man that knew
What to Sovereign sense was due;
Like one that long had sought a Scheme to find,
Whose common ties might reach all Human kind.
In men it showed him deeply read
To find they all in this agreed;
That, whatever those of rigid Morals preach,
Sensual delight is Nature's utmost reach.
He saw his tares would all their seed out grow,
And the Event has proved it so.
He tried the Soil, nor doubted it would bare,
The pleasant crop of vice he planted there.
With strength it rose, and spread apace
Through a numerous Warlike race,
To him with joy, the giddy Vulgar flew;
Who gave 'em leave to sin, and to be ign'rant too.
Hope (the mind's anchor and afflictions cure,
By which we bravely ills endure,
Hope, which inflames the bold with generous heat,
And makes the Victor resolutely great,)
With such rewards he does incite,
Such charming prospects of delight,
As none, who (like his happy followers) know
The various sweets of Beauty; can forgo.
Methinks I view the Mighty scene of Joy,
Feasting there my longing Eye;
Here a fair crowd of dazzling Nymphs I see,
From envious time and ages malice free.
No clouds there sky, or thoughts over cast,
But day and love for ever last.
Whilst Sparkling Eyes thence bannish care and night,
At once dispencing Flames, and everlasting light.
There a gay troop of lustly Lovers move,
Whose business and reward is Love.
In whom remembrance sweetens all that's past,
And fierce desire provokes the future taste:
Both Sexes shine with equal grace,
And now they meet, and now embrace,
'Till wishes are complete, and they enjoy
Pleasures that never change; yet never cloy.
Enjoyment here its wretched self undoes;
And what we get by it, we loose:
No sooner is the Short-lived pleasure done,
But strait the transitory nothings gone.
But there how blessed are the charming Shes
With mines whose wealth can never decrease
Like Fortunatus's are their Lovers gains;
They use the Virgin Treasure, yet it still remains,
Here only the Imposter was to blame,
That he to one confined their flame.
Great were the blessings he on Earth bestowed,
Greater had been to come; had He allowed
What his Successor has below;
Each man his own Seraglio.
The fiction then had bore a higher price,
And change of pleasures, made it Paradise.
On the Pope's Toe.
OUr Saviors feet when Mary kissed; with tears
She washed them clean, then wiped them with her hairs.
And curious Trav'lers when to Rome they go
To kiss for fashion the Holy Fathers Toe;
Wish that some Damsel would that task renew,
And the same office for his Vicar do.
TO DORINDA FROM Monsieur De VOITURE.
CHarming Dorinda when you sing,
My ravished Soul is on the wing,
Yet here is You out, and will not be gone.
It quits all senses but the Ear.
That, that more perfectly may hear,
It joins the force of all the five in one.
Sing treacherous Sirenes and detain
The Traveller with pleasing pain,
And make him court the fate he would shun:
However be what will His choice,
Dorinda boasts a sweeter voice;
And they that lissen to 't no danger run.
If Fortune should be long unkind,
And sow'r the temper of the mind,
Her Song deludes the ungrateful thought.
For then, who ever cannot enjoy
A perfect ease without alloy;
He never will find it, and it cannot be bought.
Whatever the Nightingal in Spring
Or Swan before its death can sing;
And all the feathered quire too:
Nay Orpheus Harp, Amphion's Lute,
And all things else without dispute,
Must humbly yield the Victory to You.
The grateful Music of the Spheres,
And what great Jove at Banquets hears,
When kind Apollo Strikes the Strings:
The consorts of the beauteous Nine
Are none so sweet, nor so divine,
As when Dorinda, dear Dorinda Sings.
THE Fiftieth EPIGRAM OF MARTIAL IMITATED.
Daphnonas, Platonas etc.
Written to one who had a Fine SEAT.
HEre rows of Laurel in just order set,
Defend the walks from the Sun's parching heat:
There lofty planes their growing branches spread,
At once the places ornament and shade:
Yonder thick cypress forms a silent grove,
A fit retreat for sorrow and for Love.
Rich in perfumes your many baths afford
A sweet refreshment to their wearied Lord;
High raised a stately Portico there stands,
The noble work of some great Artist's hands.
Where marble Pillars do the roof support,
And shining jaspars pave the inner Court.
Hard by a Spacious Hippodrome we see,
Where the swift racers strive for Victory.
From thence we hear how with a pleasing sound,
The murmuring streams glide gently through the ground.
How nature taught to vary notes by Art
In different accents Music does impart.
Yet where we find this Beauty, and this state,
(Such are the miseries which on riches wait)
Places are wanting where to Sleep, and Eat.
If this be greatness be it far from me;
Let me but sleep and eat in Poverty,
I Will sigh no more; no more will envy those,
Who real blessings for a shadow lose.
SONG.
DID but Dorinda sigh for me
Whilst at Her feet I dye;
The Sun in's course should never see
A happier Swain then I.
But ah! without concern she views
The anguish of my heart,
And void of pity does refuse
To ease the cruel Smart.
Too partial fate! that did ordain
The cruel Fair should have,
A Tyrant's power to kill with pain,
Without a will to save.
It Is just they quench who raise desire
Or else why have they charms:
A Lover no where should Expire
But in His Beautie's arms.
TO The Right HONORABLE, THE EARL OF NORTHAMPTON.
AS we, when wistly we the infant view,
The tracts of ancient Features do pursue,
Which from the Parents face kind Nature drew:
Or when we some times though but rarely trace
The lines, that did the Father's Father grace:
Whilst we are His image viewing in the Child,
Just thus (we cry) he looked, and thus he smild.
Just so (my Lord) when ever I would see
What it is that all men call Nobility,
In what it does consist, and how it shone
When those that did deserve it put it on:
I have recourfe to you: In You alas
I can alone perceive what once it was,
For you alone like your brave Fathers are,
And do not only Arms and Titles share,
(For if from Scutcheon you a greatness Sought,
'Twould be because it was without a blot.)
But all their noble qualities retain,
Heir to their virtues, left without a stain,
And kept; You're free, not lavish; great not vain;
Nor yet familiar, condescending too;
Skilled where Respect's to be received, where due;
In others I but view the poor remains
Of all that stock of Honor, which the pains
Of their illustrious Ancestors procured:
You have not only what was left secured,
But by your Real worth increased the store,
Which justly might be thought complete before.
In Them, their too degenerate Souls at best,
Seem in a meaner mould to have been cast,
Whom with their Fathers when compared, we find
A faint resemblance stamped upon their mind,
And may expect they will leave a fainter still behind.
In you th'Impression's easy to be seen,
And such is your Majestic air, and Mein,
Your Presence such; that though we did not know
You nobly born; yet we should think you so.
Though others then in this great duty fail,
While the vile custom cannot on you prevail,
To teint the vein that 'as hither purely run;
By your Great Self to be continued on;
We'll See the Fathers glories in the Son.
To a LADY that Drinks nothing but Water.
When our First Parents new created
In Eden dwelt, it is true, my Dear,
They nothing drank but Water.
But that poor liquor has been hated
Since France made Wine, and England beer,
By all that e're came after.
But you it seems a sober Woman
Fully resolve pure stream to drink,
And be another Eve:
Yet I dare swear you will meet with no man,
Who this a point of Faith will think
Your doctrine to believe.
Brimmers will all your reasons banter,
For they their wonted rounds will move,
How'ever you may bar it,
Since (as I think) there is a Terence sine Cerere et Baccho friget Venus.
Ranter,
Does positively say, that Love
Grows cold without good Claret.
I needs must tell you then (to Lovers
If drinking water you prescribe)
This for your comfort Madam;
After the Mode of Jewish rovers,
You must even wed in your own tribe
Or you will scarce find an Adam.
To a Lady whose Name was formerly Scroup now Pitts, having seen her Picture in
the Gallery at Hampton Court.
MAdam,
Though in our Hemesphere
The stars all glorious appear,
Yet some there are that do the rest out shine:
So here all seem to be of form Divine;
Yet there are graces which I view
More peculiarly in You.
Oh! that like Paris I were bid
The controversy to decide,
Freely my sentiments I would declare.
Though DORSET Pallas; MONMOUTH Juno were;
THOU Venus, still should be to me
The Fairest Goddess of the Three.
TO THE SEVEN Lords Justices.
May it please Your LORDSHIPS.
WHen Ancient Greece the famous SEVEN obeyed
To her the admiring world their homage Paid;
Wondering to See different professions joined,
And Arts with Arms successfully combined:
Her friends with pleasure saw her grandeur raised,
Praising the state, and envying while they praised;
Her Foes beheld her rise, and thence with fear
Presaged their tottering Empire's fall was near.
With like amazement Foreign Nations view
This happy Isle Governed (My Lords) by You.
The glad Confederates hence foretell afar,
The prosperous exit of a doubtful War;
And rich in mighty Hopes of future Spoils,
Already reap the fruit of all their toils.
While our Great Hero amidst dangers brave,
Resolves to lose his Life, or Europe save;
You manage all things with that prudent care,
That Gallick courage now submits to fear;
And haughty Lewis droops, enraged to find
The Prince abroad, such virtue left behind.
In vain He there attempts the Monarchs doom:
In vain base Villains do the same at home.
Since should His aim (forbid it Heaven) succeed,
Or Caesar by conspiring Traitors bleed:
Your Councels would oppose the invading tide,
And widdow'd Albion to safe harbor guide:
This your past lives assure: Each Noble Soul
That knows how to obey, knows how to Rule.
To a LADY that imposed Silence upon me.
MAdam,
I own when first that Face I viewed
With silent wonder struk, amazed I stood;
Unable to declare with what surprise
I saw, and seeing, felt Your conquering Eyes.
Till by degrees recov'ring sense, I found
My bleeding Heart pierced with a fatal wound:
I searched it well, and by my danger knew
The killing shaft could come from none but You:
Yet fear of being scorned a while suppriss'd
The anxious secret in my tortured breast.
At last the cruel pains I underwent,
Forced me to give the laboring Passion vent.
But Silence, You relentless Fair, impose.
And unconcerned my heart would have me lose;
Unheard condemn me, and with cold disdain
Reject my suit, and cry you plead in vain.
No Tyrant sure was ever known before
TO inflict so much, no Heart to suffer more.
Others, when stubborn Traitors dare conceal
Truths, it concerns the state they should reveal;
Send 'em the tortures of the Rack to feel:
Till sense of hurt does from the sufferer's breast,
By hopes of gain unmoved, the secret wrest.
Severer You see me to racks confined,
Yet still forbid me to disclose my mind.
But if you are resolved I shall obey,
And due allegiance to your orders pay;
My faithful service with possession Crown,
And give me leave to think your Heart my own.
Then wondering I shall stand, amas'd to find
Beyond my hopes the Charming Celia kind.
Then to your arms a Silent guest I Will come,
Excess of Happiness, will strike me dumb.
AN INSCRIPTION Upon a Letter Case.
NO Memorandum, or Receipt,
No Challenge where and when to meet,
Was e're (dear case) contained in YOU.
In You no bill of Fifty pound,
But what is more there may be found,
My dear Lucinda's Billet-doux.
It Is only you, and I, and She,
Know what passes 'tween us three:
If as she writes She seems to sigh,
And her tender passion own;
All this (dear confident) is known
To only you, and She, and I.
Yet if a cold disdain o'respread
Her lines, I unconcerned will Read;
Nor care a Fart if that She know.
But only You, and I, (never fear)
Can tell, when I go you know where,
That I will use 'em you know how.
A LETTER to a Gentleman that advised him to make the Campaigne in Flanders.
SIR,
CUstom ('it is true) the younger Brothers foe,
Has made my fortunes for my mind to low;
To noble acts my soaring thoughts aspire.
Though sense of want would check the Generous fire.
Like the brave Macedon, I grieve to know
That those great Ancestors to whom I owe
This heat, have nothing left for me to do.
It Is this (dear Friend) that makes me wish my fate
Had doomed me to a plentiful estate,
For whilst of such supports I stand in need;
Al though my inclinations strongly lead,
Though you advise whose councels guide my Soul,
Whose sovereign will does my resolves control,
Forgive me that I scruple to obey
Commands, which on me your Entreaties lay.
Since having weighed the matter I foresee,
The Camp is no fit station Sir for me.
Not that to Coward fears my Spirits yield,
Or that I dread the horrors of the field.
No, though in thousand shapes grim Death I view,
Still to my own and Country's honor true,
I Would face the Tyrant: in the glorious strife,
Resolved to win the prize, or lose my life.
By our great Monarch's irresistless might
Taught, I could bear the heat of all the fight,
And like him too approaching dangers slight.
Assured with Scaeva, Conquering Caesar's praise
A live or dead my daring Acts should raise.
But this deters me, that unknown at Court
I want that Interest, which does those support
Who buy Commissions cheaper then with Scars;
And get Estates by Flattering, and the Wars.
No cringing Courtier I can bribe, to tell
How often I Have charged the Frenchman, and how well:
How I the shock at Landen did endure:
Or bravely stood my ground before Namur:
'Till moved by him the generous Colonel deigns
With the next Colors to reward my pains.
Unable, and unwilling this to give,
A simple Cadet I may always live,
Condemned to rags, and scarcely worth a groat;
'Till to my breast chance guides the lucky shot,
Which rids me of a heavy load of care,
Timely preventing frenzy or despair.
Besides that Splendid Equipage I want,
In which young Officers are used to Flaunt;
Nor shall I e're be master of those Arts
Which please the giddy crowd, and win their hearts;
In gaudy Plumes let those who like 'em shine,
I hate to be what vulgar Souls call Fine;
Daubed with gold lace, and fringe while others go
Trick't up like puppets for a public show:
Still plain, and awkard as my Self, my Clothes
Put on without a Valet would expose
Me to the Scoffs of fleering Fops and Beaux.
And who could bare to hear a Coward cry
He Is a mere Country Bubble, let me dye.
Lard how he looks like a spruce Cit in red,
In martial posture at his Train-bands head:
Yet this and more with patience I must take,
Or in one day as many quarrels make,
As Jealous At -- ns in a twelvemonths time
Maintains to vindicate his Ladies crime:
Which would my peaceful temper thwart as much
As small bear drinking, goes against the Dutch:
Therefore because for every Idle word
I think it nonsense to unsheath my Sword,
Amongst the brisk young Duelists of the time,
I must be held forsooth a man of Phlegm,
Most Stoically grave, and at the best
A common Subject for their common jest.
These are my hindrances, and these you see
Will never let the Camp and me agree.
Urge me not then: for I would rather choose
To serve that worst of Jilts a Hackney Muse;
A Farce more vile then Cr -- ns or D -- fy's write;
Or Satyr which like harmless G -- lds should bite;
Nay doomed to Doggrel, and old Sterholds style,
Three story high in Grub-street let me toil:
Forced a whole week on my own nails to feed,
And earn with wretched Rhimes my Sundays bread.
Or what is worse like Og -- by translate,
Till Chandlers Shops, and Kitchens be my fate;
Rather then in the Camp pursuing Fame,
Sit down at last with Poverty and Shame.
Yours etc.

TO SYLVIANA FROM BEDLAM. June the 13th. 1696.
GO Nymph, who the Sun
Do Excel, and the Moon,
And the Stars; and put all in a hurry.
Let each conquering charm
Ten thousand alarm,
Turn the globe into Madness and Fury.
See at every turn
How I rage and I burn,
How I flash with an ardent desire:
Do but see how I stare,
How my Eyes roll and glare,
As if all was within set on fire.
Oh! where are the waves
That will cool him that raves
And not make him hotter then ever?
Send me Your Ice and Snow
That so cold makes You grow,
And instead of it, take you my Fever.
Or else Goddess dart
All thy rays at my heart,
At my Grate let your lightning enter:
Your thunder too roll
To my languishing Soul,
And rend it away from it is center.
Come fears and dispares
Ye amorous cares;
Raise no more, but extinguish desire:
Come numorous ills
Far weightier still,
That will suddenly make me expire.
If all these will not kill
Here, tell me what will,
The fair ones themselves procure me.
Or the ugly and old
For as I Have been told
They Will certainly certainly cure me.
But if I Would be at rest
With a calm serene breast,
To fresh straw I must have my recourse:
And not trouble my brains
That I Am kept in these chains,
Whilst they are easier, and lighter then Yours.
To a LADY in an Vndress.
WHy Galatea should You fly
Because undressed, a Lover's Eye?
Is it that you think my heart
Wants those little helps of Art
Which others use, to keep it Yours?
What though dress some men allures
Yet is Your Thirsis none of those
Who love a woman for her clothes:
Those charms to which The Slave you owe,
Have power to make him always so.
Essence, powder, painting, patches,
Velvets, Laces, Gawzes, washes;
And all the numerous catologue
Of Female trinkets now in vogue,
Can never make your features show
Half so ravishing as now.
The envious clowd of dress away,
We see a brighter, clearer Day,
(Then e're was known before to shine)
In those beauteous Orbs of Thine.
I burn I burn for who can bare
(Nothing between) the Sun so near.
Inform me Dearest, do I see
Some Goddess in thy shape, or THEE.
With such a charming Mein and grace,
Such lovely limbs, and such a Face,
On Id'as plains the Queen of Love
For Discord's golden apple strove:
And naked to the Sheapheards view
Did all her hidden beauties show,
In that alone surpassing You.
TO BELINDA, THAT Wrote him Word She was Sick of a Fever.
WAs it for this we with impatience prayed,
To see an answer from the Lovely Maid,
Cursing those lazy hours which all our joys delayed?
But oh! ye hours that you had been more slow;
And let us this a little later know.
For who that does these doleful accents hear
(Belinda's sick) The fatal ill can bear?
So Merchants who to India's distant shore
Send all that wealth their toyls have gained before,
In hopes to turn it into shining Oar,
Wait at the Port; hoping to learn from some,
When the expected Cargo Sails for home.
But if by chance some Messenger arrive,
Who saw, and did the common wreck survive.
Themselves and Chance they blame, and fain would then
They had more happy, or less curious been.
Yet who would think the Virtuous and the Fair
(Virtue and Love are Heaven's peculiar care,)
One common fate should with the vulgar share?
Is It not enough they keep love's vestal fire,
And burn in mutual flames of chaste desire,
Unless hot Fevers raging in their blood
Add fire to fire, and dry the vital flood?
Cruel disease, elsewhere thy power employ,
The old and ugly let thy flames destroy.
Belinda spare: nor with malicious skill
At once the Virgin, and the Lover kill.
But oh! I fear, like us thou do admire,
And triumphst in her veins with rival fire:
Assaulting still her Heart with fresh supplys,
Resolved from all to bear the Glorious prize.
So Jove to Semele's Embraces came
Burning with more then a kind Lover's flame,
And by enjoying, killed the matchless dame.
Intimating the Ladies desire not to be known,
FROM Monsieur De VOITURE. WRITTEN TO DORINDA.
I Burn, I burn, but dare not name
The charming She that raised the flame;
Your virtues to I must conceal:
For if I speak of You at all,
I surely shall discover all,
And might as well Your name reveal.
Should I but say Your Nature's pride;
And that in all the World beside
There is not one that reigns Like You,
Like You subdues: don't all men know
What to your sovereign charms they owe,
And where their adoration's due.
Or if I say when winter comes
And kills the plants, and nips the blooms,
And makes a change in every thing;
That still in you the blushing rose,
The lilly too themselves disclose.
They Would cry, that there is eternal Spring.
Or if I say that in your Eyes
An Archer close in ambush lies,
That Stoops to conquer such as Jove.
As if our humble hearts below
Were all too mean: would they not know
That thou were this great Soul of Love?
Should I Your wit and Judgment praise,
And those perfections strive to raise,
I could not give 'em half their due.
Yet still the crowd amazed would bless
Themselves to hear't; and strait confess,
They only could unite in You.
I Will say how great's Your Soul, how wise,
That fortune neither courts, nor flies.
How bravely too it Ills endures.
Would not the spacious Circle tell,
That no such Soul would daign to dwell
In any Form, but one like Yours?
But now Suppose I Should omit
Your charms of Beauty and of wit,
And tell your cringing Servile train
How great a Tyrant You are grown;
And that their Service You disown,
That all their tears are shed in vain,
Or if I say that You can save
A Poor, despairing, captive Slave,
Whose heart another did subdue;
Though he from You must naught expect;
But the cold favor of neglect;
Would not the world cry out 'twas You?
TO DORINDA Watering a Garden.
THe Scorching Sun with too much heat decays
Those Flowers and plants, his kinder beams did raise.
So flames of love if gentle, make us gay;
But when too furious, on our vitals pray;
From the suns malice you can them defend,
And to their roots Supplys of moisture lend.
While by loves heat unhappy Damon dies,
Consumed in flames that kindled at Your Eyes:
In vain Fair Nymph by the same means you strive
To Save the drooping Youth and make him live.
Your tears will never protect him from their rage.
Only Your burning too can his assuage.
SONG.
I Adore You it is true,
And no woman but You,
Yet Dorinda You must not repine.
That some hours I lend
To my Bottle and Friend,
And sacrifice Love to good wine.
I shall never side with those
Who with sighs, tears, and oaths,
Talk of languishing, burning, and dying:
Who sincerity place
In affected grimmace,
And build their chief merit on lying.
Yet I laugh at all such
Who will tope like the Dutch,
For the sake of the Liquor they drink;
While they only propose
To obtain a red nose,
With the loss of their time and their chink.
Those only are wise
Who both equally prize:
But refuse to be Servant to either:
Who by friendly compliance,
In sacred alliance
Join Cupid and Bacchus together.
For when ever they meet
All our Joys are complete,
And our jollity never can expire:
They our faculties charm,
And us mutually warm,
Whilst each from the other takes fire.
TO CLORIS On Her Dream.
VIsions of Old were sacred thought,
As messages from Heaven brought,
By which men how to act were taught.
By them were Oracles conveyed,
By them the greatest Monarchs swayed,
Their dictates all the wise obeyed.
Then Cloris never blush to find
Your self in dreams to him so kind,
Whom fate has ever Yours designed;
What though with all Love's treasure blessed
Upon Your snowy panting breast,
He seems his wearied self to rest;
And in Your Arms those joys receive
Which none but charms like Yours can give,
Often Dying but to live.
Though You the Lovely Boy embrace,
And with a secret pleasure trace
The shining glories of his face,
Then join your glowing cheeks to his,
And with an eager lover's kiss,
Clasp him close and seal his bliss,
Till he transported seem to say,
Like Jove could I keep back the day,
And make the sun his rise delay,
Three nights should not suffice for me,
In one I would join three times three,
And dedicate 'em all to Thee.
To Thee, whose charms if Jove had known,
In some bright form H' had left his throne,
TO obey a power above his own.
The Cretans, vain Idolatry
He had refused; and worshipped Thee,
A much more glorious Deity.
Yet fear not that these thoughts Exceed
Those modest bounds, Heaven has decreed
The virtuous of Your Sex shall tread.
No, fairest, no; they mean no Ill
But Love by them declares his will,
That You, what they fortell, fulfill.
THE HVE and CRY AFTER A HEART
WHile on the Flowery banks I Sat,
Where Nature does herself display,
Lamenting my too rigid fate
In that my heart wat gone astray,
Armida soon surprised me there.
Ar. What Strephon all alone, and sad?
St. My Heart is gone I know not where.
Nor where another's to be had.
And since it is gone pray bare a part
Of all the sorrow I sustain
For if I lose my subject heart,
Where will the fare Armida reign?
Ar. Armida, Swain, has hearts enough
Subdued by charms unknown,
And one She could impart to You
But that You Will lose it like Your own
Lucilla came; and thus she wept,
Lu. A heart Iv'e lost as well as You.
Had they been by each other Kept
To us they would constant been, and true.
This morn, when lying on my bed,
I wondered why I did not sigh.
All my soft, amorous cares were fled
Away, yet still I knew not why.
At length I found my heart was gone,
That used those thoughts to entertain.
I first believed I was undone,
Yet did not wish it here again.
A happiness I thought twould prove
To be thus free: but found too soon
I was for naught designed but Love:
Fit for that great employ alone.
Whether oh! whether could it go?
I cried, to be contemned, or loved?
But now too sensibly I know
It sympathetically roved.
St. I would ten thousand kisses give
To her that finds: (Lu.) then no regard
Be had to mine, it is yours I Will strive
To find, in hopes of the reward.
At last the kind Dorinda came
Far brighter than the Early day:
Is this your Heart? (cried she) for fame
Reported that Yours fled away.
St. With arrows it is disfigured so
I know not by the outward frame,
Whether the Heart is mine or no.
The wounds assure me it is the same.
The very same: Dorinda tell,
Hard by what gentle murmuring stream.
It lay, or in what lonely Cell,
Awake, or in a softer dream.
Do. Strephon, do you know Lucinda's grove,
Where kind Amyntas used to come,
And be a rival in Your Love?
St. I know the place you mean, and whom.
Do. There was it hovering round about,
Then perched on high for better view.
Lucinda turned, and found it out,
And from her Eyes an arrow threw:
Fluttering a while, like wounded thrush
Whose wing just touched by fatal shot,
Leaps up and down from bush to bush.
And after all away it Got.
I still pursued it with a glance
And saw it to the fountain rove,
Where tender Nymphs had used to dance.
I b'lieve to quench it is flames of Love.
Diana with her Nymphs was there,
And each disclosed an amorous Soul;
They each pretended to a share,
For beauty each deserved the whole.
Goddess cried I the pray resign,
With forty darts I pierced it through.
The only time I made it mine,
And now I come, and bring it You.
St. Ah! Nymph why wast thou so severe?
Can that so many darts endure?
Do. Oh! these are Pelian darts, my Dear,
And what they wound, they cure.
Thus what I Have conquered I restore,
Here take it gentle swain.
St. No keep it, give it me no more,
For I shall lose't again.
Do. If I keep Yours, Strephon, accept of mine,
To You my heart I perfectly resign.
Never fear its being lost: Your Nymph assures,
That cannot be any bodies else but Yours.
To a Friend in the Country, who desired him to send him the News.
AMidst the hurry of the busy Town
Where I can Scarcely call one hour My own,
Where all those noisy hindrances I find,
That discompose a serious, thoughtful mind;
You tell me I must write; and let you know
How things at London since your absence go.
What fashions are new-started, and from whence:
Whether of English growth, or sent from France.
What recreations are in vogue, what Plays
Censorious Critics damn, and what they praise.
Who sighs for who; and what admiring Beaux
In lamentable Song, or senseless prose
Their passions to Your Celia do disclose.
In fine You Would ha'me send you all the News
Private, or Public Letters can produce.
And the whole Catalogue of lies recite
Which Baldwin prints, or Pyke and Dyer write.
Excuse me Sir, if all you want is this,
I needs must tell you that you ask amiss.
All this and more is to your Harbor known,
He hears when, where, and how all things are done.
Verst in the Arcana of each neighboring state,
As well as if he managed the debate,
And President in every council sat.
Ask him what Buffleurs does at Liege design,
When cautious Catinat invests Turin,
Or how Joyeux will act upon the Rhine;
Where Nesmond Sails: What'er you would wish to learn
That Europe's present welfare does concern,
With the same quickness he can run ye over
As beggars tell their wants from door to door.
Or a vain Quack his Jargon does repeat
When he the gazing crowd designs to cheat.
Nor can I either spend my Ink or Time
To count the Fools who their's abuse in Rhyme.
Nor let you know how with some monster's sight
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, and Bridges-Street each night,
Vainly endeavor people to delight.
It Is very difficult I must confess
To say which suffers most the Stage or Press,
They both with monstrous Births so often teem,
And trifles which besotted Authors dream,
That with impatience we expect to see
When Dryden, Congreve, or bold Wycherly,
Will draw in their defense and set 'em free.
But 'till the Town beholds those happy days,
'Twill scarce see more new fashons, then new Plays.
TO His HIGHNESS the DUKE of GLOVCESTER Upon his Installment, at Windsor ON
Friday July 24th. 1696.
TO You, Great Prince, whose Royal birth does join
In one; the Danish, Scotch, and English line:
Who from an Ancient stock of Monarchs trace
The illustrious Authors of your mighty race,
With joy her early tribute Honor brings:
And ranks your Childhood with the greatest Kings
Justly conferring Dignities on You,
Which only are to God-like virtue due.
Nor can Your want of Years their worth degrade,
For Hero's are like Poets born, not made.
TO SYLVIA Carrying Scaron 's NOVELS to Church instead of a Common-Pray'r Book.
SYlvia, the Ends of going to Church
Are many we own,
It Is to all of us known,
Without any farther search.
But of this I had scarce any notion,
'Till it was made plain,
That some Amorous swain
Was the object of your Devotion:
If that be Your case, your mistake do not smother,
For every one knows,
If this way your heart goes,
It Is not fit that your prayers should go the other,
But then what Religion do you drive at?
For I begin to doubt,
Since I have found out
That to Common prayer you prefer Private.
After all I should think you Protestant,
But that I can prove
You Are oth' Family of Love,
And no doubt but You Will soon make the best an't.
Yet nevertheless,
To You Sylvia I guess
The promised reward will be given.
For (as Iv'e heard say)
Much to love and to pray,
Is the only sure way to reach Heaven.
TO THE Learned Rich. Blackmore M. D. On his Ingenious POEM PRINCE ARTHUR.
GReat is His task, and great should be his fame
Whose noble toyls a stately Palace frame;
Where just proportion shapes each finished part,
And the materials suit the builder's art:
In whose design both use and beauty share,
Dividing equally his skilful care.
Nor less deserves the Bard, who dares to raise
His tuneful voice in some great Hero's praise,
And boldly Sing the Man whose glorious name
Conveyed to us from distant Ages, came.
Who all those triumphs our Forefathers saw,
Knows in such lively Colors how to draw;
That we amazed his wondrous virtues view,
Envy, yet wish to imitate 'em too.
Such is thy Arthur, such thy matchless Song.
Sweet, yet Majestic; beautiful, yet strong:
Both so surprising, that we hardly know
To which the greater debt we Britains owe.
To Him, who bravely for our Country fought,
Or You, who all his Battles thus have wrote;
That Bards to come, when they thy work shall see,
Him shall admire, and write in praise of Thee.
Some British Monarch then, whose mighty name
Rival's the Conquering Macedonian's fame,
Like him will weep, when in immortal Rhyme
(Placed beyond all the vain efforts of time)
He saw Pelides's God-like actions live
And ruined Troy's unhappy fall survive.
He Will weep: and weeping wish, that bounteous Heaven
Which gave him Arthur's Soul, Thine to some Bard had given.
To thee Great Poet and Physician too
A double portion of our praise is due.
The Muses lay with Lethergy oppressed,
'Till you by Sovereign Art their ills redrest;
Taught 'em to scorn the Stage's trifling game,
And at a higher mark direct their aim.
To it is first strength you Poetry restore,
By You encouraged she again dares Soar.
And her disease with Saul departing feels,
While David-like, thy Muse both Sings and heals.
In spite of Critics rage (great Sir) go on.
Perfect the cure you have so well begun,
Nor mind what men of witty malice say,
Whose various fancy should you once obey,
Like the famed Painter's piece your work would be:
Which changed to please each nice spectator's eye,
Became at last all over deformity.
Blush not to have dug thy oar from Virgil's mine.
The stamp, not metal it is that makes the coin.
Though this the Roman's be, yet That is Thine.
THE ASSOCIATION.
SErve Thee? no, never think blind Fool,
That manly reason will submit
It self to thy Despotick rule,
Or bear the Yoke thou lay'st on it.
The sweets of Liberty it long has known,
Resolved in spite of Thee to keep 'em still it is own.
Thus I a while Love's power defied,
And played the Sullen malcontent
With fruitless stubborness denied,
To own his lawful government:
And thought in point of honor could never
Allegiance both to Him, and sovereign Reason swear.
'Twas error all I own it now,
And my misguided zeal recall,
To that great deity I bow
Whose endless power extends to all.
Since the whole World avers his right; for me
Singly to thwart it, would the height of madness be.
My will long since to him inclined
Too cautious Honor, checks in vain:
Desire with Cloe's Beauty joined,
Urge the attack, and conquest gain.
I yield, and now to Liberty perfer
The glorious privilege of serving Love and Her.
Henceforth their constant Slave I Will prove,
And whosoever those Rebels be,
That dare ill-timed seditions move,
Against their throne, are foes to Me.
While Youth, and Vigor my intentions wait,
I Will bravely lay them out in service of the State.
Philosophy in vain shall try
The growing passion to destroy,
And vanquished morals routed fly
When e're they would our peace annoy.
The glorious monarchs shall triumphant reign,
And reason not attempt to break the pleasing chain.
TO A LADY That made Images in Wax.
TO the Same matter Nature's Skill
Imparts what shapes so e're it will.
And Love who Jove so often transformed, can make
Like him all Lovers different figures take.
By a Like Power Lucinda You
In wax can several forms renew.
In this with Nature you agree:
From Chaos You as well as She
A piece of perfect Beauty can create.
And on your hand bid all the Graces wait;
But first like Love, with gentle heat
Make it for impression fit.
Prometheus art Y' already share:
Your wax does humane figures bear.
But if as that great Artist did, you would give
Your charming Images the power to live.
You need not steal your fire above,
I Will furnish you with that of love.
TO BELINDA, On Her Recovery from her Fever.
AS men when stormy winds begin to rise,
And threatening Clouds over cast the gloomy Skies;
By fears of future want, and death oppressed,
Their suppliant eyes and hands to Heaven addressed,
Beg a reprieve, and speak in tears the rest.
So when Belinda's danger waked our fears,
With vows our prayers, with sighs we mixed our tears;
And humbly asked, relenting fate would Spare
To blast the early beauties of the Fair.
Nor vain has been the wish; she lives to know
What she to us, what we to Heaven owe.
She Lives: nor has the deadly ill decayed,
Those Graces, which in all her Features played.
Her sparkling Eyes their wonted luster dart.
Her every look can still command a Heart.
Unblasted Roses in her cheeks appear,
And out-blown-Lillys spread their glories there.
Her coral lips those downy seats of bliss
With the same ardour wanton Zephirs kiss.
'Till forced from thence, to her white neck they go,
And wondering view the yet unmelted Snow.
There stay to gaze, like us amazed to find
Where fire so lately raged, That left behind.
Unchanged in all things, she with cold disdain
Still hears her Lovers of their fate complain;
Remembers not those pains she lately bore:
But frowns, and loads unhappy us with more.
Yet since Belinda lives we gladly dye,
Proud such a treasure at that rate to buy.
So Curtius once into Earth's bowels rode,
And to his own, preferred a public good.
To a Gentleman that was looking for his Spectacles whilst they were on his
Nose.
SIR,
I Own, yours is a loss
That would any man cross,
Because I don't think I er'e knew one,
Who could justly deny
That a false eye
Was good, when one wanted a true one.
Your Spectacles lay
(As a man may so say,)
Before your eyes only to blind 'em.
So that it must be granted
Their assistance you wanted,
Were they for nothing else but to find 'em.
TO A LADY Whose Smock-Sleeves were dirty and tucked up.
FROM Monsieur De VOITURE.
YOU Mopsa, who within Your Sleeve
A Thousand Lovers entertain,
Will you no neater lodging give
To all your fawning, cringing train?
There Is no one doubts but that you may
By right of Conquest, every Spark
You have subdued, in Prison lay;
But let it not be quite so dark.
You keep my heart in dungeon too
Like Malefactor to be used,
Which, tho devoted so to You,
You have to ashes even reduced;
I burning day and night have drove
The Smoke into that place I fear;
And that the fire of my Love
Has made it self a Chimney there.
A Lattin Epig. Translated.
PHyllis and Acon Shine with equal grace,
Whilst but one Eye adorns each lovely Face.
Thy Starry light to Her bright Youth impart,
Thus she will be Venus, whilst thou Cupid art.
TO DORINDA ON VALENTINE 's Day.
LOok how, my dear, the feathered kind
By mutual caresses joined,
Bill; and seem to teach us two,
What we to love, and custom owe.
Shall only You and I forbear
To meet and make a happy pair?
Shall we alone delay to live?
This day an age of bliss may give.
But Ah! when I the proffer make
Still coyly you refuse to take.
My heart I dedicate in vain,
The too mean present you disdain.
Yet since the sollemn time allows
To choose the object of our vows;
Boldly I dare profess my flame,
Proud to be Yours by any Name.
The Snow-Ball.
FAir Julia at my breast took aim,
Then threw the gathered snow;
Secure I dreaded thence no flame,
Yet feel it burn me now.
By nature cold it chils the veins.
But when by Julia thrown,
In the hot Feavourish blood it reigns
With heat before unknown.
My heart, bright Nymph, Your Beauty's due
I offer at Your feet,
Since reconciled by Love and You
Even contraries can meet.
Ah! let me not the torment know
Of unallay'd desire,
In vain, in vain with Ice or snow
You strive to quench the fire.
It Is You alone must cool the heat
Which You alone could give.
With equal flames my wishes meet
If You wood have me live.
ODE the XI. Out of the First Book of Hor.
Tu ne qvaesieris etc.
NEver teize thy Fair self ('it is all madness,) to know
When or how my Dear Nymph to the Shades we shall go.
Do not trouble old Patridge to rummage his Volumes
And cast his fine Figures, or such what do you call'ums.
For though to a minuit he could tell you your date,
You Would be never the less fearful to grapple with fate.
Let us then thank the Gods for the Years that are past,
Whether this winter we feel, be the last
We shall hear stormy Boreas bluster and roar;
Or Heaven will fling us in one, or two more.
Fill a brimmer, brave Girl, here is a health to old Time,
But to think we can stop his career is a crime.
He Is too cuning for us, while we prattle and sip,
He has taken his heel's and gin' us the slip.
If Yov've bills upon him, take 'em down on the nail,
Tick not till to morrow, for fear he should fail.
To a LADY whom I had the misfortune to hit as I was playing at Bowls.
THat You, dear Nymph, have charms unknown,
Both I and all the world must own:
And that they are attractive too.
But little did I think my Bowl
Would Sympathetically roll,
To the same place I used to do.
Had this but been a ball of Gold,
As was the famous one of old
Contended for by the matchless Three.
My wonder I had straight laid by,
And owned I knew the reason why,
It came so readily to Thee.
Dorinda do not stand so nigh,
For if, to the mark, it is the Eye
Alone, that does direct our aim.
Then I shall be undone by You,
For whilst it is you take up my View,
My bowl will biass there again.
On a LADY who was almost Burnt to Death, whilst She was at Prayers in Her
Closet.
WIth fervent zeal the pious matron prayed,
And her whole Soul in thought to Heaven conveyed.
Intent on God her busy mind
In holy raptures thither soared,
All earthly mixture left behind
Prepared to meet the bridal Lord.
But while with oil her care the Lamp supplies,
The greedy flames her Body make their prize.
Yet Heaven who by this Ordeal trial found
How earnest were her prayers, her faith how sound
Releiv'd the almost Martyred Saint,
And (though it proved her) rather chose
She her reward a while should want,
Than we the great example lose.
Else had she shared that happy Prophet's fate
Who snatched to Heaven in flames, forsook this mortal state.
Upon BELINDA's having the Toothache.
REstless you lay upon Your bed,
The pillow did Your arm sustain,
Your hand supporter of your head
Could no way ease the cruel pain.
The busy Zephirs once did wait
To mix with an uncommon air,
They hung upon your lips, and strait
They rudely pressed, and entered there.
A tender constitution'd Tooth
Used to one constant, sweeter breez,
Changing as 'twere its clime forsooth,
Had thereby gotten a disease.
And the cold Rheum your gumms did yield
Was clearer far then morning dew,
Or Crystal drops from rock distilled,
Or from Your Eyes, that grief e're drew.
Your Teeth like Parian marble white,
Did weep like Parian marble too.
Sure Sign the day could not be bright
When such dark clouds hung over You.
Your cheek too swollen did impair
The radient glories of Your Eye,
As if weak mortals could not bear
So great a light so nigh.
Says one 'twas tedious to produce,
When Young, those Instruments of pain:
And were I in your case, would choose
To have them out again.
Oh! no a tooth from Her, would be
To Spoil the Music of her song.
And then the Art would want a Key,
Which sure is found in her alone.
I tried if ought upon the ail
A thousand kisses would prevail,
Nor vain was my endeavor.
I pressed the Cheek, and warmed the Gumm,
Infused a heat, expelled the Rheum,
And left her as well as ever.
MARTIAL. Lib. 4. Epig. 22.
SCarce yet enjoyed, and half afraid to prove
The melting joys of consummated Love,
From my embraces leapt the bashful Bride:
And plunging in the crystal River, tried
To cool Love's heat, and all her beauties hide.
But the pure stream betrayed her trembling there,
Amidst the waves I saw, and knew the fair,
(Like flowers enclosed in glass:) my ravished sight
Ran over every part with fresh delight.
Till eager grown to taste the tempting bliss,
I dived, and spite of coyness snatched a kiss,
But the waves clearness made me stop at this.
TO A LADY That wept for the loss of He little Dog,
FROM Monsieur De VOITURE.
BRight Goddess I so much adore,
And whose assistance I implore,
Forbear to weep in such a measure.
If (as they say) Aurora's tears
Consolidate in gemms, my fears
^ell me You Will lose too vast a treasure.
Alas! I should too happy grow,
Too rich, and sums too mighty owe,
Were half these tears but shed for me.
But see! the lavish't pearly drops
Are thrown away upon poor pupps.
That Kings and Kingdoms too would buy.
Bright Cynthia in the Starry Sky,
Who best can with Your glories vie,
(Nor yet is Cynthia quite so fair)
When ever she begins to rise
Often weeps, and often sighs
But for a Lover are her Tears.
If like her You Would weep and sigh,
You must Your cruelty lay by,
And your affection better Show,
Placing it better: like Her, You,
Must distill the pearly dew
On all us mortals here below.
Her pity sure is weakness all
Who for favorite Shocks can cry,
With tender finger put in Eye;
And unconcerned see us men fall.
The FLATTERER.
AH! happy King Damocles cries,
How undisturbed are all thy joys?
Who see on thy well furnished board
Whatever rich nature can afford;
Whatever luxurious sense can feast,
Or gratify the Eye, or taste.
See with what have the Courtiers run
To wait on Thee their rising Sun?
How they observe the awful nod
Of mighty Thee their only God?
Thy word can make the poor man great,
And like the Deity's create.
Thy frown can change the rich man's fate.
How beauty, pleasure, ease and Love
As thy attendants always move.
Ah! happy King might I but be
For one short day as great as Thee,
With joy the next my hated breath
I would resign to welcome Death.
Unknowing wretch the King replied,
Thy wish obtained will soon decide
Our Happiness; and let thee know
That I am more a wretch than thou.
And now in Royal Honors dressed
Attended to a sumptuous feast
The mock King goes, where over his head
By the weak tenure of a thread
He hanging sees the pointed Steal,
To check the Luxury of 's meal.
Then at the smiling Tyrants feet
Lays down in have his Robes of State.
Not that I so much dread (says he)
The fatal Sword I yonder see,
Though that be sharp, yet I begin
To feel more pointed cares within.
Written in a Young Lady's Waller.
FAlsely do flattering Poets say
That all the Gods Love's power obey.
That whatever beauty does command
It Is Edicts nothing can withstand.
Just now, when through my wounded Heart
From Your fair Eyes Love shot his dart,
When on your beauteous face I gazed
At that bright Heaven of charms amas'd;
I would the silent Lyre have strung
To Lays beyond even Wallers Song.
I would, Dorinda, You have set
Far above his Amoret,
Above his Sacharissa too,
I would have raised more beauteous You.
And verses made as his complete,
M' expression soft, my fancy neat,
Surprising thoughts in every line
With pleasing turns, like His, should shine.
The tuneful God refused to inspire
My breast with that Poetic fire.
Which through all Waller's veins did run
And spite of coldness urged him on.
When in Pens-hurst's shady Grove,
He sung of Sidney and of Love.
However Dorinda read him through,
And think when ought you like, You view.
Had Phoebus done as much for me,
I would have said the same of Thee.
A LETTER To a FRIEND, Concerning an University Life.
RIding to Oxford (Sir) as slow a pace
Perhaps, as Hackney Steed in no good case
Could carry; and cold inclinations to the place.
Like well staid Alderman whom age had taught
To move as dull and heavy as his thought,
Or as his words, when for his Brethrens use
Some city Apothegm he would produce.
By that time I Twelve miles from Town had past,
Out bolts a Parson in such wondrous have,
Rushing through hedge, and leaping over Dike,
That I for my part never saw the like.
And strait I asked him if he would lost his way,
And what occasion led him thus astray.
I thought Sir to descry a nearer cut
To Oxford than was Ever yet found out.
For if that Place lie in a line direct,
I know no reason why I should affect
A Circular road, and not new ways detect.

Oh! Sir you always while you live must own
The farthest way about's the nearest home.
And I believe if you had left your Horse
To's own discretion you would never fared the worse.
For His in this seems greater Far then Yours.
But if you will daign to keep along with me --
Sir I embrace the opportunity.

Why then allons Monsieur, come on: I guess
You are a worthy member of that place.
Pray how do you like it, between you and me.
All things with you, Sir, I suppose agree?
All very well: how can I choose but love
That place which no man are could disapprove
On any just pretense; close by whose side
The murmuring streams of gentle Isis glide,
While Zephirs from the neighboring Hills inspire
The Soul, and gently fan Poetic fire.
There free from noise and in a safe recess
We may enjoy a perfect happiness.

A perfect Happiness! pray hold a blow
And let us dispute it out before we go.
Is their no Helicon but Isis stream?
And no Parnassus but the hills You name?
What must we never benefit mankind,
Thus to one corner of the World confined?
Must we consume our Youthful vigorous days
Fit for employment, in inglorious ease?
Pray where is the satisfaction that is got
In letting all men know Your good for naught?
Why good for naught? cause in a close retreat
We envy not the glories of the great,
Free from Ambition, that does toil create.
Ambition! is the greatest blessing sure
That man could here enjoy, or Heaven conferr.
How weary would each step of life be gone
Were not Ambition that enticed us on?
This like a ferment working in the vein
Stirs us to action, but creates no pain.
Nor is it through a tedious course of ease,
That we must purchase perfect happiness.
In business, Sir, You must your self embroyl,
There is no pleasure if there is no toil,
It Is from the ills we have undergone, we know
Whether we are truly happy now or no.
He that goes always in one even way
And meets no rubb's that make him turn, or stray,
No pleasant intervals can e're enjoy,
Continued ease will soon it self destroy.
No fragrant sweetness does attend that rose
Which you are always holding at Your nose.
Therefore upon this stage let every man
Appear with as much credit as he can,
What though success endeavors don't attend,
And men of business sometimes miss their end.
It argues still a lofty generous Soul
Whose hopes no fears could ever yet control.
It Is not my business to my self to live.
There Is yet a nobler end at which I drive;
Else would it seem as I were brought up here,
To show how insignificant I were.
With emulation thus we ought to strive,
And let our stock of fame our selves survive.
For it is a Satisfaction sure too mean,
Unactive to pass over life's lazy scene,
And then to be, as if we'd never been.
In short, it is the duty that You owe
Your Country Sir, to come abroad and show
Your self; if you your duty did but know.
And if without offense it may be said,
I think it looks as though you were ill bred,
And if it is possible, worse taught than fed.
Nay as for learning Sir, I hope no parts
Of Europe will pretend to half those Arts,
In such exact perfection as we do.

It Is therefore, Sir, I lay the blame on You.
For all the stock of learning that You boast
If not imparted to the World, is lost.
What though the stream be deep and crystal too?
If like the Nile it don't the land overflow.
The Oar that is treasured up is sure abused;
And might as well not be, as not be used.
So Sir do you see a f -- t for all this stuff,
Which I and all the World know well enough,
Will not be worth to e're a poring sot
Of all the packing tribe, one single groat.
Therefore the Stagarite from shelf dismount,
Des Carts too; and turn 'em to account.
Believe me, Sir, if You would get by them,
Translate them to the place from whence they came.
For I must plainly tell you that success
Will Not follow from the methods you profess.
For if the gentile learning of the Age
You Are for, from this Your self first disengage.
For if old Statutes many years ago
Compiled, are to direct your studies now,
When those who made them had a different taste
Of Learning, then the world at present has:
With strait girt doublet then may N -- on huff,
And swagger with his Ears beneath a ruff,
Were open trowsers (as they used to do
Two hundred years since) and be still a Beaux.
This difference indeed may be supposed
Between You both; he only'd be exposed
To the laughter of the gazing crowd, but You,
To ridicule and disadvantage too.
And that from the (...)
From what the old Stagarite had used to give
With greater Ease, then e're he could believe.
Sir I Will maintain the Rawest Youngster there
Whom too fond Parent's over forward care
Removed from Rod toth' University,
(As surely thinking that the tender tree
If once transplanted to another Soil,
Would answer's expectations and his toil.)
Even this Spark five terms at least, before
H' has taken a degree; and full Ten more
Before he has deserved it; shall adore
Those Ancient Sots, whose whimsick brain alone
Found out Dame Nature's ways before unknown,
Whereby she acted, or at least she might have done.
To their opinions having his confined,
With bold assurance he thwarts all mankind:
Thinks he cannot err while in their steps he goes,
Though on what grounds he follows, he scarce knows.
And may to meritorious faith pretend,
Whilst he beleives what he cannot comprehend.
He never Stoops so low as common sense
Too mean a quarry for his just pretense.
And thinks all us illeterate clowns, and fools,
Who talk not in the jargon of the Schools.
But give me leave to tell him he is undone.
And were he sensible how Far h' had run
In a wrong course, he gladly would return.
He Would come abroad where looking all around
At the first view he would his sense confound.
Start like Columbus on his new found shore,
At the sight of People he never saw before.
Pleased with discoveries he had made, he would cry
He Would found a part oth' world as well as He.
Thus much I Am sure he could not choose but own,
He Would found a part of it to Him unknown.
More I Would have said but Parson in a huff
Thus Syllogistically cut me off.
Sir since I know not where to mend my lot,
It Is best to be content with what I Have got
Ergo, do you see Sir, I Will not Stir a jot.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 12. line 20 for wise, r. Wise. p. 25. l. 2. sease, r. seize. p. 34. l. 1.
there, r. their. l. 14. loose, r. lose. p. 35. l. 1. r. Impostour. p. 51. l. 9.
suppriss'd, r. suppressed. p. 52. l. 16. amas'd, r. amazed. p. 55. l. 2. to, r.
too. p. 64. l. 11. Id'as, r. Ida's. p. 68. l. 3. to, r. too. p. 78. l. 4. fare,
r. fair. p. 80. omit the point that follows stream. p. 82. Pray r. prey. p. 92.
l. 11. could, r. I could. p. 109. l. 14. radient, r. radiant.


