portrait of Boethius SEVERINUS BOETHIUS. ANICIUS MANLIUS
Ex veteri Natua marmorea qu^ est Roma.

ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS BOETHIUS, OF THE CONSOLATION OF Philosophy.

In Five BOOKS.

Made English and Illustrated with NOTES, By the Right Honorable RICHARD Lord
Viscount PRESTON.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Awnsham and John Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row; and Francis Hildyard Bookseller in York. MDCXCV.

TO THE READER.
A Long Retirement in the Country having afforded me many Hours of leisure, I
considered that I could not employ them better than in giving an English Dress
to this Part of the Works of Boethius, entitled, Of the Consolation of
Philosophy.

Chaucer, the ancient Poet of our Nation, was the first whom I find to have
attempted a Translation of this Book into our Tongue: but that is now almost as
unintelligible to the English Reader as the Original is; the Alterations of our
Language, which he is said, before any of our Countrymen, to have endeavored
to refine, having been very many and great since the times in which he
flourished. I have also seen two other Translations, the one of them published
in the Year 1609. The other only of four Books in that of 1674, imprinted at
Oxford: and though I shall not censure either of them, I may modestly say, that
I see nothing in them which may hinder me from offering one to the Public
which may be more correct.

In this small but most admirable Book are to be found great Variety of
Learning, many weighty Sentences, much well-digested Morality, and exact Rules
for Life. This, and the other Works of our Author, show him to have been a Man
of comprehensive Learning, and of great Piety and Devotion; and his Constancy
in Suffering makes him appear to have been of as great Virtue and Courage.

He fell into ill Times, living when the Roman Empire was just expiring, being
brought to its Period by the violent Irruptions of several Northern Nations
which flowed down upon it like an impetuous Torrent; whose Force was not to be
resisted, but did carry all things before it; it being then the Custom of those
People who lived Northwards, beyond the Rhine and the Danow, born in an
healthful and prolifick Climate, to abandon their native Countries when they
were over-stock'd, (as they often happened to be) and to seek new Habitations.

By this Means the Face of Italy (and indeed of a great Part of Europe) was
overspread with (Barbarism; Arts and Civility were buried in their own Ruins,
and all was subjected to the Will and Violence of bloody Conquerors.

In the worst of these Times this good Man endeavored to maintain the Rights
of his Country, and was the great Supporter of that small Part of the Roman
Liberty which remained, desiring nothing more than to see it one day restored:
but it was not the Pleasure of Heaven to grant his Desire; it rather thought
fit to permit him to fall into the Hands of his Tormentors, whose Persecutions
and Cruelties only ended with his Life, and under the more barbarous Treatment
of those who gave a Liberty to their Tongues (as appears in several Parts of
this Book) to traduce and vilify his afflicted Virtue, to debase and decry his
Sufferings, who handled his Wounds without Compassion; and who, by stabbing his
Fame and Reputation, became more criminal than those partial Judges who
condemned him to Death, and more bloody than those Executioners who acted the
Tragedy upon his Body.

Hence it is that we may find him to have been the Subject of Reflection and
Discourse to the Assemblies of the Pretenders to Policy, the Enquirers after
and Tellers of News, who were generally the Knaves and Fools of his Country;
and of those mean-spirited Men who being at a Distance from the Dangers and
Misfortunes with which he was oppressed, thought they might safely pass a
Censure upon his Actions and Carriage, like Plowers plowing upon his Back, and
making their Furrows long; and so, at his Expense, advance a little Trophy of
Reputations to themselves, by pretending, perhaps, that their Demeanor should
have been with more Firmness if they had been in his Circumstances, when most
of them had not Souls, calmly, to think upon what he with Constancy and Bravery
did endure.

It is true that this way of treating Unfortunate, though Good Men, as it had a
Beginning long before the Times of Boethius, so daily Experience shows that it
has been carefully continued since, even to our own, and will be carried on,
doubtless, till all things shall have an End.

He from whom Fortune has withdrawn her kinder Influences, and upon whom those
who, under God, govern the World do not think fit to shine, whatever his Merits
may have been before, will find himself exposed to all the Injuries which his
Superiors, Equals or Inferiors shall think good to heap upon him: He becomes
a Reproof to all his Enemies, but especially amongst his Neighbors; his
Kinsfolks and Acquaintance stand far off him, and are afraid of him; and they
who see him without do convey themselves from him: He becomes like a broken
Vessel, and is clean forgotten, like a dead Man out of Mind: He hears the
Blasphemy of the Multitude, (which is always as ill-grounded as it is loud) and
the Drunkards make Songs upon him. So that the Observation made by the
ingenious and learned Mr. Dryden, in his Dedication before the Translation of
Juvenal, page 35, and 36. appears to be very just, which is, that amongst Men,
those who are prosperously unjust are entitled to a Panegyric, but afflicted
Virtue is insolently stabbed with all manner of Reproaches: No Decency is
considered, no Fulsomness is omitted, no Venom is wanting so far as Dullness can
supply it; for there is a perpetual Dearth of Wit, and Barrenness of good Sense
and Entertainment.

But these are the ordinary Turns of Providence, to which all Men ought to
submit; as those who are endowed with Piety and good Sense do with Willingness,
ever making the right Use of them, without being surprised at them; because
they know that that Happiness is only to be found within themselves, which
others so anxiously hope and seek for from foreign Objects.

This makes the worst of Evils, Banishment or Death, to be endured with
Cheerfulness by Men of great Souls, they knowing that the Persecution of this
World is, to be the last Proof of their Patience and Fidelity; and that when
that is at an end, their Virtue shall be rewarded and crowned.

It now remains that I acquaint the Reader with the Design of this Book, and
also that I say something concerning my Performance upon it.

Our Philosopher here attempts to bring Man to a true Understanding of the
Sovereign Good of humane Minds; for some time after the Creation of the World
he lived, and acted according to the Divine Rules and the Law of Nature: but
being fallen into a State of Sin and Impiety, he soon lost all his natural and
glorious Idea's and Forms, and was no longer cherished with the kind Favors
and Influences of Heaven as before he had been. Yet notwithstanding this
unhappy Change, Vice had not so far obtained over Virtue, but humane Nature
still had a Knowledge (though much fainter) of God; it searched after him who
gave to it a Being, and urged it self on to desire and pursue Happiness. From
hence it came to pass, that the Sages and Philosophers of several Ages differed
much in their Opinions concerning the Summum Bonum, or Sovereign Good, or
Happiness of humane Nature, as may be seen by their Writings, and the Histories
which make mention of them; which Opinions I need not now to enumerate, they
being so well known. But we, whom God has blessed with greater and more
certain Lights than Nature could afford, do now know well that our Happiness
can consist in no other thing than in its Union with the Eternal Good: This
being the highest Perfection of our Souls, it ought to incite us to pursue
vigorously so Exalted and Seraphick a State of Life; which leads us to those
Felicities which this World cannot show. Boethius therefore here demonstrates to
us plainly, that there is no substantial Happiness in this World; that Riches,
Honors, worldly Glory, or Pomp, can afford us none, but rather that we are
traveled with Uneasiness and Inquietude amidst our largest Enjoyments; that we
can never be satisfied with any thing below that Eternal and Immortal Good
which has left some Impressions of it self upon every Creature; and that we
must strongly endeavor to settle our selves in the happy Condition of a
Conjunction with the Eternal Being, and not stop in the Pursuit of it by
representing to our selves that humane Life is full of Miseries, that innocent
Virtue is afflicted and distressed, and that Wickedness is triumphant, and
Impiety prosperous. We are advised by him also to consider that God, who ever
has ruled, and will rule the World, will at last do Justice to those who have
lived according to his Precepts, and have been just and righteous, however they
may have been persecuted; and that he will show in his own time that he makes
great Difference betwixt them, and those who have offended him by transgressing
his Laws.

It is here also shown, that Death it self, which seems so terrible to our
Natures, does only, after the Fatigues and Travels of the Day of Life, lay us,
as it were, at Night to sleep, that so our high and noble Faculties may be
awakened to the Participation and Enjoyment of a more serene, free and happy
Estate, which the Misfortunes of this World cannot affect, and which shall
never have an End.

This I take to be the Sum of what is contained in this Book of Boethius.

I am now to advertise the Reader, that in my Translation I have followed the
Editions of Vallinus, and that of the Sieur Cally for the Use of the Dolphin,
because I take them to be the most correct of any of those which I have seen.
In the Annotations also I have mostly followed them, because I have found them
very learned and exact; but when I have made use of them, I have very much
contracted them. I foresee too, that it may be objected, that in them I seem to
affect borrowed Learning, (which indeed I do not, nor ever did) and that those
Stories out of the Poets and Mythologists, which swell the Volume, might have
been omitted, because they are commonly known. To this I answer, that I did not
make this Translation for the Learned, and that by Consequence I could not
intend to inform them, by my Notes and Illustrations, of any thing which they
did not know before; but that I did think they might be instructive to the
English Reader, and might make the Sense of the Book more plain and pleasant to
him, for whose Use alone both the one and the other were designed.

I know that Fault will also be found with the Liberty which I have taken in
rendering of the Verse, and with my own Additions which are in some Places made.
To this I must return, that I have endeavored, as well in translating the
Prose as Verse, not to omit any part of the Author's Sense; and, to the best of
my Understanding, I am sure I have not: but, I think, since those Translations
are allowed by all Men to be flat and insipid, where the Words of the Author
are too closely followed, it must then be necessary that something should be
added or altered by the Translator to heighten them, and to give them a more
grateful Taste, which is all I have pretended to do: But I must leave it to
others to judge how well or how ill I have performed this.

I have also rendered some Metres into blank Verse, which may seem to some
Readers to be an Effect of Laziness: But let the Censurers consult the
Original, and they will find that wherever I have done it, the Subject and
the Nature of the Meter is such, that the Author's Sense could not be clearly
expressed in the more confined way of Rithme.

THE LIFE OF BOETHIUS.
ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS BOETHIUS was descended from an ancient and noble
Family, many of his Ancestors having been Senators and Consuls, and was born at
Rome in that time when Augustulus, the last of the Roman Emperors, (having for
Fear resigned the Empire) was banished, and Odoacer King of the Herulians began
to reign in Italy, about the Year of Christ CDLXXV, or a little after. His
Grandfather seems to have been BOETHIUS, a Consular Man, who was Captain of the
Guards to Valentinian, and accompanied Aetius, that valiant Commander, in all
his Expeditions, equally sharing with him his Labors and Victories; and
suffered for his sake when he was killed by the Hand of the Emperor, who envied
his Fame, and feared his Valor; with whom the Life, Safety, and Majesty of the
Western Empire expired. His Father was ANICIUS MANLIUS FLAVIUS BOETHIUS, Son of
BOETHIUS, mentioned above, who was Consul in the Year CDLXXXVII. He dying when
his Son was an Infant, his Friends and Relations took care of his Education,
and sent him to Athens, where he not only attained to a perfect understanding
of the Greek Tongue, but also of Philosophy, and of all other kinds of
Sciences. Nor did he spend many Years in those Studies, but with a wonderful
Quickness he perfected himself in the Knowledge of all Arts and Disciplines:
Therefore returning young to Rome, he soon became the Admiration of all there,
and in short time was advanced to the chief Dignities of his Country. First he
was admitted into the Rank of Senators: Next he obtained the Consulate: and
last of all, was made Master of the Offices. He had two Wives, the one named
Helps; the other Rusticiana: The first was a Sicilian by Birth; her Father's
Name was Festus, at that time Chief of the Senate. Her Virtues, and the
Endowments of her Mind, far exceeded her Beauty and Fortune: She excelled in
Poetry, and writ according to the most exact Rules of it, accompanying her
Husband as a sweet and inspiring Genius, whilst he composed some of his
immortal Works. He desired much to have had Issue by her, and performed the
last Offices to her in the following Verses, which express with Passion his
Conjugal Affection.

HELPS dicta fui, Siculae Regionis Alumna,
Quam procul a patria, Conjugis egit amor.
Quo sine, moesta dies, nox anxia, flebilis hora,
Nec solum Caro, sed Spiritus unus erat.
Lux mea non clausa est, tali remanente marito,
Majorique animae, part superstes ero.
Porticibus sacris, tam nunc peregrina quiesco,
Judicis aeterni testificata Thronum.
Ne qua manus Bustum violet, nisi forte jugalis,
Haec iterum cupiat jungere membra suis.
Vt Thalami Cumulique comes, nec morte revellar,
Et socios vitae nectat uterque Cinis.
In English thus; Led by the Charms of my kind Lord I came
To Rome, Sicilian HELPS was my Name.
My Days, Nights, Hours, he did with Pleasure crown,
One were our Bodies, and our Souls were one.
Though forced from hence, I do my Fate survive,
Whilst still my nobler Part in him does live.
A Stranger in this sacred Porch I lie,
And of the Eternal Judge I testify.
O let no Hand invade my Tomb, unless
My Lord would mingle this my Dust with his:
As once one Bed, then should we have one Grave,
And I in both should him my much-loved Partner have.


His other Wife was RVSTICIANA, Daughter to Quintus Aurelius Memius Symmachus,
who was also Chief of the Senate, and Consul in the Year CDXXCV. By her he had
many Children, two of which were Consuls, viz. QVINTVS ANICIVS SYMMACHVS, and
ANICIVS MANLIVS SEVERINVS BOETIVS, in the Year DXXII. this bearing the Name of
his Father, the other of his Grandfather. Boethius well considering that
Symmachus, his Father-in-law, being without Heirs-male, he should do a grateful
thing to him if he gave his Name to his eldest Son by his Daughter. It Is likely
that his Wealth was not small, because (besides that he owns in his Writings,
that he lived in great Plenty and Splendor, and that he had an Abundance and
Affluence of all worldly things) his Father supported the honorable Office of
the Consulate; and his Grandfather, in the most difficult times of the Empire,
commanded the Pretorian Bands. Nor was he only considerable by his Patrimony,
for he had a great Accession to his Fortune by his Wife RVSTICIANA, to whom
(and her Sons) the whole Estate of Symmachus did descend, since Galla, the
other Daughter of Symmachus, upon the Death of her Husband, who died young,
soon after the time of his Consulship was expired, vowed perpetual Chastity,
and associated her self to the Vestals. To these Ornaments of Birth and Fortune
Nature added also the considerable Faculties of Speaking and Writing; in which
he so excelled, that himself acknowledges the first; and that the second was
not wanting to him, will appear to any one who examines what he has written
upon the several Subjects of Mathematics, Logic and Divinity: But this Divine
Work of the Consolation of Philosophy does far exceed the rest, for it abounds
in various and difficult Arguments, and yields many choice Sentences and Rules
of Life. Upon every Subject which he attempts he does so acquit himself, that
none can be said to have taught more accurately, to have proved more
irrefragably, or to have illustrated with more Perspicuity. To be short, he had
so much Strength of Soul and Thought, and he showed so much Judgment in all his
Managements, that even a most knowing Prince feared his Parts; and his Virtues
and Integrity became his Crime, and wrought his Ruin. These were the Causes of
his Banishment and Death: With these he studied to defend the good, and to curb
and restrain ill Men, whenever it was in his Power: For whilst he sustained the
Dignity of Master of the Offices (it being dangerous for him then to refuse to
do so) he was made President of the Council, to whom it belonged to oversee the
Discipline of the Palace; and being Partaker of many of the Secrets of his
Prince, was called often to advise him in his weightiest Affairs of State; and
on all these Occasions he gave great Proofs of his Abilities and inviolable
Equity. Amongst other of his generous and good Actions he defended Paulinus and
Albinus, both Consulars, and the Senate it self, with the rich Province of
Campania, against the Rapine and Violence of King Theodorick, Cyprian,
Triguilla and Conigast; and also against the devouring Avarice of the Captain
of the Guards, and other barbarous Spoilers. By these Proceedings he became the
Object of ill Men's Hate, and incurred also the Displeasure of the King. But at
this very time the Orthodox Emperor Justin, succeeding to Anastasius the Arian
like a new Sun, enlightened the Oriental Regions with the Light of the true
Faith: He confirmed that Peace which was desired by Theodorick King of the
Goths, who then ( Odoacer being slain) reigned in Italy. He having reconciled
the Church of Constantinople, and also several others, to Hormisda Bishop of
Rome, did immediately, by his Edict, banish all Arians, except the Goths, out
of the Eastern Empire. Theodorick the Goth was troubled at this Action above
measure; however he dissembled his Resentment, when behold three Informers, Men
of desperate Fortune, and worse Lives, Gaudentius and Opilio, for several
Offenses being condemned to Banishment, and Basilius lately dismissed from
being Steward of the King's Household, and also much indebted, apply to the
King and accuse BOETIVS, for that he should hinder an Informer from bringing in
his Witnesses to prove the whole Senate guilty of Treason; that he declared his
Design, by several Letters, of restoring the Liberty of Italy; and that he had
endeavored to raise himself to Honors by magical Arts, and other unlawful
Means. Theodorick jealous, as all are, of the Rights and Safety of his Crown,
and fearing too that if the true Religion should be asserted, the Romans, being
more addicted to Justin, would attempt some Great thing, and knowing that what
was done in the East against the Arians, was done at the Request and in favor
of Hormisda and the Senate of Rome, did give ready Faith to those Accusers, and
immediately sent them to the Senate at Rome, from which Place this good Man was
then far distant, where they were to present their Accusations, and to declare
that the Lives and Safety of the Prince, and of all the Goths, were now in
great Jeopardy: So, to the Grief of all good Men, the innocent Boethius, absent,
unheard, and undefended, was condemned to Death, and to Proscription. But the
King fearing that Justice and all the World would have but too good Cause of
Offense against him if this Man should die, he changed his Sentence from Death
to Banishment, that so he might be a Terror to other People; and he might still
have him in his Power to make a Sacrifice of when his barbarous Soul should
thirst after Blood. Therefore in the Year DXXII. he was banished to Milan, or
(as others say) he was confined to Ticinum, now Pavia; and all his Friends and
Relations were forbid to accompany him on his way, or to follow him thither.
Being in that Place he writ this choice Piece of the Consolation of Philosophy,
that he might in it declare his Innocence to Posterity. Whilst this learned and
good Man was employed upon this Work, and endeavoring to restore unto himself,
by Philosophy, that Contentment and Quiet of which his Enemies, by their
Insults and Injuries, had deprived him, Justin, in the Year DXXIV. did
promulgate an Edict against the Arians, by which he commanded (without
excepting even the Goths) that all the Bishops of that Opinion should be
deposed, and that their Churches should be consecrate according to the true
Christian Form. The Goths being every where banished from all Parts, applied
themselves to Theodorick. He first by Letters treats with Justin to restore
them to their Liberties and Privileges: But when he found he made no Progress
by that way, he designed an Embassy, and would make it more splendid and
weighty by the Dignity of the Persons to be sent. John the Bishop of Rome,
[which before that time was never done] and with him four of the Consular and
Patritian Orders were sent upon this Occasion, and were commanded to address to
the Emperor, to repeal that Edict, by which he had exterminated the Arians;
which if he did not speedily do, then to declare that he would destroy Italy
with Fire and Sword. The Ambassadors at their Arrival at Constantinople were
received with all Respect and Joy, the Emperor, People and Clergy, going in
Procession to meet them: John the Bishop going to the Church took the upper
Hand, and sitting on the Throne on the right Hand, he celebrated the Day of the
Resurrection of our Savior after the Roman Use, and crowned Justin the
Emperor. Theodorick did not well digest those great Honors done to his
Ambassadors, but he did not express his Discontent till the Goths by their
Letters complained to him, that John, in contempt of his Instructions, had
consecrated the Arian Churches after the Roman way. Then believing himself not
only contemned but injured, he began to rage and threaten, and to meditate
Revenge. Nor did he long consider of the way: For on the tenth of the Kalends
of November, in the Year of Christ DXXV. [and of his Banishment the fourth] by
a Sword he opened the way of Immortality to Boethius. There want not some who
say, that the King raging much when he heard the News from Constantinople, did
not, as before, think this a feigned, but did now believe it as a real and true
Conspiracy: And that he did admonish Boethius by the Tribune (to whom he had
committed the Execution) that if he did desire or hope for Mercy at his Hands,
he would disclose the whole Treason in all its Methods and Circumstances. But
he (as he might well do) insisting upon his Innocence, received the fatal Blow.
As to what relates to Symmachus, it is reported that he was sent for to Ravenna,
and was there long detained in custody. John, with his Colleagues, about this
time returned to Rome, when he found his Friend Boethius dead; Italy groaning
under Oppression and Misery, and in vain struggling with her Chain; the King
raging and furious, and Barbarity every where reigning: he stayed some little
time at Rome, and at length was persuaded by Theodorick, who had put on a
Vizard of Clemency and Mildness (though his Friends advised him to the
contrary) to go to Ravenna, accompanied with others; whom, as soon as they were
arrived, he delivered to several Keepers, and punished by several ways: John
was put into a low Dungeon, where he was soon overcome by Hunger, and the
Horror and Stench of the Place, and died the 6th of the Kalends of June: on the
Day after the Death of this holy Man Symmachus was murdered, having undergone
no legal Trial. Nor had the Rage of the Tyrant ended here; for he also designed
upon the Lives of several others of the Patritians, if he had not been deterred
from going further by the Fear which he was under of the Resentments of the
Orthodox Emperor Justin. The Body of John was translated from Ravenna with much
Pomp and Solemnity, and was received by the Clergy and People of Rome, on the
Kalends of June, with all the Ceremonies due to Martyrdom. But the same Honors
could not be done to the Bodies of Boethius and Symmachus, though they had
received the same Crown and Palm, for the King commanded that they should be
hidden in the most private Place that could be found. (Nor did Theodorick long
survive this barbarous Action, the Revenge of Heaven always pursuing and
overtaking Tyrants, when that of Men cannot; for in a few Days after the Head
of a great Fish being served up to him at Supper, Symmachus, who was by his
Command lately slain, seemed fiercely to threaten him out of it, with his Teeth
and Eyes; with which terrible Sight being stricken and amazed, he trembling and
cold, took his Bed and died, having first with Tears expressed and testified
his Grief for the Death of Boethius and Symmachus, to Elpidius his Physician,
then present. Amala Sunta, the Daughter of Theodorick, succeeding to her Father
in the Kingdom, and knowing well what had happened to him at his Death, did
soon rescind what her Father had done contrary to Right and Justice, and did
restore the Estates and Goods of their Fathers to the Children of Boethius and
Symmachus, which before had been confiscate to the Use of the King. The
Religious of those Days did then decree the usual Honors to both of their
Memories; and at this Day Boethius at Pavia on the 10th of the Kalends of
November, and Symmachus at Ravenna on the 5th of the Kalends of June, are
commemorated with much Devotion, because they died in the maintenance of the
true Faith against the impious and heretical Doctrines of Arius. The Tomb of
Boethius is to be seen at this Day in the Church of St. Augustine at Pavia, near
to the Steps of the Chancel, with the following Epitaph: Maeonia and Latia
lingua clarissimus, and qui
Consul eram, hic perii, missus in exilium;
Et quid mors rapuit? Probitas me vexit ad auras,
Et nunc fama viget maxima, vivit opus.


In English thus; Skilled in two Tongues, graced with the Consulate,
A banished Man, I yielded here to Fate;
Though Death prevailed, Virtue has raised me high,
And now my Fame and Works do through the World fly:
When many Ages after, the Emperor Otho III. did enclose his Bones then lying
neglected amongst the Rubbish in a Marble Chest. Gerbertus, a great
Philosopher, who was afterward advanced to the Papal Chair, by the Name of
Syvester II. did honor him with this following Elogy.

Roma potens, dum jura suo declarat in orb,
Tu pater, and patriae lumen, Severine Boeti,
Consulis officio, rerum disponis habenas,
Infundis lumen studiis, and cedere nescis
Graecorum ingeniis, sed men's divina coercet
Imperium Mundi. Gladio bacchante Gothorum
Libertas Romana perit: tu Consul and Exul,
Insignes Titulos praeclara morte relinquis,
Tunc decus Imperii, summas qui praegravat arts,
Tertius Otho sua dignum te judicat aula:
Aeternumque tui statuit monimenta laboris,
Et been promeritum, meritis exornat honestis.
Whilst Rome does all the World proudly awe,
Thou her great Consul do to her give Law;
No nobler Light thy Country ever saw!
The Learned take Lights from thee, thou art behind
None of the Grecian Worthies, thou do find
Room for the World in thy capacious Mind.
Now when the Roman Liberty is gone,
Banished, thou layst thy Purple Honors down,
And dying scorn'st the Gothic Tyrant's Frown.
Imperial Otho, Patron of all Arts,
To thee his Favors after Death imparts,
And builds this Monument to thy Deserts.
The End of the Life of BOETIVS.
The Testimonies of several Writers concerning Boethius translated.
Ennodius, or (as some read) Evodius, was Bishop of Ticinum or Pavia, and an
excellent Poet and Orator.
ENNODIVS Bishop of Pavia to Boethius, Epist. xiii. Lib. vii.
THOU do vouchsafe, most accomplished of Men, to extol my Virtues, when thy
Industry, even in thy Youth, and without those Inconveniences, which attend
those in Years, has given thee all the Advantages of Age: All things in the
Universe are subject to thy Diligence and Inquiry: To whom, even in the
Beginning of thy Life, assiduous Reading is Diversion; and that which others
with Sweat and Labor scarce attain to, thou conquer'st with Delight: That
which appeared in the Hands of the Ancients but a single Light, in thine shines
with double Luster and Flame; for thou have obtained the Mastery of that in thy
Beginning, which our Ancestors scarce arrived at in the last part of their
Lives.

Out of the Greek of Procopius of Caesarea in Palestine was a Rhetorician and a
Sophister: Amongst his several Histories he wrote three Books of the Gothic
Wars.
PROCOPIVS, Hist. Goth. Lib. 1.
SYmmachus, and his Son-in-law Boethius, Patricians, and nobly descended, were,
in their several times, Chiefs of the Senate and Consuls, and made deeper
Researches into Philosophy and Morality, than any Persons of their time, and
were very charitable as well to Strangers as to Romans, who were in want. Their
Merits having raised them to Honors and Authorities, they became the Hate of
those flagitious Persons who accused them falsely, and were the Occasion of
their Deaths, and of the Confiscation of their Goods. But a few Days after,
Theodorick supping, and having before him the Head of a great Fish, it appeared
to him to be the Head of Symmachus, (who by his Command was killed) grinding
his Teeth against him, and threatening him with sparkling Eyes, and an ireful
Countenance. Whence, being affrighted with the Strangeness of the Prodigy, and
his Joints and Members trembling above measure, he forthwith betook himself to
his Bed; and there acquainting Elpidius his Physician with things, in order, as
they had happened, he with Tears lamented his injurious Dealing with Symmachus
and Boethius; which when he had done, being overwhelmed with Grief, and
astonished with the late portentous Vision, he yielded to Death, giving this
his first and last Example of injurious Acting against his Subjects, by
condemning such worthy Men, contrary to his Custom, without any Cause assigned.

The same PROCOPIVS, Lib. 3. ejusdem Hist.
This was further added to complete the Misery of Rusticiana, the late Wife of
Boethius, and Daughter of Symmachus; that she who had formerly relieved the Poor
and Necessitous, should (going from House to House, and Door to Door) beg in a
servile and Country Habit, the Necessaries of Life from her Enemies. The Goths
indeed did conspire against the Life of Rusticiana; and objected to her, that
she giving Money to the Commanders of the Roman Army, was the Cause of throwing
down the Statues of Theodorick, in Revenge of the Death of Symmachus her
Father, and Boethius her Husband. Totilas however suffered no Injury to be done
to her, but preserved her and several others from all harm.

Paulus Diaconus, at the Command of Adelburga, Daughter of King Desiderias,
made a large Appendix to the History of Eutropius.
PAVLVS DIACONVS, Lib. 7. added to the History of Eutropius.
WHilst John the Pope, Theodorus, Importunus, Agapitus, Consular Men, and
another Agapitus a Patrician, were performing their Ambassy to Justin,
Theodorick, spurred on by his Rage, slew Symmachus the Patrician, who had been
Consul, and Boethius the Elder, who had also been Consul, both good Christians,
with the Sword.

Out of MARIUS his Chronicle,

Justin II. and Opilio, being Consuls; Indict. II. which was in the Year of
Grace DXXIV.

In this Year Boethius the Patrician was killed within the Territories of Milan,

Probus the younger and Philoxenus being Consuls, Indict. III. in the Year DXXV.

In the Consulate of these Men Symmachus the Patrician was massacred at Ravenna.

Anastasius was the Restorer and Keeper of the Apostolic Library, and
therefore styled Bibliothecarius.
ANASTATIVS Bibliothecar. in the Life of John I.
AT the same time when John the Pope, with Theodorus, Importunus, and Agapitus,
Exconsuls, and Agapitus the Patrician (who died at Thessalonica) were sent to
Constantinople, the Heretical King Theodorick detained two renowned Exconsular
Senators, Symmachus and Boethius, and slew them with the Sword.

Ado was Archbishop of Vienna, and writ a short Chronicle from the Beginning
of the World to his own times.
ADO of Vienna, in his Chronicle.
WHen John the Pope, in his Return came to Ravenna, Theodorick imprisoned him,
and his Companions being displeased that Justin, the chief Defender of the
Orthodox Faith, had received them so honorably; at which time he slew
Symmachus and Boethius, both Consulars, upon Account of their Faith.

AIMOINIVS de gest. Franc. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
SOME of those who were with John the Pope he burnt, others he put to Death by
several Ways and Tortures. Amongst whom Symmachus the Patrician, and Boethius
his Son-in-law, after long Imprisonment, fell by the Sword. How well Boethius
was seen in sacred and profane Letters, may, by his Writings on several
Subjects, appear. These his Treatises of Arithmetic, and Logic, and Music,
so grateful to the Romans, will testify. Furthermore, his Book of the
Consubstantiality of the Trinity, does sufficiently show how useful he might
have been to the Church, if the Times could have born him.

Joannes Sarisburiensis, or Saresberiensis, was an Englishman, and Bishop of
Chartres in France. Amongst other things he writ Policraticum, sive de Nugis
Curialium and Vestigiis Philosophorum.
JOHANNES SARISBVRIENSIS Episcop. Carnot. Policrat. Lib. 7. Cap. 15.
IF you will not believe me, revolve diligently the Book of the Consolation of
Philosophy, and the contrary will be plain to you. And although that Book does
not plainly express the word Incarnate, yet amongst those who rely upon Reason,
it is of no small Authority, whilst it yields fitting and specific Medicines
to suppress the Grief of the most sick and exulcerated Minds. Nor the Jew, nor
the Greek, under Pretext of Religion, declines the Use of Physic, whilst the
Wise in the Faith, and the Unwise out of the Faith, are so profited by the
artificial Compound of right Reason; but no Religion, where Reason has any
Sway, ought to abominate what it offers. He is profound, without Difficulty, in
his Sentences; in his Words weightily clear: He is a vehement Orator, clear
Demonstrator, an irrefragable Arguer, sometimes perswasively gliding to that
which is to follow, sometimes as it were pushing the Reader on by necessity
toward it.

Those who are desirous to know more of our Author, and of the Testimonies of
learned Men concerning him, from the time in which he flourished, downwards to
this present Age, may consult further Ennodius Bishop of Pavia, mentioned
before; Epist. L. 8. Ep. 1.
Cassiodorus, a learned and pious Man, Chancellor to King Theodorick, in two
Epistles which he writ to Boethius by the Order of that King; as also Venerable Bede; Sigelbertus a Monk of Gemblores, in the Duchy of Brabant, of the Order
of St. Benedict; Thomas Aquinas; Laurentius Valla; Sanctus Antonius Archbishop
of Florence, of the Order of the Friars-Preachers; Jacobus Philippus
Bergomensis, of the Order of the Eremites of St. Augustine; Hermolaus Barbarus,
a noble Venetian, Archbishop and Patriarch of Aquileia; Angelus Politianus, an
excellent Poet and Orator; Joannes Tritenhemius, Abbot of Spanheim; Julius
Caesar Scaliger; Lilius Gregorius Gyraldus; Centur. 6. Cap. 10.
the Centuriators of Magdeburg; and Justus Lipsius; who have all made just
Mention of Boethius in their Writings, and built honorable Monuments to his
Fame.

ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS BOETHIUS, OF THE Consolation of Philosophy. BOOK the
First.
The ARGUMENT.
Philosophy appears to Boethius, and drives away the Muses: who, as soon as she
was known to him, comforts him by the Example of other wise Men who had been
under the same Difficulties. He relates what he has deserved from the Senate,
and particular Senators, and from all Italy. Then he opens the whole Series of
his Accusation, and the Causes of his Banishment, and shows the Innocence of
his Life and Actions. Next, he complains of his many Injuries, and the Loss of
his Reputation and Dignities. Last of all, Philosophy enquires what are the
Troubles of his Mind, and the Causes of them, which are indeed the Subject
Matter of the whole following Work.

METRUM I.
Carmina, qui quondam studio florente peregi,
Flebilis, heu! moestos cogor inire modos, etc.
I Who before did lofty Verse indite,
In mournful Numbers now my Griefs recite:
Behold! the weeping Muse has bound her brow
With Cypress-Wreathes, and only dictates now
Sad Elegy to me, whose teeming Eyes
Keep time with here is. The Muse who does despise
Danger, since I am gone, disdains to stay.
And goes the kind Companion of my way.
She whose gay Favors my brisk Youth did court,
Now courts mine Age, and is its chief Support;
Which does advance before I thought it nigh,
And yet my Cares do make it onwards fly.
Too soon these Temples hoary Hairs do show,
Too soon my Summer's crowned with Alpine Snow:
My Joints do tremble, and my Skin does sit
Like a loose Garment, never made to fit.
Happy are they, whom when their Years do bloom,
Death does not seize, but when they call does come!
That to the Wretched does no Pity show;
It shuts no Eyes which Tears do overflow.
When my pleased Fates did smile, I once to Death
Had almost yielded my unwilling Breath:
But now when Fortune's gilded Favors cease,
It does arrest my kindly Hour of Ease.
Why, O my Friends! did you me Happy call?
He stands not firm, who thus like me can fall.
PROSA I.
Whilst in Silence I recounted these things, and with Styli Officio.
my Pen did delineate my Griefs and Complaints, A Woman.] Philosophy is here
meant; and because she ought not to appear but from an Eminent Situation, and
as if it were descending from Heaven, he places her over his Head; and by
assigning to her a reverend Countenance, he would signify her Original, her
Age, and her Dignity; and by her sparkling Eyes, the clear and distinct
Knowledge which she has of all things.
a Woman of a most reverend Countenance seemed to stand over my Head, with
sparkling Eyes, which were of an extraordinary Force and Quickness; her Color
was lively, and her Strength seemed to be unexhausted, although she was so old,
that she could by no means be thought one of our time. It was difficult to judge
of her Stature; for sometimes she appeared to be of the common Height of Men,
then she would seem to touch the Clouds with her Head; which again, when she
raised higher, she pierced the very Heavens with it, and was not to be followed
by the Eyes of those who looked after her. Her Garments were most artificially
made of the finest Threads and most durable Matter; which (as she her self
afterward told me) she had woven with her own Hands: They also were
overshadowed with such a Mist and Duskishness as usually covers old Images,
arising from Antiquity and the Neglect of Time. On the extreme Part of these
Vestments below, the Greek Letter [P] Philosophy is divided into Theoretical
and Practical: The first of those Species is denoted by the Letter [TH], and
consists in the pure and mere Contemplation of Truth. The latter, which is
signified by the Letter [P], consists in the Practice and Exercise of Virtue.
Theorie is placed in the upper part of the Garment; because, as Aristotle
determines, Contemplative Philosophy is much more Noble than the Active. Steps
and Degrees are placed there, by which we ascend to the one, and descend to the
other; because there can be no Exercise of Virtue without a Contemplation of
Truth, nor ought that to be without the Exercise of Virtue.
was to be read; and upon the highest Border the Letter [TH] Philosophy is
divided into Theoretical and Practical: The first of those Species is denoted
by the Letter [TH], and consists in the pure and mere Contemplation of Truth.
The latter, which is signified by the Letter [P], consists in the Practice and
Exercise of Virtue. Theorie is placed in the upper part of the Garment;
because, as Aristotle determines, Contemplative Philosophy is much more Noble
than the Active. Steps and Degrees are placed there, by which we ascend to the
one, and descend to the other; because there can be no Exercise of Virtue
without a Contemplation of Truth, nor ought that to be without the Exercise of
Virtue.
was interwoven; and betwixt them certain Steps were wrought in the form of a
Ladder, by which there was an Ascent from the lowest to the highest Letter. But
this Garment was defaced and torn by the Hands of several Violent Persons.]
Those who by Precipitation or Prejudice wrest and abuse Philosophy, and do
neither consider Truth, nor exercise Virtue.
violent Persons, who had taken away what Parts of it they could. In her right
Hand she carried Books, and in her left she swayed a Scepter. So soon as she
saw the Patronesses of Poetry standing by my Bed, and dictating to me Words, in
which I clothed my Griefs; with a concerned Countenance and inflamed Eyes, she
immediately broke out into these Expressions: What unwise Person has suffered
these scenique Strumpets to have Access to this sick Man; who are so far from
encountering his Distemper with specifique and natural Remedies, that they only
nourish and increase it by those sweet Poisons which they infuse? These are
they who, with the fruitless Thorns of the Passions, choke and destroy the
hopeful Crops of productive Reason, and who only accustom the Minds of Men to
bear and endure a Disease, but never free them from it. If (continued she,
directing her self to the Muses) your Caresses had debauched and drawn aside,
according to your Custom, any profane or unknowing Person, you should not have
been blamed by me; nor could my Labors, by such an Attempt, have been eluded:
but you have made an unhappy Proselyte of him whom I have sed with my Breasts,
and brought up in Eleatick] Logical; and it is styled so, because Logic is
said to have been invented by the great Philosopher Zeno, who was called
Eleates, because he was born in Elea, a Region of Peloponnesus, lying betwixt
Arcadia and the Ionian Sea, to the Westward; whose chief City is Elis, now
Belvedere, seated on the Bankey Coasts of the River Peneus.
Eleatique and Academique.] The Philosophy of Plato is called Academique,
because Plato was the first who professed Philosophy in the Academy. The
Academy was a Place adorned with Woods and small Groves without the Walls of
Athens, but very near them; and was first called (...), from Ecademus, a famous
Man of that City; from whence Horace, Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 2. Scilicet ut possem
curvo dignoscere rectum,
Atque inter sylvas Ecademi quaerere verum.
Now that Boethius was very knowing in both these sorts of Studies, is very
plain, because he translated the Books of Logic of Aristotle, and illustrated
them with Comments: And it will easily appear to those who shall peruse this
Work, that he thoroughly understood, and was perfectly addicted to the Opinions
of Plato.
Academique Studies. Be gone, therefore, ye Sirens, whose Pleasures kill, whose
Embraces destroy, and leave this unhappy Apostate to the Care and Skill of Me
and my Muses. This charming Company being thus rebuked, with dejected and
blushing Countenances left the Room. But I, whose Eyes were yet darkened with
Tears, not knowing who this Imperious Woman should be, was much astonished; and
fixing mine Eyes upon the Earth, I began silently to expect what she would
further do. She then approaching to me, sat down on the lower part of my Bed,
and seeing my Face overspread with Grief, and mine Eyes in that dejected
Posture, complained of the unsettled State of my Mind, in these Verses.

METRUM II.
Heu, quam praecipiti mersa profundo
Men's hebet, and propria luce relicta,
Tendit in externas ire tenebras;
Terrenis quoties flatibus aucta,
Crescit in immensum noxia cura! etc.
WHen from all Parts the Winds do blow,
And Earth-bred Cares increase and grow,
How drowned the highborn Mind does lie,
How dull's each noble Faculty;
And leaving its own proper Light,
How soon it yields to dismal Night!
When he was free, he did descry
And know each Region of the Sky;
He viewed the Glories of the Sun,
The Brightness of the I know not why he gives the Epithet of Gelida to the
Moon, unless it be that she has the Direction of the Night; which, because of
the Absence of the Sun is colder than the Day.
Gelid Moon:
He saw of every wandering Star
The various Motions through each Sphere,
They to his Numbers subject were.
Why blustering Winds do Thetis brave,
And raise the curle-headed Wave:
He knew what Spirit or Intelligence
This Globe does move and influence;
And why the Star which in the West
Does set, arises from the East:
Why in the Spring soft Zephyres blow,
And cause the fragrant Flowers to grow:
He why the generous Grape does swell
In plump Autumnus Cheeks, could tell:
Into all Secrets he did look,
And Nature was his mighty Book.
But, O! how altered is his Mind!
How grossly stupid now, and blind!
His Neck a weighty Chain does bear;
No cheerful Smiles his Face does wear;
Nor lifts he up his Head to breathe the Air.
PROSA II.
But now, said she, Medicines are more requisite than Complaints. Then looking
upon me steadfastly, and with much Attention; Art thou, continued she, that
Person, who lately being nourished with my Milk, and brought up with my Food,
did arrive at the Perfection of a vigorous and manly Soul? Certainly I gave
thee those Arms which would, if thou thy self had not thrown them away, have
defended thee firmly against every Assault. Do thou know me? From whence
proceeds this unusual Silence? From Shame or Stupidity? I had rather it were
from the former; but I am afraid thou art oppressed with the latter. But when
she saw me not only silent, but almost speechless and dumb, she reached her
Hand easily toward my Breast; And, then said she, there is no Danger, he
labors under a Lethargy, which is the common Distemper of those who are
troubled in mind. He has forgot himself a little, but he would soon be better
if he could recover the Remembrance of me; which, that he may do, I will wipe
his Eyes, darkened a little with the Clouds of Mortality: and, as she said this,
she dried the Tears from them with a part of her Garment, which she had
contracted into a fold.

METRUM III.
Tunc me discussa liquerunt nocte tenebrae,
Luminibusque prior rediit vigor, etc.
THen Night and Darkness, which had long possessed
My captived Mind, did swiftly fly away;
A sudden Light clothed my enlarged Breast,
And struck mine Eyes with its once well-known Ray.
So when a mighty Wind infests the Sky,
And watery Clouds hang heavy on its brow,
The Sun retires, the Stars concealed do lie,
And Night her Mantle over Earth does throw.
If Boreas, thundering from the Fields of Thrace,
Opens the Ivory Palaces of Light,
Phoebus shines out with a more radiant Face,
And darts new Beams upon our wondering Sight.
PROSA III.
Thus the Clouds of Sadness being dispersed, I began to breathe more freely;
and set my self to recollect the Features of her who had done so much toward
my Cure. Therefore when I had earnestly fixed mine Eyes upon her, I soon knew
her to be my tender Nurse [Philosophy] in whose School I had been instructed,
and at whose Feet, from my Youth, I had been brought up. And why, said I, thou
Source and Patroness of all Virtue, do thou descend from above into these
solitary Regions of my Banishment? Shall I, returned she, O my loved Pupil!
desert thee, and refuse to bear a part of that Burden under which I know thou
now labourest, for my sake? It Is contrary to the Rules of Philosophy, to leave
the Innocent unaccompanied in his Pilgrimage. Shall I fear an Accusation, and
be astonished, as if some new thing had happened? Is this the first time, do
thou believe, that Philosophy has been assaulted by impious and cruel Men?
Have not I, amongst the Ancients, and even before the time of thy great Master,
and my endeared Son Plato was born at Athens, A. M. 3626. or near it, and
excelled in all sorts of Learning, especially in Philosophy. His Wisdom and
Knowledge were the Occasions of much Misfortune to him: for by the Baseness and
Treachery of Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, to whose Faith he had committed
himself, as Cicero relates, he fell into great Snares and Dangers.
Plato, often contended with Folly, and supported my self against her rash
Attacks? And even, whilst he lived, did not his Master Socrates, for his Wisdom
and Learning was condemned to Death. He was born A. M. 3600. and so flourished
before the time of Plato, and was then esteemed to be the most wise and knowing
of Men, because he refined Philosophy, and rectified it, not allowing things
which were occult and involved in the Secrets of Nature, to fall under the
Consideration of it, or to be any part of its Subject, but directed its
Enquiries to the Qualities of Virtue and Vice, saying, That what was above us,
did not concern us. He, by his Precepts and Examples, exhorted his Auditors to
live well; and in his own way of living he observed an Equalness of Temper; so
that he ever showed the same Countenance in Prosperity and Adversity, neither
more pleasant nor more disturbed. He was accused for not having right
Sentiments touching the Gods, but most unjustly: and the People were so much
afflicted for his Death, that his Accusers were punished, some by Death, some
by Banishment; and, by the Order of the Senate, a Statue of Brass was raised to
his Memory.
Socrates triumph over Death, to which he was unjustly adjudg'd, I standing by
him and assisting him? Of whose Inheritance.] The Opinions and Doctrine of
Socrates.
Inheritance, when the Rout of the Epicureans and Stoics, and several of the
other Sects, snatched a part, as every one pleased; and I still opposing my
self to them, and striving against them; they, with one consent, fell upon me,
as if I had been a part of their Prey, and tore this Garment, which I had woven
with my own Hands: then every one going away with that Rag which he had
snatched, vainly believed that he had possessed himself of Philosophy, and her
whole Treasure. Some of whom, because some Footsteps and light Traces of me did
appear amongst them, the Folly of Men believing them to be my Familiars, by the
Error of the Multitude, were destroyed. But if thou art not so well acquainted
with the Banishment of Anaxagoras lived before the time of Socrates, and
consequently of Plato. He held that Matter was Infinite, but that the minute
Particles of it were agreeing amongst themselves, and at first confused, but
afterward reduced into order by the Divine Mind. From hence he, or rather
Plato, concluded that the Sun was not God, but a burning Lamp; and for this he
was banished his Country, or rather willingly left it; because it is said, he
left his Patrimonial Estate, that he might enjoy more freely the Pleasures of
Philosophy. See Diogenes Laertius concerning him.
Anaxagoras, the Poison of I have already given an Account of Socrates: The
manner of his Death was, he drunk a Draught of Hemlock or Ellebore, the Juice
of which, through extreme Cold, is Poison, which was the way of executing the
Malefactors amongst the Athenians.
Socrates, and the Torments of Zeno did philosophize before the time of
Socrates, and endured many Torments for his Wisdom and Opinions; but what they
were, or who were the Authors of them, do not appear to me.
Zeno, because they were not of thy Country; and of the length of Time which
has intervened since their Sufferings, yet the Julius Canius, or Canus, was
born in the same Century with Seneca, and was a most excellent Philosopher; and
being condemned to Death, he endured it with an almost incredible Constancy of
Mind. Seneca, l. de tranquil. c. 14.
Canii, the Seneca the Philosopher was contemporary with St. Paul, and
flourished in the first Age after our Savior's Nativity. He was the Tutor of
Nero; by whom, after he had heaped up immense Riches, he was condemned to die.
He fainted away in a warm Bath, having had some of his Veins opened, through
which his Blood did pass: and before he died, with great Constancy spoke these
Words to his Friends; Neroni saevienti nihil aliud supererat, post matrem,
fratremque interfectos, quam ut educatoris, praeceptorisque necem adjiceret.
Nothing remained for cruel Nero now to do, but to add the Barbarity of the
Death of his Teacher and Master, to the unnatural Murder of his Mother and
Brother.
Senecae, and the Boreas Soranus, a great Philosopher, of the same Age with
Seneca, who by his Justice and Industry gave so great Offense to Nero, that he
also died by his Command. The Canii, Senecae, and Sorani, are mentioned here in
the plural Number for Emphasis and mark of Distinction; as we say, your
Alexanders, your Caesar's, etc.
Sorani, all of famous Memory, and who flourished but few Ages since, may have
reached thy Knowledge: the only Cause of whose fatal and violent Ends was, that
they were educated under my Discipline, and had imbibed my Precepts, and so
became most unlike to those impious Men who wrought their Destruction.
Therefore wonder not if I be beaten with Storms whilst I sail in the Sea of
this World, since I propose no greater thing to my self than to displease ill
Men. And though the Numbers of them be great, yet it is to be contemned, since
it has no certain Guide, but is actuated by the unsteady Counsels of
Phrenetick Error. If, perhaps, they should form a Body against me, and being
stronger, assail me, I the Leader do straightways retreat with my Party into a
Fortress, whilst they in the mean time are employed in Rapine and Spoil, and in
robbing us of those trivial things which are useless to them, and not very
necessary for us: whilst we, in the mean time, (secure in our Fastness from the
Fear of their Assaults, which Folly and Ignorance can never win) laugh at them,
who, with so much Labor and Hazard, pursue the meanest and most despicable
Trifles.

METRUM IV.
Quisquis composito serenus aevo, etc. THat well-weigh'd Man, who in a settled
State,
Has triumphed over his aspiring Fate;
Who, unconcerned, Fortune in Smiles can view,
And fearless can behold her clouded Brow:
No raging Sea shall move, nor shall prevail
Against his Head; though the proud Billows swell,
Though black Vesuvio should with them conspire,
Vomiting out Auxiliary Fire:
Tho Heaven its fiercest Thunderbolts should weild,
To which even Oaks, and Rocks, and Towers must yield*
Fear not, unhappy Man, the Oppressor's Brow;
His Power from thy mean Fears alone can grow.
He who nor fears, nor hopes for any thing,
Disarms the Tyrant, and himself's a King.
But he who to himself is not a Law;
If his unstable Breast these Passions awe,
He yields his Arms, and now no more is free;
He makes his Chains, and meets his Slavery.
PROSA IV.
Do thou perceive these things, said she, and do they sink into thy Mind?
Esne (...)?
Art thou altogether unqualified and unfit to receive these Precepts? Why do
thou weep? Why do thy Tears overflow? (...).
Speak, conceal not thy Thoughts. And if thou do expect Help from the
Physician, truly discover thy Distemper. Then I, in some measure recovering my
self, spoke thus to her: Need my Sorrows then be repeated; and do not the
Severities acted by Fortune against me, appear enough of themselves, without
these Admonitions? Does not the very Face and Horror of This Place.] His sordid
and obscure Prison.
this Place move thee? Is this the Library which thou did choose for thy
particular Apartment in my House? In which, so often sitting with me, thou
did skilfully read upon all Divine and Humane Learning? Was this my Habit?
Was this my Look, when with thee I penetrated into the Secrets of Nature? when
thou Cum mihi siderum vias radio describeres.
traced'st out to me the several Motions of the Stars? when thou did show me
how to form my Life and Manners by Divine Rule and Order? And are these at last
the Rewards of my Obedience to thee? Certainly thou did deliver this Sentence
as an Eternal Sanction by the Mouth of Plato.] Plato says, L. quinto de Repub.
that those Commonwealths are most happy, whose Governors are Lovers and
Practisers of Wisdom and its Precepts; or who, by their Endeavors and Studies,
aim at being so. The same Plato, Dial. 6. de Repub. advises wise and good Men
to take upon them the Government of their Country, lest if it should be
committed to impious and wicked Men, good Men might by them be oppressed and
ruined.
Plato, viz. That those Commonwealths are most happy, who are governed by
Philosophers, or by those who study to be so. By the same Person also thou
did advise wise and discreet Men to take upon them the Government of their
Country, lest they refusing it, impious and unworthy Subjects should exert
themselves, and oppress the good and honest Citizens. Therefore I following
this great Authority, have desired to reduce to practice, in the Management of
public Business, what I learnt from thee in our grateful Retirement. And thou
and that God who infuseth thee into the Minds of wise Men, may witness for me,
that I had no other end in aspiring to the Magistracy, than that one, of doing
good to all, and protecting the Virtuous and Just. Hence was I looked upon by
evil Men as their common Enemy. Hence sprung Dissension and Discord with them;
but still the Clearness of my Conscience made me despise the Anger of the most
powerful, when I acted in the Defense of Justice and Right. How often have I
opposed Conigast.] Conigastus; or, as Cassiodorus writes him, Cunigastus, was
one who had great Authority with King Theodorick, which appears from what
Cassiodorus, L. 8. Ep. 28. relates, that King Athalavick writing to him, gives
him the Title of Illustris. This Person abusing the Authority which he had with
his Master, attempted upon the Fortunes of those whom he thought not able to
defend themselves. He being Master of the Offices, Boethius did frequently
oppose him; because it was the Business of that Magistrate to judge the Prefects
of the Provinces, and to receive the Complaints of the Provincial Subjects, and
to report them to the Prince.
Conigast, who taking Advantage of their Inabilities, would have oppressed and
ground the Faces of the Poor? How often have I withstood Triguilla.] Triguilla
was Steward of the Royal Household, who was equal to Conigast in Wickedness, but
superior to him in Power.
Triguilla, the Steward of the King's Household, and hindered him from bringing
to effect the many Injuries and Wrongs which he had hopefully projected and
begun? How often have I protected, with the Peril of my Authority, those unhappy
People, whom the lawless Avarice of the Barbarians.] The Goths.
Barbarians did vex with many Calumnies? No Man ever drew me aside from the
Paths of Right to those of Injustice: I grieved no less than the poor
Sufferers, when I saw the Fortunes of Provincial Subjects torn by the Rapine of
private Officers, and them oppressed with public Taxes. When, in the Time of a
severe Famine, the whole Province of Campania] Named Felix, called now by the
Inhabitants La terra di Lavoro, is a Region of Italy, and a Province of the
Kingdom of Naples, famous for its Fruitfulness and Number of Cities; its
Metropolis is Naples, the largest of the Italian Cities. Florus describes it
thus; L. 1. C. 16. Omnium, inquit, non modo Italia, sed toto orb terrarum,
pulcherrima Campaniae plaga est. Nihil mollius Coelo: denique bis floribus
vernat. Nihil uberius sole: ideo liberi Cererisque certamen dicitur. Nihil
hospitalius mari: hic illi nobiles portus, Cajeta, Misenus, and tepentes
fontibus Baiae: Lucrinus and Avernus, quaedam Marie Otia. Hic amicti vitibus
montes, Gaurus, Falernus, Massicus, and pulcherrimus omnium Vesuvius Aetnei
ignis imitator. Vrbes ad Mare, Formiae, Cumae, Puteoli, Neapolis, Herculcanum;
Pompei, and ipsa caput urbium Capua, quondam inter tres maximas, Romam
Carthaginemque numerata.
Campania had like to have been ruined by an Imposition upon the People, which
passed under the Name of a Coemption.] This Coemption was a Monopoly, by which
the Subjects of the Provinces were obliged to bring their Provisions and
Victuals, and generally all the Products of their Lands, into the King's
Granaries and Storehouses, to sell them there at a low Price, and to buy them
out again at a greater, such as the Public Officers should exact of them.
Coemption, I, the King being present at the Debate, contested with his
Certamen adversum praefectum Praetorii suscepi.
Captain of the Guards, on the Behalf of the Public: And at last I prevailed,
To that that heavy Impost was not exacted. I forced Paulinus.] Because he was
of the Family of the Decii, was called Decius, and was Consul in the Year of
our Redemption 498. therefore he is here called Consular.
Paulinus, a Consular Man, out of the very Jaws of those Palatini canes.
greedy Officers of the Palace, whose Ambition and Hope had already devoured
him and his Estate. When Albinus.] He descended from the same Family of the
Decii, and was Consul in the Year of Christ 493.
Albinus, who had been Consul also, was to have been cut off by a false
Accusation, I placed my self betwixt him and Cyprian.] Was the Brother of
Opilio the Informer against Boethius, of whom mention shall be hereafter.
Cyprian his Accuser, and opposed my self to the Violence of his utmost Hate
and Malice. Don't you think that I have got my self Enemies more than enough? I
ought certainly, amongst the rest of Mankind, to be more assured and safe, who
for the Love of Justice, have forfeited all my Hopes at the Court, and gained
nothing but the Envy and Hate of those who are powerful there. But, behold upon
the Accusation of what Men I now suffer! Basilius.] This Man is sometimes
praised, and sometimes found fault with by Cassiodorus. He is commended, Ep. l.
2. Variar. and Epist. 10. in which Agapita his Wife is mentioned, and said to
be, spectabilis foemina. And also, Ep. 11. in which we read what follows:
Basilius, vir spectabilis, datis precibus intimavit, Agapitam conjugem suam de
propriis penatibus a quibusdam vitio sollicitationis, abductam. Et certe in his
versata rebus firmum docetur perdidisse consilium. Quid enim facere potuit
probum, quae nullis culpis extantibus reliquit maritum. He is discommended,
Variar. l. 4. and Epist. 22. where Theodorick himself says, Basilium and
Praetextatum artis sinistrae jamdiu contagione pollutos. And Ep. 23. where the
same Prince writes, Praefectum urbis declarasse Basilium atque Praetextatum
magicis artibus imbutos esse. If this Basilius was the same Man who was here
named, he was perhaps dismissed from the King's Service for being versed in the
Magical Arts: And from thence he might be urged by his Necessities to accuse
Boethius falsely.
Basilius is one of them, who being lately, for his Offenses, dismissed from
the King's Service, and oppressed with Debt, is forced, by his Necessities, to
become my Accuser. The Credit of the other two, Opilio.] There was Opilio the
Father, and Opilio the Son: The former, as Simondus says, was Almoner to
Odoacer; which Theodorick, in Cassiodorus, seems to intimate, Variar. L.
quinto, Ep. 41. The latter, the Brother of Cyprian, was, as his Father and
Brother before him, advanced to the Dignity of Almoner, but it was after the
Death of Boethius, viz. in the Reign of Athalarick, anno Christi 528. From hence
it is that Athalarick Cassiodor, Variar. L. 8. Epist. 16. inscribed Opilioni
Comiti sacrarum, thus speaks, Secure tibi credimus, quod toties tuo generi
commissum fuisse gaudemus. Paternis fascibus praefuit, sed and frater eadem
resplenduit claritate: which might not hinder but that Opilio the Son might be
condemned to Banishment by Theodorick, together with Gaudentius, for his many
Crimes and Frauds.
Opilio and Gaudentius.] Gaudentius seems to be only known by his Accusation of
Boethius; and one of whom I can give no other Account.
Gaudentius, is so infamous, that lately, for their many Crimes and Cheats,
they were condemned to Banishment by the By the King.] Theodorick King of
Italy; who, after he had overcome and killed Odoacer, obtained that Crown, anno
Christi 409.
King: and being unwilling to obey the Sentence, presently took Sanctuary.] As
there were some Temples amongst the Heathens, so all Churches of the Christians
were always esteemed Asyla, or Sanctuaries. That some amongst the Heathens were
Asyla, appears from Virgil. l. 2. Aeneid. v. 16. shows it: Et jam porticibus
vacuis, Junonis asylo,
Custodes lecti Phaenix and durus Ulysses
Praedam asservabant.
Also Aeneid. 8. v. 342. Hinc lucum ingentem, quem Romulus acer asylum
Rettulit, and gelida monstrat sub rupe lupercal.
And that all Christian Temples were Sanctuaries, is plain ex Ced. Theod. l. 9.
tit. 47. de his qui ad Ecclesias confugiunt.
Sanctuary; of which when he had notice, he gave Command, that if they did not
leave the City of Ravenna.] A City of Italy, upon the Coast of the Adriatic
Sea. King Theodorick made this his Royal Seat, after the Defeat of Odoacer and
his Successors. The Kings of the Goths did, after him, inhabit it.
Ravenna by such a Day, they should, with all Disgrace, be driven out of it,
with Marks branded on their Foreheads. Now judge if there can be any Addition to
this my severe Usage; for upon that very Day on which this Execution was
ordered to be done upon them, the Accusation was received against me, from the
Mouths of these villainous Informers. What is then to be done? Have my many
irksome Labors and Enquiries after Wisdom deserved this? or because my
Condemnation was before determined, shall it qualify these Men to be my
Accusers? Is not Fortune ashamed; if not of the Accusation of injured
Innocence, at least of the Baseness and Infamy of its Accusers? But perhaps you
may ask, what Crime is objected to me? I am accused for designing to preserve
the Senate. Would you know the Manner and Circumstances of my Treason? Why,
it is urged, that I hindered an Informer from carrying Proofs to the King, which
should have declared the whole Senate to have been guilty of Treason? And now,
O my Mistress! what think you? shall I deny the Crime that I may not be a
Reproach to thee? No, it was always my Desire to preserve that August Body in
its Splendour, and in its just Rights, and it shall be so to the last Moment of
my Life. Shall I confess it? Then the pretended Endeavor of putting a stop to
the Accusers will cease. Shall I own it a Crime to wish the Safety of that
Assembly? Indeed its unjust Decrees against me would make it look to be so. But
Folly, which always flatters it self, cannot change the Merit of things: Nor do
I think it lawful, according to the Judgment of Socrates, either to hide the
Truth, or own a Falsity. But however that Matter may be, I leave it to be
weighed by you, and the Judgment of the Wise, having both by my Tongue and Pen
declared the whole Truth and Series of my Misfortune, and transmitted it to
indifferent and unprejudiced Posterity. To what purpose should I speak of those
forged Letters, in which I am accused, to hope for the Restoration of the
Roman Liberty? I could easily enough have detected the Falseness of that
Contrivance, even by the Confessions of my Accusers, (which is of greatest
Weight in all such Affairs) if I might have been allowed to have made use of
them. But what Liberty now can we ever hope to have? Would to Heaven we might
expect any! then I had answered them in the Words of Canius; who, when he was
accused by C. Caesar, Son to Germanicus, of being privy to a Conspiracy against
his Life, told him, Si ego, inquit, scissem, tu nescisses.
If I had known of such a Design, thou had never known it. In which thing,
Sorrow and my Misfortunes have not so dulled my Senses, that I should complain
of the Contrivances of wicked Men against the Virtuous. But I wonder that
according to their Hopes they should have effected them; for the Will to do Ill
proceeds from the Defects of humane Nature: But it is prodigious, that every
Contrivance of ill Men should prevail against the Innocent, even when the Eye
of Providence beholds it. Whence it was that one of thy Disciples properly
enough asked, If there be a God, whence then proceeds Evil? If there be none,
whence Good? Be it so, that it is natural and fit enough that ill Men, who
thirst after the Blood of the Good, and of the whole Senate, should also
promote my Destruction, who have always defended botn against their Attempts.
But have I deserved this Return from the Hands of the Senate? etc. Thou may
remember, I imagine, because always when I did or said any thing, thou were
present, and did direct me. Thou may remember, I say, when at Verona.] A
City of the Venetian Territory, built by the Gauls under the Command of
Brennus, first called Brenona, afterward Verona.
Verona, the King, greedy and desirous of our common Ruin, endeavored to have
thrown that Treason, for which Albinus was accused, on the whole Body of the
Senate; how I then, contemning any Hazard which I might run, did vindicate and
defend that Order. Thou know this to be Truth, and that I never was
accustomed to value or praise my self or my Actions: for whosoever seeks a
Name, by boasting of what he has done, will lessen, in a great measure, the
Pleasures of a self-approving Conscience. But now see the Event and Success of
my Innocence, for instead of receiving the Reward of true and steady Virtue, I
undergo the Punishment of Villainy and Impiety! What Judges were there ever, who
even upon the manifest Proofs of a Crime, did so unanimously agree in Cruelty,
that neither the Considerations of humane Nature, which necessarily errs, nor
of the Change of Fortune, which is so uncertain to all, should incline some of
them to Pity and Compassion? If I had been accused of designing to burn the
Temples, or massacre the Priests, and so destroy all good Men, yet I should
have been allowed to have been present, and upon my Confession or Conviction by
the Witnesses, should have received my Sentence. But now, for my Afffections
and Services to the Senate, I am unheard, undefended, at the Distance of 500
Miles.] Ticinum or Pavia was so far distant from the Place where the Sentence
of Boethius was pronounced.
500 Miles condemned to Death, and Proscription.] Proscription was of two
kinds: One was Proscription of Goods, when they were exposed to Sale by
Writings affixed upon the public Places of the City or Country where the
Criminal dwelt. The other was a Proscription of the Person, by which it was
signified that the Offender was banished by the Magistrates, and that his Abode
in the City or Country was not safe.
Proscription. O my Judges! may none of you be ever convicted of the like
Crime; the Falseness of which even mine Accusers themselves know, and that they
are forced to throw another pretended Offense into the Scale; which is, that
out of my Ambition and Desire of Dignity I have polluted my Conscienee with the
horrid Sin of Sacrilege.] This was another Crime objected to Boethius; but in
what the Sacrilege did consist, which was laid to his charge, does not so well
appear to me. Monsieur de la Boucherie, the French Interpreter of our Author,
thinks it consisted in his having, by deceitful Arts, gained Suffrages for the
advancing himself to the Magistracy, which the Latins call, Crimen ambitus a
circumeundo and supplicando; and the Greeks (...): which Stephanus, in thesaur.
gr. linguae verbo (...), interprets thus, (...), sive (...), popularitas
hujusmodi. (...) and (...) ita differ videntur, quod prior concionibus
multitudini lenocinari and obrepere solet, (...) vero potius muneribus
gladiatoriis and spectaculis. Vide Sis. Bud. p. 811. Both these were Crimes
punishable by the Laws of those Countries. Others, as Thomas Aquinas and
Ascensius, think that it was the Crime of Sortilegium, or Sorcery, and
practicing Magical Aarts, of which he was accused: and that for sacrilegio we
ought to read sortilegio, which seems to me to be true reading of it, for
several Reasons which would be too long to insert here.
Sacrilege. But certainly thou, my Guide and Directress, who art planted and
rooted in my Soul, have so far driven out of my Heart the Desire of mortal and
fading things, that thou do know (I being ever under thy Inspection) there
could be no Place there for that Impiety; for thou did daily instill into my
Ears and Mind that golden Saying of Pythagoras, (...).
Follow God. Nor was it convenient for me to seek Assistance from soul and
unlawful Arts, whom already thou had formed into the Excellence and Likeness
of God. Those of my Innocens penetral domus.
Family, my Friends also with whom I conversed, and Symmachus, that virtuous
and reverend Personage, to whom the Secrets of my Conversation could not be
hidden, do all, with one Voice, clear me, even from the Suspicion of that
Crime. But, O Misfortune! even thou art the greatest Cause of that Credit which
is given to my Accusers; for it is believed that I have used unlawful Arts,
because I have been bred up under thy Discipline, and imbibed thy Precepts. So
that it is not enough that that Reverence which is due to thee, should not
reflect, with Advantage, upon me thy Disciple, if thy self also do not suffer
upon my account. But this also is an heavy Accession to my Misfortunes, that
the Opinions of most People are not as they ought to be, grounded upon a due
Consideration and the Merit of Things, but upon the Events of Fortune; and that
that only should be judged to be undertaken with prudent Foresight, which is
crowned with an unhappy Success. Hence it is that those who are unfortunate do
lose, before any thing, the good Opinion of the World. It troubles me now to
remember what are the various Rumors, the different and inconsistent Opinions
of the People concerning me; some condemning, and some defending me and my
Cause: Yet this I will say, that nothing can add more to the Afflictions of the
Unhappy, who are unjustly persecuted, than when Men think they justly deserve
the Miseries which they endure. And now I am, at last, robbed of my Estate,
spoiled of mine Honors, injured in my Reputation; and instead of those Rewards
which I might justly have expected from my Country, I have been condemned to
the greatest Punishment. But now behold a more afflicting Scene! Methinks I see
the Treacherous, the Unfaithful, the Injurious, and other most Infamous
Persons, all without Cause mine Enemies, overflowing with Joy and Delight at
my Misfortunes, and contriving new Accusations against me: The Good are
affrighted with the Horror of what I suffer, and ill Men are encouraged, by the
Impunity of others, to design the greatest Wickednesses, and by Rewards to act
them; whilst the Innocent are not only deprived of their Security, but also of
the natural Privilege of defending themselves; therefore I may reasonably thus
cry out:

METRUM V.
O stelliferi Conditor Orbis, etc. ALL-knowing Architect, whose powerful Hand
Inimitably framed the starry Sky;
Who fixed on thine Eternal Throne do sit,
And with a rapid Motion turn'st the Spears;
Who do upon the Stars impose thy Laws,
And make even Planets wander by a Rule:
So that the Moon in glorious Array
Meeting her Brother, clad with Beams of Light,
Involves in sable Weeds the lesser Stars:
But when to him she nearer does approach,
Her Horns grow pale, and she is lost in Clouds.
From his cold Bed thou Hesperus do raise
To usher in the Shades of coming Night;
And then do make him change his wonted Course,
To be the pale-faced Harbinger of Day;
From which Employ he Lucifer is called.
Thou, when the fiercest Blasts of Winter rage,
Do shorten Day when ripening Summer comes,
Thou do give Wings to the slow Hours of Night;
Thou rul'st the checkered Seasons of the Year:
So that the Leaves which Boreas blows off,
When his Autumnal spoils he proudly boasts,
The gentle Zephyres kindly do restore,
And Syrius.] Or as some write Scyrius, is called so a (...), exsicco, to dry
up, and is a most bright Star placed in the Mouth of the Constellation called
Canis major, the greater Dog; which when it arises, accompanies the Rising
Sun from the Month of July, at which time the ripened Corn seems to wither.
Which Star, because it appears in the Mouth of the greater Dog, is named
Canicula. Jam rapidos torrens sitientes Syrius Indos
Ardebat Coelo, and medium Sol igneus orbem
Hauserat, arebant herbae, and cava flumina siccis
Faucibus ad limum radii tepesacta coquebant.
Virgil. 4. Georgic. v. 425.
-- Tum steriles exurere Syrius agros:
Arebant herbae, and victum seges aegra negabat.
Virgil. Aeneid. l. 3. v. 14.

Syrius broods upon the Fields of Corn,
Which the industrious Swain before had sown
Under Arcturus.] Quasi (...), is a Star in the Sign of Boots, near the Tail
of the greater Bear; which Star does accompany the Rising Sun from the Month of
October, at which time the Earth begins to cherish or nourish the Seed
committed to it. At si non fuerit tellus foecunda sub ipsum
Arcturum, tenui sat erit suspendere fulco.
Virgil. Georg. l. 1. v. 67. and v. 204.
Praeterea tam sunt Arcturi Sydera nobis
Haedorumque dies servandi, and lucidus anguis:
Quam, quibus in patriam ventosa per aequora vectis
Pontus, and Ostriseri fauces tentantur Abydi.

Arcturus colder Influence.
Nothing in Nature can Exemption plead
From that Eternal Law, which long has fixed
And chained each Being to its proper Place.
Why then do thou all other things direct
Toward the end by thee before designed,
And only leave Man's Actions uncontrolled,
In Paths uncertain leaving him to tread?
Why should unstable Fortune's erring Power
Such mighty Changes in the World work,
Whilst Innocence has the Reward of Crimes,
Whilst prosperous Vice unjustly is enthroned,
And on the Neck of Innocence does tread?
Virtue obscure, neglected and contemned
Does lie, which yet in Darkness bright appears,
And the injured Innocent those Chains does bear,
In which the Criminal justly should be bound.
No Perjury him nor Fraud can ever hurt,
If with a lying Varnish colored over;
But when he is pleased to use his mighty Power,
He can even Kings and Potentates subdue,
Whom all but he do honor and revere.
O thou who with fair Concord's lasting Bands
The disagreeing Elements do bind,
Behold the Earth, which now so long has groaned,
Oppressed with Violence and Misery!
Behold, poor Man, not the least noble Part
Of this great Work, tossed on the rolling Waves
Of giddy Chance, and almost left alone
Without a Pilot or a Polar Star,
By which to steer to his long-wish'd for Port!
Assuage at length these raging Floods,
Great Governor; and as thou do the Heaven,
So on a stable Bottom fix the Earth.
PROSA V.
Whilst my continued Griefs forced me to breath out these Complaints; she, with
a pleasant Look, and no way moved with my Expression of them, bespake me thus:
When I first saw thee, sad and weeping, I knew thee to be miserable and in
Banishment; yet at what distance from thy home I did not know, till I gathered
it by thine own Discourse: But indeed thou art not driven out of thy Country,
but have wandered thus far from it; yet if thou had rather be thought to have
been violently removed, thou have done thy self this Injury, for it was never
in the Power of any other Person to have done it: For if thou do call to mind
of what Country thou art, a Country not governed by the Fury and Ecstasies of a
giddy and passionate Multitude, as that of the Athenians was heretofore; but
(...); Iliad. th.
where there is only one Lord, one King, the Almighty Governor of the
Universe, who wishes the Increase and numerous Prosperity, and procures the
Welfare of all his Subjects and Citizens, and loves not to lessen their number,
by sending them into Banishment: to obey whose Laws, and to be governed by
them, is the noblest Liberty and greatest Happiness. Know thou not that most
ancient Law of thy Commonwealth.] Philosophy uses here the word Civitas in a
double Sense, which may agree with Heaven and with Rome, which are both said to
be the Countries of Boethius. The most ancient Laws of Rome condemned no body to
Banishment, much less the Laws of Heaven, when any one has fixed his Heart
there.
Commonwealth, which does decree, that it shall not be lawful to banish any Man
from it, who had rather fix his Adobe there than in any other Place? For
whoever has once attained to the Happiness of being settled within the Bounds
of that Territory, can never be presumed to deserve the Punishment of Exile;
but whoever once leaves off to desire to be an Inhabitant there, at the same
time leaves off to deserve to be so. Therefore the Countenance of this Place,
however dismal, does not move me so much as thine own Looks. I do not here so
much look for thy Library.] The Ancients used to adorn their Houses with Gold,
Ivory and Glass, which made a great part of the Expense of those times, as
noble Buildings, Banquets, and a great Attendance do of these; Men thinking
that they draw a Respect, Admiration and Honor from others by them. Fit
strepitus tectis, vocemque per ampla volutant
Atria; dependent lychni laquearibus aureis
Incensi; and noctem flammis funalia vincunt.
Virgil. 1. Aenid. v. 729. and Horat. lib. 2. Ode 18. distinguishing himself
from the great Men of his time, says, Non Ebur, neque dureum
Mea renidet in domo Lacunar.

Library, the Walls of which were so well inlaid with Ivory, and adorned with
Glasses, as that noble Cabinet and curious Repository of thy Mind and Thoughts.
But I did depose that there, which makes even thy Books valuable, these choice
and observable Sentences, which are the Quintessence of my voluminous Writings.
Thou have indeed spoken much Truth upon the Subject of thy great Merits from
the Public: but considering what, and how many they have been, all that thou
have said of them is but little. The Particulars which thou have recounted of
thy Integrity, and the Falseness of thine Accusation, are well known to all
Men: And thou have done well in being short in the Account of the Frauds and
Villainies of thine Accusers, because it will sound better out of the Mouth of
the People, who know all this. Thou have also severely inveighed against the
unjust Decree of the Senate. Thou have been much concerned for the Injury done
to me, and thou have bewailed the Loss of the good Esteem which Men had of
thee. Thy last Complaint was against Fortune, and that Rewards and Punishments
were not equally distributed, according to the Merits of Men: And in the end,
thy distempered Muse wishes that the same Peace which makes the Felicity of the
calm Regions above, might also govern and reside upon Earth. But because thy
Affections are yet tumultuous and disordered, and because the mutinous Passions
of Grief, Anger and Sadness do variously and successively draw and distract
thee: Thy Mind, I say, being in such a State, strong and vigorous Medicines are
not proper for thee; therefore, for the present, we will use more mild ones: so
that those Humors, which by frequent Disturbances flowed in upon thee, being
now gathered to a Head, and come to a Consistence, may, by gentle Applications,
be mollified, and be fitter to bear the more powerful Workings of stronger
Remedies, which in time may dissipate them.

METRUM VI.
Cum Phoebi Radiis grave
Cancri fidus inaestuat, etc.
WHen Phoebus in his yearly way
To Cancer] Is one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, and is placed in that
part of the Heaven which the Sun, going toward the North, touches about the
end of June, and makes the longest Day of the Year; turning from thence
Southward, from whence the Circle which Astronomers make to pass through this
Sign, is called the Tropic of Cancer.
Cancer does a Visit pay,
Who to the unwilling Earth commits the Seed,
Shall have no Crop, but may on Acorns feed:
When armed with Frosts and crowned with Snow,
Swelled Boreas from the Hills does blow:
No one or to the Groves or Woods then goes
To crop the purple Violet or Rose.
If thou would press the winy Grape
Let Tendrels in the Spring escape:
For the great Patron of Mirth and Wine,
Does for Autumnus Head his Chaplets twine.
To every Work God does assign
A proper and a fitting time:
Nor suffers any thing to pass its Bound,
Which Nature in her Actings would confound.
For he who leaving Order, strays,
And wanders in untrodden Ways,
Can never hope that glad Success should crown
That Work which he with smiling Hopes begun.
PROSA VI.
Phil. First then will thou suffer me to try the Estate, and feel the Pulse of
thy Mind, by a few Questions; that so I may better understand thy Malady, and
prescribe the Methods of thy Cure?


Boet. Ask me what thou please, and I will answer thee.


P. Think thou that this World is managed by blind Chance and Fortune? or
do thou believe that Reason has any share in the Government of it?


B. I do by no means believe or imagine, that things, so certain in their
Methods, and so regular in their Motions, should be moved and informed by so
unsteady a Cause: but I know that God, the Master-workman, does preside over
his Work; nor shall any Time or Accident ever move me from the Truth of this
Opinion.


P. So it is indeed; and of this, a little before, thy Muse did sing when thou
did also deplore the Misfortune of Man, whom alone thou did believe, not to
be under the Care of Providence; though, that every other thing was governed by
Reason, thou did not doubt. But it is miraculous to me, that thou, who have
so just Notions of all things, should be in so ill a State of Health; I will
therefore search further, for I believe thou yet labourest under some notable
Defect: But tell, me, because thou do not at all doubt but that the World is
governed by God, by what kind of Government are its Affairs managed?


B. I can not well comprehend thy Question, therefore I cannot readily answer
it.


P. I was not then deceived when I thought there was something wanting, some
Vacuity or Breach by which this whole Train of Perturbations found a way into
thy Mind. But tell me, do thou remember what is the chief End of all things,
and whither the whole Mass and Body of Nature does tend?


B. I have heard what it is, but my Griefs have dulled my Memory, and eras'd
almost every thing out of it.


P. But how then do thou know from whence all things have, their Being?


B. That I remember well, and told thee, it was from God.


P. And how then does it come to pass, that thou knowing the Cause and
Beginning of all things, should be ignorant of their End? It has ever been
of the Nature of these Perturbations, to have a Power to unsettle Men's Minds,
and to interrupt the Regular Course of thinking; but they never yet could
wholly alienate them from the genuine Sentiments of true Reason: But I pray
thee answer me this, Do thou remember that thou art a Man?


B. I am not so much distempered but I remember that.


P. Can thou then tell me what Man is?


B. If thou ask me, if I know my self to be a rational and a mortal
Creature, I answer, I do know and confess my self to be so.


P. And do thou not know that thou art somewhat more than that?


B. No.


P. Now I know another, and the greatest Cause of thy Distemper; which is, that
thou have lost the Knowledge of thy self: So that I have plainly found the
Source of thy Distemper, or rather the way of restoring thee to thy Health: For
because thou art confounded with the Oblivion of thy self, thou complainest of
thy Banishment, and of the Loss of thy Estate. And because thou do not know
what is the End of things, thou do believe wicked and lawless Men to be
powerful and happy. And because thou have forgotten by what Methods the World
is governed, thou do imagine that the many Vicissitudes and Changes of
worldly Affairs, come to pass of themselves, and are not directed by any
Governor; and do believe there are no Causes of so important Effects. These
may certainly, not only be great Occasions of a Disease, but even of Death it
self. But, Thanks be to the Author of Health, who has not suffered thee to be
wholly deserted by Reason; the true Opinion which thou have of the Government
of the World, which thou believe not subject to Humane, but to Divine Wisdom,
makes me not doubt of thy Recovery: For by this small Spark, there is to me a
great Assurance of vital Heat: But because the Time is not yet come for
stronger Remedies, and because it is natural to us to embrace false Opinions;
so soon as we have laid aside the true, from whence a Mist of Disturbances
arises, which hinders us from a true perception of Objects, I will endeavor,
by Lenitives and Fomentations, to dissipate it; so that that Darkness being
removed, thou may easily perceive the Brightness and Glories of the true
Light.


METRUM VII.
Nubibus atris
Condita nullum
Fundere possunt
Sidera lumen, etc.
WHen sable Clouds over spread
The Star-bespangled Sky,
Each little Flame does hide its Head,
And seem to die.
When a brisk Gale at South
Wrinkles the Ocean's Brow,
And by its Force the Froth
Brings from below;
Though she before were clear
And Chrystalline her Face,
Her Beauties then will disappear,
And lose their Grace.
The rapid Torrent which
Takes from the Hills its Source,
Some Rock or Shelf does often impeach,
And stop its Course.
And thou, if thou would see
Truth by the clearest Light,
If thou in Paths secure and free
Would walk aright,
Drive flattering Joys away,
And banish servile Fear;
Let vain Hope never with thee stay,
Nor Grief appear.
Clouds overspread that Mind,
And it receives a Chain,
Where these an open Entrance find,
And where they reign.
The End of the First Book.
ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS BOETHIUS, OF THE Consolation of Philosophy. BOOK the
Second.
The ARGUMENT.
Philosophy urges several Reasons to Boethius, why he should not so much desire
the Return of his former Fortunes. The Description of Fortune. Her Discourse to
Boethius, that he is not unhappy, but yet blessed with much Felicity. The
Description of humane Felicity; that it does not consist in the Gifts of
Fortune, nor in Riches, nor in Dignity and Power, nor in Glory and Fame; and
even that sometimes adverse Fortune is profitable.

PROSA I.
HAving said this, she was for some time silent; and when she perceived that I
disposed my self with a modest Silence and Attention to hear her, she thus
bespake me:

If I can see at all into the Causes and Habits of thy Disease, thou art
affected with the Loss of thy former Fortune, and languishest with the Desire
of its Return: The Change of that, as thou imaginest, toward thee, has
perverted thy Faculties, and altered the whole State and Constitution of thy
Mind. I understand the manifold Deceits of that Prodigy.] Prodigium, by Cicero,
is called that which foretells future Events, l. 2. de Not. Dear. Since
therefore Fortune is so inconstant, that when she is prosperous she seems to
foretell Adversity, and when she is adverse to presage Prosperity, she may here
be properly styled Prodigium.
Prodigy, and I know the bottom of that Familiarity she uses toward all them
whom she designs to deceive, till she has left them plunged in Sorrow, and
overwhelmed with Misfortunes and Despair. And if impartially, and without
Passion, thou will call her to remembrance, and consider well her Nature,
Habits and Deserts, thou will soon be undeceived, and find, that even when she
did most caress thee, thou did never enjoy, nor that she having now left
thee, thou do lose any thing of Beauty or of Worth. But, I think, I need not
labor much to recall these things into thy Memory; for thou were wont, when she
was present, and flattered thee most, to oppose thy manly Words to her
Allurements, and to assault her with Arrows drawn from my Quiver; Here the
Words of Boethius are, De nostro adyto prolatis insectabare sententiis: The
Sense of which Words I have, I think, fully enough rendered. Adytum was a Sacred
Place in the Temple, into which it was lawful for none but the Priest to enter:
Its Nature will appear from the Greek Etymology of the Word, which comes from
ae' called privativum, and (...) ingredior. The Heathens also called the Place
from whence the Oracles were given, (...) Aen. l. 2. Suspensi Eurypilum
scitatum Oracula Phoebi
Mittimus: isque adytis haec tristia dicta reportat.
Since therefore Philosophy is said to have her Temple and her Oracles, she
will also have her Adytum, out of which she draws her Sentences: Of which
Sentences Boethius made use whilst he was prosperous, to the purpose mentioned
above.
I mean with choice Sentences extracted from my Precepts and Labors. But every
sudden Change works a great Alteration in the Minds of Men: Hence it is that
thou also art departed from the wonted Tranquillity and Peace of thine. But it
is now time to give thee some Emollients and pleasant Lenitives, which may make
way for more powerful Medicines. Approach then, Rhetoric, with all thy
persuasive Charms, who then only do keep the right Path, when thou do not
swerve from my Institutions and Doctrines; and with Rhetoric let Music also
draw near another Servant of my Retinue, and warble out Numbers sometimes more
light and airy, sometimes more weighty and consistent.

What is it then, O Man, which has plunged thee into this Abyss of Misery and
Sorrow? Certainly thou have seen something astonishing and new. Do thou think
that Fortune is changed against thee? Thou art deceived: This was always her
Custom, and is her Nature: She has rather, in this Misadventure of thine,
preserved her Constancy in changing: Such she was when she deluded thee with
her Blandishments and false Shows of Felicity. Thou have had before a full View
of the direct Face of this blind Divinity, and thou have also now beheld her
Reverse: She, who nicely conceals her self to others, is wholly displayed and
open to thee. If thou approvest of her Manners and Customs, use them, and
complain not: If thou do abominate her Perfidy and Falseness, contemn and
cast her off, whose Sports are so dangerous and hurtful: For that which
occasions thy Melancholy, ought to have been a Cause of thy greatest Joy and
Comfort: For she has forsaken thee; of whom no Man can be secure but she will
leave him also. Do thou then esteem that to be Happiness which is ever
passing, and will not stay? Is that present Fortune so dear to thee which is
not permanent, and which, when it is gone, leaves Griefs and Discontents to
succeed in its place? So that if a Man at his pleasure cannot retain her, and
if when she goes away she makes him miserable, what is she, being so ready to
take her Flight, but a sure Presage of future Calamity? But it is not enough to
behold those Objects which are placed before our Eyes; for Wisdom has a
Prospect to the End and Event of things; and Fortune often changing from
Adverse to Prosperous, and from Prosperous to Adverse, should make Men neither
fear her Threats, nor desire her Favors. To be short, thou must with Patience
and Equality of Soul, bear whatever is acted by her upon the Scene of this
World, when thou have once submitted thy Neck to her ponderous Yoke: For if
thou do pretend to prescribe a certain time of Adobe and Recess to her, whom
thou have freely, and of thine own Accord, chosen to be thy Sovereign and
Mistress, art thou not injurious to her? and do thou not, by Impatience,
imbitter thy Lot, too hard already, which thou can not alter by thy most
vigorous Efforts? If thou once have spread thy Sails to the Winds, thou then
can not choose thy Port, but must go whither they will blow thee. When thou
committest thy Seed to the Furrows, remember that sometimes the Years are
fruitful, often barren. Have thou given up thy self to the Governance of
Fortune? thou can then do no other thing than obey her Commands. Do thou
endeavor to arrest the forward Force of the rolling Wheel.] The Ancients
feigned Fortune not only to be blind, but placed her on a rolling Stone,
because she seemed not only rashly, but with a blinded Force to administer ill
things to good, and good things to ill Men; but also like a Wheel, or any
spherical or globular Machine, to be rolled and turned by a natural Necessity:
Therefore it is the greatest Folly to expect Constancy in her Actings.
Wheel? O thou most sottish of all Mortals! when Fortune once becomes stable
and fixed, she, in the Hour she is so, leaves off to be Fortune.

METRUM I.
Haec, cum superba verterit vices dextra,
Exaestuantis more fertur Euripi, etc.
I.
When with her Hand she shifts the Scene of Fate,
She like Euripus.] There are two sorts of Euripi; one sort is made by Art, the
other is Natural: The first sort is of two kinds, as Water-pipes made that
Water may mount in them; or Conduit-pipes, which turn round, used in Fountains,
Gardens, or the like: The others are In-lets of Water, Cuts, or Channels, for
the Commodity of Merchandise or Travel, as we see them frequently in several
Countries. The natural Euripus is that which is now called by the Italians Il
stretto de negro ponto; by the French Le Destroit de negropont; or oftener, Le
Destroit del' Euripe. It is a Strait of the Aegean Sea, separating Boetia, a
Region of Achaia, and the Island Eubaea, to which it is joined, to the City of
Chalcis, by a wooden Bridge of 50 Paces only. Euripus is of the Extent of 60
Miles, and ebbs and flows seven times every Day, as Pliny and Mela testify.
Euripus often ebbs and flows;
Raising the Captive from his humble State,
She from his Throne the mighty Monarch throws.
II.
When the Unhappy weep, she slights their Tears,
Nor will she hear the miserable Groan,
But cruelly she does seal up her Ears
Against the Cries of those she has undone.
III.
Thus does she sport, and thus she boasts her Power,
And treats her Followers with a pleasing Show;
If in the running of a nimble Hour
She makes the most exalted Hero low.
PROSA II.
BUT now I would discourse thee a little in the Style and Person of Fortune,
and observe whether her Questions be reasonable or not. First; Why, O Man! do
thou by thy daily Complaints accuse me as guilty? What Injury have I done to
thee? What Goods or Advantages have I withdrawn from thee? Implead me before
what Judge thou please, concerning the Possession of Wealth and Dignities, and
if thou can prove that ever any Man had a true and fixed Propriety in them, I
will then readily grant, that those things were thine which thou do so
earnestly desire to be restored to thee. When Nature first brought thee out of
the Womb into this World, I received thee naked, necessitous, and stripped of
all things, and (which now is the Cause of thy Impatience against me) I
indulgently educated thee, I heaped my Blessings upon thee, and encompassed
thee with Glory and Splendour, and with an Affluence of all things which were in
my Power; now when I have a mind to withdraw my Bounty, and to stop the Current
of my Favors, be thankful for the Use of that which was not properly thine.
Thou have no just Cause of Complaint, for thou have lost nothing which was thy
own: Why then do thou mourn? I have done thee no Wrong. Riches, Honors, and
all other things of that kind, are subject to me, and in my Power; they are my
Servants, and acknowledge me their Mistress; they come with me, and when I
depart they follow. I dare boldly affirm, that if those things (the want of
which thou do now deplore) had been thine own, thou had not lost them:
Shall I alone be forbid to exercise my own Power, and to use my own Right?
Heaven takes the liberty to bless the World with fair and sunny Days, and again
to vail them in dark and cloudy Nights. The Year graces the Face of the Earth
with Fruits, and binds her Head with Chaplets of Flowers; and again she
destroys these with Rains and Frosts. It Is lawful also for the Sea now to
appear with a calm and smooth Brow, and again to rage in Storms and Tempests:
And shall the boundless Covetousness, and other depraved Affections of Men,
oblige me to Constancy, which is so contrary to my Nature and Customs? This is
my Power, and this my continual Sport and Exercise. I turn with a flying Motion
the rolling Wheel, pleasing my self to exalt what was below, and to depress and
humble what was on high: Ascend then, if thou please, to the height, but upon
this condition, that thou shall not think I do thee an Injury if I make thee
descend when my Sport or Humor require it. But art thou not acquainted with my
Ways and Methods? Do thou not know that Croesus.] He was the last and the
richest King of the Lydians, who having been once overcome by Cyrus King of the
Persians, and rebelling against him, he was condemned to be burnt: He being
upon the Pile, cried out, O Solon, Solon, Solon: Cyrus asking him who Solon
was, he answered, Solon was a very wise Man, who long since told me, that no
one was happy in this Life, which I now find by experience. Then Cyrus
considering the Changeableness of Fortune, ordered the Fire which was made for
the Execution to be extinguished; but a Shower from Heaven fell down, and put
it out before he could be obeyed.
Croesus King of the Lydians, who, not long before, having been formidable to
Cyrus, and being taken by him, was led to the Flames, to be a miserable
Sacrifice to his Fury; was delivered by a Shower, which in that Moment was
poured down from Heaven? Have thou forgot how Paulus Aemilius, Consul of Rome,
when he had taken Perseus.] The Son of Philip, last King of the Macedonians,
was overcome by Paulus Aemilius, the Roman Consul, at Samothrace, and with his
Sons led in Triumph: When he was first taken, and brought before Paulus, he,
pitying his Fortune, wept, and commanded him to sit down by him.
Perseus King of the Macedonians, was grieved, and even wept for his Sorrows
and Captivity? What does the Tragic Buskin more exclaim against than Fortune,
overturning with an undistinguishing Stroke the Happiness and Peace of Kings
and Commonwealths? Did thou not learn, when thou were young, that Jupiter, at
the Entry of his Palace of Olympus, does always reserve (...).
two great (...).] This Doctrine of the Platonists Boethius learnt when he was a
young Student at Athens: For those Philosophers finding that the Souls of Men,
which they believed were formed long before they were joined to the Bodies, did
some of them live miserable, and some of them more happy, feigned that two
great Vessels did stand before the Gates of Jupiter's Palace; one of which was
filled with Good, the other with Evil: of either of which, as the Souls which
were to be infused into Bodies did drink, they were to have an happy or a
miserable Lot upon Earth.
Tuns; out of the one of which he dispenses Good, out of the other Evil to the
World? What if thou have drunk too deep of the Vessel of Good? What if, for the
present, I have only veiled my self, and am not wholly departed from thee? What
if even this very Mutability, so much complained of, which is of my Essence,
should give thee just Cause to hope for, and expect better things? Yet do not
despair, be not dismayed; nor desire, whilst thou art placed within the common
Circumstances of Humanity, to live under a Law, to be calculated for thy
Meridian, and to be appropriated to thy Complexion and Inclinations.

METRUM II.
I.
Si quantas rapidis flatibus incitus
Pontus versat arenas, etc.
If Plenty from her teeming Horn,
As many Riches on the World, should pour,
As there are Sands upon the briny Shore,
Or Stars in Heaven before the purple Morn,
In the triumphal Chariot of Day,
All seen from far upon the Eastern Way;
Yet would not miserable Man
Cease to complain;
But with his causeless Cries
He would importune Heaven, and pierce the Skies.
II.
Although his Prayers reach the Almighty's Ear,
Though with Success he crown his Vow,
Though Wealth and Honor on him he confer,
Yet Cares his Mind, and Clouds possess his Brow:
He thinks his present Blessings poor,
And wildly gapes, and ever calls for more.
What Curb, or what commanding Rein
Can Avarice within just Bounds retain?
Since, when full Streams of Blessings on us flow,
Our Thirst does still increase, and our desires still grow.
The Man who thinks he is poor, though rich he be,
Does truly labor under Poverty.
PROSA III.
Phi. IF therefore Fortune should speak for her self to thee on this manner, I
believe thou have not any thing to answer; or if thou have any thing by which
thou can defend thy Complaint, offer it, and thou shall have free Liberty to
speak.


Boet. These things which thou urgest are indeed specious, being enriched with
all the Charms of Rhetoric and Music; yet their Sound then only affects and
delights us, when they strike our Ears: But the Miserable have a much deeper
Sense of their Misfortunes, which these Notes cannot remove; and when they
leave off to entertain our Ears, their Sorrow, which is settled within, with
greater Force attacks the Mind.


Phi. So it is indeed; for these are not Specificks for thy Disease which
rebels against its Cure, but rather Nourishers of it: when time serves I shall
administer those things which will pierce to its bottom. But, nevertheless,
that thou may not number thy self amongst the Miserable, let me ask thee,
have thou forgot the measure of thy Happiness and Prosperity? I speak not of
the Care which the Chief Men of the City took of thee, when thou were left an
Orphan, when thou were graced with the Affinity of those great Personages, and
were taken into their Affections, before thou were received into their
Alliance, which is the most happy and estimable kind of Propinquity. Who did
not account thee most happy in the Noble Alliance of thy The Fathers-in-law of
Boethius were Festus and Symmachus, of whom mention is made in the Life of
Boethius.
Fathers-in-law; in the chaste and exemplary Virtues of thy Though Boethius had
two Wives, Elpis and Rusticiana, yet I suppose mention is made here only of
Rusticiana, because she only was living at that time when this Book was
composed.
Wife; and in the Noble Dispositions of thy Boethius had four Sons; Patricius,
Hypatius, Symmachus, and Boethius; that two of these were Consuls is certain,
but which they were I do not find.
Sons? I pass by (for common things I will not mention) those Dignities
conferred upon Boethius being young, was admitted into the Order of the
Patricii, and perhaps he had been honored with the Consulate, which Dignity
was rarely conferred upon any one before the 30th Year of his Age.
thee in thy Youth, which have often been denied to ancient Men; for I am
impatient to come to that which was the Crown of thy Felicity: If the Fruits of
humane Labors can have any Weight of Happiness, can the Memory of that Day,
for any Evil which may since have befallen thee, ever pass out of thy Mind, in
which thou saw thy two Sons advanced to the Degree of Consuls, carried from
thy House, accompanied by so great a Number of Senators, and with the Joys and
Acclamations of the People? when thou saw them in the Court placed in their
Curule Seats.] It was the Ivory Chair which was in the Chariot in which the
Chief Magistrates of Rome did ride. From hence they were called Magistratus
Curules, who only had the Right of setting up Images. Curulis, a curru dempto
altero: nam Senatores qui Curulem magistratum, i. e. majorem bonorem gerebant,
honoris gratia, in Curiam vehi soliti erant Curru, in quo sella erat Eburnea,
supra quam considerent. Gell.
Curule Seats, and thy self in the Praises of the absent King Theodorick did
display the Treasures of thy Wit, and did deserve the Crown of Eloquence?
when in the The Circus.] It was a Place of an Oval Figure, in which the Romans,
by the Appointment of Tarquinius Priscus, one of their first Kings, did
exercise their Games: from whence those Games were called Circenses. Custom
required afterward, that every one who was created Consul, should in this
Place make a great Expense in entertaining of the Roman People with the usual
Games, otherwise they did not ingratiate themselves with them, nor did seem to
support honorably their Character.
Circus thou sitting betwixt the Consuls, did satisfy the Expectation of the
Multitude, which stood about thee, with a triumphal Largess? Thou then did
flatter Fortune by thy Expressions, when she seemed to hug and caress thee as
her Friend and Delight. Thou then receivedst from her such a Gift as was never
before made to any private Man. Will thou then come to an account with her?
This is the first time that she has looked unkindly upon thee; and if thou will equally weigh the Number of thy Blessings and Afflictions, thou can not
but in Justice acknowledge that thou art yet happy: For if therefore thou do
esteem thy self unfortunate, because the things which heretofore seemed
pleasing to thee are passed away, there is no reason for it, because even those
things which do now afflict thee, do also pass. Art thou but just now entered a
Stranger upon the Scene of this World? Do thou but now appear in this
Theater? Believe thou that there can be any Constancy or Stability in humane
Affairs, when thou see that an Hour, or a quicker Minute, dissolves humane
Nature, and separates the Soul from the Body? For although there is seldom Hope
that the things of Fortune will continue with us, yet the last Day of a Man's
Life seems to be the last also of that Prosperity which remains with us.
Where then is the great Difference? What does it import then, whether thou by
Death leavest it, or it by Flight does leave thee?


METRUM III.
Cum Polo Phoebus roseis quadrigis
Lucem spargere coeperit, etc.
I.
When Phoebus from his roseal Roscis quadrigis.] The Sun was feigned by the
Poets to be drawn in a Coach by four Horses, viz. Pyrois, Aeous, Aethon, and
Phlegon; by which Fire, Light, Heat and Flame, the four principal Effects of
the Sun, as also the four chief Hours of the Day, may be signified. Ovid. l. 2.
Metamorph. Interea volucres Pyrois, Aeous and Aethon
Solis equi, quartusque Phlegon binnitibus auram
Flammiferis implent, pedibusque repagula pulsant.

Coach
Dispenses Light, and opens Day,
The Stars grow pale at his Approach,
And shun the Glories of his Ray,
Hiding their Heads whilst he is upon his way.
II.
The Woods the Vernal Roses wear
When the Life-breathing Zephyrs.] Zephyrus is a soft and warm Wind blowing
from the West, and by its Quality it makes the Earth fruitful; therefore it is
called by the Greeks (...), a bringer of Life: by the Latins it is termed,
Favonius a fovendo, from cherishing or keeping warm, as if it were the Genital
or Elemental Spirit of the World, as Pliny says, l. 10. c. 25. Parturit almus
ager, Zephyrique tepentibus auris
Laxant arva sinus. Virg. l. 2. Georg.

Zephyrs blow;
If to the Auster] Is the Wind blowing from the South, and is of a moist and
warm Nature. It is esteemed moist, because it gathers again those Humors which
the North Wind had dispelled and scattered: Hence by Virgil it is called
humidus; by Horace, Vdus; by Ovid, Aquaticus; by St. Augustine, Pincerna
pluviarum; and by Boethius, Nebulosus. It is esteemed hot and warm, because it
blows from the South; or because by its Moistness or its Heat, or by both, it
is hurtful to living Creatures, and to Plants, but particularly to Flowers;
from whence Virgil, l. 1. Arboribusque satis Notus, pecorique sinister. And
Eclog. 2. Eheu quid volui misero mihi, floribus Austrum
Perditus, and liquidis immisi fontibus apros.
This Wind is a particular Enemy to Roses: Hence Statius l. 3. Sylvarum:
Pubentesque rosae primos moriuntur ad Austros. Therefore Auster, by our Author,
is said, spirare insanum, to blow madly; and whilst it blows, decus abire
spinis, that is, it makes the Rose to wither or die, which as it is the Queen
of Flowers, and as it is produced from a Thorn, so it is the Glory of that
Vegetable. Hence Antonius Hallaeus, a Norman Writer, very elegantly expresses
himself: -- Ortus tamen ipsa memento
O Rosa pulchralis: te informis spina creavit.

South the Wind does veer,
No more those Beauties then they show,
Which charmed our Eyes when the gay Flowers did grow.
III.
Sometimes I have the Ocean seen
Clear, undisturbed and free,
With Looks all radiant and serene:
But if the Winds awakened be
The Waves then swell and roll outragiously.
IV.
If all things vary thus their Forms,
And nothing certain does appear,
Will thou commit to the wild Storms
Thy Vessel, and let Fortune steer?
It Is sure that nothing can be constant here!
PROSA IV.
Boet. ALL this which thou recountest, O thou Source and Nourisher of all
Virtues, is most true; nor can I deny the quick and early Arrival of my
Prosperity. But one thing, when I remember it, does most sensibly afflict me;
for nothing does more add to a Man's Infelicity, than the remembrance that he
was once happy.


Phil. That thou do yet groan under the Torment of thy ill-grounded Opinion,
is not to be imputed to the evil Estate of thy Affairs; for if this empty Name
of uncertain Happiness moves thee, do but recollect with me, what Plenty thou
enjoyest, and what is yet reserved safe to thee: And therefore if thou yet do
possess that which in the best times thou did account most precious, it being
yet by the Hand of Heaven preserved safe and inviolate, can thou justly then
complain of the Injuries of Fortune? Symmachus thy Father-in-law, the Delight
and Ornament of Mankind, whose Welfare thou would readily purchase at the
rate of thy Life; one, who by an admirable Temper and Mixture is wholly made up
of Wisdom and Virtue, is yet safe, and fearless of his own Concerns; only
laments thy Injuries, and grieves for thy Misfortunes. Thy Wife yet lives an
Example of Modesty, and a Pattern of Chastity; and that I may in one Word
include all her Endowments and Perfections, the true Resemblance of her Father:
She lives, I say, and being weary of Life, breaths only for thy sake, and (in
which thing alone I will yield that thy Happiness receives Diminution) she
pines away with Grief and Tears, and with the Desire of once more enjoying thy
sweet Conversation. Why should I mention thy Consular Sons, in whom, being yet
so young, so much of the Wit and Spirit of the Grandfather and Father does
shine? Since then it is the chief Care of Men to preserve Life, thou art most
happy, if thou would but know it, to whom so many Advantages and Blessings
yet remain, which all Men value above Life. Wherefore dry up thy Tears, Fortune
has not expressed her Rage and Malice against you all; nor has the Tempest
been too violent, whilst thy Anchors yet hold, and afford to thee Cause of
present Comfort, and Hope of future Felicity.


Bo. And may they ever hold! for whilst they are firm, however things go, I
shall shift so as to keep my Vessel above the Water, and perhaps to escape; but
notwithstanding you may see from what Advantages and Dignities I am fallen.


Ph. I should think that we had made a good Advance, if thou did not yet
retain a Concern for the Diminution of thy former Estate. But I cannot suffer
that thou should, with so much Delight, mention thy Fortunes, and in so much
Anxiety bewail the Loss of so small a part of them: For whose Felicity is so
well grounded, who has not in some things cause to quarrel with his Lot? The
Condition of humane Goods is anxious and inconstant; for either they do not all
at once arrive, or if they do, they make no stay with us. One Man is blessed
with a great Affluence of Wealth, but he is ashamed of the Baseness of his
Blood. The Nobility of that Man's Descent makes him conspicuous, but being
uneasy within the Bounds of a narrow Estate, and so unable to bear up the Port
of his Ancestors, he had rather live retired and unknown. Another abounds with
Wealth, and is nobly born too, but he is unmarried, and to complete his
Happiness he would have a Wife. Another is happy in Wedlock, but he wants
Children, and is troubled that he must gather Riches for another Man's Heir.
Another has the Joy of many Children, but is soon again mortified by seeing
the evil Courses which they take. Therefore we fee, that no Man can easily
agree with the State of his Fortune; for in all Conditions there is something
which, untried, a Man does not know, and which after trial he does not approve.
Add also to this, that the Senses of the Happy are refined and delicate; and
unless every thing happens to them as they desire, or when it pleases them,
they are impatient: He who is not used to Adversity, is overcome and thrown
down by every cross Adventure; and the least evil Acccidents discompose him:
upon so minute and slender things does the Happiness of the most Fortunate
depend. How many Men are there in the World, do thou believe, who would think
themselves advanced almost to Heaven, if they could attain but to the least
part of the Remainder of thy Fortunes? This very Place, which thou call a
Place of Banishment, is their Country who inhabit it: And thy Miseries arise
only from the ill-grounded Opinion that thou art miserable. And again, every
Lot may be happy to that Man who can with Equanimity and Courage bear it. Who
is he so happy, who when once he grows impatient, does not desire to change his
State of Life? How much is humane Felicity imbittered! which though it may seem
sweet to the Enjoyer, yet is not to be retained, but when it pleases takes its
Flight? So that hence it may appear; how miserable even the greatest Felicity
of Men is, since it will not remain with those, who with Equality bear every
kind of Lot, nor will bring Comfort to those whose Minds are anxious and
oppressed. Why therefore, O wretched Mortals, do ye so industriously seek
abroad for that Felicity which is placed at home within your selves? Error and
Ignorance mislead and confound you. But I, in short, will show you the very
Hinge upon which the truest Happiness does turn. Is there any thing more
precious and estimable to thee than thy self? No, thou will say. Then if thou will weigh things well, and gain the Command over thy self, thou will possess
that which thou would never lose, and which Fortune can never take from thee.
And that thou may see that Beatitude cannot consist in those things which are
in the Power of Fortune, only consider thus; If Happiness be the Sovereign Good
of Nature, living and subsisting by Reason, then that thing cannot be it, which
can by any means be withdrawn from us, because that which cannot be taken away
is worthily esteemed the most excellent. Hence it appears that Instability of
Fortune is not susceptive of true Happiness. Add to this, that he who is
carried away by fading Felicity, does either know that it is mutable, or he
does not. If he knows it not, what Happiness can he take in the Blindness of
his Ignorance? If he knows it, he must necessarily be afraid lest he should
lose that which he knows is easily to be lost; and in that case his continual
Fear will not suffer him to be happy. Perhaps he cares not if he should lose
it, and he would not be much troubled at its Loss. Even truly the Good is but
very small and inconsiderable, the Loss of which a Man can bear with such
Equanimity and Unconcernedness. And because I know that thou art one who have
been fully persuaded, and by many Demonstrations convinced of the Immortality
of the Souls of Men; it also being evident that the Goods of Fortune receive a
Period with our Bodies by Death; it cannot then be doubted but if Death can put
an end to our Happiness, that all Men, when they die, are plunged into the
Depths of Misery. And since we know well, that many Men have endeavored to
obtain Felicity, not only by undergoing Death, but by suffering the most cruel
Pains and Torments, how then can it be imagined that this present Life can make
Men truly happy, since, when it is ended, Men do not become miserable?


METRUM IV.
Quisquis volet perennem
Cautus ponere sedem, etc.
Who warily would fix his Seat,
On which no Eastern Winds should beat,
Nor Waves which rage against the Shore
Have any Power,
He must not build upon the high
And lofty Hills, which brave the Sky;
Nor will his House securely stand
Upon the Sand.
Each Blast will one of them annoy,
And all its Force on it employ:
The other being loose and light,
Cannot bear the Weight.
Seeing the Danger then is great
To him that loves a pleasant Seat,
Lay thy Foundation upon
The firmer Stone;
And then though Air and Sea conspire,
Contemn their Rage and slight their Ire:
So happily in thy strong Hold
Thou may grow old.
PROSA V.
Phi. BUT forasmuch as the Applications of my Reasons have sunk into thee, I
think it is now time to use some more powerful Medicines: Go to then, if the
Gifts of Fortune were not fading and momentary, as they are, what is there to
be found in them which may, at any time, be accounted thine? or which, if it be
thoroughly considered and looked into, will not appear to be vile and unworthy?
Are Riches in their own Nature, or by the Estimation of Men, precious? What
sort of Riches is most excellent? Gold, or a great Mass of Silver gathered
together? But this appears more glorious by spending it, than by treasuring it
up; for Avarice always makes Men odious, and Bounty makes them famous and
renowned. And if that which is conferred upon another cannot continue with any
Man, then certainly is Money most precious when it is translated to others; and
ceases to be possessed by him who has given it. If all the Money that is in
all Parts of the World were gathered into one Hand, the rest of Mankind would
be needful and want it. The Sound of a Voice, if it be entire, and not
obstructed by any Medium, does at the same time fill the Ears of many People;
but Riches, unless they be diminished and cantoned, cannot meet the Necessities
of many; and that being done, they whom they have left must unavoidably submit
to Poverty. O therefore (may I justly say) narrow, mean, and even poor Riches!
which cannot all be enjoyed by many at the same time, and which cannot be
possessed by one, without impoverishing and ruining the rest of Mankind! Does
the Brightness of Jewels attract the Eye? But if there be any thing
extraordinary in their Splendour, it is the Brightness of the Stones, and not of
the Eye which beholds them; therefore I very much wonder that Men should admire
them: For what is it which wants the Faculties and Motions of a Soul, and the
Contexture of Joints, which can really seem beautiful to a rational Nature? For
although from the Hand of the great Workman, and for Distinction's sake, they
have derived something of an inferior Grace and Beauty, yet they are placed
below thy Excellence, and by no means worthy to attract thy Admiration. Does
the Beauty of the Fields delight thee much?


Boe. Why should it not? for it is a fair Part of the fairest Work, the
Creation of the Universe: So sometimes we are delighted with the Clearness of
the Sea's Face; sometimes we admire the Heavens, the Stars, the Sun, and Moon.


Phi. What do these things concern thee? Dare thou glory in the Splendour of
these things? Art thou embelished, or any way distinguished by the Flowers of
the Spring? or does thy Plenty swell in the fruitful Face of Summer? Why art
thou carried away with empty Joys? Why do thou embrace that Good which is out
of thy Power? for Fortune can never make that thine, which the Nature of things
forbid to be so. The Fruits of the Earth are doubtless for the Nourishment of
living Creatures; and if thou would confine thy self to the supplying only of
the Necessities of Nature, thou would not so much seek after the Affluence
and Gifts of Fortune: For Nature is satisfied with few things, and those the
least: And if thou do, after such Satiety, overcharge her with Superfluities,
that which thou do superadd, becomes either unpleasant or hurtful to her. To
proceed, do thou think that it recommends thee to the World to shine in
Variety of costly Clothes? the Sight of which, if it be grateful to the Eye,
the Matter or the Ingenuity of the Workman is to be admired. Does a great
Retinue, and the Attendance of a numerous Train of Servants, make thee happy?
If those Servants be vicious, they are a great Burden to the House, and
pernicious Enemies to the Master of it. But if they be good, why should the
Virtue and Goodness of others be put to thy Account? From all which it plainly
appears, that none of these which thou did number among thy own Goods, were
really to be esteemed so. In which, if there be no things desirable, what
Reason is there that thou should grieve for the loss of them, or rejoice at
their possession? If they are fair or beautiful by Nature, what does that
concern thee? For so by themselves, wholly sequestered from thy Riches, they
would please: They therefore are not to be esteemed precious because they are
numbered amongst thy Goods, but because they seemed so before thou were desirous
to possess them. What is it then, that with so much Noise, and so much Address,
we desire of Fortune? It is, perhaps, to drive away the Fear of Poverty by a
general Affluence of Wealth; but this often happens otherwise: for there is
great need of many Helps even to keep so great an Accession of Furniture, and
Variety of things after they are obtained: And it is most true, that they want
most things who possess the most: And on the other side, they want the fewest
who measure their Abundance by the Necessities of Nature, and not by the
Extravagance of Excentrick and irregular Desires. Is it so then, that Men have
no proper and genuine Good planted within them, but that they must be forced to
go abroad to seek it? Are things so changed, that Man, that excellent Creature,
whose Reason almost entitles him to Divinity, can be no other way sensible of
his own Glories, than by the possession of soul-less and unnecessary things?
All other Beings are content with their own Endowments, and you only (who are
the Image of God) vainly seek accessional Ornaments for your excelling Nature,
from things placed so much below you, not understanding how great an Injury you
do by it to your Maker. He ordained the Race of Men to excel all other earthly
Creatures; and you depress your Dignity and Prerogative below the lowest
Beings. For if that Good which belongs to any thing be more precious and worthy
than that thing to which it belongs, since you esteemed the most contemptible
things to be your Good, you submit your self, by that your Esteem, to them, and
take the lower Place: And this is but what you deserve. For such is the Nature
of Man, that he does then only excel other Beings, when he knows himself: But
he may be ranked below the Beasts that perish, when he once slights that
necessary and important Knowledge* For such Ignorance is natural to other
Creatures; but to Man it is unnatural and a Vice. How weak and open an Error is
it in Men, who imagine that any thing which is foreign to their Natures, can be
an Ornament to them? That cannot in Reality be so; for if any thing look bright
and glorious with that which is put upon it, that which covers it is said to
shine, and is admired; but notwithstanding the thing covered still continues in
its natural Impurity and Disesteem. I therefore deny that thing to be good
which is hurtful to him who possesses it. Am I deceived in this? Thou will say,
no; for Riches have often hurt their Possessors, since every ill Man is the
more desirous of other Men's Riches, and he thinks him alone who is in
possession of such things, to be a Man of Worth, and to be esteemed. Thou
therefore who now so much fear to be assaulted by the Spear or the Sword, if
thou had entered into the Path of this Life not encumbered with Riches, thou
might, like the wayfaring Man, with an empty Purse have sung before the
Robbers. The Happiness then derived from fading Riches is glorious indeed and
great; by the possession of which a Man loses his Security and Quiet.


METRUM V.
Felix nimium prior aetas
Contenta fidelibus arvis, etc.
I.
Too happy they, and too much blessed,
Who did in former Ages live
Content with what the faithful Earth did give,
Who Nature's kindly Products thought the best!
They, yet not lost in Luxury,
Did with the Acorn Hunger satisfy,
And the most carving Stomach fill.
They knew not Hypocras nor Hydromel,
Nor could the differing Elements join
Of Honey and of racy Wine;
Nor did the Serian.] The Seres were People who, Orosius says, L. 3. C. 23.
did inhabit a Country betwixt the Rivers Hydaspes and Indus, in whose
Territories grows a Tree covered with a small Down, according to several
Authors, as Virgil. Georg. l. 2.

Veileraque ut foliis depectant tenuia Seres. And Seneca in Oct. v. 667.

Nec Moeni a distinguit acu
Quae Phoebeis subditus Euris
Legit eois Ser arboribus.
Claudian also, Car. v. 179.

Stamine quod molli tondent de stipite Seres. This Down is produced from the
Bowels of the Silk worm, which Worm is elegantly described in the following
Verses by Antonius Hallaeus, mentioned before: Est Olli matter sanies, dat
frondea Nutrix
Pabula, Thysbaeo Morus polluta cruore.
Queis avidam ut clausus latebroso in carcere pavit
Ingluviem, totoque Satur jam corpore turget.
Viscera dum vacuans paulatim huic molle figurat
Lanicium; illuviemque modis in tenuia miris
Nec fila, and teretem glomerans convolvit in orbem.
Vt vero emeritus perfecit nobile pensum
Exanimo similis, pretiosa ut conditus Vrna.
Hic jacet, at luci mox redditur; induit alas,
Jamque avis, and vermis, neutrumque and denique monstrum est.



Serian Fleece in Tyrian] Is the Purple with which Silks are died, and it is
called Tyrium venenum, because it is a Liquor drawn from a Shellfish, and
enters into and infects the Wool, or the Silk, as Poison does the Bowels and
Veins of those who take it: It has the Epithet of Tyrium, because Tire, a City
of Phoenicia, was famous for the Fishery of the Murex, which was the Shellfish
yielding this Purple Liquor.
Tyrian Colors shine.
II.
Our Fathers on their grassy Beds did sleep,
Had smiling Visions and inspiring Dreams,
The passing Rivulets and lucid Streams
Gave wholesome draughts. Under the spreading Shade
Of the tall Pine, through which no Ray could peep,
The gentle Mortal careless lay,
Shunning the Heats of the Meridian Ray.
III.
No Man did plow the Deep, or stem the Floods
With swelling Canvass and with busy Oar:
Nor did the Merchant then expose his Goods
To sale upon an unknown Shore.
The threatening Notes of the hoarse Trumpet then
Did not the Man of War awake;
Ambition did no hateful Quarrels make,
Nor shining Blades which Purple stain:
For headlong Fury never could
Move Men to go to War,
When what was got was but a Wound or Scar,
And there was no Reward for shedding Blood.
IV.
O that those Days would come again
Which long ago went floating by,
And swallowed in the mighty Gulf of Time,
Make now an useless part of vast Eternity!
The Love of Wealth does all engage,
And more than Aetna.] The Love of Riches is fitly here compared to the Fire of
Aetna, for Aetna is a Mountain in the Island of Sicily, called now by the
Italians il Mont Gibello, which always burns and flames, and is celebrated by
most of the ancient Poets. Virg. 1. Georg.

Vidimus undantem ruptis fornacibus Aetnam,
Flammarumque globos, liquefactaque volvere saxa.
And by several others, whose Descriptions of it are common.


Aetna's Flames does rage,
And nothing can the burning Thirst assuage.
Ill fare the Man who broke the deep
And secret Closets of the Earth,
And gave to Gold and Diamonds a Birth,
Which in their Causes did desire to sleep;
And whence a thousand Troubles Men do daily reap!
PROSA VI.
BUT why should I discourse of Dignities and Powers, which Men (wholly ignorant
of the true Nature of Dignity and Power) advance and extol to the Skies? which,
if they are conferred upon a wicked Man, not the raging Flames of Aetna, nor
the most impetuous Deluge ravage so much, nor do so much harm as those Weapons
in such an hand. I believe you remember, your Ancestors desired to abolish the
Consular.] Tarquinius Superbus, the last of the Roman Kings, being become
hateful by his Tyranny to the People, who were also the more enraged by the
impious Violence of Sextus his Son committed upon the Chastity of Lucretia, was
expelled, by the Assistance of Brutus, after he had reigned twenty five Years:
Then Lucius Junius Brutus, and Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus, were first created
Consuls. At length as the Form of the Roman Government had changed from Regal
to be Consular, so, according to Livy, it was again changed from that of
Consuls to that of the Decem-viri: For the Pride of the Consuls every Day
increasing, or rather the Fierceness of the People being not wholly subdued,
which had derived its Original from Shepherds, and other savage People, who at
first for their Defense had gathered into a Body, the Consuls were laid aside,
and the Decem-viri succeeded; whose Power, because they had acted many things
very tyrannically, was condemned, and taken away the third Year after it had
been introduced into the Government.
Consular Government, which gave beginning to the Roman Liberty, because of the
Pride of the Consuls; as their Ancestors before, for the same Consideration,
had banished Kings out of their City. But if sometimes (which seldom happens)
good Men arrive at them, what other thing is there pleasing in them, besides
the Probity of those who use and enjoy them? So it comes to pass that Virtue
receives not Honor from Dignities, but Dignities derive Honor from Virtue.
But what is this Power so much celebrated, and so much desired? O ye terrene
Animals! do you not consider who they are over whom you seem to exercise
Authority? If thou should see an ambitious Mouse, claiming a Superiority with
her self over the rest of her Species, would thou not almost burst with
Laughter? So then, if thou considerest the Contexture and Temperament of his
Body, what can thou find in the World more feeble than Man, or more subject
to Casualties and Misfortunes, to whom even a Fly (one of the smallest Products
of Nature) by a Bite, or by creeping into the secret Recesses of his Body, may
be the Cause of Death? But why should any Man exercise Authority over another,
unless it be over his Body, or what is yet inferior to that, over his
Possessions, which are the Gifts of Fortune? Shall thou ever gain an Ascendant
over a free and clear Soul? Shall thou ever move the highborn Mind, consistent
with it self, and knit together by the Bands of Reason, from the proper Center
of its Quiet? When a certain Tyrant once thought by Torments to compel a
Philosophy speaks here of Anaxarchus the Philosopher, a Follower of Democritus:
This Anaxarchus having incurred the Displeasure of Nicocreon King of Cyprus,
was ordered by him to be put into a Mortar, and to be pounded with great brazen
Pestles: He bore it with so great Courage and Patience, that he said to the
Tyrant, Beat on, beat on the Back of Anaxarchus, thou can not hurt him. The
Tyrant said he would pluck out his Tongue; he hearing that, presently bit it
off, and spit it in the Tyrant's Face.
Free Man to discover some Persons who had conspired against his Life, the Man
bit off his own Tongue, and spit it in his Face swelling and bloated with Rage:
so by his Wisdom disappointing the Tyrant, and making those Torments which his
Cruelty had designed, Matter of Triumph to his Heroic Courage. To go further,
what is it that any Man may do to another, which another may not do again to
him? We are told, that it was the Custom of Busiris.] He was the Son of Neptune
by Lydia the Daughter of Epaphus, and a most cruel Tyrant of the Egyptians: He
sacrificed his Guests to Jupiter, not sparing the Priest from whom he had
received the Counsel to do it: but whilst he prepared to give the same
Treatment to Hercules, he was, with Amphidama his Son, and his Ministers and
Officers, killed by Hercules at the Altar. -- Quis aut Eurystea durum:
Aut illaudati nescit Busiridis aras. Virg. Georg. l. 3.

Busiris to kill his Guests, and himself at last was killed by Hercules his
Guest. Regulus.] He was Consul, and having vanquished the Salentini, who
inhabited that Country near the Apennine Mountains, which is now called Part
dela Terra d' Otranto, he triumphed at Rome, and was the first of the Roman
Generals who conducted a Fleet into Africa; and being himself taken by the
Carthaginians whom he had conquered, he was put to Death by them by cutting off
his Eyelids.
Regulus after a Victory put many of the Carthaginians into Chains, but himself
soon after was forced to yield to their Fetters. Do thou therefore think that
the Power of that Man ought to be magnified, who cannot hinder another from
committing that upon him which he lately committed upon another? Consider too,
that if there were any thing of proper or natural Good in these Dignities and
Powers, they would never be attained by wicked Men, for disagreeing things do
not use to unite; and Nature forbids that contrary things should join: So that
seeing wicked Men do often execute Offices of Dignity and Trust, it appears
that they are not good in themselves, because they can reside in such Subjects.
The same may also be most justly said of all the Gifts of Fortune which are
most commonly showed in greatest Plenty upon the worst of Men. It ought also to
be considered, that no Man doubts him to be valiant, in whom he has seen the
Virtue of Fortitude shine: nor him to be swift of foot, in whom he has seen
Swiftness. So Music makes a a Musician; the Science of Physic a Physician;
and Rhetoric a Rhetorician. The Nature of every thing acts properly according
to its End, nor is mixed with foreign Effects of differing Beings, but of its
own Accord repels what is contrariant to it, or may be destructive of it.
Riches cannot extinguish the unquenchable Thirst of Avarice; nor can Power give
him Command of himself, who is already the Slave of his Vices, and bound in the
insoluble Chains of his Lusts. So Dignities conferred upon ill Men do not only
not make them worthy, but rather show their Unworthiness by laying them open,
and discovering their Shame. But how comes this to pass? you are pleased to
impose upon things false Names, and differing from their Natures, which are
often laid open, and appear by the Effects of those very things: so that even
these Riches, and this Power, and that Dignity, ought not of right to be called
by those Names. And lastly, the same thing may be said of all the Gifts of
Fortune, in which it is manifest, that nothing is desirable, nor is there any
thing of native Good in them, since they are not always the Lot of good Men,
nor make them good to whom they are allotted.

METRUM VI.
Novimus quantas dederit ruinas
Urbe flammata, patribusque caecis, etc.
We know what Ruin Nero.] He governed the Roman Empire about the Year of
Christ 57. So long as he used the Advice of his Master Seneca he governed well;
but he being removed, he fell into a Course of all Wickedness and Impiety, and
became a great Example of Infamy, Luxury, Avarice and Cruelty. First he
appeared upon the Theater not only as an Actor, but as an Harper: Next, he
would wear no Habit twice; he would never travel without a thousand Carriages,
and all the Shoes of his Mules were of Silver: He fished always with a Golden
Net, and with purple and scarlet Cords: He gaping after all Men's Goods, did
only desire to appear rich. Lastly, having ordered Rome to be burnt, he laid it
to the Charge of the Christians, and put to Death the Chief of them, Peter and
Paul the Apostles; as also Seneca his Master, Antonia his Aunt, and Britannicus
his Brother, Octavia his Wife, Agrippina his Mother; and at last he killed
himself. Vid. Sueton. l. 6.
Nero's Rage did cause,
When he Burnt Rome.] He did not burn the whole City, only a Part of it, where
the worst Buildings were; which he did for a Jest, that he might by it
represent the Siege of Troy. Sueton. l. 6.
burnt Rome, and triumphed o'r its Laws,
When all the The Conscript Fathers.] A blazing Star, says Suetonius, which is
thought to portend Destruction to Governments and Potentates, began now for
several Nights to appear. Nero being troubled at this, consulted Babylus an
Astrologer; he answered, that Princes were wont to expiate these kind of
Portents by some illustrious Slaughter, and to avert their Effects from
themselves, by throwing them upon the Heads of their Ministers and the
Magistrates: upon which Advice he sentenced all the Nobility and Senators to
Death.
Conscript Fathers he did kill;
When yet his His Brother.] Britannicus who was the Son of Claudius by
Messalina, as he himself was by Agrippina, he poisoned him.
Brother's Blood, which he did spill,
Was warm, his His Mother.] Agrippina was Daughter to Germanicus, Sister to
Caligula, Wife, first of Domitianus, afterward of Claudius, whom she poisoned
that she might make Nero her Son (who rewarded her with Death) Possessor of the
Empire. When she was dead, he went to view her Body, made Observations of all
the Parts of it, and some he praised, some he dispraised. Adduntur praedictis
atrociora, says Suetonius, nec incertis autoribus, Neronem ad visendum
interfectae matris cadaver accurrisse; contrectasse membra, alia vituperasse,
sitique interim oborta bibisse.
Mother a sad Victim fell.
Then whilst the Body cold and breathless lay,
Without a Tear the Tyrant did survey
Its Parts, each Fault, each Beauty did espy;
These he did praise, and these he did decry.
This Monster yet to all those All those Lands.] He governed the Roman Empire
which stretches it self to the four Quarters of the World, East, West, North
and South. Thus Virg. Aen. l. 6.

En! hujus, nate, auspiciis illa inclyta Roma
Imperium terris, animos aequabit Olympo:
Hic vir, hic est, tibi quem promitti saepius audis
Augustus Caesar, Divum genus, aurea condet
Saecula qui rursus Latio, regnata per a^va
Saturno quondam: super and Garamantas, and Indos
Proferet imperium: jacet extra sydera tellus,
Extra anni solisque vias, ubi coelifet Atlas
Axem humero torquet stellis ardentibus aptum.

Lands gave Law,
Which Phoebus in his daily Voyage saw,
Stretching along from the remotest East
To the utmost Point of the Sea-beaten West;
And all those other Countries did control
Which toward the South reach from the Northern Pole.
Could Nero's Power remove his Passions Sway,
Or force his Rage his Reason to obey?
Power should not added be to him whose Will
Before did prompt and urge him to do ill.
PROSA VII.
Boe. THOU know well that I did the least of any Man covet mortal and fading
Possessions; I only desired an honorable Occasion of being employed in
Business and fit Matter to exercise my Virtue, lest it should silently grow
useless and old.


Phi. This is one thing which may tempt, I had almost said debauch, some Minds
naturally well inclined and endowed, though not yet arrived at the Perfection
of Virtue, I mean the Desire of Glory, and the Fame of having deserved well of
ones Country and the Commonwealth: but how small, and how truly void of Weight
even that is, do but from hence observe: Thou have learnt from Astrological
Demonstrations, that the whole Circuit of the Earth bears the Proportion only
of a Point to the Greatness of the Heaven; that is, if it be compared to the
Magnitude of the Celestial Globe, it may be judged to have no Space or Compass.
And of this small Region of the World, almost the fourth Part is inhabited by
living Creatures, known to us, as Ptolomy has seemed to prove. And if thou
shall abate also all which is overflown by the Sea, and Marshes, and Lakes, and
also all that Space of the Globe which is desert and overspread with Sands, or
burnt up by the too near Vicinity of the Sun, thou will find that what is left
for the Habitation of Men, is but a very small Proportion. And do you who are
placed in, and confined to the least Point of this Point, think of nothing but
of propagating your Fame, and exerting your Names, and making your selves
renowned? What is there august or magnificent in Glory, confined to so small
and narrow Bounds? Add to this, that this little Enclosure is inhabited by
several Nations differing in Tongue, in Manners, and in way of Life: to whom,
as well by reason of the Difficulties and Inconveniences of Journying, as by
the Diversity of Languages, and the Unfrequency of Commerce, not only the Fame
of particular Men, but even the Names of great Cities, cannot arrive. In the
time of Marcus Tullius, as himself in his Writings tells us, the Fame of the
Roman Commonwealth, which was then well grown and robust, and redoubled by the
Parthians and several other Nations in these Parts, was not yet known to those
who inhabited beyond the Mountain Caucasus. Thou see then how narrow and
strait that Glory is which thou labourest so much to propagate and dilate. Do
thou think that the Glories of a Roman Man shall reach those Places where the
Fame and Story of the illustrious Roman Commonwealth would never reach? Do not
the Customs and Institutions of several Countries disagree among themselves; so
that that which with some is adjudged to be Praiseworthy, with others is
thought to deserve Disgrace and Punishment. Hence it appears, that it is not
the Interest of any Man who desires Renown, to have his Name spread through
many Countries, and diverse People, but that he should be content with that
Glory and Fame which he can arrive at amongst his Countrymen, and not care to
have the Immortality of it extended beyond the Bounds of one Country. But how
many Men, great and famous in their Generations, has the Carelessness and
Neglect of Writers passed by in Silence? Although indeed one may justly ask,
what can such Memorials profit a Man, which with their Authors must at length
yield to the Powers of Age, and be with them buried in Oblivion? But Men
imagine that they have obtained Immortality if their Names shall but live in
future Ages. But if they would compare this to the infinite Progress of
Eternity, what have they which should make them pleased at the Diuturnity of
their Fame? For if the Duration of one Moment be compared with that of ten
thousand Years, the Spaces of both being definite, it has some, though a very
little Portion of it. (But yet this very Number of Years, and as many more as
can by Numbers be multiplied, cannot at all be compared to endless Duration:
For there may be some Comparison betwixt finite Beings amongst themselves, but
there can be none at all betwixt Infinite and Finite. Hence it is that Fame
(however durable and lasting) considered with infinite Eternity, will seem not
only to be little, but indeed nothing. But you think you cannot do well, unless
you have the empty Applause of the People; and forgoing the Pleasures of a good
Conscience, and the Consideration of the innate Worth of Virtue, and the
Pleasure of Actions resulting from it, you look for a Reward from the partial
Breath, and vain Discourses of the Many. Observe now how one once ingeniously
played upon the Lightness and Folly of such Arrogance. A certain Person accosted
another with contumelious Language, who had assumed to himself the Name of a
Philosopher, not out of a Principle of Virtue, but for the itch of Vainglory:
and he added, that he should now know if he were a true Philosopher, by bearing
patiently the Injuries offered to him; he putting on for a while a counterfeit
Patience, said then to the other, Do thou now believe me to be a Philosopher?
He answered smartly again, I had indeed believed it, if thou could still have
held thy Tongue. What then is it that great and worthy Men (for of such I
speak) who would by virtuous ways acquire Glory; what is it (I say) of
Advantage which they receive by a great Name after the Body is resolved into
Dust? For if (which our Reason and Religion forbids us to believe) the whole
Fabric of Man, Body and Soul, is dissolved, and dies together, then is there
no Glory; nor can there be when he (to whom it belongs) does no more exist. But
if the Soul which has deserved well, when it is enlarged from its earthly
Prison, does take a swift and unimpeach'd Flight to Heaven, will it not despise
the Earth and its Businesses; and being wrapped in the Joys of Heaven, rejoice
that it is wholly exempt from sublunary Considerations and Concerns?


METRUM VII.
Quicunque solam mente praecipiti petit,
Summumque credit gloriam, etc.
I.
Who Glory vainly does pursue,
And dreams it is the Sovereign Good,
Let him the starry Countries view,
And then 'twill soon be understood
How small Earth is, compared to that vast Frame;
And then he will despise, not seek a glorious Name.
II.
Why to be freed from Death should Man desire?
For though his Fame does widely fly,
Though splendid Titles he acquire,
At last the mighty thing must die;
And in the Grave is no Distinction made
Betwixt the Great and Low, the Scepter and the Spade.
III.
Where is the good Fabritius.] He was a Roman Consul, and celebrated by both
Orators and Poets, especially for his Fidelity and Truth: First because he was
tempted with the Offer of great Gifts by Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, and even
of the Promise of the fourth part of his Kingdoms, if he would leave the
Interest and Service of his Country, which he refused: And also because he sent
back to the same King Pyrrhus Tymochares his Physician, who offered, for a
Reward, to give Poison to his Prince. Which generous Action was so admired by
that King, that he said, it was more easy to divert the Sun from its Course,
than Fabritius from the Paths of Honesty. From whence Claud. Carm. 26. v. 130.

-- Et nulli pervia culpae
Pectora Fabritii donis invicta vel armis.

Fabritius now?
And where the noble Brutus.] This was Lucius Brutus, so called for the
Stupidity which he acted for fear of the Tarquins. It was he, who after the
Expulsion of the Tarquins for the Rape committed upon Lucretia, did assert the
Roman Liberty, together with Collatinus; for which Reason they were constituted
the first Consuls.
Brutus? Where
Is Cato.] As Brutus had his Name imposed from his feigned Stupidity, so Cato
derived his from his Wisdom, because catus signifies Wise; from whence Cato.
There were two excellent Men who were famous by this Surname; of one or both
of whom Philosophy may here speak, viz. Cato major and Cato minor, sprung both,
at different times, from the Portian Stock, settled at Tusculum, now called
Trascat, within a few Miles of Rome, where there are many pleasant Villa's,
magnificent Palaces, Gardens adorned with Grotto's, Cascades, and other
Waterworks belonging to the Roman Princes and Nobility. The first, who was
called the Censor, flourished about the Year 570 from the building of the City,
and arrived at a great old Age. Cato minor, who was called Praetorius, lived in
the very time of the Civil Wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey; of whom Lucan
sings something too profanely, Regard being had to the Heathenish
Superstition of those times, thus; Victrix causa Deis placuit, sed victa
Catoni. Horace also, l. 2. Carm. Ode 1. thus; Audire magnos jam videor duces
Non indecoro pulvere sordidos;
Et cuncta terrarum subacta,
Praeter atrocem animum Catonis.



Cato with his rugged Brow?
It Is little of them does appear:
In a few Letters now their Fame does live,
But nothing of their Persons can the knowledge give.
IV.
Men lie in dark Oblivion's Shade,
Nor are their Virtues spread by Fame;
Nor can they think t'outlive their Fate
By a poor airy dying Name:
To conquering Time that fancied Life must yield;
So Death will twice victoriously have won the Field.
PROSA VIII.
BUT lest thou should believe that I am an inexorable Enemy to Fortune, and
wage an endless War against her, I shall confess, that there are sometimes when
that faithless One may deserve well of Men; then I mean when she opens and
discovers her self, and freely confesses her self to be what she really is.
Thou do not perhaps yet understand what I am about to say. The thing is
wonderful which I desire to tell thee, and therefore I almost want Words to
express this Paradox, to wit, that adverse Fortune does more profit and truly
more advantage Men than prosperous: For this, under the Cloak and Show of
Happiness, when she smileth and caresses, lies and deceives; the other always
fairly and openly declares her Enmity, and shows her Instability by her
constant Changes: That deceives, this instructs; that by a precious Show of
Good binds the Minds of those she favors; this by the Knowledge of her
Fickleness frees and absolves them: therefore thou may observe the one always
faithless, airy, wavering, and ignorant of its own Condition; the other sober,
stayed, and even prudent in managing and making the best use of Adversity.
Lastly, prosperous Fortune, by her Allurements and Blandishments, draws Men
from the right, aside, and out of the direct way, leading to that which is the
sovereign Good; whilst, for the most part, the other does not only lead Men,
but as it were draw them with a Hook to true and genuine Happiness. Further,
think thou that it is to be esteemed the least Good which we receive from
this hard, and at the first sight, horrible Fortune, that she does discover to
thee the Hearts of thy faithful Friends, since she distinguishes between the
constant and doubtful Countenances of thy Companions and Acquaintance; and when
she departs, that she takes away her Friends and leaves thine. At what rate
would thou have bought the knowledge of this, when thou were (as it seemed to
thee) in thy prosperous Estate? Forbear then to deplore the Loss of thy Riches
and Honors, since thou have found the most valuable Jewel, the most precious
kind of Riches, I mean the Knowledge of thy unalterable and sincere Friends.

METRUM VIII.
Quod mundus stabili fide
Concordes variat vices, etc.
That this great Fabric of the Universe
Does by a constant Order suffer Change;
That Elements, which by Nature disagree,
Are by a Line perpetual firmly bound;
That Phoebus in his Chariot brings the Day,
And that the Moon does rule the sable Night,
Which Hesperus officiously leads on;
That the salt Waves are kept within their Bounds,
Lest they should on the Right of Earth encroach,
Is all the Effect of Love, which rules the Sea,
Which does command the many-peopled Earth,
And even to Heaven its Empire does extend.
If he his Reins should carelessly remit,
Those things which now affectionately love
Would presently declare an open War:
And would the well-mov'd Machine soon dissolve.
This, People of a different Lip does bind
With sacred Cords: this ties the Nuptial Knot,
And with chaste Vows does what is bound confirm:
This does to Friendship dictate binding Laws.
O happy Men if Love, which rules in Heaven,
Had an Ascendant o'r your noble Minds.
The End of the Second Book.
ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS BOETHIUS, OF THE Consolation of Philosophy. BOOK the
Third.
The ARGUMENT.
Philosophy now urges stronger Arguments, to wit, that all Men do seek after
Happiness; but that they do very much err in the way of obtaining it, whilst
some believe to find it in Riches, others in Dignities, in the Favor of Kings,
in the Glory of great Achievements, in Nobility, or in the Pleasures of the
Body: She demonstrates clearly, that it is in none of these, because they are
so far from being to be accounted Goods, that they are accompanied with a great
many Evils; but in God, who is the Sovereign and only Good, and that by his
Order the World is governed.

PROSA I.
BY this time she had ended her Song, when I, desirous to hear more, was so
charmed by the pleasantness of it, that I stood long expecting that she would
proceed: but at last said I, O thou chief Support and Stay of languishing
Minds, how much have thou refreshed me either with the weight of thy Sentences
or the sweetness of thy Numbers! so that now I almost think my self an equal
Match for Fortune, and able to resist her Blows. Therefore I do not only not
fear the Applications of those Remedies, which thou did say a little before
were sharp, but I earnestly desire to hear what they are. I well perceived
that, returned she, when with silence and attention thou did receive my
Words; and I did then expect such a State of Mind in thee, or what is more
true, I did then create in thee such an one. And indeed what yet remains to be
said is of such a Nature, that when it is first tasted, it seems to bite, and
is unpleasant; but when it is once swallowed it turns sweet, and is most
grateful to the Stomach. But because thou say thou would now gladly hear,
with what Desire would thou burn, if thou could imagine whither I am now
about to lead thee? Whither is that I pray thee? (said I). To that true genuine
Felicity, answered she, which thy Mind does apprehend as if it were in a Dream,
and of which thou seem to have some Foretaste. But thy Sight is so clouded
with false Forms, and light Appearances, that it cannot bear the Luster of that
Object. Then I entreat thee without Delay, show me that true Happiness. I will
most willingly, at thy Desire, do it, replied she: but I will endeavor to
describe that false and adulterate Cause which is better known to thee; and
that being fully laid open, thou will be better able to comprehend that exact
Model of true Felicity which I shall draw by casting thine Eye upon its
contrary.

METRUM I.
Qui serere ingenuum volet agrum,
Liberat arva prius fruticibus,
Falce rubos filicemque resecat, etc.
He who the grateful Field would sow,
Must Shrubs and Fern out of it throw,
That so the Corn may put away and grow.
To him who with offensive Meat
Did once his Palate vitiate,
The Labor of the busy Be is sweet.
When the The South Wind.] It is of its Nature to bring Rain, and to drive on
the waterish Clouds.
South Wind, affecting Peace,
Does its Storm-breathing Noises cease,
The radiant Glories of the Stars increase.
When Lucifer.] It is the Morning Star, which is called Venus: by the Greeks it
is called (...), and by the Latins Lucifer when it goes before the Sun, and
when it follows him Hesperus. So Virgil. Eclog. 8. v. 17. Nascere praeque
diem veniens age Lucifer almum.
Lucifer's victorious Ray
Has chased Night's darker Shades away,
Then clothed in gay Apparel comes the Day.
So if thou can thy self retrieve
From that which did thy Eyes deceive,
Thy Mind will soon the truest Good perceive.
PROSA II.
THEN fixing her Eye a little, and as it were withdrawing her self into the
most inward Cabinet of her Mind, she thus began; All the Care and manifold
Studies of Men do indeed proceed in differing Paths, but they tend to one only
End, which is Happiness: And Happiness is that complete Good, of which when a
Man is once possessed, he has nothing more to desire. This indeed is the
Sovereign Good of all, and contains all others in it: To which, if any thing
were wanting, it could not be the chief, because there would be something
without it self, some foreign Advantage which were to be desired. It is
therefore apparent that Blessedness or Happiness is that perfect State in which
all other Goods meet and center; which, as I have said, all Men endeavor to
arrive at by differing Ways and Means: For in the Minds of Men there is
naturally inserted a Desire of the true Good, but wandering Error leads them to
the false and fictitious one; so that some, believing it to be the chief of
Goods to want nothing, labor for an abundance of Riches: Others again
believing Happiness to consist in being reverenced and esteemed by their
Countrymen, endeavor all they can after Honors. There are also those who
place it in Power, and these endeavor either to rule themselves, or to be
Favorites to those who actually govern. There are those also who fancy an high
Renown to be the height of Happiness; and these, by all the Arts of War and
Peace, hasten to propagate their Names, and to arrive at Glory. Many measure
the Fruits of this Good by Joy and Cheerfulness, and they think it the happiest
thing in the World to abound in Luxury, and to be dissolved in Pleasures. Some
there are who use these Causes and Ends interchangeably; as they who desire
Riches as a Means to obtain Power and Pleasures; or as they who desire Power,
either that by it they may get Money or purchase a Name: About these and such
like things the Intention of all humane Actions and Desires is versed and
employed, as Nobility and popular Applause are sought after by some, which Men
think do make them famous, and Wives and Children by others are desired for the
sake of Pleasure. Only Friendship, which is a sacred kind of Tie, is not to be
reckoned amongst the Goods of Fortune, but amongst those of Virtue: but all
other things are desired either for the Power or the Pleasure which they
afford. Now for the Goods of the Body, they are to be referred to the things
mentioned before: For Strength, and the large Proportion of Parts, seem to give
Power and Worthiness, Beauty and Swiftness, to afford Glory and Fame; and
Health and Indolence of Body yield Joy and Pleasure. In all these things it
appears that Happiness is only wanting; for whatever any one desires above
other things, he judges that to be the chief Good: But we have already defined
Happiness to be the Sovereign of Goods; wherefore every one judges that to be
the happiest State, which he desires above all others. Thou have now therefore
before thine Eyes an exact Scheme and Form of humane Felicity, that is, Riches,
Honors, Powers, Glory and Pleasure, which last was only considered by
Epicurus.] Epicurus was a Philosopher known enough: In Physics, he taught that
Bodies were compounded of Atoms; and in Ethics, that the chief or sovereign
Good did consist in Pleasure: and argued thus; Since there are no other Goods
except Riches, Honors, Power, Glory and Pleasures; that Good amongst these
which excels the others ought to be esteemed the Sovereign Good; but Pleasure
seems to excel all the others, because the rest are not sought after, but
because they seem to bring Joyfulness and Pleasure to the Mind. Voluptuous Men
are from him usually called Epicures.
Epicurus; and consequently he did declare that Happiness consisted in that
alone, because he imagined that other things did withdraw Joy and Cheerfulness
from the Heart and Spirits. But I return to the Studies and Inclinations of
Men, whose Minds are always bent upon the chief Good, and are ever seeking
after it, though it seems to be as with a darkened Understanding, and like a
drunken Man reeling about, and not knowing which Path to take which may lead
him home. Do they, let me ask thee, seem to wander who endeavor to put
themselves into a Condition of wanting nothing? Certainly there is no State
does so much afford Happiness as that of having Plenty and Affluence of all
good things, of being out of need of being beholden to another, but having
sufficient for one's self. Or are they guilty of Folly who think that what is
the best does deserve Esteem and Reverence? Certainly no; for that thing is
surely not vile and contemptible, which all Men with so much Intention labor
after. Is not Power to be numbered amongst Goods? why not? for is that to be
esteemed feeble and without Strength, which is apparently better than all other
things? Is Renown not to be regarded? but it cannot be denied, but that
whatever is most excellent seems also to be most renowned. For to what
purpose shall we say that Happiness is not an anxious and melancholy thing, nor
subject to Grief and Trouble, since even in the least things Men seek for what
may delight and please them? These are the things which Men desire to obtain
and possess, and for this Cause do they labor after Riches, Dignities,
Commands, Glory, and Pleasure, that they may have Sufficiences and Abundance
within themselves, that so they may arrive at Esteem, Power and Fame. It must
therefore be a Good, of which all are in quest by so diverse Ways and different
Studies: And from hence it may easily appear how great the Power and Force of
Nature is, since notwithstanding that all Men differ very much in their
Opinions of Good, yet they All agree in the choice of the End of it.

METRUM II.
Quantas rerum flectat habenas
Natura potens, etc.
I Will take my Harp, and touch each warbling String,
And I, her Bard, will sing
Of Nature's powerful Hand,
Which does with Reins the Universe command.
My Song shall comprehend each Law,
By which she does all Beings bind and awe,
I Will read her mighty Pandects.] I style the Book of Nature so here, because
the Etymology of Pandectae is from (...) omne, and (...) capio, as containing
all sorts of Learning and Things: But properly the Volumes or Body of the Civil
Law called Digests, gathered and compiled from 37 Civilians, were called
Pandectae.
Pandects o'r,
My Eye into each Page shall look
Of the Elephantine.] Libri Elephantini were the Books wherein the Orders and
Decrees of the Senate of Rome were written: They were called so from the
Largeness of them.
Elephantine Book,
And I her choicest Secrets will explore.
Although the Punick.] African, or of Africa and particularly of that Part of
it near Carthage.
Punick Lion should forget
Himself, and to a servile Chain submit;
Though the same Hand which gave him Meat,
Presumes the noble Beast to beat;
Although he meanly then looks low,
And seems to dread his haughty Keepers Brow,
Yet if the Blood his Face o'r-spread,
Which that imperious Blow did shed,
His wakened Courage does arise,
And he remembers that by Right he is
The powerful Monarch of the Lawns and Wood:
Ashamed of his base Fears, he loud does cry,
His Plaints invade the Sky,
He breaks his Chain, and meets his Liberty;
And his presuming Keeper shall
A bloody Victim to his Fury fall.
When Philomel.] The Text is, quae canit altis garrula ramis Ales, I have
rendered by Philomel, because she partakes of the common Nature of all of her
kind. The Story of Philomela, Daughter of Pandion King of Athens, and the
Fiction upon it by the Poets, is so well known that I need not insert it at
length here; She was ravished by Tereus King of Thrace (who married her Sister
Progne.) He cut out her Tongue that she might not discover the Rape, but she
wrought the whole Story in Embroidery, and sent it to her Sister out of Prison:
Now at the Feast of Bacchus they were all met together; Progne therefore took
her Sister out of Prison, and made her kill her Son Itys, and dress him and
serve him up at Table to Tereus, who being enraged, would have killed them; but
pursuing his Wife, she was metamorphosed into a Swallow, Tereus into a Lapwing,
Itys into a Pheasant, and Philomel into a Nightingal, who with warbling Notes
is still feigned to lament the Misfortunes of her Family. Ovid. Metam. lib. 6.
ver. 510.
Philomel, which from the Wood
The sleeping Sun was wont to serenade,
Into her Prison is betrayed;
Although she have the choicest Food
Which Man can for his Taste invent,
Yet that will not prevent;
But, if she from the Prison view the Shade
Of that delightful Grove,
Where she had often mourned her Tragic Love,
The Meats prepared she does despise,
Charmed with the Woods which entertain her Thoughts and Eyes,
She nothing but the Woods affects,
And to their Praise her choicest Notes directs.
The Sapling forced by a strong Hand,
His tender Top does downward bend:
But if that Hand does it remit,
It strait toward Heaven again lifts up its Head.
The Sun in the Hesperian.] Philosophy takes this Argument from the Sun, whom
the Poets fable to hide himself in the Sea when he sets, that by so doing,
having purged and washed off the Filth and Dust which he has contracted in his
Course in the Day time, he might in the Morning appear more pure and splendid.
The Hesperian Sea is denominated from that Star which appears first to us
after the setting of the Sun.
Hesperian Main
At Night his Royal Bed does make,
But by Secret Path.] Because the way by which the Sun returns from the Western
to the Eastern Part of Heaven is wholly unknown; for all Countries have those
other Countries placed on the part of the Globe contrary to them for Antipodes,
the Sun not appearing to them at the same time.
a secret Path again
His wonted Journey toward the East does take.
All things regard their Origin,
And gladly thither would retreat;
To nothing certain Order does remain,
But that which makes the End to meet
With its Beginning, and a Round to be
Fixed on the Basis of Stability.
PROSA III.
AND you, O Men, whose Thoughts are so employed upon things below, that I may
fitly call you earthly Animals, do think ever of your Beginning, though it be
but with a dreaming and darkened Imagination, and you have always the true end
of Happiness in view, although you have no clear and perfect Notion of it: So
that though your natural Intention leads you to the true Good, yet indirect and
manifold Error draws you from it. Consider now if Men can by those Means by
which they endeavor to attain Happiness, arrive at their desired End. For if
Riches, if Honors, and other the like Accessions can place one in such a
State, that he shall seem to want no other thing to make him happy, then will I
confess that Felicity may be derived from such Acquisitions. But if so it be
that these cannot make good what they seem so fairly to promise, and that those
who possess them in the greatest measure, do yet want many other Advantages and
good things, will not the counterfeit and mistaken Face of Happiness be clearly
discovered in them? First of all therefore I ask thee, who not long since did
abound in Riches, whether sometimes in that great abundance thy Mind was not
anxious and discomposed upon the receiving of any notable Injury?

Boet. Truly I never remember that in my most numerous Prosperity my Spirits
were so free as not to be oppressed with some Trouble or other.


Phil. And was not that because something was absent which thou did desire,
or something present which thou would have had away?


Boet. So it was truly.


Phil. Why then thou desiredst the Presence of that, and the Absence of this.


Boet. I confess it.


Phil. Every Man wants that which he desires.


Boet. Doubtless he does.


Phil. Can that Man then who wants any thing be said to have all things
within himself sufficient for his Necessities?


Boet. No.


Phil. And did not thou in all thy Plenty labor under this want?


Boet. What then?


Phil. Then hence it follows that Riches cannot put a Man beyond all want, nor
make him self-sufficient, although this was it which they seemed to promise.
And this also I think of great Moment to be considered, that Money has nothing
in its own Nature which can hinder its being taken from the Possessor, though
against his Will.


Boet. I confess that.


Phil. It ought to be confessed, when we see every Day that the stronger takes
it from the weaker. From whence spring all Debates at Law, and all Complaints
in Courts of Judicature, but from this, that Men desire to recover their
Estates and Goods, of which they have been bereft either by Force or Fraud?


Boet. It is plain.


Phil. Then every Man needs foreign Helps to maintain the Possession of his
Money.


Boet. Who denies it?


Phil. But he would not want such Help unless he were the Owner of Money, which
he is in a possibility of losing.


Boet. That is unquestionable.


Phil. Then is the thing turned into its contrary; for Riches, which were
thought to have made a Man self-sufficient, do rather make him have need of Aid
from others. By what way do Riches drive away Necessity? Can rich Men be
neither hungry nor thirsty? Are not the Bodies of the Rich sensible of Winter's
Cold? But perhaps thou may say, such Men have wherewith to satisfy this, and
to quench that, and to keep out the other. By these Means it is true that Riches
may comfort and support those who suffer these things, but they cannot wholly
free them from such Inconveniences. But if these Necessities, which are ever
gaping and asking for more, cannot be supplied with Wealth, then there still
remains something which should be satisfied. I shall not now urge that the
smallest things are sufficient for Nature, and that nothing is enough for
Avarice. But if Riches cannot remove Want, but rather create it, why should Men
vainly imagine that they can meet and supply all humane Necessities?


METRUM III.
Quamvis fluente dives auri gurgite
Non expleturas cogat avarus opes, etc.
The rich Man's Avarice with his Wealth would grow,
Tho golden Tagus.] A great River in Spain, which having run 400 Miles, falls
into the Sea two Leagues below Lisbon; it is called by the Inhabitants of the
Country Taio, by the Portuguese d' Teio, by the French le Tage: It is said to
carry Gold-sand in the bottom of it; which, it is believed, it washes from
some Hills, where Mines of that Metal are engendered, which it passes by in its
Course.
Tagus through his Meads should flow;
Though Chains of Pearl grace his Neck and Arms,
Though with an hundred Yoke he tills his Farms:
Care shall his busy Life unquiet make,
And at his Death his Gold shall him forsake.
PROSA IV.
BUT it may be said that Dignities render those Men honored and esteemed who
possess them. I shall only then ask, if they have the Power to place Virtue in
the Minds of those who enjoy them, and clear them from Vice? Surely no, for it
has been found by experience, that they are so far from expelling vicious
Habits, that they rather make them more conspicuous. Hence it is that we often
so much disdain their being conferred upon undeserving Men. For which Reason,
Catullus.] He was a noted Poet, who was so satirical in his Verses, that he did
not spare the Emperor himself; he might therefore well reflect upon Nonius,
though so great a Magistrate. Carm. 53. Quid est Catulle, quid moraris emori?
Sella in Curuli Struma Nonius sedet:
Per Consulatum pejerat Vatinius.
Quid est Catulle, quid moraris emori?

Catullus called Nonius.] Many Critics believe that Boethius did not know that
Struma was the Surname of Nonius, as Joseph Scaliger and others: but
certainly, as the French Commentator well observes, and as it may be obvious to
others who will consider well, he is not accusable either of Ignorance or
Mistake; for though Struma was the Cognomen of Nonius his Family, it is not yet
plain here that he was styled so in Contempt by Catullus: for a Surname was
often imposed upon those who first did bear it from some notable Defect either
of Body or Mind; as upon him who was first called Servius a Servo, a Slave;
Spurius a Spurio, a Bastard; Brutus a Bruto, a brutal stupid Person. Add to
this, that this sort of Surname is never found to be joined amongst the ancient
Romans with the Name of any Person to whom Disgrace was not designed by it:
Struma was the Surname of Nonius, which doubtless was imposed on him or some of
his Ancestors, who were infected with the Struma, which is a Disease caused by
a W^n or Swelling on the Neck or Armholes, or on both, and is taken by some now
to be the King's Evil. It is the likelier also that Catullus did intend a
Reflection upon Nonius, and made his Allusion to the Disease, as I have rendered
it, because he joins Nonius the Praetor in the aforesaid Verses to Vatinius the
Consul, who laboring under that Disease, was often called by his Enemy Cicero,
Strumae aut Strumosi humoris. Pro Sestio, medentur civitati, qui exsecant
pestem aliquam tanquam Strumam: In Vatin. Strumae denique Ebore improbo
demigrarunt; and elsewhere, humidum habemas Oratorem.
Nonius the Consul, even when he was sitting in his Ivory Chair, the Strumam
appellat.
Botch or Impostume of the State. Do thou not see what great Inconveniences
Dignities have wrought to wicked Men? Their Deformities would less appear if
they were more obscure, and could be content to be without honorable Titles.
And let me now ask thee, if thou thy self (notwithstanding the Dangers which
hang over thee) could condescend to be Colleague with Decoratus.] This is the
Person to whom Theodorick in Cassiodorus writes, Var. l. 5. Ep. 31. That he
should compel some Men to pay the Money demanded of them, if he should truly
find that they were Debtors, because he was an Assessor to the Master of the
Offices: which however did not hinder but that he might be called nequissimus
Scurra and Delator. (Scurra, because he followed great Men, and by Scoffing and
Taunting did gain his Living: Mimum agit ille
Vrbani qualem foecundus Scurra Catulli.
A Delator, i. e. an Informer, because he had secretly accused other Men.)
Domitian did order that this sort of Men should be punished, saying, as
Suetonius does relate it, Qui delatores non castigat, invitat.
Decoratus in the Magistracy, who has discovered himself to be a saucy Buffoon
and an officious Informer? For it is not reasonable to reverence those Men who
have arrived at Honors without deserving them: but if thou see a Man endowed
with Wisdom, thou could not but think him worthy of Reverence and Esteem, and
of the Wisdom with which he is endowed.

Boet. No surely, for Virtue has her proper Worth, which she transfers to
those who are her Votaries. And forasmuch as Honors conferred by the People
cannot make a Man worthy of them, it is clear that they do not contain the
genuine Beauty of true Worth and Dignity: In this Men also ought to be wary;
for if a Man be so much the more abject, by how much the more he is despised of
every one; then Dignities which cannot procure Reverence or Esteem to ill Men,
whom they expose to the World, do necessarily make them more the Subjects of
Contempt and Scorn. Nor do Dignities themselves come off clear; for impious
Persons are revenged on them, since they fully and stain the Brightness of them
by their contagious Villainies. And that thou may know that Esteem and
Reverence cannot be purchased by these transitory and empty Dignities,
consider, that if a Man who has often been Consul, and run through many other
honorable Degrees of Magistracy, should perchance arrive in a barbarous
Nation, would his Honors, do thou think, make him be reverenced by those
Barbarians? Further, if it were of the Nature of Dignities to make Men
venerable and reverenced, it would perform that Office in all Places, amongst
all Nations, and at all times; as Fire, wherever it is, never parts with its
innate Quality of being hot. But because Honors do not proceed from any Power
in themselves, but arise from the false Opinion of Men, they immediately
vanish, when they chance to be amongst those who do not esteem them to be
Dignities. But this is amongst foreign Nations. Let me then ask thee, if they
always endure even with those from whom they have their Beginnings? The
Pretorship.] The Roman Pretors, as their Lawyers relate, at the Beginning were
the Magistrates who proposed only the Edicts, and the Matter of which the
Senate was to consult; but in process of time they obtained, by the Consent of
the People, the Power of making Edicts and Laws themselves. Afterward much of
their Business was to take care of, and to exhibit, at their own Expense, the
Circensian and Scenick Plays: From hence the Pretorian Dignity is here called
by our Author, Inane Nomen and gravis Sarcina.
Pretorship heretofore was a great and honorable Employ, and much sought
after, but now it is only an empty Name, and an heavy Addition to the Senator's
Expense, who ever heretofore had the The Praefectus annonae, or he who provided
the public Corn, was heretofore so great an Officer amongst the Romans, that
Augustus himself accepted of that Prefecture, and either held it so long as he
lived, or but a little before his Death he did substitute C. Turrianus: but in
the time of Boethius that Office was so embased, that it only had the Inspection
of the Bakers and Sellers of Swine, as Cassiodorus relates, lib. 6. variar.
form. 18.
Superintendency of the Markets, and was to provide Corn for the People, and
had the Care of the public Victuals, and was esteemed great and honorable;
but now what is there more vile and abject than that Employ? So that what I
said a little before is very clear, that the thing which has no proper innate
Beauty, must necessarily sometimes be splendid and admired, and sometimes
undervalued and slighted, as the Opinion of the People flows or ebbs. If
Dignities therefore cannot give Men Reverence and Esteem, if they become vile
by the Contagion of ill Men, if they lose their Luster by the Change of times,
if they are esteemed worthy, or otherwise according to the Estimation of Men,
what Beauty then is there in them which should make them desirable, or what
Dignity can they confer on others?


METRUM IV.
Quamvis se Tyrio superbus Ostro
Comeret and niveis Lapillis, etc.
Nero, with Purple and with Pearl adorned,
Was hated, and by all Men loathed and scorned;
The Senators with Curule.] This, as was said before, was the Chair made of
Ivory, and carved, in which the Chief Magistrates were carried to the
Senate House. Cuilibet his fasces dabit: eripietque Curule,
Cui volet importunus Ebur, frater, pater, add.
Hor. l. 1. Ep. 6. Sigua quoque in sella nossem formata Curuli
Et totum Numidae sculptile dentis opus.
Ovid. l. 4. de Pont. Ec. 9. Praetor adest vacuoque loco cessere Curules.
Lucan. lib. 3. Nero did confer this and other Ensigns of Dignity upon those
Senators whom he favored most: and because they were disposed rather at the
Will of the Emperor than upon the Consideration of Desert in those who
possessed them, they are styled by our Author indecoros Curules.
Curule Chairs he graced,
Which Gift the Giver's Luxury yet embas'd:
Who then can think that true Felicity
Resides in Honors, which we daily see
An impious Tyrant's gaudy Donatives to be?
PROSA V.
Phil. CAN Kingdoms or the Familiarity of Princes make a Man mighty?


Boet. How can it be otherwise, since their Felicity does always endure?


Ph. But mistake not, for both Antiquity and the present Times abound with
Examples of Kings and Potentates who have been forced to change an happy for a
calamitous Estate. And then we may justly cry out, how great and glorious a
thing is Power, which is not of Ability to preserve even it self? But if
Dominion and the Rule over many People be the efficient Cause of Happiness,
does not it follow, that if it be defective in any Part, it must necessarily
diminish that Happiness and introduce Misery? But although humane Empires
extend themselves far and wide, there must of necessity be many People over
which every King can have no Command; and on whatsoever Hand this Power which
constitutes Happiness shall fail, there must Impotence enter, which causes
Misery. Hence therefore it is natural to aver, that Princes must have a larger
Portion of Misery than of its contrary. A A Tyrant.] He means Dionysius King of
Sicily, who has been noted by all succeeding Ages for his tyrannical
Government. His History is so well known, that I need only mention here, that
one Damocles flattering Dionysius, and extolling the Happiness which he thought
he did enjoy in the possession of great Power and Wealth, the Tyrant attired
him one Day as a King, and ordered a Royal Table and Service to be prepared for
him, that he might have a Taste of that Felicity which he so much applauded:
but whilst Damocles was in his Royal Robes with delicious Fare before him,
Orders were given to hang a naked Sword with the Point downwards just over his
Head, and only fastened by an Hair; which when Damocles perceived, he could not
eat nor take any Pleasure in his Royal Attendance. By which Dionysius made him
perceive that the Life of a Prince (though living in great State and Plenty) is
very uncomfortable, since he is continually wrested and tormented with Cares
and Fear. Districtus Ensis cui super impia
Cervice pendet, non Siculae dapes
Dulcem elaborabunt saporem.
Non avium citharaeque cantus
Somnum reducent.
Hor. l. 3: Carm. Ode 1.
certain Tyrant who well understood the Danger of his Condition, did well
express the Fears and Cares which attend Government by the Terror of a naked
Sword hanging over a Man's Head. What then is this thing called Power, which
cannot expel Care, nor banish Fear? Men desire to live secure, but cannot; and
yet they glory in and boast of their Power. Can thou believe him to be
powerful, whom thou see not able to do what he would? or him mighty, who goes
surrounded with a Guard, to terrify those of whom he himself is more afraid,
and whose Power is seated in the Number of his Attendance? And now why should I
trouble my self to discourse of the Favorites of Princes, when I have showed
even Kingdoms themselves to be subject to so much Imbecility? especially since
these gaudy things are often disgraced and ruined, as well when the Prince is
fortunate as when he is unhappy. Nero would allow Seneca.] He was a Philosopher
of the Sect of the Stoics, and born at Corduba in Spain; he was Uncle to Lucan
the Poet, and Tutor to the Emperor Nero, (anno Chapter 60.) who afterward
sentenced him, that he might possess his Wealth, to drink Poison, which working
not its Effect with him, he ordered him to be put into an hot Bath, and his
Veins to be opened, out of which the Blood flowing, he gently expired. Tacitus
says, that when one of the Centurions was sent to him to denounce the
Certainty of his Death, he said, Neque aliud superesse post matrem fratremque
interfectos, quam ut educatoris, praeceptorisque necem adjicere; That there was
nothing now left for him to do after the Murder of his Mother and Brother, but
to add that of his Teacher and Master to them.
Seneca his Friend and Tutor this only Favor, to choose the manner of his Death
after he had condemned him. The Emperor Antoninus.] He was surnamed Caracalla,
and was Successor to Severus in the Roman Empire, having killed his Brother
Geta. The Impiousness of which Fact he ordered Papinian to excuse or wipe off
to the Senate and the People: Papinian refused to do it, saying, that Parricide
was sooner committed than concealed; and that it was another kind of Parricide
to accuse an innocent Person murdered: which Refusal so irritated Antoninus,
that he commanded he should be killed by his Soldiers.
Antoninus exposed Papinian.] He was a most famous Lawyer, and is said to have
excelled all those who preceded and followed his time in the Knowledge of his
Profession: He succeeded to Scaevola, whose Disciple he was in the
Administration of the Affairs relating to the Treasury of the Emperor Severus,
to whom he was related by his second Wife; and was so well esteemed by that
Emperor, that when he died he left his Sons to his Care.
Papinian, who had long been great at Court, to fall by the Swords of his
Soldiers. Both of them would willingly have renounced their Authority; and
Seneca was willing to have given his whole Estate, and all his Riches into the
Hands of Nero, and to have retired: but whilst the Force of Fate pushed them on
toward their Fall, neither of them could accomplish what they desired to have
done. What then is this Power, of which Men, even when they enjoy it, are
afraid? of which, when they are desirous, they are not sure nor safe? and
which, when they would lay it down, they cannot be acquitted of it? Are those
Friends to be trusted to in time of need, whose Friendship is not founded upon
Virtue, but upon thy Fortune? Believe it, they whom thy happy Estate have made
so, will change when that is altered; and when thou art miserable, they will be
thy Enemies. And what Plague in the World can be greater, or hurt thee more
than such an Enemy who has gained an Intimacy with thee?


METRUM V.
Qui se volet esse potentem,
Animos domet ille feroces, etc.
He to his Passions Laws must give,
Who would at Fame and Power arrive;
He must not too himself forget,
And to Lust's servile Yoke submit.
Although thy Laws and Power extend
To fruitful India.] It Is so called from the River Indus, and is a vast
Territory terminating Asia toward the East, although here it is taken for the
East.
India's distant Land;
Though frozen Thule] Was the last of the Islands which the Romans had
discovered, and lay the most Northerly of all toward the West; wherefore here
it is taken for the West. It is generally believed to be Iceland, and depends
upon the King of Denmark as King of Norway. About the End of the 9th Century it
began to be frequented by the Europeans.
Thule's stubborn Brow
Should to thy dreadful Scepter bow;
Yet if black Care invades thy Breast,
If Grief and Plaints do thee molest,
Thou neither powerful art, nor blessed.
PROSA VI.
BUT O how deceitful often, and how deformed is the thing called Glory! Hence not
without Reason did the Tragedian exclaim; (...). O Glory, Glory, there are
thousands of Men who have deserved nothing, whose Lives nevertheless thou have
rendered famous! for many have surreptitiously gotten to themselves great Names
by the false and mistaken Opinions of the Vulgar, than which nothing can be
more mean and base: For they who are praised and applauded undeservingly, must
needs, if they have any Modesty, be ashamed and blush at the Recital of their
own Praises. But if Esteem and Praise be purchased by Desert, what Satisfaction
yet can they add to the Mind of a wise Man, who measures not his Good by
popular Rumor, but by the just Rules of Truth and Conscience? And if it seem a
fair and noble thing for a Man to have made himself famous, and to have
propagated his Name, then by Consequence it must be adjudged the contrary, not
to have done so. But since, as I have before demonstrated, there must be many
People in the Earth whom the Renown of one Man could never reach, then of
necessity it must follow, that he whom thou accountest glorious, must to the
greatest part of the World be inglorious and obscure. Amongst these things I do
not think popular Favor to be worthy to be taken notice of, which is neither
the Product of Judgment, nor ever was or can be of Duration. And now who does
not see how vain, how empty, and how uncertain Titles of Nobility are? which if
referred to Renown, they are wholly foreign to it: For Nobility seems to be
that Fame and Praise which proceeds from the Merits of Ancestors. Now if
Praise can give Nobility, they necessarily are noble who are praised. Then it
follows thou can derive no Splendour from the Nobility of another, if thou
have none of thine own. But if there be any Good and Advantage in Nobility, I
think it is only this, that it serves to impose a kind of Necessity upon those
who possess it, of not degenerating from the Virtues of their Progenitors.

METRUM VI.
Omne hominum genus in terris
Simili consurgit ab ortu, etc.
The many Nations of the teeming Earth
Do from the same Beginning spring;
To the same fruitful Loins they owe their Birth,
They have one Father and one King:
He to the Moon gave Horns, and gave the Ray
To Phoebus, which adorns the welcome Day:
His Love and Bounty gave the Earth to Men,
These did with Stars adorn the Sky;
He in the Body did the Soul inshrine,
Which noble Part he sent from high.
All Beings therefore from this Source do flow,
Out of this Root these noble Branches grow.
If Men consider then from whence they rise,
Why should they boast of Pedigree?
On God their Maker let them cast their Eyes,
And no one can ignoble be
But he who meanly does to Vice submit,
And does his noble Origin forget.
PROSA VII.
WHY should I here discourse of the Pleasures of the Body, the Desire of which
is full of Anxiety, and the satisfying of them, of Repentance? What dangerous
Diseases, what intolerable Pains, being like-Fruits of Iniquity, do they bring
to the Bodies of those who enjoy them? and what Joys are to be found in the
Motions of them, I confess I know not. But this I know, that whoever will call
to mind his Luxury and Lusts, shall find much Bitterness in the Issue of them.
If these things can make Men happy, I see no Cause why Beasts also may not be
said to be in a possibility of obtaining Happiness, since by their Instinct
they are urged to intend and pursue bodily Delights. The Satisfaction of having
a Wife and Children were great, but it has been said, though against Nature,
that some in their Children have found Tormentors: How biting and uneasy the
Condition of such is, it is not necessary to tell thee, who have before this
tried it, and who art now under so great a Discomposure. In this I approve the
Opinion of Euripides.] Though he was a Poet, yet he was also a Philosopher, and
Disciple to Anaxagoras, and in his Andromache he has the Expression which our
Author quotes above.
Euripides, who said, that he who has no Children is happy in his Misfortune.

METRUM VII.
Habet omnis hoc voluptas,
Stimulis agit fruentes, etc.
Those who do Pleasures court, must find
That they will leave a Pain behind:
And as the busy Be
Away does fly when she
Has Honey given; so they
Will with no Person stay;
And like that angry Insect so
They sorely wound the Enjoyer too.
PROSA VIII.
FROM what I have said then it may without doubt appear, that all these
mentioned Ways are wrong and deceitful, and cannot lead Men to that Happiness
which they promise: And with how many Evils and Inconveniences they are
perplexed, I shall soon show thee. Consider then thus; Have thou a mind to
amass Wealth? then thou must bereave the Possessor of it. Would thou shine in
Dignities and Titles? thou must supplicate him who is the Fountain of them, and
who only can confer them; and so thou who desire to out-go others in Honor,
shall by meanly asking it become contemptible. Do thou affect Power? thou will expose thy self to Danger, by subjecting thy self to the Traps and Snares
of those who are under thee. Art thou desirous of Glory? being distracted by
sharp and severe Dispensations, thou shall forgo thy Security and Quiet.
Would thou lead a voluptuous Life? think then that all Men will scorn and
contemn him who is a Slave to that vile and frail thing, his Body. And now upon
how weak a Foundation do they build, upon how uncertain a Possession do they
rely, who value and affect corporal Delights? Can thou surpass the Elephant
in Bulk, or the Ox in Strength? Can thou excel the Tigers in Swiftness?
Behold the vast Space and Extention of the Heavens, their Firmness, and the
Swiftness of their Motions, and then at length cease to admire vile or less
things. Nor is the Heaven more to be admired for these Qualities mentioned,
than for those exact Orders and Methods by which it is governed. How fleeting,
and of how short Duration is Beauty and Exactness of Feature, how swiftly it
passes, fading sooner than a vernal Flower! For as Aristotle says, if a Man
had the Eyes of a A Lynx.] It is a Proverb now to see with the Eyes of a Lynx,
which did arise thus; Linceus is said to have been the first who found out
Mines of Brass, of Silver, and of Gold: from hence it was fabled that he was so
sharp-sighted, that he could with his Eyes pierce through the Earth, and see
what was done in Hell. Non possis oculo quantum contendere Linceus,
Non tamen idcirco contemnas Lippus inungi.
Horat. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 1.
Lynx, that so he might pierce through every Medium which should oppose him,
would not he, if he looked into the inward Recesses of the Body of Alcibiades.]
He was General of the Athenians, one of great Endowments, and very beautiful:
At first his Life was very vicious, but afterward, by the Instructions and
Persuasions of Socrates, he changed his Manners and became virtuous.
Alcibiades, whose outward Form was so fair and charming, find it noisome and
foul? And therefore thy Nature does not make thee appear beautiful, but the
Infirmity of the Eyes of thy Beholders. Esteem bodily Goods as much as thou will, but consider, that what thou so much admirest may in three Days be shaken
and dissolved by the raging Fires of a Fever. From all which we may gather
this, that those things which cannot confer those Goods which they promise, nor
are perfect and consummate by a general Meeting of all Goods in themselves, can
neither always conduct to Happiness, nor by themselves make any one happy.

METRUM VIII.
Eheu quae miseros tramite devios
Abducit ignorantia, etc.
Alas! what Ignorance does blindly lead
Poor Mortals from the noble Paths of Good!
And does with vain Imaginations feed
Their Minds of that which is not understood!
Upon the bearing Tree we find not Gold,
Nor will the Vine a Diamond afford;
Who would his Nets upon the Hills unfold,
Hoping with Fish so to supply his Board?
The early Hunter who designs to chase
The Royal Heart, or the swift-footed Roe,
To the wide Forest will himself address,
And will not to the Tyrrhene.] The Tyrrhene Sea is that part of the
Mediterranean Sea which washes the Southern Coast of Italy, as the Adriatic
does the Northern. Gens inimica mihi Tyrrhenum navigat aequor.
Virgil. Aeneid. l. 1.
Tyrrhene Waters go.
Some Men the Sea's profoundest Bottom sound,
And do the Closets of the Deep descry,
Can tell where the most Orient Pearls are found,
And where that Fish which yields the Purple Die.
They know the Shores which most frequented are
By all the tendrest of the scaly Fry,
They can describe the Coast exactly where
The fierce Sea-Vrchine.] It is a Fish covered with a Shell, and said to be of
a fierce Nature; and, as Aristotle witnesses, was often eaten by the Ancients.
Sed non omne mare est generosae fertile testae,
Murice Bajano melior Lucrina Peloris:
Ostrea Circaeis, Miseno oriuntur Echini;
Pectinibus patulis jactat se molle Tarentum.
Horat. Satyr. l. 2. Sat. 4.
Sea-Vrchine and his young ones lie.
Yet they, because the sovereign Good lies hid,
Are idely willing ever to be blind;
And what above the Pole conceals its Head
They vainly think upon the Earth to find.
What Wish can to their Folly equal be?
Honors and Riches may such Men pursue,
And these false Goods obtained, then may they see,
Too late the Worth and Value of the true.
PROSA IX.
LET it suffice that I have hitherto described the Form of counterfeit
Happiness: So that if thou considerest well, my Method will lead me to give to
thee a perfect Draught of the true.

Boet. I now see plainly that Men cannot arrive at a full Satisfaction by
Riches, nor at Power by enjoying Principalities or Kingdoms, nor at Esteem and
Reverence by the Accession of Dignities, nor at Nobility by Glory, nor at true
Joy by carnal Pleasures.


Ph. Thou say well, but know thou the Causes of all these?


Bo. I perceive them by the small Light I can afford to my self, but I should
be very glad to know them more fully from thee.


Ph. The Reason is most obvious, for humane Error does separate and divide that
which is simple, and by Nature indivisible, and does transport it from that
which is true and perfect to their contrary. Let me ask thee, can that, do
thou think, which needs nothing want Power?


Bo. No, I am not of that Opinion.


Ph. Thou think right indeed; for if there be any thing which, upon any
occasion of Performance, does show a Weakness or want of Power, it must, as to
that, necessarily need foreign Aid.


Bo. So it is.


Ph. And therefore Sufficiency and Power are of one Nature.


Bo. So it truly seems.


Ph. And think thou that things of this kind are to be undervalued and
contemned, or rather to be reverenced of all?


Bo. They are doubtless worthy of Reverence.


Ph. Let us then add to Sufficiency and Power Reverence, and so then judge of
these three as one.


Bo. Let us join them then, because the Truth must be confessed.


Ph. What do thou think then? Is that an obscure and ignoble thing which is
graced with these three great Attributes of Self-sufficiency, Power and
Reverence, or otherways is it noble and worthy of Fame? Consider then, as we
have granted before, that he who wants Gifts of Fortune; who is most powerful,
and most worthy of Renown, if he, I say, want Fame, which he cannot give to
himself, he may on that hand, in some measure, seem more weak and abject.


Bo. I cannot indeed deny it, but aver as it is, that Renown attends the
aforesaid things.


Ph. Then by consequence Renown differs nothing from the three abovementioned
Attributes.


Bo. I grant it.


Ph. Must not then that thing which wants not the Help of another, which can by
its own Strength perform every thing which is famous and reverend, of necessity
be joyful also, and always pleasant?


Bo. I cannot indeed well comprehend how any Grief or Trouble can possess the
Breast of one in those Circumstances.


Ph. Then we may well grant that such are always in a State of Joy, if what I
have said be true. And then may we also grant Self-sufficiency, Power,
Nobility, Reverence and Pleasure, do differ only in Name, but not in Essence or
Substance.


Bo. It is necessarily so.


Ph. Then therefore that which is one simple Nature is torn violently asunder
by the Pravity of Men; and whilst they endeavor for a part of a thing which
wants Parts, they neither get that Part, nor the entire thing which they so
much desire.


Bo. How can that be?


Ph. Why thus; He who in amassing Riches proposes only to himself the end of
avoiding Poverty, is no way solicitous to obtain Power; he had rather be
unknown and obscure, and chooses rather to withdraw from himself many natural
Pleasures, than run the hazard of losing that Money which he has gathered. But
surely such an one by this means does not purchase Self-sufficiency, when he
loses Power, when he is pricked with Trouble, when his sordid Ways make him be
looked upon as an Outcast, when he is hidden in Obscurity. If we come to the
Person who only aims at Power, he squanders away Riches, he despises
Pleasures, he slights Honor which is not accompanied with Power, and contemns
Glory. So then thou see how many things that Man wants. For often he must
stand in need of Necessaries, he must be subject to great Anxieties; and when
he cannot drive away these things, he shows clearly his want of that which he
did most affect, I mean Power. One may also reason thus of Honors, of Glory,
and of Pleasures. For whilst every one of these is the same with the rest,
whoever endeavors to obtain any of these without the other, loses that which
he desires.


Bo. What then if a Man should desire to gain all these things together?


Ph. I would then say, that he has a mind to arrive at the sovereign Good; but
can it be thought that it shall ever be found in these Acquisitions, which I
have showed already, not to be able to perform any thing they promise?


Bo. No surely.


Ph. In these things therefore which are believed able to satisfy our Desires,
we must by no means seek for Happiness.


Bo. I confess it, and nothing can be said more truly than this.


Ph. Thou have now then the Form and Causes of that adulterate sophisticate
Felicity: now turn again the Eyes of thy Consideration upon the contrary
Prospect, and thou shall soon comprehend that true and genuine Happiness which
I so long have promised thee.


Bo. That a blind Man may see, and who runs may read it, for thou shewedst it
to me before, when thou did endeavor to open to me the Causes of its
Counterfeit: for if I be not mistaken, that is the true consummate Felicity
which makes a Man self-sufficient, powerful, reverenced, noble and pleasant.
And that thou may know that thy Sayings have sunk deep into my Understanding,
I say, I know that that which one of these (for they are all one) can truly
perform is, without doubt, the chief Good and true Happiness.


Ph. O my Pupil, thou art most happy in this Opinion, provided thou will add
this to it, which I shall offer to thee.


Bo. What is that?


Ph. Think thou that any thing on this side Heaven can confer that Good of
which thou speak.


Bo. I think not indeed; and thou have already showed me, that nothing can be
desired beyond such a State of Perfection.


Ph. These things then abovementioned either confer the Likeness of the true
Good, or else they seem to give me some imperfect Good; but the true and
perfect one this can by no means afford.


Bo. I agree with you.


Ph. Seeing then thou know already which is the true Happiness, and which
the false one, it remains thou should be informed from what Fountain to
derive that true one.


Bo. That I indeed expect with much Impatience.


Ph. But as Plato says in his Timaeus.] Timaeus amongst his Verses mentions
this Precept of Pythagoras: -- (...),
(...).
-- Finem dein ante precatus
Numina, opus facito.
Pythag. in aur. Carm. From whence Plato says in his Book which he names
Timaeus, (...) That every one who has but the lea^^ more of a good Mind and
Inclination when he begins any thing, be it great or small, is always wont
to call upon God.
Timaeus, that even in the least things the Divine Assistance ought to be
implored, what do thou think is fit to be done, that we may deserve to find
the true Source and Seat of the sovereign Good?


Bo. I think we ought to invoke the Father and Governor of all things, for
without such an Invocation no Work is well begun.


Ph. Thou say right. And then she warbled out this Divine Orison.


METRUM IX.
O qui perpetua mundum ratione gubernas, etc. O thou who with perpetual Reason
rul'st
The World, great Maker of the Heaven and Earth!
Who do From Ages.] Philosophy makes a difference betwixt Eternity, Age, and
Time, which are several kinds of Duration. Eternity belongs to that Being which
was without a Beginning, and will be without an End, as God. An Age or Aevum is
of that thing which is indeed without an End, but not without a Beginning, viz.
of a created thing, such as is the Mind and Body, of which there is no other
than an exterior Cause; for those being created by God, shall endure for ever.
Time is of that thing which is neither without Beginning nor without End, as of
a Corporeal Form, such as is the Form of a Beast, the Form of a Plant, and the
Form of inanimate Bodies.
from Ages make swift Time proceed,
And fixed thy self, make all things else to move!
Whom Exterior.] Philosophy usually assigns four Causes, viz. the Final, the
Efficient, the Material, and the Formal; the two former are called Exterior,
the two latter Interior Causes. The Bodies which they call Physical or
Natural, such as are the Heaven and the Earth, have both interior and
exterior Causes; and created Minds have not interior but only exterior ones.
But God has neither interior nor exterior Causes; therefore he could not be
compelled to create this World either by a final or an efficient Cause.
exterior Causes did not force to frame
This Work of Floating Matter.] The word is rightly called Matter, because it
is a thing extended every way, as Matter is. It is well also called fluitous or
floating, since the Heaven, the Earth, and all other Bodies of which the World
consists, are perpetually moved, if not in all, yet in most of their Parts.
floating Matter, but the Form
Of sovereign Good, Above black Envy.] God is rightly said here, livore carere,
because being not forced to create the World by any external Cause, but by the
Form of the chief Good which was fixed in his Mind, that is, by his Will and
his infinite Wisdom. Livor in our Author means no other than Envy, and God is
rightly said to want Envy, having no Being which he can envy, himself being the
chief Good by whom and for whom the World was made; and there can be nothing
better than the chief Good.
above black Envy placed,
Within thy Breast: thou every thing do draw
From the supreme Example; fairest thy self,
Bearing the World's Figure in thy Mind,
Thou formedst this after that Prototype,
And did command it should have perfect Parts.
Thou by harmonious Measures fast do bind
The Elements, that cold things may with hot,
And moist with dry agree, lest subtle Fire
Should fly too high, or Weight should press the Earth
And Water lower than they now are placed.
Thou do the The Middle Soul.] Here our Philosopher means the Spirit or
Soul of the Universe, which was born with the Law of Nature, after the
Production of the Elements of the World. It is rightly also by our Author
called, 1. Anima. 2. Triplicis naturae media. 3. Cuncta movere. 4. A Deo
connecti. 5. Per consona membra resolvi. 6. Secta circuire. First this
Universal Spirit or Soul is acknowledged not only by the sacred Authors, but
also by the profane, as Plato, Aristotle, and many others. Principio coelum and
terras camposque liquentes,
Lucentemque globum Lunae, Titaniaque astra
Spiritus intus alit: totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem; and magno se corpore miscet.
Inde hominum pecudumque genus, vitaeque volantum,
Et quae marmoreo fert monstra sub aequore pontus.
Igneus est ollis vigor and coelestis origo
Seminibus: quantum non noxia corpora tardant,
Terrenique hebetant artus, moribundaque membra.
Hinc metaunt, cupiuntque, dolent, gaudentque: nec auras
Recipient, clausae tenebris and carcere caeco.
Virgil. Aeneid. l. 6. v. 724. Secondly, this Soul is said to be of a threefold
Nature; not that it consists of three Elements, as some think, but because it
is one, and the middle one also, of three things, which by our natural Light we
can know and distinguish; to wit, it is placed betwixt the Mind, which we
cannot perceive by our Senses, and the Body which we may. Thirdly, it is said,
cuncta movere, not because all Bodies are moved by this Spirit or Soul; for
many are solid, whose Parts do therefore rest and are quiet; but because no
Bodies may be moved unless this do move. Fourthly, it is said, a Deo connecti,
because as no Body does move but by Touch or Contact, so this Soul or Spirit of
the World cannot move unless it be connected with the Body to be moved; but it
was connected by God, by whom, when it was first made, it was moved by those
Laws of Nature which God himself did constitute. Fifthly, it is said, per
consona membra resolvi, because this anima mundi is a most liquid Body, whose
Parts, as they are moved and resolved into diverse Places, so they enter the
different Members of the informed Body. But these Members are agreeing as
amongst themselves, so with this Soul or Spirit, by which they are to be moved;
so that the lesser Members have Motion first from the Soul, then the greater
from the lesser Members, and also from the Soul. Lastly, it is said, secta
circuire, because joining its End to the Beginning of its Motion, it may seem
to form that Motion into a round: And it is cut or divided, because it being
liquid, as Water or Air, it is a Mass or Congeries of several little Bodies,
which, as they are moved, are separated one from the other. This Soul is said
to circulate through the Body in which it does reside, because every Body,
unless it be resisted, continues its Motion: So the Sap of a Tree does rather
choose to ascend to the Top of it, than to press it self through the Bark: and
it is easier for this Spirit or Soul to circulate in its Body, than to go out
of it, several Bodies being ready every where to resist it.
Middle Soul firmly connect
Of the threefold Nature, which each thing does move,
Then by agreeing Numbers it resolv'st;
When that is done, and cut into two Orbs,
It moves about returning to it self,
And then incompassing the Mind profound,
Does by that fair Idea turn the Heaven.
Thou by such Causes do produce all Souls
And All Souls and lesser Lives.] Our Philosopher means by this humane Souls,
and those also of vegetative and sensitive Creatures; and he gives to them the
Epithet of Minores, because they are included in lesser Vehicles or Machines;
putting this Difference however between Man and other Creatures, that there is
in him, besides this corporeal Spirit which is subservient to principal Form, a
Mind which has the Faculty of thinking: from whence it is that this corporeal
Spirit loses in a Man its Name and Dignity, and therefore it may be said that
in a Man there is only one Soul, and that endowed with Reason. Esse apibus
partem divinae mentis, and haustus
Aetherios dixere: Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque, tractusque maris, coelumque profundum.
Hinc pecudes, armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum,
Quemque sibi tenues nascentem arcessere vitas.
Virg. l 4. Georg. v. 220.
lesser Lives, thou make them to be fit
To their light Vehicles, and them do sow
In Heaven and Earth: they then again to thee
By a kind Law, and Ordinance benign,
Like a recoiling Flame gladly revert.
O Father, let our Minds ascend on high,
And view thy Throne august! let them behold
The Fountain of all Good; and when we have
Found the true Light, may our Minds, Eyes on thee,
The noblest Object, be for ever fixed!
Dispel the Mists, remove the mighty Bulk
Of Earth-bred-weight, and in thy Splendour shine,
For thou art ever clear! thou to the Good
Art Peace and Rest; whoever sees thee,
Sees End, Beginning, Bearer, Leader, Path, in one!
PROSA X.
NOW that thou have had the Character of the true, and also of the false
Felicity truly represented to thee, I think it time to show thee in what the
Perfection of Happiness is placed. And whilst we are in quest of this, I think
our best Method will be to examine, whether there can in Nature be such a Good
as that which thou have before defined, lest the Vanity of Imagination, and
Heat of Thought, should deceive us, and carry us beyond the Truth of the Matter
subjected to our Inquiry. But that such a thing does exist, and that it is as
it were the Fountain of all Good, cannot be denied; for every thing which is
said to be imperfect is proved to be so by the Diminution of that which is
perfect. Hence it is that if any thing in any kind be said to be imperfect, it
is presently understood that in it there is also something perfect. For if
Perfection be taken away, no Man can tell in what that which is said to be
imperfect can exist. For Nature does not derive her Origin from things
diminished and inconsummate, but proceeding from an entire and absolute
Substance, she extends her self in the remotest and most fruitless Beings. So
that if, as before I have demonstrated, there be a certain imperfect Felicity,
a fading Good, there must also be, without doubt, a solid and perfect one. It
is most logically and truly concluded (said I). But where this does reside
(continued she) thus consider; That God the Governor of all things is good, is
proved by the universal Opinion of all Men. For since nothing can be found out
which is better than God, who will deny Him to be good, than whom nothing can
be better? Reason then does so clearly demonstrate that God is good, that at
the same time it evinceth the sovereign Good to be in him. For if it were not
so, he could not be the Ruler of all things; for there would be some Being
excelling him, which would possess the perfect Good, and in this World seem to
excel him, and be antienter than he. We have already shown that all perfect
things excel those which are less perfect. Wherefore that we may not infinitely
produce our Reasons, it must be confessed that the great God is full of the
greatest and most perfect Goodness. But we have already shown that perfect
Goodness is true Happiness. Therefore it necessarily follows that true and
consummate Happiness resides only in the great and most perfect God. This
(returned I) I apprehend aright, nor can I by any means say against it. Then I
pray thee (says she) see how well and irrefragably thou can prove what I
have said, to wit, that God is wholly replenished with the sovereign Good. How
shall I do that? (replied I). Do thou presume (said she) that the Father of
all things has received this sovereign Good, with which he is proved to
abound, from any thing without himself, or that he has it so naturally that
thou should imagine that He possessing it, and Happiness possessed, are of
different Substances? If thou do think that he received it from any foreign
Hand, thou must imagine the Giver to be more excellent than the Receiver. But
that God is the most excellent of all Beings, most worthily we confess, if we
own then that the sovereign Good is in him by Nature; and yet we may conceive
that it is not the same that he is, since we speak of God, who is the Prince of
Nature, let him who can find out who it was that joined these so differing
things. Lastly, whatever does essentially differ from any thing, it cannot be
said to be that from which it is understood to differ. Therefore that which is
in its Nature differing from the chief Good, cannot be said to be the Good it
self: which to think of God would be most impious and profane, since nothing
can excel him in Goodness and Worth. Nothing that ever was can in its Nature be
better than that from which it draws its Beginnings. Wherefore that which is
the Principle of all things must, as to its Substance, with the truest reason
be concluded to be the chief of Goods.

Boet. Most right.


Phil. But Happiness was before granted to be the chief of Goods.


Bo. So it was.


Ph. Therefore it must necessarily be confessed that God is the very Happiness.


Bo. I cannot oppose the Reasons you have given, and I confess you have drawn a
very right Conclusion from your Premises.


Ph. Look then a little further, and see if this Truth can be proved more
firmly thus, to wit, that there cannot be two sovereign Goods which differ in
themselves: For it is clear, that of the Goods which differ, one cannot be what
the other is; wherefore neither can be perfect when one wants the other. But it
is evident, that that which is not perfect cannot be sovereign; therefore those
which are the chief Goods can by no means be diverse in their Natures. But I
have rightly concluded that Good and Happiness are the chief Good: wherefore
the highest Divinity must certainly be the highest Happiness.


Bo. Nothing can be truer than this; nothing by the Course of Reasoning more
firm; nor can any Conclusion be made more becoming of the Divine Majesty.


Ph. Upon the whole Matter then, as Geometricians, after they have demonstrated
their Propositions, are wont to infer and draw their (...) or Consequences, in
the same manner shall I deduce to thee something like a Corollary, thus:
Because by the attaining of Beatitude Men are happy, and Beatitude is Divinity
it self, by the attaining of Divinity it is manifest that Men are made happy.
But as from Men's being endowed with the Virtue of Justice, they are denominated
Just; and from that of Prudence they are pronounced Wise, so should they who
are possessed of Divinity by parity of reason be esteemed Gods. Every happy Man
then is a God; but by Nature there is only One, yet by suffering others to
participate of the Divine Essence nothing hinders but there may be Many.


Bo. This truly is a very fair and most precious, call it Deduction or
Corollary, which you please.


Ph. But there can be nothing nobler than that which Reason commands us to
subjoin to this.


Bo. What is that?


Ph. It is this, Since Happiness seems to comprehend in it many things, to
consider whether they all, by the Variety of Parts conjoined, do constitute the
Body of Happiness; or whether there may be any one amongst them which may
complete the Substance of it, and to which all the rest may be referred.


Bo. I could wish that thou would open these things to me by recounting them.


Ph. Do not we account Happiness a Good?


Bo. Yes certainly, and the chiefest.


Ph. Add then that Good to all the aforesaid things, for that Happiness which
is Self-sufficiency is also the Height of Power, of Reverence, of Nobility, of
Pleasure. What say thou then, are all these things, as Self-sufficiency,
Power, and the rest, Members and constituting Parts of Happiness; or are they,
as all other things are, to be referred to the Sovereign Good as their Source
and Principle?


Bo. I well understand what thou do aim to search for, but I desire to hear
what thou do propose.


Ph. Observe then the thing thus sifted and distinguished upon. If all these
things were Members of Happiness, they would differ amongst themselves; for it
is of the Nature of differing Parts to compose one Body: But it is already
demonstrated that all things are the same, therefore they are not Parts; for if
so, even out of one of them Happiness might be composed, which is absurd.


Bo. This I doubt not; but I desire to hear that which remains.


Ph. It is clear that all other things are brought to be tried by Good as the
Rule and Square: For Self-sufficiency is therefore desired, because it is
thought to be Good: So also it may be said of Power, Esteem, Nobility,
Pleasure. Good then is the Cause why all things are desired; for that which
neither in Reality nor Show does retain any thing of Good, is by no means to be
desired: On the contrary, whatever by Nature is not good, if yet it seems to be
so, is desired as if it really were so. Hence it is that Goodness, justly
looked upon, is the Cause, the Sum, the Hinge from which all our Desires arise,
in which they center, and upon which they turn. That which is the Cause of our
desiring any thing, seems it self most to be desired. For if any Man desires to
ride abroad because of his Health, he does not so much desire the Motion of
Riding as the Effect of his Health. Since therefore all things are sought after
for the sake of Good, they cannot be more desirable than Good it self. But we
have before showed that it is Happiness for which all these abovesaid things
are desired, where it is clear that only Happiness is sought for. He then who
considers this cannot deny that Good and Happiness are of one and the same
Substance.


Bo. I see no Cause why any Man should dissent from your Opinion.


Ph. And we have showed that God and Happiness are inseparably joined in
Essence.


Bo. You have so done.


Ph. We may then securely conclude that the Nature and Substance of God resides
in Good, and can be sought for no where else.


METRUM X.
Huc omnes pariter venite capti,
Quos fallax ligat improbis catenis
Terrenas habitans libido mentes, etc.
Come hither all! O come to me,
Whom in her impious Chains
Imperious Lust detains,
Which in an earthly Mind affects to be.
Here Ease from Labors you shall find;
This is the Port of Rest,
Which Storms cannot molest;
Here Is Refuge for the sickest Mind.
Whatever Tagus golden Sand,
Or Hermus.] It is a River of the Lesser Asia, called now le Sarabat: It has
its Source in Phrygia the greater, and taking its Course Westward, and being
increased by several Rivers, amongst the rest Pactolus, it enters into the
Aegean Sea by the Bay of Smyrna, and is said to have Golden Sands. Nec pulcher
Ganges, atque auro turbidus Hermus.
Virgil. Georg. l. 1. v. 151.
Hermus in his yellow way,
Can to the World convey,
Or India with its warmer Hand,
Which Diamonds yields, and Pearls both,
Can never clear the Mind,
But rather does it blind;
And in thick Darkness does it clothe.
That which does raise our Thoughts so high,
The mighty shining Bait,
Which so does captivate,
Does in Earth's lowest Caverns lie.
But the gay Light which Heaven does rule,
From which its Force it has,
Does in no obscure Path,
But by clear Light conduct the Soul.
He then who sees that Source of Light,
And will it comprehend,
Compared to it, he will find
That the Sun's Rays are wrapped in Night.
PROSA XI.
Boet. I Assent, and am overcome by the Strength of thy Reasons.


Phil. At how great a rate would thou value this Good, if thou did rightly
know it?


Bo. At an infinite rate; if at the same time I might attain to the Knowledge of
God, who is the true Good.


Ph. That thou shall do so, I shall make clear to thee by undeniable Reasons,
if thou will but grant me those things which a little before I have laid down
as Conclusions.


Bo. I grant them all.


Ph. Have not I made it clear that those things which are desired by most are
not therefore true and perfect Goods, because they differ amongst themselves;
and that when one is absent, the other cannot confer absolute Happiness? And
then that they are the perfect Good when they are molded up into one Form, that
is to say, when Self-sufficiency, Power, Veneration, Renown and Pleasure
collectively meet. For if they be not one and the same thing, they have nothing
to recommend them, or to make them to be numbered amongst desirable things?


Bo. I grant thou have demonstrated these things, nor can they by any means be
doubted of.


Ph. These things then when they are distinct not being Goods, and when they
meet immediately being made Goods, do not they owe their Beings of Good to
Unity?


Bo. So it seems to me.


Ph. But will thou yield that every thing which is good, is so by the
Participation of the sovereign Good, or not?


Bo. It is certainly so.


Ph. Thou must then by the same Reason acknowledge Unity and Good to be the same
thing: for the Substance of those things must be the same, whose Effects do not
naturally differ.


Bo. I cannot deny it.


Ph. Know thou then that every Being does so long endure and subsist as it
is entire and knit together by Unity; but that as soon as it looses that Bond
it is dissolved, and Privation follows?


Bo. How do thou make out that?


Ph. Thus; As in Animals or sensitive Creatures it is plain, the Soul and Body
being united and continuing together, the Being then is called Animal, a living
Creature: but so soon as this Unity is dissolved by the Separation of these, it
immediately perishes, ceasing to be what it was before. The Body also it self,
which whilst it remains in one Form by the Conjunction of its Members, retains
the Form and Resemblance of a Man; but if by dissevering and segregating the
Parts that Oneness is distracted, it is no more what before it was. In the same
manner, if we run through all other Beings, it will surely appear, that every
thing, as long as it preserves Unity does subsist; and if that dies, the other
must also die with it.


Bo. Though I consider never so long, yet I can see no other thing.


Ph. Is there then any thing, which inasmuch as it lives naturally, does forgo
its Desire of Subsisting, and affect Corruption and Annihilation?


Bo. If I consider those living Creatures which have any Power of willing or
refusing, I do not in Nature find any thing, which without some foreign
Impulse, or the Concurrence of outward Accidents, does cast away its Intention
and Desire of subsisting, and willingly hasten to Destruction; for every Animal
is endowed with that great Principle of Self-preservation, and pursues it, and
does eschew Mischief and Death. But if I, casting an Eye upon the Vegetative
World, consider Herbs and Trees, and other inanimate things, I confess I am
under a doubt, and know not well what to think of them.


Ph. But even of these there is no Cause that thou should doubt; for behold
Herbs and Trees first choose a convenient Place to grow in, where their Nature,
as much as it can, hinders them from withering and perishing soon; for some
spring in the Fields, others upon Mountains, others rise in Lakes and Marshes,
others put forth amongst the Stones; some choose the most barren Sands for the
Place of their Birth; and all these, if any Hand should endeavor to transplant
them to any other place, would forthwith wither. But Nature gives to every
thing that which is agreeable to, and convenient for them, and endeavors that
they should not perish before their time. Do thou not know that all Herbs and
Trees, as if their Mouths were fastened downward in the Earth, do draw up their
Nourishment by the Root, and diffuse their Strength and Bark as through their
Marrow? And also that the softest and most tender Matter, as the Pith or Marrow
is, is always laid up in the most inward Cabinet, and covered by a strong Coat
of Wood; and the uppermost Garment of Bark is opposed to the Storms and
Weather, as being fitted best to endure them? And can thou not here behold
and admire the Diligence and Care of Nature, which propagates all things by a
Multiplicity of Seeds, which all Men know are as a Foundation for a Building
not to remain for a time, but as if it were for ever? And even those things
which are thought to be inanimate, do not they by the same Reason desire that
which properly belongs to them, and to preserve their Beings? For why should
Levity carry the Flames upward, and Gravity make the Earth tend downwards
toward its Center, but that these Places and Motions agree with their several
Bodies? Furthermore, whatsoever is agreeable to the Nature of any thing, that
preserves that thing, as that which has an Abhorrency from it corrupts and
destroys it. Now that which is hard, as a Stone, does most tenaciously adhere
together in all its Parts, and resists an easy Dissolution; but what things are
liquid or flowing, as Air and Water, yield easily to those who would separate
them, but soon again return and slide back to those things from which they were
divided: but Fire does utterly refuse any such Division. And now I do not treat
of the voluntary Motions of a knowing and discerning Soul, but of natural
Intention and Instinct. Thus we swallow our Meat without thinking of it, and
draw our Breath in our Sleep without perceiving it: For the Love of Life is not
derived to living Creatures from the Inclinations and Bent of their Souls, but
only from the Principles of Nature; for the Will, often pushed on by urgent
Causes, affects and embraces that Death which Nature fears and abhors: And on
the contrary, we see that the Works of Generation, by which alone the Race of
Men is propagated, and which Nature always affects, often restrained by the
Will. Therefore this Love which every thing bears to it self, does not
proceed from the Motions of the Soul, but from the Intentions of Nature: For
Providence has given to all things created by it, this greatest Cause and
Principle of Duration, to wit, a Desire of existing as long as it can.
Therefore doubt not but every Being has a natural Appetite toward Living, and
an Abhorrence of Dissolution.


Bo. I now confess that plainly, and without doubting, I see those things which
before seemed uncertain to me.


Ph. I go on then; Whatever does desire to subsist and endure, does also desire
Unity; for if this be taken away, its Essence is dissolved.


Bo. That is most true.


Ph. Then all things desire one thing.


Bo. I assent.


Ph. But I have before demonstrated that that one thing must be that which is
good.


Bo. You have so.


Ph. All things therefore desire Good; which Good you may describe to be that
which is desired of all.


Bo. Nothing is truer: For either all things must be reduced to nothing, and so
being destitute of an Head, float and rove about without Governance and Order;
or if there be any thing to which all things do tend, that must be the chief of
all Goods.


Ph. I rejoice but too much, O my Pupil; for thou have fixed in thy Mind the
very middle and manifest Note of Truth: but this thing has been discovered to
thee, because a little before thou said thou were ignorant of it.


Bo. What is that?


Ph. Thou did not know what was the End of all things: And this is it which
every one desires. And because we have from our former Arguments gathered, that
Good is that which is the Subject of all Men's Desires, we must necessarily
confess that Good is the End of all things.


METRUM XI.
Quisquis profunda mente vestigat verum,
Cupitque nullis ille deviis falli, etc.
Who into Truth does deep Researches make,
And would not in his Quest his way mistake,
Let him into himself revolve his Eye,
Collect his Thoughts, each Property espy
Of Beings; let him too instruct his Mind,
That what she seeks without she in her self may find:
Then that which cloudy Error did o'r spread,
Will, like the Sun, exalt its radiant Head.
For when Oblivion did the Mind invade,
It did not wholly Light exterminate.
The generous Seeds of Truth lie close beneath,
And rise when Learning's gentle Zephyrs breath;
Else how could Truth in thy Discourse appear,
Unless its hidden Principles lay there?
So if what Plato in his Phaedo touches upon (...) or Reminiscence. It is said
there that Socrates had frequently this Saying in his Mouth, (...); that is,
that to learn is no other thing than to remember what had been forgotten before.
Plato's Muse did sing is true,
To learn is but Remembrance to renew.
PROSA XII.
Boet. I Now very much assent to Plato, since this second time thou have
brought these things to my remembrance. At first when my Memory was drowned by
the contagious Conjunction of my Body with my Soul, and then when I afterward
lost it in those Pressures of Sorrow under which I labored.


Ph. If thou will a little recollect what thou have granted above, thou will
not be far from remembering that thing of which a little before thou did
confess thy Ignorance.


Bo. What thing was that?


Ph. It was, by what Power the Universe is governed.


Bo. I confess I did in that own my want of Knowledge; but although I have a
Prospect of what thou will infer, yet I desire to hear it made more plain from
thy Mouth.


Ph. A little time before thou did think that there was no Reason to doubt
but that this World was governed by God.


Bo. Nor do I think otherwise now, nor shall I ever think that it ought to be
doubted; and I will briefly recount to you the Reasons which lead me to this
Opinion. The differing and contrariant Parts of which this World is composed,
had never been brought together into one beautiful Form, without the Assistance
of a powerful Hand to join them: And even after such a Conjunction the
disagreeing Qualities of their Natures had dissociated the Parts, and ruined
the Fabric, if the same conjoining Hand had not kept them together: For the
Order and Methods of Nature could not so certainly proceed, nor produce so
regular Motions, disposed and limited according to Times, Places, Actings,
Spaces, and Qualities, unless there were one remaining, fixed and immovable
Being to mesnage so great Varieties of Change. I give this excellent Being,
whatever it is, by which all things created endure, and are actuated and
informed, the known Denomination of God.


Ph. Seeing that thou have so right a Sentiment of these things, there is but
little more to be done now that thou may once more be happy and safe, and
that thou may revisit thy own Country: But let us reflect a little upon what
we have before proposed. Have not we agreed that Sufficiency is of the Nature
of true Happiness? And have we not granted that God is that true Happiness?


Bo. We have.


Ph. And that toward the Government of this World he shall need no Helps or
foreign Instruments? for if he should, he should not then be self-sufficient.


Bo. That necessarily follows.


Ph. Therefore by himself alone he disposes of all things.


Bo. It cannot be denied.


Ph. And I have showed that God is the real Good.


Bo. I remember it well.


Ph. By that Good then does he order every thing, because he governs all things
by himself, whom we have granted to be the Sovereign Good; and he is that great
and certain Rule and Method of Government which keeps the Machine of the World
together, giving it Stability, and preserving it from Corruption.


Bo. I entirely agree to this, and I did foresee before that this was it which
thou were about to say.


Ph. I believe it; and now I believe thy Eyes are more intent upon these great
Truths. But what I shall say is not less open to thy View.


Bo. What is that.


Ph. Since God is rightly believed to govern all things by his Goodness, and
all those things, as I have before taught, to hasten by a natural Bent and
Intention toward Good, can it be doubted but that they voluntarily submit to
his Government, and that of their own Accord they willingly comply with, and
yield up themselves to him their Ruler?


Bo. That must necessarily be, otherwise the Government could not subsist: if
People were suffered to draw different ways, there would be no Safety for those
who obey.


Ph. Is there any Being then, which follows the Dictates of Nature, that
endeavors to go contrary to the Laws of God?


Bo. No surely.


Ph. But if there should be so prepostrous an one, shall it ever be able to
prevail against him, whom by the Right of true Happiness we have granted to be
most powerful?


Bo. If there were such an one, certainly it could never prevail.


Ph. Then there is nothing that either will or can resist this Sovereign Good.


Bo. I think indeed there is nothing.


Ph. It is then the Sovereign Good which rules all things powerfully, and
disposes them softly and harmoniously.


Bo. How am I delighted not only with this Sum and Conclusion of thy Reasons
and Arguments, but much more also with thy very Words! so that at length those
wicked People who impiously have reprehended the Government of God, may blush
and be ashamed of their Folly.


Ph. Thou have read, amongst the Mythologists, the Story of the Giants who
stormed Heaven; but the Divine Arms, according to their Demerits, repelled and
punished them: But will thou now that we commit and compare our Reasons
together? Perhaps by so doing some clear Spark of Truth may break out.


Bo. Do as it pleases thee.


Ph. No Body then will doubt but that God is Omnipotent.


Bo. No Man in his Senses doubts of that.


Ph. And that there is nothing which he who is Almighty cannot do.


Bo. Nothing surely.


Ph. Can God then do Evil?


Bo. No.


Ph. Is Evil nothing? since he cannot do it who can do all things.


Bo. Do thou play with me, leading me by thy Reasons into an inextricable
Labyrinth, which sometimes thou entrest where thou go out, and sometimes
thou go out where thou entrest? Do thou endeavor then to amuse me by thy
intricate Reasonings, enclosing me in a wonderful Circle of Divine Simplicity?
For a little before, beginning at Happiness, thou did declare it to be the
Sovereign Good, and that it did reside in God; then that God himself was that
Good, and the Fullness of Happiness: And hence thou did infer, and give to me
as a Mark of thy Bounty, that no Body could be happy, unless he were God. Again
thou said, that the very Form of Good was the Substance of God and Happiness;
and did teach that that was the only genuine Good which was desired by all
things in Nature. Thou further did argue and demonstrate, that God by his
Goodness did govern the World, and that all things willingly obeyed him, and
that Evil had not any Nature and Existence which might be properly so called:
and these things thou did explain by no strained or far-fetched Reasons, but
by strong and natural Truths, one thing still confirming and verifying another.


Ph. I have not deluded thee, for by the Assistance of God, for which we lately
prayed, we have run through our chief Work: For such is the Nature and Form of
the Divine Substance, that it neither communicates it self to foreign things,
nor receives such into its own Nature; but, as Parmenides says of it, (...).
God is like to a Sphere which is every way round.


He rolleth the moving Globe of the World, whilst himself remains immovable:
And if I have not drawn my Reasons from things without, but those within the
Compass of my Subject, wonder not at it; for as Plato before has taught us,
there ought to be a Consonancy and Alliance betwixt the Word and Matter which
we handle.


METRUM XII.
Felix qui potuit Boni
Fontem visere lucidum, etc.
Too happy were that Mortal who
The lucid Springs of Truth could view!
Ah too too happy would he be,
Who from Earth's Bonds himself could free!
Though the The Threician Poet] was Orpheus the Son of Apollo and Caliope: he
received his Harp either from Apollo or Mercury, and was said to play so
charmingly, that the Woods and Stones moved, that the Floods stopped their
Course when he played, and the wild Beasts, by the Sweetness of his Notes, were
made more mild and tame. He had a Wife named Euridice, who whilst she fled
through a Wood from Aristeus, (who was in love with her, and pursued her) was
bitten by a Serpent, and died. The sad Accident did so much affect Orpheus,
that he went to the infernal Shades, and with the Sweetness of his Notes did so
charm Pluto, that he restored to him his Wife, but upon this condition, that he
should not look upon her till he did reach the higher Regions; but Orpheus his
Love not permitting him to observe this condition, Euridice died again, and
descended to the Place which she had so lately left. The Moral of this Fable
is, that Orpheus, by the Civility of his Manners, and the Goodness of his
Temper and Example, did civilize the barbarous People of Thrace.
Threician Poet's Song
Did make the Woods about him throng;
Though the light Touches of his Hand
Did make the rolling Rivers stand,
And made the Hind fearless abide
Close by the Lion's cruel Side;
And made the timorous Hare not fear
Before the keener Hound to appear;
Yet when the warmer Fires of Love
About his Breast did briskly move,
Those Numbers which did all things tame
Could not assuage their Master's Flame.
He of the Gods above complained,
And to the Shades he did descend:
There he did strike his tuneful Strings,
And with his choicest Art he sings,
Whilst weeping out whatever he
Had learned from fair Caliope,
What Grief could dictate, or what Love,
All that the infernal Powers could move,
He draws his dolorous Song to improve,
Whilst he those Deities does implore
His dead Euridice to restore.
The The three-jaw'd Porter.] Cerberus, a Dog feigned by the Poets to have
three Heads, and to keep the Gates of Hell.
three-jaw'd Porter, grim and fierce,
Struck with the Glories of his Verse,
Did stand amazed: the Furies who
Torment the guilty Souls below,
Did weep, and Tears down their Cheeks did flow.
Ixion.] He was Father of the Centaurs; he slew his Father-in-law: Jupiter took
him up into Heaven, where he would have ravished Juno; which being known to
Jupiter, he put a Cloud in the Place of Juno, in her Shape, of which the
Centaurs were begotten: and being thrown down to the Earth again, for boasting
that he had lain with Juno, Jupiter cast him into Hell, where he was fastened to
a Wheel, with which he was turned about continually. Volvitur Ixion, and se
sequiturque fugitq. Ovid. Metam.
Ixion now no more did reel
Under the Motion of his Wheel,
Whilst thirsty Tantalus.] He was the Son of Jupiter and Plota the Nymph, and
Grandfather to Agamemnon and Menelaus. He once entertaining the Gods, to make a
Trial of their Power, did dress and serve up to the Feast his Son Pelops; which
Fact was so abhorred by the Gods, that for his Punishment he was set in Water
up to the Chin, and Apples touched his Mouth, yet he had not Power to stoop to
quench his Thirst, nor to take those Apples to satisfy his Hunger.
Tantalus did shun
The River which did by him run:
And the The charmed Vulture.] Tityus was a Giant. When Jupiter had lain with
his Mother Elara, for fear of Juno he put her into a Cave till she was
delivered of her Son Tityus; but when he was at Age, Juno, to revenge her self,
persuaded him to ravish Latona; which he attempting, Jupiter struck him dead
with a Thunderbolt, and sent him to Hell, where a Vultur feeds upon his Liver,
which grows with the Moon.
charmed Vulture now no more
The growing Liver did devour.
At length the infernal Judge cried out,
We are o'rcome; he now has bought,
At the Expense of Verse, his Wife,
Therefore she shall return to Life:
Yet this Injunction I will lay
Upon him, whilst he is on his way,
That he his Eyes shall not backward cast
Till the infernal Bounds are past.
But who, alas! can give a Law
Which Lovers and their God shall awe?
Since Love to its own Law's confined,
Which does its Maker firmly bind:
For having left the Realm of Night,
And almost reached the Land of Light,
Orpheus himself did turn to see
His too much-loved Euridice,
Lost by his fatal Curiosity.
This Fable does belong to you
Whose Minds the Sovereign Good would view;
For he who all his Thoughts does throw,
And fix on things terrene and low,
The Noble Good must surely leave,
Which from above he did receive.
The End of the Third Book.
ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS BOETHIUS, OF THE Consolation of Philosophy. BOOK the
Fourth.
The ARGUMENT.
Philosophy teaches Boethius, who wondered why evil things happen to the good,
and good things to evil Men, that the good are powerful, and the other
impotent; that Rewards are appointed for those, and Punishments for them; that
impious Men are more miserable, if they do Injuries and remain unpunished.
Afterward she defines what Providence is, and what Fate. Then she
demonstrates, that all Fortune, whether prosperous or adverse, is good.

PROSA I.
WHen Philosophy, preserving the Dignity and the Gravity of her Countenance,
had in soft and sweet Strains sung these things, I not having wholly forgot my
Grief, and the Distemper of my Mind remaining, did thus interrupt her, being
now ready to have continued her Discourse. Those things, O thou Forerunner and
Giver of the true Light! which thou have hitherto delivered, are evidently
clear and unanswerable, as well from that Divine Testimony which they bear
about them, as from thy irrefragable Reasons: and although I had forgotten
them, through the Prevalency of Grief for the many Injuries which I have
endured, yet, as thou have said, I was not wholly ignorant of them: But this
one thing, I must own, is the greatest Cause of my Sorrow, to wit, that whilst
there is one good Ruler of all things, there should be any Evil at all, or at
the least, that it should pass unpunished. And how worthy this is of Admiration
thou may consider. To this also another greater Mischief is adjoined: For
whilst Impiety does bear Command and flourish, Virtue does not only want its
Reward, but is also trampled upon by wicked Men, and bears the Punishment due
to its Enemy. No Man therefore can enough wonder and complain that Affairs
should move so under the Governance of a God all-knowing, almighty, and willing
nothing but what is the best. And it would indeed, returned she, be a thing not
only of infinite Wonder, but also horribly monstrous, if in the well-regulated
Family of so great a Master, the worthless Vessels, as thou imaginest, should
be honored, and the more precious ones be despised: But thou art mistaken, it
is not truly so: For if these Conclusions which I have drawn be a little
reserved entire, thou shall well know by the Authority of God, of whose Reign
and Government I now speak, that the Good are always powerful and mighty, the
evil Men ever Cast-aways and weak; that Vice never passes without its
Punishment, nor Virtue without its Rewards; that Happiness always attends good
Men, and Misfortunes the wicked. These and many other things of this kind shall
be proved to thee, which may put an end to thy Complaints, and strengthen thee
with all Firmness and Solidity. And because I have lately shown to thee, with a
full Face, the Figure of true Happiness, and also in what it is placed, and all
things being run through which I think necessary to be premised, I shall now
chalk out to thee that direct way which will lead thee again to thy own
Habitation. I will also affix Wings to thy Mind, by which it may raise it self
on high, that so all Trouble being done away, and all Obstacles removed, thou
may by my Direction, by my Way, by my Conveniences of traveling, return safe
into thy own Country.

METRUM I.
Sunt etenim pennae volucres mihi
Quae celsa conscendant Poli, etc.
For I have nimble Wings which can
Transcend the Polar Height;
Which when the swifter Mind puts on,
She from the hated Earth does take her Flight:
Above the The Globe of Air.] The Air is defined by its own Bounds; and because
it is so diffused that it surrounds the Globe of Earth on all its Parts, it is
called by our Philosopher Aeris Globus.
Globe of Air does go,
And leaves the Clouds below.
Above that Region she does fly,
In which Perpetual Flames.] Here, it is supposed, is meant no other thing than
that part of the Ether which is called by Cicero, in his Book de Not. Deor.
Ardor ultimus, estque tenuis, ac perlucens, and aequabili calore suffusus:
where the Vertex or top of the Ether being considered, the Mind being carried
higher, does contemplate first the Planets which are placed below the Sun, as
Venus, Mercury, and the Moon; then the Sun it self, then those which move in
Orbs higher than the Sun, as Saturn, Jupiter and Mars; then the Fixed Stars,
and then God himself.
perpetual Flames appear,
(Which gently warm the Sky)
Caused by the Motion of the rolling Sphere:
And till she reach those Spheres, she does not stay,
Which Stars adorn, but with the Sun's will join her way.
Or else along by Saturnus.] He is here called Gelidus Senex, the cold old Man:
Senex, because the Poets feigned him to be the most ancient of the Gods, and
because his Motion is slow, like that of an old Man. He is said also to be
gelidus, because he being the highest of all the Planets, does give the least
Heat and Refreshment to the Earth.
aged Saturn's side,
Or as a A Soldier.] Miles Corusci Sideris. The Mind then contemplates Mars,
another Planet below Saturn and above the Sun, and is here called his Soldier,
because Mars was by the Ancients called the God of War; and those who
accompanied him were called his Soldiers. He is called Coruscum Sidus, the
bright or shining Star, because he shines more bright than Saturn.
Soldier with stern Mars she will ride:
Through every Sphere she runs, where Night
Most cloudless is, and bright.
And when this spacious Course is run,
She to the outmost Sphere does come,
And does its Limits pass,
And then the Unequal back she will press
Of the swift Ether, then she will be
Prepared the Empyrean.] This is the Coelum Empyraeum sive Beatorum, the
highest Heaven, where is supposed to be the Presence of God, Angels, and of
blessed Spirits departed.
Empyrean Source of Light to see.
Here the Great King his mighty Scepter bears,
And holds the Reins of the Universe:
Here the great Judge in shining Robes does stand,
And firm his moving Chariot does command.
If wandering long, at length thou shall arrive
At this blessed Place, thou then wilt soon perceive
The Country which thou long have left, and say,
From hence I sprung, and here I Will gladly stay.
If looking then beneath the Realms of Light,
Thou once again would view Earth's dismal Night,
Thou Wilt see those Tyrants whom the People dread,
Far from those shining Borders banished.
PROSA II.
Boet. O Wonderful thou promisest great things indeed! nor do I doubt but thou
can perform them: therefore I entreat thee, without delay, to satisfy my
Expectation.


Ph. First then thou shall know that virtuous Men are always armed with Power,
and that the wicked are always destitute of Strength; and these Assertions do
mutually demonstrate each other: For since Good and Evil are contrary, if Good
be powerful, Evil must be weak and frail; and if thou know the Frailness of
Evil, the Firmness of Good must also be known to thee. But that the Credit and
Truth of my Opinion may appear more abundantly, I will proceed in both ways,
confirming what is proposed now on this, now on that part. There are two Poles
upon which all humane Actions do turn, that is to say, the Will and Power; if
either of these be absent, nothing can be done: For the Will being wanting, no
Man attempts to do that which he will not do; and if Power fails, the Will is
of no Effect. Hence it is, that if thou see any Man desirous to obtain that
which he does not compass, thou needst not doubt but he wanted the Power of
obtaining that which he would have.


Bo. That Is clear, nor can it be denied.


Ph. Whom then thou see do that which he had a mind to do, can thou doubt
that he had a Power to do it?


Bo. No surely.


Ph. And in that a Man is able to do a thing, Men esteem him mighty; and in
that he is not able, he is looked upon as weak.


Bo. I confess it.


Ph. Do thou remember then that it was collected from former Reasons; that
every Intention of Man's Will, however actuated by different Studies, does
hasten toward Happiness?


Bo. I remember well that that was demonstrated.


Ph. Can thou call to mind that it has been showed, that Happiness is the
Sovereign Good, and that when Happiness is sought for, Good is desired of all?


Bo. I need not call it to mind, because it is always fixed in my Memory.


Ph. All Men then, the good as well as the bad, with one and the same
Intention, endeavor to arrive at Good.


Bo. It naturally follows.


Ph. And it is certain when Men have obtained Good, they are made good.


Bo. It is most certain.


Ph. Do good Men obtain then what they desire?


Bo. It seems so.


Ph. But if evil Men obtain the Good which they desire, they may not still be
evil?


Bo. So it is.


Ph. Since therefore then both Parties are in quest of Good, but these only
obtain it and the other lose it, it is not at all to be doubted but that good
Men are powerful, and the wicked weak and feeble.


Bo. Whoever doubts of this, does neither rightly consider the Nature of
things, nor understand the Consequences of Reasoning.


Ph. Again, if there be two, who, according to Nature, propose to themselves
the same thing, and one of them acts naturally, and performs his Intention, but
the other cannot administer the natural Office, but imitates him by another
Method than what is agreeable to Nature, who did accomplish his Purpose, yet
this Man does not attain his End; which of these do thou judge to be most
powerful?


Bo. Although I guess at what thou say, yet I desire thou would further
explain thy self.


Ph. Thou will not deny but the Motion of Walking is natural to Men?


Bo. No, I cannot.


Ph. And thou doubtest not, but to perform this Motion is the natural Office of
the Feet?


Bo. Nor will I deny it.


Ph. If then he who is able to use his Feet walks, and if another to whom this
natural Office of the Feet is wanting, creeping upon his Hands, does endeavor
to walk, which of these, by right, ought to be esteemed more able?


Bo. Proceed with what remains; for no one doubts but he who is able to move
naturally upon his Feet, is more powerful than he who cannot.


Ph. But the Sovereign Good, which even the Virtuous and Impious propose to
themselves as their End, by the one Party is sought by the natural means of
Virtue, whilst the other endeavors after it by various and differing Desires
of earthly things, which is not the natural way of obtaining it; do thou
think otherwise?


Bo. No; for the Consequence is plain, and it appears out of that which before
I granted, which was, that the Good were endowed with Power and Might, and that
the evil Men were destitute of it.


Ph. Thou do rightly run before me; and it is a good Sign, as Physicians
observe, when Nature exerts her self, and resists the Malady. But because I
perceive thou art quick of Apprehension, and ready to understand, I shall
continue to thee my Reasons: Behold then how plainly the Infirmity and Weakness
of vicious Men lies open, who cannot even attain to that to which their natural
Intention leads them, and which it almost compels them to seek. And what do
thou think would become of these Men, if they were deserted by this almost
unconquerable Bent and Help of Nature, which always goes before them? Consider
with thy self how great the Impotence of wicked Men is: Nor are they slight and
empty things to which they aspire, and which they have not Power to obtain: But
they attempt the chief and highest of all things, and there they fail; nor can
bring that to effect after which they by Day and Night endeavor; and in the
obtaining of which the Might of the Virtuous is eminent. For as thou may deem
him a good Walker, who has been able to go so far on his Feet, that no way
does lie beyond the Place at which he is arrived; so must thou necessarily judge
him to be most mighty, who has attained that thing beyond which nothing is to
be desired. True then it is, that wicked Men are wholly destitute of those
Powers which the Good amply possess: For why do they leave Virtue and pursue
Vice? Is it because they know not Good? But what is more weak and base than the
Blindness of Ignorance? or are they perhaps acquainted with the way which they
ought to follow? But Lust, or some inordinate Desires do lead them aside; so
does also Intemperance to weak Natures, which cannot resist Vice. But do they
knowingly and willingly desert Good, and turn to Evil? But this way they do not
only cease to be mighty, but also even to be. For those who neglect the common
End of all Beings, do also leave off to be. Which thing perhaps to some may
seem wonderful, that the Vicious, who make up the most numerous Part of
Mankind, should not be Men; but it is most truly so. And thus it is. I do not
deny but that the Wicked are wicked; but that they have any Being, purely and
simply, I deny: For as thou may call a Carcass a dead Man, but simply thou
can not call it a Man; so will I grant that the Vicious are vicious Men, but
absolutely that they exist I cannot confess. That thing is or has a Being
which observes its Order, and retains its Nature; but that which fails in
this, deserteth its natural Being. But thou may say, that even the Wicked
have a Power to act: Nor will I deny it; but this their Power is not derived
from Strength but Weakness. They can do Evil, it is true, but they could not do
that if they persevered in doing Good; which Possibility does clearly
demonstrate that they can do nothing: For if, as we have before gathered, Evil
be nothing, it is clear that whilst flagitious Men can only do ill, they can do
nothing. And that thou may understand what is the Bent and Force of this
Power, we have before determined that nothing is more powerful than the
Sovereign Good.


Bo. That Is true.


Ph. And that Sovereign Good can do no ill.


Bo. It can do none.


Ph. Is there then any one who thinks that Men can do all things?


Bo. No Man surely who is not mad.


Ph. But they may do Evil.


Bo. I wish they could not.


Ph. Then since he who can only do Good, can do all things, and those who are
powerful to do Evil cannot do all things, it is most evident that those who do
Evil are less powerful. And yet it further assists me toward the proving of
what I have showed, that all Power is to be reckoned amongst things to be
desired; and that all things are to be referred to the chief Good, as the
Height and Eminency of their Nature: But the Power of committing Wickedness
cannot be referred to that Good; therefore it is not desirable: but all Power
is desirable. It is therefore clear that the Power of doing Evil is not Power.
Upon the whole Matter, from hence the Power of good Men, and the undoubted
Weakness of evil Men may well appear. Hence also is the Opinion of Plato
verified, That only wise Men can attain to that which they desire, whilst the
Wicked, let them endeavor what they will, can never accomplish what they
desire to themselves, that is, to aim at Happiness; for they do what they list,
whilst by those Actions in which they delight, they think they shall obtain the
Good which they desire; but they can never be Possessors of it, for Impiety can
never be crowned with Happiness.


METRUM II.
Quos vides sedere celsos
Solii Culmine Reges, etc.
Who the vain Coverings could withdraw
Of Princes clothed in Purple, who
Surrounded with their Guards do go,
And from their powerful Thrones give Law:
Whose sterner Looks fierce Threatenings wear,
Whose boiling Breasts does Fury breath,
Shall find those mighty Men beneath
Their Robes, do heavy Fetters bear.
For Lust on this side does infuse
Her Poisons, on the other Ire
Blows up and sets the Mind on Fire,
Or Grief or Hope does it amuse.
Since then so many Tyrants have
Over one single Head the Sway,
His Actions cannot his Will obey,
Who to so many is a Slave.
PROSA III.
Phil. DO thou see then in what a Puddle of Filth Impiety does wallow, and
with what Rays of Light Goodness does shine out? By which it is clear, that
good Men never go without a Reward, and evil Men without Punishment; for that
which causes any thing to be undertaken and done, may justly be said to be the
Reward of that thing which is done; as the Crown which is won is the Reward of
him who runs in the Race for it. But we have already shown that Happiness is
that Good for which all Matters are undertaken. Therefore Happiness is the
Reward proposed to all humane Actions; and of this the Virtuous can by no means
be deprived, nor can any Man by right be called Good who wants Goodness;
therefore Virtue can never want its Reward. But however evil Men may be unquiet
or rage, yet the Crown shall never fall from the Head of the wise Man, nor
wither upon it. Nor can the Impiety of another Man bereave a worthy Soul of its
Honor: But if a Man be carried away by the Enjoyment of any foreign Good, he
may be deprived even of this, either by him who gave it to him, or by any
other. But because every Man's proper Good procures to him his Reward,
whosoever cease to be good loses that Reward. Lastly, since a Reward is
desired, because it is supposed to be a Good, who will judge him who is capable
of Good to be incapable of a Reward? But thou will say, of what Reward is he
worthy? Of the fairest, certainly, and most considerable. Call to mind that
remarkable Corollary, which a little before gathered, I gave to thee, and
consider thus: Since the Sovereign Good is Happiness, it appears that all good
Men, in that they are good, become happy; and those who are good, are as it
were Gods. Therefore is the Reward of virtuous Men such, that no time shall
impair it, no Power diminish it, nor any Impiety darken it. Since these things
then are thus, a wise Man cannot at all doubt of the Punishment which
inseparably attends wicked Men: For since Good and Evil are Contraries, so are
Rewards and Punishments: therefore as we see that Rewards follow good Actions,
there must necessarily also, on the other hand, be the Punishment for Evil.
Then as Virtue it self is a Reward to virtuous Men, so Vice is a Punishment to
the Wicked: whoever then is punished with Pain and Uneasiness, it is not to be
doubted is affected with Evil. If therefore they will rightly weigh themselves,
can they seem to be free from Punishments, whom Wickedness, the most extreme
Evil, does not only affect, but even vehemently infect? But now behold, on the
other hand, what Punishment attends evil Doers; for thou have learnt a little
before, that every Being is one, and that that one is Good. Hence it follows,
that every thing which is, or has a Being, seems to be good: Whatsoever then
fails to be good, fails to be: So that it appears that evil Men cease to be
what they were; but the remaining Form of the Body shows that these evil Men
were before however Men; wherefore when they lose their Virtue, they also lose
their humane Nature. But since only Virtue can carry Men above the common Pitch
of Humanity, it is sure that those whom Vice has deposed from the common
Condition of Mankind, it must also throw below the Merit of Men. Then it
happens that you cannot esteem him to be a Man, whom you see thus transformed
by his Vices. Does the violent Oppressor, and the Ravisher of other Men's Goods,
burn with Avarice? Thou may say that he resembles the Wolf. Is he fierce; and
does he give himself over to Controversies and Chiding? Thou may compare him
to the Dog. Is he treacherous, and one who delights to deceive? He is then like
the young Foxes. Is he intemperate in his Anger? He seems to carry about with
him the Fury of the Lion. Is he timorous and fearful of what ought not to be
feared? He is like the Heart. Is he light, and does he inconstantly change his
Purposes? He differs nothing from the Birds of the Air. Does he wallow in
filthy and unclean Lusts? He rolls himself in the Mire like the nasty Sow. So
that whosoever leaves off to be virtuous, ceases to be a Man; and since he
cannot attain to a Divine Nature, he is turned into a Beast.


METRUM III.
Vela Neritii Ducis,
Et vagas pelago rates
Eurus appulit Insulae, etc.
Whilst he on unknown Seas did widely rove,
The eastern Winds at length to that Isle drove
The wise Neritian Captain.] Ulysses, he was the Son of Laertes and Anticlea,
an eloquent and wise Captain of the Grecians, who, after the Siege of Troy was
ended, was driven into many Dangers at Sea, during the Time of ten Years,
before he could arrive at Ithaca, of which Island he was King, as also of
Dulichium, both in the Ionian Sea: (...)
(...).
Homer. lib. 1. Odyss. Ithaca is situated betwixt Zephalonia to the West, and
the Echinades to the East, which Islands are now called by the Italians Le
Curzolari, and by the French Les Cursolaires. The modern Name of Ithaca is now,
by the Italians, Valle di Compare, and its Circuit is not of above twenty
Miles. Dulichium is one of the Echinades Islands, it is very small, and is
rather to be called a Rock, and lies betwixt the Coast of Aetolia and
Zephalonia. It is now by the Italians called Dolichio. He is here called the
Neritian Captain, from the Mountain Neritus, which is a Mountain in Ithaca,
with which Title he went to the Trojan War.
Neritian Captain's wandering Sail,
Where Circe.] She is said to have been the Daughter of the Sun and of Perse a
Nymph, and to have been very skilful in Magic and Sorcery: She was married to
the King of the Sarmatians, and having poisoned her Husband, she fled to Italy,
and inhabited a Mountain there, where she led a vicious Life, and entertained
her Guests with all sorts of Debaucheries; therefore she is fabled to have
turned Men into Wolves, Tigers, and other sorts of Beasts. -- Accipimus sacra
data pocula dextra,
Quae fimul arenti sitientes hausimus ore,
Et tetigit virga summos Dea dira capillos,
Et pudet, and referam, setis horrescere coepi;
Nec jam posse queri; pro verbis edere raucum
Murmur, and in terram toto procumbere vultu,
Osque meum sensi pando occallescere rostro;
Colla tumere toris; and qua modo pocula part
Sumpta mihi fuerant, illa vestigia seci.
Ovid. Metam. l. 14.
Circe Daughter of the Sun does dwell;
Where, with enchanted Draughts, she entertains
Her new-come Guests, and binds them with her Chains.
Whilst into various Forms her Magic Hand
Does turn those Men, and does all Herbs command;
One the Resemblance of a Boar does bear,
He the Marmarick.] Marmarica is a Country of Africa, lying toward Egypt,
where the greatest and strongest Lions are found, as India is the Place where
the fiercest Tigers are. Mill Lupi, mistique Lupis Vrsique Leaeque,
Occursu fecere metum: sed nulla timenda,
Nullaque erat nostro factura in corpore vulnus;
Quinetiam blandas movere per acra caudas,
Nostraque adulantes comitant vestigia, donec
Excipiunt Famulae. Ovid. Metam. lib. 14. ver. 260.

Marmarick Lion's Paw does wear,
And like the Wolf another does appear,
Who, when he would with Tears his Fate lament,
Does clothe in dreadful Howlings his Complaint:
The Indian Tyger's Looks another shows,
And round the Palace mild and calmly goes:
But the The Arcadian God.] Our Philosopher styles Mercury, Numen Arcadis
alitis: Numen because he was feigned to be the Son of Apollo and Maia; and also
the God of Eloquence. Ales, because he was feigned to have Wings upon his Head
and Feet, because Eloquence, over which he was said to preside, takes its
Course swiftly through the Air, and diffuseth it self through the World: and
Arcas, because he was born in Arcadia. Hence Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 8.

Vobis Mercurius pater est, quem candida Maia
Cyllenes gelido conceptum vertice fudit.
Mercury was said to have given an Herb to Ulysses, after he had run through so
many Hazards, and been tossed upon so many Seas, by the Help of which he was
freed from the Charms of Circe.

Pacifer huic dederat florem Cyllenius album,
Moly vocant Superi; nigra radice tenetur.
Tutus eo, monitisque simul coelestibus, intrat
Ille domum Circes, and ad insidiosa vocatus
Pocula, conantem virga mulcere capillos
Reppulit, and stricto pavidam deterruit ense. Ovid. Metam. lib. 14.

Arcadian God when he had found
His loved Ulysses in these Fetters bound,
Released him soon from all these poisonous Harms
Which he derived from the Circean Charms.
Yet had the Mariners just now drunk a-cheer,
And into Swine soon metamorphos'd were:
They deeply tasted of the infected Bowl,
Drunk with their Fate, about they madly roll;
And now they change their wonted humane Food,
And range about for Acrons in the Wood;
Body and Members lost, the Voice does fail,
Only the nobler Mind does still prevail,
And does the Sadness of the Change bewail.
But O! too weak are Circe's Force and Hand,
Against whose Power Virtue can bravely stand.
She in her Fortress placed, despises all
The strong Efforts of both. Vice does enthral
Men's strongest Powers; and where it entrance finds,
(The Body safe) it wounds the strongest Minds.
PROSA IV.
Boet. I Confess that vicious Men are not unjustly called Beasts, for although
they retain the Form and Shapes of an humane Body, yet the Qualities of their
Souls show them to be changed into them. But I would not have it in the Power
of those vicious Persons, who even rage with a Desire of destroying just Men,
to do so.


Ph. Nor is it in their Power, as shall be showed in a convenient Place; but if
this Power which People think ill Men to have, were taken away from them they
would be eased of the greatest part of their Punishment: For it would almost
seem incredible to any one, and it is yet true, that evil Men must necessarily
be more unhappy when they have compassed what they desire, than when they
cannot do so: For if it be a miserable thing but to have a Will to do an ill
thing, it must be much worse to have a Power to do it, without which the
wretched Desire would languish without effect. Since then each of these things
has its Unhappiness, it must of necessity be, that a threefold Misfortune must
urge those Men who both will, can, and do commit Wickedness.


Bo. I grant it, but I should much desire that evil Men were soon deprived of
this Misfortune, I mean of the Power of doing ill.


Ph. They shall be dispoil'd of it sooner than perhaps thou would have them,
or than they think they shall: For there is nothing of so late a Beginning
within the narrow Bounds of this Life, that can continue long, or expect
Immutability; and the great Hopes and subtle Machinations of ill Men are by a
sudden and unforeseen End ruinated and destroyed; which thing puts an End to
their Wickedness. For if Vice subjects Men to Misery, the longer they are
vicious, the longer they must be miserable; whom I should judge the most unhappy
of all Beings, if their Unhappiness were not ended at least by Death: For if I
have made a true Conclusion concerning the Misfortune which attends Impiety,
that Misery must be without end which certainly is Eternal.


Bo. This is a most wonderful Consequence, and difficult to be granted; yet I
must acknowledge it does but too much agree with those things which we have
concluded before.


Ph. Thou do rightly judge: but he who thinks it hard to assent to a
Conclusion, it is fit he should demonstrate that the Premises are untrue, or
that from the Collation of the Propositions a necessary Conclusion is not to be
drawn; otherwise if the Premises be granted, he has no Reason to blame the
Inference from them: for this which I am now about to say will not seem less
wonderful, but it necessarily follows from what has been before proposed.


Bo. What is that?


Ph. That wicked Men are more happy when they are punished according to their
Demerits, than if they should escape the Hand of Justice. Nor do I now offer to
thee that which every Man can think, that the Manners of ill Men are corrected
by Vengeance, and that by fear of Torment they are reduced to the right way,
and that they are Examples to other Men to fly from things which are blame
worthy: but I, after another manner, believe these Wretches if they escape
Punishment to be unhappy, although no Regard be had to the Correction and
Example.


Bo. And what other manner is there besides those abovementioned?


Ph. Have we not granted already that the Good are happy, and the Impious
miserable?


Bo. We have.


Ph. If then there be any Addition of Good to any Man's Misery, is not he
happier than another, whose Misery is pure and simple, without the mixture of
any manner of Good?


Bo. It seems so to be.


Ph. And if to the same miserable Person, who wants all manner of Goods to
those Evils which have already made him miserable, another should be annexed,
is not he to be esteemed much more unhappy than he whose Misfortune is relieved
by the participation of Good?


Bo. What will follow then?


Ph. Evil Men then, even when they are punished, have something of Good
annexed, to wit, the Punishment it self, which, as it is the Effect of Justice,
is good: And there is also annexed to the same Persons, when they go
unpunished; something more of Ill, that is to say, Impunity it self, which
before thou have deservedly granted to be an Evil.


Bo. I cannot deny it.


Ph. Much more unhappy then are impious Wretches when they meet with an unjust
Impunity, than when they fall under a merited Vengeance. But it is manifest,
that nothing can be more just than that evil Men should be punished, and unjust
than that they should escape Punishment.


Bo. Who denies it?


Ph. Nor will any Man deny but that every thing which is just, is good; and on
the other hand, whatsoever is unjust, is ill.


Bo. These are consequential to our former Conclusions: But I pray thee tell
me, do thou believe that there are any Punishments allotted to Souls after
the Death of the Bodies?


Ph. Great ones most certainly; some of which I believe to be exercised and
applied by Sharpness of Pain, others by a kind of Purgative Clemency.] Here
(says Vallinus) Boethius acknowledges not only as a Christian, but as a
Catholic one also, that some evil Men are condemned to eternal Punishments;
and others, by long Pains and Torments for their Sins, are cleansed and purged
by Fire. The French Commentator, the Sieur Cally, the Royal Professor of
Eloquence and of Philosophy in the University of Caen in Normandy, and
Principal of the College of the Arts there, says, that Philosophy would here
perhaps express the Opinion of the Platonists, or of the Pythagoreans, which
was, that some Souls, whose Impieties had been so great that they could not be
effaced by any Purgations, were condemned to eternal Punishments; and that
others, whose Crimes were not so great, did either enjoy the eternal Pleasures
of Elysium without any Purgation, or being partly purged, were transmuted and
put into the Bodies of Beasts. Ergo exercentur poenis; veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt: aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos: aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni:
Quisque suos patimur manes: Exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium, and pauci laeta arva tenemus. Virg. lib. 6. Aeneid.

Purgative Clemency: Purgatoria Clementia.
But we will not at this time discourse of these. But our Business hitherto
has been, to let thee see that the Power which thou did imagine to be most
unworthily bestowed upon evil Men, is indeed none at all: And also that thou
might be satisfied that evil Men, who as thou did complain went unpunished,
do never indeed escape Punishment: And also that thou might learn that that
License of doing Evil, which thou prayedst might soon end, is not long; and
that the Enjoyers would be more unhappy if it were longer, and most wretched of
all if it were perpetual. After this I showed that ill Men are more unhappy if
they be dismissed with an unjust Impunity, than if punished with a just
Revenge. From which Opinion it follows, that then they are urged and afflicted
with the greatest Punishments when they are believed to escape free.


Bo. When I consider intently thy Reasons, I think nothing can be said more
truly. But if we look upon the Judgments of Men, who is there to whom these
things seem not only not to be bel^eved, but also not to be heard?


Ph. So it is indeed: for they who have long been accustomed to Darkness cannot
lift up their Eyes to the Light of perspicuous Truth without difficulty; and
they resemble those Birds which see well by Night, but are blind in the
Daytime: For whilst they do not regard the Order of things, but only their own
disordered Affections, they vainly imagine the Power of doing Evil, or Impunity
after it is acted, to be an Happiness. But now, behold what the Law Eternal
delivers! Conform thy Mind to the best things, and then thou shall have no
need of a Judge to confer upon thee a Reward, since thou have adjoined thy self
to the most excellent things. But if thou art inclined to Impiety, and do
embrace wicked Practices, seek for no Avenger without, for thou have sorfeited
thy Advantages, and associated thy self with the worst of things: as if thou
should by turns sometimes behold the Heavens, sometimes the sordid Earth; and
that all other things ceasing from without, thy Eye should seem to carry thee
now above the Stars, and that again thou should be placed upon the Earth. But
the Multitude does not consider this. What then? Shall we put our selves into
the Company of those which I have before showed to resemble Beasts? What will thou say, if a Man who has quite lost his Sight, and has also forgotten that
ever he saw, and should think that he wants nothing to render him perfect,
should we therefore judge those who retain their Sight to be blind also? Either
will the Many acquiesce in what I shall say, although it is supported by as
firm Reasons, to wit, that those are more unhappy who do, than they who suffer
Injuries.


Bo. I would willingly hear those Reasons.


Ph. Can thou deny but that all ill Men deserve Punishment?


Bo. No, I cannot.


Ph. But I am thoroughly satisfied that impious Men are many ways unhappy.


Bo. Certainly they are so.


Ph. Then thou doubtest not that those who deserve Punishment are miserable.


Bo. I agree.


Ph. If therefore thou were to be Judge, to which do thou think thou would
adjudg Punishment, to him who has done, or to him who has suffered the Injury?


Bo. I doubt not but that I should adjudg Satisfaction to the Sufferer, by
punishing the Doer of Wrong.


Ph. The injuring Person then would seem more miserable to thee than him who
had received the Wrong.


Bo. That follows.


Ph. From this then, and from several other Reasons founded on the same bottom,
it appears, that Impiety, properly and by its own Nature, makes Men miserable;
and that an Injury done to any Man is the Misery of the Doer, and not of the
Sufferer. But now Orators and Advocates run a Course contrary to this: For they
endeavor the Pity and Compassion of the Judges for those who suffered any
thing bitter or grievous, when the juster Pity is due to them who did the
Wrong; who should be led to Judgment, as the Sick are to the Physician, not by
angry but by merciful and compassionate Accusers; that so they may, by the
Application of Punishment, as a fit and proper Remedy, be cured of the Malady
of the Crime. By this means the Employment of this kind of Defenders would
either wholly cease, or else, that it may be more to the Advantage of Mankind,
it would be turned into an Habit of Accusation, and would always be forward to
accuse, and not to excuse ill Men: and even those Wretches themselves, if they
could through the least Hole or Chink behold that Virtue which they have
forsaken, and see that they should be in some way of cleansing themselves from
their filthy Vices, by receiving the Pains and Torments which are due to them,
they ought, for the Recompense of regaining the Virtue from which they have
fallen, not to esteem them so, but should cheerfully refuse the Defense of
their Advocates, and give themselves up wholly to their Accusers and Judges.
Hence it is that the Wise hate no Body* For who but the most foolish would hate
good Men? and it is irrational to hate the most profligate: For if a depraved
Temper be, as it were, the Sickness of the Soul, since we do not think those
whose Bodies are distempered to be worthy of our Hate, but rather of our
Compassion, much less are those over whom Vice, more cruel than any bodily
Distemper, has gained the Ascendant to be adjudged so, but are rather to be
looked upon as Subjects of our Pity.


METRUM IV.
Quid tantos juvat excitare motus,
Et propria fatum sollicitare manu? etc.
Why should vain Man so great Commotions raise?
Why with his Hand should he his Fate convey?
If Death be sought, that comes, and never stays
For winged Steeds to help it on its way,
They whom the Lion and the rugged Bear,
The Indian Tiger, and the foaming Boar,
With eager Teeth, and with armed Claws do tear,
Do stain their Swords in their own reeking Gore.
Is it because their Manners differing are,
And that their many Customs disagree,
That they unjustly thus engage in War,
And fiercely urge each others Destiny?
This Reason is not just for shedding Blood.
Would thou to each Man give what he deserves;
Love, as by Right thou art obliged, the Good,
And pity him who from fair Virtue swerves.
PROSA V.
Boet. HERE I plainly see what Happiness or Misery is placed in the Deserts of
good and of evil Men. But in this same common Estate of Fortune I perceive
something both of Good and Evil: For no wise Man had rather be exposed to
Banishment, Poverty, and Ignominy, than excel in Riches, Honors, Power, and
continue in a flourishing Estate in his own Country. For in this the more
clearly and openly the Duty of Wisdom does appear, when the Happiness of the
Governors is in some measure diffused, and communicated to Subjects; whilst
Imprisonment, and all legal Punishments are only due to those pernicious and
profligate Citizens, for whom they were at first instituted and appointed. Why
then should things suffer so unnatural a Change? Why should Punishments due to
Crimes, oppress the Good, and the Rewards of Virtue be born only by wicked and
flagitious Men? These things I much wonder at, and I desire to learn from thee
what may be the Reason of so unjust a Distribution. For my Wonder would be
less, did I believe all things to be governed by Chance. But now even God, the
Governor of all things, does heighten my Astonishment, who whilst he does
often distribute good things to the Good, and evil things to the Wicked, yet
does sometimes give to the Virtuous an hard Portion, and to the impious Man he
grants his Heart's Desire. What Difference then is there to be found, unless
Men may be acquainted with the Cause betwixt his Proceedings and the Actings of
Chance?


Ph. Nor is it at all to be admired if Men fancy something rash and confused in
these Methods of Acting, if they are ignorant of the Reason of that Order by
which God proceeds. But although thou art ignorant of the Cause of this great
Disposal of things, yet because the good Governor of all things does temper
and inform the World, never doubt but that all things are done rightly and as
they ought to be.


METRUM V.
Siquis Arcturi sidera nescit
Propinqua summo Cardine labi, etc.
Who knows not that Arcturus.] Videsis Annotat. in l. 1.
Arcturus moves
Near to the Arctick Pole, nor why
Boots.] Or Bubulcus, is called so because it is a Constellation framed of
Stars, which resemble the Form of a Cart and Oxen. This Constellation is very
near to the North Pole; and being placed so high, it always appears in our
Hemisphere. It is said also to drown its Flames late in the Sea, because it
never descends below our Horizon.
Boots slow passes his Wain,
Drowning in the Sea his later Flame,
When he unfolds his quicker Rise,
Will wonder at the Laws of Heaven.
And if he know not why the Horns
Of the Full-Moon.] It often happens that the Earth is so interposed betwixt
the Sun and the Full-Moon, that the Moon being obscured by the terrestrial
Shadows, does lose the round Splendour which it borrowed from the Sun; and that
the Stars, whose Light was before obscured by the greater Brightness of the
Moon, begin to shine out: From whence the Ancients, whose Superstition made
them believe that that Decrease was occasioned by Charms, did think they might
deliver her from it by the tinkling of brazen Vessels or Cymbals: From whence
Tibullus, Cantus and e curru Lunam deducere tentat
Et faceret, si non era repulsa sonent.
And Juven. Sat. 6.
Tot pariiter pelves, tot tintinnabula dicas
Pulsari: jam nemo tubas atque era fatiget,
Vna laboranti poterit succurrere Lunae.
And Virg. Eclog. 8.
Carmina vel Coelo possunt deducere Lunam.


All these things, says Boethius, make the Admiration of the Vulgar, because
they know not the Causes of them.


Full-Moon grow pale, whilst they
Are dipped within the Bounds of Night,
And how the Moon, confused and dark,
Displays those Stars which she before
Had in her brighter Glories hid.
A vulgar Error is retained
By many People, who do think
To rescue Luna from Eclipse
With brazen Cymbals, and with Strokes
On Basins, which do rend the Air.
Yet none admire when Corus] Or Caurus, the North-west Wind. Philosophy having
showed that Men wonder at many things because they know not the Causes of them,
does now show that they wonder not at things of which they know the Causes: As
why Corus does beat the Waves fiercely against the Seacoasts, they knowing
that Wind is a moved Body, and that any Body which has Motion does naturally
strike against any other Body which meets it in its way. As also Men do not
admire why an Heap of Snow hardened and congealed by Cold, should be melted by
the Heat of the Sun, because they know that the quiet Parts of the hardened
Snow may be dissolved by the moved Particles of the warm Sun.
Corus blows,
And makes the Waves assault the Shore;
Nor when the Sun's refreshing Heat,
Dissolves vast Heaps of congealed Snow.
For here the Causes open lie:
But those which closely are wrapped up,
Disquiet much the Thoughts and Mind.
The giddy People stand amazed
At that which rarely or by chance arrives.
But if that cloudy Error would depart,
Which stupid Ignorance does raise,
These things no more by Men would be admired.
PROSA VI.
Boet. SO it is; but because it is thy Province to unfold the hidden Causes of
things, and to lay open those Reasons which are now invelop'd in Darkness, I
entreat thee to give me thy Judgment in this Matter, and to discourse upon it,
for this Wonder troubles me very much. Philosophy then a little smiling, said
to me, O thou call'st upon me to declare to thee the greatest thing which could
be asked, and which indeed can scarce be answered: For such is the Matter of
it, that one Doubt being removed, innumerable others, like the Heads of Hydra.]
This was a Monster feigned by the Poets to have fifty, or, as others will, an
hundred Heads; one of which being cut off, two did arise in its Place, till
Hercules having cut off one of the Heads, did sear the Wound with hot Iron.
Hydra, grow up. Nor would there indeed be any End of them, unless they were
restrained by the Quickness and lively Fire of the Mind: For in this Matter Men
are wont to make Questions of the simple Actings of Providence, of the Order
and Course of Destiny, of sudden Chance, of Knowledge, of Divine Predestination,
and of Free Will: And of what Weight these things are, thou thy self may
perceive. But because it is part of thy Medicine, and it will contribute much
to thy Cure to know these things, although I am confined within the narrow
Bounds of Time, I shall endeavor to give thee some Taste of them. And although
the Charms and Music of my Verse may delight thee, yet thou must defer that
Pleasure a little, whilst I in order weave together my Reasons, which may tend
to the Solution of thy Doubts.


Bo. Observe thy own Method as it pleases thee. Then taking her Beginning as
from another Principle, she thus discoursed.


Ph. The Generation of all things, and every Progression of changeable Natures,
and all things which are any way moved, receive their Causes, Order and Forms
out of the Stability or Constancy of the Divine Mind. And this being placed in
the Height of its own Purity or Simplicity, does establish a manifold Mode or
Way in doing things; which Mode or Manner of Proceeding, when Men behold it in
the Purity of the Divine Understanding, is called Providence; but being applied
and referred to that which it moves, and of which it disposes, it was called
Fate or Destiny. And if any one shall thoroughly weigh in his Mind the Force and
Energy of the one and of the other, he shall soon find them to be different
things: For Providence is that Divine Reason settled in the chief Governor of
the World, by which he disposes all things; but Fate or Destiny is a
Disposition inherent in moveable Beings, by which Providence knits them
together in their Orders. Providence embraces and comprehends all things,
although diverse, although infinite; but Fate orders and digests all single
things into Motion, and distributeth them according to Place, Form and Time: So
that the Explication of this temporal Order being joined or folded up, in
regard to the Divine Mind, may be called Providence; and being unfolded and
digested according to Time, and the other Circumstances, it may be called Fate.
And although these things be different, yet one of them depends upon the other;
for the Order of Fate proceeds from the pure Simplicity of Providence: For as
the Artificer forming in his Mind the Shape of the thing which he is about to
make, moves to effect his Work, and does in process of time draw out that which
before he had singly in his Imagination designed; so God by his Providence
simply and firmly does dispose the things which are to be done; and he does in
several Ways, and according to Time, administer by Fate those very things which
he has so disposed. So then, whether Fate be exercised and moved by some
Divine Spirits which attend upon Providence, or by some Soul, or by the
Ministry of the whole Body of Nature, or by the Celestial Motions of the Stars,
or by Angelick Virtue, or by the manifold Subtlety of Demons, whether good or
bad, or if by any of these, or if by all of them the Series of Fate is woven:
This certainly is manifest, that the immovable and simple way of doing things
is Providence; and that the movable Contexture and temporal Order of those
things which the Divine Purity fore-disposed and ordered to be done, is Fate.
Hence it is that all things which are under the Dominion of Fate, are also
subject to Providence, which commands even Fate it self. But some things which
are placed under the Guidance and Protection of Providence, are wholly exempt
from the Jurisdiction of Fate, and surmount the Series of it; and those are
such things as are stably fixed near to the Divinity, and are above the Order
of fatal Mobility. For even as amongst several Circles turning about the same
Center, that which is innermost approaches most to the Simplicity of the
middle Point, and is as it were a Center, round which they may turn, to those
placed without it; and that which is outermost, rolling in a greater Circuit,
the further it departs from the middle Individuity of the Point, so much the
more Space it does fill; but yet if any thing should join and fasten it self to
the Point, it is constrained to be immovable, and cease to be dilated. By
parity of Reason the further any thing departs from the first Mind, that is
from God, it is so much the more embarassed, and faster bound in the Bonds of
Destiny; and every thing is by so much the freer from Fate, by how much it
approaches nearer to the Center of all things. And if it closely adheres to
the Firmness of the supreme Mind, without moving, it goes beyond the Necessity
and Power of Destiny. As Ratiocination then is to the Intellect, as that which
is begotten is to that which has a proper Being, as Time is to Eternity, as
the Circle is to the Center; so is the movable Order of Fate to the stable
Simplicity of Providence. This Order moves the Heavens and the Stars,
tempereth the Elements, and makes them agree amongst themselves, and by an
alternative Change transforms them. It renews all things which are born, and
which die by the like Progressions of Sexes and Seeds. This binds together the
Actions and Fortunes of Men by an indissoluble Connection of Causes; which,
since they proceed from the Origin of immovable Providence, must also
themselves necessarily be unchangeable: For so things are always best governed,
if that pure Simplicity or Singleness, dwelling in the Divine Nature, may
produce that unalterable Order of Causes; for this Order, by its own
Unchangeableness and Constancy, may restrain those things which in their Nature
are mutable, and which would otherwise rashly and irregularly float about.
Hence it is that although things may seem confused and disturbed to Men who
cannot aright consider this Order, nevertheless the proper Manner and Course of
every thing directs and disposes it to the true Good: For there is nothing
done for the sake of Evil, no not by the most flagitious Wretches; who, as I
have fully before demonstrated, are in their Researches after Good diverted by
crooked Error, whilst the Order proceeding from the Center of Sovereign Good
does not mislead any from its Principles. But thou may say, what greater
Confusion can there be, that both prosperous and adverse things should by times
happen to good Men, and that evil Men can enjoy what their Hearts can desire,
and yet be afflicted too with things which they hate? Do People live now adays
so virtuously, and with so much Integrity, that those whom Men think good or
bad, must necessarily be either? But in this the Judgments of Men disagree
much: For those whom some judge worthy of a Reward, others think to deserve
Punishment. But let us grant, that it is possible that some one may be able to
distinguish betwixt the Good and the Bad; Is it possible therefore that he
should look into the inward Temperament of the Mind, and pronounce of it as one
may of the Body? But it is miraculous to him who knows it not, why sweet things
should be agreeable to some Bodies, and bitter to others; and why some sick
People are eased by Lenitives, others are helped by sharper Medicines. But it
is no wonder to the Physician, who knows the Measure and Temperament of
Health and Sickness. But what other thing is it that makes the Mind healthful
and strong than Goodness? And what is its Sickness but Vice? Who is the
Preserver of Good, and the Driver away of Evil, other than God the great Ruler
and Physician of the Mind? who, when he looks about him from the high
Observatory of his Providence, sees and knows what is convenient for every one,
and then accommodates him with the Convenience. Hence then proceeds that
remarkable Miracle of the Order of Destiny, since the all-knowing God does that
at which the Ignorant are astonished. But now that I may glance at a few things
concerning the Depth of the Divine Knowledge, which humane Reason may
comprehend, that Man whom thou believe to be most just, and the greatest
Observer and Maintainer of Equity, of that Man, I say, the all-knowing
Providence does think otherwise. And My Familiar Lucan.] Lucan is here styled
by Philosophy Familiaris noster Lucanus, because he was a Philosopher, and a
Vein of Philosophy seems to run through the whole Work of his Pharsalia.
my Familiar Lucan told us, that the vanquishing Cause was pleasing to the
Gods, but the vanquished to Cato: Know this then, that whatsoever thou see
done contrary to thy Hope or Expectation, that notwithstanding the Order of
things is preserved right and entire; but to thy perverted Opinion it seems
Confusion. But let us suppose that a Man may have behaved himself so well, that
the Approbation of God and Man may both agree in him; but he is perhaps of a
weak Courage: so that if any thing cross should befall him, he will forgo his
Innocence, since with it he cannot retain his Fortune. The wise Dispensation of
Providence then spares him whom Adversity may make worse, lest he should be
put to labor and travel, who is not able to undergo such Hardship, nor to bear
Afflictions. Another Man is Master of all Virtues, is holy, and one who draws
nigh to God: Providence judges it Injustice that that Man should be oppressed
by any Adversity; so that it will not suffer him to labor even under any
bodily Distemper: But as One more excellent than I.] It is supposed that our
Philosopher means here Hermes Trismegistus: He was an Egyptian Philosopher,
and called Trismegistus, that is, ter maximus, because he is said to have
spoken of a Trinity in the Godhead, by Suidas; or because he was both a King, a
Priest, and a Philosopher: He first distinguished Time into Hours; he lived in
the time of Moses, about the Year of the World 2440.
one more excellent than I said, (...)* Virtues do build up the Body of the
Holy Man. But it often comes to pass that good Men have the Government of
things committed to them, that the exuberant Improbity of ill Men may be
repelled and abated. To some, according to the Qualities of their Minds, he
gives a kind of Mixture of Fortune, chequered with Good and Evil: Upon some he
lays grievous heavy Crosses, lest they should grow luxurious by too long a
Course of Felicity: Upon others he sometimes lays also heavy Crosses, that
their Virtues may be confirmed by the Use and Exercise of Patience: Some fear
more than they ought that thing which they can bear: Others despise more than
they ought that which they cannot; and those, that by the Experiment they may
come to the Knowledge of themselves, he sometimes afflicts. And many there are
who have purchased a great Name in the World, at the Expense of a glorious
Death. And some Men whose Courage has not yielded to Torment, have given a
noble Example to others, that Virtue is not to be overcome by Adversity. And
there is no doubt but that all these things are done justly and in order, and
for the Good of those to whom they happen. It also proceeds from the said
Causes that sometimes Adversity, sometimes Prosperity, comes to be the Lot of
ill Men. And it is the Wonder of no Man, that flagitious Persons should be
afflicted, because they are always thought to deserve what comes upon them; and
that their Punishment does deter others from such Aims, and often work a
Reformation in those on whom they are inflicted: But the Prosperity of such
yields a great Argument to the Good, and directs them what to judge of this kind
of Happiness, which they so often see to fall to the share of the worst of Men.
In which thing I think often there is a Dispensation, because the Nature of
some Men may be so forward and importunate, that Poverty, and the want of
Necessaries, would rather urge them to do ill. But this Disease Providence does
cure by applying the powerful Medicine of Money. One Man finding his Conscience
deeply spotted with Crimes, and comparing himself and his Fortune, fears
perhaps that the Happiness which he enjoyed by the Use of it, should be wholly
done away by its Loss; he will therefore change his Manners, and whilst he
fears to lose his Estate he will leave his Impiety. Upon another Happiness is
conferred without Desert, and that precipitates him into a merited Destruction.
To some there is a Power of Punishing granted, that it may exercise the Virtues
of the Good, and may be Cause of Punishment and Torment to the Evil. For as
there is no Covenant or Agreement betwixt the Virtuous and the Wicked, so
neither can wretched Men agree amongst themselves. And why should they? for
they disagree amongst themselves by reason of their Vices, which rend and tear
the Conscience; and they often do those things, which when they are over, they
judge they ought not to have done them. From whence Providence has often
produced a signal Miracle, to wit, that evil Men have often made other ill Men
good: For when some of these find that they have suffered an Injury from others
of them, urged by the Hate of those that have offended them, they have returned
to the Ways of Virtue, studying nothing more than to be unlike to those Persons
whom they hate. It is only the great Power of God which can make Evil turn to
Good, when by using them agreeably and conveniently he draws out of them the
Effect of some Good: For a certain Order embraces all Beings, so that
whatsoever does depart from the Reason and Laws of that Order which is assigned
to it, yet it passes into and under the Laws of another Order; for nothing is
left in the Power of Chance or Uncertainty in the Realm of Providence. (...).
It is hard for me to express how God rules and disposes all things by his
Providence. Nor is it lawful for a Man (if he could) to comprehend all the
Machines and Movements of the Divine Work, even in his Thought, much less to
declare and describe them in Words. Let it suffice to have seen only this, that
God, the Framer of all Natures, orders and disposes every thing toward Good;
and whilst he endeavors to retain those things which he has made in his own
Likeness, he banisheth all Evil by the Course of Destiny, without the Bounds of
his Commonwealth. Hence it is that if thou do but regard the all-disposing
Providence, thou may easily see, that there are not those Evils which Men
believe do abound upon the Face of the Earth. But now I see that thou do
almost lie down under the Weight and Prolixity of my Reasoning; and that thou
do expect the Music of my Verse: receive then this Draught with which when
thou art refreshed, thou may more strongly proceed to other Matters which yet
remain.


METRUM VI.
Si vis celsi jura tonantis
Pura solers cernere mente,
Aspice summi culmina Coeli, etc.
If with a Mind well-clear'd thou would
Weigh well the Laws of the high Thunderer,
Behold the Height of the Empyrean Heaven;
There by a just and certain Bound the Stars
Preserve their ancient Peace and Amity.
The Sun being moved by his resplendent Flame
Does not impede pale Phoebe's colder Sphere.
Nor does the Northern Bear, which proudly round
The towering Battlements of the Universe
Inclines his head long Course, ever desire
To drench his Flames in the vast Ocean,
Although he sees the other Stars do so.
Vesper observing Time, exactly leads
The Horns of Night, and Lucifer again
Brings on the Day, which cherishes the Earth.
So mutual Love does all things ever move:
And from the starry Regions cruel War
Is banished far. This beauteous Concord so
In equal Measures tempers the Elements;
That when things moist and dry begin to fight,
They do attack and do retreat by turns;
That Cold with Heat a lasting Peace does make;
That the aspiring Flame may mount on high,
And that the Earth may toward its Center tend.
By these same Causes in the warming Spring
The flowring Year does grateful Sweets breath out,
The hotter Summer ripeneth the Corn:
Laden with Apples then Autumnus comes,
And Winter wets the Earth with many Showers.
This Temperature does nourish and bring forth
Whatever in the Universe does breath:
And this does also take away and bide,
And does by Death efface whatever has been born,
Whilst the World's Creator sits on high,
And ruling mesnageth the Reins of things,
The mighty King and Lord, Fountain and Source,
The Law, and the wise Judge of Equity,
Those things to which he did a Motion give
He stops, and thus being moved, he does confirm.
For if their direct Motions he did not
Revoke, and forced them in a Round to move,
Those things which now by Order do endure
Would straight from their Beginning fall, and soon
Would into nothing be resolved.
This Love to every thing is common then,
And all things do propose Good as their End;
For otherwise they could not last, unless
By Love's kind Circulation they revert
To that first Cause, which gave them Being, God.
PROSA VII.
Phil. DO thou not see now what follows from all the things which I have
spoken.


Bo. What is the Consequence?


Ph. That all Fortune is good.


Bo. And how, I prithee, can that be?


Ph. Observe then that since all Fortune is either prosperous or adverse, it is
given either to reward or exercise the Good, or to punish or correct the Bad;
and all Fortune is good which appears to be either just or profitable.


Bo. The Reason is most true, and if I consider the Doctrine either of
Providence or Fate, which a little before thou taughtest me, thy Opinion is
founded upon a firm Ground. But let us range it, if thou please, amongst
those Positions which, a little before, thou said were not commonly believed
by the People.


Ph. Why so?


Bo. Because it is the common and frequent Phrase of Men, that the Fortune of
such an one is bad.


Ph. Will thou then that I shall for a while draw nearer to the Peoples way of
Discourse, lest we should seem too much to have receded from the Usages of
Mankind?


Bo. As thou please.


Ph. Think thou not then that every thing which is profitable is good?


Bo. Yes surely.


Ph. But whatsoever does either exercise or correct is profitable.


Bo. I confess it.


Ph. Therefore it is good.


Bo. Why should it not?


Ph. But this is the Fortune of them who are either fixed in Virtue, and wage a
constant War against Adversity, or of those who, abandoning Vice, take the way
of Virtue.


Bo. I cannot deny it.


Ph. But what say thou of that pleasant Fortune which is given as a Reward to
good Men, do the Many conceive it to be ill?


Bo. Certainly no, but rather they believe it to be very good, as it is indeed.


Ph. But what say thou of that other, which although it be sharp, and
inflicts just Punishment upon the Wicked, do Men take it to be good?


Bo. No sure, but rather the most wretched and tormenting thing that can be
thought upon.


Ph. Behold then, and mark well, if we, following the Opinion of the People,
have not concluded something which is very contrary to the common Opinion.


Bo. What is that?


Ph. It follows clearly to the things before granted, that whatsoever the
Fortune of all those who are either in possession of, or growing in Virtue, or
otherwise in search after her, may be, it is good; but that the Fortune of
those who live in Impiety and Sin must be the worst of any thing.


Bo. That is true, although no one dare confess it.


Ph. Why so, for the wise Man ought not to be cast down when he is brought into
the Field to wage War with Fortune, no more than the valiant Man ought to be
dismayed when he hears the Trumpet sound to Battle: For Difficulty and Hardship
gives the Occasion to one that he may increase and propagate his Glory; and to
the other, that he may confirm and improve his Wisdom. From hence is Virtue
denominated, because leaning upon its own Strength, and confiding in its proper
Force, it is not to be overcome by Adversity: Nor thou who art so far advanced
in the Course of Virtue, art not to be carried away by Delights, and to wallow
in Lust; thou must engage valiantly and fiercely against every Fortune. And
lest Adversity should oppress thee, or Prosperity corrupt thee, possess thy
self of the Golden Mean, and retain it with all thy Strength: For whatsoever is
below, or goes beyond that, implies a Contempt of true Happiness, and loses
the Reward of its Labor. It lies in thy own Hand to choose what Fortune thou
likest; for all Fortune which seems sharp and grievous, unless it exercise
the Virtues of the Good, or chastise the Impiety of the Wicked, is a Punishment.


METRUM VII.
Bella bis quinis operatus annis
Ultor Atreides Phrygiae ruinis
Fratris amissos thalamos piavit, etc.
By ten Years bloody War, and Phrygia.] It is a Region of the Lesser Asia,
situated toward the West, according to Ptolomy and Strabo.
Phrygia's Fate
Atreides] Agamemnon. Paris the Son of Priam King of Troy having equipped a
Fleet, went into Greece to visit Menelaus King of Sparta, and against the Laws
of Hospitality stole away his Wife; which Agamemnon the Son of Atreus, and
Brother of the aforesaid Menelaus, very much resenting, he did call together
the Grecian Chieftains, and sailing into Phrygia, besieged Troy; and having
taken it, after a Siege of ten Years, destroyed it with Fire and Sword. The
same Agamemnon when he was going upon this Expedition, when he arrived at Aulis
a Port of Boeotia, and had made a Review of his Army, did ignorantly kill an
Heart which had been consecrated to Diana; with which the Goddess being
offended, did send a Pestilence, and suppressed the Winds, so that he laid
Wind-bound in the Haven. He consulted in this Exigence the Oracle, which gave
for Answer, that the Gods would not be appeased till he had sacrificed
Iphigenia his Daughter; Agamemnon obeyed, and himself performed the Office of
the Priest, by sacrificing his Daughter; so that after many Labors and Perils
he accomplished his Enterprise. Hence Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 2. Saepe fugam Danai
Troja cupiere relicta
Moliri, and longo fessi discedere bello,
Fecissentque utinam! saepe illos aspera Ponti
Interclusit byems, and terruit Auster ^untes.
Praecipue cum jam hic trabibus contextus acernis
Staret equus, toto fonuerunt aethere nimbi:
Suspensi Eurypylum scitatum Oracula Phoebi
Mittimus; isque adytis haec tristia dicta reportat:
Sanguine placastis ventos, and virgin caesa.
Cum primum Iliacas Danai venistis ad oras, etc.

Atreides did revenge, and expiate
His Brother's Loss. Whilst his unquiet Mind
Pressed him to sail, with Blood he buys a Wind
For the Argolick Fleet, he puts off all
Compassion, and vows his Daughter shall
A Victim to the injured Goddess fall.
The wise Ulysses did with Tears lament
His slaughtered Friends, whom Polyphemus.] Feigned to be one of the Cyclops,
and the Son of Neptune, a huge Giant, who had but one Eye, and that feigned to
be in his Forehead: He took Ulysses and four of his Company, and kept them in
his Den; he devoured his Companions, but Ulysses having a Bottle of strong
Wine, he gave it to him to drink, which cast him into a deep Sleep; so that
Ulysses with his Staff put out his Eye, and made his Escape.
Polyphemus
Devoured by him down to the Shades; but he sent
Appeased their Manes, putting out the Eye
Of that great Monster, whilst he in his Den
Did lie at Ease, buried in Sleep and Wine.
His many Labors consecrate to Fame
The Great Alcides.] Philosophy proves by the Example of Hercules, that Heaven
and Immortality are not to be attained to but by the undergoing of many
afflicting Labors upon Earth. He was feigned to be the Son of Jupiter and
Alcmena, and therefore hated by Juno, who exercised him still with new Toils
and Adventures.
Alcides, and his mighty Name.
The The Centaurs.] This was the first Labor of Hercules. The Centaurs were
People of Thessaly, inhabiting the Country joining upon the Mountain Pelion,
who first attempted to make Horses tame, and to fight upon them: For this
Reason they were looked upon by their Neighbors to be Monsters, and to have
the Parts both of Men and Horses. Hercules setting upon these People, overcame
and slew many of them.
Centaurs, and the The Lion.] In the Nemaean Wood, which was a wild Part of the
Country of Achaia, there was a Lion of an extraordinary Greatness, which was
invulnerable by any Weapon made either of Iron or Brass: but Hercules attacking
him, killed him with his Hands, and clothed himself with his Skin. This was his
second Labor.
Lion he o'rethrew,
And took the Spoil; he the foul The Harpies.] They were feigned to be Birds of
so great Dimension, hovering always about a Town called Stymphalus in Arcadia,
that they darkened the Sun; and so ravenous, that they spoiled the whole Country
about. Hercules is said to have invented a Timbrel or sounding Instrument of
Brass, and to have driven them all away: which was his third Labor. --
Vncisque timendae
Vnguibus Arcadiae volucres Stymphala colentes.
Lucret. lib. 5.
Harpies slew:
Though in the Door, etc.] His fourth Labor was this: The Hesperides,
Daughters of Hesperus, who was Brother of Atlas, viz. Egle, Arethusa and
Hesperethusa, were feigned to have possessed Gardius, lying near to Lixa,
called now by the Europeans L'arache, a Town of Mauritania Tingitana, which
takes its Denomination from Tingis, now Tangier, which were planted with Trees
which produced Golden Fruit, and which were guarded by a waking Dragon; which
Dragon Hercules slew, and carried the Fruit to Euristheus his Father-in-law.
Though in the Door the watchful Dragon lay,
He boldly took the Golden Fruit away:
He made grim Cerberus.] Pirithous, the Son of Ixion: his Wife Hippodame being
dead, made an Agreement with Theseus, that they should marry none who were not
descended from Jupiter. Upon this Theseus stole away Helena; and Pirithous
designing to take away Proserpina the Wife of Pluto, went down to Hell, Theseus
and Hercules accompanying him; but Pirithous upon his first Attempt was killed
by Cerberus, whom Theseus endeavoring to help, was taken alive by Pluto, and
was bound by him till Hercules bound Cerberus in a threefold Chain. This was
his fifth Labor.
Cerberus to a Chain submit;
He overthrew the mighty Diomedes.] He was King of Thracia, and fed his Horses
with Man's Flesh; Hercules slew him, and gave him to his Horses to be eaten.
This was his sixth Labor. From whence Ovid, Non tibi succurrit crudi Diomedis
imago
Efferus humana qui dape pavit equos.

Diomede,
And made his fiery Horses on him feed.
He burnt the Poison, and did The seventh Labor of Hercules was the killing of
Hydra. Videsis Litt. (p) supra.
Hydra tame,
The headlong Achelous.] The eighth Labor of Hercules was this: Achelous,
feigned to be the Son of Oceanus and Tethys, fought with Hercules for Deianira
the Daughter of Oeneus King of Caledonia; but Achelous being unequal in
Strength to him, turned himself first into a Serpent, then into a Bull, but
Hercules cut of his Horn, which became the Cornu copiae, or Horn of Plenty,
which made Achelous, being ashamed to appear with one Horn, to hide himself in
a River of his Name.
Achelous he o'recame,
Blushing within his Banks he hid his Head.
On Libyan Sands he left Antaeus.] He was feigned to be the Son of Neptune and
the Earth, and to be of so large Dimensions that he was said to be of the
Height of sixty four Cubits: He engaging in Fight with Hercules, so often as
his Strength failed him touched the Earth, and recovered Strength, which when
Hercules perceived, he lifted him up into the Air, and so killed him, which was
his ninth Labor.
Antaeus dead:
He by the Death of Cacus.] The tenth Labor which Hercules did accomplish was
killing of Cacus, feigned to be the Son of Vulcan, and who infested all Italy
with his Robberies, and did not spare Hercules himself; for he stole his Oxen;
and that he might not be discovered by their Footsteps, he drew them by the
Tails into his Cave: but Hercules discovering them by their Lowing, recovered
his Cattle, and killed Cacus, revenging an Injury which Cacus had done to
Evander, whose Guest or Servant he had been.
Cacus did appease
Evander's Wrath: the foaming The Boar.] The Erymanthian Boar in Arcadia, which
was so large and fierce that it almost had depopulated the whole Country:
Hercules brought this Boar to Eurystheus King of Micene in Greece, which was
his eleventh Labor.
Boar did seize:
Those Shoulders which the The Spheres.] Atlas is an high Hill of Mauritania,
which stretches it self through a great Part of Africa, from the Atlantic
Ocean, called so from this Mountain, as far Eastward as the Confines of the
Deserts of Barca: It is called now by the Spaniards Los Montes Claros; by other
Europeans the Mountain Atlas. It received its Name from Atlas a King of
Mauritania, who because he was a great Astronomer, and, as it is said, Inventor
of Astrology, was feigned to bear the Heavens upon his Shoulders, by
maintaining and propagating the Science of it. Hercules is fabled for one Day
to have eased Atlas of that Weight, for which he merited an (...), and to be
admitted into the Society of the Gods. From whence therefore this is called his
last and noblest Labor.
Spheres were soon to press,
That both his last and noblest Labor was;
And he did merit to be called a God,
Who did support so glorious a Load.
Go then, ye noble Souls, disdain Delay,
Follow the great Example in his way:
Why, O ye slothful, do ye basely fly?
Who conquers Earth does gain Eternity.
The End of the Fourth Book.
ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS BOETHIUS, OF THE Consolation of Philosophy. BOOK the
Fifth.
The ARGUMENT.
In this Book Boethius defines Chance: He declares whether there be Free Will
or not, and what is the Order of Providence; and he describes the Methods of
Destiny in the Administration of things. He then proves that the Prescience of
God does not take away the Liberty of Men; which whole Question he handles and
solves with most solid Reasons.

PROSA I.
THUS she had spoken, and turned her Discourse to handle and dispatch some
other Matters; when I thus bespake her. Thy Exhortation is most just and right,
and most worthy of thy Authority: But what thou but now say, to wit, that the
Question concerning Providence was entangled with many others, I find by
Experience to be true: Therefore I now ask, if Chance be any thing at all, and
if it be, what thou take it to be?

Ph. I hasten to pay the Debt of my Promise, and to open that way to thee which
may lead thee back to thy Country. But although it may be very profitable, and
much to thy Advantage to know these things, yet they lead us out of our
designed way: And it is to be feared that if thou should be tired by pursuing
these Bypath, that is, by discussing Questions foreign to our Subject, thou
would not be able to perform thy Journey in following the right Road.


Bo. Fear not that at all; for it will as much refresh me as Rest, to know
those things in which I am most delighted, since there is no Reason to doubt of
the things following, when every part of thy Disputation shall have been
grounded upon undoubted Truth and Certainty.


Ph. I will then comply with thee: If any Man does define Chance to be an Event
produced by a rash Motion, and without any connection of Causes, I then affirm
that Chance is nothing, and I pronounce it to be an empty Word, without any
signification of the subject Matter; for who can imagine, that God restraining
all things by Order, there should be any Place left for rash Folly and
Disorder? For it is a great Truth, that nothing can spring out of nothing;
which none of the Ancients ever opposed, although they understood it not of
God, the operating Principle, the chief Beginner, and Worker of all things; but
they made a kind of a Foundation of a material Subject, that is, of the Nature
of all Reason: But if any thing does arise from no Causes, that will seem to
spring out of nothing. But if this cannot be done, it is impossible that Chance
should be any such thing as it is before defined.


Bo. What then is there nothing which may rightly be called Chance or Fortune?
Or is there any thing, although concealed from the Vulgar, to which these Words
may be applied?


Ph. My Aristotle, in his Physics, gives this a brief Definition, and with a
Reason near to Truth.


Bo. How I pray thee does he define it?


Ph. So often as a Man does any thing, for the sake of any other thing, and
another thing than that he intended to do, is produced by other Causes, that
thing so produced is called Chance: As if a Man break up the Earth upon the
account of Tillage, and find there Gold hidden, this is believed to happen by
Chance, although it be not so: for it has its proper Causes; the unforeseen
and unexpected Concourse of which seems to have brought forth Chance: for if
the Husbandman had not plowed his Field, and if the Hider of the Gold had not
hid it in that Place, the Gold had not been found. These are therefore the
Causes of a fortuitous Gain and Advantage, which proceed from a Conflux of
encountering Causes, and not from the Intention of the Doer: For neither he who
hid the Gold, nor he who tilled the Field, intended or understood that that
Treasure should be found there: But, as I said, it happened that the one did
dig where the other had hid his Money; and so these Actions concurring, the
mentioned Effect was produced. Therefore Chance may be defined to be an
unthought-of Event of Causes flowing together in things which are done to
attain some other end: But that Order which proceeds by an unavoidable
Connection of things, streaming from the Fountain of Providence, and which
ranks all things according to Place and Time, makes all Causes assemble and
meet together.


METRUM I.
Rupis Achaemeniae scopulis, ubi versa sequentum
Pectoribus figit spicula pugna fugax, etc.
Swift Tygris and Euphrates.] Tygris is denominated from its swift Flowing, its
Name in the Persian Language signifying an Arrow. It is a River which rises in
the greater Armenia: Virgil mentions it in his 6th Eclogue. Ante pererratis
amborum finibus exul
Aut Ararim Parthus bibet, aut Germania Tigrim.
Euphrates is another River so called from the Pleasure and Profit it occasions
to the Inhabitants of those Countries through which it passes, by overflowing
the Fields, and making them fruitful. If these Rivers do not arise out of the
same Head, they certainly spring from one Mountain; and having for a great way
taken their several Courses, they at last encompass Mesopotamia, and then
joining their Streams they flow together into the Persian Gulf.
Tygris and Euphrates flow
From the Achemenian.] Achemenia by some here is understood to be Armenia, and
the Mountain out of which these Rivers flow is a Part of Mount Taurus.
Achemenian Mountains rocky Brow,
Where in his Flight the Parthians.] The Parthians were a People who descended
from the Scythians, and stretched the Bounds of their Country to those Parts of
Asia which were washed by the Rivers Tygris and Euphrates. These People were
famous Archers, and used in their Battles, when they fled, to shoot their
Arrows backward, and so to gall their Enemies; then turning their Horses, they
would renew the Fight. Hence Virg. Georg. l. 3. Fidentemque fuga Parthum,
versisque sagittis.
Parthians nimble Dart
Does backward pierce the keen Pursuer's Heart,
And soon again these mighty Rivers part.
But if they in their Course should meet again,
Whatever things do swim on either Stream
Would flow together; Ships together steer,
Trees float, which from their Banks the Waters tear,
The mingled Floods would these together bear.
Yet the declining Earth, and good
Order, which in its Course directs the Flood,
Governs these things. So though we often see
Chance seem to wander unconfined and free,
It owns a providential Law which curbs its Liberty.
PROSA II.
Boet. I Understand this well, and I agree that what thou say is true: But is
there, I pray thee, any Freedom allowed to our Wills in this long Train of
cohering Causes, or does the Chain of Destiny also bind the Motions of Men's
Souls?


Ph. There is a Freedom of the Will, nor was there ever any rational Nature
which was not accompanied with it: For that which naturally has the Use of
Reason, has also a Judgment by which it may judge of, and discern every thing.
Of it self then it knows what things are to be avoided, and what to be
desired: Now that thing which a Man judges to be desirable he seeks, and he
refuses that which he deems ought to be avoided; therefore whoever is endowed
with Reason is also possessed of a Liberty of desiring and refusing. But I do
not hold that this Liberty is equal in all Beings; for in supernal and divine
Substances, such as Spirits and Angels are, there is a clear Judgment, and an
incorrupt Will, and a ready and efficacious Power of doing things which are
desired: But the Souls of Men must necessarily be more free when they continue
to exercise themselves in the Contemplation of the Divine Mind; and they must
be less so when they are withdrawn from that noble Speculation, and slide into
corporal Substances; and yet less free when they are encompassed by, and
closely bound up in earthly Members. But the last and meanest Slavery is, when
they give themselves over to Vice, and so fall from the Possession of their
proper Reason: for as soon as they remove their Eyes from the Light of the
highest Truth, and fix them upon low, dark and base Objects, they are
immediately wrapped in a Cloud of Ignorance, are disturbed with pernicious
Desires and Affections; to which when they approach and agree, they help
forward and increase that Servitude which they bring upon themselves; and in
some manner, even under the Liberty proper to them, they are Captives. But yet
the Eye of Providence, which beholds all things from Eternity, sees this, and
disposes, according to their Merits, all things as they are predestined;
(...) that is, Homer. Iliad. g.
He sees and hears all things.


METRUM II.
Puro clarum lumine Phoebum
Melliflui canit oris Homerus, etc.
The sweet-tongu'd Homer's flowing Verse
Does sing of Phoebus, and his purer Light;
Yet the Sun's Rays can never pierce
Into Earth's Bowels, nor his Sight
Reach to the secret Chambers of the Deep,
Where Thetis does her choicest Treasure keep.
But with the World's great Maker it is not so;
He all things from the Heights of Heaven does see,
Nor Earth nor Clouds impede, he will know
What is, what was, and what shall be:
Since God does every Being then alone
Clearly behold, call him the Only Sun.
PROSA III.
Boet. NOW I am distracted with a more difficult Doubt than ever.


Ph. What is that I pray thee? for I do conjecture at what thou art troubled.


Bo. It seems to be repugnant and adverse to Reason, that God should have a
Fore-knowledg of all things, and at the same time there should be any such
thing as Free Will: For if God foresees all things, and can in no manner be
deceived, then that which Providence has foreseen must necessarily come to
pass. Wherefore if from Eternity God does not only foreknow the Deeds, but
also the Counsels and Wills of Men, there can be no Liberty of Will; nor can
there be any other Deed, or any other Will than that which Divine Providence,
which can by no means be deceived, has foreseen or forethought. For if things
may fall out contrary to such Foreseeing, and be wrested another way, there can
be no firm Prescience of Futurities, but rather an uncertain Opinion of them;
and I take it to be impious to believe this of God. Nor do I approve of that
Reason by which some think themselves able to unloose the Knot of this
Question: For they say that a thing is not necessarily to happen, because God
has foreseen that it will be; but rather on the contrary, because a thing is
to happen, it cannot lie hid from the Divine Providence; and so the Necessity
slides upon the other side, it not being necessary that those things should
happen which are foreseen, though it be so that those things should be foreseen
which are to happen: And it is just as if Men busied themselves to enquire
which thing is the Cause of which thing, as whether Prescience be the Cause of
the Necessity of things to come, or otherwise the Necessity of things to come
were the Cause of Providence. But I shall now endeavor to evince by
Demonstration, that however the Order of Causes may stand, the Event of things
foreseen is necessary, although Prescience does not seem to impose a Necessity
upon future things to fall out. For if a Man sit, the Opinion of him that
conjectures that he does sit, must necessarily be true. And again, on the
contrary, if that Opinion be true of any one, because he sits, it is of
necessity true that he does sit. In both of these then there is a Necessity
lodged; for in one is the Necessity of Sitting, and in the other is that of
Truth: But a Man does not therefore sit because the Opinion of his sitting is
true; but the Opinion is rather true, because the Man did sit before. So that
although the Cause of Truth arises from the other part, yet there is in both a
common Necessity seated. Thus may we reason also concerning Providence and
future Events: For if therefore because things are future they are foreseen,
they are not therefore because they are foreseen to arrive: Nevertheless it is
necessary that things to come should be foreseen of God; or if foreseen, that
they should happen: and this thing alone is enough to destroy the Doctrine of
Free Will. But how preposterous a thing is it now, that the Event of temporal
things should be said to be the Cause of eternal Prescience? For what other
thing is it to imagine that God does foresee future things because they are to
happen, than to imagine that what has happened before has been the Cause of
God's all-searching Providence? Add also to this, that when I know that any
thing is, it is necessary that it should be. So also when I know that such a
thing shall come, that must of necessity arrive. Hence it therefore follows
that the Event of a foreknown thing cannot be avoided. Lastly, if any Man does
think otherwise of a thing than it really is, that is not only not Knowledge,
but a false Opinion, differing far from the Truth of Knowledge. Wherefore if any
thing be so to come that its Arrival be not certain and necessary, how can it
be foreseen that it will come? For as pure Knowledge is not mingled and
confounded with Falsity; so also that thing which is conceived by it, and
derived from it, can be no otherwise than according to its Conception. And this
is the Cause that Science abhors Lies and Falsity, and cannot be mistaken in
what it knows, because it is necessary that every thing should be so as that
comprehends it to be. What follows then? In what manner does God know these
uncertain Contingencies? For if he believes that a thing shall inevitably fall
out, which possibly may not fall out, he is deceived; but to believe or to
speak this, is impiously to blaspheme. But if Providence discerns that so as
things are to come; they shall come; so that he knows that many may or may not
be done, what then is this Fore-knowledg, which comprehends nothing certain,
nothing stable? Or what does this differ from the ridiculous Divination of
Tiresias.] He was a Prophet of Thebes, who was feigned to be made blind by
Juno, and to be endowed with the Faculty of Prophesying by Jupiter. Hence Hor.
l. 2. Sermon. Sat. 5. Hoc quoque, Tiresia, praeter narrata, petenti
Responde: quibus amissas reparare queam res
Artibus atque modis.
-- O nulli quicquam mentite, vides, ut
Nudus inopsque domum redeam, te vate.
This Prophet used to speak ambiguously, as others who pretended to that Gift
did, and was used to say, Quicquid dicam aut erit, aut non: When Horace in the
same Place; O Laertiade, quicquid dicam aut erit, aut non:
Divinare etenim magnus mihi donat Apollo.

Tiresias? who said, Quicquid dicam aut erit aut non: All that I shall say
shall either happen or shall not. Or how much does Divine Providence differ
from humane Opinion, if it make uncertain Judgments of things, as Men do, the
Events whereof are not certain. But if there can be nothing of Uncertainty in
him who is the sure Fountain of all things, the Event of those things must be
certain which he firmly did know before would happen. Whence it follows that
Men have no Freedom in their Counsels and Actions; which the Divine Mind,
foreseeing all things, without Falsity or Error, does strongly bind, and
necessarily oblige to one Event. And if it be once granted that there is no
Freedom of Will, it is very evident how great the Confusion, and how mighty the
Distraction will be of humane Affairs: For in vain are Rewards and Punishments
proposed to the Virtuous and Flagitious, which have not been deserved by any
free and voluntary Motion of the Soul. And that which is now adjudged to be the
most just, will be esteemed the most unequal thing in the World, which is, that
evil Men should be punished, and the good rewarded, whom their proper Will does
not incline either to Virtue or Vice, but who are by a certain Necessity
imposed upon Futurities, compelled and thrust forwards toward both. Nor would
there be such things as Virtue or Vice, but rather an undistinguished Mixture
and Confusion of all Rewards. And from this also it will follow, that since all
Order is derived from Providence, and that nothing is left free to the Counsels
and Intentions of Men, that also our Vices shall be referred to the Author of
all Good, than which no Opinion can be more impious. And of this it will also
be a Consequence, that Men shall have no Reason either to hope for any thing
from God, or to pray to him: For, for what should any Man either hope or pray,
since the Series and the unalterable Course of Destiny knitteth all things
together which are desirable? Therefore that only Commerce and Alliance which
is betwixt God and Men, I mean the Liberty of Hoping and Praying, shall be
abolished, and quite extinguished. For at the just Price of Humility and Virtue
we deserve the inestimable Reward of Divine Grace: And these are the only
Means, to wit, Hope and Prayer, by which Men seem to have Power to speak with
God, and to be advanced and joined to the inaccessible Light, even before they
obtain their Requests. And if Men believe that Hope and Prayer have no Power,
because of the Necessity of future Events, what thing is there then by which we
may be united, and may hold fast to God the Prince and Director of all things?
Wherefore Mankind must of necessity, as thou did sing a little before, be
dissevered and disjoined from its Good, and must shrink from its Beginning.


METRUM III.
Quaenam discors foedera rerum
Causa resolvit? etc.
Tell me what disagreeing Cause
Loosens the Bands, and from their Laws
All Beings frees? what powerful Hand
Does make the two Great Truths.] They are the Divine Providence, and the Free
Will of Man.
great Truths contend,
Which separate, subsist, and be,
Yet when they are joined do disagree?
Tell me, can Truths then never differ,
And do they still agree together?
The Mind, with Members clothed, and Night,
Can never, with her darkened Sight,
Bring the close Bonds of things to light.
But why does Man disturb his Mind
The hidden Notes of Truth to find?
Knows he what he to know desires?
But who for what is known inquires?
If not, what blindly seeks he? Who
Wishes for that he does not know?
Or in pursuit of it why does he go?
Or if he seek, where shall he find
The Thing? or if Chance be so kind
To show it to him, how shall he
When found, know what its Form should be:
Or when the Soul does God behold,
Can it all Principles unfold?
But whilst in Flesh it now is hid,
It does not quite it self forget;
With it the Sums of things remain,
Though it Particulars does not retain.
Who to seek Truth then does advance,
Is not in either Circumstance:
For every thing he knows not,
Nor has he wholly all forgot:
But of what to his Thought does come
He recollects and weighs the Sum,
That he may add those Parts which he
Has lost, to those kept in his Memory.
PROSA IV.
Phil. THIS is the old Complaint against Providence, and the Question has been
much agitated and canvas'd by M. T. Cicero.] Videas lib. 2. de Divinatione.
Marcus Tullius Cicero, in his Book of Divination; and thou thy self have
considered it much and long, and made deep Researches into it, but it has not
yet been diligently and thoroughly determined by any of you. And the Cause of
these Difficulties is, that the Motions of humane Ratiocination and Discourse
cannot approach to the Purity of the Divine Prescience, which if Men would any
way comprehend, there would be no doubt or scruple left: Which Difficulties I
shall endeavor to clear to you, and remove, when I have explained and answered
those Reasons by which thou have been moved. For I ask why thou do not think
the Reasons of those who attempt to solve this Question efficacious and
satisfactory; which because they cannot maintain that Prescience is a necessary
Cause of things to come, think that Free Will is nothing hindered by
Prescience? Let me ask, do thou draw an Argument of the Necessity of future
things from any other Topic than this, that those things which are foreknown
cannot but come to pass? If therefore Foreknowledg imposes no Necessity upon
future things, as thou thy self a little before did confess, what is it which
may constrain the voluntary End of things to a certain Event? Now for
Argument-sake, that thou may better understand what Will follow, let us
suppose that there is no Prescience: Shall therefore, as much I mean as in that
lies, those things which proceed from Free Will, be constrained to submit to
the Laws of Necessity?


Bo. No certainly.


Ph. Let us then again suppose that there is such a thing as Prescience, but
that it does not bind things by Necessity; the same entire and absolute Liberty
of the Will will, I think, remain. But thou will say, that although the
Prescience of things to come does not intimate a Necessity of their coming, yet
it is a Sign that they will necessarily happen. In this manner although
Prescience had never been, the Events of future things would certainly be
necessary: For every Sign signifies only what a thing may be, but it does not
effect the thing which it designeth. Wherefore it must first be demonstrated;
that nothing happens but of Necessity, that it may appear that Prescience is
a Sign of that Necessity. Otherwise if there be no Necessity, that
Fore-knowledg can be no Sign of that which is not. And now it appears that this
Proof is supported with firm Reason, and not by Signs and Arguments drawn from
without, but from agreeing and necessary Causes. But how can it then happen,
that those things which are foreseen should not fall out? As if we should not
believe that those things will happen which Providence foreknows are to come;
and that we should not rather think, that though they do happen, yet there is
nothing in their own Nature of Necessity which makes them to do so; which thou
may easily perceive by what I shall say. We see many things when they are
done before our Eyes; as what we see the Charioteer do in turning and winding
of his Chariot; and so thou may imagine it is in all other things. Now is
there any Necessity which compels these things to be done?


Bo. No certainly, for the Working and Effect of Art were vain if all things
were moved by Compulsion.


Ph. The things then which are done are under no Necessity that they should be
done; then first before they were done, they were to have arrived without
Necessity. Wherefore some things come to pass whose Ends are absolved from all
Necessity: For I do not think that any Man will say this, that what is done
now, before it was done, was not to have happened. These things therefore,
although foreknown, have free Events: For as the Knowledge of present things
does impose no Necessity upon things which are now done, no more does the
Fore-knowledg of Futurities upon those which are to come. But of this very
thing thou may say there is a doubt, as whether there can be any certain
Prenotion of things which have no certain and necessary Events: for they seem
to discord, since thou do think that if they be foreseen, they must
necessarily fall out; and if that Necessity fail, they cannot be foreseen; and
that nothing can be comprehended by Science but what is certain. And if those
things which are attended by no certain Event, are foreseen as if they were
certain, that would create a Darkness and Obscurity of Opinion, but not a
steady true Knowledge. And thou think it not to be according to the Integrity
and Manner of Science, to judge of things otherwise than they are. The Cause of
which Error is, that whatsoever Man knows, he thinks his Knowledge is derived
from the Power and Nature only of that which is known, whilst is quite the
contrary: For every thing which is known, is comprehended not after the Power
and Force of the thing, but rather after the Faculty of the Knower. And that
this may be cleared by a short Example, the Sight does one way perceive the
same Roundness of a Body, and the Touch another. The Eye which is placed at a
Distance beholds the whole together, and comprehends it at the same time with
its Rays: But the other cleaving and being joined to the Orb, and moving about
the Circuit, finds out the Roundness by the Parts. And Man himself is one way
looked upon by Sense, another way by the Imagination, another by Reason,
another by the Understanding; for the Sense considers the Figure as it is
constituted and directed in the subject Matter: The Imagination judges of the
Figure alone without the Matter: But Reason transcends the other, and weighs
with an universal Consideration the single Species; but the Eye of the
Understanding soareth higher, for it surmounteth the universal Bounds, and runs
distinctly over the very simple Form by Purity and Subtlety of Thought. In
which that is mostly to be considered, that the superior Power of
Comprehending does embrace the inferior, but the Inferior can by no means
mount up to the Superior: For the Sense can comprehend nothing which is not of
Matter, nor does the Imagination regard the universal Species, nor does Reason
comprehend the simple Form; but the Understanding which looks as it were from
above, when it has conceived the Form, it judges also of all things which are
under it, but it knows them in the same manner by which it comprehended the
Form, which can be known to none of the other: For it knows the whole of
Reason, the Figure of the Imagination, the sensible Matter, neither using
Reason, the Imagination, nor the Senses; but, as I may say, with one Effort of
Mind it brings all things formally within the Compass of its View. Reason
also when she looks upon any universal thing, using neither the Imagination
nor the Senses, does yet comprehend all imaginable and sensible things: For it
is she who defines the Universality of her Conception thus: Man is a rational
Creature with two Feet; which though it be an universal Notion, no one yet is
ignorant of Man's being an imaginable and sensible thing, which she considers
not by Imagination or Sense, but by a rational Conception. The Imagination
also, although it deriveth its Power of seeing and forming Figures from the
Senses, yet in the Absence, and without the Use of the Senses, it considers and
comprehends all sensible things, not by a sensible, but by an imaginative way
of Judging. Do not thou see then, that all things in knowing use rather their
own proper Faculties, than the Force or Powers of those things which are to be
known? Nor is it unreasonable that it should be so; for since every Judgment is
the Act of the Judger, it is necessary that every one should do his own Work by
the Help of his own Faculties, and not by the Assistance of foreign Power.


METRUM IV.
Quondam porticus attulit
Obscuros nimium senes, etc.
The The Porch.] There was a Porch in Athens where some Philosophers did
usually meet to dispute, and other People to hear News. Zeno, amongst the
Ancients, was the first who took occasion to teach Philosophy in this Place;
from whence his Disciples were called Stoics; (...) in the Greek Language
signifying Porch.
Porch did heretofore produce
A kind of dark Philosophers,
Who ignorantly did believe
That all the Images of things,
Obvious to Sense, imprinted were
By outward Objects on the Mind:
As heretofore with a swift Style
Men used on waxen Tables smooth,
And free from any Characters,
Letters and Figures to ingrave.
But by its proper Motions if the Mind
Can nothing do, nor yet explain,
But only passively does lie
From outward Objects taking all
Idea's, and its Figures, and presents,
Like some dull Mirror to the Eye,
The fainter Images of things;
Whence does the Knowledge then proceed
By which the Mind does all things comprehend?
Whence is the Force which does behold
Each Being then? or whence is that
Which does divide those things when known?
Or that again which recollects
Divided things, changing its way
Alternately, for sometimes it
Raises its Head to higher things,
Then to the lowest does descend?
And when to it self it does return,
Confuteth false things by the true?
This Cause now efficacious is,
More powerful too than that which does
Admit the Characters impressed
Like servile Matter; yet the Sense,
Which in the living Body does remain,
Does go before, and does excite
And move the Forces of the Mind:
As when the Light does strike the Eye,
Or as the Voice does strike the Ear:
Then is the Force of Thought awaked,
Calls out the Species which it has within
It self, to move about and act,
Applies them to the outward Notes,
Mingling and joining all those Images
Fixed in it self in foreign Forms.
PROSA V.
BUT if in knowing and perceiving of Bodies, although the Qualities objected
from without may affect the Instruments or Organs of the Senses, and the
Passion or Suffering of the Body may go before the Strength and Vigor of the
acting Soul, which may call forth the Act of the Mind or Thought residing
within it self, and may in the mean time excite the Forms which lie quietly
within: If, I say, in the perception of bodily things the Soul is not by the
Impression of Passion made to know these things, but by its own Power judges
of the Passion and Suffering of the Body, how much more then shall those things
which are absolved and free from the Passions and Affections of Bodies, and
from any Commerce with them, not in discerning, be guided by outward Objects,
but accomplish and execute purely the Acts of their own Minds and Thoughts? By
this Reason then there are several sorts of Knowing, to several and differing
Substances: For Sense, which is alone destitute of all other Knowledge, is
allotted to those Creatures which cannot move; such as are Shells of the Sea,
and other things which are nourished by sticking to the Rocks. But the
imaginative Power is possessed by Beasts, which can move of themselves, and who
seem to have some kind of Faculty of desiring or refusing things; but Reason is
the Talent of Mankind alone, as Intelligence only appertains to the Divine
Nature. Hence it is that that Knowledge exceeds all other, which by its own
Nature is not only acquainted with the Matter of that which properly belongs to
it, but also with that which is subjected to all others. But how will it then
fall out, if Sense and Imagination oppose and are contrary to Reason, affirming
that that Universal is nothing which Reason thinks it so perfectly sees? For
Sense intimates that that which is sensible and imaginable, cannot be
universal: Then therefore the Judgment of Reason must be true, that nothing can
be sensible: Or else, because she knows that many things are subject to Sense
and Imagination, the Conception of Reason must be vain, which considers that
which is sensible and singular as an Universal. But if Reason should again
answer to those things, and say, that she truly comprehends what is sensible
and imaginable within the Compass of Universality; but yet she cannot aspire to
the Knowledge of Universality, because Knowledge of the former cannot exceed
corporeal Figures: But as to the Knowledge of things, we ought to give Belief to
the more firm and perfect Judgment of them. In a Contest of this kind
therefore, ought not we who have in us all the Powers of Reason, Imagination,
and Sense, rather to approve and support the Cause of Reason? Like this it is,
when humane Reason imagines that the Divine Understanding beholds or knows
not things to come, but just as they are beheld or known by her. For thus thou
arguest; What things do not seem to have certain and necessary Events, they
cannot be foreknown certainly to happen. Of these things therefore there is no
Fore-knowledg; or if we believe that there be any, then is there nothing which
does not happen of Necessity. If therefore we might have the Judgment of the
Divine Mind, as we are Partakers of Reason, we should judge as we have already
judged, that Imagination and Sense ought to yield to Reason, and also judge that
it is most just that humane Reason ought to submit it self to the Mind of God.
Wherefore, if we may, let us advance our selves to the Height of the highest
Intelligence, and there Reason shall see that which she cannot find in her
self; and that is, in what manner the Prescience of God sees and defines all
things, although they have no certain Event; nor let this be looked upon as an
Opinion, but rather the Purity and Simplicity of the Supreme Knowledge, which
can be included within no Bounds.

METRUM V.
Quam variis terras animalia permeant figuris! Namque alia extento sunt
corpore, pulveremque verrunt, etc. In Shapes how differing Creatures wander
through the Earth!
Some with extended Bodies go, and sweep the Dust,
And by the Impression of their Breasts a Furrow make.
Some beat the yielding winds with nimbleness of wing,
And with a moister Flight swim through the Air;
Some with their Feet affect to press the softer ground,
Or in the verdant Meads, or in green Woods to walk.
Yet tho thou see them differ in their various Forms,
They do in this together center and agree,
That their Looks downward bent, their heavier Sense makes dull.
But Man alone does raise his noble Head on high,
Light, and erect he stands, and does despise the Earth.
Thou art admonished by this Figure then, unless
Thy earthly Mind does thee deceive, that whilst toward
The Heavens thy Face thou raisest, and thy Forehead do
Advance, thou should advance thy Mind on high,
Lest, whilst thy Body toward the starry Regions looks,
Thy noble Mind should toward the Center be deprest.
PROSA VI.
Phil. BEcause therefore, as I have demonstrated a little before, that every
thing which is known, is not by its own Nature known, but by that of him who
comprehends it, let us now behold, as far as it is lawful for Philosophers,
what the Estate is of the Divine Substance, that we may better see what this
Knowledge is. It is the common Judgment then of all those who live by the Rules
of Reason, that God is Eternal: Let us then consider what Eternity is, for this
would lay open to us, at the same time, the Nature of God and his Knowledge.
Eternity therefore is a total and a perfect Possession of a Life which shall
never have an End; which appears more clearly from the Comparison of temporal
things: For whatsoever lives in time, proceeds to the present, from what is
past to what is to come: And there is nothing under the Laws of Time, which can
at once comprehend the whole Space of its Life. For a Man does not yet possess
to Morrow; and what was Yesterday he has already lost; and in the Life of this
Day you live no more but as in this passing and transitory flowing Moment.
Whatever therefore is subject to a temporal Condition, although, as Aristotle
thought of the World, it never began to be, nor shall ever have end, but its
Life shall be drawn out to an Infinity of Time, yet it is not that which Men
may rightly judge to be Eternal: for although it comprehends the Space of an
infinite Life, yet it does not embrace altogether at the same time; for it
wants the future things which are not yet arrived. Whatsoever then comprehends
and possesses together, and at the same time the Fullness of an endless Life,
which wants nothing of Futurity, and from which nothing that is past is
escaped, ought justly to be esteemed Eternal: For it is necessary that that
should always be present to it self, and Master of it self, and that it have
always with it the Infinity of movable Time. Therefore they err, who when they
heard that Plato believed that this World neither had Beginning, nor shall have
End, in this manner they make that which is created, Coeternal with its
Creator: For it is one thing to be led on through an interminable Life, which
Plato granted to the World, and another to comprehend at the same time together
the Presence of such an one, which it is manifest is only proper to God. Nor
ought it to seem to us that God is antienter than the created World by quantity
of Time, but rather by the simple Propriety of his Nature. The infinite Motion
of temporal things imitates the present State of immovable Life: and since it
can neither counterfeit nor equal it, from Immobility it passes into Motion;
from the Simplicity of a present, it goes into an infinite Quantity of future
and past Time: And since it cannot together possess the Fullness of it self; yet
in this, since it never cease in some measure to be, it seems faintly to
emulate that, to whose Perfection it cannot attain, and which it cannot fully
express, binding it self to some kind of Presence of this small and swift
Moment; which, because it bears some Resemblance of that durable and present
Time, it gives to those things to which it happens a seeming Existence. And
because this small Moment may not stay, it does therefore proceed in the
infinite way of Time. And hence it is that it continues it self in Progression,
to the Fullness of which it could not attain by being fixed. If then we would,
following Plato, impose Names suitable to things, let us say, that God is only
Eternal, and the World is Perpetual. Since then every Judgment comprehends
those things which are subject to it, according to its own Nature, there must
always be allowed to God an eternal and ever present State: His Knowledge also
exceeding all the Motions of Time, remains in the Pureness and Simplicity of
its Presence, containing the infinite Spaces of present and past Time, and
considers all things by the Purity of that Knowledge, as if they were now
doing. If therefore thou would rightly consider of that Prescience by which
he fore-knoweth all things, thou shall not esteem it as a Fore-knowledg of what
is to come, but more rightly thou will find it to be the Knowledge of the
present, and never failing NOW. Therefore it is not to be called Praevidentia,
but rather Providentia; which being placed far above all inferior things, does
as it were behold all from the very Heights of the World. What is it then that
thou would have, that these things should be attended by a necessary Event,
which are viewed by the Divine Eye, since Men do not make those things
necessary which they behold? For does thine Eye which beholds a present
thing, add any thing of Necessity to it?


Bo. No, it does not.


Ph. But if Men do make a just Comparison betwixt the Divine and Humane
Prescience, then as you see something by your temporal one, God sees all
things by his eternal one. Therefore this Divine Foresight does not change the
Nature and Property of things, but only beholds those things as present to him,
which shall in time be produced: Nor does it confound the Judgment of things,
but knows at one View what is necessarily, and what is not necessarily to
arrive. So you, when at the same time you see a Man walk upon the Earth, and
the Sun to rise in the Heaven, although both were seen at the same time, yet
you discern and judge that the Action of the one was voluntary, and that of the
other was a necessary one: So therefore the Eye of God looking down and
beholding all things under him, does not at all disturb the Qualities of
things, which to him are present, but, in respect of Time, to you are future.
Hence it is that this is not an Opinion, but a certain Knowledge grounded upon
Truth, that when God knows that any thing is to be, at the same time he
knows it not to be under a Necessity of existing. And here if thou say,
that what God does foresee shall happen, it cannot but happen; and that which
cannot do otherwise than happen, must of Necessity come to pass, and so must
bind me to a Necessity: I will confess that this is a most solid Truth, but it
is such an one that scarce any one can attain to, unless he be acquainted with
the Mind of God. For I will answer thee thus; That the Thing which is to
arrive, being referred to the Divine Knowledge, becomes necessary; but if it be
taken according to its own Nature, it seems altogether absolute and free: For
there are two kinds of Necessities; one simple, as that it is necessary for all
Men to die; the other is conditional, as if thou know any one does walk, it
is necessary that he do walk. What then any one knows, it cannot be otherwise
than it is known to be: But this Condition does not at all draw that simple one
along with it. For its proper Nature does not constitute this Necessity, but
the Addition of the Condition: For no Necessity compels a Man to walk, who
walks voluntarily, although it must be necessary that he should walk when he
does. Therefore, in the same manner, if Providence sees any thing present, it
is necessary that it should be, although in its own Nature there be nothing to
constitute that Necessity: but all Futurities, which proceed from Free Will,
God sees as present to him. These things therefore, Relation being had to the
Divine Sight, are made necessary by the Condition of the Divine Knowledge; but
being considered by themselves, they do not recede from the absolute Liberty of
their Nature. All things therefore shall come to pass, which God foresees shall
have a Being, but many of them proceed from Free Will; which, although they do
happen, yet they do not by existing lose any thing of their Nature; by which it
was in their Power before they did happen, not to have happened.


Bo. What then, is it to the purpose if things be not necessary in their own
Nature, since by the Condition of the Divine Knowledge they fall out together,
as if they lay under a Necessity?


Ph. This is the Difference, that those things which a little before I proposed
to thee, to wit, the Sun rising, and a Man going, which, when they are done,
cannot but be done: But yet it was necessary that one of these before it was
done should exist, but it was not so with the other. So then those things which
God does see at present, do without doubt exist; but some of them proceed from
the Nature of things, as is instanced in the rising of the Sun; and others from
the Will and Power of the Doer, as it is in the other Instance.


Bo. Therefore I did not say amiss when I said, that some things, being
referred to the Divine Knowledge, are necessary; but if considered by
themselves, they are absolved from the Bonds of Necessity. Just as every thing
which is an Object of the Senses, if it be considered by Reason, it is
universal; but if by it self, it is singular. But thou may say, that if it be
in my Power to change my purpose, I shall destroy Providence, and make it to
signify nothing, if perchance I should change that which she has foreseen.


Ph. Thus I will answer thee, That thou may perchance alter thy purpose; but
because the present Truth of the Divine Providence foreseeth that thou may
change it; but whether thou do it or not, or which way soever thou may turn
it, thou can not avoid the Prescience of God; no more than thou can fly
from the Sight of his Eye, although by the Freedom of thy Will thou do turn
thy self to never so great a Diversity of Actions. But what then may thou
say? Shall the Divine Knowledge be changed according to the Mutability of my
Disposition; so that when I would now do that, and now do this, that also
should seem to vary its turns of Knowing? No certainly; for the Divine Eye
foreruns all future things, and returns and brings them back to the Presence of
God's proper Knowledge. Nor does he, as thou think, change his turns of
Foreknowing, now this, now that; but he remains fixed, and at once foresees and
comprehends all the Variations and Changes. Which present Faculty of
comprehending and seeing all things, God does not receive from the Events of
future things, but from the proper Simplicity of his own Nature. Hence also
that is resolved which thou did lay down a little before, which was, that it
is unfit to be thought that our future Actions and Events are the Causes of the
Prescience of God: For this Strength of the Divine Mind which embraces and
comprehends all things with a present Knowledge, has it self appointed a Method
and Bounds to all things, and is not beholden to Futurities. Since then things
are thus, there remains to Men an inviolable Freedom of Will. Nor are the Laws
to blame when they propose Rewards and Punishments to those whose Wills are
free from the Yoke of Necessity. That God also who foreknoweth all things
remains above, and the always-present Eternity of his Sight agrees with the
future Quality of our Actions, dispensing Rewards to good, and Punishments to
evil Men. Nor are our Hopes and Prayers lodged and addressed to God in vain,
which when they are sincere and honest cannot be unsuccessful, nor without
Effect. Hate Vice then, and turn from it; love, honor and adore Virtue;
advance your Minds and Thoughts to the truest Hope, and let your humble Prayers
mount on high: for there is a great Necessity of being good and virtuous
imposed upon you, if you will not dissemble, since you act in the Sight of a
Judge that sees all things.


The End of the Fifth and last Book.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. lin. 24. for Theoric read Theory. P. 5. l. ult. f. Bankey Coasts r.
Banks. P. 18. l. 21. f. sole r. solo. P. 19. in Margin r. adversus praefectum
praetorio. P. 24. l. 9. dele etc. P. 27. l. 23. f. unhappy r. happy. P. 30. l.
11. f. Scyrius r. Seirius; and f. (...) r. (...). P. 31. l. 20. r. Behold poor.
P. 34. l. 2. for these r. those. P. 39. l. ult. r. seems. P. 40. l. 5. f. she
r. it. l. 6, and 7. f. her r. its. P. 45. l. 11. f. Scene r. Theater. P. 46. l.
25. r. Negroponte. l. 27. r. Baeotia. P. 50. l. 8. r. did. P. 51. l. 16. f.
all r. is. P. 57. l. ult. f. pulchralis r. pulchra tui. P. 67. l. 8. r.
Natures. P. 71. l. 3. r. craving. l. 28. f. nec r. net. P. 72. l. 15. r. with.
P. 76. l. 23. r. Amphidamas. P. 78. l. 12. r. caesis. P. 82. l. 5, 6. r.
redoubted. P. 86. l. 31. f. Trascat r. Frascati. l. ult. r. Grotta's. P. 89. l.
16. f. line r. ligue. P. 100. l. 15. f. his r. her. l. 19. r. rendered it by. P.
106. l. penult. f. humidum r. tumidum. P. 109. l. 13. dele the last and. P.
110. l. 20. f. his r. hic. P. 113. l. 22. r. adjiceret. P. 130. l. 24. f.
fluitous r. fluitans. P. 176. l. 5. dele just. P. 191. l. 24. f. was r. is. P.
208. l. 29. f. Gardius r. Gardens. P. 217. l. 12. r. corporeal.


