The Fifth Book of the Author, In Three Parts.

The First; Of the Becoming Man or INCARNATION of Jesus Christ The Son of God.

That is, Concerning The Virgin Mary, What she Was from her Original, and what
kind of Mother she came to be in the Conception of her Son Jesus Christ, And
how the Eternal Word is become Man.

The Second Part, is of Christ's Suffering, Dying, Death, and Resurrection, and
how we may enter thereinto.

The Third Part, is of the Tree of Christian Faith; showing what True Faith is.

Written Through the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, By Jacob Behme THE
Teutonick Philosopher, Dwelling at Gerlitz in Lusatia in Germany, 1620.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Lodowick Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhil, 1659.

The PREFACE to the Reader of Jacob Behmes Book of Christ's Incarnation.
Reader,
IT is an Eminent Text. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have
Eternal life, and they are they which testify of ME, And Ye will not come unto
ME that ye might have Life, Joh. 5. 39. 40. which are the words of our Lord
and, Savior Jesus Christ to the Jews at Jerusalem, in the days of this
Conversation upon Earth in Mortal Flesh: They thought to have Eternal life in
the Scriptures, and were present with Christ outwardly, yet would not come unto
Him, though the Scriptures are they that testify of Him: by which it may
appear, that the Coming to Christ must needs be inwardly, in Coming to be like
him in their Hearts, in becoming Meek and lowly of Heart: such only and no
other do come unto him in any Age or Place of this world or in Eternity: nor
can any other possibly have life.

Though the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are indeed the written
word of God; Penned by the Holy Prophets and Apostles, who speak as they were
inspired by the Holy Ghost, whose words are some of them recorded in the Holy
writings the Bible.

Yet if we consider it seriously, can we think that the Eternal Ever-living
word, CHRIST JESUS, by which all things were Created, and which is God himself;
who has spoken by his Word, in all his Holy Ones, that have spoken forth the
Things mentioned in the Scriptures, and there recorded by the Command of the
same word: I say this being weighed, can it enter into our Hearts to think,
that this powerful word which is God, would only have the Scriptures, to be
called the word of God, and the living power to be slightly passed by as not
observed, or those Texts that speak of it, to be interpreted of the Holy
Scriptures only; as if there were no such Thing besides; whereas, for the sake
of that, they were written, the holy Men spoke, and God has wrought, all
things, and that by, and for, it, to his own Glory.

Also, that the writing, should be preferred, before the Thing that is written
of, therein, and which caused the writing and dictated it, as it is, by those,
that think, the word is not that, which fills all Things, calling in the
Hearts of All, though not regarded.

Further; that this Holy Scripture does say: the word is in the Heart; and yet
is not by some, conceived to be there, before the word was known to be written
by any Man, or spoken by humane voice, neither of which, could be, or act,
unless first directed by the same Eternal Word.

And then; that the Word is in the Hearts of those only that have heard or
read the Scriptures, or the Word vocally pronounced by Man.

And at length to think, the Word, is only the Scriptures of the Bible, in
their Hearts, by and after the hearing or reading it, and remembering what it
mentions in Words, according to their own Notions or apprehensions of the
Things in their Minds, though perhaps not understood, by those Persons, nor
indeed can be, but by the Spirit of understanding, awakened and revived in Man,
by the power of the Living Word in the Heart, filling the soul with
understanding and believing; in those who are obedient, to the Movings and
dictates thereof in the Mind, though they never read or learned it from any
outward word or writing at all; of which, there are many Examples in the Holy
Scriptures.

And so now, That the Scriptures, which mention the word of Life, should be
taken to be that very word of Life it self, and that thereby the Thing which is
so called in the Scriptures, should be thought to be the Scriptures only, and
no further search or inquiry made, what that Thing is, or where it is, and how
to find the very Thing it self; as if, that were impossible, or not the Maine
Matter to be looked after; whereas God himself says, Am not I he that fills
all things, and in him are all Things: Can not HE then be found, and whosoever
finds him, can he miss of finding ALL THINGS? This seems strange that it
should enter into the Heart of any Man: and that we should be so tied up to
former apprehensions and Conclusions fixed in our Minds, that further
consideration of it cannot easily take place, and sink into us, it may make us
stand a while, and examine what may be the cause thereof.

And then we may observe, that commonly our disposition is such, that we love
not to hear opposion, or a different apprehension of others, least we should
thereby be led to think and Believe, that which is contrary to our former once
framed Ground of Opinion, abstracted from outward sense only: and this because
all Conclusions raised upon it, when that is once removed, do fall to the
ground, and so we loose that Great Labor, and must be put to work a fresh upon
that new Foundation, and then a fear if that should again be shaken, there must
be another labor, with the like hazard of unprofitable Success, which is so
huge a discourgement to any Mind, that it brings it at length to be
languishing and as it were dead, epecially if an assured infallible immovable
internal Ground be not presented to it, that it may go on cheerfully to build,
with hope to enjoy fruit, in beholding the beauty of its Superstructure; and
when it is thus dead in it self, it is most capable to be taught by the
quickening Spirit of Truth, that lies hidden in it, under its former but
supposed Truths.

Yet, to deny, that the Holy Scriptures, are the written word of God, or the
Word of God Expressed in writing, is, besides the opposing of apparent Truth,
to undervalue, that precious help to the knowing and understanding, what that
Word was, by which it was written, which is the very End for which it was
committed to writing and continued to us, and is, one of the most Excellent
fruits of the wisdom remaining in Letters, which that Eternal Word has
produced in this outward visible transitory World.

But, the Esteeming that fruit, and looking after it more then the Roor, and
setting it up instead of, and above, the hidden Word in all things; is that
which has been attempted in the Hearts of Men, by the suggestion of the
Arch-Enemy of all Mankind: who knows well enough, that if the inward Word be
once Choked and killed at the Root, so that it grows not to be felt known
and obeyed; he will soon cause in Evil Minds, that Most precious literal Word,
to be used only as a pretense, thereby to cover all Sin in Hypocrisy, causing
the Word in the Heart, not to be so much as thought on or observed: whereas, on
the Contrary, he that highly esteems of the Word, the Commandment, Christ in
the Heart, that word of Faith, by which the heart it self comes originally to
have its very being: cannot in the least fail of Esteeming, the powerful
working thereof in the inexpressible various wisdom, dwelling in the Heart and
appearing from the Mouth or Pen of any Man whatsoever.

Therefore peruse this Book, which will inform us, how the Eternal Word became
Man, and how the Man JESUS CHRIST, who was born of the Virgin Mary, and lived
upon Earth, for the space of Three and Thirty years and upwards, then was
Crucified, dyed, was buried, arose again, and ascended into Heaven; within the
little part of the World, that Space of the Country of Egypt the Wildernss,
the Land of Canaan Judea and City of Jerusalem, in the fullness of Time, about
sixteen hundred and fifty Eight years ago. How HE was also, this Eternal Word,
which was, is, and Ever shall be, God, and Christ, the Eternal Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the End, the word of Faith; that very Word which is in our
Hearts, the word of Life, the inserted or ingrafted Word, the word of Grace,
the Spirit of Life, the Bread which came down from Heaven, and which always is
in Heaven, not the outward, though in the outward Bread, for we live not by
bread alone, but by every word which proceeds out of the Mouth of God, this
is the Bread of Life, Our (...). Mat. 6. 11.
Daily Bread: and so how he is both God and Man: Also how we that are Men, may
here in this Life, be rightly partakers of Him according to the sayings of the
Scriptures, also of his Sufferings Death and Resurrection: and how or in what
manner it is, that he is like unto us in all things Sin only excepted, and
yet he took our Sins upon him, and he that knew no Sin, became Sin for
us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. All this will be
clearly discerned in this Treatise of the Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST or his
Becoming Man: and therefore also, that so precious knowledge may not remain any
longer shut up, it is here published in the English Tongue.

Though by perusing it and Meditating therein, the Holy Bible will appear
assuredly, to be as much the Word of God, as a writing by Man's hand can be; and
the words there, once spoken by the Prophets, Christ, the Apostles and other
Holy Men, as much the word of God, as words and voices of Men can be; The true
sense and meaning thereof, in the understanding, as much the word of God as the
Meaning in the Mind and understanding of any Man can be.

Yet the writing, the Words, and sense or meanings, proceeding from Creaturely
Instruments, are creaturely, whereas, the Thing properly called the word of
God, which inwardly frames those Meanings and forms all things whatsoever
both visible and invisible, is not a Creature, for it is the Creator, the
Creating Word, which is God himself, who forms all things in himself, and so
ALL is HE, not one JOT, a Creature; But he creates the Creature, and dwells
therein, yet the Creature is not nor ever can be, He: and so that word of his
which is produced effected brought forth and Manifested Externally by the
Creature, is Gods Word, but is not, God the Word, But the inward Word in the
Heart, that word of Faith, even Christ the Word, that Word is God.

Let me enquire a little Were not all The Things which are seen are Temporal,
but the Things which are not seen are Eternal.
Eternal Things whatsoever, 2 Cor. 4. 28.
in Being in their own uncreated World, before therewas so much as the least
Glimps of any Created thing, either Angel or Man, either Created Light or
Darkness, either Created Heaven or Hell, or this World? And were not the Divine
holy Spiritual, and all other Natural things in Being, without the Created
inward and outward world as well as in them? And had it not been so, though the
Angels world and ours had never been created? And were not all the Things
without them and within them, in Being, though they had not been spoken of in
the Scriptures? were not, the Word, God; though John the Apostle had not said
so? were not the Pure in Heart Blessed? should we not through Patience possess
our Souls? Is not God himself Light? And if we walk in the Light as he is in
the Light, does not the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanse us from All Sins?
otherwise not, though it be in us. And is not his Flesh meat indeed and his
Blood drink indeed? Why do we not eat and drink thereof? If we deny our selves,
and take up the Cross of Christ, that is, tribulation anguish afflictions
adversities and Crosses, and follow him in Meekness and well-doing, loving those
that hurt us, returning Good for Evil to every one, and blessing for Cursing,
and this unfeignedly from a sincere Heart: are we not his true Disciples? will
not Heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that desire it? though certain
Disciples, that believed and had been baptized in the Time of the Apostles, had
not so much as heard whether there was any holy Ghost, yet being baptized in
the Name of the Lord JESUS, and having the hands of Paul laid on them, they
received the holy Ghost and Spoke with Tongues and prophesied. Do not they
receive the Seed into Good Ground, that hear the Inward Word, and receive,
consent to, or obey it, and so, understand it, and also bring forth fruit? Does
not Faith come by inward Hearing, and that Hearing by the same word of God? And
can those that have not Ears to hear, that is, Spiritual Ears, hear, though his
voice his Spiritual Tongue and voice is gone into all the Earth, that Word
ingrafted in every thing by which all does subsist? Can the Natural Man
perceive the Things of God, seeing they are spiritually to be discerned: or can
any teach them rightly, that is Spiritually, but by the Spirit? And if the word
of Promise the Seed of the woman had not been quickened in Adam and Eve, by Gods
putting Enmity between the Woman's and the Serpents Seed, they both of them and
all their posterity, had been merely Natural and Children of wrath only, and
had been incapable of ever becoming the Children of Grace and Mercy: but in the
Word of promise Christ in them, all Mankind have in them, the Spiritual Man,
the hidden Man of the Heart, in whom, even Cain was able to do well, and so
doing should have been accepted, and in whom, they are not only able to discern
but to do all things; but if they love themselves, more then God in them; then
their Perdition is of themselves. Has not God shed abroad his Love in our
Hearts? Can any rightly say, Lord! Lord! but by the Holy Spirit? And are not
the Father the Word and Spirit which bear record in Heaven One? And do not the
Spirit the Water and the Blood which bear record on the Earth agree in One?
Also, is not the Kingdom of Heaven within us? And does it not consist in Peace
Righteousness, and Joy in the Holy Ghost? and then must not all needs be in us?
And we may thereby apprehend and understand it rightly, though yet we know it
not nor ever read it, or though it had not been related in the Holy Scriptures.

How many Thousand Endless Mysteries, are Treasured up in the hidden wisdom of
God in Christ, and in him in us? when we find him and partake of him, in him we
have them all, and from his fullness receive Grace for Grace: how narrowly
therefore should we search and observe, the exact words of the Scripture, which
so surely as an Index, point us to these invaluable things; and use that
powerful word in our Hearts, by which hearing Comes, and direction and power of
understanding those things, not only which are expressed inwardly or
outwardly, but even whatsoever is hidden in Christ, in whom all fullness dwells:
and then can any thing be impossible to be apprehended or known by a Soul, that
has the very Thing in it self, where nothing can be hid from its inward Eyes?

And since God works in us both to will and to do, why refuse we to will and
to do? by hearkening and yielding to the Lusts of our own Hearts, being
Servants in Obedience to the Evil, and not of God, who is likewise in us with
his Grace and fullness: we thinking nevertheless, that we can neither will nor
do, endeavoring to bring Scripture to prove it; to the quenching of the
Spirit, the manifestation whereof, is given to every one to profit withal: and
this is effected in those that understand not, how to satsfie themselves, in
the meaning of those Scripture Arguments that are alleged for proofs; not
considering that God works in us to be able through him in us, so that there
is himself his power and ability in our Selves, though not Self-ability, as of
our selves: for, the Most Holy Man born of the fleshly Seed of Father and
Mother, of himself as of himself, is not able to think a Good Thought, but
there is none so wicked, except he be altogether incapable to desire
Conversion, and so is a Devil, but does at some time or other in this life,
think a Good Thought; which testifies the good work of God in his-heart and
soul, and is the stirring of the Divine Word therein, in which is Light, but
Men love darkness rather then Light, though it Ever Eternally shone in the
Darkness, and is the very light of their life in them; and that because their
Deeds are Evil; and they will not follow to will and do according to it, which
is the Obedience to the divine. Light in them; though God has given even his
whole self unto them to Convert them, wherein they are able to do all things
through Christ that strengthens them; and yet will not, but neglect so great
Salvation. And these Comfortable words expressed in the holy Scriptures are
faithful and the Things certain and undeniably true though the Scriptures had
never made mention of them; and are all of them to be discerned known and
thoroughly understood in the Things themselves, by and in every Soul; but our
want is that we seek not.

The Consideration whereof, should move us, earnestly to labor, to understand,
more and more, where and how, that word is to be found felt seen and known, as
this Book does exceedingly help us; that we may infallibly Experimentally, and
understandingly, Testify unto the Truth of the Holy Scriptures, by the through
Examination of the Things it speaks of; seeing the Scripture directs to that
which is to be understood no way but in the Things themselves, as all that is
written of is to be known Experimentally, whether it be Natural or Divine,
solely by comparing the writing by and with the Things, else all is but a
Notional and Imaginary Supposition or Opinion without understanding, but by the
knowing of Things we should by degrees cease from Contention, and rightly
certainly and infallibly know God, and the Wonders he has wrought and can and
will work in all things, especially in the Souls of Holy Men, some of whom, out
of the good hidden treasure of the living word in the Heart, have committed to
writing those few things contained in the Scriptures, being few in respect of
the Infinite Depths of the Deity; and so proceeding forward from Grace to
Grace, from Knowledge to knowledge, we may attain to the measure of the fullness
of the stature of a Man in Christ and not be always children in understanding,
but even strong Men in Christ.

The Apostle John's words. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our Selves; May
they be taken as meant speaking of others, and not himself included? what then
shall we think was become of his Earthly Old Adam of his outward Flesh and
Blood, wherein he was Mortal? had he not that when he said so, that he might
justly exclude himself from having any sin? as having laid of this life and
body he might have done, having the new heavenly Body, and not the old Earthly
one about him at all: in which Mortal flesh and Blood only, which Christ
himself took of the Seed of the Virgin Mary, he became, Sin, for us, and
could die; else it had not been possible, as is largely cleared in this
Treatise: Though if there be no Consent of the Soul, it may truly be said by
any one, with the Apostle Paul, It is no more I, that do the Evil which I would
not, but Sin that dwells in me: Yet of this Mortal Corruptible Flesh, which
dies and remains in Corruption in the Grave, and will not be changed till the
General Resurrection of all the Dead at the last day, of that it may be always
said, as he likewise says of himself, after he was rapt into the Third Heaven,
and not of others only: I know that in me, that is, in my Flesh, dwells no
Good thing. And that is it, in which Evil was present with him, when he
would do Good; for with his Flesh he served the Law of Sin: Can any serve
God with his Flesh? but with the Mind he can, and does when he wills the
Good.

Yet why are the Mysteries of the Bible, so little understood, but because we
apprehend not, that God and Christ and the Holy Spirit, and all Graces, as also
Sin, are inwardly in Every soul; the flesh lusting against the Spirit and
the Spirit against the Flesh in every one, and so the love and wrath of God is
in all things either hidden or manifested; and that all the things which we
perceive in this corruptible world to be transitory, are in the spiritual
inward uncreated world, Eternal in Substance, and cannot but endure for
evermore, which if it were considered we should find what all things are, for
they are to be found within our Souls, and with our Inward Eyes, and may be
plainly seen discerned and known; and so the holy Scriptures, as we come to a
greater measure of the knowledge of the Things, not only that they are, but
what and how they are, as this Author teaches, would come to be understood, as
to all those Mysteries of the Gospel of Christ's Eternal Redemption and
Salvation, which he has purchased for all Mankind: then which there is not
any thing comparably desirably to be known, by any of the Sons of Men, which
are here fundamentally and particularly explained more then in any other Book
of the Authors, wherein thou will find such Mysteries discovered as formerly
thou could not have believed, though one had told thee of them, and which
thou have not so clearly understood, though thou have often read of them in the
Scriptures: And if all Jews Turks Heathens and others not yet true Christians,
should perceive the Things therein written, they would instantly with willing
and ready Hearts believe in God aright, and worship the Father in Spirit and in
Truth; and know the Only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, and then
be filled with Joy in the Holy Ghost; and love Embrace and highly esteem the
understanding of the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, which nnot many
yet care to be assured they understand them aright by the true knowledge of the
Things written of therein. Though also the Ground of all Mysteries are in this
Book laid open, which being apprehended, may bring us at length to the full
understanding of all that the Scriptures do contein, except in what the spirit
of God will conceal, as what the seven Thunders in the Revelations, sounded
forth, which yet will be made known to that soul, what those things are, that
the Spirit will not yet reveal, but that the Father will reserve in his own
power, till the thing be near to be accomplished, though it may be understood
by one or other holy soul in the Nature of the Thing, with a Command not to
make it known to others; yet though we understand things never so perfectly in
our Spirits souls and heavenly Bodies in our Inward Man, we enjoy them inwardly
only, in assured hope, but not as we shall do, neither do we see them as we
shall do, when we so enjoy them as we do now this world with this outward Body,
both which, will be changed together at the End, and though this body is Cor.
15. 42. 43.
sown in weakness, at the resurrection thereof, it is raised in power, a
spiritual incorruptible immortal Eternal body, made conformable to Christ's
Glorious Body, to such as have been partakers of him in this life, this will be
in that World, where all Evil shall be done away, first from sticking and
adhereing to us as now in and by our Outward Man in this life: and them also,
all corruption being done away, as at the change of this world and resurrection
of the Body that will be also released from those Clogs of imperfection which
now hang on us Outwardly; and on this whole now visible world, and will do till
all Things are separated by the Fire at the last day and every thing shall go
to its own Place, the wicked into everlasting Torment, the Righteous to Eternal
Bliss; then Corruption shall put on Incorruption, and God shall be all in all;
yet all things will remain to be what they then are, though God will be all in
Every one of them.

In the mean time, we may attain Perfection, in our souls, spirits, and new
heavenly Bodies, being therein truly members of Christ in us, yet we should
bring down our Body daily, and Mortify our Members that are on the Earth, and
learn to know how every one of us, may justly account our selves even the Chief
of sinners, finding sin to be out of measure sinful, and thereby strive through
Godly sorrow, to bring forth Indignation in us against it: and how sin dwells,
though we should not let it reign in our Mortal Bodies, to obey it in the Lusts
thereof, and if by the spirit we thus mortify the deeds of the Body, we shall
live, for then we bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, wherein we are perfect
even in this life.

And because this Treatise will so exceedingly further us, in these several
divine Considerations, let me desire the Reader for his own Benefit, to peruse
it seriously: and he will find as I have done, more then now before he read it
he can conceive; though I viewing my self in the Looking-Glass of my sins, may
find just cause to acknowledge myself one of the unworthiest of the Children of
Men.

1658. 25. December, London. John Sparrow.

The First Chapter Why the Becoming man or Incarnation of Jesus Christ, has
not hitherto been rightly understood. Also Of the two Eternal Principles, and
of the Temporary Principle.
1. WHen Christ asked his Disciples, Mat. 16. 13
Whom do the people say that the Son of man is? They answered, 14.
Some say thou art Elijah, some, that thou art John the Baptist, or one of the
Prophets.

2. 15.
He asked them, and said, Whom say ye then that I am?

3. 16.
Them answered him Peter, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God.

4. 17.
And he answered them and said, Of a truth Flesh and Blood has not revealed
that unto thee but my Father in Heaven; 21.
And upon this he made known unto them his Suffering. Dying and Resurrection

5. To signify, that self Reason in the wit and wisdom of this world, could
not in its own Reason know nor apprehend this Person, who was both God and Man.

6. But he would for the most part, be rightly known, only those that would
wholly yield up themselves to him, and for his name sake, suffer the Cross,
Tribulation and Persecution: who would earnestly cleave to him.

7. As indeed it so came to pass then also; That, even while he conversed
visibly amongst us in this world, he was least known by the Wise in Reason.

8. And though he went up and down in divine Wonders, doing Miracles, yet
outward Reason was so blind and void of understanding, that those great wonders
were by the wisest in the Arts and Sciences of Reason, ascribed to the Devil.

9. And as at the time when he walked visibly in this world, he remained
unknown by the wse in their own Reason; so he still remains unknown to
outward Reason.

10. From hence is so much contention disputation and strife arisen about his
Person; in that outward Reason supposes it can reach fathom and search out
what God and Man is; and how God and Man can be one Person.

11. Which strife has filled the circuit and face of the Earth, self Reason
continually supposing it has found and gotten the Pearl, not withal
con^dering, that God's Kingdom is not of this world, and that Flesh and Blood
cannot know or apprehend it.

12. Therefore now it concerns every one, that will speak or teach of the
Divine Mysteries, that he have the spirit of God, and know in the Light of God,
those Matters which he will give forth for true; and not suck or draw them from
his own Reason; and so without divine knowledge, run upon the bare Letter in his
opinion, and drag the Scripture by the Hair of the Head, to prove it, as is
usualy done by Reason.

13. From this, so exceeding many errors are arisen, in that the divine
knowledge has been sought in men's own wit and Art; and so men are drawn from
the truth of God, to their own Reason; so that the Becoming Man of Incarnation
of Christ, has been accounted a strange work and thing.

14. Whereas yet we must all, in that Becoming Man or Incarnation, be born of
God again, if we will ever escape the wrath of the Eternal Torment or Nature.

15. But seeing it is a familiar intimate and native innate work to the
children of God, wherewith they should exercise themselves daily and hourly;
and should always enter into the Becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ, and go
forth from the earthly Reason; and so, in this miserable life, must be born in
the birth and Becoming man or Incarnation of Christ, if they mean to be the
children of God in Christ.

16. I have therefore undertaken to write this high mystery, according to my
knowledge and gifts, for a memorial, that so I may have cause also heartily to
be refreshed and quickened with my Immanuel.

17. Seeing I also, together with others, the children of God and Christ, stand
in this birth; that I may have a Remembrancer, and support or stay, if the dark
earthly Flesh and Blood, together with the Devi^s Poison, should surprise me or
prevail over me, and obscure and darken my Image.

18. Therefore I have undertaken it as an exercise of Faith, whereby my Soul
may thus, as a Branch or twig in its Tree Jesus Christ, quicken it self from
his Sap and virtue.

19. And that not with wise and high eloquence of Art, or from the Reason of
this world; but according to the knowledge which I have from my Tree Christ;
that my little sprout in the Tree and life of God, together with others, may
grow and flourish.

20. And though I search sublimely and deep, and shall set it down very
clearly; yet this must be said to the Reader; that without the Spirit of God it
will be a Mystery to him, and hidden from him.

21. Therefore let every one take heed how he judges, that he fall not into
the judgment of God, and be captivated by his own Turba, and that his own
Reason cast him not down headlong. This I say out of good will, and give it to
the Reader to ponder of.

22. When we will write of the Becoming Man or Incarnation, and birth of JESUS
CHRIST the Son of God, and speak rightly thereof, then we must consider the
cause, and what it is that moved God to become Man, seeing he needed not that to
the accomplishment or perfection of his Being or Substance.

23. Neither can we by any means say, that his own Being or Substance has
altered it self in the Becoming-Man or Incarnation.

24. For God is unchangeable, and yet is become what he was not, though his
property for all that remains unaltered; that which was only aimed at, was
the salvation of fallen Man, that he might bring him into Paradise again.

25. And here we are to cnosider of the first Man, how he was before his fall,
for whose sake the Deity has moved it self; which ought highly to be
considered by US Men.

26. We know what Moses says, That Genes. 1. 26, 27. 5. and 1. 9. and 6
God Created man according to his Similitude, in an Image of or according to
him; understand it thus, That God, who is a Spirit, beheld himself in an Image,
as in a Similitude.

27. Nevertheless he has also created this World, that so he might manifest
the Eternal Nature in substantiality, also in living Creatures and Figures,
that all this might be a Similitude and out-birth or express Image, out of the
Eternal Nature of the first Principle.

28. Which Similitude, before the time of the world, stood in the wisdom of
God as a hidden or Desire.
Magia, and was beheld in the wisdom by the Spirit of God.

29. Who in the time of the beginning of this world, moved the Eternal Nature,
and opened and brought forth the similitude of the hidden divine world.

30. For the Fiery world stood as it were swallowed up or hidden in the light
of God; in that the light of the Majesty ruled alone in it self.

31. And yet we must not think that the Fiery World was not then; It was then;
but it severed it self in or into its own Principle, and was not manifested in
the Light of God's Majesty.

32. As we may observe in the Fire and Light, that the Fre is indeed a cause of
the Light, and yet the light dwells in the Fire, un-apprehended by the Fire,
and bears or has another source or quality then the Fire.

33. For the fire is fierceness and consumes, and the light is meekness, and
out of its virtue or power, comes Substantiality viz: Water, or the Sulphur of
a thing, which the Fire attracteth into it self, and uses it to its strength
and life, and so is an eternal Band.

34. This Fire and divine Light, have each stood still in it self from
Eternity, each standing in its order, in its own Principle, and having neither
Ground nor Beginning.

35. For the Fire has in it self for its source or quality, its own Form viz:
the Desiring; out of which, and in which, all Forms of Nature are generated;
one being continually a cause of the other, as is mentioned expressly at large
in the other writings.

36. And we find in the Light of Nature, that the Fire in its own Essence, has
been as in an astringent desirous source or quality, a darkness in it self,
which in the Meekness of God has stood as it were swallowed up; so that it
has not been qualifying or producing its Quality, but Essentially in it self,
and not kindled.

37. And though it has as it were burned, yet that has been as a Principle of
its own, in it self only perceptible.

38. For there have been only two Principles from Eternity; the one in it self,
the Fiery world; the other also in it self, the Light-flaming world.

39. And yet they were not parted asunder, as the Fire and Light are not parted
asunder, and the Light dwells in the Fire, unapprehended by the Fire.

40. And thus we are to understand two Spirits one in another viz: 1o One
fiery, according to the Essence of the Astringent and stearn Nature out of the
hot and cold stearn Essential Fire, which is understood to be God's
wrath-spirit and source or quality, and belongs to the Fathers property;
according to which he calls himself, an angry Exodus 20. 4.
jealous God, and Heb. 12. 29.
a consuming fire, in which the first Principle is understood.

41. And 2o The other a Meek Light-flaming Spirit, which from Eternity
conceives its variation or transmutation in the Cnter of the Light; for it is
in the first Principle, in the Fathers Property, a Fiery Spirit; and in the
second Principle, in the light, a meek light-flaming spirit, and is only one,
and not two; but is understood to be in two sources or qualities, viz: in Fire
and Light, according to the property of each source or quality.

42. As is sufficiently to be understood by us, in every outward Fire, wherein
the Fire source or quality, gives a wrathful fierce spirit, which is
consuming; and the source or quality of the light, gives a meek amiable
Air-Spirit, and yet is Originally, but one Spirit.

43. In like manner we are to conceive of the Being or Substance of Eternity,
viz: the holy Trinity, which in the Light, we apprehend to be the Deity; and in
the Fire, to be the Eternal Nature; as is sufficiently cleared in the other
writings.

44. For the Omnipotent Spirit of God with both the Principles, has been from
Eternity All itself, there is nothing before it; It is it self the Ground or
Bysse, and the Abyss.

45. And yet the Holy Divine Being or Substance, is especially observed to be a
Being or Substance of its own, in it self, and dwells without or beyond the
fiery or fiering Nature and property, in the lights property, and is called
GOT.
GOD, not from the Fires property but from the Lights property.

46. Though indeed both properties are unsevered, as we may understand by this
world, wherein there lies a hidden Fire in the Deep of Nature, and hidden in
all beings or substances and Things, else no outward fire could be brought
forth.

47. And we see that the Meekness of the water holds that hidden fire captive
in it self, that it cannot manifest it self; for it is as it were swallowed up
in the water, and yet is, though not substantially, yet Essentially; and in the
awakening is made known, and Operative or qualifying; and all were a Nullity or
Nothing and an Abyss, without the Fire.

48. Thus we understand also, that the Third Principle, viz: the source or
quality, and the Spirit of this world, stood from Eternity, hidden in the
Nature of the Fathers property, and was known by the Light-flaming Holy Spirit,
in the Holy Magia, viz: in the divine wisdom, in the Divine Tincture.

49. For the sake of which, the Deity has moved it self, according to the
Nature of the Genetri^, and generated the great Mystery, wherein then ALL lay,
whatsoever the Eternal Nature was able to do.

50. And it has been only a Mystery; and has not been as a Creature, but as a
Chaos, Quintissence, Mist, or Mixture together.

51. Wherein the wrathful or fierce Nature, has generated a Dark Mist or
Cloud; and the light flaming Nature in its property, has generated the Flame
in the Majesty, and the Meekness; which has been the Water source or Quality,
and the cause of the Divine substantiality, from Eternity.

52. And it is only virtue or Power, and Spirit, which has been of no
Similitude; and there is no footsteps of any thing therein; but the Spirit of
God in a twofold source quality and form, viz: a hot and a cold stearn
fire-source or quality; and then a Meek love-source or quality, according to
the kind of the Fire, and of the Light.

53. These have as a Mystery, gone one into another, and yet the one has not
comprehended the other, but have stood as it were in two Principles.

54. Wherein then the Astringency, viz: the Father of Nature has continualy
comprehended or compacted the Substantiality in the Mystery; where then it has
formed it self as it were into an Image, and yet has been no Image, but as a
Shadow of an Image.

55. All this in the mystery has indeed thus continually had an Eternal
beginning, of which a man cannot say, that there is any thing which has not
had its figuree, as a Shadow in the Eternal Great Magia.

56. But it has been no Being or Substance; but a spiritual or divine Scene
or sport one in another, and is the Magia of the great Wonders of God, where
there is continually what was not, or where there was nothing but only an
Abyss; and that is now in the Nature of the Fire and Light, come into a Ground.

57. And yet it is out of or from Nothing, but only out of the Spirit of the
source or quality, which is also no Being or substance, but a source or
quality, which generateth it self in it self in or into two Properties, and
also severeth it self into two Principles.

58. It has no Framer or Fashioner.
seperater or maker, but is it self the cause, as is particularly mentioned at
large in the other writings, that the Abyss introduces and generateth it felf
into a Ground.

59. Thus now we may coneeive of the Creation of this World, as also of the
Creation of Angels, also of Man, and all other creatures. All is Created out of
the great Mystery.

60. For the third. Principle has stood before God, as a Magia; and was not or
has not been wholly manifested or revealed.

61. Also God has had no similitude, wherein he could discover his own Being
or Substance, but only the wisdom, that has been his longing delight, and has
stood in his will with his Being or Substance, as a great wonder, in the light
flaming divine Magia of the spirit of God.

62. For it has been the habitation of the spirit of God, and is no Genetrix,
but the manifestation or revelation of God, a Virgin, and a cause of the divine
substantiality.

63. For in it stood the light flaming divine Tincture to the heart of God,
viz: to the word of life of the Deity; and it has been the revelation or
manifestation of the Holy Trinity.

64. Not that, from its own ability and production, it manifests or reveals
God; but the divine Center out of God's heart or being and substance,
manifests it self in it: It is a Looking-Glass of the Deity.

65. For every Looking-Glass stands still, or quiet and steady, and
generateth no Image, but receives the Image: and thus the Virgin of wisdom is
a Looking-Glass of the Deity, wherein the spirit of God sees it self, as also
all wonders of the Magia, which with the creation of the Third Principle are
come into Being or Substance; and is all created out of the great Mystery.

66. And this Virgin of the wisdom of God, stood in the Mystery; and in it the
spirit of God has discovered the formation of the Creatures* for it is the
out-spoken or express Image of whatsoever God the Father has spoken forth out
of his Center of the light flaming divine Property, out of the Center of his
heart, out of the word of the Deity, by his Holy Spirit.

67. Itstandeth before the Deity as a glance or Looking-Glass, wherein the
Deity sees it self; and in it stands the divine Kingdom of joy of the divine
Will and Pleasure, viz: the great wonders of Eternity which have neihere
beginning nor end nor number.

68. But is all an Eternal Beginning and an Eternal End, and is together as it
were an AVGE.
EYE, which sees where there is nothing in the Seeing or in Sight; but the
seeing arises out of the Essence of the Fire and Light.

69. Understand in the Fires Essence, the Fathers Property, and the first
Principle; and in the lights quality or source and property, the Sons Nature,
viz: the second Principle; and the driving Spirit out of both properties,
understand to be the spirit of God, which in the first Principle is fierce or
wrathful, stearn, astringent, bitter, cold, and fiery, and is the driving
spirit in the Anger.

70. And therefore rests not in the fierce wrath and anger; but is thrusting
forth, and blowing forth of the Essential fire, in that it uniteth it self
again in the Essence of the Fire; for the wrathful Essences draw it again into
them; for it is their source or quality and life, and yet go^th in the kindled
fire into the light forth from the Father into the Son, and opens the fiery
Essence^ in the source or quality of the light.

71. Where then the fiery Essence in the great desire of the burning Love, and
the first stearn source or quality, in the Lights quality or source, is not
known; but the fierceness of the fire, is only thus a cause of the light
flaming Majesty, and of the desiring Love.

72. And thus we are to understand the Being or substance of the Deity, and
also the Eternal Nature; and we understand always the Divine Being or
substance, in the light of the Majesty; for the meek light makes the stearn
nature of the Father, meek lovely and merciful.

73. And is called the Father of Mercy, according to his Heart or Son; for
the Property of the Father stands in the Nature of fire and light, and is
himself the Being of all Beeings or Substance of all Substances.

74. He is the Abyss and the Bysse or ground, and parts him self in the
Eternal Birth into Three Properties, as into Three Persons; also into Three
Principles.

75. Whereas yet in the Eternity, there are but Two in Being or Substance, and
the Third is as a Looking-Glass of the first Two; out of which this world as a
comprehensible or palpable Being or Substance, is created in a Beginning and
End.

The Second Chapter. Of the Revelation or Manifestation of the Mystery; How out
of the Eternal Spiritual Mystery, the Temporary Mystery is flown forth.
1. SEeing then thus there has been a Mystery from Eternity; therefore now its
manifestation or Revelation is to be considered: for we can speak no otherwise
of the Eternity, then as of a Spirit.

2. For it has all been only a Spirit, and yet from Eternity has generated it
self into Being or Substance, and that through Desiring and Longing.

3. Neither can it be said at all, that in the Eternity there has not been
Being or Substance; for no Fire subsisteth without Being or Substance.

4. Also there is no Meekness without the Generating of Being or Substance; for
the Meekness generateth Water, and the Fire swalloweth up the water, and
makes it in it self, one part Heaven and Firmament, and the other part Sulphur.

5. In which the fire Spirit, by its Essential wheel, makes a Mercury, and
further awakeneth the Vulcan; that is, strikes up the Fire, that so the Third
Spirit, viz: the Air becomes generated.

6. Where then the noble Tincture stands in the midst, as a Transparency or
Reflection.
Glance with the Colors, and Originally arises out of the Wisdom of God.

7. For the Colors arise from the source or quality: Every Color stands
with its Substantiality, in the meekness of the quality or source of the water,
excepting the Black, which does not so, that has its Original out of the harsh
astringent fierceness; The Forms of Nature.
they all receive their colors from the source or quality.

8. Thus now every form longs after the other, and from the Desirous Longing
every form is impregnated from the other; and the one brings the other to
Being or Substance; so that the Eternity stands in a perpetual enduring
Magia, wherein Nature stands in a sprouting springing and wrestling; and the
fire consumes that, and affords or gives it also, and so is an Eternal Band.

9. Only the light of the Majesty and Trinity of God, is unchangeable: for the
Fire cannot comprehend it; and it dwells Free in it self.

10. And yet it is perceptible and known to Us, that the light of the Love is
desirous, viz: of the wonders and figures in the wisdom.

11. In which desiring; this world, as a Model, has been known from Eternity
in the wisdom, in the Deep hidden Magia of God; for the Desiring of the Love
searches into or predominateth in, the Ground or Byss, and Abyss.

12. Therein has also from Eternity, the desire of the fierce wrath and harsh
stern source or quality in the Fathers Nature and property, together mingled it
self.

13. And so the Image of Angels and Men, have been from Eternity discovered in
the Divine property in Gods wisdom; as also, in the property of the fierce
wrath, the Devil, But not in the holy Light-flaming property.

14. But yet in no Image or, Or Substance.
Being and Substance; but in the way or Manner, as in a deep sense, a thought
darteth up, and is brought before its own looking-Glass of the Mind; where, in
the Mind often a thing appears, Or that comes not into Being or Substance.
that is not in Being or Substance.

15. Thus have the two Genetrixes, viz: the fierce wrath in the Fire, and also
the Love in the Meekness or Light: set their Of figure.
Model in the wisdom.

16. Where then the Heart of God in the Love, has longed to Create, this Model
into an Angelical Image, out of the Divine substantiality, that it should be a
similitude and Image of the Deity, and should dwell in the wisdom of God, to
fulfill the longing of the Deity, and to the Eternal rejoicing of the Divine
Kingdom of Joy.

17. And now we are to conceive or apprehend of the Word Fiat, that it has
comprised or c^tched this and brought it into a Substance and Corporeal Being:
for, the will to this Image, has existed out of the Father, out of the Fathers
property in the word or Heart of God from Eternity, as a desirous will to the
Creature, and to the Manifestation of the Deity.

18. But being it had not moved it self from Eternity, till at the Creation of
the Angels; therefore there was no Creation performed till the Creation of the
Angels.

19. But the Ground and Cause thereof, we are not to know, and God has
reserved it to his own Power and Might, how it came to pass, that God has once
moved himself; seeing, or notwithstanding, he is an unchangeable God: and we
shall here search no further, for this troubles us.

20. Only of the Creation we have ability to speak, for it is a Work in the
Being or Substance of God: and we understand, that the Will of the Word or
Heart of God, comprehended or Comprised the astringent Fiat in the Center of
the Fathers Nature, together with the Seven Spirits and Forms of the Eternal
Nature, and that in the Form and Manner of the Thrones.

21 Where then the harsh Fiat, stood not as a Maker, but as a Creator in the
property of Each Essence, As or viz:
All in the Great Wonders of the VVisdome.

22. As the Figures were from Eternity discovered in the Or Nature.
Wisdom, so they now became comprehended by the Fiat, in the Will-Spirit of
God.

23. Not out of strange Matter, but out of Gods Essences, out of the Fathers
Nature, and became introduced by Gods Will-Spirit into the light of the Majesty.

24. Where then they were Children, and not strange guests: generated and
Created out of the Fathers Nature and property, and their willspirit was
inclined or directed into the Sons Nature and property.

25. They could and should Eat of Gods love-substantiality, in the Light of the
Majesty: where then their fierce wrathful property out of the Fathers Nature
became changed into Love and Joy.

26. And that they all did, besides or except one Throne and Kingdom, and that
turned it self away from the light of Love; and would rule and domineer in the
stern Nature of the Fire, above Gods meekness and Love.

27 And was therefore, driven out from the Fathers Property, from its own
Creaturely Place, into the Eternal Darkness, into the Abyss of the stern Fiat;
and there must stand in its own Eternity* and thus the fierce wrath of the
Eternal Nature is here also filled.

28. But yet we are not to think; that King Lucifer also could not have stood:
He had the light of the Majesty Or belonging to him.
for himself as well as the other Thrones of Angels: If he had Imagined
thereinto, or according to it, He had continued an Angel.

29. But he drew himself out of Gods Love into the Anger, and so he is now an
Enemy of the love of God and of all Holy Angels.

30. We are here to consider further: Of the Enimicitious kindling of the
Extruded Spirits: while they were yet in the Fathers property: How they with
their Imagination kindled the Nature of the substantiality; so that out of the
Heavenly Substantiality, Earth and Stones are come to Be: and the Meek Spirit
of the water is come to be a burning Firmament in the fires source or quality:
whereupon the Creation of this World, viz: of the Third Principle, followed.

31. And for the Place of this World there was an other Light awakened, viz.
the SUN: that so the Devils Pomp might be withdrawn from him, and he was thrust
out and shut up as a Prisoner in the Darkness between the Kingdom of God and of
this world.

32. Where then in this world, he has no further to Rule, but only in the
Turba, in the fierce wrath and Anger of God; where that is awakened there he is
Executioner: and is a continual Liar, Mischiefer and betrayer and Cheater of
the Creatures.

33. He turns all Good into Evil, so far as he is permitted room to do so;
whatsoever is Terrible and Pompous, there he shows his might, and wills
continually to be above God.

34. But the Heaven which is Created out of the midst of the Waters, as a Meek
Firmament, allayeth his Pomp, so that he is not Chief Great Prince in this
world; but Or Anger-Prince.
Prince of wrath.

35. Now when the Devil was thrust out of his Place, this Place or Throne
thereupon stood without its Angelical Host, in great desire and longing after
its Prince; but he was thrust out.

36. So now God Created for it another Prince, Adam the first Man, who was also
a Throne-Prince before God* and here we are rightly to consider his Creation,
as also his Fall; for the sake of whom, the Heart of God moved it self, and
became Man.

37. It is not so slight or trivial a thing or Matter, about the Creation of
Man, for whose Fall sake, God became Man, that he might Help him again.

38. So also his Fall was not the mere Biting of an Apple; also his Creation
was not in that manner, as outward Reason supposes, which understands the
first Adam in his Creation, to be only a mere Clod of Earth.

39. No, my Dear Mind, God is not become man for the sake of a Clod of Earth:
neither was the matter merely one disobedient Act for which God was so enraged
that his wrath could not be pacified, except it be revenged on the Son of God
and slay him.

40. To Us Men indeed, since the loosing of our Paradisical Image, this Mystery
has continued hidden, except to some who have attained the Heavenly Mystery
again: to them somewhat thereof has been opened, according to the Inward Man.

41. For in Adam we are Dead as to Paradise, and must Sprout and Grow again
through Death and the Corruption of the Body, into Paradise, as into another
world, in the life of God, into the Heavenly Substantiality and Corporeity.

42. And though it be so in some, that they attain the Substantiality of God,
viz: Christ's Body, again, on to the soul; yet the Perished Earthly Adam has
covered the Holy and pure Mystery, so that the Great secret Mystery has
continued hidden to Reason.

43. For God dwells not in this world in the Outward Principle, but in the
Inward: he dwells indeed, in the Place of this world, but this world
apprehends him not: how then will the Earthly Man apprehend the secret
Mysteries of God.

44. And if a Man do apprehend them, he apprehends them according to the
Inward Man, which is born of God again.

45. But seeing the Divine Mystery will now more and more henceforth, be laid
so wholly open, and be so very apprehensibly given to Man, that he will very
clearly apprehend the hidden secret: therefore it ought by him to be well
considered what it signifies: Even the Harvest of this world, for the
beginning has found the End: and the Middle is set into the separation.

46, Let this be told to you ye Children, who would inherit the Kingdom of God:
there is a time of Great Earnestness or severity at Hand: the Floar shall be
purged, Evil and Good shall be severed one from another: The Day Dawneth, this
is highly known.

47. When we will speak of Man, and rightly understand, out of what he is made;
we must Consider of the Deity, together with the Being of All Beings or
Substance of all Substances; for Man was Created according to the similitude of
God, out of all the Three Principles; a total Image and Similitude, according
to all Beings or Substances.

48. He must not be an Image of this world only; for this worlds Image is
Beastial; and for the sake of no Beastiall Image, is God become Man.

49. For neither did God create Man to live thus in a Beastial Property, as we
now live in after the Fall, but in the Paradisicall, in the Eternal Life.

50. Man had no such beastial Flesh, but heavenly Flesh, but in the Fall His
Flesh:
it became earthly and beastiall.

51. Neither are we to understand it in such a sense, that he had nothing of
this world in him: He had the Kingdom and Dominion of this world in him; but
the Four Elements ruled not in him; but the Four Elements were in One, and the
Earthly Dominion lay hidden in him.

52. He should live in the Heavenly source or Quality; and though all was
stirring in him, yet he should rule with the Heavenly source or Quality of the
second Principle over the Earthly; and the Kingdom and the source or Quality of
the Stars and Elements should be under the Paradisical source or Quality.

53. No Heat nor Frost, no Sickness nor Mishap or Mischief, also no fear should
touch him or terrify him, his body could go through Earth and Stone,
uninterrupted by any thing.

54. For that would be no Eternal Man, which earthliness could limit, which
were thus fragile.

55. Therefore we should rightly consider of Man: It is not Sophistry or
Opinion that will do it, but knowing and Understanding in the Spirit of God.

56. It is of necessity you must be born again, if you will see the Kingdom of
God again, out of which you are departed.

57. Art will not do it; but Gods Spirit, which sets open the Doors of Heaven
to the Image of man, so that he can see with Three Eyes.

58. For Man stands in a Threefold life, if so be he be Gods Child; if not,
he stands only in a Twofold life.

59. And it is sufficiently known to us, that Adam is, with the right Holy
Image, which was the similitude according to the holy Trinity, gone forth out
of the Divine Being or Substance, and has Imagined in or according to the
Earthliness, and has brought the earthly Kingdom into the divine Image, and
darkened or obscured it, and made it perish, whereupon also we then lost our
Paradisical Seeing.

60. Also God has withdrawn Paradise from Us, whereupon we became then weak
faint and feeble; and instantly, the Four Elements, together with the
Constellations or Astrum in us became strong and mighty, so that we are with
Adam fallen home to them.

61. Which also is the Cause of the Woman, that God divided Adam, when he could
not stand, and parted him into two Tinctures, viz. according to the Fire and
Water, as shall be mentioned here following; the one affording soul, the other
Spirit.

62. And after the fall Man became a beastial Being or Substance, who must
propagate after a Beastial property or kind; and then the Heaven and Paradise
as also the Deity, became a Mystery to Him.

63. Whereas yet the Eternal continued in Man, viz: the Noble soul, but
covered with an Earthly Garment, and darkened, and infected with the earthly
source or quality, and poisoned by the false or Evil Imagination; so that it
was no more known to be Gods Child.

64. For the sake of which, God became Man, that he might deliver it from the
Dark Earthliness again, and bring it again into Heavenly Substantiality, in
Christ's Flesh and Blood, which fills the Heaven.

The Third Chapter. The Gate of the Creation of Man; and of the breathing in of
the Soul and of the Spirit.
1. ALthough this has been cleared enough in the other Writings; yet because
every one has them not ready at Hand: therefore it is necessary: to set down a
brief recital or round description of the Creation of Man; whereby Christ's
Becoming Man or Incarnation, may be the better understood afterward.

2. Also for the sake of the Pearl, which continually more and more befalls
and becomes given and opened to Man in his seeking; which is a singular Joy to
me, thus to delight my self with God.

3. The Creation of Man is done or performed in all the Three Principles, viz:
in the Fathers Eternal Nature and property; And in the Sons Eternal Nature
and property; and in this worlds Nature and property.

4. And, into the Man which the word Fiat Created, was the Threefold Spirit,
out of the Three Principles and sources or qualities breathed in to be his
life; viz: he was Created by a Threefold Fiat; understand the Corporeity or
Substantiality; and the will of the Heart of God, introduced the Spirit into
him, according to all the Three Priuciples; understand it, as follows.

5. Man was created totally after the similitude of God, God manifested himself
in the Humanity in an Image, which should be as himself.

6, For, God is ALL; and All is proceeded from him; and yet all is not called
God, therefore, because all is not Good.

7. For, as far as concerns the Pure Deity, God is a light-flaming Spirit, and
dwells in Nothing but only in himself; Nothing is like him.

8. But as far as concerns the property of Fire, out of which the light is
generated; we apprehend that the property of the Fire is Nature, which is a
Cause of the Life, Moving, and of the Spirit; else there would be no Spirit,
also no Light nor Being or Substance, but an Eternal Vacuum voidness cessation
privation or Negation.
Stilness, neither Color nor virtue, but all would be an Abyss wsthout Being
or Substance.

9. Although yet the light of the Majesty dwells in the Abyss, and is not
apprehended by the fiery Nature and property; For as to the Fire, and Light, we
are to Understand as follows.

10. The Fire has and makes a terrible and Consuming source and Quality or
torment: now in the source or quality and torment, there is a sincking down
like a dying, or free yieldiug up it self.

11. That free yielding up it self falls into the liberty, without or beyond
the source or quality or torment, as into Death; and yet is no Death, but it so
goes a degree deeper down into it self, and becomes free from the source or
quality or torment of the fires Anguish; and yet has the sharpness of the
Fire, yet not in the Anguish, but in the Or Joy.
Liberty.

12. And then the Liberty and the Abyss, is a Life, and becomes a Light in it
self; for it gets the Flash of the Anguish Source or Quality or torment; and
becomes desirous, viz: of the Substantiality.

13. And the Desiring impregnateth it self with substantiality out of the
Liberty and Meekness: For, in that the Anguish source or quality or torment,
sinketh or enters in, it rejoices that it is free from the Anguish; and
draws the joy into it self, and goes with its will out from it self, which
is the Life and The Holy Spirit.
Spirit of Joy.

14. For which, here we had need of an Angels Tongue: yet hereby we will give
to the Reader that loves God, a short explanation, to consider of; for the
understanding of the Heavenly Substantiality.

15. For, in God, All is power Spirit and Life; But whatsoever is Being or
Substance, that is not Spirit; but that which sinketh down from the Fire, as
into Inability, that is Being or Substance.

16. For, the Spirit arises in the Fire, but it severeth it self into two
Sources or Qualities: as one into the Fire, and one in the sincking down into
the Liberty, into the Light.

17. This is called God; for it is Meek and Lovely, and has in it self the
Kingdom of Joy; and the Angelical world is understood in the sunk down Liberty
of the Substantiality.

18. Therefore when we were gone out from the Liberty of the Angelical
Substantiality, into the Dark source or quality, whose Abyss was the Fire,
then there was no Remedy, unless, the Lights power and Word, as a word of
Divine Life, became a Man, and brought us out of the darkness, through the fire
source or quality, through the Death in the fire, aagain into the Liberty of
the divine Life, into the divine Substantiality.

19. And Therefore must Christ dye, and with the soul-Spirit go through the
Fire of the Eternal Nature, viz: through Note.
Hell and the fierce wrath of the Eternal Nature, and enter into the Divine
Substantiality; and break open a way for our souls through the Death and Anger;
through which, we may with, and in, him, enter through death into the Eternal
Life.

20. But concerning the divine Substantiality, viz: concerning the divine
Corporeity, we are to understand as follows.

21. We understand that the Light gives Meekness, viz: Love: Now the fires
anguish desires Meekness, that it may slake its great Thirst, for the fire is
desirous, and the Meekness is giving, for it gives it self.

22. Thus in the desiring of Meekness, comes to be substance or Being, viz; a
substantial Wesenheit.
Essentiality: which is sunk down from the fiercewrath, which gives its own
Life freely, and that is Corporeity, for out of the power in the Meekness, it
becomes substantial, and is, by the Astringency as by the Eternal Fiat,
attracted or put on and retained.

23. And is therefore called Substantiality or Corporeity; because it is sunk
down from the fire source or quality and Spirit, and is in respect of the
spirit as mute or inanimate, Dead and impotent; whereas Yet, it is an Essential
Life.

24. Understand us aright thus,: when God created the Angels, there were only
Two Principles manifested and in Being or Substance; viz: that in the Fire, and
that in the light; viz: One in the fierce wrathful Substantiality in the stern
astringent Fiat, with the forms of the fires Nature.

25. And then that in the Heavenly substantiality, out of the Holy Power, with
the water source or quality of Meekness of the Life of Joy: in which the divine
Sulphur, as in the Love and Meekness; was generated; its Fiat was Gods desiring
will.

26. Out of this divine Substantiality, viz: out of Gods Nature, the Angels as
Creatures were Created, and the source or quality of their Spirit and Life,
arises in the Fire.

27. For without Fire no Spirit does subsist: and if it go out of the Fire into
the Light, there it obtains the love source or quality, and the fire becomes
only a cause of its Life: but the fires fierceness becomes quenched with the
Love in the Light.

28. But Lucifer despised this, and continued in the Fire-Spirit, and so
Elevated himself also and kindled the substantiality in his Place, out of which
Earth and Stone came to be; and he was thrust out; and so the Third Corporeity
and the Third Principle began, together with the Kingdom of this world.

29. So when the Devil was thrust out into the Darkness, then God Created
another Image according to his similitude, in this Place.

30. But if it must be Gods similitude according to all the Three Principles;
then must it also be taken out of all the Three, and out of All Beings or
Substances of this Place or of this Deep: as far as the Fiat, had with Lucifers
Principality, given it self into the Either to the Creation.

31. For, Man came in the sted of Lucifer: and hence arises also the Envy of
the Devils, that they cannot afford Man that Honor: but lead him continually
into the Evil way of perdition, whereby they may but increase their Kingdom:
and they do it as a spite against the Meekness, viz: the love of God,
supposing that seeing they live in the fierce strong Might; that they are
higher then the Spirit of God in the Love and Meekness.

32. Understand it thus: Gods Will-Spirit viz: the Holy Spirit has comprised
the Twofold Fiat in two Principles, viz: in the Angelical world the Inward,
and in this outward world, the Outward, and Created den Mesch oder Menschen, as
a Mixed person; for The Or Mass.
Mixture or Man, he should be an Image according to the Inward and outward
world; but should with the inward source or quality, rule over the outward;
thus he should have been the similitude of God:

33. For, the outward Substantiality hung to the Inward, and the Paradise grew
through the Earth, and Men in this world upon the Face of the Earth was in
Paradise; for Paradisical fruit grew for him, till the Fall, when the Lord
Cursed the Earth.

34. Then Paradise passed into the Mystery, and became a Mystery or hidden
secrecy to Man; whereas yet if he be born of God again, according to the Inward
Man, he dwells in Paradise, but according to the Outward he dwells in this
world.

35. We are further to consider the Beginning and Original of Man: thus. God
has created his Body out of the The Quintessence or Mother.
Matrix of the Earth, out of which the Earth was Created.

36. All was together one in another, and yet parted it self into Three
Principles of a Threefold Substantiality; and yet that in the fierce wrath was
not known.

37. Now if Adam had continued in Innocence, he had lived the whole time of
this world only in Two Principles, and had ruled with one over all, and the
fierce wrathful Kingdom had not been known or manifested in Him, though indeed
he had it in him.

38. And we are to understand furthee; that Adams Body was Created out of the
Inward Element, wherein the Inward Firmament and Heaven together with the
Heavenly Essences, do lie, as to one Part, by the Inward Fiat.

39. And, as to the other Part he was created by the outward Fiat, out of the
outward Four Elements, and out of the Constellation or Astrum; for in the
Matrix of the Earth, they stood one among another; The Paradise was therein,
and the Body was created also in Paradise.

40. Understand us aright: He had divine and also Earthly Substantiality on
him, but the Earthly was impotent and as it were swallowed up in the Divine.

41. The Substance or matter out of which the Body was Created was a Mass, or
Lump of fire and water, together with the Out-going substantial working powers
and properties:
Essences of Both those principles, although the First also lay therein, but
not stirring.

42. Every Principle, should continue in its seat, and should not mix, even as
is done in God, and then Man were a Total Image according to Gods Being or
Substance.

Of the Breathing-in of the Soul and of the Spirit.
43. The Body is a similitude according to Gods substantiality; the Soul and
Spirit are a similitude according to the Holy Trinity,

44. God gave the Body his substantiality out of the Three Principles; and the
Spirit together with the Soul, out of the fountain of the Threefold Spirit of
the All-Being All-Substantial Deity.

45. And thus we are to understand, that the soul, with its Image, and with its
outward Spirit, is proceeded out of three Principles and breathed and
introduced into the Body: as Moses witnesses; Genesis 2. 7.
God breathed into Man the living Breath into his Nostrils, and so Man became a
living soul.

46. But now the Breath and Spirit of God is Threefold, viz: in a Threefold
source or Quality.

47. In the first Principle it is a fiery Breath and Spirit, which is the true
cause of the Life, and stands in the Fathers source or quality, viz: in the
Center of the fierce wrathful Nature.

48. And then in the second Principle Gods breath or Spirit, is the light
flaming love-spirit, viz; the true spirit of the True Deity, which is called
God the Holy Ghost.

49. And in the Third Principle, as in the similitude of God, Gods Breath is
the Aire-spirit upon which the Holy Ghost rides; as David says: Genesis 1. 2.
The Lord rides upon the Wings of the Wine: and Moses says, Psalm. 18. 10.
The Spirit of God moved upon the Water; that is upon the Capsula, or
enclosure, where the Air arises.

50. Now this Threefold Spirit, has the total God out of all the Three
Principles, introduced and Breathed-in, into the Created Image.

51. Viz: First, the Fire Spirit, he has introduced into him from within, and
not at the Nostrils, but in the Heart in the Twofold Tincture of the inward and
outward Blood; although the Outward was not known or discerned, but was a
Mystery, But the Inward was stirring, and had Two Tinctures, viz: one out of
the Fire, and one out of the Light.

52. This Fire-spirit is the true Essential soul, for it has the Center of
Nature with its four forms for its fiery might; It strikes up the fire, it
self, and it self makes the wheel of the Essences, as in the The three
Principles.
Second and The Threefold Life.
Third Book is mentioned at Large.

53. And thou art to know, that the Essential Souls-fire is not the true Image
according to the Deity; It is no Image, but a Magical perpetual enduring Fire.

54. It has had no beginning: also it will have no End.

55. And understand: That God has introduced the Eternal Begining-less Fire,
which has been from Eternity in it self in the Eternal Magia, as in the
willing of God in the desiring of the Eternal Nature, as an Eternal Center of
the Genetrix: for this Image should be a Similitude of or according to him,

56. And secondly, in like manner it is, with the Essential souls-Fire; the
Holy Spirit has introduced the Light-flaming Love-spirit out of it self, and
that even in the Second Principle, wherein the Deity is understood.

57. Not in at the Nostrils; but as Fire and Light hang one to another and are
One; but in two sources or qualities: thus was the Good Love-spirit, together
with the Essential Fire-spirit introduced into his Heart.

58. And each source or quality, brought its own Tincture along with it, as a
peculiar Life of its own; and in the Love-Tincture the right true Spirit is
understood; which is the Image of God, which is a similitude according to the
clear true Deity, which respects the whole Man properly, also fills the
whole Man, but in its own Principle.

59. The soul, as to what purely belongs unto it; is a Fire-Eye, or a
fire-Looking-Glass; wherein the Deity has manifested it self according to the
first Principle, viz: according to Nature, for it is a Creature, and yet
Created in no similitude.

60. But its Image which it brings forth out of its fire-Eye into the Light,
that is the True Image or Creature, for the sake of which God became Man, and
introduced it again out of the fierce wrath of the Eternal Nature in Ternarium
sanctum into the Holy Ternary.

61. And we are to understand further, thus, concerning the soul and its Image:
It is indeed together a Spirit; but the Soul is a hungry fire, and must have
substantiality, else it will be a hungry Dark valley, as the Devils are become
such.

62. Thus, the soul makes Fire and Life; and the meekness of the Image makes
Love and heavenly substantiality; thus the souls fire, becomes Meekened and
satiated with Love.

63. For the Image has water out of Gods fountain, which flows into Eternal
life, the same is Love and Meekness, and it receives that out of the Majesty
of God: As is to be seen in a kindled Fire; that the fire in it self is a
fierce wrathful source or quality, and the Light is a Meek amiable source or
quality: and that, in the deep of this world, out of Light and Air, water
comes to be; this is thus also, in a similitude.

64. Thirdly, God has in like manner at once, breathed-in, the Spirit of this
world, with the source or quality of the Stars and Elements, viz. the Air,
into Man, into his Nostrils; that should be a ruler in the outward Kingdom, and
open the wonders of the outward World; to which End also God created Man in
the Outward Life.

65. But the Outward Man should not reach into the Image.

66. And the Image of God, should not lodge the outward Spirit in it self; and
suffer that to rule over it.

67. For its food was from the Word and power of God: and the outward Body had
paradisical food not from the Sack of Worms, for it had not that.

68. Also he had neither the form nor shape of Masculine or Feminine, for he
was both; and had both Tinctures, viz: of the soul and of the Spirit of the
soul; of the Fire and of the Light.

69. And he should generate another Man out of himself according to his
Similitude: he was a chaste Virgin in one only pure Love: he loved and
impregnated himself, through the Imagination; and so also Or (...)
was his propagation.

70. He was a Lord over the Stars and Elements, a similitude of God; as God
dwells in the stars and Elements and they apprehend not him: he rules over
all: thus was Man Created also.

71. The Earthly source was not wholly stirring in him; he had indeed the
Aire-spirit; but the Heat and Cold should not touch him, for the substantiality
of God pressed through all; as the Paradise pressed and sprouted through the
Earth; so sprouted the Heavenly substantiality in the outward Being or
Substance of his Body, and outward Spirit. In God, that, was very possible,
which to us, in the earthly Life seems strange.

72. Fourthly, thus Adam, with the introducing of his fair Heavenly Image into
the spirit of God, has together received the Living word of God, which was the
food of his soul and Image: that living Word was surrounded with the divine
Virgin of wisdom.

73. And you are to know, that the souls Image, stood in the Virgin-like-Image,
which was discovered in the Deity from Eternity.

74. And the pure Image of Adam, was out of the wisdom of God: for, God would
thus behold and manifest himself in an Image; and that was the similitude
according to God; understand, according to Gods Spirit: according to the Number
Three; a Total chaste Image, like the Angels of God

75. And in this Image, Adam was the child of God; not a similitude only, but
a Child. I say, born of God, out of the Being of all Beings or Substance of
all Substances.

76. Thus we have shortly acquainted you, and offered to your understanding;
what kind of Image Adam was before his Fall, and how God has created him; for
the better understanding, why Gods Word is become Man: how it was brought
about, and what it has caused or produced and effected.

The Fourth Chapter. Of the Paradisical Or Life.
Being or Substance and Dominion: How it would have been if Man had continued
in Innocence.
1. MAny Objections has the Devil framed, whereby he would Excuse himself;
saying God has Creatted him thus as he is; whereas his Angelical form which he
once had, always convinces him, that he is a Liar.

2. And thus he always does to the poor fallen Man, he introduces always the
Earthly Kingdom with its power and ability into him; that so he may have a
constant looking Glass before him, that he also may blame God, as if he had
created him earthly and Evil.

3. But he leaves out the best, viz: First, the Paradise, in which Man was
created; and then Secondly, Gods Omnipotence; that Deuteronomy. 8. 3. Mat. and Luke 4.
4.
Man lives not by bread only, but also from the Power and Word of God: and
Thirdly, that Paradise with its source or quality ruled over the Earthlinesse.

4. He shows Man only his Hard miserable fleshly Naked form or Condition:
but the form or Condition in Innocence, wherein Adam knew not that he was
Naked; he covers or concealeth that, to seduce Man.

5. And so, he would have this very much concealed, from us poor Children of
Eve: and though the Earthly Or Carcass.
Sack is not worthy to know it; yet it is very Necessary for our Minds to know
it.

6. So it is also necessary for us to fly to the True Door Keeper who has the
Key to Open it, to pray to him, and yield up our selves wholly to him; desiring
him that he will yet vouchsafe to open to us, the Paradisical Gate in the
Inward Center of our Image, that the Paradisical Light might shine to us in our
Minds, that so we might become longing to dwell with our IMMANUEL again, with
the Inward and New Man in Paradise.

7. For, without this Opening, we understand Nothing of Paradise and of our
Image which we had in Innocence.

8. But being Christ the Son of God has generated us again to the Paradisical
Image; we should not be so remiss, to rely upon Art and earthly Reason: for so
we find no^ Paradise and Christ; who must become Man in us, if we will ever see
God; in our Reason, it is all but Dead and Blind.

9. We must go out from Reason, and enter into the becoming Man or Incarnation
of Christ, and then we shall be taught of God; and then we have power to speak
of God, Paradise, and of the Kingdom of Heaven.

10. And in the Earthly Reason, which only proceeds from the Constellation
or Astrum, we are but Fools in the presence of God if we will speak of the
Heavenly Mystery; for we speak of a Thing which we have not seen or known.

11. But even a Child knows its Mother, so also every one that is born of
God again, knows his Mother, not with Earthly Eyes, but with divine, with the
Eyes of the Mother from whom he is born: this we present to the true hearted
Reader to consider, what he is to do; and from what mind and apprehension or
understanding, we will write.

12. Reason of the outward world, will needs hold, that God Created Man in the
outward Dominion, in the source or quality of the fiery Stars and four
Elements; but if that were so, then he was Created in the Angnish and Death.

13. For, the starry Heaven has its limit; when it attaineth that, it leaves
the Creature; of which it was a leader; and then that Domininion and Being or
Substance of the Creature passes away which was subject to the outward Heaven.

14. And we see very well, how we fall away and dye when the outward Heaven
with the Elements, leave us, so that even a Child in the Mothers womb is
clearly old enough to dye: also oftentimes it perishes, while it is yet
without Life, and in the Fiat of the outward Dominion, is in the coming to be a
Body, before the Center of Nature strikes up the Fire of the soul.

15. And thus by Adams fall, we clearly know the Dying and Death; that Adam as
soon as he became Earthly, dyed as to Paradise, and was dead to the Kingdom of
God: therefore then the Regeneration was necessary for us, else we could not
become Living again.

16. But seeing God did forbid Adam the Earthly fruit which was mixed, not to
touch it, and also ereated only one Man with Masculine and Feminine
Properties, with both Tinctures, as of the fire, and of the Light in the Love;
and brought him instantly into Paradise, yea he was Created in Paradise:
therefore we cannot give way to Reason, which by the Devils Infection or
instigation, says, that Man was Created Earthly.

17. For whatsoever was solely Created from the Earthly life, or from the
Earthly source or quality, that is Beastial, it has beginning and End, and
reaches not the Eternity, for it is not out of the Eternity.

18. And that now, which is not out of the Eternity, that is, transitory, and
only a looking Glass wherein the Eternal wisdom has beheld it self as in a
Figure and similitude.

19. There remains thereof nothing else but a shadow without source or
quality and being or substance; it passes away, as a wind, which has raised
itself, and then lies down again.

20. For such a Creatures sake, the word of God, is not become Flesh: the
Eternal is not for the sake of the Transitory entered into the transitory
substantiality.

21. Also it is not therefore entered into the Earthly, that it would raise and
introduce the Earthly transitory, into the Power of the Majesty; but for the
sake of that which was proceeded out of the Power of the Majesty; but was
become evil and Earthly, and as it were extinguished in Death, that it might
make it living again, and awaken, and lift it up into the power of the Majesty,
into that state it was in, before it was a Creature.

22. And we are to understand otherwise then we have hitherto done concerning
Man; having accounted him beastial: Indeed he became Beastial, according to the
property of this World; when he dyed in Adam, from thence forward he lived to
this world, and not to God.

23. But if he entered with his will-spirit into God, then the will-spirit
would attain the Noble Image again, and according to the Image, would live in
God* and according to the Beastial property, would live to this world.

24. Thus he was in Death and yet was living, and therefore Gods word Became
Man, that it might unite him into God again, that he might be totally born
again in God.

25. We are to conceive of the Paradisical Image thus; we say and apprehend,
that Adam was Created Good, pure, and immaculate: as was also Lucifer and his
Hoasts.

26. He had pure eyes, and that Twofold: for he had both kingdoms in him, viz:
Gods Kingdom and the Kingdom of this world.

27. But as God is Lord over all, so should Man also in the power of God, be
Lord over this world; for as God rules in all and presses through all,
imperceptibly to the Thing; so could the hidden divine Man press into all, and
see all.

28. Indeed the outward Man.
was in the Outward; World.
but he was Lord ^ver the outward, it was under him; it could not subdue him,
he could break the Rocks without any prejudice to him.

29. The Tincture of the Earth was wholly known to him, he should have found
out all the Wonders of the Earth: for to that end he was also created in the
outward; that he should manifest in figures, and produce into work, what was
seen in the Eternal wisdom, for he had the Virgin wisdom in him

30. Gold Silver and the Precious Metalls are indeed also out of the Heavenly
Magia, thus enclosed and shut up by or with the kindling: they are another
thing then Earth; Man loves that well and uses it for his maintenance; but he
knows not its ground and Original; it is not in vain, loved by the Mind; it
has a high Original, if we would consider of it.

31. But we are justly silent of it here; seeing Man wthout that loves it too
much, and thereby withdraws himself from the spirit of God.

32. One should not love the Body more then the Spirit, for the Spirit is the
Life: this we give you to understand in a similitude, and are silent of the
Matter with the ground and Original thereof.

33. But know this, that it was given to Man for his Sport and Ornament, he had
it by the right of Nature; it was his, understand, the outward Bodies, for the
outward Body with its Tincture, and the Metalline Tincture, are near a kind.

34. But when the Tincture of the outward Body, was destroyed by the Devils
Evil longing; then the Metalline Tincture, hid it self also from the Humane,
and became an enemy to it; for it is purer then the perished in the outward Man.

35. Let this be manifested to you, ye Seekers of the Metalline Tincture, If
you would find the Philosophers stone, then apply your selves to the New Birth
in Christ; else it will be hard ^or you to apprehend it; for it has a great
agreement with the heavenly substantiality; which if it were released from the
fierce wrath, would be very well seen.

36. Its luster signifies somewhat, so that, if we had paradisicall eyes, we
should well apprehend it: The Mind shows it us indeed, but the understanding
and full knowledge, is dead as to Paradise.

37. Therefore seeing we use that Noble thing, to the dishonor of God, and to
the destruction of our selves; not to honor God thereby, and to enter with our
Spirit, into the Spirit of God, but leave the Spirit, and cleave to the
substantiality, therefore is the Matalline Tincture become a Mystery, for we
are become strangers to it.

38. Man was created, that he should be a Lord of the Tincture, and it was
subjected to him; and he became its servant, and also strange to it, therefore
now he seeks in Gold and finds Earth.

39. Because he forsook the Spirit, and went with his Spirit into the
substan^iality, therefore the Substantiality has captivated him and shut him
Up in Death, so that, as the Tincture of the Earth lies shut up in the fierce
w^ath, till the Judgment of God, so also the spirit of Man lies shut up in the
Anger, unless he go forth, and become generated in God.

40. For, the Devil would be Chief Great Prince, with his fierce wrath in the
heavenly substantiality, therefore it was shut up from him, and became Earth
and Stone, so that he is not Prince, but a Captive in the Anger, and the
substantiality profits not him, for he is Spirit.

41 He contemns the Heavenly Substantiality, and kindles the Mother of
Nature, viz: the Astringency or Fiat, which instantly made all palpable and
Corporeal, which Gods Spirit Or Concreted.
created or compacted together.

42. And yet it was well or easy to be known to Man, he could well release the
Tincture, and bring forth the Pearl, to his Sport or Scene and Joy, and to the
Manifestation of Gods Glory and Deeds of wonder, if he had continued in
Innocence.

43. As to Mans-Eating and Drinking, whereby he should give his (...)
nourishment and substantiality, it was thus.

44. He had a twofold fi^e in him, viz: the Souls fire, and the outward fire
of the Sun and Constella^ions or Astrum: Now every fire must have Brimstone on
Being and Substance, or else it subsisteth not; that is, it burns not:
Concerning which we have sufficient understanding in the Divine Being or
Substance: what the nourishment of Man was.

45. For, as is mentioned above, the souls fire is fed with Gods Love,
meekness, and substantiality, together with whatsoever, the word viz: the
Divine Center, brings forth.

46. For, the soul is out of the Eternal Magic Fire, which must also have
Magic food, viz: by or with the Imagination.

47. If it has Gods Image, then it Imagines in Gods Love, in the Divine
substantiality, and eats of Gods food, of the food of the A^gels.

48. But if not, then it eats of whatsoever it imagines in, or of whatsoever
the Imagination enters into; whether it be of the Earthly of hellish source or
quality, and into that Matrix also it falls; indeed not with its substance,
but is filled therewith, and that begins to quality or operate in it self,
as poison does in the flesh.

49. Also it is sufficiently to be known by us in the food of the Outward Body,
thus; The outward Man was indeed, yet he was as it were half swallowed up by
the Inward, the Inward ruled throughout; and thus every life took of its own
food.

50. Viz: the Image of God, or the Souls Spirit and Image, did eat of the
Divine heavenly substantiality; the outward body did Eat of the paradisicall
fruit in the mouth and not into the Body: for as the outward Body stood half
swallowed up in the Inward, so was also the fruit of Paradise.

51. The Divine substantiality sprouted through the Earthly, and had half
swallowed up the Earthly in the Paradisical fruit, so that the fruit was not
known to be Earthly; and therefore it was called Paradise, as a sprouting
through the Anger, where the love of God sprouted through the Anger and bare
fruit; as the Language of Nature clearly uuderstandeth the same, without any
Exposition or far fetched Meaning.

52. And thus we are further to understand, how God dwells in this world; and
the world is as it were swallowed up in him; It is impotent in him, and he
Omnipotent; thus was Man also, and thus he did Eat, his earthly Eating was
heavenly.

53. As we know that we must be born again, so the Paradisical fruit; was born
again out of the Anger into the Heavenly Essentiality.

54. Or, as we see, that a good sweet herb, grows out of the bitter Earth,
which the Sun qualifieth, or causes to be otherwise, then the Earth had
qualified or caused it to be: so the Holy Man qualified the Paradisical fruit
in his Mouth, so that the Earthlinesse, was swallowed up as Nothing, and
stirred not Man at all.

55. Or, as we know, that the Earth shall at the E^d be swallowed up, and be no
more a Note.
palpable body, so was also Man's outward Bating, he did eat the fruit in the
Mouth; and needed no Teeth for that, for there was the dividing of the Power.

56. There were Two Centres, of the power in Adams Mouth, each took its own;
the Earthly was changed into a Heavenly source or quality; as we know, that 1
Cor. 15. 51. 52.
we shall be changed as to our Bodies, and be turned into a Heavenly powerful
Body; thus also was the transmutation in the Mouth.

57. And the Body received the Power; for 1 Cor. 4. 20.
the Kingdom of God consists in Power, and thus Man stood clearly in the
Kingdom of God, for he was immortal and a Child of God.

58. But if he should have Eaten thus into the Guts, and have had Such a Stink
in his Body, as we now Have; I will ask a Reason, whether that were Paradise,
and whether Gods Spirit did dwell in that; whereas Gods Spirit was to dwell in
Adam, as in the Creature of God.

59. His labor in Paradise upon the Earth was Child-like, but with heavenly
Wit or Ingenuity understanding and skill; he might plant Trees, also other
Plants, all according to his pleasure: in all there would grow to him
Paradisical fruit, and all would be pure to him, he did what he would, and did
all right.

60. He had no Law, but only the Law of the Imagination or longing pleasure
and delight: that he was to place with or by his Spirit, in God, and so he
should have continued Eternally.

61. And although God had changed the Earth, yet he had continued without
necessity, and Death, all would be but changed into Heavenly Substantiality.

62. So also is to be understood concerning his drinking, the inward Man drank
the Water of Eternal Life, out of Gods Being or Substance, and the outward
drank the Water upon the Earth.

63. But as the Sun, and the Air, suck up the water, and yet is not filled with
it; so it was also in Man's Mouth, it separated it self in the Mystery.

64. As we conceive and certainly know, and it is the whole Truth, that God
Made all things out of Nothing but only out of his Power* so all whatsoever
was Earthly should in Man's Mouth, go again into that which it was before the
Creation of the World.

65. The Spirit and power thereof belonged to Man, but not an Earthly Body: for
God had once created him a Body which was Eternal, and needed no Creating more.

66. He, understand, Adam, was a Princely Throne, made out of Heaven Earth
Stars and the Elements, as also out of Gods Being or Substance: A Lord of the
World, and a Child of God.

67. Observe this ye Philosophers, it is the true ground and highly known;
Mingle no School fictions with it; it is clear enough; Opinion does it not, but
the true Spirit born of God knows it aright.

68. All Opinion without knowledge, is an Earthly folly, and here understands
Earth and the four Elements; But Gods Spirit understands the One Element
only, wherein the four lie hidden.

69. Not four, should rule in Adam, but the One over the four, the Heavenly
Element over the four Elements of this world: and thus we must be again if we
will possess Paradise; for which things sake God is become Man.

70. Let this be told you Ye, School-Disputers or wranglers, ye go about the
Circle and enter not within, as the Cat about the scalding Broth, which is
afraid of the burning Heat, so are ye afraid and ashamed before the fire of God.

71. And as little as the Cat eats the scalding Broth, but goes about
smelling at the Edg thereof: so little also does Man eat the Paradisical fruit,
unless he go out from Adams skin which the Devil has defiled, and enter again
into the regeneration of Christ.

72. He must Enter within the Circle, and cast away the skin of Reason; and
then he attaineth Humane Wit or Ingenuity and Undershanding, and Divine skill
and knowledge: No learning does it; but to be born or regenerated in it.

The Fifth Chapter. Of the Lamentable and M^serable Full of Man.
1. IFwe will rightly describe the Becoming Man or Incarnation, of JESUS
CHRIST; it is necessary that we should set down the Cause, why God is become
Man.

2. It is no small cause, or for nothing, as the Jews and the Turks look upon
it, the Christians also are half dumb concerning it: for indeed it must needs
be a great Cause, wherefore the unchangeable God has moved himself: Therefore
observe this, we will set you down the Cause.

3 Adam was Or, One.
a Man, and * an Image of God, * a whole similitude according to God; although
Note.
God is no Image, he is the Kingdom, the Power, also the Glory and the
Eternity; All in All.

4. Yet the Deep without ground, longed or pleased to manifest it self in
Similitudes, as indeed there were such manifestations which were done from
Eternity in the wisdom of God, as in a Virgin-like Figure.

5. Which yet was no Genetrix; but a Looking-Glass of the Deity, and of the
Eternity, in the Ground or Byss and in the Abyss, an Eye of the Glory of God.

6. And according to that Eye, and in that Eye the Thrones of Princes became
Created; viz: the Angels and in the End, Man; he had again the Throne in
himself as being Created out of the Eternal Magia, out of Gods Being or
Substance, out of the Nothing into somewhat, out of the Spirit into Body.

7. And as the Eternal Magia Generated him out of it self, into an Eye of the
Wonders and Wisdom of God: so he should and could generate another Man out of
himself after a Magical manner, without dividing or rending of his Body.

8. For he was conceived in Gods longing Pleasure or delight, and the Desire of
God, had generated him and brought him forth; and so he also had that same
longing, to his own impregnating of himself.

9. For, Venus's Tincture is the Matrix which was Impregnated with the
substantiality, viz: with Sulphur in the Fire, which yet in Venus's Water
comes to Being or Substance.

10. The Fire Tincture, gives Soul; and the Lights Tincture gives Spirit; and
the Water, viz: the substantiality gives Body: and Mercurius, viz: the Center
of Nature, gives the wheel of the Essences, and the Great life, in the Fire,
and Water, heavenly and Earthly; and the Sal or Salt Heavenly and Earthly,
holds it in the Being or Substance, for it is the Fiat.

11. For, as Man has the Outward Constellation or Astrum in him, which is his
Wheel of the outward worlds Essences and Cause of the Mind: so also he has
the Inward Constellation or Astrum of the Center of the fiery Essences, as also
in the second Principle; he has the Light flaming Divine Essences.

12. He had the whole Magia of the Being of all Beeings or Substance of all
Substances in him; it was the possibility in him, he could generate Magically;
for he loved himself, and desired his likeness again out of his Center, As he
was Conceived from Gods desire, and brought forth by the Genetrix in the Fiat;
so should he also have brought forth his Angelical or Humane Host.

13. But, whether they should all have been generated out of One, viz: out of
that one Princely Throne; or successively all one out of another, is not
needful to be known, for the limit is broken: we have enough in the Knowledge,
in that we know what we are, and what our Kingdom is.

14. Indeed I find in the Deep in the Center, that one should have proceeded
out of the other: for the Heavenly Center has its Minutes, as well as the
Earthly, which always strike: where the Wheel with all the Three Principles
always goes, and always one wonder opens it self after another.

15. Thus was Man's Image also found and contrived wherein the wonders lie
without number: they should be opened by the Humane Host.

16. And clearly in Time, one Greater Wonder is opened in one then in another;
all according to the Heavenly and Earthly Birth, and wonderful Variation or
Alteration: as is done also at this very day; that in One more Art and
understanding of the Wonders lies then in an other.

17. Therefore I conclude, that one man should have been generated and
proceeded from another: for the sake of the Great Wonders, and for the pleasure
delight and joy of Man wherein a Man would have brought forth his like.

18. Thus should the Humane Generations have stood in the Generating, till God
had set the Third Principle of this World again, in its own Either.

19. For it is a Globe with Beginning and End, for the beginning reaches to
the End, that the last may pass into the First; thus all is finished and
entire.

20. And then will the Middle again be cleared, and go again into that which
it was before the Times of this world, even all but the Wonders, which continue
in Gods wisdom in the great Magia, standing, as a shadovv of this World.

21. Now seeing Adam was so Glorious an Image; moreover in the sted and place
of extruded Lucifer,; the Devil would not allow or afford him that, but Envied
it vehemently, and set his Vizard and Imagination always before Adam: he slipped
also with his Imagination into the Earthlinesse of the fruit: and Imagined or
represented before Adam as if Great Glory did stick in his enkindled
Earthliness.

22. Though indeed Adam did not know him, for he came not in his own Form, but
the form of the Serpent, as in the form of a Sumptuous Beautiful Cunning
Beast, and Managed his Apish Sport like a Fowler, who deceives the fowls and
so catches them.

23. So did he also, he infected the Earthly Kingdom with his disease and
venom of Pride, and half killed it, as is to be seen in Earth and Stones,
which though so very much diseased venomed and full of vanity, yet would very
Romans 8. 20. 22
fain be loosed from the vanity.

24. And when The Earth.
it found that Adam was a child of God, and had the Glory and the Power, then
it Imagined or longed vehemently after Adam, together with the Kindled Anger of
God, that also Imagined or longed after Adam, to delight it self in this
living Image.

25. All drew Adam and would have him; the Kingdom of Heaven would have him,
for he was created for it.

26. Also the Earthly Kingdom would have him, for it had one part in him; it
would be his Lord, seeing he was but a Creature.

27. Also the fierce wrath, set open its Jaws, and would be Creaturely and
substantial, to satiate its great fierce hunger.

28. And thus stood Adam in the Trial or Proba for forty Days, so long as
Christ was tempted in the Wilderness, and Israel on Moant Si^^i, when God gave
them the Law, to see whether it were possible, that this people, could in the
Fathers source or quality in the Law, stand before God.

29. And whether Man could have continued in Obedience, so as to have set his
Imagination Or into: that is, Imagine or think like God.
upon God; so that God should not have needed to become Man; for which cause,
God did such wonders in Egypt, that man might see, that there is a God, and so
love and fear him.

30. But the Devil was a liar and deceiver, and seduced Israel, so that they
made a Calf, and worshipped it for God, now seeing it was not possible for
Israel to stand; therefore * Moses came from the Mountain with the Tables, upon
which the Law was written, and brake them, and slew the worshippers of the Calf.

31. So also must not Moses bring this People, into the promised Land, it could
not be; JOSUA and lastly JESUS must do it, who stood in the Temptation before
the Devil and the Anger of God, who overcame the Anger and brake Death in
pieces, as Moses did the Tables of the Law.

32. The first Adam now could not stand, though the Kingdom of God stood before
his Eyes and he in Paradise; yet Gods Anger was so very much inflamed, that it
drew Adam; for he was too much kindled in the Earth through the Devils
Imagination and strong willing.

33. Now says Reason: Had the Devil so great Might? yes dear Man: Man had it
also, he can throw down Mountains, if he enters strongly with his Imagination.

34. The Devil was also out of the great Magia of God, and a Prince or King of
this Throne, and Entered into the strongest Might of the Fire, in a will and
entention to be a Lord over all the Host of Heaven.

35. Thus the Magia became kindled, and the Great Turba Generated, that had
wrestled with Adam, to try, whether he would be strong enough, to possess the
Devils Kingdom, and to rule in the same, with other Sources or Qualities.

36. This, Adams Rational Spirit did not understand, but the Magic Essences
strove against one another, whence the whole Lust and the will did exist, till
Adam began and Imagined after the Earthliness, and would have earthly fruit.

37. There all was done: then his Noble Image, which should eat only of the
word of the Lord, became infected and Obscured.

38. And so then instantly grevv the Earthly Tree of Temptation; for Adam had
desired it and given way for it.

39. Then Adam must be tempted, to try whether he could stand, for the stern
Commandment came from God.

40. And God said: Thou shall Eat of every Tree in Paradise, but of the Tree of
knowledge of Good and Evil thou shall not eat: for the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall dye the Death, that is, dye to the Kingdom of Heaven and
become Earthly.

41. And Adam knew the Commandment well, and also did not eat thereof; but he
Imagined thereinto, and was captivated in his Imagination, also quite
powerless, also faint and weak, till he was overcome, then he fell down and
slept.

42. Thus he fell home to the Magia; and his Glory was at an End; for the
sleep signifies Death and a being overcome; for the Earthly Kingdom had
overcome him, it would rule over him.

43. The Kingdom of the Stars would have Adam, and bring forth its Wonders by
him, for there was no other Creature so highly graduated and dignified as Man,
which could attain the Kingdom of the Stars.

44. Therefore Adam was drawn, and rightly Tempted, to try whether he could be
a Lord and King, over the Stars and Elements.

45. The Devil was busy, he supposed he should overthrow Man, and bring him
into his power, whereby this Throne would at last remain to be his Kingdom.

46. For he knew well, that if Man should go forth from Gods will, that he
would be Earthly; and he knew also well, that the Abyss of H^ ll, stood in the
Earthly Kingdom, and therefore he was now so busy.

47. For if Adam had generated Magically, then he had continued in Para^ise
upon Earth, and that the Devil did not like, he was not able to endure that, it
did not relish with him in his Kingdom; for it did not smell like brimstone and
fire, but like Love and Sweetness: Then thought the Devil, if thou Eatest not
of that Plant, then I my self shall not continue a fiery Lord.

48. Thus the Fall of Adam stuck wholly in the Earthly Essence, and lost the
heavenly Essence, out of which the divine Love flows, and he attained the
Earthly Essence, out of which, wrath Malice poison venom sickness and Misery
flows; and lost the Heavenly Eyes.

49. Also, he could no more eat after a Paradisical Manner, but he Imagined
after the forbidden fruit, wherein Evil and Good were mixed, as at this day all
fruits on Earth are mixed.

50. Thus the four Elements became stirring and qualifying or working him: for
his will with its Imagination took the Earthly Kingdom in the Souls fire for a
Lodging.

51. Thus he went away from the Spirit of God into the Spirit of the Stars
and Elements, that received him and rejoiced it self in him, for it was now
living and mighty in him; before it must be in subjection and servitude, but
now it gat the Dominion.

52 There the Devil made merry, and derided God: but he knew not what lay
behind, he knew not at all of the Crusher of the Serpent, who should take away
his Throne and break his Kingdom in pieces.

53. Thus Adam sunk down into sleep in the Magia, for God saw that he could
not stand; therefore he said

54, Genesis 2. 18.
It is not Good that this Man is alone, we will make a help for him, that may
be with him, through whom he may propagate and multiply.

55. For he saw the Fall, and came to Help him, in another way; for he would
not that his Image should perish.

Reasons Objection
56. Reason says: First. Why did God suffer the Tree to grow, by which Adam
was Tempted? therefore sure it must needs be his will that Adam should be
Tempted.

57. Secondly; Thus, will Reason also impute it to Gods will, and supposes
that God willed that Adam should Fall; Thirdly: That God wills to have some
Men to be in Heaven, and some to be in Hell, else he could have hindered the
Evil, and have kept Adam, so that he had continued Good, and in Paradise.

58. Thus also the present World Judges; for it says: if God had not made
Evil, nothing had been Evil; seeing all has proceeded from him, and he alone
is the Creator, who has made all, and so he has made Evil and Good, else it
would not be so: this will reason strictly Maintain.

59. Also, it thinks; if that had not been which the Devil, and also Man,
have looked upon and Gazed, and are become Evil; then the Devil had continued
an Angel, Man in Paradise.

Answer.
60. Yes dear Reason; now thou have the white and the Hub right: thou can not
fail if thou art not blind.

61. Hearken! Why do thou not say to the Light: why Suffer thou the Fire
to be? How pleasant would thou be, if thou did not dwell in the Fire: I
would pitch my Tent with thee, but thou dwell in the Fire, and so I cannot.

62. Say now to the Light, go out from the Fire, and then thou will be good and
pleasant: and if the Light follow your direction, you will find a great
Treasure: O how would you rejoice, if you could dwell in the Light and the Fire
not burn you!

63. Thus far goes Reason; but look upon it a right, with Magic Eyes,
understand, with Divine and also with Natural Eyes: then this shall be shown
you, unless you are altogether Blind and Dead.

64. Behold I offer it to your understanding, in a similitude. Seeing Reason is
A foolish Virgin.
1 Cor. 2. 14.
Foolishness, and understands Nothing of the Spirit of God; I will so set it
down as if I had power and were able to take away the Light from the Fire;
which yet cannot be, and see what would follow upon it.

65. Behold, If I take away the Light from the Fire; then First the Light would
loose its Or root.
Essence, out of which it shines; Secondly, It would loose its Life, and be
Impotent: Thirdly it would be captivated by the Darkness, and overpowred and be
exinguished in it self, and become Nothing; for it is the Eternal Liberty, and
an Abyss; while it shines it is Good; and when it extinguisheth, it is Nothing.

66. Now behold further: what would remain of the Fire if I should take away
the Light and Luster from the Fire? Nothing but a dry hunger and a Darkness; it
loses the Essence and source or quality, it hungreth, and yet is nothing; the
Sulphur which it had is a Death; it consumes it self while there is any
Essence left; and when there is no more, it becomes Nothing, an Abyss, wherein
there is not the least footsteps or remainder of Any thing.

67. Now dear seeking Mind; conceive of it but thus; God is the Eternal Light;
his power and source or quality, dwells in the Light, the Light causes
Meekness, and out of the Meekness comes Being or Substance; that Being or
Substance is Gods Being or Substance, and the Source or Quality of the Light
is the Spirit of God, which there is the Original.
Understanding: there is no other God then this: in the Light is the Power, and
the Power is the Kingdom.

68. But Now the Light and the Power have only a Love-will; it desires not
Evil; indeed it desires Being or Substance, but from or out of its own
Essence: understand out of the love and sweetness, for that is conformable to
the Light.

69. But yet the Light arises from the Fire, and without the fire it would be
Nothing; without that, it would have no Essence; the Fire makes Life and
Mobility, and is Nature. Yet it has another will then the Light, for it is
Covetous and wills only to Consume, it takes and receives only, and
climeth up aloft in Pride.

70. The Light receives not but Gives, that the Fire may be preserved: the
source or quality of the Fire is fierce wrath; its Essences are Bitter, its
Sting is enimicitious and unpleasant.

71. It is an Enmity in it self, it consumes it self: and if the Light did
not come to help it, it would devour it self, so that out of it would be
Nothing: Dear seeking Mind, consider this, and thou will soon come to the
Limit to Rest.

72. God is from Eternity, the Power and the Light, and he is called God
according to the Light, and according to the Power of the Light, according to
the Spirit of the Light.

73. Not according to the Fire-spirit, for that is called his fierce wrath, his
Anger, and is not called God, but the consuming fire of the Might and strength
of God.

74. The Fire is called Nature; the Light is not called Nature: it has indeed
the Fires property; but changes it out of fierce wrath into Love, out of
devouring Consuming, into generating, out of enmity and hatred, and bitter woe
and Torment, into Meek weldoing pleasant amiable desiring and a perpetual
satisfying and fulfilling.

75. For, the Love desire, draws the Meekness of the Light into it self: and
is an impregnated Virgin; viz: with the Wit Ingenuity or Knowledge and Wisdom
of the Power of the Deity.

76. Thus it is highly known to Us; what God and Nature is, as also the Or the
Ground
Bysse and Abyss, also the deep of Eternity; thus we apprehend, that the
Eternal Fire is Magical; and is generated in the desiring Will, as is mentioned
in the Second and Third Book.

77. Now seeing the Eternal Abyss is Magical therefore that is Magical also,
whatsoever is generated out of the Eternal; for, out of the Desiring, all
things are come to be: Heaven and Earth are Magical, and the Mind with the
Senses or Thoughts are Magical: If we will but once know, or understand our
selves.

78. Now, what can the Light do, if the fire lay hold of somewhat and devoureth
it? seeing the Thing that is apprehended by the Fire, is also Magical.

79. Seeing then it has a Life, and the Power and understanding of the Light,
why does it then run into the Fire?

80. The Devil was indeed an Angel, and Adam an Image of God, they had both the
Fire and the Light, as also divine Wit Ingenuity or Understanding in them: Why
did the Devil Imagine according to the Fire, and Adam according to the Earth?
They were Free.

81. The Light and Power drew not the Devil into the Fire, but the fierce wrath
of Nature; Why did the Spirit assent to be willing?

82. Whatsoever the Magia makes it self, that, it has; the Devil Made
himself Hell, and that he has; and Adam made himself Earth, and that he is.

83. God is no Creature, also no Maker, but a Spirit and an Opener. When the
Creation was: we are to Conceive and apprehend of it thus.

84. The Fire and Light had together at once awakened themselves in the
pleasure delight and Longing, and desired a Looking-Glass or Image according to
the Eternity.

85. Moreover we have it in true knowledge, that the fierce wrath, viz: the
Nature of the Fire, is no Maker, that has made Nothing out of it self that is
Substantial, for besides that cannot be; but it has made Spirit and Source or
Quality.

86. But yet no Creature stands solely and barely in the Essence; if a
Creature be, it must be out of a Substance, viz: out of the power of Sulphur;
it must subsist in the Spiritual Sal, or Salt; and then out of the ^ire Source
or Quality comes a Mercury, and true Essential Life; Moreover it must have a
Glance or Luster, if it be to have understanding or knowledge in it.

87. Thus we know that all Creatures, stand in Spiritual Sulphur Mercurius and
Sal; * Or Substance
and must not be only Spirit, but it must be Sulphur; wherein the Fiat
stands, viz: the sour Matrix to the Center of Nature, wherein the Spirit is
preserved.

88. That is, it must be substance, for, where there is no Substance, there is
also, no Creating; whereas yet a Creaturely Spirit is no palpable Substance;
but it must draw in Substance into it self through its ^^agination, else it
would not subsist.

89. So then if the Devil drew fierce wrathfulness, into him, and Man
Earthliness, what could the Love of the Substantiality of God, do to that: The
Devil had indeed the Love and Meekness of God with the divine Substance set
before him and offered to him, as also to Man, who will blame, God, now.

90. But the fierce wrathful Essence was too strong, so that it overcame the
love Essence; what can God do to that? if a good branch be planted, and
perishes; what can the Earth do to that: It gives thereto Sap and Virtue, why
does not the Branch draw the same to it?

91. Thou will say; its Essences are too weak, but what can the Earth do to
that, and he also, who has planted that branch: his will is to produce a good
Tree for his pleasure and delight, and would eat of its fruit: but if he knew
that the branch would perish, he would never plant it.

92. Thus we are to apprehend, that the Angels are Created not as one that
sets a Tree; but with the Moving of God, with both the Principles, as Light,
and darkness; in which the Fire lay hidden; yet the fire did not burn in the
Creating and in the Moving, as yet at this day it does not burn, for it has a
principle of it own.

93. Why did Lucifer kindle That, the will existed out of his Creature, and not
without or beyond him; he would be a Lord over Fire and Light, he would
extinguish the Light, and Contemned the Meekness and would be a Fire-Lord.

94. And when he despised the Light, and his birth in Meekness, then he was
justly thrust out: thus he lost Fire and Light and must dwell in the Abyss in
the darkness; if he will have fire, he must strike it up for himself, and
kindle it with his Or Evilness.
Malice or Malignity in the Imagination.

95. Which yet does not burn rightly to him, but only in the Essential fierce
wrathful source or quality, as the four forms in the Center of Nature, do
afford in themselves.

96. Viz: Astringent hard rough and cold is one form, Bitter stinging
enimicitions is the second form in the Center, Anguish Woe and Tormentive
source or quality is the Third, and with the Anguish, as in the stirring and
life, he strikes up the fire, in the hard astringency, between the hard and
bitter sting, so that it appears like Lightning; that is the fourth Form.

97. Now if there be no meekness, or substance of Meekness, then it gives no
light, but only a Flash, for the Anguish wills to have the Liberty, but is
too sharp, and gets it only as a Flash, that is, Fire, and yet has no
stability or Ground.

98. Thus, the Devil must dwell in the Darkness, and has only the fierce
wrathful Flash in him, also the whole form or Condition in his dwelling is
only a fierce wrathful Flash; As if it sent forth Thunderbolts.
as if it did continually Thunder and Lighten: Thus the Hellish property sets
it self in the source or quality.

99. Thus we are to understand also in a Similitude, concerning the Tree of
Temptation, which Adam stirred up by his Imagination; he desired; and so the
Matrix of Nature, set that before him which he desired.

100. But God did forbid him it; and commanded that he should not touch it; God
would not have him do it; but the earthly Matrix would have Adam; for it knew
in Adam the divine Power.

101. And seeing it was by the Devils Kindling become earthly; but not quite
dead, therefore it Romans 8. 20. 22
groaned after that which it was before, viz: after the Liberty; to be freed
from the vanity; and in Adam was the Liberty; therefore it drew Adam so that he
Imagined.

102. And thus Adam Lusted against the Command and will of God, this is as Paul
says. Gal. 5. 17.
The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh

103. Adams flesh was half Earthly and half Heavenly; thus has Adams Spirit
also by the Imagination brought a power into the Earth, and so the Matrix of
Nature, gave him what he would have.

104. He must be Tempted, to try whether he would stand an Angel in the stead
of Lucifer; and therefore God Created him not barely an Angel, so that, if he
should fall, and not stand he might help him.

105. So that he might not perish in the fierce wrath* as Lucifer did,
therefore he was Created out of Matter, and his Spirit was introduced into the
Matter, viz: into a Sulphur of water and fire, that God might again exgenerate
a New Life unto him, as a fair pleasant smelling blossom springs out of the
Earth.

106. Thus also was the purpose of God; being he knew that he would not stand;
concerning which Paul also says; Ephe. 1. 4. 5.
We were foreseen or Elected in Christ Jesus, before the foundation of the
world was laid.

107. That is; when Lucifer fell, then was not the foundation of this world yet
laid, and yet then was Man clearly foreseen in the wisdom of God.

108. But being he should be made out of Three Principles; there was imminent
danger in respect of the kindled Sulphur of the Matter; and though indeed he
was Created above the Earth; yet he was extracted out of the Sulphur of the
Earthly Matrix; as a fair blossom out of the Earth; and there was plainly
danger.

109. And therein had the amiable blessed saving Name Jesus, Together,
co-imaged it self as a Savior and Regenerator; for, MAN is the greatest
Arcanum or secret Mystery that God Ever wrought.

110. He has the Figure, and is the Similitude, showing how the Deity has
exgenerated it self from Eternity, out of the fierce wrath, out of the Fire,
by the sincking through Death, into another Principle of another Source or
Quality.

111. For thus is he also exgenerated out of Death again, and grows out of
Death again, into another Principle of another source or quality, and virtue or
power; wherein he is quite free from the Earthliness.

112. And it is very good, that we are with the Earthly part fallen home to the
Earth, in as much as we also retain the divine part.

113. For so we are wholly pure, and come wholly Note.
perfect, without any Lust suggestion or infection, of the Devil, into the
Kingdom of God again: and are a much greater Arcanum or secret Mystery then the
Angels.

114. We shall also* as to the heavenly Substantiality, excel them, for they
are flames of fire, thoroughly illustrated with the Light, but we attain the
Great source or quality of the Meekness and Love, which flows forth in Gods
holy Substantiality.

115. Therefore they do very wrongfully and falsely who say, God wills not to
have all Men in Heaven 1 Timothy 2. 4.
He wills that all should be saved or helped: the fault is in Man himself,
that he will not suffer himself to be Saved or helped.

116. And although many be of an Evil Propensity or Complexion.
inclination, that proceeds not from God; but from the Mother of Nature; i^
thou layest the blame on God, thou lie; Gods Spirit withdraws i^ self from
no Man.

117. Cast away your Evil or wickedness, and enter into the Meekness, press
into the Truth, into Love, and yield thy self up to God, and so thou will be
saved or helped; for therefore is JESUS Born, in that he wills to Save or
help.

118. Thou will say: I am kept back that I cannot: yes indeed that is right;
thou willest to have it so; the Devil also would have it so.

119. Art thou a ^ (...) Soldier.
Champion; why do thou not strive or fight against the Evil? but if thou
strivest or fightest against the Good, thou are an Enemy of God: do thou
suppose that God will set an Angels Crown upon the Devil?

120. Art thou an Enemy? then thou art no friend, if thou will be a friend,
then forsake thy Enmity and hatred, and go to the Father; and so thou art a
Son.

121. Therefore; whosoever lays the blame on God: is a liar and Murderer, as
well as the Devil.

122. Art thou the Maker of thy own self? Why do thou make thy self Evil?
and though indeed thou art Of an Evil Complexion.
Evil Matter, yet God has bestowed his heart and Spirit upon thee; take that
to you in your making, and you make your self Good.

123. But if thou take Covetousness and high-mindedness, as also
Voluptuousness and pleasure of the Earthly Life; what should God do with that:
should God now sit in thy scornful high-mind? O no! that is not his source or
quality.

124. But if thou say; I am of an Evil source or quality; and cannot, I am
kept back.

125. Very well: Let the Evil source or quality, be as it is: but go thou with
thy will-Spirit into Gods love-Spirit, and give up thy self into his Mercy:
thou will once well be freed from the Evil source or quality.

126. The Evil source or quality is out of or from the Earth, if the Earth get
the Body, then it may take away its Evil, but thou art and remainest to be one
Spirit with and in the will of God; in his Love.

127. Let the Evil Adam be gone; there will a good and new one Sprout forth out
of the Old, as a fair Blossom, springs out of the stinking Dung: onley have
a care thou retainest the Spirit in God;

128. Concerning the Evil Body which sticks full of Evil Affections, there
is not much to be done: if it be inclined to Evil, do it the less good; give
it no occasion to wantonness.

129. To keep it in subjection is a good Remedy; to be full and frolic, is at
length, to make the Ass perfectly to wallow in the Mirc, where it defiles it
self sufficiently like a Swine.

130. To be sober, and to lead a Temperate life, is a Good purgation for the
Evil Ass, not to give it that it lusts after, to let it fast often, so that
it may not hinder Prayer, that is good for it; it, is not willing, but the
understanding must be Lord; for it bears Gods Image.

131. This Latin does not relish well to the Rational World: in the Lust of
the Flesh; but seeing that relisheth it not, but draws into the place thereof
mere vain Earthly Voluptuousness and pleasure, and swalloweth them into it
self; therefore is the Anger stirring in them, that draws them continually
with Adam out of Paradise, and with Lucifer, into the Abyss, and there thou will swallow and devour to the full what thou have here willingly drawn into
thy self.

132. But thou should not lay the blame on God; if thou do thou art a
Liar, and an Enemy of the Truth; God wills no Evil, also there is no Evil
Thought in him: he has only one Source or Quality, and that is, Love and Joy.

133. But his fierce wrath, viz: Nature, has many Sources or Qualities;
therefore let every one have a care what he does, every Man is his own God, and
his own Devil: that source or quality which he inclines himself, or yields
himself up into, that leads and drives him; and he is the Work-master
thereof.

134. It is a great Misety that Man is so blind, that he can not know what God
is: for all, that Act. 17. 28.
he lives in God.

135. And yet there are Men that forbid such a thing, that Man should not
search what God is, and yet will be Teachers of and for God: verily, such are
even Teachers of and for the Devil, that he may not be known.

The Sixth Chapter. Of Adams Sleep: How God made a Woman out of him; and how he
became quite Earthly: also how God by the Curse has withdrawn Paradise from
him.
1. WHen Man became weary and tired, he fell into a sleep, viz: into the Magia,
it was with him as if he were not in this world, for all his Senses or Thoughts
ceased, the wheel of the Essences, passed into a Rest.

2. He was as it were Essential Not Substantial, he was altogether like the
Magia; for he knew nothing of his Body; he lay, as dead, but was not Dead, but
The Spirit of the Body.
the Spirit stood still.

3. And then the Essences have their Effect, and the Spirit of the soul only
sees or discerns; and there is pourtrayed in the sydereal Spirit, all
whatsoever the starry heaven brings forth.

4. And stood Magically, in the Mind as a Looking-Glass on which the Spirit of
this world Or is overcome with Gazing.
Gazeth; and conveigheth whatsoever it sees in the Looking-Glass into the
Essences; and the Essences Qualify or operate.
flow forth therein: as if they did perform the work in the Spirit, and
pourtray it in the Spirit: which are Dreams and Representations, or Figures.

5. Thus, we are to know, that when the Earthliness wrestled with Adam, and
that he Imagined thereinto; he became instantly infected thereby, and in his
Mind became dark and stern.

6. For the Earthliness began to qualify or operate like water, that begins
to sees by the fire: the source or quality of the Stars became stirring, and
were now, Lord, of the Body.

7. And now Moses says very right Genesis 2. 21.
God suffered a Deep sleep to fall upon him: that is, being his Will-spirit
Imagined after Earthliness, God let him fall down; for he brought with the
Imagination earthliness into the heavenly Substantiality, and that, the Spirit
of God which is a Spirit of Light, would not have.

8. For, Adams Spirit was a Creature, and proceeded forth out of Gods
Love-spirit: therefore indeed it did not willingly leave him; but the
Earthliness had already captivated him.

9. And when that left him, then he sank down in impotency, and fell home to
the Third Principle, viz: to the Stars and the Four Elements thus he lay in
the Earthly Magia, and was not yet wholly Earthly.

10. He lay in the Mystery, between the Kingdom of God and of this world, where
both the Fiat's viz: the divine and the Earthly, were stirring in him: and now
the Two Kingdoms, viz: of God and of Hell, were first in strife about Man.

11. And so now, if the dear Name JESUS, had not been Or Imaged.
incorporated in Adam, even before his Creation, as in the substantiality of
God, wherein the Virgin of Wisdom stood, wherein Adam was created, he would
indeed have slept still and have been in the Earthly Death.

12. And this is the cause; why the Second Adam Math. 12. 40.
Christ, must rest till the Third Day, in the Earth, in the first sleep of
Adam; and awaken or raise up the first Adam again out of the Earthliness.

13. For Christ had also a soul and spirit out of Adam, and the precious Dear
word of the Deity, together with Gods Spirit, awakened and raised up again in
Christ's flesh, the dead substantiality of the Sulphur; viz: the Body, which, in
Adam, was dead; and put it again into the power of the Majesty of God, and
therewith, US all.

14. All those which with their Faith and Imagination, in Christ's flesh and
blood, in his Death and Rest, go into the Earth; they sprout all, with their
Spirit and will, forth, in the divine substantiality, and are a fair Blossom
in the Majesty of God.

15. And God, the Eternal word and power, will at the last day awaken and raise
up in himself, with his spirit, the dead Body which with Adam is fallen home
to the Earth.

16. For, Christ's soul and Flesh, which is also our Soul and Flesh; understand
it right, that part which Adam received out of the divine substantiality: has
God, through and in the Death of Christ, separated from the Earthly source or
quality, and has awakened and raised it up, and introduced it into the divine
substantiality again, as it was before the Time of the World, and Us, in and
with him.

17. And we are only wanting in our giving up our selves into it: in that we
suffer the Devil to withold us: for our death is broken, our sleep is become
a Life; and that, in Christ, and through Christ, in God, and through God, in
the Eternity, with our Byss or Ground, in the Abyss, viz: in the Majesty
without or beyond the fiery Nature.

18. O Blindness, that we know not our selves! O thou Noble, Man; if thou
knew thy self, who thou art, how woulst thou rejoice? How woulst thou give
the Devil his Arrant to be gone, who day and night endeavors to make our
Mind Earthly, that we should not know our true Native Country; out of which we
are gone forth.

19. O, miserable Corrupted Reason, if thou knew but one little spark of
thy first Glory, how would thou pant after it.

20. How very amiable and blessed is but the glimps of the divine
substantiality? How sweet is the water of the Eternal Life our of Gods Majesty?

21. O! Most worthy Light, draw us into thee again, we are now, with Adam
fallen asleep into the Earthly source or quality: O! come thou most worthy
Word, and awaken or raise us up, in Christ!

22 O! thou most worthy Light: for thou art indeed appeared, destroy and break
now the Devils Power, which holds us captive; break the power and Might of
the Antichrist and of Covetousness, and deliver us from the Evil one.

23. Awaken and raise us up, O Lord! for we have long slept in the Devils Net
in the Earthly source or quality; let us yet once see thy salvation.

24. Bring forth the New Jerusalem; It is Day: why should we sleep in the Day?

25. O! Come, thou breaker through Death, Thou Powerful Savior and Conqueror,
and break in pieces the Devils Kingdom upon Earth: Give us, Poor sick Adam yet
a Cordial draught out of Sion, that we may refresh us, and go into our true
Native-Country.

26. The Spirits answer.
Behold all Mountains and Hills together with the Valleys are full of the glory
of the Lord; it springs up as a sprout, who will hinder it. Hallelujah.

27. Now when Adam was fallen asleep, he lay in the Mystery as in Gods Wonder,
what it did with him, that was done.

28. Thus the incorporated or Imaged Name JESUS moved the Fiat again in two
Forms, viz: in both the Tinctures, of the Fire and of the Water.

29. For, this first Image was now fallen home to the Name JESUS in the word of
Life: and so now the word of Life was the Second Creator, understand, with the
incorporated or Imaged Name JESUS, which would become Man: that severed the two
Tinctures one from another, viz: the Tincture of the Fire and of the Light.

30. Yet not wholly in the power, but in the substantiality; for, i^ the
Substantiality of the Tincture of the Light, was the Sulphur of Venus of the
Love, in which Adam should and could impregnate himself: The Fires Tincture
gave soul, and the Lights Tincture gave Spirit.

31. Viz: an Image according to the outward Image, the fire-Life Imagined after
the Light-life: and the Light-life after the Fire-life: viz: after the
Essential power out of which the Light shines.

32. This was in Adam, but One, for he was Man and Or Woman.
Wife.

33. And the word of Life, took the Tincture of Venus, with the heavenly and
earthly Fiat, from Adam, also a Rib or Bone out of his Side, as also the half
Cross in the Head.

34. Which is the Character of the Holy Trinity; Marked by the word of Life,
viz, with the Severe Name of GOD, GoTTes.
GOTTES: which bears such a Character. T.

35. T, signifying the Cross of Christ; on which he should suffer Death; and
New regenerate Adam again, and in the Name JESU, introduce him in Ternarium
Sanstum, into the Holy Ternary.

36. All these, the Fiat took into it self, together with all Essences of the
Humane property, as also the property of the souls Fire, but in Venus's
Tincture, not according to the might and strength of the Center; and Separated
it into the whole form of Man.

37. Thus was the Woman built, with all Members of the feminine properties, as
they still have them: For, the Spirit of the great world, Spiritus Majoris
Mundi; had now the strongest Fiat, and figured the woman in such a form, as it
could in possibility.

38. For the Angelical Form was gone: the propagation must now be in A
Beastiall Manner.

39. And so also there was given to Adam, being he was fallen home to the
Earthly Magia; a beastial form and shape of Masculine Members, and Adams
generating was given to the Fiat: and that makes a similitude of him, out of
him.

40. If he had continued heavenly Minded, then he had himself generated
heavenly; but now the Earthly Fiat did it; and his outward body hecame a Beast;
he lost also the heavenly wit or understanding; and the Power of the
Omnipotency.

41. Beloved Reader thus thou art to know, that the Second Adam; Christ has
not in vain suffered himself to be Crucified, and with a Spear to be pierced
in his side, nor has in vain shed his blood; here lies the Key.

42. Adam was broken in the Side by the Rib for the Woman, into that very Side
must Longinus's Spear, with Gods fierce wrath, come; for it was come into
Adam, and out of Mary's earthliness, into Christ's Side also.

43. And the Blood of Christ must drown the fierce wrath and take it away from
the First Adam; for the Second Adam had also Heavenly blood, that must drown
the Earthly Turba, that the first Adam might be whole again.

44. Let this be told you, ye Children of Men; for it is become known in
Ternario Sancto, in the Holy Ternary; and not in Supposition or Opinion: it
concerns both Soul and Body; take heed what you do.

45. Thus now the humane propagation began in a beastial manner; for Adam
retained the Limbus; and his Eve the Matrix of Venus, for, the the Tinctures
were divided.

46. So now Each Tincture is an Whole.
entire or total Magia, viz: a desirous longing, wherein the Center of Nature
is generated, and that in the Sulphur.

47. Thus then in the Sulphur, is again the desirous Magia, together with the
Tincture; and yet can not come to Life, except the Tincture of Fire come into
Venus's Tincture; and Venus's Tincture, can awaken no Life, it is too weak, so
that life cannot be therein.

48. And both the Tinctures desire also the Life; and so the vehement
Imagination of Man and Wife, begins, so that the one desires to mix with
the other.

49. For, the power of the Essences wills to be living; and the Tincture
drives on that, and desires the same.

50. For, the Tincture, is from or out of the Eternal Life, and yet is shut in
with the Substantiality: and in that respect it wills to live, as it has
done from Eternity.

51. And therefore the Man longs after the Matrix of the Wise; and the wife
after the Limbus of the Man.

52. The Woman has a Watery Tincture; and the Man, a fiery, the Man sows
Soul, and the Woman Spirit; and both (...) flesh, viz: Sulphur: Therefore is
Man and Wife but one Body, (...) together a Child.

53. And therefore ought to continue together; if they Once Mix; for they are
become one Body: and whosoever mixeth with another or separateth from one
another, they break the Order or Ordinance of Nature, and such a one is like a
Brute beast, and considers not that in his seed the Eternal Tincture lies,
wherein the divine Substantiality lies hid: and in that regard; will one day,
in the wrath-part, he awakened.

54. Also that is a work which will follow after Man in the shadow, and its
source or quality, will one day be made stirring in the Conscience.

55. For, the Tincture, in the Seed, arises out of the Eternity; it is not
transitory; it appears in the Spirits form, and passes into the Magia of
Man; out of which it has generated and shed forth Man.

56. Mark this ye Whores and Whoremongers, what you work in private Corners
many times with great falsehood and wickedness, that passes into your
Consciences, and becomes to you an Evil Gnawing Worm.

57. The Tincture is an eternal Substance; and it would fain be in the Love of
God; but if ye cast it into a false or impure Vessel in abomination and
inordinateness, then it will hardly attain Gods Love, and then it passes with
its Imagination again into the first Place, viz: into you.

58. If it be come to be false in a false Vessel, so that it can not rest; then
it will gnaw you indeed, and also pass into the hellish abyss in the Conscience.

59. It is not Fiction or jesting Matter; be not so Beastial; for a Beast has
its Tincture merely from this world, but you not so, ye have it out of the
Eternity, and that which is Eternal dies not.

60. Though indeed you destroy the Sulphur, yet the will-Spirit in the Sulphur
with the Noble Tincture, passes into the Mystery; and each Mystery takes that
which is its own; and that Mystery at the last Day, when the Spirit of God will
move it self in all the Three Principles, will be Manifested, and there you
will see your Fine or Goodly.
fair Works.

61. Thus the great Mercy of God over all the Generations of Mankind, is highly
known to us, that God would help Man thus; else if God had (...) the beastial
property, he would at the same instant have (...) than and a Woman; he would
not have made One alone with (...) the Tinctures.

62. But God knew well the Fall of Man, as also the Treachery of the Devil,
which thus with or by Eve was brought to derision; The Devil supposed thus,
when Adam fell down into a Sleep; Now I am Lord and Prince upon Earth, but the
seed of the Woman hindered that.

63. We are to understand the awakening of Adam out of his sleep; he slept in
the heavenly world, and awaked and to the Earthly world, the Spirit of the
great World awakened and raised him up.

64. Then he saw the Woman, and knew her, Genesis 2. 23.
that she was his flesh and his Bone, for the Virgin of the wisdom of God, was
yet in him; and he looked upon her, and Imagined into her; for she had gotten
his Matrix; as also the Tincture of Venus; and so instantly the one Tincture
received the other by the Imagination: therefore Adam took her to him, and
said; Genesis 2. 23.
Man shall call her Woman, because she is taken out of Man.

65. Also Eve is known to be no Pure immaculate Virgin* as also all her
Daughters; The Turba has destroyed the Virginity, and Made the pure Love
Earthly; the Earthly Imagination destroys the right Virginity.

66. For, Gods wisdom is a pure Virgin; in which Christ was conceived; and in a
right Virgin-like Vessel became Man, as hereafter will follow.

67. Thus also could not the Earthly Virgin continue in Paradise; though they
were yet in Paradise, also they had both of them the Paradisical Source or
Quality; but mixed with Earthly longing.

68. Genesis 2. 25.
They were Naked, and had the beastial Members for propagation, and knew it
not, also they were not ashamed: for the Spirit of the Great World had not yet
the dominion over them; till they did eat the Earthly fruit, and then * their
eyes were opened, for the Heavenly Virgin of Gods wisdom departed from them,
and then they first felt the Kingdom of the Stars and Elements.

69. When the Spirit of God withdrew forth, then the Earthly Spirit with the
fierce wrathful source or quality, drew in, and there the Devil gat an entrance
and infected them, and brought them into the fierce wrath and Evil Malice or
Malignity: as it is still at this day.

70. For, the wrath of God out of the Eternal Nature, which the Devil has
kindled and awakened, sticks in the Earthly Center: also, no life can be
generated, unless the Center be awakened; for the Principle stands in the
Fire, wherein all Life stands: and the Center of Nature has fierce
wrathfulness in its forms.

71. Therefore it is this only that will do it: stoop and submit thy self, and
enter into Meekness, and let thy Life be right and just.

72. For, the Life is Fire, and the Life's Image, which is the similitude of
God, that is in the Light, viz: in the Love-fire.

73. But the Love-fire does not afford or give the Center of Nature, and
therefore the Devil always supposes that he is a greater Lord then the
Creatures in the Love-fire.

74. Indeed he is more strong or stern, but he lives in the darkness; and
devoureth the strong or stern Substantiality, into himself, and therefore also
he is an Enemy to the Love.

75. And we are to know* that the Devil is in fault, and the Cause, that Man
was created in his stead; also, we are to know, that he is guilty of Man's Fall.

76. Although Adam and his Eve (when God had divided Adam) could not stand:
they were indeed in Paradise, and should have eaten paradisical fruit, after an
Angelical manner; but they have not eaten thereof; for the Tree of knowledge of
Good and Evil, was more acceptible to them.

77. And Eve, as soon as she was made, imagined into or longed after the Tree
of Temptation: and though Adam did open the Commandment, and made it known to
her, yet the Lust or longing was only after the the Tree.

78. For, the Earthly Essences, were not yet Manifested in Adam and E^ e, they
were yet captivated, therefore The Essences.
they drove so on into the Lust, for they would needs be Lord.

79. And this came to pass through the Infection of the Devil, through his,
Ascendent false or wicked Imagination: and therefore he laid himself in the
form of a Serpent, at the Tree, and praised the fruit to Eve, Genesis 3. 5. 6.
that it makes Wise or Cunning.

80. Yes Wise and Cunning indeed, to know Evil and Good, misery enough; for a
Two fold source or quality to rule in one only Creature: the not knowing it
were better.

81. He tells them, Lies, and Truth, together Genesis 3. 5. 6.
they shall be Cunning or Wise, and their Eyes shall be opened.

82. Yes sufficien^ly; they quickly saw, that with the Earthly source or
quality, they were fallen home to the Spirit of this world, so that they were
Naked, and knew their Earthly Members, they came to have entrails in the Body,
and a stinking Or Carcass.
Sack of Worms, full of woe and misery, in anguish and Toil; as is mentioned in
the Book of the Three Principles, and so we see now before our eyes, what
manner of Paradisical Angels we are, and how we must generate and Or get our
living.
nourish our selves in Anxiety care and Misery; which should have been done
after another manner.

83. Thus we sufficiently know Adams Fall, and why he could not continue in
Paradise: and what Paradise was; which is, still, to this very day: only it
bears not Paradisical fruit, and we have not the Paradisical source or
Quality, and Eyes: and so we see it not.

84. For God has Genesis 3. 17.
cursed the Earth for Man's sake, so that Paradise springs no more through the
Earth; for it is become a Locus Beat^rum.
Mystery; and yet it is, continually, there.

85. And into that Mystery the souls of the Saints depart, when the Earthly
body separateth it self from the Soul.

86. It is in this world; and yet is out of this world; for this Worlds quality
or source, touches it not.

87. The whole World would have continued to be Paradise, if Adam had Continued
in Innocence, but when God pronounced the Curse, then Paradise departed.

88. For Gods Cursing, is fleeing: It is a fleeing, not departing away, but a
going into another Principle, viz: into himself.

89. For the Spirit of God, proceeds forth from God into the Substantiality,
but when this Sustantiality became Earthly, and that the Devil dwelt therein,
who was Gods Enemy, then the Spirit of God, passed into its own Principle; viz:
into the Love; and departed out of the Earthliness; and there it stands now
presented to Man in the Light of Life.

90. So that whosoever now desires to Enter into the Love of God; let him go
with his will-Spirit into Paradise; and then Paradise will spring up again into
or in his will-Spirit, and he will receive on-to his Image again, the Heavenly
Substantiality, in which the Holy Spirit rules.

91. Let this be a Pearl to you, ye Children of Men; for it is the true Ground;
whosoever seeks and finds it, he has mere Joy therein: It is Mat. 13. 44.
46.
the Pearl which lies hid in the field, for which one sold all his goods and
bought the Pearl, of which Christ speaks.

92. Thus also we may know Genesis 3. 24.
the Cherubine, which draw Adam and Eve out of Paradise, viz: the stern or
strong Angel; which signifies the Cutter off of the Earthly life from
Paradise, where Body and Soul must part asunder.

93. It is indeed known to Us: that Adam and Eve, were driven away out of the
place, where the Tree of Temptation stood; for, Paradisical fruit stood there;
which they should no more see nor Eat, for the Heavenly belongs not to the
Earthly.

94. Also, the Beasts were driven out, in respect of the Evil Tree; for, they
could not eat of the Paradisical fruit: but of this Tree, Every beast could
Eat, for it was Earthly.

95. Thus must they leave Paradise: for God had clothed them, through the
Spirit of the Great World, Genesis 3. 21.
with the skins of Beasts instead of the Heavenly Clothing of clarity and
brightness.

96. And he had pronounced their sentence, what they should do and suffer in
this World, what they should thence forward Eat, and how they should nourish
themselves or Genesis 3. 17. 18. 19.
get their living, in Care and Misery, till they should return altogether, to
the Earth from whence they were extracted as to one Part.

The seventh Chapter. Of the promised Seed of the Woman, and Crusher of the
Serpent.
1. NOw then, Adam and Eve, standing thus, as Man and Wife, in Paradise; and
having yet the heavenly source or quality and Joy, though Mixed, the Devil
could not endure that; for his Envy was too great.

2. Seeing he had overthrown Adam, and brought down his Angelical form: he
looked now upon Eve, viz: the Woman out of Adam, and thought: she might
conceive Children in Paradise, and remain in Paradise, thou will therefore
seduce her, that she may eat of the forbidden fruit, and so she will become
Earthly, and then thou may reach into her heart, and bring thy Imagination
into her, and so shall get her into thy Kingdom, and thou shall continue still
Prince in the Third Principle upon Earth.

3. Which he then also did, and persuaded her to the Evil fruit, so that Genesis
3. 6.
she laid hold on the Tree and brake off an Apple; and did Eat, and gave also
to Adam.

4. Now when Adam saw, that Eve did not Instantly fall down, and dye, he did
Eat also, for the Lust was in both of them.

5. This is the Bitt, upon which Heaven and Paradise departed: where the Genesis
3. 24.
Cherubine, viz: the Or Circumciser.
Cutter off, with the Naked Sword came and stood before the Door, and suffered
them no more to come into Paradise.

6. His Sword was that of the destroying Angel, which now cutteth Men with
heart, cold sickness, necessity and Death; and at last cutteth off the Earthly
Life from the Soul.

7. When this Sword was to be broken in the Death of Christ, then Math. 27. 51.
the Earth Trembled, and the Luke 23. 45.
Sun lost its things Light; and the Rocks cleft in sunder before the strong
Might of God, which thus brake Death in pieces.

8. Math. 27. 52.
Thus also the Graves of the Saints, Opened; and their Bodies went out from
Death again, for the Sword was broken, and the Angel which Guarded Paradise,
was done away: and the Bodies of the Saints, went into Paradise again;

9. But here, when Adam and Eve, did eat the Earthly fruit, they Luke 10. 30.
fell among Murderers, who wounded them and cast them out; and let them lie
half dead.

10. Their going forth out of Paradise, is the going from Jerusalem to Jerico:
for they went out of Heaven into this Evil corrupt World, into the house of
Sin.

11. Where instantly, in their Minds, in the Center of Nature, the wheel of the
Senses or Thoughts began to qualify or Operate in the Earthly source or
quality: where one sense or thought was against and Contrary to the other,
where Envy, Pride, Covetousness, Anger and Contrary opposite will, sufficiently
flowed forth upon heaps.

12. For, the Noble Light of Love, was extinguished, which makes the fierce
wrathful source or quality, amiable, friendly and meek, in which, the spirit of
God works, and the fair Virgin of Gods Wisdom rests; they went out from
the fair Wisdom.

13. God had created Adam in the chaste Virgin of his Wisdom: but he became in
the presence and stead thereof, an Evil Earthly Opposire By the word Woman
understand the divided Body: see the Three Principles, cap. 13. verse. 1.
Woman, with which he must live in this beastial form in mere care anxiety and
necessity.

14. And, out of his fair Garden of pleasure, which he had in him, there came
an Opposite Thorny and Thistly, Garden; whence yet he somewhat sought the
Virginal.
Virgin-like fruit.

15. But it went with him as with a These, who has been in a fair Garden to
keep it; but is for his Theft cast out from it, and yet would fain eat to fruit
thereof, but cannot get in, but goes round about the outside, and reaches
over with his hand after the fruit, which yet the Gardener snatcheth out of his
hand again, and he must go away lamenting, and cannot satisfy his Lust or
longing.

16. Thus it goes also with him concerning the Woman, when he was in Gods
Love, and the Woman in him a chaste Virgin, in Gods Sweetness and Wisdom, then
he did eat of her fruit, and could very well refresh or delight himself with
his own Love in the Matrix of Venus.

17. For, the Fire- Tincture, has a great Joyful recreating delight in the
Lights Tincture, and that he had in himself, he was Man and Wise.

18. But now he must go round without that Gardine, and touch the Tincture of
Venus, but with one Member, whereas yet the Inward Tinctures in the seeds
receive one another, and labor to produce a Life.

19. But the outward Body is not worthy, that it should enjoy the Inward Joyful
qualifying or operation, wherein the souls Life is sown.

20. The inward Essence only enjoy that; for they are out of the Eternal; but
the outward Beastial Ass, brings or affords only a beastial Longing or
Lust.

21. He knows nothing of the Joy of the Essences; when one Tincture comes
into the other, and what is done then: where there is yet somewhat of Paradise;
but the Earthly Essence mixeth it self suddenly therein, and it is but as a
joyful Glimpse.

22. Wherein the will to Life, becomes generated, which afterward drives on,
and impregnateth it self with Sulphur, till it may reach the Principle, and
strike up fire in the Center, wherein then there is a true Life, and again a
Soul is generated.

23. Now when the fair Image thus departed away from Gods Love, then it knew it
self, that it was come into another Source or quality; then began fear and
terror before the fierce wrath of God, for it began to qualify or operate in
them, they looked one upon another and perceived their Beastial form, and Genesis
3. 7.
that they were Naked.

24. And then sure the Devil Danced, and God was derided, for verse. 8.
they were afraid, and crept behind the Trees Or Braided the Stalks of the
leaves together.
and took leaves from the figtrees; and wreathed them together, and held them
before their shame.

25. For, the heavenly Virgin was gone, they knew the fall and were ashamed:
that is, the Soul, which is out of the Eternal, was ashamedof the Or Beastial
Kind.
Beastliness, as it is at this day, when we are ashamed of our beastial
Members.

26. And hence it is, that the Woman Clotheth her self with a white Or white
Apron.
covering before her shame: that the Spirit of the Soul, which glanceth forth at
the Eyes, be not disturbed, for it knows the Matrix of Venus, which also as
suddenly in the Man or Masculine begineth to Imagine upon it or Lust after it.

27. Which, if the Woman clotheth her self with Black, and Covers her Eyes,
it not easily Effected; but only by Imagining or Lusting.

28. But else, instantly both the Tinctures, of the Man and Wife cath one the
Other in the Eyes, where the Spirit glanceth forth.

29. Now, when Adam and Eve stood thus in terror, before the Anger of God,
Genesis 3. 9. 10.
God, cattle Adam, and said; Adam where art thou? and be said: Here I am: I was
afraid, for I am Naked.

30. Verse. 11. 12.
And he said; Who has told thee that thou art Naked? Have thou not eaten of
the Tree, that I forbad thee: and be said; the Woman gave unto me, and I did
Eat.

31. verse. 13.
And he said to the Woman, Why did thou that; she said, the Serpent beguild
me, so that I did Eat.

32. Here we understand the great Love of God; in that God called Adam again,
that he should know, seek and find himself; and turn again to God.

33. For, Adam had been in God; but he was gone out from the Love out of the
Second Principle into the Third.

34. Wherefore, God said. Where are thou, Adam? do thou not see thou are no
more in Heaven? he turned his friendly Countenance again to one part in Adam
understand in that part which he had received out of the heavenly
Substantiality, and glanced upon it again with his Spirit.

35. And Genesis 3. 14.
said to the Serpent, the Old Devil: Seeing thou have done this, cursed art
thou.

36. And to the Creaturely Serpent; which must now be a Creature; for the Devil
had turned himself into the Form of a Serpent; therefore must the Serpent also
continue: to it he said, Thou shall go upon thy Belly, and eat Earth.

37. Seeing it had seduced Man, so that he was become Earthly, therefore should
also the Devils Image be Earthly, and devour the fierce ^^athful Earthly source
or quality, viz: Poison; that should now be its source or quality.

38. And here we are to know: that the Devil figured or framed to himself the
Serpents Image from the Constellations and Elements, through his Imagination,
for he had great Power, till the Lord wholly cursed him; and set the Dear name
JESUS, for a Mark or limit of Separation; and there his great power was laid.

39. For, he said to Adam and Eve; Genesis 3. 15
the seed of the Woman shall Crush the Serpents head: and Thou, understand, the
Serpent shall sting him in the heel: that is, in Gods, fierce wrath thou will
stay him.

40. But he shall sprout forth out of Death, and Crush thy Head; that is take
away thy power and overcome the wrath, with the Love.

41. And here in this place, has the word of the Promise, of the seed of the
Woman; IHS
which was the Dear Name IHESUS, with its Character, Imaged it self in the
Light of the Life.

42. And likewise in that Character, has Imaged the highly precious Virgin of
Gods wisdom, in which; Christ, as the destroyer of Death, should become a true
Man; and take away the power of Death, and destroy the Devils sting.

43. Which there should Rev. 19. 15.
tread the Winepress of the fierce, wrath and anger, and enter into the Anger
viz: into the Center of the Fire, and quench the Fire with his heavenly Blood;
and with the water of Meekness out of the fountain of the Heart of God.

44. And know assuredly, that if the Word of the Promise, had not Imaged it
self in the Light of Life, when Adam and Eve sell into the Earthly source of
quality, then would the Spirit of the soul have become a fierce wrathful Devil,
and the Body an evil Beast, as indeed it is now, and if the Elementary Water
did not allay the insolency of the Fierce wrath, Men would well see; how many a
one would be a devouring Devil.

45. Thus now we are to consider and Conceive, that the world before Christ's
becoming Man or Incarnation, were saved in this imaged or imprinted Word and
Name.

46. Those who have put their will into God, they have received that word of
Promise; for, the Soul was received thereinto.

47. For, the whole Law of Moses, concerning the Sacrifices, is throughout
nothing else, but a Type of the Humanity of Christ: of what Christ in his
Humanity, did perform by his Sacrifice, that which he did perform with his
Blood and with his Love, in drowning that Anger of God; that, Moses did perform
with the Sacrifice with the Blood of Beasts.

48. For, the word of the Promise, was in the Covenant, and God for the Time,
represented the figure, and permitted himself to be attoned or reconciled in
the Covenant, with or by a Similitude.

49. For, the Name Jesus, was in the Covenant, and that attoned or reconciled
through Imagination, the Anger and fierce wrath of the Fathers Nature.

50. The Jews indeed understood not that but the Covenant understood it well;
for the Beastiall Man was not worthy to know it, till Christ was born, and then
went the sound forth.

51. Which yet after a short time, was covered again, by the Antichrist christ
in Babel; for, the Beastial Man of wickedness malignity or Malice, is not
worthy of the most precious Name JESUS.

52. Also it does not belong to the Beastial part, but to the divine part; the
Beast must remain in the wild Earth; and at the last Judgment Day, be
consumed through Gods Fire; but the heavenly part shall be introduced into the
divine power.

53. Therefore it is an abomination to God, that Man should so pride himself
with the Beast.

54. The Beast is not the Image; as the Sacrifice of Moses was not the
atonement or reconciliation, but the Covenont of Grace, and the word of Life
in the Covenant.

55. The Circumcision of the Jews, that they were to Circumcise the Male
Children only: contains rightly in it self, as follows.

56. Adam was the one only Man that God Created, and in him ws Gods Image,
Eve, his wife, God would not Create, generation was to be out of one only.

57. But seeing he fell, so that God must make him a wise, then came the
Covenant and promise again upon One only; that all should again be regenerated
and new born out of one only, viz: out of the Second Adam; not out of the
Virgin Mary, but out of Christ the Heavenly Adam.

58. For, the First Man's Blood, that is, Adams, which he received out of the
Substantiality of God, was to To do the thing.
avail; and not the Earthly blood of the Woman, in that Adam was become
Earthly, and a Woman must be contrived for him, therefore also was only the
Masculine Kind Circumcised.

59. And Christ must take upon him the Masculine Form, though inwardly he
stood in a Virgin-like Image; that the purpose of God might stand.

60. For, the Man's property, viz: the Fires, must Rules and the Woman's
property, viz: the Lights, must allay his Fire: and bring it into the Meek
Image of God.

61. The Woman's blood, could not have attoned or pacified the Anger of God; the
Man's blood only must do it; for the Woman belongs unto, or to be in, the
Man; and in the Kingdom of God is to be a Masculine Virgin, as Adam was; Not a
Woman.

62. The Woman comes to be saved in the Covenant of the Man: for, the Covenant
was made for the Man's, viz: the Masculine Virgins sake; that She.
it may be reconciled again.

63. Therefore says Paul's 1. Tim. 2. 14. 15.
The Woman becomes saved through bearing of Children; and not only so, but
also in the Covenant of the Man; for she is a part of Adam; therefore 1 Pet. 3.
1. 5.
should every Woman be subject to the Man or Husband, and he should be Lord.

64. God gives also to the Man, the Virgin-like wisdom she should govern the
Woman, not as a Tyrant; but Ephe. 5. 25. 28.
as his own Life or Body; for she is his Body and his Flesh, an Image of or out
of him, his help, and his Rose-Garden, though indeed she be Earthly and weak;
yet he must know, that he himself, is the cause and accessory thereto; and
must bear with her, and not give way to his wrath, to destroy her.

65. Also the Woman must know, that she is to be saved in the Covenant and
Blood of the Man, and that she is Adams and the Man's Ribbe and Tincture, and
the Man's own belonging to him.

66. She should be Humble; As a Member serves the Body, so should the Woman
serve the Man and love him as her self.

67. Her Love should solely be Or injected.
cast into him, for, so doing, she attaineth the Heavenly Virgin, together with
divine wit or understandand Skill, as also the Spirit of the Covenant.

68. But to the Single or unmarried Virgins, and Men without wives, as also to
the Widows, it is said, that they have Christ's Covenant for a Spouse,
therefore should they be Chaste and Humble.

69. For, Christ is the Man's Bride, and his chaste Virgin which Adam Lost.

70. And, he is also the Bridegroom of the unmarried Virgins and Widows; for
his Masculine-ness, is their Masculine-ness, so that thus they every one appear
before God as Masculine Virgins.

71. ^ath. 6. 12.
For, our Image, now becomes generated in Willing and believing, Now Where our
Heart and Will is, there is also our Treasure and Image.

72. Wherefore, beware of Whoredom and false or wrong Love, for, thereby the
right Image comes to be disturbed.

73. Extra.
Whoredom is the Greatest abomination, that Man works in himself 1. Cor. 6.
18.
Other things go into a Figure without him, the Whore standing in him; for he
works or Effects a false Image, in which the Image or Virgin of God is not
known, but a Beastial one.

74. Note ye wanton lecherous unchaste Children of Men.
Let this be said to thee OMan, there sticks so great Abomination behind i;
at which Heaven it self with its Imagination is amazed.

75. Heaven.
It enters not easily into the Beastial Imagination; whereupon also, so very
Many Beast-Men are Born, as at this Day may be demonstrated.

The Eighth Chapter. Of the Virgin Mary, and of the Becoming Man or Incarnation
of Jesus Christ the Son of God.
1. MAny have attempted to write of the Virgin Mary; and supposed that she was
not an Earthly Or Daughter.
Maid: to them indeed has been presented a Glimpse of the Eternal virginity;
but the right Mark they have hitherto failed of.

2. For, many have merely supposed, that she was not the Daughter of Joachim
and Anna; because Christ is called the Seed of the Woman, and is so too.

3. Also he himself witnesses, that Job. 8. 23.
he is from above, that he is come from Heaven; and therefore he must sure also
be born of a Total heavenly Virgin.

4. But that would little benefit us poor children of Eve; that are become
Earthly, and carry our souls in Earthly Vessels: where should our poor souls
become, if the word of Eternal Life, had not received it into it self (...)

5. If Christ had brought a soul from Heaven; where then should our soul
become, and the Covenant with Adam and Eve, viz: that Genesis 3. 15.
The Seed of the Woman should Crush the Serpents Head.

6. If Christ would have come and been born totally from Heaven, he should not
have needed to have been born a Man, upon Earth, and where then would the
Covenant become, in which the Name JESUS, or the Promise, did incorporate it
self, in the Light of Life, that is, in the Tincture of the soul, instantly in
Paradise when Adam fell? yea indeed before Adam was Created: as Paul says;
Ephe. 1. 4.
We are Elected in Christ, before the foundation of the World was laid.

7. For, God, in his wisdom, knew the Fall; therefore the Name JESUS did so
instantly incorporate it self into the word of Life, environed with the Virgin
of Wisdom, in Adams^ Image, with the Cross.

8. For, the soul it self, is even a Cross-Birth: as when the soul-Fire
kindles it ^^^fe, then it makes in the flash, a Cross; that is, an Eye with a
Cross, with Three Principles, with the Character of the Holy Trinity; as in the
Third Book or part, concerning the Threefold Life of Man, is declared; and yet
further in the Fourth Part, the forty Questions of the Soul.

9. We are to understand, that Mary, in whom Christ became Man, was truly the
Danghter of Joachim and Anna, according to the Outward Flesh: and was extracted
out of the Seed of Joachim and Anna, according to the Outward Man.

10. But, according to the will, she was a Daughter of the Covenant of Promise,
for she was the Mark, to which it pointed at.

11. In her, stood the Center in the Covenant; and therefore she was, * Luke 1.
42.
by the Holy Ghost in the Covenant, highly blessed among and above all women
Ever since Eve; for the Covenant opened it self in her.

12. You must understand it aright, according to its high precious worth: The
word, together with the Promise, which with the Jews, stood in the Type or
prefiguration, as in a Looking-Glass, wherein God, the Angry Father Imagined,
and thereby quenched his Anger; that moved it self N^w after an Essential
manner: which from Eternity had not been done before.

13.* For, when Gabriel the Prince, brought her the Message, that she should be
impregnated or with Child; and that she consented thereto; and said; Luke 1. 38.
be it unto me as thou have said: then the Center of the Holy Trinity, moved it
self, and opened the Covenant, that is, the Eternal Virginity, which Adam
lost, became opened in her in the word of Life.

14. For the Virgin of Gods Wisdom, environed the word of Life, viz: the Center
of the Holy Trinity: thus the Center became Moved; and the Heavenly Vulcan,
struck up the Fire of Love; so that the Principle in the Love-flame, became
generated.

15. Unde^stand this right; In Mary's Essences, in the Virgin-like Essences,
which perished in Adam, out of which he was to generate a virgin-like Image,
according to the Wisdom of God, the divine fire became struck up; and the
Principle of Love kindled.

16. You are to understand that, in the seed of Mary, When she became
impregnate, with the Soul-Spirit, that is with the Tincture of Venus; for, in
the Tincture of Venus; that is, in the Source or Quality of Love, Adams first
Fire, became struck up in the word of Life.

17. And in the Child JESUS, (...) both Tinctures perfect; just as in Adam, and
the word of Life in the Covenant, understand, in the Holy Trinity, was the
Center; and the Principle appeared, as in or to the Fathers part.

18. Christ became Man in GOD, and also in MARY, in all the THREE Principles;
and together therewith also in the EARTHLY world.

19. Phil. 2. 7.
He took the form of a Servant upon him, that he might be able to Master Death
and the Devil.

20. For he was to be a Prince, in the Place or space of this world, in the
Angelical Prince-Throne, viz: uopn the seat, and in the Authority, of the late
Angel and Prince Lucifer, over all the Three Principles.

21. Now then. First: If he must be Lord over this outward World: then he must
also dwell in the Outward World; and have it Essence and property.

22. In like manner Secondly: If he must be Gods Son, then he must also be
generated out of God.

23. And Thirdly: If he must quench the Fathers Anger: then he must of
necessity be also in the Father.

24. And Fourthly: If he must be the Soon of Man, then he must also of
necessity be of Man's Essence and Substance: and Fifthly, must have a humane
Soul, and a humane Body as we all have.

25. It is known to us, that Mary, his Mother, as also Christ, from or of his
Mother, were both of the humane Essence, with Body, Soul, and Spirit; and that
Christ received a Soul out of Mary's Essence; yet without Masculine Seed.

26. Only the great Secret Arcanum of God, was there opened; and the first
Man, with his S^cret Mystery, which fell into Death, was here generated to Life
again; understand; in the Principle of God.

27. For, because of this, the Deity Moved it self, and struck up the Fire in
the Fathers Principle, and so the deadened Sulphur; which dyed in Adant, became
living again.

28. For the word had in it self heavenly Substantiality; and opened it self
in the Heavenly Substantiality, in the virgin-like Image of the Deity; this is
the pure chaste Virgin wherein the Word of Life became Man.

29. And so the Outward Mary became adorned and Luke 1. 4^.
blessed with the Highly blessed heavenly Virgin* among all Women of this World.

30. In her, that which was dead and shut up of the Humanity, became living
again; and so she became as highly graduated or Dignified, as the first Man
before the Fall, and became a Mother of the Throne-Prince.

31. This came not out of her ability, but out of Gods ability: unless the
Center of God had moved it self in her; she would have been no otherwise, then
all Eves Daughters.

32. But, in this place, The word of Life had fix^d the Mark; as also the
Covenant of Promise, and therefore she is the blessed among all Women, and
above all Eves Children.

33. Not that she is a Goddess, which Men should honor as God; for she is not
the Mark; for she also said: Luke 1. 3^.
How shall that come to pass, since I know not of any Man?

34. But, the word of Life in the Center of the Father, which gave in it self,
with the Moving of the Deity, into the Humanity; and opened it self in the
Humane Essence; that is the Mark, that is the Goal* that we must run to; in the
Regeneration.

35. This is a greater wonder then in the first Adam, for the first Adam was
created out of Three Principles, and his Spirit was introduced into him through
the Spirit of God; and the Heart of God needed not to move it self in an
especial manner; for Gods Spirit did only move it self, out of Gods Heart.

36. But now, the Center or Heart of God moved it self: which had rested from
Eternity; and the Divine Fire was there struck up, and kindled or awakened; as
a Man may Express it.

The Dear or precious Gate. 37.
We should rightly understand, the becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ the
Son of God, thus: he is not become Man in the Virgin Mary only, so that his
Deity or divine Substantiality, did sit bolted up or fixed therein; No, O Man;
it is in another Manner.

38. Let not Reason befool thee; we understand somewhat else: as little as God
dwells alone in one only place: but is Col. 2. 9.
the Fullness of all things; so little also has God moved himself in one
Particlo.
Sparkle.

39. For God is not divisible, but Total Every where: where he manifests
himself, there he is Totally manifest.

40. Also, he is not measurable, for him, is no place found, unless he make a
place for himself in a Creature; yet he is totally near the Creature Extra.
without or beyond the Creature.

41. When the Word moved it self to the opening of Life, then it opened it
self in the divine Substantiality, in the water of Eternal Life, it entered in
and became Sulphur, that is Flesh and Blood.

42. It made heavenly Tincture, which the Deity did close about and fill,
wherein the wisdom of God stands Eternally, together with the divine Magia.

43. Understand it right: The Deity, has longed to become Flesh and Blood; and
although the pure clear Deity, continues Spirit, yet is it become the Spirit
and Life of Flesh; and works in the Flesh; so that we may say, when we with
our Imagination enter into God, and wholly give up our selves into him, we
Enter into Gods Flesh and Blood, and live in God.

44. For, the Word is become Man, and God is the Word.

45. We do not thus take away the Creature of Christ, that he should not be a
Creature* we will give you a simitude hereof, in the Sun and its Luster; and
take it thus.

46. We liken the Sun, to the Creature of Christ in a similitu de which is
indeed a Body: and we liken the whole Deep of this world, to the Eternal word
in the Father.

47. Now we see plainly, that the Sun shines in the whole Deep, and gives it
warmth and Power.

48. But now we cannot say, that in the Deep, without or beyond the body of the
Sun, there is not also, the power of the Sun; if that were not there, then
would the Deep also not receive, the power and Luster of the Sun; it is only
thus, one power and Luster receives the other; the Deep with its Luster is
hidden, is hidden with its Luster.

49. If God would please, the whole deep would be a Mere Sun: it were but only
to be kindled, that the Water might be sawallowed up, and come to be a Spirit:
then would the Luster of the Sun, shine every where, if the Fires Center,
should but kindle, as it is in the Place of the Sun.

50. Know also; that we understand, that the Heart of God has rested from
Eternity; but, with the moving and entering into the wisdom, it is become
manifest in all Places.

51. Though yet in God there is neither place nor Mark, but merely in the
Creature of Christ, there has the Total holy Trinity manifested it self in a
Creature, and so through the Creature through the whole Heaven.

52. He is gone thither, and Heb. 11. 16. Note.
has prepared the place for us, where we shall see his Light; and dwell in his
wisdom, and Eat of his divine Substantiality: his Substantiality fills the
Heaven and Paradise.

53. Were we not, in the beginning, made out of Gods Substantiality? why should
we not also stand therein?

54. As the Air and the Water, fill this world, and all of us enjoy them: so in
the hiddenness is the divine Substantiality, which we enjoy, if with earnest
Imagining and with the will we give^ up our selves thereinto.

55. And this now, is Christ's flesh and blood, in the divine power; for the
Flesh and Blood of the Creature of Christ, stands therein, and is one Being,
one Power, one Spirit, one God, one fullness, altogether undivided by any
place, yet in its own Principle.

56. A swinish man, will here say: O how we will devour him! O thou Ass, first
come so far, that you may reach him; for thou shall not devour him with thy
Earthly Mouth.

57. He is a Principle Deeper, and yet is Or of the
the Outward; He was in the Virgin Mary, and also as to his Birth, in this
world: and Mat. 24. 30.
will also appear at the last day, in all the Three Principles, before all Men
and Devils.

58. He has truly Mat 8. 17.
teken upon him the Earthly source or quality, but in his Death, when he
overcame Death, the divine source swallowed up the Earthly, and took away its
Dominion.

59. Not in that manner, as if Christ had laid off somewhat, but the outward
Source or Quality became overcome, and as it were swallowed up, and in that he
now lives, he lives in God.

60. Thus was Adam also to be, but stood not, and therefore must the Word be
generated and become Man and give it self up into the Substantiality, that we
might receive power to be able to live in God.

61. Thus has Christ restored or brought back again, what Adam lost, and much
more; for the Word is every where become Man.

62. Understand; it is every where opened in the divine Substantiality, wherein
our Eternal Humanity does Consist.

63. For, in that Bodily Substance, shall we stand in Eternity, wherein the
Virgin of God stands.

64. We must put on Gods Virgin; for Christ has put it on, he is become Man in
the Eternal virgin, and in the Earthly virgin.

65. Though the Earthly was no right Virgin: but the Heavenly, divine made it,
to be a Vigin in the blessing, that is in the opening of the Word and Covenant;
for, that part in Mary, which she inherited from Adam, out of the heavenly
Substantiality, which Adam made Earthly, that became blessed.

66. Thus the Earthly part in her, only, dyed, the other lives Eternally, and
came to be a chaste modest virgin again, not in the Death, but in the blessing.

67. When God opened himself in her, then she put on the virgin of God, and
became a Masculine virgin in the Heavenly part.

68. Thus Christ became born of a right pure chaste heavenly Virgin; for she
received in the blessing, the Limbus of God, into her Matrix, in her Seed.

69. She received no strange thing, onley the Limbus opened it self in her, in
Gods power, wherein Adam was Dead, that, in Gods moving became living.

70. And Gods Essence in the word of Life entered in, into her Limbus; wherein
the souls Center became opened, so that Mary became impregnated of a Soul and
also of a Spirit, both heavenly and Earthly.

71. And this was a Right Image of God, a Similitude according to, and in, the
Holy Trinity, out of all the Three Principles.

The Nineth Chapter. Of Mary's Virginity, what she was before the Blessing, and
what she came to be in the Blessing.
1. IT is highly necessary for Us poor Children of Eve to know, this; for our
Eternal Salvation lies therein; It is the Gate of Imma^uel, and the whole
Christian Faith Stands therein; and it is also the Gate of the Greatest
Secret Arcanum.

2. For herein lies enclosed the Secrecy of Man, in that he is, the Similitude
and Image of God; for, our whole Religion Consists in Three Parts, which we
urge and Teach.

3. As First, concerning the Creation; what Essence, substance, and property,
Man is, whether he be Eternal or not Eternal? and how that is possible, what
properly the humane Original is, from which he proceeded in the Beginning.

4. Secondly: Seeing there is so much spoken and taught Concerning his Fall,
and that we see, that we are become Mortal because of the Fall, moreover,
subjected to Evil, and to the fierce wrathful source; what then properly his
Fall has been.

5. Thirdly: Seeing God will receive us to Grace again: and for whose sake also
he has given the Law and Teaching, also confirmed then with Deeds of Wonder or
Miracles, what therefore, properly, the New Regeneration is.

6. And being we see that we must dye, in what power and Spirit we can, be new
Regenerated again, and rise again from Death.

7. All this we find pourtrayed in these two Images, viz: in the Eternal Holy,
and then also in the Earthly corruptible Virginity: and find also the New
Regeneration in the Image of Christ, very clear and bright.

8. For, in the Eternal Virginity, viz: in God wisdom, wherein the Image and
Similitude of God is seen as in a Looking-Glass from Eternity, and known by the
Spirit of God; was Adam the first Man Created.

9. He had the Virginity for his own, viz: the true love- Tincture, in the
Light, which is desirous of the Fires Tincture, that it might be a burning Life
in power and Glory; and in the Fires Essence, might be a Genetrix, which in the
Lights Essence without the Fire, cannot be.

10. And thus we acknowledge a Virginity in the wisdom of God, from Eternity,
in the desirous will of the divine substance.

11. Not a Woman, which generateth, but a figure in the Looking-Glass of Gods
wisdom; a pure Chaste Image without substance; yet in the Essence, but not
manifested in the Fires Essence, but in the Lights quality or source.

12. This Image God has Creeated into a Substance, and that out of all the
Three Principles; so that it is a similitude according to the Deity and
Eternity, as a total Looking-Glass of the Byss or Ground and of the Abyss; of
the Spirit and also of the Substance: and was created out of the Etetnal, not
to the Corruptibility or frailty

13. But seeing the Earthly and Corruptible hangs to the Eternal, so thereby
has the Earthly Lust introduced it self into the Eternal Heavenly, and
infected the Heavenly property: for it would dwell in the Eternal, and yet was
destroyed in the fierce wrath of God.

14. Thus the Earthly Source or quality destroyed the Heavenly, and became the
Turba of the heavenly, as we know and perceive by Earth and Stones, which
assuredly have their Original out of the Eternal; but are perished in the
fierce wrath and Fire-source of quality; and the Fiat has made Earth and
Stones out of the heavenly Substantiality.

15. For the sake of which, a Day of Separation is appointed wherein every
thing shall enter again into its own Either, and be preserved or purified by the
Fire.

16. Thus also was Man created in the virginity in Gods wisdom, but became
apprehended by the fierce wrath and Anger of God, and therefore became so
suddenly perished and Earthly.

17. And as the Earth must pass away, and be tried or purified in the Fire, and
go again into that which it was before; so also Man; shall go agin into the
virginity wherein he was Created.

18. But, in that, it was not possible for Man, that he should rise from the
fieece wrathful Death, and enter into a New Birth; for his virginity, was shut
up together in Death; for which cause God made a Woman out of him: therefore
the Deity must move it self, and open that which was shut up, and make it
living again; and that was done in Mary, the included shut up Virgin.

19. Understand, in the Virginity which Adam inherited out of Gods Wisdom; not
out of the Earthly part of the Third Principle, but out of the Heavenly holy
Part of the Second Principle, which became included and shut up in the Earthly
Death in the Anger of God with the Earthly Imagination and yielding up
thereinto, and was as it were Dead: even as the Earth also appears as Dead.

20. And therefore has the Heart of God moved it self; destroyed Death; and
generated the Life again.

21. Thus now to Us the Birth and becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ, is a
Or Joyful.
powerful and very weighty Matter, that the Total abyssal Heart of God, has
moved it self, and so therewith, the heavenly Substantiality, which was shut
up in death, is become living again: so that we may now say with good ground.

22. God himself has withstood his Anger, in that, with the Center of his
Heartt, which fills the E^ernity without ground and limit, he has again
opened himself, taken away the power of Death, and broken the sting of the
fierce wrath and Anger: in as much, as the Love and Meekness, has opened it
self in the Anger, and quenched the power of the Fire.

23. And still much more is it a great Joy to Us Men, that God has opened
himself, in our mortified and dead virginity; and so on thoroughly and totally.

24. But, that the Word, or the power of Gods Life, has given in it self
again into the Humanity, viz: into the Dead and as it were disappeared
virginity, and opened again the virgin-like Life, at that we rejoice; and go
with our Imagination, into the Center, wherein God has opened himself in the
humanity, viz: into his Sons becoming Man or Incarnation.

25. And so in our Imagination, which we introduce into his becoming Man, we
become impregnated of his opened Word, and power of the Heavenly and divine
Substantiality, not at all with that which is strange, yet it seems strange
to the Earthliness.

26. The Word has opened it self every where, even in Every Man's light of
life; and there is wanting only this, that the Soul-spirit give it self up
thereinto; and so it puts the Eternal Virginity on again; not as a Garment,
but as from its own Essence: And in that Soul-Spirit God becomes Generated or
Born.

27. For Mary, together with all Eves Daughters were generated or become
Earthly; but the Covenant of Gods Love, showed iu their Essence, that God would
therein unshut the Life again.

28. And we cannot say throughout, concerning Mary's Virginity, as to the
Earthly Life before the Blessing, before Gods Heart moved it self; that she
was then a Totally perfect Virgin, according to the first, before the Fall; but
she was a natural Daughter of Eve.

29. But this we say with good gro^nd, that in Mary, as also in all Adams
Children, the Eternal virginity in the Covenant of Promise, has layen shut up,
as it were in Death, yet, in God, not ^aded,

30. For, the Name JESUS, in the Center or Heart of God, has from Eternity
together Imaged it self, in the Virgin of Gods wisdom as in a Looking-Glass:
and has stood against the Center of the Father, viz: the Center of the Fire
and fierce wrath: Not in the fierce wrath of the Essence, but in the Light in
the Lights Essence.

31. And Man was Ephe. 1. 4.
foreseen also in that Essence, in the Name JESU, before the foundation of the
world was laid: wherein Adam then was in a Heavenly Essence, without a Natural
and Creaturely Substance.

32. For in the Wsdom, the Fall was known, e're Man became a Creature, and that
accoording to the fires property; not in the Lights property, but according to
the first Principle.

33. And thus now according to our deep knowledge, we say, of Mary: that,
before the time of the opening and Massage of the Angel, she was such a Virgin
as Eve was, when she wen out of Paradise.

34. E're Adam knew her; then indeed she was a Virgin, but the right virginity
was perished in her, and infected with the Earthly Longing, and the beastiall
property was manifested on her.

35. For, the Earthly Imagination destroyed the heavenly property, so that she
was a Woman, and was not chaste pure Imma^^^a^e (...).

36. For, She was but one part of the Heavenly Virgin* the Other Part was Adam.

37. And so there has been no right pure virgin generated from Eve, which was
total or entire in Substance: the Turba destroyed the virgininity in all, till
the Savior or Champion in the Battle, Came; who was a total masculine Virgin
in Gods wisdom, according to the Heavenly Substance, and the Earthly hung to
him: but the heavenly ruled over the Earthly; for so should Adam also be, but
he stood not.

38. Therefore, we say with good ground, that Mary, was the Daughter of Joachim
and Anna; and has, according to the Earthly part, their Substantiality,
Essentially in her.

39. And then we say, that she was the Daughter of Gods Covenant, and that God
has fixed the Mark of Regeneration, in her: so that the whole Old Testament
has looked into that Mark, and all Prophets have Prophesied concerning that
Mark, that God would open the the Eternal Virginity again, and that, that Mark
was blessed.

40. For, God had given himself with his Mercy with the Covenant of Promise,
into this Mark, and the word of Promise stood in the Covenant, in the Light of
Life, against the Anger.

41. And the first world before the Deluge or Flood; and after; became saved in
that Covenant, which God set before himself as a Virgin-like Looking-Glass;
for, the Eternal Virgin, appeared in the Covenant, as in Gods Looking-Glass;
and the Deity O^ ha^ a longing delight thereto.
delighted it self therein.

42. For, if Israel had kept the Covenant, and performed the work of the
Covenant, then that had been acceptible to God, as if the humanity had been in
the Looking-G^ass of wisdom; and though indeed Israel were Earthly and Evil,
yet nevertheless, God dwelt in Israel in his Covenant in the Wisdom according
to his Love and Mercy.

43. Thus the Works of the Law, were Or in a Looking-Glass.
a Looking-Glass before God, till the Life became generated or Born out of the
Covenant, till the fulfilling came, and there the Works in the Looking-Glass
Ceased; and the work of the fulfilling in the flesh and blood in the Heavenly
Substantiality began to rise again.

44. For in Mary was the beginning, when the Angel brought the Message; and she
said: Luke 1. 38.
he is done unto me as thou have said; there instantly the Center of Life, in
the Word of God, viz: in the Heart of God, moved in her dead heavenly seed.

45. For all the Three Principles of the Deity, became stirring and catched
hold of the divine Tincture, in the Dead heavenly Substantiality.

46, Not that God stood without Substance, but Man was dead in the heavenly
Substance, and now came the Heart of God with living divine Substantiality,
into Death, and awakened or raised up the Dead Substantiality.

47. It did not at this time, take away the Earthly source or quality, but
entered into the Earthly source or quality, as a Lord, and Vanquisher of the
source or quality.

48, For, the right Life should be introduced, through Death and the Anger of
God; which was done on the Cross, where death was destroyed, and the fierce
wrath captivated, and was quenched and vanquished with the Love.

49. And thus we understand now, what, Mary, with the fulfilling was come to
be, viz: a right pure Virgin according to the heavenly Part: for when the Heart
of God moved it self, and that the Day brake forth in her, then shone in her
the Light of the Clarity or brightness and purity of God; for her dead
virginity, viz: Gods wisdom, became opened and Living.

50. For, she became filled with the divine virginity, viz: with Gods wisdom.

51. And in that wisdom and divine Substantiality, as also in the dead and now
living Substantiality, Job. 1. 14.
the Word became flesh, a Sulphur, with the Center of Nature out of the Fathers
Essence, and out of Mary's Essence, a life out of Death, a fruit with both the
Tinctures perfectly, whereas both the Tinctures were but One.

52. And as Adam was become a Man, so Christ became, a Man also, according to
the outward World.

53. For, not Eves Image in the Woman's Tincture, was to remain, but Adams Image
was to remain, as he was a Man and also a Woman.

54. But yet being one of the Mar^s must appear according to the Might and
power of the outward Fiat, and that also the Champion in the Battle would be
fixed and persented in all the Three Principles, therefore the Champion in the
Battle, gat Masculine Marks of distinction^

55. For the Man has the Fires Tincture, viz: of the Fathers property, so now
the Father is the strength and Might of all things, and the Son is his Love.

56. Thus the Word became Man in the feminine Essence, but became a Man, that
his love might quench the Anger and fierce wrath in the Father.

57. For Venus's Tincture has the Water-source or quality, and the Woman has
Venus's Tincture: Thus must the Fire, become quenched by the water of Eternal
Life; and the Fathers burning Essence in the Fire, become quenched again.

58. Now we know that Mary, the Mother of Christ, according to Flesh Soul and
Spirit in the blessing, is a pure chaste Virgin; for that is her Blessing, that
God has opened himself in her.

59. She has carried the Word of Life in her Body: that has moved it self in
her.

60. She, has not moved the Word, but the Word has moved her, both the fruit
which she did bear, and her Soul, as also that part of her dead Substantiality;
so that her Soul instantly became environed with the divine living
Substantiality.

61. Not according to the Earthly part, viz: according to the Third Principle,
but according to the Second Principle, so that thus the Earthly did but hang
upon her.

62. For, her soul should also, with the word of Life, which in her became Man,
together enter through death and the Anger of the Father, into the heavenly
divine source or quality.

63. And therefore must her outward Man dye away from the Earthly source or
quality that Her Outward Man.
it may live to God.

64. And, therefore, in that she was blessed, and did bear the Mark in the
Covenant, her body, not vanished, departed or dissolved, for the heavenly has
swallowed up the Eartthly, and holds that Eternally captive, to the honor of
God and the Manifestation of his deeds of Wonder; It shall never be forgotten
in Eternity, that God is become Man in her.

65. But that some say, she remained totally in death, and quite vanished or
Corrupted: their Reason might well discern otherwise, for that which is highly
blessed, is Or intransitory.
uncorruptible, or cannot vanish away.

66. Her heavenly part of the divine substantiality, which she had in her,
blessed; that is intransitory: else it must follow; that Gods substantiality in
the Blessing, were yet once more fallen and dead, as was done in Adam, for the
sake of which dying indeed, God became Man, that he might being it to life
again.

67. Indeed, according to the Outward Life, viz: according to the outward
source or quality she died, but she lives according to the Blessing, in Gods
substantiality, and also in her own Substantiality, not in the Four Elements,
but in the root of the four Elements, viz: in the One Element, which holds
the Four Elements shut up in it self in the Paradise in the pure Element in
the Divine Substantiality in the Or Life.
Body of God.

68. Therefore we say, that Mary, was greater in dignity, then Ever any
Daughter of or from Adam, in that God has fixed the Mark of his Covenant in
her, and that she alone among all Eves Daughters, has attained the blessing,
viz: the pure Virgin-like chastity, which in all Eves Daughters, was perished.

69. But, Or By, or as to her.
with her stood the Virginity in the Covenant, till the word of Life highly
b^essed her, and then she, became, a right chaste Virgin, in which God became
Generated.

70. For Christ said to the Jews, I am from above; but ye are from beneath; I
am not of thi^ world.

71. If he were become Man in an Earthly Vessel, and not in a pu^ modest Chaste
heavenly Virgin, he had of necessity been of this World.

72. But thus he became Man in the Heavenly Virgin, and the Earthly source or
quality did but hang to him, for, the Essence of the Soul was in us poor
Children of Men, become infected.

73. And he was to introduce our Soul in the heavenly Essence in himself;
through the fire of God, in Ternarium Sanctum: into the holy Ternary.

74. For, it was for the Souls sake that all was done, being it had been taken
out of the Eternal, therefore also God would not forsake it.

Question.
75. Note ye that are called Men^onites.
Therefore, if it be asked, what kind of Matter it was, whereinto Gods Word and
Heart has given in it self, and made it self a Body? whether it be strange
Matter come from Heaven? Or, whether it was of Maryes Essence and seed.

Answer.
76. This is our Answer: That Gods Heart was never without Substance; for, its
dwelling is from Eternity in the Light, and the power in the Light, is the
Heart or Word, which God has spoken from Eternity.

77. And, the Speaking was the Holy Spirit of God, which with the Speaking
goes forth out of the power of the Light, out of the spoken Word.

78. And that which is out spoken is Gods Wonder and Wisdom, and this has in
it, the divine Looking-Glass of the Wisdom, whereinto the Spirit of God
looks, and wherein it opens the Wonders.

79. Thus understand, that the word, which out of or from the Heart of God the
Father, was environed with the heavenly Chaste Virgin of wisdom, dwells in
the heavenly Substantiality, and has in like manner, opened it self, in
Mary's Essence and Substantiality, viz: in her own seed, understand in the
humane seed, and has taken into it self, Mary's seed, dead, and blind, as to
God, and awakened or railed it, to Life again.

80. The living Substantiality came together in the half dead, to a Body, not
to a transitory, which should cease or vanish, but to an Eternal, which should
remain Eternally, for here the Eternal Life became generated again.

81. Thus, the Substantiality of the Eternity in God, of his Deep, without
Ground, and the Substantiality of the dead Adam in the Humanity, became one
Substantiality; totally or entirely one Substance: so that the Creature,
Christ, with his Substantiality, in like manner at once filled the whole
Father, which is without bounds limit or Ground.

82. Yet, the Creaturely Soul continues and is a Creature, and according to
the Third Princidle, viz: as to the Creature, this Christ, is a Creature, and
King of Men, as also, according to the Second Principle, a Child of the
Abyssal Father.

83. Whatsoever the Father is, in his Abyssal Deep that the Son is in his
Creature: for the power and virtue in the Creature, is, with the power without
or beyond the Creature, one power, one Substantiality, in which the Angels and
Men dwell.

84. But in the Humanity, it gives also Heavenly.
flesh and blood, and therefore also it is and remains a Creature, but Note;
Created and Generated are two things.
uncreated, yet generated, as to one part, out of God from Eternity, as to the
other part, out of the Humanity.

85. And God and Man is become one person, one Christ, One God, one Holy
Trinity, in the Humanity, and also in like manner Every where; so that when we
see Christ, we see the Holy Trinity in one only Image.

86. His Creature is an Image, and out of or from us Men; our High Priest and
King; our Brother; his power and virtue is our power and virtue; if we be
indeed generated of God again, in the Faith, to him.

87. He is not strange or terrible to Us, but is our Love- Tincture: He is with
his power, the quickening of our Souls, our life, and our Souls delightful
habitation.

88. When we find him, we find our Help or salvation; as in like manner Adam
should have found him, but the suffered himself to be seduced, and found at
length, a Woman.

89. Then said he; Genesis 2. 23.
She is Flesh of my Flesh, and bone of My bone, and took her to him for a
Companion: so also when our Soul, finds him, it says, that is my Virgin,
which I had lost in Adam, when an Earthly Woman came to be out of it.

90. I have now again found my love-Virgin out of my Love: I will now never
more let it go from me again, it is Mine, my flesh and blood, my strength
virtue and Power, which I lost in Adam, it, will I keep.

91. O, it is a friendly keeping, a friendly qualifying or coworking, beauty,
brightness, fruit, power, and virtue.

92. Thus the poor Soul finds its lost Lights Tincture, and its Love-Virgin,
and in this The Virgin Sophia or Christ in us.
Spouse, or Wife, the Noble Or lost Soul.
Bridegroom becomes found.

93. For* it has longed after the Matrix of Venus; but has found only a
Masculine Sulphur, and must have suffered it self to be impregnated with
Earthly seed.

94. Here it attaineth the right fires and Man's Tincture, so that thus it is
also a right Masculine Virgin as Adam was in his I^nocency.

The Tenth Chapter. Of Geniture or Birth.
the Becoming Man, or Incarnation, of Jesus Chrst the Son of God; and how he
lay Nine Months as all the Children of Men, shut up in his Mothers Body or
Womb: and how properly his Becoming Man, is.
1. MEn have had much disputing about Christ's Or Incarnation.
becoming Man; but very blindly and have made many Opinions concerning it: and
so Men have been turned about with Opinion, and have left and let the right
becoming Man or Incarnation, lie still; upon which, our Eternal Salvation,
depends.

2. Of which, all the cause has been, that Men have sought it in outward Wit
or Understanding and Art: and Not at the right Mark Aim or Place.

3. If a Man were entered into Christ's becoming Man or Incarnation, and were
born of, or out of, God; it would need no disputing: for the Spirit of God,
opens to every one, the becoming Man or Incarnation even in himself; and
without this there is no finding it.

4. For, how will we find, in this Worlds Reason, that, which is not in this
World; we find in the outward Reason scarce any Glimps thereof; but in Gods
Spirit, is the right finding.

5. The becoming Man or Incarnation, of Christ, is such a Mystery; as which the
Outward Reason knows nothing of; for it is done in all the Three Principles:
and cannot be searched out, unless a man know the first Man, in his Creation
before the Fall.

6. For Adam was to generate the Second Man with the Character of the Holy
Trinity, out of himself, in which the Name JESUS was Imaged or Incorporated.

7. But that could not be, and therefore must another Adam come, in whom it was
possible: for Christ is the Virgin-like Image, with the Character of the Holy
Trinity; he is conceived in Gods Love, and generated in this world.

8. Adam had divine Substantiality, and his soul was out of the first Principle
out of the Fathers property, and that should have with its Imagination inclined
it self into the Fathers Heart, viz: into the Word and Spirit of Love and
purity, and have eaten of the Substantiality of Love, and then it had retained
Gods Substance in the Word of Life in it self, and would have been impregnated
with the power out of the Heart of God.

9. Whence then it should have Imagined out of it self into ^s substantiality
and it self have impregnated its Substantiality, so that a whole similitude
according to the first Image, would have Existed, through the Imagination and
the yielding up of the Soul into it: and be conceived in the power of the
Substantiality.

10. But being this could not be done in Adam, because of the Ear^^liness which
clave to him, therefore it was done in the Second Adam Christ; who was in such
a manner conceived through Gods Imagination and entering into the Image of the
first Adam.

11. And it is known to us, that being the first Adam had fixed his Imagination
in the Earthliness, he is become Earthly, and that done against the purpose of
God, yet the purpose of God must stand.

12. For, here God set his purpose in Adams Child, and brought his Imagination
into the perished Image, and Impregnated the same with his divine power, and
Substantiality, and Converted the Souls will out of the Earthliness into God,
so that thus Mary became Impregnated with such a Child, as Adam should have
been impregnated with.

13. Which self ability could not effect, but sunk down into sleep, viz: into
the Magia, where then the Woman was made out of Adam, which should not have
been Made, but Adam should himself have impregnated in Venus's Matrix, and
have generated Magically.

14. But seeing that might not be, therefore was Adam divided, and his own will
of Great Might and power was broken in him, and shut up in Death.

15. And seeing he would not set his Imagination into the Spirit of God,
therefore must his great Might and power in Death, hold still, and let the
Spirit of God set his Imogination into it, and do with it what he will.

16. Therefore Gods Spirit awakened the Life to him out of that Death and
became the Spirit of that Life, that, the Image and Similitude according to
God, which was known from Eternity in Gods wisdom, might yet be generated and
subsist.

17. For it stood before the time of the World, and from Eternity in the
Virgin-Looking-Glass in the wisdom of God; and that in two Forms.

18. Viz: according to the First Principle of the Father in the Fire; and in
the second Principle of the Son, in the Light; and yet was only Manifest in
the Light; and in the Fire as it were in a Magia, viz; in a possibility.

19. As the Starry Heaven, modelleth to Man a figure in sleep in his Mind
according to its ability or Or Capacity.
possibility: so also has the Image in the Center of the Fires Nature appeared
altogether Invisibly.

20. But in the wisdom in the Looking-Glass of the Deity, it has appeared as
an Image, like a shadow, yet without Material Substance; and yet has been in
the Essence of that Spirit.

21. Which if it had discerned it self in the Looking-Glass of the wisdom, it
would have known and seen this Image, and would once have set its will
thereinto, to bring it into Substantiality; that God might have an Image or
similitude in Substance; where it might not need any more to see it self as in
a Looking-Glass, but Or feel.
find it self in Substance.

22. Therefore seeing, the first Image Imagined into the stern Might and power,
and thereupon became Earthly and Dead, Gods Spirit brought its will and life
into Death, and took to it self again the first Life, out of Death, that the
first Life might stand in full obedience before it, and that it alone may be
the Will and the Deed.

23. Thus, it is known to us, that God has Entered into the half dead Image,
understand into Mary, and even into that virgin-like form, which lay shut up in
Death, wherein Adam should have become impregnated, and generated an Image of
himself in the Virgin-like Chastity.

24. In this shut up Virgin-like half dead Matrix, is Gods Word or Heart, viz:
the Center of the Holy Trinity, become a Humane Image, without hurt to his
Substance.

25. And whereas the first living Virgin-like Matrix in Adam would not be
obedient to God, yet now, when it was again awakened and raised out of Death,
it became Obedient, and gave it self totally humbly and willingly into Gods
will: and thus now the right Virgin-like Image became figured into the
Obedience of God again.

26. For, the first will must remain in Death, which Imagined against Gods
will, and a pure Obedient will became awakened which might remain in the
heavenly Meekness, which would no more suffer the Image in the fire in the
Fathers part, to flow up in it self, but would remain in one souce or quality.

27. Even as the Deity, brings its Life but into ONE only source or quality,
viz: into the Light, into the Holy Spirit; and yet carries on his Dominion,
over all the Three Principles.

28. Also we are to understand concerning Christ's becoming Man or Incarnation,
that, when Gods Spirit awakened again, the Virgin-like Life in Mary, which in
the Earthly Essence, lay shut up in Death and fierce wrath; then that Life
hence-forward turned it self only into the ONE only will, viz: into Gods
Love, and gave it self up to the Spirit of God.

29. Thus that Life, became impregnated of a right virgin-like Image; which
should have been with Adam, but was not done.

30. For the one Imagination received the other, Gods Imagination, received the
Imagination in Death, and brought it to Life again; that Life Imagined again
into God, and became Impregnated with God* and became, out of the Deity and
Humanity, ONE Person.

31. The Deity hung to the heavenly Substantiality, which has ever been from
Eternity, with the Kingdom Power and Glory, viz: the Kingdom of Paradise, and
the Angelical World, viz: the Spirit and the Seven forms in the Center of
Nature: as in the Third Part or Book of the Threefold Life, is mentioned with
all Circumstances.

32. And the Humanity hung to the Kingdom of this world, but when the will of
the humanity gave it self up into the Deity, then this virgin-like Image in
Christ Jesus, came to be only a Guest in this world, and his Deity was a Lord
over this World.

33. For thus it was to be in Adam, also, that Note.
the lesser and impotent should be subject to the greater and Omnipotent.

34. But Adams will, went into the less and impotent: end therefore he became
altogether impotent, and fell down into sleep, and home again to the Creator.

35. But with Christ, this Image remained standing in the Divine Wisdom, and
the Earthly source or quality hung to it in the Office and Manner of a Servant:
but now no more as a Lord; as it was over Adam, and Mary his Mother before the
high blessing and opening of the Deity: but as a Servant: for this Image became
now in Gods Spirit and Might, a Lord over the Third Principle of this World.

Qustion.
36. Now says Reason: How is it come to pass in this becoming Man or
Incarnation? Was then the Life so suddenly with the Point of Conception, become
stirring, above the Natural Course, so that that Part of Mary, viz: the Woman's
seed instantly lived?

Answer.
37. No: for it was an Essential seed, and became in its Natural Time,
stirring, with Soul and Spirit, as all Adams Children.

38. But that part of the Deity, environed with divine Substantiallty and
wisdom, lives from Eternity to Eternity.

39. The Deity, went not to nor fro: what it was that it remained to be, and
what it was not, that it came to be.

40. It gave it self with divine Substantiality, into the Essence and
Substantiality of Mary; and Mary's Essence and Gods Essence, became one Or
Person.
Son.

41. But Mary's Essences were Mortal, but Gods Essences, were Immortal.

42. Therefore must Mary's Essences dye on the Cross, and go through Death into
Life; to which Gods Essences did help; else it had been impossible.

43. Thus Gods Essence helped us, and still always helps us through Christ
into Gods Essence and Life again.

44. Thus we konw the becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ, to be natural, as
of all the Children, of Men; for the heavenly divine Subsstantiality, has
given it self, with its Life into the Earthly half dead subtantiality.

45. The Lord, gave himself to be under the Servant, that the Servant might
become living, and is in like manner, in Nine Months, become a perfect Man,
and also continues a True God, and is also after the Manner and way of all
Adams Children, become born into this World, through that very way and passage,
as all Men are.

46. And that therefore, Not that he needed it, he could have been born
Magically, but he would not, nor should not; for he was to heal our impure
Birth or Geniture, and Entrance into this Life.

47. He should enter into our Entrance into this World, and introduce us out of
this World, into Gods Entrance, and bring us out of the Earthly source or
quality.

48. For, if he had been generated or born Magically after a divine Manner,
then he had not been Naturally in this World; for the heavenly Substantiality
must have swallowed up the Earthly source or quality; and then he had not been
Heb. 4. 15.
like us.

49. How then would he have suffered Death; have entered into Death, and
destroyed it? but therefore it was not so.

50. He is truly and really the Woman's Seed and is entered into this World the
Natural way like all Men, but yet also is gone forth through death, the divine
way, of the divine Might and Substantiality.

51. He is a divine living Substantiality, which subsisted in Death, and
destroyed and despised death, and brought the half dead humanity through Death
into Eternal Life.

52. For, the Earthly part, which he took to himself out of his Mother Mary,
that is, to or upon the divine Substance; dyed away on the Cross from the
Earthly source or quality.

53. Thus was the Soul, in the Subantiality of God, and as a victorious
Conquering Prince, Acts 2. 27.
went into the Hell of Devils, that is into Gods Anger, and quenched it with
Gods love and Meekness of the divine Love-suhstantiality.

54. For, the Love-fire came into the Anger-Fire-, and drowned the Anger,
wherein the Devil would be God.

55. Thus was the Devil taken captive Or by.
with the darkness, and lost his Dominion; for the sting and the Sword of the
Cherubine the staying Angel, was here destroyed.

56. And this was the Cause that God became Man, viz: that he might introduce
us, out of Death, into the Eternal Life, and quench the Anger which burned in
Us, with the Love.

57. For, you must understand us aright: how Gods Anger became quenched, not
with the Mortal Blood of Christ which he shed, upon which the Jews despised him.

58. But with the Blood of the Eternal Life, out of Gods substance, which was
immortal, which had in it the fountain of the Water of Eternal Life, that
became shed upon the Cross with and under the outward Blood, and when, the
outward fell to the Earth, then fell the Heavenly with it, but yet it was
immortal.

59. Thus Mat. 27. 51.
the Earth received Christ's Blood, whence it Trembled and Quaked, for the
fierce wrath of God in it became now overcome, and the living Blood came into
it which was come out of Gods Substantiality, from Heaven.

60. That Mat. 27. 52. 53
Opened the Graves of the Saints, and Opened Death, and made a Path through
Death, Col. 2. 14. 15.
so that Death was made a show of in Tiumph.

61. For, when Christ's Body arose from Death, then he bare Death as a Spectacle
or show on his Body, for its Might was broken or destroyed.

The Eleventh Chapter. Of the Benefit, and what Profit, the Becoming Man or
Incarnation, and Geniture or Birth of Jesus Christ the Son of God, is, to us
poor Children of Eve. The Most rich lovely Gate of all.
1. WE poor Children of Eve, were all Dead in Adam; and though we did as it
were Live, yet we lived only to this World, and Death waited for us, and
continually devoured One after another; and there were no remedy for us, if God
had not Generated us again out of his Substance.

2. We should not in Eternity as to the Body, have returned again, but our Soul
would have Eternally continued in Gods Anger source or quality, with all Devils.

3. But the Becoming Man or Incarnation of Jesus Christ, is become a powerful
Substance or Matter to us, for, for our sakes is God become Man, that he might
bring our humanity out of Death into himself again, and redeem or release our
Soul out of the fire of Gods Anger.

4. For, the Soul in it self, is a Fire-source or quality, and contains in
it self the First Principle the harsh astringency, which in it self labors
only Or toward.
to the Fire.

5. But if the Love and Meekness of God, become withdrawn from this Souls Birth
or Geniture, or become infected with a total stern Matter, then it continues a
source or quality in the Darkness, a total stern roughness, devouring it
self, and yet also in the hunger of the will, always thus generating it self
again.

9. For, a thing that has no beginning nor Ground, that has also no End, but
it self is its Ground, it generateth it Self.

7. And yet we will not say, that the Soul has no Beginning; it has a
Beginning, but only according to the Creature, not according to the Essence,
its Essence is from Eternity.

8. For, the divine Fiat, has comprised it in the Center of the Eternal
Nature, and brought it into a substantial Substance; moreover with the whole
Cross, with the Character of the Holy Trinity; as a Similitude of the Threefold
Spirit of the Deity, wherein God dwells; now whether it be done in Love or
Anger, that is in Light or Fire; for in which of them soever it Imagines, of
that it becomes impregnated; for it is a Magic Spirit, a source or quality in
it self.

9. Thus it is the Center of the Eternity, a fire of the Deity in the Father,
yet not in the Fathers Liberty, but in the Eternal Nature.

10. It is not Come to be.
come before the Substance, but in the Substance.

11. But Gods Liberty is Extra.
without or beyond the Substance, but dwells in the Substance: for in the
substance God becomes Manifest.

12. And there would be No God without the Substance; but an Eternal stilness,
without source or quality.

13. But in the source or quality the Fire becomes generated, and out of the
Fire, the Light, where then two Substances fever themselves, and drive on a
Twofold source or quality; viz: a fierce wrathful hungry thirsty one, in the
Fire, and a Meek lovely yielding giving oue, in the Light.

14. For, the Light gives, and the Fire takes away; the Light gives
Meekness, and out of the Meekness, Substantiality, that is the Fires food, or
else it were a dark fierce wrathful hunger in it self.

15. As indeed a Spirit is, if it have not the substance of the Light; like a
loathsome poison.

16. But if it attaineth substance of Meekness, then it attracteth that in it
self, and dwells therein, and uses it for food and also for the Body; for
it affects or infecteth it self therewith, and impregnateth it self; for
its substance is its satiating or fulfilling, and thus the hunger becomes
stilled.

17. We are to conceive of the humane Soul thus; it was taken out of the Center
of Nature, not out of the Or the four Elements.
Looking Glass of the Eternal, as viz: out of the source or quality of this
world, but out of the Eternal Essence of the Spirit, or out of the first
Principle of the Fathers property as to, or according to Nature.

18. Not from Substance or from somewhat, but the Spirit of the Deity breathed
into it, the Life, understand, the Image, into Adams self, out of all the
Three Principles: It has breathed into him, the Center of Nature, as viz: the
fire source or quality, to Life.

19. Also the Meekness of the Love, out of the substance of the Deity, as the
second Principle with divine heavenly Subantiality.

20. As also the Spirit of this World, as the Loaking-Glass or pretotype or
prefiguration of Gods wisdom, with the Wonders.

21. But now the Spirit of this World is by the Devils kindling and poison,
which he has darted thereinto, become perished, for the Devil dwells in this
world, and is a continual infecter of the outward Nature and property: though
in the fierce wrath only, viz: in the harsh astringent desire, he is Mighty
powerful.

22. But he puts his Imagination with his false Tincture, also into the
Love, and poysoneth the Souls best Jewel: and has infected Adams soul, with
his Imagination, with his Evil hunger-spirit, so that Adams soul lusted after
the Earthly source or quality, from which Lust it became impregnated with the
Earthly source or quality; so that the Outward Kingdom became introduced into
the Inward, whence the Light of the first Principle Extinguished; and his
divine Substantiality, wherein he should live Eternally, became shut up in the
Earthly Death.

23. Thus, for this Image and also Soul, there was no remedy more, unless then
the Deity did move it self according to the second Principle, viz: according to
the Light of Life in it; and did kindle the substantiality which was shut up in
Death, again with the Love Glance: which was done in the becoming Man, or
Incarnation, of Christ.

24. And this is the Greatest Wonder that God has wrought; in that he has
moved himself with the Center of the Holy Trinity in the Woman's Seed.

25. For Gods Heart would not reveal or Manifest it self in the Fire, as viz.
in the Man's Tincture, but in the Spirits Tincture, viz: in Venus, in the Love
of the Life, that the Fire in the Man's Tincture might be apprehended with the
Meekness and Love of God.

26. For, the Eternal Life should and must spring again out of the shut up
Death; For, here has the Root Jesse, and Numb. 17. 8.
the true Rod of Aaran, budded, and boarn fair fruit.

27. For in Adam the Paradise was shut up in Death, when he became Earthly; but
in Christ that springs again out of Death.

28. From Adam we have all inherited Death, but from Christ we inherit the
Eternal Life.

29. Christ is that virgin-like Image, which Adam should have Generated out of
himself, with both the Tinctures.

30. But being he could not, therefore he was divided, and so it must be done
through Two Bodies Genesis 49. 10.
till Shiloh came, that is the Son of the Virgin, which became generated out
of God and Man.

31. He is the Breaker through: of which the Prophets spoke, saying, Isai. 53.
2.
He shoots up like a Plant or sprout, he sprouteth as a Juniper Tree, in Gods
substance.

32. He has, with his entrance into the humane half dead Essence broken or
destroyed death, for he sprouted at once both in the humane and divine Essence.

33. He brought to us, along with him in our Humanity, the virgin-like
Chastity, of the wisdom of God, he environed our souls Essence with heavenly
substantiality.

34. He was the Champion or Savior in the Battle, where the two Kingdoms lay
together in strife, viz: Gods Anger and Gods Love; he gave himself willingly
up into the Anger, and quenched it with his Love, understand, in the humane
Essence.

35. He came out of God into this world, and assumed our Soul into himself,
that he might introduce us out of the Earthliness of this world, again in
himself into God.

36. He generated us again a new in himself, that we might be capable to live
in God.

37. Out James 1. 18.
of his will begat he or generated he us, that we should put our will into him,
and then he brings us in himself to the Father, into our Native Country,
again: viz: into Paradise out of which Adam went forth.

38. He is become our Fountain, his water springs up in us: he is our Spring,
and we are Drops in him, he is become the fullness of our substantiality, that
we in him may live in God.

39. For, God is become Man, he has introduced his abyssal immensurable
substance into the Humanity; his Substance which fills the Heaven that he
manifested in the Humanity.

40. Thus, the Humane Substance and Gods substance are become one substance,
one fullness of God; our substance is his moving in his Heaven.

51. We are his Children, his Wonder, his moving in his abyssal Body.

42. He is Father, and we his Children in him: we dwell in him and he in Us; we
are his Instrument, wherewith he seeks and makes what he will.

43 He is the Fire, and also the Light, together with all substance, or every
thing. He is hidden, and the Work makes him Manifest.

44. Thus we know that God is a Spirit; and his Eternal Will is Magical that
is desirous; he always makes substance out of Nothing, and that in a twofold
source, viz: according to the Fire and Light.

45. Out of the fire, comes fierce wrath, climing up, Pride, willing not to
unite it self with the Light; but a fierce wrathful Eager Earnest will,
according to which he is not called God, but a fierce wrathful consuming Fire.

46. This Fire also becomes not manifest in the pure Deity, for the Light has
swallowed up the Fire into it self, and gives to the Fire its Love, its
substantiality, its water, so that in Gods substance there is only Love, Joy,
and a pleasant habitation, and no fire, known.

47. But the Fire is only a Cause of the desirous Will and of the Love, as
also of the Light and of the Majesty, else there would be no substance: As it
has been largely expounded in the former writings.

48. And now it is known to Us, wherein our New Regeneration stands, even
while we are yet in this world, covered with the Earthly Tent or Tabernacle,
and are fallen home to the Earthly life, viz: merely, in the Imagination, that
we with our will enter into Gods will, and wholly unite and give up our selves
into Him, which is called Faith, or, Believing.

49. For Word Faith, or, Glauden, Believing, is not Historical, but it is a
receiving out of Gods Substance, to Eat of Gods Substance, to introduce Gods
substance with the Imagination into the Souls Fire, to still its hunger
therewith, and so to put on the Substance of God.

50. Not as a Garment, but as a Body of the Soul; the Soul must have Gods
Substance in its Fire, it must Eat the Bread of God, if it will be a Child.

51. Thus also it becomes New born in Gods Spirit and Substance, which Spirit
it transplanteth out of the soil of the fierce wrath and Anger, into the soil
of Love, Meekness, and humility of God, and blossometh forth with a new blossom
in Gods soil or field.

52 And that blossom which grows in Gods Love, is the right true Image of
the Deity, which God desired when he Created Adam to or in his likeness, that
now has Gods and Man's Son, Regenerated, to us, again.

53. For his Regeneration out of God and out of our Substance, is our
Regeneration; his power, Life, and Spirit, is all ours.

54. And we need do no more to it, but that we only and merely, enter with our
will-Spirit, through him into Gods substance, and so our Will becomes
generated in Gods will, and receives divine power and substance.

55. Not strange substance, but our first, with which we with Adam entered into
Death: and that awakeneth and raises up again to us, the first born out of the
Dead, which is Christus, Christ.

56. He is God, but yet is generated or born out of us, that he might make us
living from or out of the Death.

57. Not any strange Life which we have not had in this World, but our own Life
for Gods purpose must stand.

58. The fait blossom and Image, must grow out of the Corrupted soil, and not
only so, but also out of the pure Soil.

59. We must be generated or Born of or out of the Virgin, not out of the Man
of the Anger, out of the Fires Tincture, but out of the Lights Tincture.

60. We put on the Virgin of Christ, with our giving up our selves thereinto.

61. We herewith become the Virgin of Modesty and Chastity and purity in
Ternario Sancto, in the holy Ternary, in the Angelical world; a Looking-Glass
of the Holy Trinity, whetein God beholds himself, and which he has taken to
him for his Spouse.

62. He is our Husband or Man, to whom we in Christ have been betrothed Married
and incorporated.

63. And We, are now, Mary, in the Covenant of Grace out of which God and Man
become generated or born.

64. Mary, was the first in the high blessing, for in her was the Mark at which
the Covenant aimed or pointed.

65. She was known in God in the highly precious Name JESU, before the
foundation of the World was laid.

66. Not that she brought the Life out of Death, but that God, in her, would
bring the Life out of Death: and therefore she became highly blessed; and the
pure virgin Modesty was put on, to her.

67. And out of that Virginity, out of which Christ became Generated or born,
we all must be generated or Born; for we must become Rev. 14. 4.
Virgins, and follow after the Lamb of God, else we shall not see God: For,
Christ says, John 3. 5.
Ye must be generated or born anew, if ye will see the Kingdom of God, through
water and the holy Spirit.

68. The water is the Virginity, for the Virgin brings the Lights and Waters
Tincture, viz: Love and Meekness.

69. And the Spirit, out of which we must become generated or Born, is that
which gave it self into the Woman's seed with the Moving of the Deity, which
brake or destroyed Death, which out of the water brings forth a Light-flaming
Blossom, wherein he is the spirit and life of the blossom.

70. Not according to the Fire-source or quality of the fierce wrath, but
according to the Quality of the Light in the Meekness and humility,

The Twlefth Chapter. Of the Pure Virginity: How we poor Children of Eve must
be conceived out of the pure Virginlike Modesty or Chastity in the Becoming Man
or Incarnation of Christ, and be new born in God; else we shall not see God.
1. WE poor Children of Eve, find in us, no pure virgin-like thoughts: for
Mother Eve, which was a Woman, has made us all Feminine and Masculine.

2. We are in Adam and Eve all become Men and Women; except we enter into the
heavenly virginity, with our desiring Will, in which God has generated us out
of Christ to be Virgins again.

3. Not according to the Earthly Life in which there is no Modesty, Chastity,
and purity, but according to the Life of the Heavenly Virgin, in which Christ
became a Man; and which with the Over-shadowing of the Holy Ghost, became put
on to Mary, which is without ground limit and End; which every where stands
before the Deity; which is a Looking-Giass and representation or Or reflex.
express Image of the Deity.

4. Into this Virgin, wherein the Holy Tinity dwells, wherein we were
discerned or discovered before the times of the world by the Spirit of God, and
were know in the Name of JESU, we must Enter with our Will-Spirit.

5. For, our true Image, in which we are the similitude of God, is with Adam
and Eve extinguished to Us, and become Earthly.

6. Which is done through Lust or Imagination; and so Gods clear Countenance
became covered; for we lost the heavenly Modesty or Chastity.

7. But seeing God, for us, has, out of his favor and Love, opened his clear
countenance toward us again in the becoming Man, or Incarnation, of Christ:
and so now it lies in this; that as we in Adam have imagined into the earthly
longing, whence we are become Earthly, so we now set our desiring will in the
havenly Virgin, and bring our longing thereinto, and then our Image goes out
from the Earthly Woman; and conceives the virginlike Essence and property,
wherein God dwells, wherein the souls Image may attain the Countenance of God
again.

8. Outward Reason says, how may that come to pass? that we might be born
again out of the Virgin, out of which Christ was born? It understands solely
Mary: but we understand, not the Mary which is a creaturely Virgin.

9. For as we also, in the immaterial Virgin-like modesty or chastity, became
Creaturely Virgins, so if we enter into the becoming Man or Incarnation of
Christ; not according to the outward Life in the four Elements, but according
to the Inward in the One Element, where the Fire of God swalloweth up the four
Elements into it self; and yet in his Light, viz: in the second Principle,
wherein, the outward Man and Woman must go through death, in Christ's
resurrection, as a virgin in the one Element, wherein all the four lie hidden;
we then grow forth and spring in the Right vi^gin-like wisdom of God.

10. We must dye away from the Man and the Woman, and Crucify the Corrupt
Adam: he must die with Christ and be cast into the Fathers Anger.

11. That swalloweth up the Earthly Man and the Earthly Woman, and gives to
the soul, out of the becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ, a virgin-like
Image, wherein the Man and the Woman is but one only Image, with one only Love.

12. Now the Man sets his Love in or upon the Woman, and the Woman in or upon
the Man; but if both the loves be turned into one, there is then no desire of
Co-mixture more in the one only Image, but the Image loves it self.

13. But now the Image, in the beginning was Created in the virgin-like
wisdom of God, viz: out of the divine substantiality.

14. And now because the substance was become Earthly and fallen into death,
therefore the Word which became Man awakened and raised it up again; and so the
Earthly source or quality remains with death in the Anger, and the raised
remains in the word of life, in the virgin-like Modesty or chastity.

15. And so we bear here in this World a two fold Man in one Person, viz: a
virgin-like Image born out of the becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ; and an
Earthly Image Masculine and Feminine, shut up in Death and in the Anger of God.

16. The Earthly must bear the Cross, and suffer it self to be scorned
persecuted and afflicted in the Anger, and becomes at length given to Death;
and then the Anger swalloweth it up into the sourcive qualifycating fire of God.

17. And so if the word of Life, which in Mary, became Man, is together in the
Earthly Image, then, Christ, who wrought the word of Life out of God, rises up
from Death, and brings the Essence of the sourcive or Qualificating fire,
understand the humane Essence; out, forth from Death.

18. For he is arisen out from Death, and lives in God, and his life is become
our Life, and his death our Death, we are buried in his death, and sprout
forth, in his resurrection and victory, in his Life.

19. But understand the meaning right. Adam was the virgin-like Image: he had
peculiar Love of his own: for the Spirit of God had breathed it into him: for
what other can the Spirit of God breath out of it self, then what it self is.

20. But now, that, is All; and yet all sources or qualities, are not called
God; but in all sources or qualities there is but one only Spirit, which is
God; viz: according to the second principle in the Light; yet there is no Light
without Fire.

21. But in the fire, he is not the love-Spirit, or Holy Ghost; but the fierce
wrath of Nature and a cause of the Holy Spirit; an Anger and a Consuming fire.

22. For in Fire, is the Spirit of Nature, Free; and yet the Essential fire
also gives or affords, Nature, and is it self, Nature.

23. And yet we understand, but one holy Spirit, in the Light; though indeed
all is but one substance; yet we understand, that the Matter, which is
generated out of the Meekness of the Light, is as it were impetent and obscure;
which the fire draws and swalloweth up into it self.

24. But gives forth out of the Material source or quality out of the fire, a
mighty potent Spirit, which is free from the Matter, and also from the fire;
and though the fire reteineth it: yet it apprehends not its source or quality.

25. As we see, that the Light dwells in the Fire, and yet has not the
source or quality of the Fire, but a Meek love-source or quality; which also,
would not be, if the Matter were not dead and consumed in the Fire.

26. Thus we consider and conceive of the first Adam; he was contrived or Note.
Imagined out of the Lights Essence and substantiality, but being he was to go
into a Creature and was to be a total or entire Similitude of God, according to
all substances, according to all the Three Principles, therefore he became also
apprehended with the word Fiat in all substances of all the Three Principles,
and was brought into a Creature.

27. Now certainly, all the three Principles were free in Him, and stood one in
another, each in its Order, and so he was a right total or entire similitude,
of God, according to and out of the substance of all substances.

18. But we are to know and observe; How the Third Principle, viz: the source
or quality of this world in the kindling of Lucifer, became totally fierce
wrathful thirsty and base or Evil; and instantly, in Adam thirsted after the
Second Principle, viz: after the heavenly Matter, whence the Longing in Adam
Existed; for the source or quality of the pure Love out of the Holy Spirit had
Or oe^^fioned.
refused that.

29. But when the Love entered into the Earthly source or quality to satisfy
it, in its kindled thirst; then the pure Material love conceived or received
the desirous Earthly perished Cortupt Longing.

30. And then the second Principle Extinguished, not as a Death, as that it
were become a Nothing, but it became caprivated in the fierce wrathful thirst.

31. Now then seeing God is a Light, the pure Love-source or quality stood as
shut up in Death without the Light of God.

32. And now the Image was perished and captivated in the fierce wrath of God,
and the Own self-love lost its might and strength, for it was shut up in the
perished corrupt Earthliness, and loved Earthlness.

33. Thus a Woman or Wife must be made out of this Image, and the Two Tinctures
viz: the fires Essence, and the Matrixes watery Essence, must be parted, viz:
into a Man and a Woman.

34. Whereas yet the Love thus became moving in a twofold source or quality,
and so one Tincture loved and desired the other, and mingled together, whence
the Generation was to be propagated and maintained.

35. But now this Generation of Men, thus in the Earthly source or quality,
could not know or see God, for the pure Immaculate Love was shut up in the
Earthly thirsty source or quality, and was shut up and captivated in the fierce
wrath of the Eternal Nature, which Lucifer had kindled: for the fierce wrath
had attracted the love with the Earthliness into it self.

36. That now in the captivated love, stood the virgin-like Mcdesty or Chastity
of the wisdom of God; which to Adam, was with the second Principle, with the
heavenly substantiality; together incorporated to his body, and much more the
Spirit of the Meek substantiality, through the breathing in of the Holy Spirit;
which was breathed into Adam.

37. And so now there was no Remedy, unless the Deity awakened it self, in the
divine Virgin, according to the second Principle, in the virginity which was
shut up in Death; and that another Image, came to be out of the First.

38. Thus it is sufficiently known and understood by us; that the first Image
must be given to the fierce wrath, wherewith it might quench its thirst: and
must go into Consumption, as into the Essential fire; whereas yet the Essence
dies not, nor consumes.

39. For which cause, God has appointed a Day, wherein he will being the
Essence of the Old and first Adam, through the fire, that it might be delivered
or loosed from the vanity viz: form the Longing of the Devil, and of the Anger
of the Eternal Nature.

40. And we understand further, that God has again borught into US, the life
of his Eternal substance, when he moved himself, with his own heart and Word,
or power of the divine Life in the virginity which was shut up in Death, viz:
in the true pure Love; and kindled that again; and introduced his heavenly
substantiality, with the pure Virginity into the virginity which was shut up in
Death; and has, out of the heavenly, and out of the Virginity that was shut up
in Death and Anger, generated a New Image.

41. And then Thirdly we understand; that this New Image, must, through Death
and the fierce wrath of the fire, be introuduced again into the heavenly divine
substantialit, in Ternarium Sanctum, into the Holy Ternary.

42. For, the Earthly longing which the Devil had possessed, must remain in the
Fire, and was given to the Devil for food; therein he (...) Adams virginity,
and introduced it out of Death through Gods fire, into the divine source or
quality.

51. Christ, is become Adam, not the divided; but the virgin-like Adam, which,
Adam was, before his sleep.

52. He has introduced, the perished-corrupted, in Death, into Gods fire, and
has brought forth the pure virgin-like, out of Death through the fire: whose
Son thou art, if thou do not remain lying in Death, as rotten wood which
cannot qualify or operate, which in the fire gives no Essence, but becomes
Dark or black Synder or Ashes.

Question.
53. Now says Reason; how comes it then, seeing I am Christ's Member and Gods
Child, that I do not find nor feel him.

Answer.
54. Here indeed sticks the Matter, dear defiled piece of Wood, smell into
thy bolome, what is it thou stinkest of? Even of Hellish Lust and Longing, viz:
of Hellish voluptuous pleasure, Covetousness, honor and power.

55. Hearken, these are the Devils Garment; pluck off the Hide or skin, and
cast it away, put thy desire into Christ's Life, Spirit, flesh, and blood;
Imagine thereinto, as thou have Imagined into the Earthly Longing; and so thou will put on Christ, in thy Body; and in thy flesh and blond, thou will become
Christ; his becoming Man or Incarnation will instantly unite it self in thee,
and thou will become born or generated in Christ.

56. For, the Deity or the Word, which moved it self in Mary and became Man,
that became Man also in like manner, in all Men that had dyed from Adam, to
that time; who had given up and Commended their Spirits into God, or into the
Promised Messiah.

57. And it passed upon all those which were yet to be born out of the
Corrupted perished Adam, who would but suffer that word to awaken them or arise
in them: for, the first Man, comprehends also the last.

58. Adam is the stock, we all are his branches, but Christ is become our sap
virtue and life.

59. Now if a branch on the Tree withers, what can the virtue, and the sap of
the Tree do to it: It gives its virtue to all brances why then does not the
branceh draw the sap and virtue into it.

60. The fault is, that Man draws devilish virtue or power and Essence or
sap, instead of divine Essence, into himself, and lets the Devil seduce him
into Earthly desires longing and lust.

61. For, the Devil knows the Branch, which in the Country that was his, is
grown up to him, and still grows: and therefore, as he was a Murtheter and
liar at the beginning, so he is still, and infecteth or poysoneth Men.

62. Being he knows, that they are fallen to the outward Dominion of the
Stars into his Magic Longing; therefore he is a Continual poysoner of the Or
Constellations.
Complexion; and where he smells but a Crum that serves his turn, that he
always sets before Man; and if a Man Imagines into it, he will suddenly
infect him.

63. Therefore it is said: 1 Pet. 4. 7. and 5. 8.
Watch, pray, be sober, lead a Temperare life: for the Devil your Adversary,
goes about as a roaring Lion; and seeks whom he may devour.

64. Seek not so, after Convetousness, riches, Money, Goods, Might, and honor;
for we are, in Christ, not of this world.

65. For therefore Christ Joh. 16. 16.
went to the Father, viz: into the Divine substance, that we should, with our
hearts, Minds, thoughts and wills, follow after him: and so Mat. 28. 20.
he will be with us all the days to the End of the World; but not in the
source or quality of this World.

66. We should press forth out of the source or quality of this world our from
the Earthly Man, and give up our wills into his will, and Introduce our
Imagination and Longing in to him: and so, we, in his virginity which he has
stirred up again in us, become impregnated, and Conceive the Word; which makes
it self stirring in him; in our virginity shut up in Death; and become born in
Christ in our selves.

67. For as death through Adam pressed upon us all, so the word of Life out of
or from Christ presses upon us all.

68. For, the Moving of the Deity in the becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ,
has continued moveable, and stands open to all M^n, the failing is only in
the Entering in, that Man suffers the Devil to detein him.

69. Christ need not first depart from his Place, and Enter into us, when we
become new born in Him: for, the divine Substance, wherein he became born or
generated, has in all places and Cornors the second Principle in it; and where
a Man may say, there is God Present, there a Man may say, The Becoming Man or
Incarnation of Christ is present also; for it became opened in Mary, and so
qualifieth or operateth backward again even into Adam, and forward even into
the Lift man.

70. Now says Reason: Romans 3. 28.
Faith alone attaineth it; very right: In the right Faith the Impregnation
proceeds.

71. For, Faith is Spirit, and desires Substance, and that substance is
nevertheless in all Men, and that which is wanting, is, that it apprehend the
Spirit of Faith.

72. And if it be come apprehended, then the fair Lilly blossometh out of it:
not only a Spirit, but the Virgin-like Image, becomes generated or born out
of Death into Life.

73. The Rod of Aaron, which is dry; sprouteth forth out of the dry death, and
takes its body out of Death; the fair New virgin-like life, out of the half
dead virginity.

74. And this, the dry Rod of Aaron signified; as also Old Zachary; also
Abraham with his old Sarah; who according to the outward world were all as it
were dead, and no more fruitful.

75. But the Promise in the New Regeneration must do it, the Life must sprout
out of Death.

76. The Old Adam which became Earthly must not be Lord; Nor Esau the first
born, to whom formerly the Inheritance had belonged if Adam had continued
standing; But the second Adam, Christ, who sprouted forth through death out of
the first, must remain Lord.

77. Not the Man or the Woman, shall possess the Kingdom of God, but the
Virgin, which becomes generated or born out of the Man's and Woman's Death, must
be Queen of Heaven.

78. One only Generation or sex, not two; one only Tree, not Many: Christ was
the stock, being he was the root of the New Body which sprouteth out of Death,
which brought forth the dead virgin again as a fair branch out of Death.

79. And we all are his sprouts and stand all upon one stock, which is Christ.

80. Thus we are Christ's Sprouts, his branches, his children, and God is the
Father of as all, and also of Christ, Acts 17. 28.
In him we live and Move and are.

81. We bear Christ's Flesh and blood in us, if we do but come to the New Birth,
for we become regenerated in Christ's Spirit.

82. That in Mary; became a living Man in the dead humanity, without the
touching of a Man, and that also becomes a Man in our selves, in our dead
virginity.

83. And henceforward that which is wanting is this, that we cast the Old Adam
viz: the Husk; into Death, that the Earthly life's quality or source may depart
from us, and so we go forth from the Devil, out of his Country.

84. And not alone this; for, the Old Adam must not be so totally cast away,
but the Husk only, viz: the Shell wherein the Seed or Kernel lies.

85. Out of the Old Essence must the New Man in Gods blessing sprout forth, as
the blade out of the Grain, or Corn, as Christ teaches us.

86. Note.
Therefore must the Essence be injected into Gods Anger, must be persecuted,
afflicted, plagued, scorned, and lie under the Cross: for the New Man must
sprout forth out of God anger fire, he must be Tried in the Fire.

87. We were fallen home to the Angers Essence; but the Love of God set it
self in the Anger, and quenched the Anger with the Love in the blood of the
Heavenly substantiality in the Death of Christ.

88. Thus the Anger retained the Husk, viz: the perished corrupt Man,
understand the Earthly source or quality; and the Love retained the New Man.

89. Therefore can no Man besides, shed heavenly Blood, the Earthly Mortal
Blood only; for, Christ, who was conceived without Man and Woman, he only
could do it; for, in his heavenly substantiality there was no Earthly Blood.

90. But yet he did shed his heavenly blood under or among the Earthly, that he
might deliver us poor Earthly Men from the fierce wrath.

91. For, his heavenly blood must in its blood shedding mix it self together
with the Earthly, that the Turba in the Earthliness in us, which held us
captive, might be drowned; and that the Anger might be quenched with the love
of the Heavenly blood.

92. He gave his life for us, into Death, he went for us, into Hell, into the
source or quality of the Fathers Fire; and out of Hell again into God; that he
might break or destroy Death, and drown the Anger, and make way for us.

93. Therefore now the whole matter depends on this that we follow afte^ him,
he has indeed broken and destroyed death, and quenched the Anger; yet if we
will be conformable to his Image, then we must follow him into his Death, Mark.
10. 21.
take his, Cross upon us, suffer persecution, be scorned, despised and slain.

24. For, the Old Husk belongs to the Anger of God, it must be purged.

95. For, it is not the Old Man, that must live in us, but the New: the old is
to be given up to the Anger, for, the New Man blossometh up out of the Anger,
as the Light shines out of the Fire.

96. Thus the Old Adam must be Wood or Fuel for the Fire; that the New may
sprout forth in the Light of the Fire; for it must subsist in the Fire.

97. That is not Eternal, which cannot subsist in the Fire, and which arises
not out of the Fire.

98. Our Soul is out of Gods Fire, and the Body out of the Lights Fire.

99. But, understand always, by the Body, an inanimate substantiality, which
is no Spirit, but an Essential Fire.

100. The The Spirit of the Soul.
Spirit is much higher; for its Original is the fire of the fierce wrath of the
fierce wrathful source or quality, and its right life, or Body, which it has
in it self, is the Light of the Meekness; that dwells in the Fire, and gives
to the Fire its meek sustenance or body, else the Fire would not subsist; it
will have sowewhat to Consume.

101. For, God the Father says also; I am an angry zealous jealous or fierce
wrathful God, a Consuming fire; and yet calls himself also, Deuteronomy. 4. 31.
Jer. 3. 12.
a merciful loving God, according to his Light, according to his Hertz, and
therefore he says; Barm-hertz-ig. Heart, Warm-heart-ed: or Merciful.

102. For, in the Light the water of Eternal Life becomes Generated; which
quenches the fire and the fierce anger of the Father.

The Thirteenth Chapter. Of the twofold Man, viz. of ohe Old and New Adam, as
of two sorts of of Men; How the Old and Evil behaveth it self toward the New:
What Religion Faith and Life each of them leads, and what each of them
understands.
1. ^ALl whatsoever, concerning Christ, is in the Old Adam taught, written,
preached, or Spoken, he it from Art or how it will, it is out of or from Death,
and has neither understanding nor Life, for the Old Adam without Christ is
dead.

2. It must be the New, which becomes generated out of the Virgin, that must
do it; that only understands the Word of Regeneration, and, Joh. 10. 2.
enters into the sheepfold at the Door of Christ.

3. The Old Adam will climb up into it through Art and searching or
Speculation; it supposes Christ may sufficiently be apprehended in the Letter;
he who has learned Arts and Languages, and has read much, is called and
Instituted by Christ to Teach; the Spirit of God must Speak through his
Preaching, though, likely, he is but the perished Corrupt Old Adam only.

4. But Christ says; Joh. 10. 1.
They are Thieves and Murderers, and come only to Rob and steal: he who
goes not in at the door of the sheepfold, but climeth up some other way, he is
a Thief and a Murderer.

5. Further he says; Joh. 10. 7. 9.
I am the door to the sheep, he that enters in through me, shall find
Pasture, and the sheep will follow him: Mat. 12. 30.
for whosoever is not with me is against me.

6. A Teacher should and must be generated from or born of Christ, or else he
is a Thief and a Murderer; and stands there to Preach only for a Or a Living.
Belly full; he does it for Money and honor sake; he teatheth his own Word,
not Gods word.

7. But if he be Regenerated out of Christ, then he teaches Christ's word; for
he stands in the Tree of Christ, and gives his Sound out of the Tree of
Christ wherein he stands.

8. Threfore it is, that there is so much strife and Opposition upon Earth,
because Men 2 Timothy 4. 3.
heap up Teachers to themselves, according as their Ears do Itch, after what
the Old Evil Adam pleases to Hear, after what serves to his climing up and
fleshly pleasure and voluptuousness, what serves to his Might and Pomp.

9. O ye Devill's Teachers, how will you subsist before the Anger of God.

10. Why do you Teach, when you Jer. 23. 21.
are not sent from God? ye are sent from Babel, from the Great Whore, from the
Mother of the Great Woredoms upon Earth, ye are not born of the Virgin, but of
the perfidious Adulterous Woman.

11. For ye not only Col. 2. 8.
Teach humane Traditions, and fictions; but ye also persecute the Teachers that
are sent; which are borne of Christ.

12. Ye strive about Religion; and yet there is no strife at all in Religion: 1
Cor. 12. 4.
There are manifold Gifts, yet it is but one Spirit that speaks.

13. As a Tree has many Branches; and the fruit many several Forms, and one
does not look altogether like another; also as the Earth bears manifold
herbs and blossoms, and the Earth is the only Mother to them; thus it is also
with those who speak, out of or from Gods Spirit.

14. Every one speaks out of the Wonders of his Gifts, yet their Tree and
soil upon which they stand, is Christ, in God.

15. And ye Spirit- Binders, will not endure that, ye will stop the Mouth of
your Christ, whom yet your selves Teach with your Earthly Tongue; unknown; from
the Pulpit; and bind him to your Laws.

16. O! alas! the true Church of Christ has no Law: Christ is the Temple or
Chruch into which we must Enter.

17. The Heaps of stone, make none, New Men; but the Temple, Christ, wherein
Gods Spirit teaches; thae awakeneth and raises up the half dead Image that it
begins to sprout forth.

18. They avail all alike: God asks not after Art, not fine eloquent
Expessions: but whosoever comes to him, he will not thrust him away or reject
him.

19. 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Christ is come into this world, to call and save poor sinners. And Isaiah
says: Isai. 42. 19.
Who is so simple as my Servant.

20. Therefore the Wit and wisdom of this World does it not, it makes only
Pride and Pust up Reason, it will out aloft, and wills to rule and domineer.

21. But Christ says, Mat. 10. 37.
He that Ieaveth not House, and Land, Goods, Luke 14. 26.
Money, Wife, and Child, for my Names sake, is not worthy of me. All
whatsoever is in this world, must not be so loved as the dear highly precious
Name JESUS.

22. For all whatsoever this World has, is Earthly; but the Name JESUS
heavenly; and out of the Name JESUS we must become Regenerated out of the
Virgin.

23. Therefore the Child of the Virgin stands against the Old Adam, he
presents or shows forth himself, with or by desires of Temporal pleasures and
Voluptuousness, honor, power, might and Authority, and is a fierce wrathful
Dragon, which only wills to devour, as the Revelation of John represents
him to be a Cruel horrible Dragon.

24. Rev. 12. 1. 5.
The Virgins Child stands upon the Moon; and wears a Crown with Six
heavenly and six Earthly. See the Threefold life. chapter 9. verse 73.
Twelve Stars; for it treads the Earthly, viz: the Moon under its feet: It
is Sprouted out from the Earthly Moon, as a blossom out of the Earth, and
therefore the Virgin-like Image stands upon the Moon.

25. Against which, the fierce wrathful Dargon, casts sorth his streams of
Water, Rev. 12. 15.
and would fain continually, drown the Virginlike Image, Rev. 12. 16.
but the Earth comes to help the Woman; and swalloweth up the stream and
flood of water, and brings the Woman into Egypt.

26. That is, the Virgin-like Image, must suffer it self to be put into
Egypt, into Bondage and servitude; and the Earth, viz: the fierce wrath of
God; Covers the virgin-like Image; it devoureth the streams of the Dragon.

27. Although the Dragon with his abominations overwhelmeth the virgin-like
Image, and reproacheth, slandereth, and despises it; yet that hurts not the
Virgins Child; for, the fierce wrath, takes the reproach and slander, which is
cast forth upon the Child, to it self; for, the Earth always signifies the
fierce wrath of God.

28. Thus the Virgins Child stands upon the Earth, as upon the Earthly Moon,
and must continually fly into Egypt before the D^agon; it must here be onley
under the Bondage and Servitude of Pharao.

29. But it stands upon the Moon, not under the Moon: the Prince Josua or
JESUS, brings it through Jordan into Jerusalem: it must only through Death
go into Jerusalem, and leave the Moon.

30. It is but a Guest in this World, a stranger and Pilgrim; it must wander
through the Dragons Country; and when the Dragon casts forth his streams upon
it, it must bow down and pass under the Crose; and then the Anger of God
receives the Dragons fire to it.

31. It is known to us, that the Old Adam knows and understands Nothing of
the New, it understands all things, in an Earthly manner: it knows not
where nor what God is; it flatters it self, and ascribes honesty and holiness
to it.

32. It supposes it serves God, and yet serves but the Old Dragon, it
Offers Sacrifice, and yet its heart hangs to the Dragon, it will suddenly
be honest, and with the Earthliness go into heaven.

53. And yet it despises the Children of Heaven, whereby it declares, that is
a stranger in Heaven: it is only, a Lord upon Earth, and Devil in Hell.

34. Among such Thorns and Thistles, must Gods Children grow, they are not
known in this World, for the Anger of God Covers them.

35. A Child of God also Note. Note.
Knows not himself aright; he sees only the Old Adam which hangs to him,
which will always drown the virgin-childe.

36. But if the virgin Child conceive a glimpse in the The mercy of God, viz*
the Holy Earth, the Eternal substantiality, the Body of Christ.
Holy Ternary, then it knows it self, when the Noble fair Garland or Crown
of Victory is set upon it, there must the Old Adam first look back, and knows
not what is done to him.

37. He is indeed very Joyful: like one that danceth to an Instrument of Music
when that Cease sounding, his Joy has an End, and he remains to be the Old
Adam; for he belongs to the Earth, and not to the Angelical World.

38. So soon as it comes so far with a Man, that the virgin-like Image,
begins to sprout forth out of the Old Adam, so that a Man gives up his Soul
and Spirit into the Obedience of God, then the strife with him begins: then
the Old Adam in the Anger of God striveth with the New Adam.

39. The Old, will be Lord in flesh and blood, also the Devil cannot endure the
virgin-like Branch, for he dares not to touch it; but the Old Adam may touch
infect and posses it.

40. Because his own dwelling in the Darkness of the Abyss pleases him not,
therefore he would fain dwell in Man, for he is an Enemy to God, and has Extra.
without Man, no authority.

41. Therefore he possesses Man and leads him according to his pleasure into
the Anger and fierce wrath of God, wherewith he scorneth Gods Love and
Meekness; for he supposes still, seeing he is a fierce wrathful fire-source or
quality, that he is higher then the Humility, being he can go so terribly.

42. But being he dare not touch the virgin-like Branch, therefore he uses
sublime subtle Craft, knavery and wickedness, and destroys it, so that it is
not known or acknowledged in this world: Note.
else too many such little branches might grow in his supposed Country, for he
is wrath, and an Enemy to them, he brings his Proud Ministers or Officers,
and P^^gurs, with scorn, upon that man, so that he is persecuted, despised and
held a Fool.

43. And this he does through the Reason-Learned wise world, through those who
call themselves shepherds or Pastors of Chirst, upon whom the world looks;
that so the Holy Lilly branch may not be known: else men might observe it, and
too many such branches may grow for him: and then he should loose his Dominion
among Men.

44. But the Noble Lilly Twig or Branch, grows in Patience and Meekness, and
takes its Essence pover and smell out of the Soil of God, as also, out of
Christ's becoming Man or incarnation; for Christ's Spirit is its Essence; Gods
Substance is its Body.

45. Not out of any strange or Heterogene property, but out of its own,
included and shut up in Death, and in Christ, Sprouting, Essence; grows the
virgin-like Lilly Twig or Branch: It seeks not nor desires the fariness or
excellency of this world, but of the Angelical world.

46. For, it also grows not in this world in the Third Principle, but in the
Second Principle in the Paradise-world: and therefore there is great strife in
flesh and blood in the outward Reason.

47. Note.
The Old Adam knows not the New, and perceives that it withstandeth and
opposes him; it wills not what the Old, wills; it continually leads the
Old to abstinence, which causes woe to the Old, The Old wills only to have
pleasure, voluptuousness and temporal honor; it Cannot endure the Cross and
Contempt.

48. But the New is well pleased, that it shall bear the Marks Mahlzeichen.
or Prints of the wounds of Christ, Romans 8. 29.
That it should become conformable to the Image of Christ.

49. Therefore the Old goes often very mournfully about, when it sees it must
be a fool, and yet knows not how it befalls him, for he knows not Gods
will.

50. He has only the will of this world, what there flattereth fair, he
wills to have that; he would fain be Lord continually, before whom, Men must
bow or stoop.

41. But the New boweth it self before its God, and desires nothing, also
wills nothing, but it pants after its God, as a child after its Mother; It
casts it self into the bosom of its Mother, and gives its body up to its
heavenly Mother, into the Spirit of Christ.

52. It desires the food and Drink of its Eternal Mother, and it Eats in the
bosom of the Mother, as a child in the body or womb of the Mother eats of
its Mother.

53. For, so long as it is covered in the Old Adam, so long it is yet in the
becoming Man or Incarnation; but when the Old dies, then the New becomes
Generated or born forth out of the Old.

54. It leaves the Vessel, wherein it lay, and became a virgin-like child, ^o
the Earth, and to the Judgment of God, but it becomes born or brought forth
as a blossom in the Kingdom of God.

55. And then when the Day of Resteration shall come, all his Note. Note. Rev.
14. 13.
Works, which he has wrought Good, within the Old Adam, shall follow after
him; and the Evil or Malignity of the Old Adam shall be burnt up in Gods fire,
and be given to the Devil for food.

56. Now says Reason: being the New Man in this world, in the Old, is only in
the becoming Man or Incarnation, then it is Note.
not PERFECT.

57. This is no otherwise then as with a child, where the seed with two
Tinctures, viz: the Masculine and Feminine is sown, the one in the other, and
a Child comes out of it.

58. For as soon as a Man Converteth, and turns himself to God Math. 22. 37.
with heart, Mind, thoughts and will; and goes out from his wicked ways,
Luke 18. 27.
and gives himself up wholly sincerely and Earnestly, into God; Note.
then, in the fire of the soul in the old perished or Corrupted Image, the
Impregnation begins.

59. And the Soul apprehends in it self, the Word, that moved it self in
Mary, in the Center of the Holy Trinity, which in Mary, with the Modest highly
blessed heavenly Virgin, the wisdom of God gave in it self into the half
dead Virgin, and became a True Man.

60. That very Word, which in Mary, in the Center of the Holy Trinity, moved or
roused it self, which united or Espoused it self with the half dead shut up
virginity; apprehends the Soulish Fire; and then instantly, in the Souls
Image, viz: in the souls Light, in the Meckness, viz: in the shut up
virgin-like wisdom, the Impregnation begineth.

61. For, Man's love-Tincture apprehends Gods Love-Tincture; and the seed is
sown in the Holy Spirit in the Souls Image; as in Our Book of the Threefold
Life of Man is written at large.

62. Now behold! When the virgin-like Marks, in Gods love, appear; then may
this twig or branch be born; for in God ALL is PERFECT.

63. But being it sticks covered in the Old Adam, and stands only as it
were in the Essence as a ^^^d, therefore there is great danger concerning it:
for, many attain this Twig or Branch first at their last End.

64. And though indeed he has brought it along with him out of his Mothers
body or womb, yet it becomes perished or corrupt, and broken, and made
earthly, by many.

65. Thus it goes also with the poor sinner, when he repents, but afterward
becomes an Evil Man, it goes with him as befell Adam, who was a fair Glorious
Image Created and highly Englightned from God.

66. But when he suffered Lust to overcome him, he became Earthly, and his fair
Image became captivated in the Earthly source or quality in the Anger of God;
and thus it goes continually.

67. But this we say: according as we have received enlightening in the Grace of
God, and have wrestled much for the Garland; that they that in the Earnest
continue steadfast or Constant, till his Twig or Branch, get a Bud or little
blossom, his Twig or branch will not easily be broken in one or more storms:
for that which is weak, has also a weak life.

68. We speak not thus in or as concerning the Deity, but Naturally it is thus,
and indeed also all is done Naturally; for the Eternal has also its Nature,
and the one does but proceed out of the other.

69. If this world bad not been poisoned by the Malignity and fierce wrath of
the Devil, then Adam had continued in this world in Paradise, and there would
have been no such fierce wrath in the Stars and Elements.

70. For the Devil was a King and great Lord in the place of this world, and he
has awakened the fierce wrath.

71. God therefore created the Heaven out of the midst of the Waters, that the
fiery Nature, viz: the fiery Firmament, might be captivated with the
water-Heaven, that its fierce wrath might be quenched.

72. Else, if the water should be gone or pass away, Men would plainly see,
what would be in this world, nothing else but a cold stern harsh astringent and
fiery burning: yet only Dark, for there could be no Light; for, the Light
subsisteth merely in the Meekness: so there can also be no shining fire, except
it have meek substantiality.

73. Therefore it is known to US, that God has burned the heavenly
substantiality into water, which was done Naturally.

74. When God the Father moved himself, and the Devil fell, who would be a
fire-Lord over the Meekness; then there was such a Bolt thrust in before his
poisoned Malignity: so that now he is Gods Ape or Mimick, and not Lord, a raver
and fulfiller in the Anger-source or quality.

75. Therefore being we know this; that we are environed with the Anger, we
should have a care of our selves, and not so slightly and meanly Esteem our
selves: for we are, not only from this world, but also in lik manner, from the
divine World, which stands hidden in this world, and is near us.

76. We can live and be in Three worlds at once; if we sprout forth with the
virgin-like Image, out of the Evil life.

77. Eor, we live in the first Principle, in the fire-world in the fire, as to
the Essential-soul, viz: as to the fire-source or quality, in the Center of
Nature of Eternity.

78. And then, with the right pure Virgin Image, we live in the Light-flaming,
Paradise-world, although in the place of this world the same is not manifest,
yet in the virgin Image in the Holy Spirit, and in the word that dwells in
the virgin-like Image, becomes known.

79. And then Thirdly, with the Old Adam, we live in this Corrupted sickly
world with the Devil in his kindled sickness or Longing: therefore it is said
be Watchful, Note. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
or Circumspect.

80. Christ says: Mat. 10. 16.
Be simple as Doves, and subtle as Serpents, take heed to your selves.

81. In Gods Kingdom we need woe subtilty, we are only Children in the bosom
of the Mother; but in this world we must be watchful, or Circumspect, or look
to our selves.

82. We carry the Noble Treasure in an Earthly Vessel; it is soon done, to
loose God and the Kingdom of Heaven, which after this time is more to be
attained.

83. We are here in the soil and in the seed; we stand here in the growing, if
it fall out that the Stalk be once broken, yet the root is there still, so that
another stalk may grow.

14. Here, the Door of Grace stands open to Man, there is no sinner so great,
but if the Convert, he may be regenerated, or new born out of the Evil
Malignity.

85. But whosoever wilfully and ob^^inately casts his root into the Devils
Mire and as to his growing or sprouting out again, despairs or Note.
resloves against it: who will help him, that will not himself be helped also
God will not have him, who himself will not.

86. But if in his will he converts to God, then God will have him: for he
which wills in Gods Anger, him will Gods anger have; But he which wills in
the Love, him will Gods love have.

87. Paul says: Romans 6. 16.
To whom you give your selves as Servants in Obedience; either of sin to
Death, or of the Obedience of God to righteousness: its Servant ye are.

88. The wicked is to God an acceptable 2 Cor. 2. 16.
savor in the Anger, and the Holy or Saint is an acceptable savor in his Love.

89. But can a Man make of himself what he will? he has both before him: the
fire and the Light: will he be an Angel in the Light, then Gods Spirit in
Christ helps him to the Society of the Engel-schaar.
Angelical Quire.

90. Note, ye disputers about Free Will.
But, will he be a Devil in Fire, then Gods Anger and fierce wrath helps him,
and draws him into the Abyss to the Devil: he gets his Or Mind,
inclination, or propensity.
Ascendent, which he has a longing or Lust unto.

91. But if he breaks the first longing or Lust, and enters into another,
then he gets another Or Mind, inclination, or propensity.
Ascendent, but the first hangs exceedingly to him, it wills continually to
have him again.

92. Therefore must the Noble Grain often stand in great pinchings, it must
suffer it self to be pricked with Thorns, for Genesis 3. 15.
the Serpent continually stingeth the woman's seed, viz: the virgin-Child in the
Heel, the sting of the Serpent sticks in the Old Adam, it continually
stingeth the virgin-Childe in the Mothers body or Note
Womb, in the Heel..

93. Therefore the life in this world, is with us poor captive Men, a valley of
Misery, full of anguish, Crosses, cares, sorrow and troubles: we are here
strange Guests, and are upon the Path of our Pilgrimage.

94. We must wander through great dismal wild desert Corners; and are
environed with Evil Beasts, with Adders, Serpents, Wolves, and very horrible
beasts, and the Evillest Beast, we carry in our Bosom.

95. Our fair little Virgin, stands in that Evil desert Den or stable of
Beasts, as a lodging.

96. But we know and say this with good ground; that when the Noble Twig or
Branch grows, and becomes strong: then in that Man, the Old Adam must be
Servant: must go behind, and often do what it wills not: he must often
suffer the Cross, scorn, reproach and Death, and that he does not willingly.

97. But, the virgin-like Image in Christ subdueth him, for it will readily and
with Joy follow after Christ its Bridegroom, and be conformable to him in the
Cross and tribulation.

98. And we may well say this also: that indeed none become Crowned with the
virgin-like Rev. 12. 1.
Crown, which the woman, in the Revelation of John, wears; with Twelve Stars,
viz: with the six Spirits of Nature, heavenly, and with the six Spirits
Earthly; unless he stand in the streams of the Dragon, and fly along into
Agypt, viz: under the Cross in the Plagues of Egypt.

99. He must Luke 14. 27. Note.
bear Christ's Cross; and put On Christ's Thorney Crown, suffer himself to be
mocked, abused and scorned; if he will put on Christ's and the Virgins Crown, he
must first bear the Thorney Crown, if he will put on the Heavenly.

100. We present to the Enlightened still a secret Arcanum to be known; that
when the Pearl becomes lowen; he then first puts on the Crown in the Holy
Ternary, with very great Joy and honor before Gods Angels and all N^^e.
holy Virgins, and there is very great Joy therein.

101. But that Crown hides it self again; for in that place, God becomes
Man: How then can there be but Great Joy?

102. The Old Adam danceth for Company, but as an Ass after the Harp: but the
Crown is laid by, in the becoming Man, or Incarnation.

103. Will thou now be a Conqueror, then thou must, in the footsteps of Christ,
fight with the Old Ass also, against the Devil.

104. If thou overcomest, and wilt be acknowledged and received for a
victorious Child of God; then will the woman's Crown with the Twelve stars be
set upon thee, thou shall wear that, till the virgin be born out of the Woman,
out of thy death, or with thy Death; that shall put on the Note.
Threefold Crown of the Great honor and Glory in the Holy Ternary.

105. For, while the virgin-like Image lies yet shut up in the Old Adam, it
attaineth not the Angels-Crown; for it stands yet in great danger and hazard.

106. But when it is born, with the dying of the Old Adam; and Crept forth out
of the husk or shell; then it is an Angel: and can perish Note. Note.
no more, and then the right by-laid Crown wherein God became Man, will be set
upon it.

107. But it reteineth the Crown of Twelve Stars also for an Eternal Or
Ensign.
Mark, for it shall not be forgotten in Eternity, that God, in the Earthly
Woman, has again unshut the virginity, and is become Man.

108. The six Earthly Marks shall stand for an Eternal Wonder, and be an
Eternal Song of Praise, that God has delivered us out of Necessity and Death.

109. And the six heavenly Marks shall be our Crown and Honor or Glory, that
we with the Heavenly have overcome the Earthly.

110. Thus shall the Marks of victory remain standing in Eternity, in which it
shall be known, what God has had to do with the Humanity; and, how, Man is
the greatest Wonder in Heaven; at which the Angels highly rejoice.

The Fourteenth Chapter. Of the New-Regeneration; in what Substance Being and
Property, the New-Regeneration, viz: the Virgin-Child, stands, while it yet
sticks in the Old Adam.
1. BEing we swim in this miserable Sea, in this Earthly flesh and Blood; and
are become of an Earthly source or quality; wherein we lie shut up in the
dimness in the Glimmering; therefore let not the Noble Mind cease to search
concerning its true Native Country: into which it is to go.

2. It continually says: where is thy God? or when shall it come to pass, that
I may see the Countenance of God? where is my The New-Man.
Noble Pearl? where is the virgins-Child; I see it not yet; how is it with me,
that I am so anxious about that which yet I cannot see?

3. I find indeed, the great longing and desire after it; but cannot see, where
my heart might rest.

4. I am yet continually as a Woman, which would fain bring forth: how fain
would I see my fruit, which is promised me from my God.

5. There is a Continual longing for the Birth, Psalm. 19. 2.
one day calls another, the Morning to the Evening, and the Night to the Day
again, and hops in the Abstinence; when once the clear Morning Star will
arise, which will give rest to the Mind.

6. And it is with it, as with a Woman, that labors for the Birth; that
continually hops for the discovery, and waits for it with longing and
groaning.

7. Thus my beloved, Children of God, it goes with us, we suppose that we are
far off from it; yet thus we stand in the Birth; we generato thus in great
groaning in anguish; and know not the seed which we generate; for it lies shut
up.

8. We generate not as to this World; how will we then see the fruit with the
Eyes of this world? neither does the fruit belong to this world.

9. But seeing we have attained the True knowledge of this Matter, not as to
the outward Man, but as to the Inward; therefore we will pourtray it in a
similitude, for the Readers sake, and for our Refreshment.

10. If we would consider our selves, how we are so twofold, with a Twofold
Mind, Thoughts, senses and will, we can not better come to the knowledge
thereof then by considering the Creature or Creation.

11. We see a rude stone lying on the ground, and in many of them, there is the
best Gold, and we see plainly how the Gold glisters in the Stone, but the stone
is inanimate, and knows not that it has such Noble precious Gold in it.

12. So also we; we are Earthly* Sulphur, but we have an Heavenly Sulphur in
the Earthly, wherein each is its own by it self.

13. Indeed, during this life time, they are one among another, but they
qualify or operate not together, one with the other, the one is the Note.
conteiner and dwelling house of the other.

14. As we see in Gold, that the rude drossy stone is not the Gold, but is
only its receptacle that contains it; also its rude drossiness does not
afford the Gold; but the Tinctura solis, or Tincture of Sol affords it in the
rude Stone.

15. But the rude Stone is the Mother, and Sol is the Father, for Sol
impregnateth the rude stone, because it has the Center of Nature, out of which
Sol has its Original.

16. If we would go on into the Center, we would set it down: but seeing it is
sufficiently explained in the other writings we let it alone here.

17. But so it is also with Men; the Earthly Man is signified by the rude
drossy Stone: Sol signifies the Word which became Man, which impregnateth the
corrupted perished Man.

18. The cause is this: the Corrupted perished Man is indeed Earthly he has
the Eternal Center of Nature, he longs after Gods Word or New-Man, viz: the
heavenly Gold.
Sol* for in his Creation Gods Sol, was taken along to his Substance.

19. But now the rude Stone has overgrown the Gold, and has swallowed it up
into it self, so that the Gold is intermixed with the rude drossy Sulphur: and
cannot escape the rude Sulphur, unless it be cleansed in the fire, so that the
rude drossiness be melted away, and then Sol remains alone.

20. Understand this of Dying and consuming, therein the rude drossy Earthly
flesh, is melted away, and then the virgin-like spiritual flesh, remains alone

21. Understand us aright, what we mean; we speak the precious and sublime
Truth, as we know and understand it.

22. The New-Man is not only a Spirit: He is even Flesh and Blood, as the Gold
in the stone is not only Spirit, it has a Body, but not such a one as the
rude drossy stone is; but a Body, which subsisteth in the Center of Nature, in
the Fire.

23. Whose Body, the fire cannot Consume, and that, because the Gold has
another Principle.

24. Do thou know this thou Earthly Man? No, It justly remains Mute in
silence: for the Earth is not worthy of the Gold, though indeed it carries it,
and also generateth it.

25. So also the earthly Man, is not worthy of the Jewel, which he carries,
and though indeed he helps to generate it, yet he is but dark or dusky Earth,
in respect of the virgin-childe, born of God.

26. And as the Gold has a true Body, which lies hidden and captive in the
rude drossy stone: so also the virgin-like Tincture in the Earthly Man has a
true real Heavenly divine Body in flesh and blood.

27. But not in such flesh and and blood as the Earthly: It can subsist in the
Fire, it goes through Stone and Wood, and is not apprehended; as the Gold
presses through the rude Stone and breaks it Not, neither does it break or
destroy it self.

28. Thus it is also with the Earthly Man: when he conceives the Word of life,
which became Man in Christ, then he conceives it in the perished Sulphur of
his flesh and Blood, in the virgin-like Center which was shut up in Death;
wherein Adam was a virgin like Image: wherein the wild Earth inveloped, his
Gold of the clear Divine Substantiality; so that the heavenly must stand in
Death in the Center of the Fire: In that very Center, I say.

29. And in that very Center, the Word of Life moved it self, which became Man
in Mary, and therein, the Substantiality shut up in Death, attained a living
Tincture.

30. And then the Noble Gold, viz: the heavenly substantiality in Death, began
to sprout forth, and had instantly in it self the Holy Spirit in the word of
Life, which Note.
there proceeds from the Father and the Son, and makes the wisdom, viz:
the heavenly Virgin, as a Looking-Glass of the Express Image of the Deity, as a
pure Sulphur for it self; a pure flesh and blood wherein it dwells.

31. Not earthly Essence, but divine Essence, out of the heavenly
Substantiality.

32. This is Note. Joh. 6. 54.
the true real Flesh and Blood of Christ; for it grows in Christ's Spirit in
the word of Life, which became Man, which brake or destroyed Death, wherein the
divine Tincture sprouted again, and generated substance out of it self.

33. For all is generated and proceeded out of Gods desiring: But if God be a
fire and also a Light, then it is sufficiently knowable to Us, out of what
every thing is proceeded.

34. Yet we cannot by any means say otherwise, then that out of the Good and
richly amiable; Good is proceeded.

35. For, a Good-desiring will, conceives in its Note.
Imagination, its like; it makes that, through the hunger of its desiring like
it self.

36. Thus it is knowable to us, that being the Deity has Or longed.
pleased to have a Looking-Glass, an Image of its like; that the divine
longing, Pleasure or Placet, would also in its impregnating, have the Good and
Most lovely, to be generated in its desirous will, a right similitude,
according to the Good, according to the clear bright Deity.

37. But that the Earthly has intermixed it self therewith; that is the fault
of the desirous Anger, viz: of the fire; the fault of the Devil who with his
Imagination kindled it.

38. Thus also it is highly knowable to us, That God Note.
would not forsake his own, his very best and loveliest of all, which he
Created to his likeness, into a Creaturely substance.

39. He rather became himself, such a one as he had Created, that he might
generate or bring forth the perished or corrupted out of perdition or
Corruption again, and put or change it into the Best, wherein he might
Eternally dwell.

40. And we say with good ground, that God himself dwells Subsistingly in the
New Man, not through a Glimps or a strange Glance or appearance, but
substantially, yet in his own Principle.

41. The outward Man, touches or apprehends him not.

42. Also, the flesh and Blood of the New-Man, Note. Note.
is not God. It is heavenly Substantiality; God is Spirit; God does not perish
or Corrupt, though plainly the Substance perishes or Corrupts: thus God
remains in himself.

43. He needs no going away, for he uses also no going or Entering in.

44. But he manifests himself in Flesh and Blood; it is his longing pleasure,
to possess a similitude.

45. And thus if we rightly know our selves, and go according to it; we then
find, that, Man, understand the whole Man, is a right similitude of or
according to God.

46. For, according to the Earthly life and Body, he is of from this world; and
according to the virgin-like Life and Body he is from heaven.

47. For, the virgin-like Essence, has heavenly Tincture, and makes heavenly
Flesh, in which God dwells.

48. As, the Gold in the Stone has another Tincture then the rude drossy
stone; and that very Tincture has another Body: Every, Body, comes to be out
of its own Tincture.

49. As therefore we know, that the Earth is become generated from ^he fierce
wrath out of the Center of the harsh astringent hellish fi^e, viz: Of the Cold
Fire: out of the Sulphur, of the Stern severity in the Anguish to Fire: as is
mentioned in the Book of the Three Principles.

50. Thus also a good Corpus or Body, comes out of a Good Essence, for the
Essence Note.
makes the life; and yet it self is not the Life: the Life arises in the
Principle, as in the Fire; be it in the Cold or in the Hot, or in the light
Fire; each is a Principle of its own, and yet is not severed.

52. Thus we will now with good Ground of Truth, speak and say, concerning the
Humanity, with clear plain and unveyled words, not from supposition or Opinion,
but from our own true knowledge in the enlightening given us from God.

52. First, that the new Regenerate Man; which lies hidden in the Old, as the
Gold in the Stone: has a heavenly Tincture, and has divine heavenly flesh and
Blood on it,

53. And that the Spirit of that Flesh, is no strange Spirit but its own,
generated out of its own Essence.

54. Secondly: And then we also clearly know and say; that the Word which in
Mary became Man, is the first Ground to the beginning Tincture in the Sulphur:
and plainly know, that Christ's Spirit which fills heaven in All places,
dwells in that very Tincture.

55. Thirdly, we manifestly know, that this heavenly Flesh is Christ's Flesh, in
which the Holy Trinity dwells undivided.

56. Fourthly; we apparently know, that it is possible, that, that very flesh
and Blood in the Time of the Old Adam, can through Imagination become perished
or Corrupted again, as came to pass in Adam.

57. Fifthly; we say, that the Deity in the perishing or Corrupting, does not
depart or go away, also is touched with No Evil.

58. For, that which loses the Love of God; that falls home to the Anger:
what falls out from the Light, that catches the fire: and the Spirit of God
remains to it self unperished or incorrupt.

59. Sixthly; That, the possibility to the New Birth, is, in all Men, else God
were divided, and not in one place as he is in another.

60. And herein we exactly know, that, Man, is drawn, by the Fire and the
Light; to which he inclines with the Beam of the Balance, into that he
falls; and yet he may in his life time, raise up the Tongue of his Angle or
Beam, aloft again.

61. Also, that the Holy clear Deity, wills no Evil; it also wills no
Devil, it has desired none, much less to have any man be in Hellin the Anger
of God.

62. But seeing there is no Light without fire; therefore it is sufficiently
knowable to Us, how the Devil has through Imagination gazed or reflected
himself on the Anger-fire, as also all men that will become Damned; they will
not suffer themselves to be remedyed, but themselves fulfill the Greedy
fire-source or quality; they suffer themselves to be drawn, and yet can well
stand.

63. Seventhly, we say; That the true Temple, wherein the Holy Ghost preaches,
is in the New Birth;

64. That all is Dead Crooked and Lame, which teaches not out of Gods Spirit.

65. That the Holy Spirit mixeth not it self in the sound of the Mouth of the
wicked: That no wicked Man is Christ's shepherd.

66. For, although, in the Holy, or Saints, the Clock comes to be struck with
or by the voice of the wicked; it would indeed be done by the Cry of a Beast,
if its noise were intelligible, and did sound the most precious Name of God.

67. For as soon as the Name of God is mentioned, and gives a sound, then
instantly the other sound catches it, viz: in that place wherein it is
sounded, as, in the holy Soul.

68. But no wicked awakeneth, or raises up another wicked, out of Death; for,
that cannot be; they are both in the Anger of God, and lie yet shut up in Death.

69. Had we our selves been able to have risen up out of Death, then had Gods
heart not needed to have become Man.

70. Therefore we say with Certain Ground: Note.
That only that very word, which there is become Man, awakeneth or raises up
the poor sinner out of his Death; and generateth him to Repentance and to a new
life.

71. Therefore all Preachers or Cryers, that are wicked or ungodly, are not
profitable in the Temple of Christ; but those that have Christ's spirit, Note.
they are his shepherds.

72. We clearly know and say, That all Teachers which give out themselves for
Christ's servants and Church-Ministers, and that for their Bellies and honor
sake, and yet are Unregenerate; are the Antichrist and the Woman in the
Revelation of John, upon the Dragon.

73. We say; That all Tyranny and self usurped power and Authority, wherewith
the miserable are squeezed, Oppressed, drunk up, vexed and tormented, is that
abominable Horrible Cruel Beast, upon which Antichrist Rides.

74. We know and say; that the Time is near; and the Day Dawneth or breaks,
wherein Rev. 19. 20. Note.
this Evil Beast with the Whore, shall go into the Abyss.

Amen Halelujah Amen.
The second Part of the Book of the Incarnation, is concerning The Suffering,
Dying, Death, and Resurrection, of CHRIST And How we must enter into, Christ's
Suffering Dying and Death and Rise again with and through him out of his Death,
and become conformable to his Image, and Eternally Live in Him.

Written In the Year 1620. in the German Tongue. By Jacob Behme THE Teutonick
Philosopher, Dwelling at Gerlitz.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Lodowick Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhil, 1659.

Of CHRIST'S Suffering, Dying, Death, and Resurrection. And How we must Enter
into, Christ's suffering, dying, and Death, and arise with and through him, out
of his Death; and become like his Image, and live in him Eternally.
The First Chapter. Of the Eternal Beginning, and of the Eternal End.
1. Reasons, Objection.
OUtward Reason says: were it not sufficient that God became man in US;
wherefore Must Christ suffer and Dye.

2. could not God then thus introduce Man into Heaven with the New Birth? Is
not God Omnipotent enough to do what he will?

3. What pleasure has God in Death and dying? that he has not only suffered
his Son to dye on the Cross, but that we all must Dye also?

4. If then God has by the Dying of his Son, redeemed us, and paid a ransom
for us, wherefore then must we also dye and perish or be consumed? thus Reason
runs on.

Answer.
5. To this Looking-Glass we will have the Antichrist, who calls himself
Christ's Minister, Pastor, or shepherd, invited for a Guest: and all the
high-Schools or Universities of this World; with their disputations and Laws;
as also all the Children of Christ; who bear Christ Cross: They shall all see
the true Ground.

6. Not with this meaning, to contemn any in his Ignorance, but for the true
Teaching and Instruction, that every one might seek and find himself.

7. For it will be a very Earnest matter, and concerns Man, it costeth body
and Soul.

8. He ought not at all to flight it; for he that has this knowledge given
him, he has prepared his Trumpet; It concerns all Mankind; Note.
Mat. 25. 7.
Every one should trim his Lamp.

9. There will be a Great Twofold King Come, out of Two Gates: he is but one
Only, and yet two; he has Punishment and Grace.
Fire and Light; he draws in both, on Earth and also in Heaven, let this be a
Wonder to thee.

10. Dear Children of Christ, when we consider of Death, how we must go through
Death into Life, then we find altogether another kind of Life; which comes out
of Death.

11. And we find Instantly, why Christ must have dyed; and why we must also dye
in Christ's Death, rise again in him; and with him, and through him, enter into
Gods Kingdom.

12. If now we would find this, we must then consider the Eternity in the
Ground and Abyss, else there is no finding of it: we must only find it where
it is.

13. For, out of the Eternal Ground have we, with the Image of God, our
original, viz: with the soul and its Image.

14. But are become introduced into the Temporary and Corruptible, viz: into
the source or quality thereof.

15. But now the Eternity, viz: the Abyss, is a Liberty without source or
Extra. ^^thout or beyond.
quality and therefore we must go again into the Liberty through dying.

16. Yet we cannot say, that there is no Life therein; it is the right Life,
which there subsisteth Eternally without source or quality.

17. And we give you it in a True real similitude to meditate and consider of:
which indeed is a similitude according to the Kingdom of this world; but if we
Or apply in our Mind and Thoughts.
take the divine world to it, or along with it; then it is the Substance it
self.

18. You know that our Life consists in Fire, for without warmth we live not.

19. Now, the Fire has its own Center, its own Maker in its Circle or
Circumference and Extent, viz: the se^ven Forms or Spirits of Nature.

20. And yet only the First four Forms are acknowledged and accounted to be
Nature, viz: the springing source or quality, wherein the fire becomes
awakened and struck up, that there be a Principle and life's Circle or Center
there, wherein the Sea the 12. Question of the Soul, verse 19. 20. and 22.
Matter of the burning, makes it self, in the Spirits or forms, and is also
Continually consumed in the Fire.

21. And the Fire gives forth out of the Consumptibility.
Consumingness, an other that is better, then the First, which makes the Fire.

22. For, the Fire kills or mortifieth and devoureth the substance which the
fire it self Makes, understand the Essential Fire, in the forms to Fire: it
confumeth that, and gives out of the Death, a much Nobler and better, which it
cannot Consume.

23. And that is demonstrated to you in fire and Light; which is not only the
true similitude, but it is the substance it self; only a Man is to
distinguish the Principles; It is indeed all a Fire; but distinguishes it
self according to the source or Quality.

24. If we will present this to be understood; it is necessary, that we mention
the fires Original: but being we have elsewhere, viz: in the Book of the Three
Principles, and in other besides, described it at large, with all
Circumstances: therefore here we will set down a brief description, and direct
the Reader to the other writings, if he would thoroughly search out the Seven
forms of Nature.

25. The Fire has Especially Three forms in it to the Center; and the Fourth
form is the fire it self, and gives the Principle, viz: the Life, together
with the Spirit; for in the first Three Forms there is no right Spirit, they
are only Essences.

26. Viz: First, the Harsh Astringency, that is the desirous Will; that is the
first and Chiefest Form.

27. Secondly, And the Bitter stinging, that is the second Form, a Cause of the
Essences.

28. Thirdly: After that, the Anguish, viz: the Circle or Center of Life: the
turning wheel, which catches or apprehends the senses or Thoughts, viz: the
bitter Essences, in it self, and swalloweth them up as it were into Death; and
gives forth out of the Anxious Chamber, viz: out of Death, the Mind, viz:
another Center.

29. Now understand this thus; Note.
In the Eternity, viz: in the Abyss without or beyond Nature, is Nothing but a
stilness without substance; it has also nothing that gives or affords any
thing; it is an Eternal Rest, and like Nothing: an Abyss without beginnig and
End; it is also no limit Circumscription or place, no seeking or finding, or
any thing in possibility there.

30. That Abyss is like an Eye: AVge.
AVge, for it is its own LookingGlass; it has no Moving, also neither Light
nor Darkness.

31. It is Especially a Note.
Magia, and it has a will, after which we should not dive or search, for it
troubles us.

32. With or by this very will, we understand, the Ground of the Deity, which
is of No Original, for it apprehends it self in it self; concerning which
we are justly Mute or silent; for it is without or beyond Nature.

33. And being we are in Nature, we know it not Or to. Note.
in Eternity, for, in the Will, the Deity it self, is All; and the Eternal
Original of its own Spirit, and of All and every substance.

34. Note wherein God is Omnipotent and Omniscient.
In that very will it is Omnipotent and Omniscient; but in that will it is not
called or known to be God, for it is therein, neither Good nor Evil.

35. It is a desirous will, which there is the beginning and also the End, for
the End makes also the beginning of this will, and the beginning the End.

36. And thus we find that All substances are shut up in an Eye AVge. AVge.
and that is as a Looking-Glass, wherein the will * beholds it self, what it
is.

37. And in that Or ^specteth.
beholding, it becomes desirous of that Substance which it self is.

38. And the Desiring is a drawing in, and yet there is Nothing, that can there
be drawn, but the will draws it self in the desiring it self, and modelleth
it in its desiring, for what it is.

39. Note the introduction of the Eternal will into substance.
That very Model is the Looking-Glass, wherein the will sees what it is for it
is a similitude of or according to the willing.

40. And we know that very Looking-Glass, wherein the will sees or beholds
it self; to be the Eternal wisdom of God.

41. For, it is an Eternal Virgin without Substance, and yet is the
Looking-Glass of all substances, in which all things have been foreseen from
Eternity whatsoever there should or could be.

42. But now also, this Looking-Glass, is not the seeing it self: but the
will, which is desirous; that is the outgoing longing pleasure of the will,
which goes forth out of the will, and that is a Spirit, and makes, in the
longing pleasure of the desiring, the Looking-Glass.

43. The Spirit is the Life, the Looking-Glass is the Manifestation or
Revelation of the Life; else the Spirit would not know it self: for the
Looking-Glass, viz: the wisdom, is its ground and reteiner or preserver.

44. It is the Invention, or that which is found by the Spirit, where the
Spirit finds it self in the Wisdom.

45. The wisdom without the Spirit, is no substance; and the Spirit without
the wisdom is not manifest to it self, and one without the Other were an
Abyss.

46. Thus the wisdom, viz: the Looking-Glass of the Spirit of the Deity, is
for or as to it self, Mute, inanimate or silent, Note the wisdom is the body
of the spirit.
and is the Deities, viz: the Spirits Body, wherein the Spirit dwells.

47. It is a Virgin-like Matrix, wherein the Spirit opens it self: and is
the substantiality of God, viz: a Holy Divine Sulphur, Formed or figured.
apprehended in the Imagination, of from or by the Spirit of the Abyss of
Eternity.

48. Note what A. and O. are. Rev. 1. 8.
And this Looking-Glass or Sulphur, is the Eternal first Beginning, and the
Eternal first End: and is every where like an Eye* AVge, wherewith the Spirit
sees; what it is therein, and what it would open or manifest.

49. This Looking-Glass or Eye, AVge, is without ground or limit, as indeed the
Spirit has no Ground but only in this Eye, AVge.

50. It is Every where altogether totally Entire undivided, as we know that the
Abyss cannot be divided, for there is Nothing that there divides, there is no
moving Extra.
without or beyond the Spirit. Thus it is knowable to us, what the Unus
Circulus. Tinctura est Sapientie Ornamentum.
Eternal Spirit in the wisdom is: and what the Eternal beginning and the
Eternal End is.

The second Chapter. The true and highly-worthy and precious Gate of the Holy
Trinity. The Eye AVge of the Eternal Life's Glance.
1. As then we understand, that the Eternal beginning in the Abyss, is an
Eternal will in it self; whose Original in it self, no creature shall ever
know.

2. Yet we are to know, and are given to know in the spirit, its ground; which
it makes to it self; wherein it rests.

3. For, a will is thin or Obscure, as it were Nothing: therefore it is
desirous; it wills to be somewhat; that it might be Manifest in it self.

4. For the Nothing causes the willing, that it is desirous; and the desiring
is an Imagination.

5. Wherein the will, in the Looking-Glass of Wisdom, discovers it self,
and so it Imagines out of the Abyss into it self, and makes to it self in
the Imagination, a ground in it self; and impregnateth it self with the
Imagination out of the wisdom, viz: out of the Virgin-like Looking-Glass which
there, is a Mother without generating, without willing.

6. The impregnation is not performed in the Or Spirit.
Looking-Glass, but in the willing: in the willings Imagination.

7. The Looking-Glass remains Eternally a Virgin, without generating; but the
will becomes impregnated with the Glimps of the Looking-Glass.

8. For the will is Father, and the Impregnation in the Father, viz: in the
will, is Heart, or Son; for it is the wills, viz: the Fathers Ground, wherein
the Spirit of the willing (...) in the Ground, and out of the willing in the
ground goes forth into the Virgin-like wisdom.

9. Thus, the willings Imagination, viz: the Fathers: attracteth the
Looking-Glasses Avision, or aspect form or representation, viz: the Wonder of
the Power Colors and virtue, into it self, and so becomes impregnated with
the Glance of the wisdom with the power and virtue: This is the wills, viz:
the Fathers Heart, wherein the Abyssal will attaineth a ground in it self,
through and in the Eternal Imagination.

10. Thus we know the Fathers impregnating to be the Center of the Spirit of
the Eternity, wherein the Eternal Spirit continually apprehends it self.

11. For, the will is the beginning; and the moving or drawing in into the
Imagination, viz: to the Looking-Glass of wisdom, is the Eternal abyssal
Spirit, which arises in the willing, and apprehends it self in the Center
of the Heart, in the power of the intracted wisdom, and is the Hearts Life and
Spirit.

12. Now then being the Eternal Abyssal will in it self, is as it were
inanimats mute or silent, therefore that which is apprehended or conceived, our
of the wisdom, which is called Heart or Center is the word of the willing; for
it is the sound or the power, and is the willings Mouth, which manifests the
willing.

13. For, the will, viz* the Father, Speaks with the moving of the Spirit,
the power, forth, in the Looking-Glass of the wisdom.

14. And with the speaking forth, the Spirit goes, out from the willing out of
the Word of the Mouth of God, viz: out of the Center of the Heart, forth, into
that which is out-spoken, viz* into the Virgin-like Looking-Glass; and opens
the word of life in the Looking-Glass of wisdom, so that the Threefold
substance of the Deity in the wisdom becomes Manifest.

15. Thus we acknowledge an Eternal abyssal divine Substance, and therein Three
Persons, whereas one is not the other.

16. Viz: the Eternal will, which is the Cause of all and every substance;
that is the First Person; yet, is not the substance it self; but the Cause of
Substance, and is free from Substance, for it is the Abyss.

17. There is nothing before it, that can give it, but it gives it self, of
which we have no knowledge.

18. It is All, and yet also thus but ONE only, in it self without substance,
a Nothing.

19. And in this One only willing, ar^seth the Eternal Beginning through Note.
Imagination or desiring.

20. And in the Desiring, the willing impregnateth it self out of the Eye,
AVge, of wisdom; which with the willing is in like or Equal Eternity, without
ground and beginning, as is mentioned above.

21. That very Impregnation is the Ground of the willing, and of the substance
of all Substances, and is the Son of the willing.

22. For, the will generateth this Son from Eternity in Eternity perpetually,
for it is its Note.
Heart or its word, viz: a sound or revelation or Manifestation of the Abyss of
the still Eternity, and is the willings * Mouth or understanding; and is justly
called another Person, then the Father: for it is the Fathers revelation or
Manifestation, his Ground and Substance.

23. For a Will is no substance, but the willings Imagination makes Substance.

24. Thus, the second Person is the substance of the Deity; understand; the
substance of the Holy Trinity; the Mouth of the Manifestation or Revelation of
the substance of all Substances, and the power of the Life of all and every
Life.

25. The Third Person, is the Spirit, which with the apprehension of the
Willing through the Imagination, out of the power of, the speaking, goes forth
out of the Mouth of the Father, into the Eye, AVge, viz: into the Looking Glass
of wisdom, that is clearly free from the willing and also from the Word.

26. And although, indeed the will out of the Word gives it, yet it is free as
the Air is free from the Fire: as Men see, that the Air is the Fires spirit
and Life, and yet is another thing then the Fire, and yet is given forth also
from the Fire.

27. And as Men see, that the Air gives forth a living and moving Heaven,
which is lustrous and moveable: so also is the Holy Spirit, the Spirit and Life
of the Deity; and another Person, then the Father and Son.

28. It bears also another Office; it opens the wisdom of God, so that the
Wonders Appear: as the Air opens all the Life of this World, that all Live
and Grow.

29. Thus, this is a short explanation of the Deity in the Abyss; how God
dwells in himself, and is himself the Center of the Genetrix.

30. But now the humane Mind rests not satisfied with this; it asks or
inquireth after Nature, after that out of which this world is become born or
Generated, and All Created: Therefore now the Text concerning the Principle
follows further; to which we have invited Reason for a Guest.

The Third Chapter. How God, without the Principle of Fire, would not be
manifested or revealed: also Concerning the Eternal Substance: and Concerning
the Abyssal Will.
1. We have by this description, showed you: what the Deity without or beyond
Nature, is: wherein it is to be understood, that the Deity; as concerning the
Three Persons, together with the Eternal Wisdom, that they are free from
Nature* and that the Deity has yet a deeper Ground, then the Principle in the
Fire.

2. But now, the Deity without the Principle were not or would not be Manifest.

3. And understand, the Deity without or beyond the Principle to be a Glimps of
the Great Wonder, which none knows or can know, what is is, wherein all
Colors power and virtue appear in a very terrible substance, which yet seems
like no substance; but a terrible Wonder-AVge, or Eye of Wonder^; so that
neither Fire, Light, no^ Darkness, may be discerned, but a Glimps of such a
Spirit, in a high deep blew green and mixed Color, wherein all Colors lie,
and yet none may be known from the other, but resembles a Flash which is
terrible, whose Glimps disturbeth and Consumes all.

4. Thus we are to know, concerning the Eternal substance, viz: the Eternal
Spirit; without the Fire and Light; for it is a desirous will, which thus
makes it self a Spirit.

5. This Spirit is the Eternal Potentiality of the Abyss, wherein the Abyss
brings it self into a Ground, whence all substance arises.

6. For every Form in the Spirit, is an Imagination, a desirous will, and
desires to manifest or Reveal it self.

7. Every Form impregnateth its Imagination, and Every form also desires to
manifest it self: and therefore is the Looking-Glass of the Glimps, a Wonder of
the substance of all Substances, and of the wonder there is neither Number
ground nor End.

8. It is a mere Wonder, whose comprehension can not be written; for only the
soulish Spirit, which arises out of this Wonder, that alone understands it.

9. And then we understand, how this Abyssal will, is from Eternity in
Eterni^y, perpetually desirous, viz: to Manifest it self, and to search or
fathom it self, what it is; to bring the Wonder into a Substance, and to
Manifest it self in the Wonders.

10. The desiring, is an Imagination, wherein the willing draws into it self,
and impregnateth it self, and The first ground of the dark world.
overshadoweth it self with the Imagination, that so out of the free willing a
Contrary or opposite will existeth, to be free from the Overshadowing, viz:
from the Darkness.

11. For, that which is drawn in, is the Darkness of the free willing, whereas
otherwise without the Imagination, it would be free: ^et also, in it self
without the Imagination, it would be a Nothing.

12. Thus there arises together, in the first willing in the Desiring, a
Contrary or opposite willing: for, the desiring is drawing in, and the first
will is quiet or still, and in it self, without substance.

13. But it Impregnateth it self, with the desiring, so that it is full of
Substance, viz: of the Wonder and power which overshadow it, and make a
Darkness of it or out of it.

14. Whereas then in the indrawn powers an other will apprehends it self, to
go out from the dark power into the liberty.

15. That other or second will, is the Hearts or words Will; for it is a cause
of the Principle, that the anxious wheel kindles the Fire.

16. So then it goes through the Anguish, viz: through the fire, forth, with
the shining or Luster of the Light, viz: the Majesty, wherein then the
Substance of the Holy Trinity becomes Manifest; and conceives or assumeth
here the dear and precious Name God. GOLL.

17. Understand this further thus. The first will, viz: God the Father, that is
and remains Eternally free from the Anxious source or quality; as to what the
willing in it self, is; but its desiring becomes impregnated, and in the
desiring, arises Nature, with the Forms, and Nature dwells in the Will, viz:
in God, and the will in Nature.

19. And yet there is no Mingling; for the will is so very thin as it were
Nothing, and therefore it is not apprehensible, it is not comprehended by
Nature; else if it might be Comprehended there would in the Deity, be BUT, ONE
Person.

20. It is indeed the cause of Nature, but yet it is, and remains in
Eternity, another World; and Nature, remains also another world in it self;
for it stands in the power of the Essence, out of which the Principle arises.

21. For, the Clear bright Deity in the Majesty, stands not in the Essence or
in the Principle, but in the Liberty without or beyond Nature.

22. But the shining Light without or beyond the Principle makes, the
Incomprehensible or Abyssal Deity manifest; it gives the shining or Luster of
the Majesty; and yet has it not in it self, but it comprehends or
conceives it out of the Looking-Glass of the virgin-like wisdom, out of the
Liberty of God.

23. For, if the Looking-Glass of Wisdom, were not, then could no Fire or
Light be generated; it all takes its Original, from the Looking-Glass of the
Deity: that is now to be understood, in this manner following.

24. God, is in himself, the Abyss, viz: the first World, of which no Creature
knows any thing at all; Viz: the Creature.
for it stands solely and alone, with Spirit and Body in the Byss or Ground.

25. Thus also God himself in the Abyss, would not be manifest to ^imselfe;
but his wisdom is from Eternity become his Ground or Byss.

26. After which therefore the Eternal willing of the Abyss of the Deity has
pleased to Long, from whence the divine Imagination has existed, so that the
Abyssal will of the Deity, has thus from Eternity, in the Imagination, with
the power of the Avision or Aspect, or form of the Looking-Glass of Wonders,
impregnated it self.

27. Now, in this Impregnation of the Eternal Original, are two Principles to
be understood, viz: First, the Eternal Darkness, out of which the Eternal world
Originateth it self, and the Substantiality of the fierce wrath in the
Darkness, wherein we understand Gods anger and the Abyss of Nature: and thus we
know and acknowledge the fiery world to be the Great Life.

28. And then also Secondly we understand, First, how out of the Fire, the
Light becomes generated. And Secondly; how, between the fiery and light World
Death is.

29. Thirdly, How the Light shines out of Death: and Fourthly: How the
Light-flaming World, is another principle source or quality in it self, then
the fire-world: and yet neither is separated from the other, neither can the
one comprehend the other.

30. Fi^thly, we understand; How the Light-world fills the Eternal Liberty.
viz: the first willing, which is called Father.

31. Sixthly; Thus we understand also, herein Earnestly and fundamentally: how,
that Natural life, which will dwell in the Light flaming world, must go through
death, and must become generated or born forth out of Death.

32. Seventhly, Yet we understand or mean; that Life which originally arises
out of the Darkness, viz: out of the Essence of the dark substantiality; as
viz: the soul of Man; which had out of the fire-world turned it self into the
Dark substantiality in Adam: Eighthly; Therefore then we fundamentally and
Exactly understand; wherefore God, viz: the Heart of God, is become Man.

33. And Ninthly; wherefore he must of necessity dye, and enter into Death, and
break his Life in Death, and afterward bring it through the fiery world into
the Light-flaming World: And Tenthly, wherefore we must thus follow him.

34. And Eleventhly; we understand further, wherefore many souls remain and
Continue in the fire-world, and cannot go through Death into the light-world.
Twelfthly, what Death is. Thirteenthly also, what the Soul is. This is now as
follows.

35. When we consider what the life is; we find that it specially consists in
Three parts, viz: first, in the Desiring; Secondly in the Mind; Thirdly in the
senses or thoughts.

36. Now if we search further, what that is which gives or affords that;
then we find; the Center, viz: the Essential Wheel, which has the Or Vulcanus.
Fire-Smith in it self.

37. And then if we consider further, whence that Essential Fire existeth; we
find, that it takes its original in the Desiring of the Eternal abyssal
willing, which, with the desiring makes to it self a Ground.

38. For, every desiring is attractive, or harsh and astringent, of that which
the will desires; Or before it.
and yet there is nothing for it, that it may desire, but only it self; that
is the Great Wonder-Eye, Wunder-AVge, without limit and ground; wherein all
lies.

39. And yet also is a Nothing, unless it become in the desiring will, made a
somewhat, which is done by Imagination; wherein it becomes a substance,
whereas yet it is a Nothing, for it is only an overshadowing of the
Free-willing.

40. Which Substance, over-shadoweth the Liberty, viz: the Thin unsearchable
willing, so that two worlds come to be: first: One which in it self is
incomprehensible and unconceivable, an abyss and Eternal Liberty; and Secondly,
one which comprehends, and makes it self a Darkness.

41. And yet neither is sundred from the other, only this is the difference or
distinction, that Joh. 1. 5.
the Darkness cannot comprehend the Liberty; for The Liberty.
it is too Thin, and dwells also in it self, as also the Darkness dwells
in it self.

The very Earnest Gate.
42. Here now we understand. First, how the Fathers Second Will, which, in the
Looking-Glass of wisdom he sharpeneth to his hearts Center, becomes
impregnated with the substantiality in the Father Imagination.

43. And Secondly that, the same impregnation in respect of the liberty of the
first will, which is called Father, is a Darkness: and Thirdly, How in the
Darkness or substantiality, all powers, Colors and Virtues lie in the
Imagination; moreover all Wonders.

44. And Fourthly, we understand; How the powers, wonders and virtues, must be
manifested through the Fire, viz: in the Principle wherein all passes into its
Essence: for in the principle the Essence originally arises.

45. And fifthly; we understand very Earnestly and exactly; that, in the
Principle, ere, the fire arises, there is a dying, viz: the great anguish life.

46. Which yet is no dying, but a harsh astringent, stern dying source or
quality, out of which the great and strong Life arises, viz: the fire-life;
And sixthly, then out of the deadned, the sight-Life, with the power of the
Love.

47. Which Light-life with the Love dwells in the Eternal Liberty, viz: in
the first willing, which is called Father; for, that, the Father in his own
willing, which is himself, desires; and nothing more.

48. That now understand thus: ye see and know that there is no Light without
Fire; and there is no Fire, without the Earnest source or quality, which source
or quality is like a Dying; and the Sabstantiality out of which the Fire
burns must thus also dye and be consumed.

49. Out of the Consuming consists two Principles, of two great Lives; One in
the source or quality which is called Fire, and one out of the vanquishedness,
viz: out of the Death, which is called Light, which is Immaterial and without
source or Quality, and yet has all sources or qualities in it, but not the
source of the fierce wrath.

50. For, the fierce wrath is remained in Death, and the Light-life grows out
of the Dying, as a fair blossom out of the Earth, and is no more, apprehended
by the Dying.

51. As then ye see, how the Light dwells in the Fire, and the fire cannot
move it, and besides that there is also nothing that can move the Light; for it
is like the Eternal Liberty, and dwells in the Liberty.

52. Here ye understand, how the Son is another Person then the Father; for
he is the Light-world; and yet dwells in the Father; and the Father
generateth him in his willing; and he is rightly the Fathers Love, also Isai.
9. 6.
wonder Council and Power.

53. For, the Father generateth him in his Imagination in himself* and
brings him through his own fire, viz: through the Principle, forth through
Death, so that the Son makes and is another World, viz: another Principle in
the Father: then the fire-world in the darkness, is.

54. Thus you understand also, How the Fathers Eternal Spirit, divided it self
into Three Worlds. The First is the Exit out of the Imagination of the first
willing of the Abyss, Which is called Father; in which, with the outgoing it
opens the wisdom: and dwells in the wisdom, and wears it upon it self,
as its Garment of the Great wonders.

55. Secondly: it is the Cause to the indrawing to the Substantiality of the
darknese, viz: to the other world, and is the Cause, and the Spirit to the
Original of the Essential Fire: it is it self the source or quality, in the
Anguish of the Principle, and also of the fiery world, viz: of the Great Life.

56. And then Thirdly, It is it self also, that which the power in the dying
of the principle, brings forth out of the Fire, wherein the power, out of the
anguish, out of the dying, severeth it self from the Dying, goes into the
Liberty, dwells in the Liberty, and makes the Light-world, and so it is the
flame of the Love in the Lightworld.

57. Here in this place arises the dear Mat. 28. 19.
Name of God, of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.

58. For, in the Fire-world, Viz: the Eternal Spirit of the Father.
it is not called the Holy Spirit or God, but Gods Anger, Gods fierce wrath;
wherein as to this, God calls himself a Consuming fire.

59. But in the Light-world, viz: in the Son of God, it is the Flame of Love,
and the power of the Holy divine Life; wherein it is called God the Holy Spirit.

60. And the Light-world, is called the Wonder, Council, and Power, of the
Deity, which the Holy Spirit opens, for it is the Life therein.

61. And is all, together, as far as our Heart and Mind or Thought can reach:
Nothing, but only these Three worlds; it ALL stands therein.

62. Viz: First, there is the Eternal Liberty, and therein the light, with the
power in the Looking-Glass of wisdom, which is called God the Father Son and
Holy Spirit.

63. Secondly, there is the dark substantiality, in the Imagination, in the
harsh astringent desirous willing; the Impregnation of the desiring, wherein
all stands in the Darkness, viz: in the anxious death.

64. Thirdly: There is the fiery world, viz: the first Principle, which
stands in the Anguish, viz* the Great strong Omnipotent Life, wherein the
Light-world dwells; but runapprehended by the Fire.

The Fourth Chapter. Of the Principle, and of the Original of the Fire-World;
and of the Center of Nature; also how the Light severeth it self from the
Fire: so that, from Eternity in Eternity, two Worlds are one in another.
1. We will not write mutely or not to be understood, but demonstratively with
good Evidence: We perceive and know, that every Life does originate it self
out of the Anguish, as in a venom or poison, which is a dying, and yet is also
the life it self; As it is plainly to be perceived in Men and all Creatures.

2. For, without the Anguish or poison, there is no Life, as is very well to be
seen in all Creatures, Especially in Man, which existeth in Three Principles.

3 As First. One in the Fire, wherein the Great Life stands, to which a dying
Poison viz: the Gall, belongs, which Poison makes the Anguish-Chamber,
wherein the Fire-life originally arises.

4 And Secondly: out of the fire-life, the second Principle, viz: the
Light-life, out of which the Noble Mind with the Senses or thoughts Existeth,
wherein we bear and understand our Noble Image: for, the fire-life in the
Heart, originally arises from the Death of the The Gall is the Dying, source
or quality.
Gall.

5. Thirdly: We understand the Third Principle in the other Anguish-Chamber,
viz: in the Maw or Stomach or Entrails; whereinto we stuff the four Elements
with the constellation or Astrum, where then the other Anguish-Chamber, viz:
the third Center, is; viz: the Kingdom of this World; a stinck and Evil source
or qualities, house; wherein the third Life, viz: the starry and Elementary
life becomes generated; and through the outward Body, governs, with the
Reason of the third Principle.

6. Now, we understand very well; that, in the Heart, viz: in the Center, there
stands another world hidden, which is incomprehensible, to the starry and
Elementary source or qualities house; for the Heart sigheth or pants after
that World.

7. And the Spirit which becomes generated out of the Death of the Hearts
Poison, possesses that other world; for, it is free from the Poison, which
kindles the Fire, and yet dwells in the Fire of the Heart.

8. But Note.
with its Imagination, it conceives or comprehends the other world of the
Libertty, in the Imagination; and dwells in the Liberty, without of beyond
the fire-source or quality, but that only so far as it brings or bears a
longing pleasure, to or into God.

9. Now then seeing there is such a Threefold dominion in Man, sure it is much
more so without or beyond Man, for if that were not it could not possibly have
come into Man; for where there is nothing, there also Nothing comes to be: but
if somewhat comes to be, it comes out of that which is there; Every
Imagination modelleth only its like in it self, and manifests it self in
the Similitude.

10. Seeing then that the Note. Note.
Substance of all Substances, is an Eternal Wonder, in Three Principles;
therefore it brings also forth only Wonders, Every Principle according to
its Property, and Every property again out of its Imagination; whereby we know
that the Eternal is a mere wonder.

11. Therefore now we are to think upon these wonders; and to consider, the
kind and property of the Eternal Genetrix; for there can be no property unless
it have a mother that gives or affords it.

12. Therefore we understand now, first, in this Great wonder of all wonders,
which is God and the Eternity, together with Nature: Especially seven Mothers,
out of which the substance of all Substances, originally arises; and yet they
are all seven but one only substance, none of them is the first or the Last,
they are all seven alike Eternal without beginning; their beginning is the
Opening of the Wonders of the ONE only Eternal willing, which is called God
the Father.

13. And then Secondly, the Seven Wonders could not be manifested or revealed,
if the ONE only Eternal will, which is called Father, were not desirous.

14. But if it be desirous, then it is an Imagining in it self, and is a
longing pleasure to find it self.

15. And it finds it self also in the Imagination, it finds Especially
Seven.
Three forms in it self. whereof None is the other, and also none is without
the other, but every one generateth the other: and if the one were not, the
other would not be; but the will remains an Eternal Nothing without
substance, also without shining or Luster.

16. So now if the will be desirous, therefore it is in-drawing, of that which
is in the Imagination; wherein yet there is nothing; and so it draws it
self, and impregnateth it self in the Imagination, and not in the willing,
for the will is as Thin as Nothing.

17. But now, every desiring, is harsh or astringent; for it is its property:
and that is the first Mother.

18. And the willings indrawing in the desiring, is the other or Second Mother;
for these are two forms which are contrary or opposite one to the other; for,
the will is quiet or Still as a Nothing: and it is harsh or astringent, like a
still death; and the Indrawing is its stirring or rousing.

19. And, that, the still will in the harsh astringency cannot endure, and
thereupon draws much more vehemently in it self, and yet does but only
sharpen its own willing, in the drawing, and, will with its stern indrawing,
shut in and retain, the Indrawing; and in such a manner does but only awaken
or raise it up.

20. The harder the harsh astringency gripeth together to hold the sting, the
greater only is the sting, the raging and the breaking: for the sting will not
suffer it self to be tamed, and yet is so strongly held by its Mother that it
cannot get away.

21. It will be above, and the Mother beneath; for the harsh astringency
draws into it self, and makes it self Hard; and she is a sincking
down-wards, and makes in the Sulphur the Phur, and in the Mercurius the Sul.

22. And the sting, makes, in the Sal, Phur, or makes to it self further,
the bitter form, viz: the woe, an Enmity in the Astringent Harshnese, and
wills continually to rend forth out of the Astringency, but yet cannot.

23. Thus one climeth upwards, and the other tends downwards, and so if it
cannot, it becomes winding as a Rota. Centrum Eterna Natura, and revum Omnium.
wheel, and wheeleth it self continually inwards into it self; and this now,
is the Third Form, from whence the Essence Originally arises, and the Wonder
of Multiplicity without Number and Ground.

24. In this wheel, understand, the Wonder or power, which the Will,
understand, the first abyssal will out of the Looking-Glass of the Abyss
draws into it self to its Center or Heart; that, is here the will of the
power and Wonder.

25. In this wheel of the great Anguish: originally arises the other or second
will, viz; the Sons will, to go forth out of the anguish into the still
Liberty of the first Abyssal willing.

26. For the wheel makes Nature; for so Nature originally arises; it is the
Center and the breaking of the still Eternity, that kills the Nothing, but it
makes the great Life.

27. But that we speak of killing, it is to be understood in this manner: it is
no killing, but it is the pe^ceptibility.

28. For the Life, before the fire, is Mute or silent or inanimate, and without
feeling: it is only a hunger after the Life; as the Material world is only a
hunger after the Life; and in its hunger so very eagerly or strongly labors,
toward the Principle; that it may reach the fire: wherein then the Life of
this World, originally arises.

29. And it cannot be otherwise; unless it break the first Matrix, viz: the
harsh astringent desiring; this is the wheel of the first Three Forms, viz:
harsh astringency; and the drawing of the harsh astringency makes the Anguish,
and source-substance or quality-substance.

30. For, it is a terrifying in it self, in that it should be so, that the
Nothing should come into perceptibility; for, that is the Poyson-source or
quality; whence the fierce wrath and all Evil* malignity or Malice, originally
arises, and yet is the right original of the perceptible life.

31. The Life finds it self thus, viz: in the Anguish source or quality; as
we see it in all Creatures, that the Life takes its original in the stifled
blood, in the Anguish; both the Creaturely Life, and also the Essential Life;
as in stinking Dung in the rottenness; where, in the 1 Cor. 15. 36.
dying of the Corn or Grain the Great Life Springs up.

32. Whereas yet in the Essence, no dying is understood: but an anguishing
source or quality, wherein the Mother must spring forth: which is a Mute or
silent or inanimate substantiality: as is to be perceived in Corn, where the
Essential Life grows out of the Corruption.

33. In like manner, it is held with the Center of Nature; the Anguish-source
or quality is the right Center, and makes the fire
Triangle in Nature.

34. And the fire-flash, viz: the fourth form of Nature, makes, of the
Triangle, a cross
Cross; for there is the Principle and becomes sevevered into two worlds, of
two Principles, viz: into a two fold source or quality and Life: One source
abides or remains, and is the fire or anguish-life; the other or second
source existeth in the breaking or Corrupting of the Anguish: which understand
as follows.

35. The first form of the Substantiality, viz: the harsh astringency in the
desirous unconceivable or unpalpable willing, must give it self wholly up to
the anguish source or quality in the wheel of Nature, for the sting is two
strong; thus the harsh astringency sincketh down as a Death, and yet is no
death, but a dying source or quality.

36. For the sting becomes Lord, and changes the harsh astringency into its
property, viz: into a raging flash, into an anguish source or quality, which
from the sting and the harsh astringency, is bitter; as is the kind and Manner
of Poison.

37. For, the Poison or the dying, has especially Three forms, viz: harsh
astringency, bitterness, and Anguish: it makes it self thus in it self; and
has no Maker, but only the strong will in the Great life in the fire.

38. Understand us aright thus: The Abyss has no Life; but in such a property
the Great Eternal Life becomes generated, the Abyss has no mobility or
feeling.

39. Thus the Mobility or feeling generateth it self; and thus the Nothing
finds it self in the Eternal willing; whose Note.
ground we know not, also should not search, for it troubles or disturbeth us.

40. And yet this is only an Essential Life without understanding, like the
Earth; and the Death or dying, wherein really there is a source or quality in
it self, but in the darkness without understanding; for the harsh astringent
anguish draws into it self, and that which is indrawn makes darkness, so
that the Anguish Life stands in the Darkness.

41. For every substance is, in it self, dark, unless it have the Lights
Tincture in it self.

42. For, thus the Tincture is a Liberty or freedom, from the darkness, and is
not comprehended by the anguish source or quality: for it is in the
Light-world; and though indeed it sticks in the substantiality, viz: in a
dark Body; yet is out of the substance of the Lightworld; where no Begriffe.
Comprehension is.

43. We have mentioned above, First, concerning the Looking-Glass of the
wisdom, of the wonder of All substances: and Secondly, Concerning the Ternary
or Number Three of the Substance of All Substances; how they Originally arise
out of one only willing, which is called the Father of all Substances.

44. And Thirdly, how it creates another will in it self; to manifest or find
it self in it self; or as a Man may say, to find what and how is is.

45. And then Fourthly; How that Second re-Created Magickwill to find it self,
is its heart and own seat of possession.

46. And Fifthly: How the first abystal will, impregnateth, it self with the
Imagination it self, out of the Looking-Glass of the Wonder, which in the Light
world is called the Wisdom.

47. And then Sixthly: as we have mentioned; How that first ayssal will,
together with the Impregnation; and also the Looking-Glass of the wonder or
wisdom, in such a property, before the Principle of Fire; is no divine
substance, rightly called: but much rather a Mystery of the wonder of all
substances.

48. Which Mystery, takes its partition, in the Fire, into infinite Endless
Parts or substances, and yet remains also but ONE substance.

49. Thus we give you now further to understand concerning the other or second
will; which, the first will in its Imagination or impregnation, Creates; which
is the Great Mystery, Mysterium Magnum, wherein the first will which is called
Father, seeks, finds and feels it self, as a light in the Heart: How that
very other or second will, is the Note. Note.
Mother of the Genetrix, in the indrawn or in the Imagination impressed or
conceived impregnation.

50. It is that which causes originally the Seven forms of Nature; and it is
also that which causes the Anguish wheel, viz: the harsh astringency: it is
also that which in the Anguish goes forth through Death into the Liberty,
which breaks or Heb. 2. 14.
destroys death, and gives or affords the Life, which kindles the Fire,
and in fire, takes the Glance of the Majesty into it self, and in the Light
of the Majesty dwells in the fire, unapprehended by the Fire, as one that
feels nothing, which is dyed away from the source or quality, and brings
another sovrce or quality into it self, which feel^th not nor finds the
first from which it has dyed away.

51. And that we may briefly and yet fundamentally and properly or Exactly,
distinguish the fires Original; know, that we perceive, in the Deep opened to
us out of Gods Grace; that the fire in its Original, stands in two Causes.

52. The first cause is the willing-spirit of the Heart, understand, the
Fathers Second will, viz: the Sons property.

53. And, the Second Cause, is the Willings Materia.
Matter, viz: of the wonders of the Wheel, of the Essential Life, viz: the
Anguish Chamber.

54. The anguish sigheth or Romans 8. 22.
groaneth after the willing of the Liberty, and the will longs or groaneth
after the Manifestation or Revelation; for, the willing cannot in the still
liberty in it self, manifest or reveal it self, without the Essential fire,
which in the anguish, viz: in the dying comes to the Manifestation or
Revelation, and to the Great Life.

55. Thus, the will is in the dark anguish* and the Anguish is* the darkness it
self.

56. Now then, being the anguish thus vehemently Note.
groaneth or pants after the willing of the Liberty: so it conceives or
receives the willing of the Liberty as a flash, as a great Crack as when a Man
powers water into the Fire

57. And here the right dying is Effected: for the very fierce wrathful dark
anguish, screecketh or trembles before the flash, viz: the darkness before the
Light; for the darkness is Killed and vanquished, and the terror or Crack is a
Crack of great Joy.

58. There the harsh astringent fierce wrathful Poison sincketh down into
Death, and becomes impotent or weak, for it loses the sting, and yet is no
Death, but thus the right life of the feeling and panting, becomes kindled.

59. For this is, just as if a Man did strike Note.
Steel and a Stone together; for they are two Great hungers, of the willing
after the substantiality, and of the substantiality after the Life.

60. The will gives or or affords Life; and the substantiality gives or
affords the Manifestation or Revelation of the Life: as fire burns out of a
Candle, so burns the will not of the Essential substantiality.

61. Note. Fire is the Principle. The white fire, is the divine Love fire.
The will is not the Light it self, but the Spirit of the Light or of the Fire:
the Light arises out of the Essence, and the Essence again out of the willing.

62. The anxious Essential Fire, is the Matter to the shining Fire: and the
will Kindles it self in the Essential Fire, and gives or affords the white
amiable fire, that dwells in the hot fire without feeling.

63. The will takes its feeling, from the fierce wrath of the Essential fire,
(in the fourth form) that it is manifest in it self, and yet remains free
from the fierce wrath; for the source or quality becomes in the kindling,
changed into a meek Love-source or quality.

64. And here the other or second will receives its Name Spirit; for out of
the Essential fire, it attaineth the property of all wonders, also the right
life of the power and might over the Essential fire-life; for from Nature it
takes the power into it self; and brings also the Liberty into it self.

65. Thus the Liberty is a stilness without substance, and so the still liberty
gives it self, into the substance of the Anguish: and the anguish receives
that same liberty without source or quality, whence It becomes so richly full
of joy, that out of the Anguish love comes to be.

66. For, the will which had given it self into the Anguish; becomes thus
delivered from the death of the Anguish, and therefore it finds it self in
the Liberty, and goes forth from the fierce wrath of the Anguish.

67. For here death is broken or destroyed, and yet remains a Death in it
self; but the willing-Spirit, viz: the right holy Life, goes with the breaking
open forth out of the anguish.

68. And is now also a fire; but a fire in the Liberty: and burns in the
Love-source or quality; as a Man may see this in Fire and Light, how the
Essential fire is a burning woe or pain, and the Light an amiable richly Joyful
delight and habitation, without sensible pain, source, or quality.

69. And yet has all sources or qualities and properties of fire in it; yet in
another Essence, viz: a friendly munificent well-doing Essence; a right Glimps
of the rich Kingdom of Joy: and the fire a Glimps of terror, and of Anguish;
and yet one dwells in the other, and yet also the one finds not the other
in the Essence.

70. Thus there are two Worlds one in another, whereof none comprendeth or
apprehends the other; and nothing can go into the Light-world, but only
through Dying, and for or at the Dying must the Note.
Imagination first lead the way.

71. The anxious Will must Romans 8. 22.
groan or pant after the Liberty of the power of the Light, and totally give it
self thereinto, and with the desirous Imagination conceive or comprehend the
power of the Liberty; and thus the strong will goes through the death of the
darkness, quite through the Essential fire, and falls into the Light-world,
and dwells in the fire, without source pain or quality in the Kingdom of Joy:
This is the Gate in Ternarium. Sanctum, into the Holy Ternary: and, Glauben,
Faith or Believing in the Holy Ghost.

72. Dear Children of Man: here understand, the Fall of the Devil, who turned
his willing-spirit only into the Essential Fire, and thereby would needs
dominecre over the Light.

73. Understand here also, the Fall of Man, who turned his Imagination into the
Material Essential substantiality, and is gone forth out of the Light.

74. For which cause, the will of the Love out of the light world, is again
entered into the Material Substantiality in the humanity, and has again
espoused or united it self to the Essential fire-spirit in Man, viz: of the
soul, and given it self thereinto: and has introduced the same quite through
death and the Fire, into the light-world in Ternarium Sanctum, into the Holy
Ternary, viz: in the willing of the Holy Trinity.

75. Let this be a finding and knowing to you, and despise it not for the Great
depth sake, which will not be every Man's comprehension, the Cause is, the
darkness wherein Man plungeth himself.

76. Else every one might very well find it, if the Earthly way were once
broken through, and that the Adamical evil malignant or Malicious flesh, were
Note.
not so dearly loved, which is the hinderance.

The Fifth Chapter. Of the Principle, in it self; what it is.
1. WE ought further to consider the first four Forms of Nature; and so we
shall find, what a Principle is.

2. For that is properly a Principle, when a thing becomes, what it never was
before; where out of Nothing a source or quality comes to be; and out of the
source or quality, a right life with understanding and senses or thoughts.

3. And yet we know the right Principle to be in the fires Original, in the
fire-source or quality, which breaks the substantiality and also the darkness.

4. Thus we acknowledge and understand, First, the Essence and property of the
Fire for a Principle; for it makes and gives the Original, of Life; and of
all mobility, also the strong might of the fierce wrath.

5. Secondly: We understand and acknowledge that also for a Principle. First,
which can dwell in the fire, unapprehended by the fire: Secondly, which can
take away the might of the fire: And thirdly, can change the fires quality or
source into a Meek love. Fourthly, which is omnipotent over all. Fifthly, which
has the understanding, to break the Root of the fire; And out of the fire to
make darkness, and a dry hunger and thirst, without finding any case or
refreshment as the Hellish quality or source is.

6. This is the Abyss wherein the substance is Choked or made faint with
thirst and hunger.
spoiled; where death domineereth with its sting, as a spoiled or faintened
Poison.

7. Wherein really there is an Essential Life, but it hates and is at enmity
with it self, where the right fires kindling is not attained; but only appears
as a flash without blazing.

8. And thus we give you to understand, that in the Eternal there are no more
but two Principles, viz: one is the burning or blazing fire, which becomes
filled with the Light; the Light gives it its property; so that out of the
burning source or quality, an high Kingdom of Joy comes to be.

9. For the Anguish attaineth the Liberty, and so the burning fire continues
only to be a cause of finding the Life and the Light of the Majesty.

10. The fire, takes into it self, the Lights property, viz: the meekness, and
the light takes into it self the fires property: viz: the Life, and to find
it self; and the second Principle is understood in the Light, or to be the
Light.

11. But the Essential substantiality, out of which the Fire burns,
continues Eternally a Darkness, and a source or quality of fierce wrath;
wherein the Devil dwells.

12. As ye see plainly, that the fire is another thing then that out of which
the fire burns.

13. Thus the Principle consists in Fire, and not in the Essential source or
quality of the Substantiality.

14, The Essential source or quality, is the Center of Nature, the cause of the
Principle; but it is dark, and the fire shining.

15. And here is rightly shown you: how, the breaking of the fierce wrath, viz:
of the Death: and the Eternal Liberty out of Nature, both together; are the
Cause of the shining.

16. For, Therefore is the Wonder-spirit of the Abyss, desirous, viz: that it
might become shining; and therefore it brings it self into source or quality,
that it may perceive and find it self, and that it might manifest or reveal its
wonder in the source or quality, for without source or quality there can be no
Manifestation or revelation.

17. Now understand us further, thus: The source or quality, viz: the fierce
wrath has no right substantiality, but the harsh fierce wrath is the
substantiality of the sting, wherein it sticks or stingeth.

11. And the Anguish, together also with the fire, are or make also no right
substantiality, but it is only such a Spirit; yet the one must be thicker then
the other, else there would be no finding.

19. As, viz: the harsh astringency makes thick and dark, and so the bitter
sting finds the Anguish, in the harsh dark property; as in In einer M^^teria.
Matter; for if there were no Matter, there would be no spirit or finding.

20. The Abyss finds it self in the harsh astringent darkness, but it
breaks open the darkness, and goes forth out of the harsh darkness, as a
spirit, which has found it self in the anguish-source or quality.

21. But it leaves that hard Matter of the darkness, wherein it found it
self; and goes in into it self, again into the Liberty, viz, into the Abyss,
and dwells in it self; thus must the source or quality, be its sharpness and
finding; and is to it also a kindling of its Liberty. viz: of the Light;
wherein it sees it self what it is.

22. And thus now it desires no more for it self, but the source or quality,
but modelleth it self, and seeks or sees it self according to all Forms.

23. And every form is desirous to find and to manifest or reveal it self; and
thus also every form finds it self in it self, but yet goes with the
desiring out of it self, and sets it self there represented as a figure or
Spirit; and that is the Eternal wisdom, in the Colors wonders and virtues,
and yet is not particular but all totally universally* yet in infinite forms.

24. These forms, have with the moving of the first willing, which is called
Father, incorporated or corporised themselves into Spirits, viz: into Angels,
that so the hidden substance might perceive, and find and see it self in
Creatures, and that there might be an Eternal sport or Scene in the wonders of
Gods wisdom.

25. And thus we understand further, the substantiality of the Light-world,
which really is a right substantiality; for no right substance can consist in
fire, but the Spirit only of the Substance.

26. But the fire causes the substance; for it is a hunger, an Earnest
desiring, it must have substance or it extinguisheth.

27. Understand this as follows. The meeknese gives, and the fire takes:
the Meekness is a going forth out of it self, and gives a substance, of its
likeness, every form out of it self.

28. And the fire devoureth that, yet it gives the Light out of it: it gives
that which is more Noble then what it had devoured, it gives Spirit for
substance.

29. For it devoureth the Meek munificence or well doing, that is, Rev. 21. 6.
and 22. 1. 17.
the water of Eternal Life: but it gives the spirit of Eternal Life; As ye
see, that the Wind goes out of the fire, as also the Air, viz: the right
spirit out of the fire-life.

30. Thus understand our Mind aright: God the Father, is in himself, the
Liberty without or beyond Nature; but makes himself manifest in Nature through
the Fire, the fiery Nature is his property.

31. But he is in himself the Abyss, wherein there is no feeling of any source
quality or pain.

32. But yet brings his desirous willing, into source or quality, and
Creates to himself in the source or quality, an other or second willing to go
out of the source or quality again into the Liberty without or beyond the
source or quality.

33. That same second will is his Son, which he generateth out of his own
Eternal willing from Eternity.

34. Which he brings through the breaking open of the source or quality of
Death, viz: through the Earnest severity of his fierce wrath, forth, Through
the fire.

35. That very second will, viz: the Son, of God the Father; is, that which
breaks or destroys Death, viz: the stern dark source or quality, which
kindles the fire, and goes forth through the Fire as a thining Luster or
Glance of the fire, and fills or satiateth the first willing, which is called
Father.

36. For, the Glance is also as a thin as a Nothing or as the will which is
called Father, and therefore it can dwell in the Liberty, viz: in the Fathers
Willing, and makes the Father, Light, clear, bright, amiable, friendly, for it
is the Fathers Herts oder Barmhertzigkcit. Heart or Mercifulness.

37. It is the Fathers substantiality, it fills or satiateth the Father in
all places, though indeed there is no place in him, no beginning nor End.

38. Understand us further, thus, The Fathers fire, devoureth the Meek
substance, viz: the water-source or quality of Eternal Life into it self, into
the fires own Essence, and meekeneth it self therewith.

39. There must the substantiality in the fire, as it were dye, for the fire
devoureth it into it self, and Consumes it.

40. Note.
And gives forth out of the Consumingness a living richly Joyful spirit; and
that is the Holy Spirit; which thus goes forth from the Father and the Son,
into the Great Wonder of the holy substantiality, and opens the same
perpetually and Eternally.

41. Thus the Deity is an Eternal Band, which cannot cease or pass away; and
thus it generateth it self from Eternity and the first is continually also the
last, and the last again the first.

42. And thus understand the Father to be the fiery world; the Son, the Light
and power-world; and the holy spirit, to be the Life of the Deity, viz: to be
the outgoing driving Power; and yet all is but ONE God.

43. As the Fire and the Light, together with the Air, are but one only
Substance; but yet divides it self into Three parts; and none can subsist
without the other; for, the fire, is not the Light, also not the wind, which
goes forth out of the Fire.

44. Each has its office, and Each has its own Substance in it self; and yet
each is the others life, and a cause of the others life.

45. For the Wo^^^ ^loweth the fire up, else it would be stifled in its fierce
wrath; (...) would fall into the dark death, even as the stifling is the true
(...); wherein the fire of Nature extinguisheth, and no more draw ^^^bstance
into it.

46. Of all thi^^ have a good similitude in the outward World, in all
Creatures; she^ (...) every Life, viz: the Essential Fire-life, draws
substance to (...) that is its food to Ear.

47. And the fire of its life, consumes the substance, and gives forth the
Spirit of the power out of that which is consumed; and that is the life of the
Creature.

48. And you see doubtless very rightly, how the Life arises out of Death: it
becomes no Life, unless it break that Shell.
out of which the Life should go fort^; it must also go into the Anguish
Chamber into the Center and must reach to attain the fire-flash in the Anguish,
else there is no Kindling.

49. Although the Fire be manifold, and so also the Life; yet, out of the
greatest Anguish existeth also the greatest Life, as out of a right Fire.

50. Thus dear children of God in Christ, we give you our knowledge and
Purposed proposal.
intent to ponder of. We mentioned in the beginning, that we would show you
concerning the Death of Christ. First, wherefore Christ must have dyed: and
secondly, wherefore we must dye also: and Thirdly, rise again, in Christ.

51. This you see now in this description very clearly; and understand our
Great Misery, that it has been necessary for us, that the word or Life of the
Holy Light-world is become a Man and has generated us anew in himself:
whosoever understands nothing here, he is not generated or born of God.

52. Do but see into what Lodging Adam has introduced us; He was an extract of
all the Three Principles, a total similitude according to all the Three-worlds,
and had in his Mind and Spirit the Angelical property in him.

53. He was introduced into the holy power and substantiality, viz: into
Paradise, that is, the divine substantiality, he should have eaten of divine
substantiality, and have drunk the water of Eternal Life after an Angelical
Manner; as in the Book of the Threefold Life has been mentioned at large.

54. But he lost the divine substantiality, and the Angelical property, and
Imagined into the out-birth, viz: into the Kingdom of the Earthly source or
quality, which the Devil had kindled in his Fall: He turned his Eyes out from
God into the Earthly Or Ruler.
God, out from the divine Light, into the light of this world.

55. Thus he became captivated, and remained in the Earthly source or quality;
and so he fell into the Earthly Corruptible source or quality, which rules in
him, and fills him; it puts a body on to him, and breaks or destroys
it again: and swalloweth it up into its own Essence, into its Essential Fire.

56. But being the soul was breathed in, out of the Spirit of God, viz: out of
the Eternal, into Man, so that the soul is an Angel, therefore has God assumed
the same to himself again.

57. And the power of the holy Light-world, viz: the Heart of God is entered
into the humane Essence, which lay shut up in death, into the anguish Chamber
of our Misery.

58. He has gotten into himself a soul out of our Essence, he has taken our
Mortal Life into himself, and introduced the soul through death, through the
Earnest severe fire of God the Father, into the Light-world: has broken or
destroyed death which held us captive, and unshut the life.

59. Now it may not nor cannot be otherwise; w^osoever will possess the
Light-world: must enter in through the same path, which he has made, he must
enter into the death of Christ, and so in Christ's Resurrection he enters into
the Light-world.

60. Even as we know, that the Eternal Word of the Father, which is the Fathers
heart; becomes generated from Eternity to Eternity, out of the fierce wrath of
the Death of Darkness, through the Fathers Fire; and is in himself the right
Center of the Holy Trinity, and is out of himself, together with the outgone
Holy Spirit, the Light-flaming Majesty or Light-world.

61. Thus also in like manner and property, must we with our Hearts, Senses or
Thoughts and Minds, go forth out of the harsh astringent stern and Evil or
malignant Earthliness out of our selves, out of the perished or corrupted
Adamical Man, and with our earnest severe willing and doing slay him.

62. We must take upon us the Old Adams Cross, which hangs to us, while we
live; and must upon and in the
Cross, go into the Center of Nature, into the Triangle, and be born anew again
out of the anxious wheel,
if we will be Angels.

63. But seeing we were not able to do this; therefore has Christ given
himself into that ve^ry Center of the fierce wrath, and broken the fierce
wrath, and extinguished it with his Love.

64. For he brought heavenly divine substantiality into that very fierce wrath
into the Center of the Anguish-Chamber, and extinguished the souls
anguish-fire, viz: the fierce wrath of the Father of the fiery world in the
soul: so that thus Now, we fall no more Or into the Bosom of wrath.
home to the fierce wrath.

65. But when we give up our selves into the Death of Christ, and go forth out
of our selves, out of the Evil Earthly Adam; then we fall in Christ's death into
the Path or way, which he has made or prepared for us, we fall into Luke 16.
22. 23.
the Bosom of Abraham; that is into Christ's Arms, who receives us into
himself.

66. For, the Bosom of Abraham, is the Note.
unshut light world in the death of Christ; it is the Paradise; wherein God
Created us.

67. And now the Matter lies in this, Not that we be Lip-Christians or
Mouth-Christians, and pourtray and represent Christ's death before us, and
remain wicked in heart, spirit, and soul, but that we very Earnestly with Mind
and Thoughts, with willing and doing, go forth out of the evil Inclinations or
Injections, and strive and fight against them.

68. And though they evidently cleave and hang to us; yet we must daily and
hourly slay that ev^^ Adam, as to his willing and doing ^ we must do, that
which we would not willingly do.

69. We Mat. 16. 24.
must deny our earthly Evil life it self, and put on Christ's life in us, and
then Mat. 11. 12.
the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violence take it to
themselves, as Christ said.

70. Thus we become impregnated with the Kingdom of Heaven, and enter thus into
Christ's death Even while we are alive in this Body.
with the living Body, and receive the Body of Christ, viz: the divine
substantiality, we carry the Kingdom of Heaven in Us.

71. And thus we are Christ's* Children, Members, and heirs in Gods Kingdom, and
the express reflex Image of the Holy divine World, which is God the Father
Son and Holy Spirit; and the same Holy Trinitys, substantiality.

72. All whatsoever becomes generated and opened out of the wisdom or
substantiality, is our Paradise; and nothing dies to or in us, but only the
dead Adam, the Earthly, Evil one, whose willing we here nevertheless, have
continually broken and destroyed, to whom we are become Enemies.

73. Note what goes from us in our death.
Our Enemy only departs from us, he must go into the fire, understand, into
the Essential fire, viz: into the Four Elements, and into the Mystery, and must
at the End of this Time, be tried through the fire of God; and our Note what
rises again as our Resurrecti^
Wonders and Works must be presented to us there again; whatsoever the Earthly
Mystery has devoured and swallowed up into it self, that it must give up again
into the fire of God.

74. And yet not such an Evil [one, or substance] Or for.
but the fire of God devoureth Note.
the Evil, and gives us such a one for it, as we here in our Anxious seeking,
have sought or desired.

75. For, as the fire deuoureth the substantiality, but gives Spirit for
substance; so shall our Works in the Spirit and Joy out of the fire of God be
presented and set before us as a clear fair Looking-Glass, like the wonders and
wisdom of God.

76. Let this be manifested or revealed to you dear Children, for it is become
highly known; suffer not your selves to be so tickled with Christ's death, and
to pourtray or paint the same before you as a work, done, and that it is enough
for us, when we know and believe that it is done for us.

77. What does it avail me, that I know a Treasure lies hid deepe^ and that I
dig it not out; it avails nothing to Comfort and flater in hypocrisy, and
with the Mouth to give good words and fine babbling; but yet keep Wickedness
in the soul.

78. Christ says, Joh. 3. 3. 5. 7.
Ye must become born anew, or else ye will not see the Kingdom of God: Mat. 8.
3.
we must Convert and become as a Child in the Mothers body or womb, and be
generated or born out of divine substantiality.

79. We must put a New Garment on to our soul; viz: the Mantle of Christ, the
Humanity of Christ: else no flattering Hypocrisy avails.

80. It is all Lying which the Mouth-Cry, says, which pourtrayeth Christ
before our Eyes, as that he has done it for us, and that we should only
comfort our selves with it, and thereupon do walk in the old Adam, in
Covetousness, high-mindedness, and falsehood, in the Lusts of Evil and
Maliciousness; it is the Antichristian deceit of the false Spiritualty or
Clergy; of whom the Revelation warns us.

81. It all avails nothing, that we flatter our selves, and tickle our selves
with Christ's suffering and Death: we must enter into it; and be like or Romans 8.
21.
conformable to his Image, and then is Christ's suffering and death profitable
to us.

82. Mat. 16. 24.
We must take his Cross upon us, and follow him, quench the Evil Lusts and slay
them; and always readily and earnestly will and desire that which is well; and
then we shall plainly see, what Christ's footsteps are.

83. When we shall strive and James 4. 7.
fight against the Devil the Old Adam, and the Evil world, against Earthly
reason which desires only pleasure and voluptuousness, then Christ's Cross
becomes rightly laid upon us; for the Devil is it, the world is it, and our
Evil Adam is it, that we must fight against: all these are our Enemies.

84. And there must the New Man stand as a Champion, and fight in the Footsteps
of Christ.

85. O how innumerable many Enemies will he there awaken and stir up, which
will all fall upon him: and this may indeed be called fighting for the Thorney
victorious Garland or Crown of Christ, as a Conqueror, and yet only be
continually despised, as Acts 22. 22.
one that is not worthy to live upon the Earth. Heb. 11. 36. to the 38.


86. This may indeed be called; standing in the Battle, and Faith or Believing;
where outward reason says clearly No, there it is Good to set Christ's
suffering and Death in the forefront, and to present, and set it before the
Devil the World and Death, together with the Earthly Reason, and not Note.
despair, or give over as a desperate Coward.

87. For, here it is for an Angels Crown, either to be an Angel or a Devil.

88. We must in trouble and affliction become New born, for it costeth much to
wrestle with Gods anger and to vanquish the Devil: if we had not there Christ
by and with us, we should loose the Battle.

89. A small handful of skill and knowledge, will not do it, that we know this,
and tickle our selves with Gods Grace, and make God a Cover for our sins,
that so we may stick and finely Cover the wickedness and Vizard of the Devil
under the sufferings of Christ.

90. O No! The wicked one must be destroyed in Christ's sufferings and Death: he
must not be a wicked one, if he will be a child, be must become an Obedient
Son, he must labor in the sufferings of Christ, and walk in the footsteps of
the Truth righteousness and Love; he must, do, not, know, only.

91. The Devil knows it also well, what does that avail him? The Practice
must follow, else it is but falsehood and deceit.

92. Hypocritical dissembling Reason says, Christ has done it. we cannot do
it. Very right; he has done, that which we could not do: he has broken and
destroyed Death, and brought or restored Life again; what will that avail me,
if I enter not into him.

93. He is in Heaven, and I in this world, I must enter into him in his way and
passage that he has made for us, Else I remain without.

94. For, he says; Mat. 11. 28. 29.
Come to me all that are weary and heavy laden, I will refresh or quicken you;
take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of Heart, and
so you shall find rest to your souls.

95. In his path or Passage we must enter in to him; we must Romans 12. 21.
doc good for Evil, and love one another, Gal. 2. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 6.
as he did us, and gave his Life for us: If we do thus, then we quench Gods
Anger also in our Neighbor.

96. We must give good example; not in crafty subtilty, slights and designs,
but 2 Cor. 1. 12.
in Simplicity, with a good will and Heart.

97. Not as a dissembling hypocritical whore, which says; I am a Virgin, and
dissembles in outward Modesty, but yet is a whore in her heart: all must be in
very Earnest Sincerity.

98. Rather have no Money nor Goods, also loose temporal Honor, reputation and
power, then Gods Kingdom. He that Note.
finds God has found all: He that loses him has lost all: He has lost
himself.

99. O. How very hardly does it come to pass to break the Earthly will; Come
but to this Dancing Ring, thou will afterward no more, need to ask, after the
footsteps of Christ, thou will see them very well.

100. Thou will well feel the Cross of Christ; thou will well feel Gods Anger,
which otherwise finely rests and sleeps in the Old Adam, till thou finely
fattenest him with dignities, and then he gives thee thy Kingdom of Heaven
which thou have here sought after.

The Sixth Chapter. Of our Death. Why we must Dye; Notwithstanding Christ dyed
for us. CITATIO PRIMA, The First Summons warning arrest Constraint* or
Compulsary.
Citation.
1. ODear Flattering Hypocritial Reason, come hither to this Feast. Hither we
have invited you all, both the knowing and the Ignorant; all you that would see
God: it is a hard S^al and a fast Lock, to open, think upon it, it concerns
you all.

Reasons, Objection.
2, Reason says; was not God Omnipotent enough; to forgive Adam his sin; but
that first God must become Man, suffer, and permit himself to be put to Death?
What pleasure has God in Death?

3. Or if he would needs redeem us in such a way; wherefore seeing Christ has
redeemed us, must we, then, also dye?

Answer.
4. Dance here dear Reason; Guess, till thou hittest it: be a Doctor here, and
know nothing, be Learned and also Dumb or Mute. Will thou not, but thou must,
unless thou come to this School, understand, the School of the Holy Spirit.

5. Who is here that can unshut this? Is it not that Rev. 5. 7.
Closed or shut book of him that sits upon the Throne or seat in the
Revelation of Jesus Christ?

6. Then says the Hypocrite, we know it well; therefore say I, I have not
heard it from them, nor read it in their Writings, they have also forbidden me
this seeing; and have shot a Sinne-Bolt upon it, and imputed or accounted it
for sin, to them that seek such things, or desire to know them.

7. Hereby has the fair Woman continued finely Covered: O how has Antichrist
been able to sport and act its Scene under this Covering.

8. But it shall stand open, against the will of the Devil and of Hell, for the
time is born; the Day of the bringing again or Restoration breaks, that it
may be found what Adam lost.

9. The Scripture says; Genesis 3. 19. and 18. 27.
We are Dust and Ashes, that is very right: we are dust and Earth.

10. But now it may be asked. Whether God made man out of Earth? That, Reason
will maintain; and prove it out of Moses, whom yet they understand not; neither
does the proof afford it, but affords much more, that Man is a Limus, that
is, an Extract out of all the Three Principles.

11. If he is to be a similitude of Gods substance, then he must needs be
proceeded out of Gods substance, for that which is not out of the Eternal, that
is not permanent.

12. All that which begins, belongs to that out of which it is gone forth;
so that if it be proceeded forth barely out of the Earth; then we are of the
Earth, what then can blame us that we do so as the Earths property drives and
wills.

13. But if there be Romans 2. 14. and 7. 23.
a Law in us, that blames, checketh or accuses us, that we live Earthly; then
that it self is not Earthly; but it is out of or from that, to which it
directs and draws us: viz: out of the B^ernal, whither it also draws us:
and Romans 2. 15.
our own Consciences blame or accuse us before the Eternal, that we make and do
that which is against the Eternal.

14. But if we give our selves up to that which draws us into the Eternal,
then must the other that draws us into the Earthly break or Corrupt, and
enter into that into which it wills, viz: into the Earth, into which it
draws us, and that willing which we give up into the Eternal, that the
Eternal receives in.

15. Being God has Created man in a substance, to be therein Eternally, viz:
in flesh and Blood: therefore of necessity, to that willing, which gives it
self up into the Eternal, must such flesh and blood be put on; as it was, when
God Created it in Paradise in the Eternal.

16. Whereby then we clearly known, that God has not created us in such flesh
and blood, as we now bear upon us, but in such flesh and blood; as, to the
willing in the New birth, is put on.

17. Else it would instantly before the Fall have been Earthly and Corruptible:
what should my Conscience blame or accuse me for that, wherein God had Created
me? Or what should it desire other then what it was in its own substance?

18. Thus we necessarily find it clear, that there is yet another substance in
our flesh, which groaneth, sigheth and pants after that, which yet now, is
not.

19. Being then that it sigheth and pants after that which ye now is not,
therefore it must needs have been so in the beginning of its being and
substance, else there would be no sighing or longing in it after another thing.

20 For, we know, that Every substance sigheth after that, out of which it had
its first Original; and so our will sigheth after such a flesh as God Created,
which may subsist in God, not after an earthly transitory one, in source and
quality, but after a permanent one without source or quality.

21. Whereby we clearly understand, that we are gone forth out of the Eternal
into the Corruptible, that we have attracted or contracted the Matter to the
The Limus is not of all the Three Principles.
Limus, and are become Earth, where^s yet God had extracted us out thereof as a
Mass, and introduced his Spirit thereinto with the Eternal.

22. For, Adams Imagination, has drawn the Earthly source or quality of the
Stars and Four Elements into the Limus, and the Stars and Elements have drawn
in the longing Malady of the Earth; and thus the heavenly Matter, of the
heavenly Flesh, became Earthly.

23. For, the Spirit of God, which was breathed in from the Word Fiat into the
Limus, out of Gods Heart, which had heavenly substantiality, heavenly flesh and
blood on it, that should rule Adam according to the heavenly divine property.

24. But being the Devil, when he sat in Heaven had infected the Limus, so, now
he did to it also, this wickedness, and infected it with his Imagination, so
that it began to Imagine or long after the perished Malady or seeking of the
Earthly source or Quality, whence he became captivated by the Kingdom of this
perished world, which drew in, into the Limus as a Lord.

25. And Now the Image of God became perished, and fell into the Earthly source
or quality.

26. But being the heavenly Spirit was in the perished Earthly The Sulphur and
Limus are near of the same portent.
Sulphur, the heavenly glance of the divine Fire, could not so subsist in the
burning; for the Eternal fires Light subsisteth in the Liberty, without or
beyond the source or quality.

27. But being the water of the Liberty, which was the food of the Eternal
fire, became Earthly, that is, filled with Earthliness, and that the Meek love
became infected with the Earthly evil Longing and Malady.

28. Therefore could not the Eternal fire burn, also give no Light; but it
Flowed or qualified Quall.
Glowed thus in the Earthly flesh, as a damped fire, that cannot burn for
mo^sture.

29. That very fire Note.
Gnaweth us now, it always blames or accuses us, and would fain burn, and
receive heavenly Substantiality, therefore it must devour and swallow up the
earthly source or quality into it self, viz: the Earthly Imagination, wherein
the Devils longing Malady, mixeth it slfe.

30. Thus, it also becomes Evil, and draws us Continually to the Abyss, into
the Center of Nature, into the Anguish-Chamber, out of which it went forth in
the Beginning.

31. Thus thou see O Man what thou art; and whatsoever thou further make
out of thy self; that thou will be in Eternity; and thou see wherefore thou
must break Corrupt and dye; for the Kingdom of 1. Joh. 2. 16. 17.
this world passes away.

32. Yet thou art not in thy outward substance, so potent to continue in that
Kingdom, even to its Eternity: but thou art impotent or weak therein, and lie
merely therein, in a Constellation or Astrum, which has the Configuration or
Course; wherein thou in flesh and blood or the Earthly substance in the Mothers
body or Womb art flown forth.

33. Thou art so impotent or weak in the outward life, that thou can not
prevent thy Constellation or Astrum, thou must go into the Corruption or
breaking of thy Body, when the Constellation leaves thee.

34 And there thou see undeniably what Genesis 3. 19.
thou art, viz: Dust of the Earth: Earth full of stinking rottenness, even
while thou live; a dead Carcass, while thou yet live.

35. Thou live to the Aspects.
Configuration and Elements, they rule and drive thee according to their
property: they give thee employment and Art: and when their Seculum, time or
season or period, is run about, that thy Constellation, under which thou were
Conceived and born to this world, is finished, then they let thee fall away.

36. And then thy body falls home to the four Elements, and thy spirit which
leads thee, to the Mystery; out of which the Astrum or Configuration became
generated, and wilt be here reserved to the Judgment of God, where God will
prove and try all through the fire of his Might.

37. Thus thou must Moulder away and become Earth, and a Nothing, all but the
spirit which is proceeded out of the Eternal, which God introduced into the
Limus: therein consider what thou art, even a handful of Earth, and a source or
quality-house or tormentive Workhouse of the Stars and Elements.

38. Will thou not have thy soul or Eternal Spirit which is given thee from
the Eternal highest Good; here in this time, kindled again in the Light of God,
so that it becomes born again in the Light, out of the divine substantiality;
then it falls in the Mystery to the Center of Nature, viz: home again to the
first Mother, into the Anguish Chamber of of the first four forms of Nature.

39. There it must be a Spirit in the dark anguish source or quality, with all
Devils, and devour that which it has in this world introduced into it self;
that will be its food and life.

40. But being God would not have it thus with man his similitude and Image,
therefore he himself is become that, which poor Man was come to be, after that
he was fallen out of the divine substantiality out of Paradise: that he might
help him again, so that Man has in himself the Gate of Regeneration, that he
can in the souls fire Joh. 3. 3. 5.
become born again in God.

41. And that the same souls fire draw into it self divine substantiality
again, and fill it self with the divine Love-source; from which, the divine
Kingdom of joy becomes born again; and that the souls fire bring forth the
Holy spirit again, as is before mentioned.

42. Which went forth out of the souls fire, and that the Adamical flesh might
draw back the ungodly willing, so that the poor soul might not be filled again
with the Earthly and devilish Longing Malady.

The Gate of the New-Man.
43. This is now to be understood thus, God is become Man and has introduced
our humane soul into the divine substantiality again in Christ: that eats
again of the divine substantiality, viz: of the love and meekness, and drinks
of the water-spirit of Eternal Life, out of the Eternal wisdom, which is the
fountain of divine substantiality.

44. That same soul of Christ, has gotten divine heavenly flesh and Blood on
it, together with the word which is the Center of the Light-world, which
therein Imagines or longs after the poor Captive Souls, that very Word
dwells in the divine substantiality, and in the virgin of Wisdom.

45. But Note. John 1. 14.
came into Mary, and took our own Flesh and Blood into the divine
substantiality, and brake and destroyed the power which held us captive in the
anger of Death and of the fierce wrath, on the Cross, viz: in the Center of
Nature of the Original in the Fathers Eternal willing to Nature, out of which
our soul was taken.

46. And kindled in that same Essence, viz: in the souls dark fire, the burning
Light fire, again, and brought the other or second willing of the soul through
the fire of God, viz: quite forth out of the Original, into the burning white
clear bright Light.

47. And when Nature in the soul found this, it became richly full of Joy, it
brake Death in pieces, and sprouted with Gods power forth into the Light world,
and made out of the fire a Love-desire, so that in Eternity no fire more is
perceived or known, but a great and strong will in the Love, after its sprouts
and branches, viz: after our souls.

48. And this is that which we say: God thirsts after our souls: Joh. 15. 5.
He is become our stock, we are his sprouts and branches.

49. As a stock always gives its sap to the Branches, so that they live and
bear fruit, to the Glory of the whole Tree: so does also to us, our stock the
Or Tree.
Lord JESUS CHRIST in the Light world, which has manifested himself in our
souls, he will have our souls, viz: Note.
his Branches.

50. He is entered into Adams place or sted, who has destroyed us: he is
become Adam in the Regeneration.

51. Adam brought our souls into this world into the Death of the fierce
wrathfulness: and he brought our soul, out of Death through the Fire of God,
and kindled it in the Fire again, so that it attained the shining Light again,
whereas else it had continued in the Dark Death in the Anguish source or
quality.

52. And now at present it lies Note.
only, in our selves Entering in, that we only follow after in the same way,
which he has made.

53. We need only to cast our Imagination and Total willing into Him, which is
Called Glauben, Believing or Faith; and to oppose the Old Earthly willing, and
so we conceive or receive the Spirit of Christ out of the Regeneration; which
draws heavenly substance into our souls, Joh. 6. 51. 53.
viz: Christ's heavenly flesh and Blood.

54. When the Soul tastes that, then it breaks through the dark Death in it
self, and kindles the Fire of Eternity in it self, out of which the shining
Light of the Meekness burns.

55. That same very Meekness, draws the Soul again into it self, viz: the
souls Fire, and swalloweth the same up into it self, and gives forth out of
the Death the Life and Spirit of Christ.

56. Thus that same Spirit, which goes forth out of the Eternal fire, dwells
in the Light world with God, and is the right Image of the Holy Trinity.

57. According to the right Image our conversation is in Heaven.
It dwells not in this world, the body apprehends it not; but the Noble
Mind, wherein the soul is a Fire, that apprehends it, yet not palpably.

58. Indeed the Noble Image, dwells in the souls fire of the Mind; but it
hovereth therein, as the light in the Fire.

59. For, while the Earthly Man lives; the soul is continually in hazard or
Danger; for the Devil has Enmity with The Soul.
it, who continually casts forth his streams with false and wicked
Imaginations into the starry and Elementary spirit and reaches or graspeth
therewith after the souls Fire, and wills continually to infect the same with
Earthly devils longing and Malady.

60. There must the Noble Image defend it self against the Souls fire, and
there it costeth striving and fighting for the Angels Garland, there rises up
often in the Old Adam, Anguish; doubting and unbelief, when the Devil sets upon
the soul.

61. O thou Cross of Christ, how heavy art thou ofentimes, how does the heaven
hide it self, but so the Noble Grain is sown, when that is sprung up, then it
brings forth much fair fruit in Patience; Thus every little sprout grows
in the soul, out of the divine wisdom.

62. It must all press forth out of the Anguish Chamber, as a sprout out of the
root of the Tree, it is all generated in the anguish..

63. Note ye children of the Noble Sophia.
if a Man will have divine knowledge, he must very many times go into the
anguish-Chamber, into the Center; for Every sparckle of the Divine Ingenium wit
skill or understanding out of Gods wisdom, must become generated out of the
Center of Nature; else it is not permanent or Eternal.

64. It must out of the Eternal Ground, stand upon the Eternal Root, and so it
is a Sprout in Gods Kingdom out of Christ's Tree.

65. Thus we understand the Dying, what it is, and wherefore Christ must have
dyed, and why we must all dye in Christ's Death, if we will possess his Glory.

66. The Old Adam cannot do that, he must again into that out of which he is
gone forth, he 1 Cor. 3. 13.
shall be tried through the fire of God, and give up the Note.
wonders again which he has swallowed up.

67 Note.
They must come again to Man, and appear to Man according to his will, so far
as he has here made them in Gods willing; but so for as to Gods dishonor, so
they belong to the Devil in the Abyss.

68. Therefore let every one look to it, what they here do and make, with what
Mind and Conscience he speaks, does and ^^nye seth; it shall all be tried
through the Fire.

69. And what is capable of the Fire, that it shall devour, and give it to the
Abyss in the Anguish; 1. Cor. 3. 15.
of that a man shall have loss and hurt, and shall want it in the other world.

70 Instead of having Joy that he was a Mat. 20. 1.
Labourer in the Vineyard of God; he will be found to be a Mat. 25. 26.
sluggish servant.

71. Therefore will also the power Might clarity and brightness in the wonders
of the divine wisdom in the other world be very unlike and different.

72. Many is here a wiched King, but in Mat. 12. 32. Ephesians. 1. 21.
the other world to come a swine-heard shall be preferred before him, in the
Clarity brightness and Wisdom: the Cause is, his wonders will be given to the
Abyss, being they were Evil.

73. Behold ye dear Men, I show ye a similitude of the Angelica^ world, behold
the flowery blossoming surface of the Earth, or the stars and Constellations,
how 1 Cor. 15. 41.
one Star, also one herb excels another in power, virtue and beauty, also
in the Ornament of its form: so also the angelical World.

74. For we shall be presented in a spiritual Flesh and Blood; not in such a Or
Condition
form or manner, as here.

75. The spiritual Body can go through Earthly stone, so subtle it is, else it
were not capable of the Deity.

76. For God dwells without or beyond the palpable source or quality, in the
Quiet still Liberty; his own substance is the light and power of the Majesty.

77. Thus we must also have a power-body; but truly and really in flesh and
Blood; but therein is a Glance of the Tincture; for the spirit it so very thin
that it is unapprehensible by the Body, and yet is palpable in the liberty,
Else it were a Nothing.

78. And the Body is much thicker then the spirit, that so the Spirit may lay
hold of it and Eat it; whence it maintains the spirit-Life in the Fire; and
gives forth out of the Fire, the Light of the Majesty, and out of the Light,
again, the Meekness in flesh and blood, so that there is an Eternal substance.

79. Now if we thus find and know our self; then we see know and understand
Note.
what God is and can do; and what the Substance of all substances, is.

80. And we thus find how altogether blindly, we are lead astray Erroniously,
in that Men tell us very much of Gods will, and represent the Deity continually
as some forinsik or strange substance, which is far of from us, as if God were
some strange thing.

81. And did bear only some inclinable will toward Us, and did forgive sin
out of Favor, as a King pardons one his Life, which had forfeited it.

82. But no! hearken; It is not Hypocritical flattery and seeming Holiness, and
to continue and abide wicked that is called for: but it is said; we must become
born out of God, or to be lost from God Eternally.

83. For, true Faith and Will must do it; the will must earnestly enter into
God, it must attain heavenly Substance, else neither singing, Ringing, Crying
or flattering, or whatsoever it may be called, will avail.

84. God needs no service or Ministry: we should serve and Minister one to
another; and love one another, and give thanks to the Great God, that is, to
lift up our self in one Mind and Consent into God, and make known his
wonders; to call upon his Name, and praise him; that is the Joy in Ternario
sancto, in the holy Ternary; where the Eternal wisdom; out of the praise,
gives forth Wonders, powers and sprouts.

85. Thus the Devils Kingdom becomes destroyed, and Mat. 6. 10.
Gods Kingdom comes to Us, Luke 11. 2.
and his will is done: Else all is but humane Inventions, Traditions and
doings, in the sight of God: an unprofitable thing, a flattery or Hypocrisy,
and makes no atonement or reconciliation, but only leads a Man away from
God.

86. Gods Kingdom must Come in us; and his will be done, in us: and so we serve
him aright; when we Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39.
love him from our whole Heart, soul and all our powers, and our Neighbor as
our selves; this is the whole service of God which he accepts of us.

87. What need we flatter our selves; are we righteous? then we our selves are
Gods in the Great God; and what we do then, God does it in and through us.

88. If his Spirit be in us, why do we so very long take care about Gods
service; if he will do any thing, we should be willing and ready Servants, he
must be the Workmaster, if a work be to please God.

89. Whatsoever is besides that, is Earthly built in the Spirit of this world:
we build that for the outward Heaven, for the Stars and Elements which have
their productions and wonders in Us, and for the Dark Devil; whom we serve with
works without the spirit of God.

90. Let this be said to you; it is highly known, No work pleases God, except
it proceed Romans 14. 23.
from Faith in God; flatter how thou will, yet thou labourest only in this
world, thou sowest in an Earthly field.

91. But if Gal. 6. 7. 8.
thou will reap heavenly fruit, then thou must sow heavenly seed; and if it
comes not to root in a strange field, then thy seed comes to thee again, and
grows in thy own field, and thou will enjoy the fruit thy self.

The seventh Chapter. Of Divine or Spiritual SEEING or Vision; how in this
World Man can have divine and Heavenly Substantiality or skill and knowledge:
so that he can rightly speak of God: and how his seeing is. CITATIO SECUNDA.
The Second Summons warning arrest Constraint or Compulsary.
Citation. Or Invitation: of the Outward Reason of this world, in the Outward
flesh and bload.
1. Question.
OUtward Reason says: How may a Man in this world see into God, viz: into
another world; and say what God is? that cannot be: It must needs be a
Representation or Imagination.
Phantasy wherewith the Man tickleth and deceives himself.

Answer.
2. Thus far it comes: it can not search further that it might rest^ and if
I stuck in that same Art, then I also would say the same; for he who sees
nothing, says nothing is there; what he sees, that he knows, and further he
knows of Nothing but that which is before his Eyes.

3. But I would have the Scorner, and total Earthly Man, asked; whether the
Heaven be blind, as also Hell, and God himself?

4. Or whether there be also any seeing in the divine World? whether also, the
Spirit of God sees, both in the Love-light-world, as also in the fierce wrath
in the Anger-world in the Center?

5. Does he say, there is a seeing therein; as indeed is very true, Note.
then he should look to it, that he do not often see with the Devils Eyes, in
his purposed Malice and wickedness; when he long before medelleth and Or
purposes and Contriveth
frames a thing to himself in his Imagination in false evil Maliciousness, to
bring it to pass; and sees beforehand how he may and will Effect his
wickedness.

6. Can he there see the wicked Malice before hand: why sees he not also his
wages and recompense beforehand?

7. O no; the Devil sees with his Eyes and covers the Punishment, that he
may bring the Evil wickedness to pass.

8. If he would drive the Devil out, then he would see his great Folly which
the Devil has prompted him to.

9. He lets him see the Evil, and lends him Eyes to do it withal, though
the thing be far off, and long before it be to be done: and yet is so blinded
that he knows not that he sees with the Devils Eyes.

10. In like manner the Holy or Saint sees with Gods Eyes; what God
prepurposeth, that the spirit of God in the New Regeneration, sees out of the
right humane Eyes, out of the Image of God.

11. It is to the wise, a Seeing and also a Doing; not to the Old Adam; that
must be a servant to it, that must Put in Execution.
manage in the work, that which the New man, sees in God.

12. Yet Christ says Joh. 5. 9.
The Son of Man does Nothing, but what he sees the Father do, and that he
does also.

13. Now therefore is the Son of Man become our Or habitation
House, into which we are entered; he is become our Body, and his Spirit is our
spirit.

14. Should we then in Christ, be blind, as to God? The Spirit of Christ, sees
through, and in us, what he will; and whatsoever he will, that we see and know,
in him; and without him we know nothing of God.

15. He does divine Works, and sees what and when he will, not when Adam will,
when Adam would fain shed abroad his Malignant wickedness, with high-mindedness
to be looked upon.

16. O, no: there he hides himself: he sees not, in us, in the light of Joy,
in God; but in the Cross and Tribulation, in Christ's suffering and dying, in
Christ's persecution and Contempt, in great sorrow and Lamentation, into these
he sees, and lets the Old Ass Crouch and bear the Cross, that is its Office.

17. But in the way through the Death of Christ, the New-Man sees, into the
Angelical world, it is to him much easier and clearer to apprehend, then the
Earthly world; it is done Naturally.

18. Not with Imagining, but with seeing Eyes; with those Eyes which shall
possess the Angelical World; viz: with the Eyes of the souls Image.

19. With the Spirit which goes forth out of the souls Fire, that Spirit sees
into heaven, that beholds God and the Eternity, and no other; and that is
also the Noble Image according to the similitude of God.

20. Out of or from this seeing has this Pen written, not from other Masters,
or out of Conjecture whether it be true or No.

21. Though now indeed a Creature is but a piece, and not a total entireness,
so that we see only in Part, yet it is searchable and fundamental.

22. But the wisdom of God, suffers not it self to be written, for it is
infinite or Endless, without Number and Comprehension 1 Cor. 13. 9. to 12.
we know only in Part.

23. And though indeed we know much more, yet the Earthly Tongue cannot lift it
self up and say it, or bring it forth: It speaks only words of this World,
and not words of the Inward World; for the Mind reteineth them in 1 Pet. 3. 4.
the hidden Man.

24. And therefore one always understands otherwise then an other, all
according as every one is endued with the wisdom; and so also he apprehends,
and so he expounds it.

25. Every one will not understand my writings according to my meaning and
sense, indeed it may be not one: but every one according to his Gifts, for his
Or Bettering.
benefit, one more then another, according as the Spirit has its property in
him.

26. For, the Spirit of God is often 1 Cor. 14. 32.
subject to the Spirits of Men, if they will that which is good or well, and
sees or looks, after what, Man wills; that his good work be not hindered;
but that every where, above all, Gods will or willing or desiring be done.

27. For, the Spirit which becomes generated out of the souls Fire out of Gods
Meekness and substance, that is also the Holy Spirit: It dwells in the Divine
Property, and takes its seeing out of the divine property.

28. What is it now that is strange to or in us, that we cannot see God? This
world and the Devil in Gods Anger, it is, that we see not with Gods Eyes; else
there is no hinderance.

28. Now if one says: I see nothing divine: he should consider, that Flesh and
Blood together with the subtilty and Craft of the Devil, is a hinderance and
Cover, to him, oftentimes, in that he wills, in his high-mindedness for his
own honor, to see God, and oftentimes, in that he is filled and blinded with
the earthly Malignity.

30. Note.
Let him look into the footsteps of Christ, and enter into a new Life, and
yield himself to be under the Cross of Christ, and desire only the Entrance
of Christ, through Christ's death, descention into Hell, and ascension into
Heaven; to the Father; what shall hinder him: but that he must needs see the
Father, and his savior Christ, together with the Holy Spirit.

31. Should now the Holy spirit be blind, when he dwells in Man? or write I
this, for my own Boasting?

32. Not so, but for a rule of Direction to the Reader: that he might forsake
his Error, and depart from the way of wickedness and abomination, forth into a
holy divine substance, that he also with the divine Eyes might see the wonders
of God, that so Gods will may be done.

33. To which End this Pen has written very Much; and not for its own honor,
the pleasure and voluptuousness, of this life's, sake, as the driver continually
reproacheth us, that we do, and yet it remains only to the Driver in the
Anger of God, whom we would fain that he may have the Kingdom of heaven, if he
might be but released from the Devil and the Earthly state and proud Longing
Malady; which make him blind.

34. Thus dear children of God; you who seek with much sighing and Tears; Let
this be in earnest sincerity to you: Our seeing and knowing is in God: He
manifests or reveals to every one in this world, as much as he will, as he
knows is profitable and good for him.

35. For he that sees out of or from God, he has Gods work to manage; he
should and must manage teach speak and do that which he sees; else his seeing
will be taken from him; for this world is not worthy of Gods Seeing.

36. But for the Wonders sake and the revelation of God; it becomes given to
many to see, that the Name of God may be manifested to the world; which will
also be a witness against all the Doings of the ungodly which pervers the truth
into Lies; and despise the Holy Spirit.

37. For, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
we are not our own, but his whom we serve in his Light.

38. We know nothing of God: He, God himself, is our knowing and seeing.

39. We are Nothing, that he may be all in us: we should be blind, deaf, and
dumb, and know no Life in us, that he may be our Life and seeing, and our work
may be his.

40. Our Tongue should not say; if we have done any thing that is good; this
have we done but this has the Lord in us, done: His Name be highly pr^ised.

41. But what does this Evil world now? If any say, this has God in me done,
if it be good; then says the world; Thou Fool I thou have done it: God is not
in thee: thou lie: Thus the Spirit of God must be their Fool and Liar.

42. What is it then: or who speaks out of the Blasphemous Mouth? Even the
Devil, who is an Enemy of God, that he may hide and Cover the work of God, that
Gods spirit might not become known; and that he may continue, Prince of the
World even till the Judgment.

43. Note.
Thus, When you see, that the World fights against you, persecuteth you,
despises, slandereth you, for the sake of the knowledge and Name of God, then
consider that you have the Black Devil before you: then sigh and long that Gods
Kingdom may come to us, and the Devils sting may be broken or destroyed; that
So enflamed by the Devil.
the Man through your longing, sighing and praying, may be released from the
Devil; And then you Labor rightly in Gods Vineyard, you prevent the Devil of
his Kingdom and bring forth fruit upon Gods Table.

44. For in Love and Meekness, we become New Born out of the Anger of God; in
Love and Meekness we must strive and fight, in the Devils Thorny Bath, in this
world, against him.

45. For, Love, is, his Poison, it is a fire of Terror to him, wherein he
cannot stay: if he knew the least spark of Love in himself, he would cast it
away; or would burst himself therefore that he might be rid of it.

49. Therefore is Love and Meekness, our Sword; wherewith we can fight for the
Noble Garland under Christ's Thorney Crown, with the Devil, and the World.

47. For, Love is the fire of the second Principle, it is Gods Fire; The Devil,
and the World, is an Enemy to it.

48. The Love, has Gods Eyes, and sees in God, and the Anger has the Eyes of
the fierce wrath in the Anger of God, that sees in Hell in the source or
Torment and Death

49. The World supposes merely, that a Man must see God with the Earthly and
Starry Eyes; it knows not, that God dwells not in the outward, but in the
Inward.

50. And if then it sees nothing admirable or wonderful in Gods children, it
saith^ O, he is a Fool, he is an Idiot, he is Melancholy; thus much it knows.

51. O, hearken Sir, I know well what Melancholy is; I know also well what is
from God: I know them both, and thee also, in thy blindness; but such
knowledge, costeth not Melancholy, but a victorious wrestling.

52. For, it is given to None without wrestling; unless he be a limit or Mark
chosen of God; otherwise he must wrestle for the Garland.

53. Indeed many a Man is chosen to it in his Mothers body or womb; as John the
Baptist, and others more, apprehended in the Covenant of Gods Promise, who are
always a Limit, or Mark of a Seculum or highest Pitch of an Age, who are born
with the time of the Great Year, and are Chosen to open and disclose the
wonders which God entendeth or purposes.

54. But, Note.
not all out of the Limit or Mark; but Many of them out of their Zealous
seeking; for, Christ says, Mat. 7. 7.
Seek and you shall find, knock and so it will be opened unto you: also Joh. 6.
37.
Whosoever comes to me those I will not reject or cast out. Also, Joh. 17. 24.
Father, I will that those, whom thou have given me be where I am: that is,
that those who are born out of Christ with the New man; be, in God his Father.
Also, * Father, I will that they see my Glory which I had before the foundation
of the World.

55. Here lies the seeing, out of Christ's spirit, out of Gods Kingdom, in the
power of the Word, of the substance the Deity, with the Eyes of God: and not
with the Eyes of this World, and of the outward Flesh.

56. Thus thou blind world, know wherewith we see, when we speak and write of
God, and let thy false Judging alone: see thou with thy Eyes, and let Gods
Children see with their Eyes; see out of or from thy Gifts, let another see out
of or from his Gifts.

57. 1 Cor. 7. 17.
As every one is Called so let him see; and so let him walk or Converse; for we
Manage not all one and the same Conversation; but every one according to his
Gift and Calling to serve Gods honor and Wonders.

58. The Spirit of God suffers not it self so to be tied or bound up, as
outward Reason supposes, with its Decrees Cannons and Councils, whereby
always one Chain of Antichrist is linked to another, that Men will Judge above
Gods Spirit, and Maintain and hold their Obscurities.
Conceits or opinions to be Gods Covenant; as if God were not at home in this
world, or as if they were Gods upon Earth; and moreover what they will Believe,
they establish with an Oath.

59. Is not this a work of Folly, to bind up and tie the Holy Spirit with his
Gifts of wonder, to an Oath; he must Believe what they will, and yet they know
him not, also they are not born of him; and yet they make Laws what he shall
do.

60. I say, that all such Covenants and binding is Antichrist and unbelief, let
it seem or flatter how it will: Gods Spirit on the Contrary is unbound, he
goes not into such a Covenant or Band, but he appears freely, to the seeking
humble lowly Mind, according to his Gift, Genaturetist, qualified or capable.
as he his * inclined.

61. He is also even very subjected to it, if it do but Earnestly desire him;
what then would that Institutions.
Covenant in humane wit and prudence of this world, do, if it did belong to the
honor of God? are not all Or Institutions.
Covenants generated out of self Pomp state and Pride.

62. Friendly Conference and Colloquy together is very Good and necessary, that
one present or impart his Gifts to the other; but the Covenants or Institutions
are a false or wicked chain against God.

63. God has once made one Covenant with us, in Christ, that is enough in
Eternity: he makes no more; He has once taken Mankind into the Covenant, and
made a firm Testament with or by Death and Blood; there is enough in that, we
justly rest satisfied in that, and cleave to this Covenant.

64. Note. Christendom.
Note we ought not dare to dance so Boldly and audaciously lewdly about Christ's
Cup, as is done at present; else it will be takeh away; as is done to the Turks.

65. There is a very great earnest severity at Hand, such as has not been
since the beginning of the World: Let is be said to you, it is become known:
the Antichrist shall stand Discovered, or bare.
Naked.

66. But look to it, that you become not thereby the worse Note. Seeming
Christianity.
for the Axe is put to the Tree: the Mat. 3. 19.
Evil Tree shall be hewn down, and cast into the Fire; the time is near; let
none stick or hide himself, in the Lust of the Flesh.

67. For, it avalleth nothing, that any know how he should be Newborn, and set
continues in the Old skin, in the pleasure and voluptuousness of the Old Man,
in Covetousness, high-mindedness, unrighteousness, in unchastity, immodesty,
and in a dishonest or scandalous wicked life; ^ Tim. 5. 6.
such a one is dead while he lives, and sticks in the Jaws of Gods Anger,
their knowledge will accuse and Condemn them at the Judgment.

68. If he receives the word of knowledge and conceives it, so that God
gives him to know it, that it is the right way to Life; then he must presently
be a door of the word, and go forth from the Evil or wickedness; or else he
has a heavy Judgment upon him.

69. What is he better then the Devil, who James 2. 19.
also knows Gods will, but yet does his own Evil will: one is as the other,
neither Good, so long till he becomes a doer of the Word; and then he walks
in Gods way, and is in the Vineyard in Gods Labor.

70. The Hypocritical Babel teaches now at present; that our works merit
Nothing, Christ has delivered us from Death and Hell: we must only Believe
and so we are righteous.

71. Hearken O Babel; Luke 12. 47.
The servant who knows his Lords will, and does it not, shall suffer many
stripes: a knowing without doing, is just as a fire which glimmereth but cannot
burn for moisture.

72. Will thou that thy divine Faiths Fire should burn, then thou must blow it
up, and put off from Thee the Devils and the worlds Moisture; thou must enter
into the Life of Christ.

73. Will thou be his Child, then thou must enter into his house: and manage
his work, else thou art out of it without, and an Hypocrite Exodus 20. 7.
who bears the Name of God in vain or unprofitably; Romans 2. 21. etc.
thou teach one thing and do another, and testifiest thus, that Gods
Judgment is right concerning thee.

74. Or, what pleasure has God in thy knowing, when as thou still continuest
wicked? do thou suppose he will accept thy Hypocrisy?

75. That thou Cryest to him: Lord! give me a strong Faith in the Merits of thy
Son Christ: that he has satisfied for my sins: supposest thou, that, that
is enough?

76. O Sir, no, hearken: Via vitae.
thou must enter into Christ's Suffering and dying, and be born a second time
out of his Death; thou must become a Member in and with him; thou must
constantly Crucify the Old Adam; and always hang upon Christ's Cross, and must
become an obedient Child, that always hearkeneth what the father says, and
always would fain do that.

77. Thou must enter into the Doing, Else thou art but a Monster or Mimick.
Vizard without Life, thou must together with God, work good works of Love
toward thy Neighbor, and continually exercise thy Faith, and always be
prepared, and ready at Zach. 6. 15.
the voice of the Lord, when he Calls thee out of the old skin, to go home
into the pure Garment.

78. See; though thou plainly walk in this way, yet thou will have upon thee
weakness enough, and feel far too much; thou will still work very far Note.
too much Evil.

79. For we have an Evil Guest lodging within us, to comfort ones self only
does not avail, but to fight and strive against it; and Continually to slay and
vanquish it: without this it is ever too strong and will have the Dominion.

80. Christ has indeed in us and for us, broken and destroyed Death; and made
way for us, but what does it help me, to comfort my self with that, and learn
to know that, and yet continue lying shut up in the dark Anger, and Captivated
in the Chains of the Devil?

81. I must even enter into that very way and Path, and walk in that street as
a Pilgrim or stranger who wandereth out of Death into Life.

The Eighth Chapter. Of the Pilgrims-VVay out of Death into Life.
1. DEar Children, let us very heartily speak one with another concerning the
Ground and Foundation. Our true life, wherewith we should see God, is as a
damped fire, in many also, as the fire shut up in a Stone; we must strike upon
it with true earnest sincere entering and turning In to God.

2. Look upon Gods care in providing which has taken for us aforehand: Titus.
3. 5. 6.
He has regenerated us in Christ out of the Water of Eternal Life, and has
left us at last the same in the Covenant of Baptism for a Key; that we should
therewith unlock and therewith Note. Heb. 10. 22.
besprinckle our souls Fire; that it may become capable of the Divine Fire.

3. And has Mat. 26. 26, 27, 28.
given us his Body for food, and his Blood for drink, that we should receive
it, and enter into his Covenant, and feed our souls therewith, that they may be
quickened and awake up from Death, that the divine Fire, may kindle them.

4. Dear Children; It must burn, and not continue to lie shut up in Stone, or
as an Ember or Tinder, which would fain glimmer, and cannot for the Devils
Moisture.

5. The Historical Faith is only an Ember, which glimmereth like a little
spark; it must become Kindled, we must give it Matter, wherein the sparkle may
kindle it self.

6. The soul must press forth out of the Reason of this world in to the life of
Christ; into Christ's flesh and Blood, and so it conceives the Matter to its
kindling: It must be in Earnest Sincerity.

7. For, the History reaches not Christ's flesh and Blood, Death must be broke
open.

8. Although indeed Christ has broke it open, yet the Earnest sincere desire
must follow after, that would fain do or act, and always labor therein.

9. As a Pilgrim or Messenger who has a long dangerous way to travail, he
always runs on toward the End, and is unwear^ed, though woe and misery
befall him, yet he hops for the End, and comes always nearer where then he
Expects in hope his wages and refreshment, and joyeth that his sore travail and
wandering will have an End.

10. Thus must a man that will travail and wander to God, behave himself in
the Way of his Pilgrimage: He must continually more and more wander or travail
forth out of the Earthly Reason, out from the will of the Flesh, of the Devil
and the World.

11. Often woe and misery befall him, when he must forsake that, which he might
well have had, and could therewith have swum in Temporal Honor.

12. But if he will Travel in the Right Path, then he must only put on the
Mantle of Righteousness, and put off the Mantle of Covetousness and the
Hypocritical Life.

13. He must Isai. 58. 6. 7.
impart his bread to the Hungry, and give his clothes for a Covering, and not
be an Oppressor of the Miserable; and only fill his own Sack full, squeese
away the sweet from the simple; and impose Laws upon him, only for his pride
and pleasure sake.

14. He is no Christian that does such things, but he travelleth in the Path of
this world, as the stars and the Elements with the Devils infection and Lust,
drive him.

15. And though likely he knows the Faith of Gods Mercifulness, of the
satisfaction of Christ, yet that will not help him: for Mat. 7. 21.
not all that say Lord Lord shall enter enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but
those that do the will of my Father in Heaven.

16. And that will is, Mat. 22. 39.
Love thy Neighbor as thy self: Mat. 7. 12.
What thou will that men should do to thee, that do thou also.

17. Say not in thy Heart: I sit in this Office and Lordship, of Right: I have
bought purchased or inherited it, that which my Subjects do for me they are
obliged to do it.

18. See and search, whether that has a right original, whether it be ordained
of God, or whether it takes its original from deceit, and self state and
pride, and out of Covetousness.

19. If thou find that it be of Gods Ordaining, then look to it, and walk
therein, according to the Commandment of Love and Righteousness: Consider that
therein, thou art a Servant and Minister; and Not a Lord over Christ's Children.

20. And not that thou fittest therein only to draw their sweat to thee, but
that thou art their Judge and shepherd, and that Luke 16. 2.
thou shall give an account of the Office.

21. Mat. 25. 15. 27.
Five Talents have been given thee thou should return them up to thy Lord
with increase and usury: thou should lead thy inferiors in the right way,
thou should give him good Example in Instruction and reproving of evil and
wickedness.

22. For, it will be required of thee, If thou reprovest not the wicked, and
protectest not the Oppressed and afflicted.

23. Thou art not therefore their Ruler, that thou should be their Lord: not
thou; but God is their Lord. Thou should be their Judge, and part them in
their fallings out, and decide their differences.

24. Not for thy Covetousness only art thou their Judge, but for their
Conscience sake, that thou should instruct lead and direct the simple, not
only with squeezing of his sweat, but with Gentleness and Meekness.

25. Thou have a heavy burden upon thee; thou must give an Earnest severe
account thereof.

26. Note ye Magistrates and Superiors. Emperors Kings Princes Lords Rulers
and All Officers whatsoever.
When the Miserable sigheth concerning thee in his oppression, he complains
of thee before his and thy Lord, thou shall and Must stand with him before the
Judgment, for the sentence passes upon thy soul no Hypocrisy will help.

27. Whatsoever was sown with Tears, in right Earnestness, that becomes a
substance, and belongs to the Judgment of God: except a man Convert, and
reconcile himself with well-doing and benefit to the oppressed that they may
bless him; then that Substance breaks.

28. Therefore ye Rulers and Superiors, you ought to look narrowly to your
state and Condition; whence it arises Originally: the Root will shortly be
narrowly sought after: Romans 14. 12.
every one shall give an account of his state and Condition.

29. But have a care that therewith you Or Domineer.
ride not in the Hellish fire, as the fierce wrathful Devil himself does: and
so ye be found his servants and Ministers; as the Spirit of the Wonders shows
us; that ye are become the That is, the Tyrants are become, the Eternal wraths
own propriety*
fulfilling of the Eternal anger and fierce wrath.

30. Say not in thy Heart: thus have my Parents, Elders, Ancestors and
predecessors walked, I have inherited it from them: Thou know not into what
Lodging they are entered.

31. Will thou be a Christian and a Child of God* then thou must not look upon
the way of thy predecessors; How they have rid on in Pleasure and
voluptuousness: but look upon Gods word: that must be the Light of thy Feet.

32. For, Many who have done Evil, are gone into the Abyss, and thou will
follow after them: if thou walk in their footsteps.

33. Suffer not the Devil to pourtray or paint before thee the Hypocritical
way; his Color glistere outwardly, and in the Or in the substance.
Essences it is Poison.

34. O, how dangerous away have we to wander and travail through this world:
and it were to be wished that there were no Note ye Socinians who teach that
the wicked shall not rise again, or be tormented.
Eternal thing in the wicked, then they would not suffer Eternal Torment; and
be in the Eternal scorn and reproach.

35. As they have here in this life been the Enemies of Gods children, so also
they continue to be for ever the Enemies of God and of his children.

36. Therefore must the Children of God, take the Cross upon them, and here
sweat in the Thistly and Thorney Bath, and become born anew in Anguish; they
must walk in a Narrow steep Path, where Reason always says: Thou art a Fool,
thou might live in Joy and Jollity, and be saved well enough

37. O, how often outward Reason strikes and smites the Noble Image, which
springs up out of the Thorney Bath, out of Tribulation: how many sprouts
become torn of from the Pearl-Tree, through Doubting and Unbelief, which bring
Man into the False and wicked way.

38. The Miserable sigh, and paint, after temporal sustenance; and Curses the
Oppressor, which bereaveth him of his sweat, and thinks he does right in it,
yet he does but destroy himself therein; he does even as wickedly as his
driver or Oppressor.

39. Did he take to himself Patience, and Consider, that he walks upon the
Pilgrime's Evil Path, and did set his Hope in his Journeys End, and did
Consider that thus under the Cross and misery, under oppression, Mat. 20. 1.
he labors in the Vineyard of Christ; O how Happily and blessedly should he
do.

40. He has cause hereby to look for another and better life, seeing he must
here swim in Anguish and Misery: if he rightly understand it, how well God
entendeth it toward him* that so he might the more seek and hunt after him,
that he might not build upon the Earthly Life.

41. Being he sees, that it is but a vale of Misery affliction and oppression,
and that he must spend his days here in hard streights, in Misery, in vain
Labor weariness and Care: yet he is to Consider, that God lets it not pass
so in vain; but that in like manner he thus gives cause, to seek the true
Rest, which is not in this world.

42. Besides he must every hour expect death; and leave his work to another;
what is it then, for a Man to build his Hope upon this world, wherein he is but
only a Guest: and a Wanderer or Pilgrim, which must there wander through the
way or Passage of his Constellation.

43. If he did assume the Inward Constellation, O! how happily and blessedly
would he labor in Gods work, and let the outward, go, as it may or can be!

44. A Man in this world that entendeth to possess the Kingdom of God he has
no better way, neither can he have any better Council and advice, but that he
continually Consider and Conceive, that he is in the Vineyard of God with all
his doings and substance, and whatsoever he is, and that he do it to or for God.

45. His Mind should in a Constant Hope be looking toward God, that he shall
obtain his wages for his Labor, from God; and that he labors in Gods deeds
of wonder; and therefore should be diligent in the Labor which he performs.

46. And when he must oftentimes serve his driver or oppressor in weariness,
without wages, then let him but Consider, that he labors for God; and be
patient in Hope that God will well bestow his wages upon him in due time.

47. For Mat. 20. 8.
the Lord of the Vineyard does not pay his Laborers off at Noon day, but in *
the Evening when their Day Labor is done, when we go home to our Lord, our of
the Vale of this Tabernacle, and then every one receives his wages.

48. Note.
Those then who have labored much for a long time; have much wages to Expect.

49. But they that have been Snorers, Grunters, Note ye Lazy sluggish Laborers.
sluggish, Lazy, and Evil, murmuring, whining, pettish, Laborers, in
Impatience, such a one has done small service, and ought well to expect
moreover, to have punishment from his Lord; for he has but misled other
Laborers, and has been an unprofitable Labourer, and has performed mere vain
false and Evil work, to cheat his Lord of his wages, he justly receives
punishment for his wages.

CITATIO TERTIA* The Third Summons warning arrest or Constraint.
Citation. The Gate in the Center of Nature.
50. Question.
Reason says. Why does God let it go so, that here is nothing but vain
toylsome weariness, as also vexation and oppression, one plaguing and
afflicting another? And though many have much and want nothing; yet they have
no quiet and rest; they hunt only after oppression and Unquietness; and their
heart is never quiet and still.

Answer.
51. See, thou Locked-up knowledge: the Ground or foundation of the world is
thus; the Original of Life is also thus; in this world it may or can, not be
otherwise.

52. Except a Man become New born, and then he is otherwise in the New-man; and
yet this oppression and driving cleaves always to him in the Old Man; Note.
This is, Gal. 5. 17.
the strife of the Spirit against the Flesh, where the Flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh.

Question.
53. Now says Reason; whence has this its original?

Answer.
54. Answer: Behold! in the Center of Nature there is such a Thing Being or
substance: do but Mind it.

55. The Eternal will which is called God; that is Free; for it has in it
nothing but the Light of the Majesty; and dwells in the Eternal Nothing; and
therefore also Nothing can touch him.

56. But his Desiring; which makes the Center of Nature; that has such a
property; for therein is the harsh astringency, viz: the first Property of
Nature, which always attracteth to it self, and receives where nothing is,
where it has made Nothing: and takes it and twitcheth it up together.

57. Yet it may not Eat it, also it is not profitable to it: Thus it makes to
it self anguish pain and unquietness therewith; as also Covetousness, in Man,
does.

58. The Second Form, is its drawing or Sting; that is its Servant or Child,
which there twitcheth together what the desire will; that is the Labourer; and
signifies the Inferior Man, who is Evil, base, Angry, Raging, and stingeth
and throbbeth in the Harsh astringency.

59. And that cannot the Astringent harshness endure from the servant, but
draws it the more eagerly; and so the servant becomes more Evil and Base,
more raging, and stormeth the Lords house.

60. Thereupon, will the Lord bind and hold the servant, and the servant
teareth forth with Malice aloft again.

61. And then seeing the Lord, viz: the harsh astringency cannot overpower it;
they struggle together in Great Anguish, enmity and Opposition, and begin to
make a whirling-wheel; to worry murder and put to death one the other.

62. This is the Third Form of Nature, whence arises Wars, fighting, strife,
destroying of Country and City, envy and anxious vexatious Malice and
wickedness: whereas always one would have the other Dead; wills to devour
all and draw it into it self, it wills to have it alone, and yet there is
nothing profitable to it but hurtful.

63. It does as the fierce wrath of Nature does, that swalloweth it self up
into it self: and Consumes and breaks it self, and yet it generateth it self
also thus.

64. Note.
Whence, all Evil comes; the Devil together with all Evil things or
substances comes from hence: thus they have their Original: as Nature in the
Center does, understand, without the Light.

65. Thus does the Devil also, who has not the Light: as also Evil Men and
Beasts, also herbs and Grass, and all whatsoever is odious or Enemicitious.

66. For, it is the poyson-wheel, whence the Life arises Originally, that
whirleth it self thus in great anguish, in stinging raging and breaking; till
it Creates another will in it self to go out of the Anguish, and sincketh it
self down into Death, and gives it self free therein into Liberty.

67. So it destroys the stinging and breaking in death, and falls into the
Liberty of the first willing, which kindles the Anguish of Death-with the
still Liberty, whence the Anguish is terrified, Death breaks, and out of the
Anguish goes forth a Life of Joy.

68. Thus it goes also with Man when he is in the Anguish and Enmity, that the
sting of Death and of Anger rages in him, so that he is anxious Covetous,
Envious Angry and Enemicitious.

69. Then he should not continue in this Evil Substance, Condition, or Doings;
else he is in the Forms of Death Anger fi^rce wrath and Hellish Fire: and if
the water-source or quality were not in him together with Flesh and Blood, then
he would instanly be a kindled Devil, and nothing else.

70. But he should consider himself, and Create another will in his Evil
Anguish, and go out from the Covetous Malice, into the liberty of God, where
there is continually Rest enough.

71. He should in Death sinck down into Patience, and willingly give up himself
into the Anxious wheel, and Cr^^^ a Thirst after Gods quickening, which is the
Liberty, and so (...) ^cketh down quite through the anxious Death, and falls
into the Liberty.

72. And so when its Anguish tastes the Liberty, that it is such a still meek
source or Quality, then the Anguish becomes terrified, and in the Terror
breaks the Enimicitious harsh Death; for it is a Crack or Terror of Great
Joy, and a Kindling of the Life of God.

73. Thus the A Branch on the Vine Christ*
Pearl-Branch or sprout becomes Generated; that now stands in the trembling
of Joy; but in great danger; for the Death and the Anguish source or quality is
its Root.

74. And is environed therewith as a fair green Slip or Branch grows out of a
stinking dunhil out of the strong source, and attaineth another Essence,
smell, substance and source or quality, then its mother has, out of which it
became generated.

75. As then also the source or quality in Nature, has such a property, so
that out of the Evil, viz: out of the Anguish, the Great Life becomes
Generated.

76. And as we further know: that Nature in the Crack or Terror divides it
self into two Kingdoms; the First, into the Kingdom of Joy: The Second, into a
sincking of Death into a Darkness: so also Man, when the Lilly branch to the
Kingdom of Joy thus becomes Generated, then its Nature divides it self into
Two Wills.

77. As First, the one rises up in the Lilly and grows in Gods Kingdom:
Secondly, the other sincketh down in the Dark Death, and pants or longs
after the Earth; after its Mother: which striveth always against the Lilly;
and the Lilly flies before or from the roughness.

78. As a sprout grows out of the Earth; and the Essence flees before or
from the Earth, and is drawn up by the sun; till it becomes a stalk or Tree:
so also Gods Sun draws Man's Lilly, viz: the Note.
New Man, always, in his power, forth from the Evil Essence, and draws at
last out of it, a Tree in Gods Kingdom.

79. And then he lets the old Evil Tree or Shell, under which the New did
grow; fall away into the Earth into its Mother, after which it indeed Longed;
and out of the Earth again into the Center of Nature, at the End of the Day of
Separation, wherein all must again go into its Either.

80. Thus goes the Lilly also into its Either, viz: into the Note.
free will, into the light of the Majesty.

81. Understand it further thus; when thus two Kingdoms divide themselves in
the Crack or Terror of Nature, then is the terror or Crack in it self a
flash, and Cause of the Fire, viz: of the Life's kindling.

82. Thus the Prima Materia, viz: the first Matter, which the harshness makes
with its entering in, wherein the Enmity existed, divides it self into TWO
Parts, One downwards into Death: this is the Essential Life with substantiality
of this world: such as Earth and Stone.

83. And then the Second Part; severeth it self out of the Terror or Crack of
the Fire into the Light of the Liberty; for the Terror of the fire, kindles
the Liberty so that it also Note.
becomes desirous: and that now in its desiring draws the Kingdom of Joy
into it self, viz: the Meek well-doing, and makes is also become Or Material.
Matter.

84. This now, is the Heavenly divine Or Corporcity
substantiality; which draws the fire again into it self; and devourth it in
its Crack or Terror, which is the fire's source or quality: and there the soft
meekness Consumes the source or quality, and brings it self into the highest
Joy: so that out of Auguish, Love; and out of fire, a loveburning, Comes to be.

85. And gives out of the Burning, the Richly Joyful spirit of the Eternal
life, which is called the Spirit of God, which arises Originally in the
first-willing which is called the Father, for it is the desiring of Nature; and
is in the fire, a fire-source or quality, and in the Anguish of Death, a sting
of Death and of fierce wrath, and the Enmity in the substance of Nature viz: in
the Center.

86. And in the Light, it is the divine Kingdom of Joy; which there in the
divine substantiality, viz: in the wisdom, which is the Colors of the Virtues
and Powers, opens the Noble Note.
Tincture, which is the Glance of the Heavenly Substantiality.

87. And Causes in the Substantiality, the Element of the Angelical world, out
of which this world is an Out-birth; but in the Anger; kindled by the Devil:
who is a cause that the fierce wrath of Nature has kindled it self; whence in
the substantiality Earth and Stone are come to be: as it is before our Eyes.

88. Which the Maghtiest source or quality in Verbo Fiat in the world Fiat,
has separated into a Principle, as in the Book of the Threefold Life is
expressed at Large.

89. Thus, understand the Fire-^lash for the fourth form of Nature.

90. And the Love-birth of the Kingdom of Joy; for the Fifth Form.

91. And the swallowing in of substantiality, out of the Meekness into the
Fire-source or quality, where the fire also attaineth the Kingdom of Joy, viz:
the sound, of the Manifestation or revelation of the Colors Wonders and
Virtues, whence the five Senses, viz: Seeing Hearing Smelling Tasting and
Feeling, Exit; for the sixth Form of Nature.

92. And the Substantiality of the Light, in which the divine Element is
comprehended, out of which the Springing growing or Paradise existeth: for the
seventh Form; as again for the Mother of all Forms, which give^h substance
power and Meekness to all Forms; so that there is an E^ernal Life and an
Eternal dwelling or delight of Life.

93. For, the Seventh Form, holds or contains in it self the Angelical
world; as also the Paradise, or right Kingdom of Heaven, wherein the substances
of the Deity is Manifest, and all whatsoever the Light world contains: as we
have expressed in our Other Books.

The Ninth Chapter. Further and More Circumstance of this Third Citation.
Highly to be Considered.
1. THus ye Children of Man; be here seeing and Not Blind; Observe what is
here manifested to you; it is done not in vain; there is somewhat more behind:
sleep Not, it is high Time, do but see what the substance of all substances is.

2. This world is generated forth, out of the Eternal; the Ground or
Foundation of Nature.
Center of Nature, has ever been from Eternity; but to has not been manifest.

3. With this is world and with the Devils Sternness anger or Malice.
fierce wrath, it is come into substance: But yet understand what the Devil is.

4. He is a Spirit of his Legions, out of the Center of Nature; Note, the Devil
was Created in the Divine substantiality.
as one when he was Created in the Divine substantiality.

5. And yet he was to be proved or tried in the fire, and to set his
Imagination into the Love, but he set it into the Center, of the wrathfulness,
back into the fourth form of the Anguish, and would fain d^mineer in the fire
over Gods Meekness, as an Enemy of the Kingdom of Joy: and despised the Love,
when he saw, that the fire, gave strength and Might.

6. And therefore he was Thrust out of the fire of God into the Anguish of the
Darkness, into the Center of the fourth Form: he had no more of the Fire, but
the Terrible Flash, and that is his right Life.

7. But the will of God: which however, in Angels and Man longs and pants
after the Life, which comes to help the Life, with the Liberty, viz: with the
Meekness, that has left or forsaken him; and so he cannot attain the Light, in
Eternity.

8. Also he can frame or Create no Imagination or longing after it; for Gods
will spirit, flows into him and quelleth him in the Anguish Chamber, in the
first four forms of Nature; he can not attain the Fifth.

9. And though indeed, he has all forms, of Nature, yet all is enimicitious
and Opposite or of Contrary will; for the Holy Spirit has left him, and now
the source or fountain of the Anger or fierce wrath is in him.

10. God, who is ALL, has opened his fierce wrath, or the Center of the
Original, in him: so that it also is Creaturely; for it has also longed to
manifest it self.

11. And when God once moved himself to the Creation of Angels, then all became
manifest, whatsoever from Eternity in the Wonders of the wisdom stood hidden
in the Center, both in Love and Anger.

12. Seeing now we thus know: what we are; and that God lets us know it; we
should now look to it, and generate some Good out of us: for we have the Center
of the Eternal Nature in us.

13. If we make an Angel out of us, then we are that.

14. If we make a Devil out of us; then also we are that.

15. Here we are in the Making, in the Creating; we stand in the field: Gods
willing in the Love, stands in the Center of the Life toward us.

16. God is become Man, and wills to have us; so also his Anger in the
Kingdom of the fierce wrath wills to have us; the Devil also wills to have
us into his society: and Gods Angels also into theirs: to which soever we are
Factour and Trade, thither we go.

17. Note.
If we put our Imagination into the Light of God; and go with earnest sincerity
into that; then we come into it, and are also with earnestness drawn into it.

18. Will we then put our willing into the Glory of this world, and let the
Eternal go; then we have to expect, that we must with this worlds fierce wrath,
enter into the first Mystery.

19. Note.
Shall we not then have divine Imagination, viz: Faith, in us, then the divine
Love will leave us, and not let us in at her Doars.

20. Assuredly, if God break them not open, then we come into Necessity; if
thou bring Not Gods spirit along with thee, thou will never more attain it.

21. Therefore, it is Good to Spring and grow forth in this Life: Christ is
Become our field; we may without any great anguish or trouble attain it; Note.
it is but to do this viz: to break our Will.

22. That is woeful, for the Old Adam will not, so also the Anger will not; the
Devil also will not.

23. Behold! O, Man: thou thy self art thy own Enemy: that which thou hold
to be thy friend, that is thy Enemy; would thou be saved, and see God, then
thou must become worst Enemy to thy best friend, viz: to thy outward Life.

24. Not that thou should destroy it, but, its will, only: thou must do
what thou willest not, thou must become thy own Enemy, or else thou cast not
see God.

25. For, that which thou now hold for thy friend, is proceeded out of the
Anguish Chamber; and has still the Anguish life in it, it has the Anger
source or quality and the Devils sickness longing or Malady in it.

26. Thou must frame or Create a will in God: thou must frame or Create a will
out of thy soul, and with the same go forth out of Evil wickedness and Malice,
into God; and so thou will be introduced into Gods Fire.

27. Understand; the willing-spirit; that, will kindle thy soul, and so then,
reach after the life and spirit of Christ, and thou will receive it: which will
new Regenerate thee, with a New willing, which will abide with thee.

28. The same, is the blossom of thy soul, wherein, the New-Child stands in
the Image of God: to that God gives Christ's flesh and blood, to feed on.

29. And not to the Adamical Ass, as Babel wonderfully Dreameth: as if the
wicked should participate or be made partakers of the Body of Christ! O, No.

30. They receive the four Elements, and therein, the Anger of God, and
therefore ^ Cor. 11. 29
because they distinguish or discern not the Lords Body, which is every where
present in Heaven; and becomes fed upon by that soul, which attaineth Heaven.

31. Not, as a sign, as the other Phantasy Dreameth; not Spirit without
Substance; but the substance of the spirit environed and enclosed with Gods
wisdom, Christ's Flesh, which fills the Light-world in every Place: which the
Word that became Man brought along with it into Mary.

32. That same Substantiality, although indeed, in Mary, it became Opened in
its flesh and blood, and assumed humane Essence to it self, Joh. 3. 13.
was at that very Time, while Christ lay in the body or womb of Mary, in Heaven
in the one Element in all Places.

33. It never came at any time from any Place many miles off, into Mary: No,
but the included Center which Adam had shut up in the Anger of God in Death,
that, the word of the Deity did unshut or unlock; and introduced the divine
substantiality, into the virgin-like Center shut up in Death.

34. That was done in the Body or womb of Mary, in the limit or Mark of the
Covenant; not departing away, also not entering in, but unshutting,
in-generating, and in this world Ex-generating.

35. God-and-Man one Person; Heavenly, and in Death enclosed substantiality and
virginity; one substantiality: one only Man, in heaven and in this World.

36. And such must we also be; for the Word which became Man, is stirring in
the soul; and stands in the sound of the Life in all Souls.

37. Now go whither thou will, thou have now the Center of the Deity in thee in
the sound and stirring; and also, the Center of the fierce wrath, into which
thou go, and which thou awakenest therein stands thy Life.

38. Do what thou please, thou art free, and God lets thee know it: He
calls thee; if thou come, then thou will be his Child; if thou go into
the Anger, then thou will also be taken up by that.

The Tenth Chapter. Of Gods Express-Reflex Image of Man, viz: of Gods
similitude and Man.
1. WE cannot in this world see our substantiality or New Body, while we are in
the Earthly Body: the Outward Man knows it not; only the Spirit, which
becomes generated, and goes forth out of the New Man, that knows its Body.

2. But if we would fain have the knowledge thereof, and would know whether we
are in the New Birth: then we have no better proof or trial of it; then by or
in the similitude of God, which we understand, to be viz: the Desiring, the
sense or Note.
Thoughts and the Mind.

3. These Things contein in them, the Center of the spirit, out of which the
strong will becomes generated and brought forth; in which, the right true
similitude, and the Image of God with flesh and Blood, stands, which the
outward man knows not.

4. For that very Image is not in this world, but it has another Principle,
viz: in the Angelical world, and during this Time of the Body stands in the
Mystery in the secrecy or Arcanum.

5. As the Gold in the Stone, whereas the Gold has another Tincture, another
Essence another Glance and Luster or shining; and the rudeness or drossiness of
the Stone, cannot comprehend it: and the Gold also does not comprehend the rude
drossiness of the Stone, and yet the rude drossiness, viz: the Anguish Center,
is a Cause of the Gold; for the rude drossiness is the Mother, and the Sun or
Sol is the Father.

6. Thus also is our Old Adam and Body, a Cause of the New Body; for it is the
Mother: out of the Old substantiality originally arises the new Body, and Gods
Spirit in Christ is the Father, as the Sun is the Father of the Gold: so also
is Gods heart the Father of the New-Man.

7. But now we can not know the New Man, better then in the Center, namely in
the Desiring, Thoughts and Mind.

8. Note. How we may know whether the Noble Lilly-branch, viz: the Body of Gods
Image, be Generated in us.
When we find our selves thus, viz: that our Desiring stands totally
according to and toward God; that our Thoughts continually run in the will of
God, and that the Mind totally gives it self up in Obedience into the will of
God, and that the Imagination or longing sucketh of Gods power: then we may
assuredly know, that the Noble Lilly-Branch is generated, that the Image of God
is in substance; that God in the similitude is become Man.

9. There it is necessary that the Noble Image be highly regarded and taken
care of, and that the Old Adam with his Lusts have no room or space left him,
but that he be continually put to death, that the New-Man may Grow, and be
great, and become adorned with the Wonders of the wisdom.

10. But now Reason asks: How is then the similitude?

11. Behold! God is Spirit, and the Mind, together with the Thoughts and desire
is also Spirit. The Mind is the wheel of Nature, the Desire is the Center, viz:
the first substance to Nature: the Thoughts are the Or Branches.
Essences.

12. For, out of the Essences go the senses or Thoughts; they are and have
their Original, out of the sting of the desirousness, viz: out of the harsh
astringency; for they are the bitterness, and run always into the Mind as an
anguish wheel, and seek rest, to try whether they may attain the liberty of God.

13. They are they, which strike up the fire in the Anguish wheel, viz: in the
Mind, and in the kindling in the Crack or Terror willingly give up themselves
into Death: and thus sinck down through the fire-source or quality, into the
Liberty, viz: into Gods Arms, and they go forth into the Liberty as a Life out
of Death.

14. They are the Root of the New Taste or relish, which penetrate into Gods
wisdom and wonders; they bring the Desire, out of the Anguish of Death, they
fill their Mother the Mind, and give it power from Gods Essence.

15. Thus is the mind, the wheel, or the Right Chamber of the Life, viz: Or
dwelling of the soul.
the souls own House, of which it self is a Part; if the substantiality,
understand, the substantiality of the Tincture, be accounted to it, viz: the
Fire-life.

16. For, out of the Fire-life ^^isteth the Mind, and the fire-life dwells in
the Mind: but the Mind is Nobler then the Fire, for it is the Mobility of the
Fires-life: it makes the understanding.

17. The Thoughts or senses are the Minds Servants, and are the subtilest
Messengers; they go into God, and again out of God into necessity.

18. And wherein-soever they kindle themselves either in God, or in Necessity,
viz: in falsehood or wickedness, that they bring home to the Mind.

19. Therefore must the Noble Mind often be Lord over the Evil or wickedness,
and stifle it, in its Anguish, when the Thoughts have entertained or laden in,
false or evil Imaginations into the Desire.

20. Thus understand it lastly in this Manner: God is himself ALL and in ALL.

21. But he goes forth out of the fierce wrath, and finds the Light-and
power- world in himself: he himself makes them, so that the fierce wrath
with all forms are only a Cause of the Life, and a finding of himself in Great
Wonders.

22. He is the Ground or Byss and Abyss; the Liberty and also the Nature, in
Light and Darkness.

23. And Man also is IT all, if he do but so seek and find himself as God does.

24. Our whole Writing and Teaching, aims at this, how we must seek make and
lastly find our selves; how we must generate or bring forth; that we may be
ONE spirit with God; that God may be in US, and we in God; that Gods
Love-spirit in us, may be the willing and the Doing.

25. And that we, withdraw from the Anguish source or Quality, that we may
introduce our selves into the true similitude in Three worlds, that each of
them may stand in their Order, and that the Light-world in us, may be LORD,
that, that may lead the Dominion.

26. That so, the Anguish world may abide hidden in the Light-world, as it does
also in God, and so be only a Cause of the Life and of Gods wonders.

27. Else, if we attain not the Light-world, then is the Anguish-world in us,
the upper Dominion, and so we live Eternally in an Enimicitious source or
Quality.

28. And this strife lasts so long as the Earthly Life endures; and then it
goes into the Eternal Either, either into Light or into Darkness; whence there
is no release more, and therefore Gods Spirit warns us, and teaches us the
right way. AMEN.

Conclusion.
29. Thus Reader who love God; Know, that a Man is the true similitude of
God, which God highly loves, and manifests himself in this similitude; as in
his own: God is in Man the Midlemost.

30. But he dwells only in himself: and if it be so that the spirit of Man,
become ONE spirit with HIM, then he manifests himself in the humanity, viz:
in the Mind, Thoughts and Desiring; so that the Mind feels him.

31. Else in this world he is very much too subtle to be beheld by us, only
the Thoughts behold him in the Spirit, understand in the willing-spirit; for
the will sends the Thoughts into God, and God gives himself into the
Thoughts.

32. And then the Thoughts bring the Power of God to the will: and the will
receives them with Joy, but with Or Quaking
Trembling.

33. For it acknowledges it self unworthy, seeing it proceeds out of a rough
Lodging, viz: out of a wavering Mind; and therefore it receives the Power in
the sinking down before God.

34. Thus out of its Triumph comes a soft gentle Meekness to be: that is Gods
true substance, and it apprehends that very Substance.

35. And that conceived or apprehended substance, is in the willing, the
heavenly Body, and is called the True and Right Faith; which the will has
received in the power of God; the same sincketh or demerseth it self into the
Mind, and dwells in the fire of the Soul.

36. Thus the Image of God is entire or total; and God sees or finds himself
in such a similitude.

37. And we should not at all think or Conceive of God that he is a strange
substance or sorrein Thing, to the wicked indeed he is a strange substance: for
the wicked apprehends him not.

38. God is in him indeed, but not Manifest, in the willing and mind of the
wicked and ungodly; it is only his fierce wrath that is manifest in him, he
cannot reach or attain the Light.

39. It is in him, but it is not profitable to him, his Essence conceives or
apprehends not it; it shows it self before him; and is only his pain source
or Torment; and he does but hate it and is an Enemy to it, as the Devil is an
Enemy to the Sun; and also to the light of God.

40. He would be better at Ease, if he could be Eternally in the Dark; and knew
that God were far from him, and then he would find no shame or reproach in
him.

41. But if he knew, that God is so near him, and he cannot apprehend him, that
would be his greatest plague, so that he would hate himself, and it would make
him an Eternal contrary will, opposite Anguish and despair, in that he knows,
that he cannot attain Gods favor of gracious Countenance.

42. His own falsehood or wickedness plagueth him, but he can create or procure
no Comfort, that he might come to Grace, for he touches not God, but only the
Center in the Anguish in the fierce wrath.

43. He abides in Death, and in the Dying source or Torment, and cannot break
through; for there comes nothing to help him, of which he can lay hold,
whereby he might Ground or found himself in the Kingdom of God.

44. When he has lead a Thousand years in the Abyss in the Deep, yet then he
would be without God in the Darkness, and YET God is in him, but helps him
not; also he knows him not, only he knows of him and only feels his
fierce wrath.

45. Understand that thus: just as a fire is in a Stone, and the Stone knows
it not, it feels it not, only, the fierce wrathful cause ^um.
to or of the fire, which holds the harsh astringent Stone, Captive in a Body;
it feels that.

46. Thus, the Devil also feels only the Cause of the Light, that very
cause, is the fierce wrathful Center: and holds him captive, and that he
hates and cannot endure it: and yet he has nothing else that would be better
for him.

47. Thus he is nothing but a fierce wrathful vehement eager Malignity or
Malice, a Dying source or Torment, and yet is no Dying, but a deadly loathsome
poison, a hunger and thirst; but no refreshment.

48. Note. What is the Devils riding Horse. To be considered, by Liars
Blasphemers and Boasters.
All that is evil base envious, harsh astringent and bitter; whatsoever flees
away from the humiliy, as he has done, that is his strength and his odious
desire.

49. Whatsoever hates and is an Enemy to God, and flies from, or Curses God,
that is serviceable to him, whatsoever turns or perverteth the Truth into
Lies, that is his will upon which he rides; and wherein he voluntarily
dwells.

50. Thus also is the wicked and ungodly Man; when he loses God, then he is
in the Anguish source or torment, and has the Devils will.

51. But know this: God has in the humane soul, broken and destroyed the
hardness of Death; and is Entered into the limit aim or Mark of the Covenant
wherein death becomes broke open: he has broke open the limit or Mark in the
Center of the soul, and set his light toward Man's light of Life.

52. The Light is afforded him, so long as he lives in the virtue and power of
the Sun; will ^e Convert, and enter into Gods Light, he will be accepted: No
Election or Predestination is concluded upon him.

53. But when he loses the Suns Life, and has also Nothing of Gods Life,
then all is out and lost with him, then he is and remains a Devil.

54. But God knows those that are his: he knowth who will turn and convert to
him, upon those goes the Election of which the Scripture Speaks; and upon
those which will not, goes the Reprobation or hardening, or the withdrawing of
Light.

55. Man has undeniably both Centers in him, and so then if he will be ^s
Devil, Shall God then cast the Pearl in the way of the Devil; Shall he shed
forth his Spirit into the ungodly or wicked willing.

56. Indeed, out of Man's willing must Gods spirit become Generated, it must it
self become God in the willing Spirit, or else he attaineth not divine
substantiality, viz: the wisdom.

57. Therefore Mind and Consider your selves dear Children, and go in at the
right Door: It is not called only Forgiveness: but being generated or Born a
new: and then is the right Forgiveness; that is, Sin is then a Husk or Shell
the New Man growth out of it, and casts the husk away, and that is called
Gods forgiveness.

58 God forgiveth the Evil away from the New Man: he gives it away from him:
it becomes not put away from the Body; but the sin becomes given into the
CENTER, for fuel or wood for the fire, and must thus be a cause of the fires
Principle, out of which the Light shines.

59. It must serve the Holy Man for the Best, as Saint Paul says, Romans 8. 28.
All things must serve for the Best to them that Love God, even Sin.

60. Romans 6. 1. 2.
What say we then? Shall we then sin? that our Salvation may become
generated? that be far off: How shall I will to enter again into that to
which I have dyed? Shall I go out of the Light into Darkness?

61. But thus it must be, that the Saints of God may loose Nothing; therefore
it must all serve them: that which to Sinners is a Sting 2 Cor. 2. 15. 16.
unto Death, that is to the Saints a Might and Power unto Life.

62. Then says outward Reason: surely I must sin, that my salvation may be
great.

63. But we know, that whosoever goes forth out of the Light, he goes into
the Darkness: let him look to it that he abide not in the Darkness; for he
sins purposely stubbornly or obstinately, in or against the Holy Spirit:
Gal. 6. 7.
Err not; God will not be Mocked nor slighted.

64. Of his Love, we are after our Fall become righteous again, through his
Entrance into our Flesh.

65. But he that enters purposely or obstinately into Sin, he despises and
Contemns the becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ: and takes a heavy burden
upon or into himself: he should do well to look to it; he will more hardly be
able to go again out of the purposed sin: then one, to whom the way of God is
not yet Manifested.

66. Therefore it is Good to shun, and to flee fom Evil, to turn his Eye from
falsehood and wickedness, that he Senses or Thoughts may not enter into that
which is false or wicked: and bring that afterward to the Heart, whence Lust
does exist, so that the Desire Imagines, and brings it into the Mind, whence
the Noble Image becomes destroyed, and an Abomination in the presence of God.

67. We would have the Reader and Hearer that loves God, faithfully warned
from our Gifts and Deep knowledge: and we have very earnestly and faithfully
presented you the way of the Truth, and of the Light; and we admonish you all
Christianly, to Consider of it and to read it diligently: It has its fruit in
it self.

Hallelujah.
Amen.
The third Part of the Book of the Incarnation, is concerning The TREE of the
Christian Faith.

A True Instruction, how Man may be ONE Spirit with God: and what he must do,
that he may work the works of God: wherein the whole Christian Doctrine and
Faith is briefly comprised.

ALSO What Faith, and Doctrine is.

An open Gate of the great secret Arcanum of God, out of the divine Magia
through the Three Principles of the Divine Being or Substance

Written Anno 1620. in the Month of May. In High Dutch.

By Jacob Behme THE Teutonick Philosopher,

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Lodowick Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhil, 1659.

The First Chapter. What Faith and Believing is.
1. CHrist says, Mat. 6. 33.
Seek first the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof, and so shall all
other things be added unto you.

2. Also, Luke 11. 13.
My father will give the Holy Spirit to them that pray unto him for it: Joh.
16. 13.
when that comes, that will lead you into all Truth: Joh. 14. 26.
that will intimate to you all whatsoever I have said to you.

3. Joh. 16. 14. 15.
For, it will receive of Mine and make it known to you, Mat. 10. 19.
that will give you a Mouth and wisdom what ye shall speak.

4. And Saint Paul says: Romans 8. 26.
We know not what we should pray or speak: but the spirit of God, helps us
mightily according to that which is pleasing to God.

5. And so now Faith, is not an Historical knowledge, for a Man to Make
Articles of it, and to depend only on them, and to force his mind into the
works of his Reason; but Faith is Or a Spirit one with or in God.
ONE Spirit with God: for the Holy Spirit moves in the Spirit of Faith.

6. True Faith, is the Might of God, ONE Spirit with God; it works in God and
with God.

7. It is free, and bound to no Articles, but only to the right and true Love;
wherein it fetches the breath of its Life's power and strenth; and lies not in
humane Arbitrium Opinion or Conjecture.

8. For, as God is free from all inclination or deviation, so that he does what
he will; and need give no account for it, so also is the True Faith free in the
Spirit of God; it has no more but one Inclination, viz: into the Love and
Mercy of God, viz: that it cast its willing into Gods willing; and to go out
from the Syderial and Elementary Reason.

9. It Seeks not it self in the Reason of the Flesh; but in Gods Love; and so
if it thus finds it self, then it finds it self in God, and coworketh with
God, not as to Reason what that will, but in God, what Gods spirit will.

10. For, it prizeth or Esteemth not the Earthly Life, that it may live in God,
and that Gods spirit in it may be Phil. 2. 13.
the Willing and the Doing; it gives up it self in humility into Gods
willing, and sincketh through Reason into Death, and yet springs with Gods
Spirit into the Life of God. It is as it were not; and yet is in God, in All.

11. It is a Crown and Or Adorning
Ornament of the Deity; a Wonder in the Divine Magia: it makes where Nothing
is, and takes where nothing is made: it works and none teeth its Substance.

12. It Or raises.
lifts up it self aloft, and yet needs no climing up: it is very Mighty, and
yet is the most lowly humility of all, it has all; and yet comprehends
nothing more then Meekness; and so it is free from all Bosheit.
Evil.

13. And has no Law, for the fierce wrath of Nature touches it not: it
subsisteth in Eternity; for it is comprehended in No Ground, it is included or
Bolted up in Nothing.

14. As the Abyss of Eternity is Free, and Rests in Nothing, but only in it
self, where there is an Eternal Meekness; so also, is the right true Faith in
the Abyss.

15. It is in it self, the substance: it lives, and yet seeks not its own
Life, but it seeks the Life of the Eternal still Rest: It goes forth out of
its own life's Spirit, and possesses it self.

16. Thus, it is free from the source or Torment, and dwells thus in the
Eternal Liberty in God.

17. It is with, or as to, the Eternal Liberty, as a Nothing; and yet is in
All: All comes to it; which God and the Eternity is and can possibly do: it is
apprehended by Nothing, and yet is a fair Inhabiting delight in the Great might
or Potency of God.

18. It is in Substance, and yet is or becomes apprehended by no substance: It
is a Play-fellow Companioness and Copsmate of the divine^ Virgin of the wisdom
of God: In that, stand the Great wonders of God; Sophia.
and yet is free from All.

19. As the Light is free from the Fire, and yet is continually generated from
the Fire, and yet the fire source or Torment cannot apprehend or stir it: In
like manner, I present to your understanding, that thus, Faith becomes
generated out of the Life's Spirit, viz: out of a Continual burning Fire, and
shines in that same fire, and fills the life's fire, and yet is never
apprehended.

20. But if it becomes apprehended, then is it self entered into Reason as
into a Prison: and is no more in God, in its liberty, but is entered into the
source quality or Torment.

21. It Plagueth it self, and yet there it may well be free; in the Reason it
works the wonders in the Fire of Nature, and in the liberty it works the
wonders of God.

The Second Chapter. Of Faiths Original: and why Faith and Doubting dwell
together.
1. NOw seeing Faith is ONE Spirit with God; therefore we are to consider of
its Original, For we may not say, that it is a Figure or Image of Reason, Faith
is Gods Image, viz: the desiring seeing and Mind.
but it is Gods Image, Gods similitude, an Eternal Figure.

2. And yet may destroy or Corrupt it self in the time of the Body, or
transmute and alter or change it self into the Anguish-source.

3. For in its own substance in the Original, it is merely a willing, and that
willing is a Seed, and that must the fire-spirit, viz: the Soul, sow into the
Liberty of God.

4. And so a Tree grows out of that seed, of which the soul feeds, and
allayeth or meekeneth its fire-life: so that it becomes powerful, and gives
its virtue to the root of this Tree, whence the Tree grows in the Spirit of
God even into the wonders of the Majesty of God, and springs in the Paradise
of God.

5. And although it be so; that thus we are as it were dumb or Mute and may
notwell be understood; for Reason will needs comprehend and see all presently;
yet we will set it down very clearly to the Light: why Faith and Doubting are
together: And as it were bound with a Chain, so that there is a vehement strife
in Man, all the Time, while he is a Guest in 2. Cor. 5. 1.
this Tabernacle of the Earthly Life.

6. Unless, he so very eagerly sinck down in himself, that he can introduce the
Life's fire into the Liberty of God, and so he is in the life of Reason, as
Dead, and though he lives, Romans 6. 10.
he lives to God.

7. Which is indeed a highly precious life of a Man, and is rarely or seldom
found in any, for it is Note.
like the first Image, which God Created.

8. Although the Mortal hangs to it, ye it is as it were Dead, as if a Dead
Image hung to him, into which corruption belongs, wherein the true Man lives
not.

9. For, the Right life stands converted, and is in another world, in an
other Principle, and lives in another source or Quality.

10. Uuderstand us now therefore in this manner: ye see and know the Original
of the Humane Life, how that existeth in the Mothers Womb or Body; and ye see
moreover wherein it qualifieth or operateth, and moves it self, viz: chiefly
in Four Forms; as, in Fire, Air, water, and Earth or Flesh.

11. And though clearly it thus stands therein, yet it is in this no more
then a Beastial Life, For its Reason comes to it from the Const^llations, and
finds, that the Sun and the Constellation makes a Tincture in the four
Elements, whence the Reason and qualification or working comes, also pleasure
and displeasure.

12. But it is not by far yet, the right humane Life: for this Reason seeks
no higher, but only it self in its wonders.

13. Yet there is in Man a Desire and a great Longing or panting after a higher
better and Eternal Life, wherein there is no such source quality or Torment.

14. And though it be clear that Reason apprehends it not, nor sees it not,
yet a Mystery lies in Reason, which there tastes and knows it, whence the
seeking existeth.

15. Whereby we know that the same Mystery, is together implanted in the first
Creation, and is Man's own, and thus find, that it stands in a desiring or
Longing, viz: in a Magic seeking.

16. Further we find, that, with that Mystery, we are in a strange Lodging for
our House: that, the same Mystery stands not in the spirit of this World: for
that apprehends it not, also finds it not, whereby then we know the heavy
fall of Adam.

17. For, we find that Mystery in the willing of the Mind first; that it is a
secret fountain Spring, which openth it self in another Principle.

18. Secondly, we understand also, that, that Mystery stands hidden in the
fire in the Anguish source or quality, and opens it self, through the Anguish
of the willing.

19. And then Thirdly we find, how that same Mystery is held captive by the
spirit of this world.

20. And as the Outward life's Reason has Might or ability, to enter thereinto,
and to destroy it, so that, that mystery comes not to the Light, in that it
covers the same, so that the Genetrix cannot generate; and so Note.
abides as a Mystery hidden.

21. And so then when the Body breaks, then the willing has nothing More
which can open the Mystery: and thereupon the fire or Souls spirit abides in
the Darkness; and the Mystery stands Eternally hidden in it, as in another
Principle.

22. Thus we know that Mystery to be Note.
Gods Kingdom, which stands hidden in the soul, which gives a longing
pleasure and desire, so that it Imagines in that Mystery.

23. Where then it becomes impregnated magically in that Mystery out of which
the willing existeth to it, to go forth out of the Firelife into the Mystery of
God.

24. And so now if it lifts up the willing, and casts it from it into the
Mystery, then the willing becomes Impregnated in the Mystery.

25. For, it is longing and attaineth or comes to be the Body of the Mystery,
viz: the substance of the Mystery, which is Gods substance, which is Note.
Incomprehensible to Nature; Thus the willing draws Gods similitude or Image
on to it self.

26. So now when the willing is generated out of the Souls Fire, then it
stands indeed also with its Root in the soul, and so between the willing and
the soul there is no parting or renting: but the willing thus becomes ONE
spirit in or with God, and becomes the souls Garment, so that the soul in the
willing becomes hidden in God.

27. So that though it dwells in the Body, yet nevertheless it is with its
willing environed and hidden in God; and is thus in the willing, which is the
right earnest Faith, a Child of God; and dwells in another world.

28. This now is not so to be understood, like a Historical willing, whereby
Reason knows, that there is in it self a desire after God, and yet holds or
reteineth that very desire captive, in Evil or wickedness, so that the willing
cannot go out from the soul, and enter into the Life or Mystery of God, but
makes Opinions, and sets the willing inthe Conjectures.

29. Wherein then it cannot reach the Mystery, and so abides in the
Conjecture, or indeed altogether hidden in the soul, in which it is directed
and pointed or put off to a Future thing, whereby Reason holds the will
Captive in the Longing or lust of the Flesh in the Syderial Magia, and
continually says; to Morrow thou will go forth and seek the Mystery of God.

30. Verily, there is no own or Note. Thou must through Christ in thee deny thy
self.
self ability of finding it: This Opinion deceives itself; so also the Liberty
is in no Conjecture or Opinion, where the will may Enter in and behold God,
that Reason need to Image or Contrive to make or to do somewhat, and so
therewith to be pleasing to God.

31. For there is no righter way then only to go with the willing out from
Reason, and not will to seek it self, but Gods Love, to cast it self wholly
into Gods willing, and to let all lie, which Reason casts in the way.

32. And though there were great sins and forepast Lusts, into which the Body
was Entered; only to go above them with the will, and Esteem Gods Love greater
then the ^orbid Pleasure of sins.

33. For God is not an accepter of sins but an accepter of the Obedient free
willing, he lets not sins, into himself.

34. But a humble lowly willing, which goes forth out of the house of Sins,
and wills sins No more, but sincketh it self out from Reason into it Love,
as an Obedient humble Child, that he accepts; for it is pure.

35. But so long as it sticks in the Opinion and Conjecture, it is surrounded
with the Opinion, and is not free.

36. But now seeing then God is free in himself from the Evil or wickedness, so
must the willing also be free, and then it is Gods similitude Image and
propriety: for, J^^. 6. 37.
What comes to him into his Liberty, he will not cast that away, as Christ
Teaches us.

The Third Chapter. Whence, Good and Evil, Love and Anger, Life and Death, Joy
and Sorrow, Comes: and how the Wonders of Nature appear in the Free will of
God; And yet the Liberty of God mingleth not it self with the Wonders of Nature.
1. ANd understand us further in this Manner: We apprehend and have it
sufficiently made known to us even in the Holy Scripture, as also in the light
of Nature and in All and Every thing or Substance; that from the Eternal
Substance all proceeds, both Good and Evil, Love and Anger, Life and Death,
Joy and Sorrow.

2. Yet we cannot say, that therefore Evil and Death Comes from God; for Note.
in God is no Evil, also no Death, and in Eternity no Evil goes into Him.

3. The fierce wrath only proceeds out of the fire of Nature, where the life
stands as in a Magia, where one form desires and awakeneth the other, whence
the Essences of Multiplicity Exist; out of which the wonders become generated;
in which the Eternity manifests or reveals it self in Similitudes.

4. And yet we must say that in Gods willing, there is a desiring, which there
causes the Magia, out of which the Multiplicity existeth.

5. And yet the Multiplicity is not Gods willing it self: which is free from
all substance; but in the Seeking or longing of the willing, Nature generateth
it self with all forms, where then all originally arises out of the Desiring,
as viz: out of the Eternal Magia.

6. And we are further to know, that all whatsoever there attaineth Life (which
Imagines into the seeking or Longing, and sets its will into Nature), that
it is the Child of Nature, and ONE life with Nature.

7. But whatsoever with its willing; goes forth out of the seeking or longing
of Nature, into the free willing of God, that becomes accepted and known in
that free willing, and is ONE spirit in, or with GOD.

8. And though it be Nature: as also Nature has Ever from Eternity generated
it self in Gods willing, yet its Spirit-life is without or beyond Nature in
the free willing, Note.
and so the wonders stand manifested in God, and yet are not God himself.

9. And if the souls will-spirit goes forth from the Reason of Nature into the
free-willing of God, then is the willing-spirit Gods Child, and the
Nature-spirit Gods wonder; and the Creature, stands inturned into it self,
as God himself.

10. For, the Sydereall or Reason-spirit, seeks in its Magia, in it self, in
its Center, the Wonders of Eternity: To which End, God has created the soul,
in the Body of the outward Nature, though indeed it be only apprehended in the
Inward.

11. And the willing-spirit goes into the liberty of God, where then the Holy
Spirit brings it into the Free divine Mystery, so that the Deity stands
manifest in the willing-spirit, and in the Reason Spirit stands the Magia of
Nature, with its wonders, Manifest.

12. So then seeing the soul is the Center, where the right willingspirit
toward the liberty of God, goes forth into the liberty of God, viz: into the
Divine Mystery, yet it has the Sydereall spirit for a Band.

13. And if it tameth that so that it works not Evil, may introduce, the
Sydereal Wonders, which in the Elementary Looking-Glass became made or brought
to a Substance, and bring them before the Majesty of God into the free willing
of God: that so the wonders may shine or appear in the divine Liberty, as a
similitude of Gods willing.

14. Not so to understand; that the liberty of God mixeth with the
Nature-wonders and with the similitude, so that they be One; NO.

15. God abides Eternally Free; he dwells in the wonders as the Soul in the
Body; and so little as the Body apprehends the soul, or the fire, the Light;
so little also does Nature, the Deity.

16. And yet is ONE substance, and has from Eternity parted it self into two
substances, viz: the Fire and the Light.

17. Where in the Fire we understand the source or quality of Nature; and in
the Light, the Mystery the spirit of the Life without source or quality,
although the Fire also is a Mystery*

18. Thus, understand us, it has one and the same form or manner in Man. The
Soul is the Fire of the true humane life; that, God out of the Eternal Nature
in Adam breathed or blew up by or with his spirit, as viz: out of the Center of
God.

19. And the Spirit that became generated out of the souls fire, which Gods
spirit formed to its Image; that, HAS the divine Mystery, out of which the
willing toward the Love of God, becomes Generated, out of which the Divine
Magia or seeking, Existeth; that, the willing spirit of God, desires.

20. And so now if it Lift up it self, that is, go forth out of the hidden
Mystery into the liberty of God, then it is a branch bud or sprout in Gods
Kingdom: Sprouted out of Gods Mystery, and works in Gods willing, and
Continually opens the Wonders of Gods wisdom.

21. NOT in that form or Manner, as if in God somewhat New were become
Generated, that had not been from Eternity in Gods wisdom, which has no
Ground or bottom nor Number.

22. Only in the souls Spirit in it self the Endless or Infinite Mystery
becomes Manifest to Gods honor and deeds of Wonder: and to the Eternal Joy of
it self, understand of the Creatures self.

23. Now seeing the Earthly perished seeking or longing mixeth it self together
with the Starry source or quality, and that the soul in the heavy Fall of Adam,
has with its willing imagined into the Starry seeking or longing, as also into
the Earthly, and introduced, the strange Magia into it self; therefore is the
willing become broken or Corrupted, and the divine Image become destroyed.

24. And the Heavenly divine Image of Man became Earthly, so that the right
willing stands as it were reversed or turned about, as viz. in the spirit of
this world, viz: in Reason, which is generated out of the Constellation.

25. Now therefore it is necessary for the right Image of God, which is thus
destroyed and become Earthly; that it become Joh. 3. 3. 5. 7.
born again anew.

26. And there would be no Remedy or Council found, to help this Image; if the
word out of the Center of God, viz: Gods own Life, should not become Man, and
new Regenerate the pure soul again in it self, whose Image was now perished:
and there the right Image, become helped again, else it would Eternally have
been bereaved or deprived of the liberty and Majesty of God.

27. And so now seeing all souls are proceeded out of ONE, they are all
THEREFORE generated out of the perished or Corrupted Root.

28. But seeing the New regenerated Life in Christ is come again into Or one.
a soul: therefore it is necessary, that we all cast our willing into the
Regeneration of Christ: for in Christ we are with our souls, become Generated
in God again, and have in Christ attained the Image again.

29. For our Mystery in the soul stood after the Fall only and barely in the
Magia of Nature, which in its Center, is a Fire, and the Image was turned out
of the liberty of God into the outward Magia, viz: into the outward Principle.

30. So now when that breaks or Corrupts in the Substance; then the poor
perished Image of the Soul, stands as a forlorn lost child, where in its own
Center it can awaken or stir up Nothing, but only the fierce wrathful
fire-source or quality: for it is gone out of the word of God, viz: out of Gods
Mystery, into a Corruptible Looking-Glass, viz: into the spirit of this world;
which is inceptive and finite, or has a beginning and End.

31. And therefore also the souls Body is wholly become Earthly, and is fallen
home to Corruptibility and to Death.

32. Therefore it is necessary for us: (being God has out of Grace turned his
Love to us, and has turned in our soul, in Christ, into himself again into the
Liberty, and made the divine Mystery stirring in the Image, so that the Image
can dwell again in God, viz: in the Paradisical Wonders) that we break off our
willing from the outward Center, viz: from the transitory Life, and introduce
it into the free willing of God.

33. And to that Now belongs, not a History only, or knowledge; for one to
say. I Believe, that is, I know it, or desire it, and yet abide with the
willing in the outward Principle, viz: stand in the outward seeking or Longing:
No!

34. The thing is this, Joh. 3. 3. 5. 7.
Ye must become born anew, through the water and Holy Spirit: Else ye will not
see the Kingdom of God.

35. It must be sincere or Earnest: the Reasons willing, must become broken; it
must be a living motion of the willing, which breaks quite through Reason,
and which striveth or fights against Reason.

36. And though that indeed be not possible for the soul, since it is become so
very perished or Corrupted; yet there is no better Council or remedy for it,
then that it should make it self with all its reason and thoughts, as it were
dead, and incline and unite it self merely and only into Gods Mercy, and give
it self up thereinto; that there be no other Room left for Reason, but that it
must be compelled and Subdued.

37. And if the willing do thus strike down Reason, then it is as it were dead,
and yet there lives, but it becomes the right willings servant, and yet there
without that, will be Lord.

38. For Gods willing must become Lord over Reason; if Reason would make or do
any thing virtuous, which subsisteth before God.

39. For nothing subsisteth before God unless it be generated in Gods willing.

40. But if the willing turns it self into God; then the willings spirit
becomes Gods child.

41. Then also do subsist before God, the Or Works.
Wonders, which have been made or wrought by or with the Reason-spirit; for
they have been made in Gods willing* and have become put out of the inceptive
and set in the Eternal.

42. And though indeed we cannot say, that our work or Doings; or that which we
have made, abides Eternally; yet the shadow or Image of the same abides; and
though they truly and really abide in the substance, yet but in the Mystery,
viz: in the Divine Magia, before the wisdom of God.

43. Where only the outward principle thereof breaks or Corrupts, viz: the
outward Dominion in the four Elements.

44. And there yet the Four will become set again into the One; where then all
Colors and forms or varieties of the four, will become known, with ALL
WHATSOEVER is become generated therein.

45. Therefore then a final day of separation is appointed by God, wherein 1
Cor. 3. 13.
all shall be proved or Tried through the Fire, what is generated in the
willing of God, or, not; where Each Principle will reap its own.

46. And there Much of Many Men's works will abide in the fire, because they
were not become generated in Gods willing; for Nothing impure, goes into God.

47. But whatsoever is generated out of another Magia, that is not Pure; of
which we have the Earth for an Example, which is perished.

48. Do thou ask; Why? Answer. The Devil with his Legions, sat, in his
Creation, where really he was Created an Angel; in the Sulphur, or in the
CENTER of Nature, Note, out of what the Earth is Created.
out of which the Earth afterward became Created; he has awakened or stirred
up the fierce wrath in Nature.

49 So that the Earth has an Evil impure seeking or Longing; although it is
become shut up in Death, and reserved for Or Justifica^on.
Putrefaction.

50. Where it shall be proved in the Eternal Fire, and come again, into
whatsoever it was before the Creation, viz: into the Eternal Magia of the
Eternal Nature.

The Fourth Chapter. How a Man must Live, that he may attain the Liberty of
God: and how the Image of God becomes destroyed. Also of the state of the
wicked, after the Dying of the Body.
1. NOw then seeing all is included and shut up in Gods willing; whatsoever is
become generated in Nature: therefore thus we understand, that Nothing can
enter into Gods willing; unless it became generated or Made in Gods willing:
and so we understand Clearly, that it is necessary for us, that we with all our
Reason and Thoughts give up our selves into Gods willing.

2. And so Ephe. 4. 18.
labor with the Hands in the world, and seek and make food for the Belly, and
yet not at all set our willing thereinto, so as to account any earthly thing
our Treasure.

3. For, Mat. 6. 21.
where our willing and Heart is, there is also our Treasure: Is our willing in
Gods willing? then we have the Great Mystery of God, out of which this world,
as a similitude has been generated, and so have both, viz: the Eternal, and
the Corruptible; and yet more; we bring the wonders of our works, into the
Eternal Mystery: for they hang or cleave to the willing-spirit.

4. But if we turn away our willing from the Eternal into the Earthly Mystery;
and account Money our Treasure, and the Beauty of the Body for our Luster, and
honor or authority and power of our Best Jewel* then our willing is captivated
in the same; and so now hangs only to the Looking-Glass, and attaineth not
the liberty of God.

5. For, the Looking-Glass, viz: the outward Kingdom shall be tried through
Fire, and the fierce wrath shall be severed from the Pure, where then the
fierce wrath will be an Isai. 33. 14.
Eternal Burning.

6. Now if Reason introduces the soulish Mind, with the willing spirit of the
soul, in which the Image of God, and the right true Man stands, into the
outward Looking-Glass, viz: into an Hypocritical seeking or Longing; then
indeed is the Image and right true Man captivated therewith, and infected with
the outward Magia, viz: with the seeking or longing thereof.

7. Where then the Image puts on the outward substantiality, not only as a
Garment, but it is an infection and total mixture.

8. Though indeed the soulish-fire, mixeth not it self with the outward
Kingdom; yet the souls willing-spirit, which is Magical, mixeth it self, and
so the Image of God becomes destroyed; and altered into an Earthly, where then
the souls fire-life remains rough, and has in the willing-spirit, an Earthly
Image.

9. So now if the body breaks and dies, then the soul reteineth its Image,
viz: its willing-Spirit: and now is departed away from the Bodies Image: for in
the dying is a Severing asunder, and then the Image appears with and in those
things, which it has received into it self wherewith it is become infected;
and that source or quality it has in it self.

10. What it has loved here, that has been its Treasure, whereinto the
willing-Spirit has entered, and according to that also the soulish Image
figureth it self.

11. Has any turned his heart and Mind into Pride state and Courtliness, in
the time of his life: then that very source or quality continually springs in
the souls fire into the Image; and flies forth Over or above.
over the Love and Meekness, viz: forth over Gods liberty, and can not possess
nor apprehend the liberty.

12. But it flows up thus in it self in such an anguish source or quality,
and figureth the willing-spirit continually according to the Earthly Things;
into which its willing has Entered, and g^^^ereth thus therewith in the souls
Fire, and continually climeth up in Pride and state, and will needs go forth in
the fire over Gods Meekness.

13 For it can Frame or Create no other willing, for it cannot enter into the
liberty of God, into the Holy Mystery; where it might create or procure another
willing; it lives only and barely in it self.

14. It has Nothing; and can also attain Nothing but only, that which in the
outward Life it has comprehended or Conceived in it self.

15. And thus it goes also with a Covetous Person, who has in his
willing-spirit and Image, the Magic Covetous seeking or longing, who wills
always to have much, and figureth all that is in his willing-spirit, where
with he was busied in the Life of the Body.

16. But being that has left him, and that his substance is no more Earthly,
therefore yet he carries along the Earthly willing, and so plagueth and
tormenteth himself therewith, or he can attain nothing else.

17. And yet it goes much worse with The false wicked decei^ful Man.
falsehood, against which the Miserable have cried out, and cursed him for his
Oppression and Extortion.

18. For, all whatsoever has been wrought in the Evil wickedness or Malice,
which he has caused, follows after him: for it has become wrought in the
Mystery of the Anger, and so the perished soul falls thereinto after the
Dying of the Body.

19. And there it must Bathe in those Abominations, so that if it were
possible, for it to unite it self with the willing into Gods love, yet it
would have those same Abominations and Malice on its Back, for they make it
Eternally despair.

20. Where then at last the soul departs away, and renounceth God, and
desires only to clime up and to live in those Abominations.

21. And this is its Joy, that it blasphemeth God and his Saints or Holy ones,
but yet lifts up it self in the abominations above God and the Kigdome of
Heaven, and yet sees or apprehends none of them.

22. Thus we give you to Consider, what the willing and Zuvers^cht.
aim or confidence is, viz: that it is the Master and Leader, which
introduces the Image of Man, both into Gods Love, and also in Gods anger.

23. For in the willing, the right true Faith becomes generated wherein the
Noble Image of God stands; for in the Faith or believing, we become again
through Christ, generated in God: and attain again the Noble Image, which Adam
had lost, and Christ with Gods life, has introduced into the humanity again.

24. Thus a false or wicked will destroys the Image, for the willing-spirit
is the Root of the Image, for it draws the Mystery of God into it self.

25. And the Spirit of that same Mystery Or brings to Light.
opens the fair Image, and draws on to it the divine Mystery, viz: Gods
Substantiality, understand, Christ's heavenly Body; which became generated out
of God, in the Dear and fair virgin of his wisdom, which fills Heaven.

26. So then if our Mind and Willing become set thereinto, and that the
willing desires the same; then is the willing Magical and goes thereinto: and
if it then hungereth after it, then it may eat the Bread of God.

27. And now Sprouteth to it the New Body, which is the saving amiable blessed
Tree of the Christian Faith; for every Body, or Corpus, loves it self.

28. And so then the soul gets Gods Body, which is so sweet saving amiable
and blessed, how then will it not love the same, which yet is given to it for
its own, in which it lives and dwells; and of whose power and virtue it
eats and strengthens it self.

29. Now None should deceive himself, and abide sticking in his falsehood and
unrighteousness, and comfort himself with a Historical Faith, whereby he
thinks, God is Good and favorable, he will forgive me well enough, I will
gather Treasure, and enjoy my full thereof, also leave my Children much riches
and honor, I will yet one day repent well enough; It is a mere deceit.

30. Thou gatherest and heapest together in falsehood, and attractest into thee
unrighteousness; and though it be all done in the best way that may be, yet it
is but earthly; and thou have demersed thy heart and willing down into an
earthly vessel, and clothed and infected thy Noble Image therewith.

31. Moreover thou inheritest and purchasest only pride for thy Children, so
that they only Set their willing-spirit also thereinto.

32. Thou Think to do good to thy self, and thou do to thy self and thy
Children, the worst thou can.

33. Indeed the outward Life must have sustenance; and he does Note.
foolishly who voluntarily gives his goods to a wicked one.

34. But much more foolishly does HE, that with his goods makes himself to be
a wicked one: in that he sets his heart upon them, and holds temporal
transitory pleasure, more in honor, then the Eternal untransitory goods which
have no End.

35. Note. ye Merciful.
But he is blessed that comes to help the Miserable; for they wish all good to
him, and pray to God, that he would bless him, in Bodyand Soul.

36. And thus their wish and blessing passes to the Giver into the Mystery;
and environeth him, and follows after him as a good Work generated in God:
for he takes that Treasure along with him, and not the Earthly.

37. For, when the Body Dies, then the Image passes into the Mystery, that
is, it becomes manifest in the Mystery of God.

38. For, in the Time of the Earthly Life, the outward Principle was a Cover
before it, and that falls away with the dying of the Body, and then the
divine Mystery appears in the Image, and therein, all good deeds and works;
which were become generated in the Love in the willing of God.

39. All the prayers and wishes of the honest and virtuous Children of God,
stand in the Mystery, and incline themselves toward, and appropriate
themselves with the Image: For, the children of the Miserable, whom he came to
help in their necessity and tribulation, have sent their willing in their
prayer into Gods Mystery: and therewith unite them, to their deliverer and
comforter.

40. And so when that same wel-doer comes into the Mystery, so that the
Earthly Life falls away, then all things become Manifest, and every one
uniteth it self to its own, into which the willing has severed it.

41. And all this becomes reserved to the Judgment of God the holy spirit, in
the Mystery; and there every one shall reap what he has here sown in his
field, Gal. 6. 7, 8.
there it shall all spring up grow and blossom in a heavenly new Earth.

42. In which, Man will draw and put on to his divine Image, the Body of the
perfect Mystery of God; and see before him, viz: before the bodily or Corporeal
Image, his righteousness standing, and why he is so fair Beautiful and bright.

43. He will know the Cause thereof, and Eternally rejoice himself therein,
and conceive or comprehend his Song of Praise or Hallelujah therein, to Gods
honor and deeds of Wonder.

44. On the Contrary the Wicked Heap or Multitude will have the scorn derision
reproach Covetousness Pride State Pomp evil Malignity and wicked Malice, and
the Curse of the Miserable, in their Mystery, gathered together into the Anger;
which will also follow after them, and so they will ever continually know the
Cause of their source or quality and Torment, and in that regard be Eternal
Enemies of God and of his Children.

The Fifth Chapter. Why the wicked Convert not. What the most Smarting thing in
Converting is. Of the false Pastors or shepherds. Of the Tree of Faith. How a
Man must enter into the Kingdom of God. Of the Breaking of the Kingdom of
Lucifer. Of the Three Forms of Life: and what we have inherited from Adam, and
from Christ.
1. ALL this the wicked Multitude cannot conceive or apprehend, and the Cause
is this, there is no willing in them, which desires to conceive it.

2. For, the Earthly substance has captivated them, so that they can Create or
frame no willing into Gods Mystery; they are to God as the Dead; there is no
breath of divine Life in them, also they will nothing thereof, they are bolted
up into Gods Anger Mystery, so that they know not themselves.

3. God has not done that to them, but they are with their Willing-spirit gone
thereinto, and so demersed themselves, and therefore they run on like Mad men.

4. Where yet the Noble Jewel in them stands hidden in the Noble Center, in
the divine Principle^ and they can very well, with their willing, go forth out
of the Earthly substance and Malice or wickedness, into the willing of God.

5. But they wilfully and obstinately let the fierce wrath hold them; for, the
Proud stately, self honouring-life, pleases them too well, and that holds
them also.

6. But after this Time, there is no Remedy more; when the souls Fire, is
merely and barely Naked, then it can be quenched by or with nothing but only
with Gods Meekness, with the water of the Eternal Life in the Mystery of God,
and that they reach not or attain not; there is afterward a Luke 16. 26.
Great Cliffe or Gulf between them, a whole Principle.

7. But in this Time, while the soul Swimmeth and burns in the Blood, it may
well be, for the spirit of God Psalm. 18. 10.
goes upon the wings of the wind; God is become Man.

8. The spirit of God, goes with the willing, into the soul, it desires the
soul; it sets its Magia toward the soul: the soul need only to Rev. 3. 20.
open the Door, and so it goes voluntarily in, and opens the Noble Grain to
the Tree of the Christian Faith.

9. But this is the most smarting, which enters most bitterly into Man; he
must break off the willing-spirit from the Earthly Substance; he must bring
forth the willing-spirit out from its Earthly Treasure, viz: out from Pride
State Covetousness and Envy, as also out from Anger and falsehood toward the
Spirit of God.

10. His Mouth must not be an Hypocritical flatterer, and his heart and willing
abide sticking in the Earthly Mystery, it must be sincere and Earnest from the
Ground of the Heart and of the soul.

11. The Will must turn it self about into the Divine Mystery, viz: into Gods
love, that the Spirit of God may have space and place in it, to blow up the
divine Sparckle, else there is no Remedy, it is no flattering hypocrisy will do
it.

12. Note.
And though one should learn all the Scriptures outwardly without book by
roate, and should sit all his life long in the Church; and yet would abide in
the souls Image, an Earthly Beastial Man, which in his heart hunteth only
after falsehood deceit and wickedness, then his flattering Hypocrisy will help
him nothing.

13. A Preacher, who handles Gods Mystery in the outward Externally, and yet
has not Gods Image in the Inward, Internally, but only hunteth after honor
and Covetousness, he is as near to the Devil, as the meanest of all, he is
only a Jugler with Gods Mysteries, and an Hypocrite without power.

14. He himself has not the Mystery, and how then will he give or Ephesians. 6. 19.
dispense it to others? He is a false shepherd and Mat. 7. 15.
A Wolf among the sheep.

15. For every Man which bears the Mystery of God, that is, who has awakened
or stirred it up, and given himself up thereto, so that Gods Spirit drives
him, Note.
HE is Gods Priest, for he Teaches out of or from God, none can rightly Teach,
unless he teach out of or from Gods Mystery.

16. But how will he teach, who is without it, will he not teach from Art and
Earthly Reason; what does that Concern Gods Mystery.

17. Although Reason be a Noble Thing or substance, yet without Gods Spirit, it
is blind; for Christ saith^ Joh. 15. 5.
Without (...) ye can do nothing: Romans 8. 14.
those whom the spirit of God leads or drives, those are Gods Children.

18. But Joh. 10. 1.
he who climeth into the sheepfold, another way then through Christ's Spirit, he
is a Thief and a Murderer, and Comes only to rob and steal, and to seek his
own profit, he is not a Pastor or feeder of the sheep, but a devourer; as wolf
does.

19. We are to understand thus concerning the Tree of Christian Faith, it must
be living, and not a dead History or knowledge; the Word of Life must in the
Image be born or generated Man, that the Soul may bear Gods Image, without that
he is not Gods child.

20. No flattering Hypocrisy, or deferring of Repentance upon hope avails;
so long as one bears the Earthly Image on the soul, he is without Gods
Mystery.

21. Thou should not dare to think, I will yet one day Convert well enough;
but I will before hand gather enough, that I may not want, and Earthly business
may not afterward lie in the way: No, that is the Devils griping Tallon.

22. * Note. Acts 14. 22. 2 These. 1. 4.
But through persecution the Cross and Tribulation through reproach and
disgrace, must we go into the Kingdom of God.

23. For the Devil manageth his dominion in the Earthly Image, and he
reproacheth the children of God in his proud stately pompous Seat, when they
would run away from him, or escape from him: Thus the wicked Multitude serve
the Devil and help to promote his work.

24. All this, the Man that will go to God, must not regard, he must consider,
that he is in a strange Country among Murderers, and is a Pilgrim, who
wandereth or travaileth into his true Native Country, he falls among the
Murderers, who vex and rob him.

25. And if he can but bring it so far, that he reteineth his Noble Image,
then he has Goods enough: for he gets the heavenly Mystery instead thereof,
wherein all lies; out of which this world is only a Looking-Glass of it.

26. And he is indeed very foolish, which takes the Glimps of a Looking-Glass
for a substantial Thing or Being: for the Looking-Glass breaks, and he that
loves the same is bereaved thereof.

27. And he is like one who in a great water Mat. 7. 26.
builds his house upon the sand; and the water carries away his house; and
so it is also with the Earthly Hope.

28. O Child of Man, thou Noble Creature, let The outward Looking-Glass
it not have the power; it costeth thy Eternal Kingdom, seek thy self and find
thy self, but not in the Earthly Kingdom.

29. O how very well is it with him, that finds himself in Gods; Kingdom; who
draws on the heavenly and divine Mystery, and enters thereinto.

30. All the Ornament and Bravery of this world, is Dung in respect of the
Heavenly: and is not worth a Man's setting his Love upon it.

31. Although it be so; that it must yet be brought to the Work or Effect.
Wonders; to which End also God has Created it: that Man, understand, the
outward Man, should open the Wonders of the outward Nature, viz: in the outward
Mystery, both out of the Earth and above the Earth.

32. All whatsoever the Stars can do, and the Earth has in it, should Man
bring into Wonders, into Forms, and into Being and Substance, according to the
Eternal Figure, which became seen in Gods wisdom, before the Times of the
World.

33. But he should not set his willing therein, and Esteem that for his
Treasure, but for his Joy and Ornament he may use it; but with the Inward Man
he should labor in Gods Mystery, and then Gods Spirit helps him also to seek
and find the Outward.

34. Seeing then, we are through the Heavy fall become so perished, that our
Mind is become turned out of the heavenly Mystery into the Earthly, as into the
Looking-Glass, so that we are found as it were half dead; therefore it is
highly necessary for us, that we go quite forth out of the Earthly, with our
Mind and willing: and seek our selves first, before we seek the Earthly Beauty
and Ornament; that we may first learn to know, where we are at home, and not
make our Mind Earthly.

35. For, though Man stands clearly in the Image of God, yet he is in a Three
fold Life; but if he loose Gods Image, then he is only in a Twofold.

36. The First Life is the Souls Life, and it originally arises in the Fire
of the Eternal Nature, and stands Especially in Seven Forms, all according to
the Spirit of Nature, as in our second and Third Book is expressed and declared.

37. And the Second Life stands in the Image, which is or becomes generated
out of the fountain of the Eternal Nature, viz: out of the souls Fire, which
Image stands in the Light in another source or quality, and has its living
Spirit; as you may find it in Fire and Light.

38. For, the source or quality of the Light, is not as the source or quality
of the Fire, and yet the Light existeth out of the Fire, where a Man is to
understand in the source or quality of the Light, the meek pure amiable Spirit,
and in the source or quality of the fire, the Cause thereof.

39. As you see, that out of the fire the Air Originally arises, which is the
Spirit, and the Air also is understood to be in Four Forms, as First, one Day
according to the fierce wrath of the fire; and Secondly, a Moist or damp one,
viz: water, from the harsh astringent attraction; and Thirdly, a Meek one from
the Light: and Fourthly, a swelling rising one, from the fierce wrath of the
fire-Crack.

40. Wherein we then understand; that the Light in all Forms is Master, for it
has the Meekness, and is a Life, which becomes generated through the fierce
wrathful Death, viz: through the Anguish source or quality in the sincking
down: viz: as another Principle, which subsisteth in the fire without feeling;
and yet has its feeling in it self; viz: the Laudable worthly Relish.

41. Wherein then we understand, that the water, becomes generated through the
Death, through the sincking down through the fires Anguish, and we understand
further, how yet it is no Death, and yet it is a Death.

42. But the Light makes it Sprouting, so that there is a Life therein, which
life stands in the Lights Power, wherein the life sprouteth out of Death.

43. And, understand; the Substantiality, viz: the Comprehensibility or
Palpability, for, or to be, the water; which is dead in it self, but the
fire-life, and the Lights power is its Life.

44. Thus the substantiality is esteemed as it were dead, where the Life is its
own therein, and possesses and generateth it self in it self.

45. Wherein the Death of the substantiality must give the Body thereto; as is
declared in our Third Book: where then in the Light-life, and in the water of
the Death, we understand two forms; and according to the Anguish in the Fire,
the Third.

46. As First, in the Anguish of the Mortifying or killing in the fierce wrath
of the Fire, we understand a fierce wrathful water, which in respect of the
first four forms to Nature, viz: harshness, bitterness anguish and fire, is
like Poison, and, is also Poison, a hellish substantiality in the fierce wrath,
according to the original of the first Principle, wherein Gods Anger springs
or flows up.

47. And Secondly, we understand the other water, in the Lights Crack, in which
the source or quality sincketh down quite through the Mortifying, and in the
Death, becomes like as it were nothing, for in the Nothing, the Eternal
Liberty, viz: the Eternal Abyss of the Eternity; becomes attained.

48. And if then the incomprehensible Light, in that very sincking down into
the Eternity shines or discovers it self, and, always fills the sinking
down, then sprouteth forth in the Light, the power of the Light, viz: the Life
of the demersed or sunck down Death.

49. For, the fierce wrath of the Fire, abides in the fierce wrathful source
or quality of the fierce wrathful water, and goes Note.
not along into Death; also it cannot be, for the fierce wrathfulness is the
stern Almighty life; that cannot dye, nor attain the Eternal Liberty; for it is
called, and remains to be, in Eternity, the Nature-life.

50. And though indeed in the Light-life, there is found also a Nature, yet it
is not painful odious or Enemicitious, as that in the Original of Nature,
according to which, God called himself a zealous jealous Angry God.

51. For, in the Light-source or quality, the water, which is sunck down
through death into the Liberty, becomes a source and water of the Eternal life
of Joy, in which the Meekness and Love, Eternally flow up.

52. Where then there is no more sincking down, but a sprouting, which is
called Paradise.

53. And the movinng out of the waters-source, is called Element, that is the
pure Element in the Angelical world.

54. And the Cause of the fire in the Light, is the Eternal Firmament, wherein
the Eternal skill and knowledge in Gods wisdom becomes opened: as we have a
similitnde hereof in the Firmament and Stars.

55. Thus, we understand two worlds one in another, one not comprehending the
Other, viz: One, in the fierce wrath of the fiery Nature, in the water of the
Poison and Anguish source or Quality, wherein the Devil dwells.

56. And then one in the Light, wherein the water of the Light, is sunck down,
out of the Anguish, into the Eternal Liberty, which the Poyson-water, cannot
apprehend or reach.

57. And yet is not severed asunder, but only through the Death, where it
divides it self into two Principles, and so severeth it self into two Lives,
viz: one in the Anger, and the other in the Love, which Life, is known to be
the right Life.

58. And herein sticks the ground; that as we with Adam went out of this Life
into the Outward Life; wherefore also God became Man: so he must introduce us
through this death, through and out of the fierce wrathful source or quality
out of the fire-Anguish-life, through the Death into the Light-and Love-life,
again.

59. Whereas yet the Gates of Death, were in the wrathfulness shut up in the
humane soul, so that the soul stood in the Anguish source or quality, in the
inward Nature, in the fire of the Poison, viz: in the water of the Anguish.

60. And there has the Prince Christ, broken the Look Fort or Bar of Death,
and is with his humane soul sprouted forth through the Death into the Light of
God again, and so now his Light-life leads Death captive, and so it is become
a Reproach and Scorn.

61 For with the Lock Fort or Bar, Lucifer thought to be a Lord and
Omnipotent Prince.

62. But when the Lock Fort or Bar became broken, then the Power of the Deity
in the Light destroyed his Kingdom; and there he became a Captive servant, for
Gods Light and the Water of Meekness is his Death; for the Anger, becomes
killed or mortified therewith.

63. Thus is the Light and the Love entered into the Anger, together with the
Paradise-Element, and the water of the Eternal Life, and Gods anger is become
quenched.

64. And so now Lucifer abides in himself in an anxious fierce wrathful
fire-source, where his Body is a Poison, a source of Poyson-water.

65. And thus, is become thrust out from Gods fire, into the Matrix of the
Eternal Nature, viz. into the stern harshness, which generateth the Eternal
darkness, wherein he manageth the very stern dominion in the Anxious Mercurius,
and so is as a Reproach or Outcast.

66. Who in his Original was a Prince, but now is no more then an Executioner,
a Base Slave, which must be there in Gods fierce wrath, as a Hangman, who
punishes the Evil, when he is commanded by his Lord to do so: he has no
further power.

67. Although yet he is a deceiver, that he might entrap many, and that his
Kingdom may be great, that he may have many, and not stand in reproach with so
few.

68. As a Whore thinks, if there were many Whores, then I should not be a
Where alone, I am as others are; thus he also desires a great Tribe or
Genealogy; that thereby he may reproach God.

69. For he always attributes the blame and fault to God, that he is fallen,
as that bis wrath has so drawn him, and thrust him into such a willing of
Pride and state, so that he stood not.

70. Thus he supposes, if he did draw many to him, that his Kingdom would be
great, and so should get more to him, that would do as he does and Curse God,
but justify himself; that is his strength and pleasure in his dark harsh
anguish, where he continually stirs up the fire in himself; and flies out
above the Thrones, and so holds himself still to be a Prince and King.

71. And though he be indeed Evil, yet he is a Prince in his Legions in the
Anger in his Creature, but, With the Anger without his Creature, he has not
power to Act; therein he must abide as an impotent captive.

72. Thus understand the Life, in two forms, viz: one according to the fire of
Nature, and the other according to the fire of Light, which fire bunreth in the
Love, wherein the Noble Image of God appears or shines.

73. And we understand herein, that the willing of Man should enter into Gods
willing, and so he goes, in Christ's Death with Christ's soul, through Death
into the Eternal Liberty of God into the light Life; and Col. 3. 3.
there he is in Christ with God.

74. And the Third Form of Life is the outward Created Life from or out of this
world, viz: from the Sun, Stars, and Elements.

75. Which, Gods spirit, with or by the Spirit of the Great world, Genesis 2. 7.
to Adam breathed into his Nostrils, wherein then also he became an outward
soul, which moves or swimmeth in the Blood and Water, and burns in the
outward kindled Fire, viz: in the warmth,

76. That same outward Life, should not gripe into the Image in the Inward
Life, also the Image should not let in that into the inward Light, which
shines through Death, and sprouteth with its power into the Eternal Liberty;
for the outward Life, is only a similitude of the inward Life.

77. The Inward Spirit, should only, in the outward Looking-Glass, open the
Eternal Wonders, which in Gods wisdom, were become discovered in the Abyss in
the divine Magia; and bring them to a figured Looking-Glass, viz: to a Looking
Glass of Wonders, to Gods honor, and to the Joy of the Inward Man, generated
or Born out of God.

78. But its will should not go into it, to draw in the outward wonders into
the Image; as we now with Lamentable Misery know, that Man, draws in and
Imageth to himself an Earthly treasure into the Mind, and so destroys the
pure Image of God in the second Principle.

79. For, his willing- spirit, goes into the Earthly Substance, and bring th
his Body, wherein the Image stands, into the Earthly Substance, viz: into the
Earthly Treasure, into an Earthly Vessel, or Comprehension.

80. And now, the Image through the Imagination becomes also Earthly, and
goes again into Death, and loses God and the Kingdom of Heaven; for, his
willing-spirit sticks with the Body in the outward Life.

81. And now the outward Life must die, and break or Corrupt, that the Created
Image according to the Inward Kingdom may appear and shine.

82. And thus the willing-spirit, sticks with the Body, in the outward
Wonders, and brings them in the dying of the outward life, along with it self
before Note.
the Judgment of God.

83. And there shall the willing-spirit go through the fire, and the Image
shall be tried through the fire, and all that is Earthly must be burned off
from the Image, it must be pure and Immaculate, or without spot.

84. As the Light subsisteth in the Fire, so must willing-spirit also subsist
in Gods Fire, and if there it cannot go free through the fire of God, through
Death; then will this Image be spewed out into the Eternal Darkness.

85. And this is verily the heavy Fall of Adam, that he has put his
willing-spirit into the outward Life, viz: into outward Principle, into the
false seeking or wicked longing Lust; and Imagined according to or longed after
the Earthly Life.

86. And so he went out of Paradise, (which sprouteth forth through death into
the Second Principle) forth into the outward; and wen^ thus into Death, and so
must dye, and thus his Image became de^stroyed.

87. This, we have inherited from Adam, but from the second Adam^Christ, the
Regeneration.

88. Where we must enter into Christ's Becoming Man or Incarnation, and with him
into his Death, and out of Death with him sprout forth into the Paradise-world
into the Eternal substantiality of the Liberty of God.

The Sixth Chapter. What Lust can do: How we are fallen in Adam, and helped
again in Christ: and how it is no Easy Matter to become a right true Christian.
1. THus we understand, that it lies in Lust; that destruction or perdition,
is come out of the Lust, and yet still Comes from thence continually.

2. For Lust is an Imagining, where the Imagination windeth or insinuates it
self into all Forms of Nature, so that, they all become impregnated with the
Thing, out of which, the Lust existeth.

3. As then we understand, that the outward spirit of Man, which is a
fimilitude of the Inward has lusted after the fair Image; and in that regard
set its Imagination into the Inward, whence the inward is become Affected or
Tincted.
infected.

4. And being it did not instantly feel the death, therefore, did it give the
space and room to the outward in its willing-Spirit, and so the outward is
drawn into the Inward for a Lodging, and is at length become the Host in the
house, and has obscured or dimmed the inward, so that the fair Image is
disappeared.

5. There the Image fell among the Murderers, viz: among the stern or severe
Note, these spirits Cain was afraid of. See Mysterium Magnum, chapter 29. verse. 55.
Spirits of Nature, and of the Life's original, these held the Image Captive,
and drew off from it the Paradise Garment, and committed murder within it,
Luke 10. 30.
and left it lying half dead.

6. And now the Samaritan, Christ, was needful, and that is the Cause, that God
became Man.

7. If the wound or hurt could have been healed, by a word speaking or word
forgiveness, God would not have become Man.

8. But God and Paradise were lost, as also the Noble Image became destroyed
and made desolate; and must be New-Regenerated or born out of God again.

9. And therefore came God with his word, which is the Center in the
Light-life, * and became Flesh, so that the Soul gat a divine Paradisical
habitation again; thus, to be understood.

10. That, as Adams Soul had opened the Door of the Fires Essences, and had let
in the Earthly Essences; whose source or quality had wound it self into the
Paradise-Image, and made the Image Earthly.

11. So Gods Heart did set open the Doors of the Lights Essences, and
encompassed the soul with heavenly Flesh, and so the Holy Fleshes Essences
Imagined after the Image, after the souls Essences.

12. Thus now, the soul became impregnated again, so that it went with its
willing-spirit through the Death, into the Paradise-life.

13. And thence came the Temptation of Christ, that he became Tempted, to try
whether the Soul would Eat of the Word of the Lord, whether it could enter
through Death into Gods Life.

14. Which in the End became fulfilled on the Stock or Tree of the Cross, where
Christ's Soul, went through the fire of the fierce wrath, through the stern
source, through Death; and sprouted forth again into the Holy Paradise-world,
in which Adam was Created.

15. Thus are we Men become helped again, and it is necessary for us, that we
draw away our willing, Thoughts, and Mind, from all Earthly things, and, turn
them into Christ's Suffering, Dying, Death, and Resurrection.

16. So that we continually Crucify the Old Adam with Christ's Death, and
continually dye from Sin in the Death and Dying of Christ, and continually
rise again with him out of the Anguish of Death, into a New Man; and sprout
into the life of God, else there is no Remedy.

17. We must dye away to the Earthly willing in our willing, and must
continually become regenerated to the New world in Faith, in the Flesh and
Blood of Christ; we must be generated or Born out of Christ's Flesh; if we will
see Gods Kingdom.

18. It is not so slight a thing to be a right true Christian, it is the very
hardest thing of all; the willing must be a Or Soldier.
Champion, and fight against the perished corrupt willing.

19. It must, sinck it self down out of the Earthly Reason into the Death of
Christ into Gods anger, and as a worthy Champion break the power of the
Earthly willing.

20. And with so hardy and bold a courage, that it will set and hazard the
Earthly life upon it, and not give over till it have broken the Earthly
willing, which indeed has been a strong Battle with me, where two Principles
strive and fight one with the other for victory.

21. It is no slight matter, it must be earnest, to fight for the victorious
Crown and Garland, for none get that unless he Overcome, he must break the
Might of the Earthly willing, which yet of his own Might he can not do.

22. Note. Note.
But if he sincketh himself down out of the Earthly Reason into Christ's Death
with his inward willing, then he sinketh down through Christ's death, through
Gods fierce wrath, and through all the holding Cords of the Devil, into the
Paradise-world into the Life of Christ.

23. He must make his Earthly will.
will as it were dead, and so he lives to God, and sincketh down into Gods
Love, though there he lives in the outward Kingdom or Dominion.

24. Yet I speak of the victorious Crown or Garland which he gets in the
Paradise-world, if he once presses in, for there the Noble seed becomes ^^wn,
and he gets the Highly precious Or Pawn.
pledge or Earnest of the Holy Spirit, which afterward leads and directs
him.

25. And though he must in this world travail or wander in a dark Valley,
wherein the Devil and the worlds wickedness continually Rusheth and Roareth
tumultuously upon him, and often casts the outward Man into abominations, and
so Covers Mat. 13. 31.
the Noble Grain of Mustard seed; yet it will not suffer it self to be kept
back.

26. But thence sprouteth forth, and a Tree Grows out of it in Gods Kingdom,
against all the raving and Raging of the Devil and his followers, and
dependents.

27. And the More the Noble Pearl-Tree, is sought the more swiftly and strongly
it grows, suffers not it self to be suppressed, though it costeth the
outward life.

28. Thus my Dear Mind search aright after the Tree of Christian Faith: it
stands not in this world.

29. Indeed it must be in thee, but thou must with the Tree, be with Christ in
God, so that the world does but hang to thee, even as Note.
it hung also to Christ.

30. Not so to understand it, as if this World were not at all useful or
profitable in the sight of God; It is the Great Mystery, Mysterium Magnum.

31. Man is therefore become Created in this world, as a wise Ruler or Manager
thereof, that he should open all Wonders, which were from Eternity in the
Sulphur, out of which this world with the Stars and Elements were Created,
and according to his willing, bring them into Forms Figures and Images, all to
his Joy and Glory.

32. He is created wholly free without any Law, he had no Law, but only the
Nature-Law, that he should not mix one Principle in another.

33. The Inward Man should let no Earthly thing into it, but should rule
Omnipotently over the outward Principle: and so no Death nor Dying would have
come into him.

34. Also the outward Elements could not have touched him, neither Heat nor
Frost had touched him.

35. For, as the Noble Image must subsist in the Fire, so also should that same
Noble Image, rule through the whole Man, through all the Three Principles, and
rule and fill all with the Paradisical source or quality.

36. But since that cannot be at all, and that indeed the flesh is become
earthly, therefore now we must become generated in the Faith, where truly the
Earthly Life covers the right Life.

37. Therefore we must put on the right Garment, which is called Hope, and set
our willing into the Hope, and Continually Labor upon the Tree of Faith, that
it may bring forth its fruit, viz: the saving amiable and blessed Note.
Love toward God and its Neighbor.

38. He should do Good, not for his own sake only, but also therefore, that he
may Edify and better his Neighbor, with his Example and Life.

39. He should Consider, that he is a Tree in the Kingdom of God; and that he
must bear fruit to God, and grow in Gods field and soil, and that his fruits
belong to Gods Table.

40. And that he should conceive or comprise his works and Wonders in the right
true Love, and Converse and walk in Love, that he may bring them into Gods
Kingdom.

41. For, God is a Spirit, and Faith is also a Spirit or One Spirit in him, and
God is in Christ Become Man, and the Faiths Spirit, is also in Christ Generated
or Born Man.

42. Thus the willing-spirit converseth or walks in God, for it is ONE spirit
with God, and works or co-worketh with God, divine works.

43. And though it be so, that the Earthly Life covers it, in, so that NOTE.
NOTE.
he knows not his work which he has generated or born in the Faith, yet in
the breaking of the Earthly Body, it will be manifest.

44. For the Hope is its Chist or Cabinet, and a Mystery, wherein, the Faiths
work, becomes sown and Kept.

The Seventh Chapter. To what End this World, and all Substances or Things
were Created. Also of the Two Eternal Mysteries. Of the Mighty strife in Man
about the Image: and wherein the Tree of Christian Faith stands Grows and
bears Fruit.
1. SEeing then that Man stands thus in a Threefold, Life, So therefore is
every Life a Mystery or hidden Arcanum to the other, and desires the other, to
which End, this World, with all substances or Things are become Created.

2. For, the divine substantiality desires the Looking Glass or Similitude,
for this world is a similitude according to Gods being or substance.

3. And God is manifest in an Earthly similitude, for the Wonders of the
Arcanum or hidden secrecy, might not be opened in the Angelical world, in the
Love-Birth.

4. But in this world, where Love and Anger is mixed, therein is a Twofold
Genetrix, and there it might be.

5. For, all things originally arise out of the fire-Root, and yet were
encompassed with the Water of Meekness, so that it is an amiable or lovely
Substance or Being.

6. Yet, thus the Fire, became not known in the Angelical world, for the Center
of the Genetrix stands in the Light, and is the word of God: and so the
Wonders of Nature may not, otherwise, then in a Spiritual Magia, become opened,
that is, become seen in Gods wisdom.

7. But seeing that same is almost incomprehensibe to the Angels and to the
souls of Men; and yet God will be known in Angels and Men, therefore the
Angelical World lusts or longs after the Great Wonders, to know them, which
have from Eternity stood in the wisdom of God.

And they became in the Earthly Similitude brought to substance in Figures and
Images, all according to the Eternal Essences of the Center of Nature, that the
Wonders may stand Eternally.

9. Yet not Essentially, but in Figures in Images, and similitudes in formings
according to the willing, indeed Magically, but yet the Genetrix is in the
Center of the wonders.

10. For it has once become awakened or raised out of the Fire, but it will be
again swallowed up into the Mystery, and stands as a hidden Life.

11. Therefore shall all substances or things become manifest as in shadows in
the Angelical world, yet Note.
those only which in Gods willing have become introduced into the Mystery.

12. For the Mysteries which are Eternal are two, as one in the Love and one in
the Anger: into which soever the willing-spirit with its wonders enters in,
therein stands its work and Wonder.

13. So in like manner, we are to know, that also the outward vehemently
desires the Inward, for all runs after the Center, viz: after the Original,
and desires the Liberty.

14. For in the fire of Nature, there is anguish and pain or sourcive quality,
therefore now will the Imaging or the Image of the Meekness in the sourcive
quality of Love be free, and yet may not in the sourcive quality of the fiery
Essences, be free, so long, till the sourcive quality divides it self in the
breaking, and there each passes into its Mystery.

15. In like manner will the fire be free from the water, for the water is also
the Fires Death, and it is also Mystery to it.

16. And we see likewise hereby, how the water, holds the fire Captive, and
yet no Dying is in the Fire, but it is only a Mystery in the Fire.

17. As then may be seen, how it breaks forth in the water, and Displayeth.
opens it self, so that opens it self out of the Center of its own
Genetrix, as is to be seen in the Lighting and Tempest, also in a Stone, which
yet is water; may be known.

18. And yet we see especially, how all forms of Nature desire the Light, for
in that desiring the Oil becomes generated, wherein the Light becomes known,
for it originally arises out of the Meekness.

19. Thus first, we are to know, our Life: that in us the Fires-Center stands
open, for the Life burns in the Fire.

20. And then Secondly we are to, ponder and Consider of the desire to Love,
which in the word of Life originally arises in the Angelical world, where the
Heart of God with his desiring stands toward us with his Imagining, and also
draws us into the divine Mystery.

21. And then Thirdly; we are to Consider the Magic Kingdom of this world,
which also burns in us, and vehemently draws us into its wonders; for it
wills to be manifest.

22. And Man is become Created therein to that End, that he should manifest
that same Mystery, and to bring the Wonders to Light, and into forms according
to the Eternal wisdom.

23. Now then seeing he is to do this, and that he thus burns in a Threefold
fire, therefore, the right Spirit, in which the Angelical Image sticks, has
great weariness, and is in great danger, for it wandereth upon a very small
Bridge.

24. For, it has two Enemies, which continually draw it, each would be in the
Image, and bring its sourcive quality thereinto, as, viz: the Inward fire, and
also the outward Fire, the inward Kingdom of the fierce wrath, and also the
outward Earthly Kingdom of the Looking-Glass; and thus the right Image sticks
in the Midst in the Quetzung.
Squeezing Press.

25. For the Inward Kingdom, will, through the outward, open the Wonders.

26. But being it is too sharp, therefore the outward Kingdom flees away
before the Inward, and graspeth after the Midlemost, viz: after the Image,
which stands in the Liberty of God, and so flees and slippeth it self into
the Image for it all graspeth after the Heart of God, that is, after the Center
of the Kingdom of Joy.

27. Therefore now it is necessary for the Image, that it defend it self, and
not let in the Earthly Guest, much less fiery; and yet becomes generated cut
of Both, viz: out of the fire, the Life; and out of the outward, the Wonder.

28. Therefore it is highly necessary for Man's Image, that he lead 1 Pet. 5. 8.
a sober temperate life, and not fill himself with the outward Kingdom, for else
it makes an indvvelling in the Noble Image.

29. And we understand herein, the mighty strife in Man about the Image of
God; for there are Three that strive about it, as first, the stern strong
fire-Life; and then Secondly the divine Life; and then Thirdly, the Earthly
Life; and so the Noble Image sticks in the midst, and is drawn of Three.

30. Now it is necessary for it, that it hide it self with the Faith in the
Mystery of Hope, and stand still in that same Mystery.

31. Where then the Devil in the inward fire-life, continually rides forth
into the outward earthly life, in pride Covetousness and falsehood or wickedness
over the Noble Image; and would introduce it into the fire, and anguish life,
and break or destroy it.

32. For, he supposes continually, that the place of this world is his
Kingdom, he will suffer no another Image therein.

33. Now thereupon the Noble Image, falls into the Cross and Tribulation into
anguish and necessity, and here there belongs strife to it, to fight for the
Noble victorious Crown or Garland, of Gods Image.

34. And hence originally arises Prayer, so that the Image continually goes
forth out of the introduced Earthly substance or Being, and also out of the
proud stately hellish abominations, with the Prayer; and continually Enters
into Gods life into his Love.

35. And thus the right Image continually kills the Earthly Adam, and also
the hellish pride and state of the Devil, and must always stand as a Champion.

36. And it is most necessary of all for it, that it should insinuate it self
into Patience, and Cast it self under the Cross, and continually Spring or flow
up into the Love.

37. For, that is its Sword; wherewith it slays the Devil, and drives forth
the Earthly substance, it has no other sword, wherewith to defend it self,
then the Meek water of the Eternal Life, and that, the proud stately fierce
wrathful Spirit relisheth not; for it is his poison, and he flees before it.

38. Now if we will rightly demonstrate the Tree of Christian Faith, then we
say: Its Root, stands in the Mystery of the Hope, its Sprouting stands in
the Love, and its Body in the Or Reception
Comprehension of Faith.

39. That is, where the Image, through its earnest desiring, presses into the
love of God, and, comprehends or attracteth the Substantiality of God, that
is, Christ's Body; that is now the Corpus or Body, wherein the Tree, stands,
grows, florisheth and brings forth fruits in Patience, which all belong in,
to the Angelical world.

40. They are the Souls food, wherein it eats and refreshes or quicken its
fiery Life, so that it is transmuted or changed into the Light or Meekness.

41. And thus the Tree grows in the Paradise of God, which the Outward Man
Note the Outward MAN, nor Reason, knowthe not the Tree of Faith.
knows not, and Reason apprehends it not.

42. But, to the Noble Image, it is very well to be known, that will then when
the outward life breaks, be manifest, and all its works follow after it in
the Mystery of Hope, into which it has sown.

43. Therefore should none, who will travail in the Path of Gods Pilgrimage,
propose or purpose to himself, to have in this world, Good and frolic Days,
with worldly honor, but Tribulation Scorn reproach and persecution, attend him
every hour.

44. He is here only in a vale of Misery, and must continually stand in
strife, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
for the Devil goes about as a Roaring-Lion, he stirs up all his children
of Malice and wickedness against him.

45. He is accounted as a Fool; he is Note. Note.
unknown to his Brethren, his Mothers house scorned and despises him.

46. He goes away and sows in Tribulation, and is anxious, but there is none
that Or takes notice of it.
apprehends it, or into whose heart it enters, every man supposes his
Folly, plagueth him thus.

47. Thus he remains hidden to the World, for Joh. 8. 23.
he is with his Noble Image not of this world, but born of God; Psalm. 126. 5.
He sows in Tribulation and reapeth in Joy.

48. But who shall express his Glory, which will be his wages? or who shall
speak of the Crown or Garland of Victory which he attaineth?

49. Who can express the Crown of the Virgin of Gods wisdom, which the Virgin
of Sophia.
Gods wisdom sets upon him; where is there such a fair beauteous One? For
it excels the Heaven.

50. O, Noble Image! Thou art indeed an Image of the Holy Trinity of God: in
which God himself dwells! God sets upon thee, his beautifulest Ornament;
that thou should Eternally Exult in Him.

51. What is I pray, the substance of this World, seeing it breaks or
Corrupts, and brings a Man only into anguish Cares encumbrances and
misery, and besides into Gods Anger, and breaks or destroys his fair Image,
and draws a Vizard on to him.

52. Note you that do wickedly not only without doubting, but with confident
daring presumption.
O, how great a shame and reproach will that Man have of it: when he shall thus
appear at the Judgment Day of God, in a beastial Image: besides that which
follows hereafter, that he shall abide eternally therein.

53. Then Lamentation begins, there will be sighing waiting and howling for
the Lost Earnest Penny and Talent, which cannot be reached or attained again
Eternally.

54. There, shall the Image stand in Eternity before the Abominable Devils, and
do what the Abominable Prince Lucifer will.

The Eighth Chapter. In what manner, God forgiveth sins: and how a Man
becomes a Child of God.
1. MY beloved seeking and desirous Mind, thou that Mat. 5. 6.
Hungerest, and Thirstest after Gods Kingdom: Mark the Ground I pray thee, what
is showed to thee.

2. It is not truly so easy a thing to become a child of God, as Babol
Teaches, where Men bring Consciences into the History, and so tickle and
flatter them Courtlike with Christ's sufferings and Death; where Men teach
forgiveness of sins Historically.

3. Like a worldly Judicatory, where ones faults are remitted him of Grace,
though he plainly abide wicked in his heart.

4. It is clean otherwise here: God will have no dissembling Hypocrites: he
takes not sin from us in such a manner, in that we cleave to the knowledge,
and Comfort our selves with the suffering of Christ; and yet in the Conscience,
abide in the Abominations.

5. It is said, Joh. 3. 3. 5. 7.
Ye must be born a New, or else ye shall not see the Kingdom of God.

6. He that will tickle himself with Christ's suffering and Death, and
appropriate the same to himself, and yet with his willing will abide
unregenerated in the Adamical Man; does like one that comfort himself, that
his Lord will bestow his Land upon him, without considering that he is not his
Son, whereas he has promised that he will bestow it only upon his Son: so
it is also here.

7. Will thou possess the Land of thy Lord, and have it for thy proper own,
then thou must become his right and true Son, Genesis 21. 10. Gal. 4. 3.
For the Son of the Maid servant shall not inherit with the free: the Son
of the History is a stranger.

8. Thou must become born or generated of God in Christ, that thou may be a
Or a Son of his body begotten or generated.
bodily Son; and then thou art Gods child, and an heir of the sufferings and
death of Christ.

9. And Christ's Death is thy Death, his Resurrection out of the Grave is thy
Resurrection, his Ascension into Heaven, is thy Ascension into Heaven; and his
Eternal life's Kingdom is thy Kingdom.

10. In that thou are his right true Son born of his flesh and blood, so thou
art Note.
an heir of all his Goods; else thou can not be Christ's Child and Heir.

11. So long as the Earthly Kingdom sticks to thee, in thy Image, so long
thou art, the perished Adams Earthly Son; no flattering hypocrisy will help,
give as many good words before God as thou will, yet thou art but a strange
Child.

12. And Gods goods do not belong unto thee, so long, till thou come with
Luke 15. 20.
the lost Son to the Father again; with a right true sorrow and repentance
for thy lost Goods of inheritance.

13. Thou must go forth with thy willing-spirit out from the Earthly Life. and
break or destroy the Earthly willing, which is woeful to the Mind and
willing-spirit to forsake the treasure it possessed, wherein the willing-spirit
became generated; and must enter into Gods willing.

14. And there thou sowest thy Seed in Gods Kingdom; and art new born in God,
as fruit, which grows in Gods field: for thy willing receives Gods power,
Christs^Body, and the New Body in God, grows to thee.

15. And then thou art Gods Child, and Christ's Goods belong to thee; and his
Merits are thy merits, his Suffering Death and Resurrection, is all thine, thou
art a Member of his Body, and his Spirit is thy Spirit, Prove. 4. 11.
He leads thee upon right Paths; and all that thou do, thou do to God.

19. Thou sowest in this world, and reapest in the Heaven of God, thou art Gods
Work of Wonder, and openest in the Earthly Life, his Wonders; and drawest thy
self with thy willing-spirit, into the Holy Mystery.

17. Mark this, ye Covetous, ye Proud, ye Envious, ye false Judgers, ye wicked
Malicious, which introduce your willing and desire, into Earthly Goods, into
Money and Plenty, into pleasure and the voluptuousness of this Life, and esteem
Money and Goods to be your Treasure, and set your desire therein, and yet for
all that will be Gods Children.

18. Ye stand and dissemble before God, ^e shall forgive you your Sins, but ye
abide with your Image in Adams Skin, in Adams Flesh, and so Comfort your selves
with the Sufferings of Christ, and are but dissemblers ye are not Gods Children.

19. Ye must become born in God if ye would be his Children, else ye deceive
your selves together with your Hypocrites or dissemblers who paint before you a
Glistring Color.

20. They Teach, and are Mat. 7. 22. 23.
not known of God, Jer. 14. 14. 23, 21. and 27. 15.
not sent to Teach, they do it for their Belly and for worldly honors sake,
and are Rev. 17. 1.
the Great Where at Babel, who flatter God with their Lips, and with the heart
and willing-spirit they serve the Rev. 12. 3.
Dragon at Babel.

21. Beloved Mind, will thou be the Chlide of God, then prepare thy self for
affaults; and for Tribulation, it is no light and soft entrance into the Child's
Life, especially, where Reason lies captive in the Earthly Kingdom.

22. It must be broken, and the willing must go out from Reason; it must sow it
self into Gods Kingdom in lowly obedience, as a Grain is sown in a field or
soil: it must in Reason make it self as it* were dead and give it self up to
God, and so the New fruit grows in Gods Kingdom.

23. Thus that Man stands in a Threefold Life, and all belongs to God.

24. The Inward fiery Essences of the first Principle, become incorporated with
the New body in Christ, so that they flow up in Christ's Flesh and Blood out of
Gods willing, and their Fire, is Gods Fire, out of which the Love meekness and
humility burns.

25. Where the Holy Spirit goes forth, and helps him to stand out the Battle
against the Earthly Reason, also against the p^rished corrupt Flesh, and the
willing of the Devil: (...)
his Yoke of the earthly willing becomes lighter to him; but he must in this
World, abide in the strife.

26. For, to the Earthly Life, belongs sustenance, that he must seek, and yet
ought not to hang his willing and heart thereupon.

27. It must Trust God, and his earthly Reason passes always into doubting,
it will fail him, it will needs always see God, and yet cannot, for God
dwells not in the Earthly Kingdom, but in himself.

28. Thus must Reason, being it cannot set God be compelled into Hope,

29. There then Doubting runs Counter against Faith or Believing, and would
destroy the Hope, and therefore must the Earnest willing with the right true
Image strive and fight against the Earthly Reason: there is woe and it often
goes sadly.

30. Especially, if Reason looks after the Course of this World, and so its
willing-spirit, as it were foolish has respect toward the Course of this
world: There it is said, be sober, watch fast and pray; that is, that ye may
Tame the Earthly Reason, and make it as it were dead; that Gods spirit may find
place in you.

31. If that appears, that soon overcomes the Earthly Reason, and the
willing in the anguish discovers it self with its love and sweetness, where
then always one fair little Branch or other becomes generated out of the Tree
of Faith.

32. And Romans 8. 28.
all tribulation and assaults or Temptations serve for the best to the Children
of God: for as often as God hangs hovering over them, so that they become
introduced into anguish and Tribulation. then they always stand in the Birth
of a New little branch out of the Tree of Faith.

33. When, the spirit of God appearth again, then he always brings up a new
sprout, at which the Noble Image very highly rejoices it self.

34. And now it is but to stand out the first earnest Brunt, that the Earthly
Tree may be overcome, and the Noble Grain be sown in Gods field, that The right
true Man
Man may learn to know the Earthly Man.

35. For, * Or Similitude.
when the willing receives Gods light, then the Looking-Glass sees it self in
it self, Outgoing substantiaal power and understanding.
one Essence sees the other in the Light, and so the whole Man finds himself
in himself, and knows what he is; which in the Earthly Reason, he Note.
cannot know.

36. Also none should Think, that the Tree of Christian Faith may be seen or
known in the Kingdom of this world, outward Reason knows it Not.

37. And though the fair Tree, stands very clearly in the inward Man, yet the
outward earthly Reason doubts for all that: for the spirit of God 1 Cor. 2.
14.
is as foolishness to it; for it cannot apprehend it.

38. And though it be so, that often the holy spirit opens it self in the
outward Looking-Glass, so that the outward life highly rejoices therein: and
for great Joy becomes Trembling: and thinks now I have attained the worthy
precious Guest, now I will believe it, yet there is no perfect steddiness
therein.

39. For, the Spirit of God does not stay continually in the Earthly sourcive
quality: it will have a pure vessel, and if it departs into its Principle,
viz: into the right Image, then the outward Life becomes weak and fainting.

40. Therefore must the Noble Image always be in strife and fight against the
outward-Reason-life; and the more it striveth and fights, the greater grows
the fair Tree, for it works or co-worketh with God.

41. For, as an Earthly Tree, grows in wind, Rain, Cold and Heat, so also
the Tree of Gods Image, grows under the Cross and tribulation and anguish and
pain in scorn and reproach, and sprouteth up into Gods Kingdom, and Luke. 8. 15.
brings forth fruit in Patience.

42. Now seeing we know this, we should labor therein, and let no fear or
terror keep us back, for we shall well reap and enjoy it Eternally; what we
have here sown in anguish and weariness, that will comfort us Eternally. AMEN.

Written by the Author Anno 1620. in the Month of May.

The End.
These whole Three parts translated into English, in six weeks and four days,
Ending September 1657.
THE CONTENTS of the Chapters of the First Part. Of the Becoming Man or
Incarnation of Jesus Christ the Son of God, that is: concering the Virgin
Mary, what she was from Her original, and what kind of Mother she came to be,
in the Conception of her Son Jesus Christ; and how the Eternal Word is become
Man.
CHAP. I. WHy the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, or his becoming Man, has not
been rightly understood hitherto: Also; Of the Two Eternal Principles, and of
the Temporary Principle. Containing 75. Verses. CHAP. II. Of the Revelation of
the Mystery; how the Temporary Mystery is flown forth out of the Eternal
spiritual Mystery. Containing 64. Verses. CHAP. III. The Gate, of the Creation
of Man; also of the breathing in of the Soul and of the Spirit. Containing 76.
Verses. CHAP IV. Of the Paradisical Being or Substance and Regiment or
Dominion; how it would have been if Man had continued in Innocence. 72. Verses.
CHAP. V. Of the Lamentable and Miserable Fall of Man. 135. Verses. CHAP. VI. Of
Adams Sleep: How God made a Woman out of him: How at length he became Earthly:
And how God by the Curse, has withdrawn Paradise from him. 69. Verses. CHAP.
VII. Of the Promised Seed of the Woman; and of the Crusher of the Serpent. 75.
Verses. CHAP. VIII. Of the Virgin Mary; And of the Becoming Man or Incarnation
of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. 71. Ver. CHAP. IX. Of the Virgin Mary; what
she was before the Blessing: and what she came to be in the Blessing or
Salutation. 94. Verses. CHAP. X. Of the Becoming Man or Incarnation of Jesus
Christ the Son of God. How he lay Nine Months as all the Children of Men, in
his Mothers Body or Womb: and how his Becoming Man or Incarnation properly is.
61. Verses. CHAP. XI. Of the Vtility, or what profit, the Incarnation and Birth
of Jesus Christ the Son of God, is to us poor Children of Eve: The Most
richly amiable and lovely Gate of All. 70. Verses. CHAP. XII. Of the pure
Immaculate Virginity: How we poor Children of Eve, must be conceived of the
pure virgin Chastity in the Incarnation of Christ; and be new Born in God; or
else we shall not see God. 102. Verse. CHAP. XIII. Of the Twofold Man, viz: the
Old Adam, and the New Adam, two sorts of Men; How the Old Evil one behaveth it
self toward the New: What kind of Religion Life and Belief, each of them
Exercises; and what each of them understands. 110. Verse. CHAP. XIV. Of the
New Regeneration: in what Substance Essence Being and Property, the New
Regeneration, viz: the Child of the Virgin, Consists, while it yet sticks in
the Old Adam: 74. Verses.
THE CONTENTS of the Chapters of the Second Part, Being of Christ's Suffering,
Dying, Death and Resurrection, and how we must enter into Christ's Suffering and
Death, and rise again out of his Death with and through him, and be conformable
to his Image; and live in him Eternally.
CHAP. I. OF the Eternal Beginning: and of the Eternal End. 50. Verses. CHAP.
II. The true and Highly precious Gate of the Holy Trinity: The Eye of the
Eternal Life: or the Luster of Life. 30. Verses. CHAP. III. How, God, without
the Principle of Fire, would not be manifested or Revealed: also, of the
Eternal Being or Substance and of the Abyssal will, together with the very
severe Earnest Gate. 64. Verses. CHAP. IV. Of the Principle, and Original of
the Fire-world; and of the Center of Nature: and how the Fire severeth it self
from the Light; so that from Eternity, in Eternity, there are two Worlds one in
another. 76. Verses: CHAP. V. Of the Principle in it self, what it is. 100.
Verses. CHAP. VI. Of Our Death: why we must dye, notwithstanding Christ dyed
for us: the First Citation or Summons; and of the New Man. 91. Verses. CHAP.
VII. Of Spiritual Sight or Vision; How Man in this world may have divine and
Heavenly Substantiality, so that he can rightly speak of God: and how his Sight
or Vision is: the Second Citation or Summons, and Invitation of outward Reason
in Flesh and Blood. 81. Verses. CHAP. VIII. The Way or Pilgrimage from Death
into Life; and the Gate into the Center of Nature; the Third Citation or
Summons. 93. Verses. CHAP. IX. Further and more Circumstances converning this
Third Citation or Summons; highly to be considered. 38. Ver. CHAP. X. Of the
Express Image of Man, that is, of the Similitude of God in Man: with a
Conclusion. 67. Verses.
THE CONTENTS of the Chapters of the Third Part, Of the Tree of Christian
Faith: a true instruction, how a Man may become One spirit with God, and what
he must do that he may work the works of God; wherein is briefly comprised the
whole Christian Teaching and Faith: also what Faith and Teaching is, An open
Gate of the Great Mystery of God out of the Divine Magia through the Three
Principles of the Divine Being or Substance.
CHAP. I. WHat Faith, and Believing is. 21. Verses. CHAP. II. Of the Original
of Faith: and why Faith and Doubting dwell together. 36. Verses: CHAP. III.
Whence Good and Evil, Love and wrath, Life and Death, Joy and sorrow, proceed;
and how the Wonders of Nature appear in the Free Will of God; without the Free
will of Gods mingling with the Wonders of Nature. 50. Verses. CHAP. IV. How men
must live, to attain the liberty of God; and How the Image of God becomes
destroyed; also of the state and Condition of the wicked after the decease or
dying of the Body. 44. Verses. CHAP. V. Why the wicked Convert not: what the
Tartest and sharpest thing in Conversion, is: of the false Shepherds: Of the
Tree of Faith: How men must enter into the Kingdom of God: Of the breaking of
the Kingdom of Lucifer: Of the Three forms of Life; and what we have inherited
from Adam and Christ. 88. Verses. CHAP. VI. What Lust can do: How we are fallen
in Adam, and Regenerated again in Christ: And how it is no light thing to be a
right Christian. 44. Verses. CHAP. VII. To what End this world and All Beeings
are Created: Also concerning the two Eternal Mysteries: of the Mighty strife in
Man concerning the Image; and wherein the Tree of Christian Faith, stands
grows and bears fruit. 541. Verses. CHAP. VIII. In what manner, God
forgiveth sins, and how Man becomes a child of God. 45. Verses.
The End.
A Catalogue of Jacob Behme's Books, Printed in English. According to the
numbers in the Catalogue, at the End of the Book of the 40 Questions. Printed,
1647.
1. THe Aurora. 2. The Three Principles of the divine Essence or Substance. 3.
The Thrcefold Life of Man. 4. The 40. Questions of the Soul. 5. The Incarnation
of Jesus Christ, 8. Of the Last Times, or 1000 years Sabbath, being the 4. and
5. of his Epistles. 9. The Signature of All things. 10. Of the 4. Complexions,
to comfort a Soul in Temptation. 12. The Considerations on Esai as Steefels
Book. 13. Of true Repentance. 14. Of true Resignation. 15. Of Regeneration.
These are the Way to Christ.
16. Of Predestination and Election; with 17. An Appendix: of Repentance. 18.
The Mystcrium Magnum, An Exposition of GENESIS; concerning the Manifestation or
Revelation of the Divine Word through the Three Principles of the divine
Essence; Also of the original of the World, and the Creation, wherein the
Kingdom of Nature and of Grace, are Expounded: for the better understanding of
the Old and New Testament; and what Adam and Christ are. 19 A Table of the 3
Principles, Explained. 20. Of the Supersensual Life. 22. Of the Two Testaments
of Christ, viz: Baptism and the Supper. 23. A Dialogue between the Enlightened
and unenlightened soul; of Illumination. 25. The 177. Theosphick Questions,
without the 13 Answers. 26. An Epitome or Abstract of the Mysterium Magnum. 28.
An Exposition of the Threefold World. 31. Being 35. Letters or Epistles of
Jacob Behme to several friends of his concerning the Divine Mysteries.
A Clavis or Key of his writings. Prephesies of the End of the world: Collected
out of several of Jocob Behme's Writings: called Mercurius Teuconicus.

The Life of Jacob Behme, written by Durand Hotham Esquire
Philosophy reformed and improved, containing 3 Books of Paracelsus to the
Athenians, helpful to the understanding of Jacob Behme's Writings. Also these
Philosophical pieces, viz: Magia Adamica, or the Antiquity of Magic; of the
Magicians Heavenly Chaos, and first Matter of All things. Lumen de Lumine, or a
New Magical Light discovered to the world. The Chemists Key to shut and open
the true doctrine of Corruption and Generation, illustrated from the true Light
of Nature.
These Books are to be sold by Lodowick Lloyd, near the Castle in Cornhill,
London, 1659.

Errata escaped in Printing Jacob Behme's Book of Christ's Incarnation.
Preface. Page. 9. line 13 for Heed, read Seed. l. 28. r. and the p. 14. l. 13.
f. desirably r. desirable. 15. Margin. r. 1 Cor. p. 16. l. 9. none. r. on. 25.
f. any. r. my.

The first Part. ^. 1. l. 3. Margin. r. c 15. p. 2. l. 2. r. the wise in p 4.
l. 4. f^^ e. r. Fire. l. 37. f Cnter r. Center p. 6. l. 29. r. i. as a. p. 8. l
9. f. it in. r. l. on. 4. l. 40. f Hoasts. r. Host. p. 28. l. 16 f. a ason. r.
of Reason. p. 35. l. 6. r. in him. p. 48. (...) f. the side. r. hts side. p.
49. l. 15. f. he. r. be (...) 2. l. 8. and 9. f. shall r. should p. 53. l. 14.
f. draw (...). p. 56. l. 28. f. beastliness. r. beastial^^^ 2. 60. l. 37. f.
things. r. Sins. p. 66. l. 10. (...) out is hidden with its Luster. p. 67. l.
31. (...) fair Virgin. p. 74, l. 2. f. r. ^p. 7^ (...) 3. (...) p. (...). l.
36. r. which the left. p. 81. l. 13. f. be^^^ (...) 1 r. for the word. l. 11.
r. the Love p. 94. l. 6. f. wrought r. brought p. 9. in the Margin. r.
occasioned. p. 97. l. 33. became. r. become. p. 101. l. 34. r. but the p. (...)
l. 30. r. one only. p. 109. Margin. l. 5. (...). 10. p. 110. l. 37. f. burned.
r. turned. (...) 29. r. is no more p. 116. l. 10. f. Men. in Man.

The Second Part. P. 119. l. 30. r. what it is. p. 132. l. 1. r. for ^ it. p.
135. l. 16. r. divides it self. p. 138. l. 34. r. beginning to appear is. p.
141. l. 15. r. how it is. p. 143. l. 39. f. not. out. p. 149. l. 21. r. as
thin. p. 152. f. make p. 159. l. 2. Margin f. not. r. out. p. 171. l. 3.
Margin, (...) 174. l. 3. Margin. f. r.. and f. 19. r. 10. l. 4. f.. r. ^. p.
1^6. 19. r. (...) has. p. 179. (...) f. paint. r. pant. p. 8. l. 5. Margin. f.
* (...) p. 1^6. f. one. and.

The Third Part. P. 208. ^. 2. f. pure. f. poor. p. 211. P. 9. r. it was
become l. 22. f. of (...) p. 203. l. (...) f. or. r. for. l. (...) into. p. 40.
l. 14. f. Day. r. Day p. 224. l. r^^viz into the. l. 35. r. and went. p. 226.
l. 20. r. and whether. p. 227. l. 37. r. it suffers not. p. 220. l. 18. f.
therein. r. there. p. 232. l. r. 3. r. draw, (...) l. 27. r. less the fiery. l.
29. r. wonders. p. 23. (...) Margin. r. l 4. and p. 239. l. (...) of.

The Contents. Page 2. l. 9. f. 69. ^. 96.


