

ANNIVERSARY TO THE Kings Most Excellent Majesty CHARLES the II. ON HIS
Birth-and-Restauration-Day, May 29. Having Resolved to Marry with the Infanta
of Portugal, May the 8th. 1661.
Connubio jungam stabili, Propriamque dicabo.
Virg.
LEt us fall down! and Worship Charles His Ray!
A Sun! that Summer's all our Year to May!
Had Phoebus ever shone so fair as This,
Daphne had escaped her Metamorphosis.
The Priests oth' East, by the influence of your Worth,
Mistaking Shrines, shall now Adore the North.
The Guiding-Starr, oth' Man-child God, did gain
Less Seekers there, than does our Charles His Waine.
Sol in Aspect with Luna! Lo! a Queen
Coming from far! famed Beauties Magazin!
The Wealth oth' World! the Glory of the Earth!
Fair as the Starr that blazed at Charles His Birth!
A Queen of Beauty, Love, and Innocence!
Sweet as the Smoke perfumed with Frankincence!
A Feature made up of such Harmony,
As Nature had her nicest Symmetry
Reserved till now. Her more than Glorious Eye,
Shines like a Diamond set in Ebonye.
Whereat, the God of Love, does Light his Darts
When He resolves the spoil of sullen Hearts.
Her World-like Head, tress'd with such lovely Brown,
That Every single Hair deserves a Crown.
Whose All, and Every part, do so excel,
Plutarch Could never have found Her Parallel.
For sure as Heavens have designed Her Queen,
'Twas only Charles could Match with Katherine.
Thus like the Southern Queen She Is drawing on
To Commune with our Wiser Solomon.
We Will 'bate the Spice and Camells (Gifts too small)
Bringing Her single Self, She gives Us All.
When two such Planets in Conjunction are
At Every Birth, how Great will be the Starr!
Twice did Our Edward winn the Peoples Love
By Mien, and Person. -- Oh how Charles would move!
'Twixt their two Fates the only difference is
That gained it for a Time, for ever, This.
As erst to Caesar, Nations now agree
To yield to One that is more August than He.
How timely did the Grecian fall asleep!
Had He now Lived, there were no Cause to Weep.
He little thought the Sea had ever hid
A World, where You should out-doe what He did.
How tamely did the Swedish Charles retreat!
And quit the Earth in dread of Charles the Great!
It Is one Excuse for Atheists, that they view
A Deity, and think there is None, but You.
When two such Planets in Conjunction are,
At Every Birth, how Great will be the Starr!
Blessed be this Month for ever! Nature's Pride!
VVorth all the Seasons of the Year beside!
A Month that such a Flower has brought forth,
As decks the South, and perfumes all the North!
What York and Lancaster could never have done,
Till they were well Contracted into One.
This Month scarce ownes a Day that has not shown
More Triumph in it, then in Annalls known.
For un-beholden to his Ushers Shower,
He (of himself) affords Another Flower,
So rare, that, amongst Natures Glories, seen
'Twill be un-question'd, Which is King and Queen.
May from this precious Plant an Offspring rise
To make all Christendom a Paradise!
That Every Son may be AUGUST, we pray,
And Every Daughter Lady of the May!
-- Tecum Sociales impleat annos
Quae nisi Te, nullo Conjuge, Digna fuit!
Ovid.
Hen. Bold olim e N. C. Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1661.


