The Epistles of JACOB BEHMEN aliter, TEVTONICVS PHILOSOPHVS. Very useful and
necessary for those that read his VVritings, and are very full of excellent and
plain Instructions how to attain to The Life of CHRIST. Translated out of the
German Language.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons for Gyles Calvert, at the Black Spread Eagle, at
the West end of Paul's Church, 1649.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AS there is no Book or Treatise which this Author has written, but the
footsteps and Characters of Divine Light, and knowledge are therein Imprinted
and discerned, and may be of special use and improvement to the Christian,
impartial, Reader; so likewise these his Epistles, written at sundry times,
and occasions to several Friends; and thus gathered and compact together, may
of right be reckoned as one Book, not of the smallest benefit and direction to
the Reader, Lover, and Practitioner of that Divine light, and knowledge, which
his Writings do contain, and hold forth:
Indeed, the bare Letter of any Man's Writings, though written from a Divine
Gift, and real manifestation of light in and to themselves, cannot breath the
spirit of wisdom into us: for the sound of understanding is not to be
Characterized, or Painted on Paper; no more then the Notes, and Characters of
Music can give the real Sound, and Tune, unto the Ear; but they are a
direction how the skillful Musician shall play on the Instrument; so also our
mind is as an Organ, or Instrument; but it Sounds only according to the Tune,
and Note, of that Spirit, that does possess and act it: And we do convert,
and assimulate all things according to that Spirit, and will that is ruling,
and predominant in us; and therein the mind, thoughts, and senses, are
enkindled, and enflamed; for if we have a bare Astrall, Worldly, Carnal,
Selfe-conceited, Contemning, Cavilling, Pharisaicall, Hypocritical Spirit;
accordingly we do form, and frame our Notions, Judgment, and Censure; and
pervert all things to a wrong sense and use; but if the Divine Spirit of Love,
Light, meekness, humility, selfe-denyall, syncerity, and holy desires do
dwell, rule, and act in us; then our understanding is accordingly holy, Divine,
and real: for To the pure, all things are pure; but to the impure, all things
are impure; for their very Minds and Consciences are defiled: As this Author
received not his Learning, Gifts, and high Endowments, from the Schools of
this World;
but from the School of Divine wisdom, the illumination of the holy Spirit;
so likewise the meaning and drift of his Writings will not be understood of
those who are merely trained up, and skilled in the litterall and Historical
School of this World; and according to the Canons, Rules, and Axioms of their
wise Pharisaicall Reason, who do contemn, judge, and rashly censure, all that
speak not their phrase, style, and Dialect: For if we had all that ever the
Prophets,
Christ, and his Apostles did speak and teach, and the knowledge of all
Divine, illuminate men, in their several Gifts, deciphered in Writings, and
should read in them many years; yet if we did not desire to become one with
the same spirit of Divine knowledge; and endeavor to have it innate, and
essential in us, to the living expression of Divine love and righteousness;
they would be but as dark and Historical unto us: and the frame and structure
of our knowledge, which by our artificial Reason we should build unto our
selves upon that foundation; would be but a vapouring Notion, a blind
Pedanticall Luciferian ostentation of a Pharisaicall knowledge, that would not
edify, but puff up;
from which selfe-conceited, Verbal, high-flowne, contrived knowledge, which
wise Letter-learned Reason, devoyd of the illumination of the holy Spirit, has
gathered in diverse forms unto it self, by its own imaginary apprehensions,
and expositions, upon the Writings of holy men; the many mental Idols,
Opinions, Contentions, Rents, and divisions, are arisen in the Christian World;
which have almost quite destroyed all brotherly love; but the God of love, by
the efflux and breakings forth of his Divine light, and holy spirit in us, so
expel and drive them into the Abyss of darkness, from whence they come, that
in the several dispensations of his Divine Gifts, and manifestations of light
unto us, We may rightly understand, and serve one another in Love: that the
great Babylonish building of our own tottering imaginations, and wanton
opinions, which we (by the sharp inventions, and glozing glosses of vain
contriving reason, in the many and various conjectures, about the ways, how God
is to be worshipped and served) have endeavored to rear up unto our selves,
may fall: that so we may all come to speak the One holy language of Christian
Love to each other: who hitherto have been so divided, that in sted of building
up one another in the holy Faith of Christ, we have bruised, battered, and
beaten down one another in the spiritual pride and hypocrisy of Antichrist.

There are some that are so far forestalled with a strong self-conceit of
their own light and love of self-will,
that whatsoever bears not the stamp, and superscription of their approved
Patrons, Schools, and Institutions, is but as darkness and nifling shaddows
unto them, and ungrounded prejudice, cavilling superstition, and vain suspicion
do so much possess them, that they reject it as not worth the reading over;
weening that they have a right Orthodox judgment, rectified in all points of
Philosophy, and Divinity; but these cannot see how far they are like the
blind selfe-conceited Scribes and Pharisees, those Luciferian wiselings that
thought none could teach them any thing; because they were skilled in the
Letter of the Scripture; but Christ told them, that They erred, not knowing the
Scriptures, etc.

Others again, the Mysterious Antichrist in Babel, by a selfish illumination,
and blind persuasion, has so deeply captivated, and imprisoned; yea,
bewildred, and bewitched, in his Mystery of iniquity and hypocrisy, that they
do not only take upon them to contemn, and condemn all that seem to
contradict their received Principles, and opinions, but from the workings of
the unclean Pharisaicall spirit in them, They will draw strange conclusions,
and perverted meanings, from the words and works of others; to make them odious
and abominable; but these are like unto Toads, that turn all they eat into a
poysonfull nourishment, which they will spit out again, upon those that do
but touch them.

Others there are also,
that are very greedy, and eager of reading Books, to better and improve their
knowledge; but their simple wellmeaning minds are so much darkened, and
possessed with the Principles, mental Idols; and opinions of their approved
Masters; and to them they have so chained, devoted, and Sacrificed their
consciences in blindfolded Hypocrisy; that nothing can take any true
impression upon them: but that which speaks for, pleads for, and maintains
their cause, their way, their Sect, unto which they have given up and addicted
themselves; and that they will hold, and believe, rather because they will, or
because such, and such, of whom they have a good opinion do say so; or because
they have already received and maintained it, then from any true impartial
consideration that it is right, or from any effectual living essential
knowledge, and real spiritual Being of it in their own Souls, etc. But for
those that know enough already, and are so well conceited of their own selves,
this Author has written nothing; but for the Seeking, hungry, desirous Soul;
that by unfeigned repentance, conversion, and introversion of its will, mind,
and thoughts to God, does endeavor the real practice of Christianity, and the
leading of an upright conversation in all humility, meekness, simplicity,
patience, forbearance, righteousness, and Christian love toward all men,
without a Selfish singular disrespect, or Pharisaicall contemning and
condemning of Others.

The true way and means for a man to free himself from all blind contentions,
disputes, doubts, errors, and controversies in Religion; and to get out of
that tedious Maze, and wearisome laborinth of perplexing thoughts, ways, and
opinions concerning God, Christ, Faith, Election; the Ordinances, or the way of
worship, wherein the World does trace it self, is faithfully set down, and
declared according to the ground of the Scripture, and true experience in this
Author; the attainement of which light, will give real satisfaction, and
assurance to the Soul, so that it shall not need say, Is it true? What
Arguments are there for it? How can it be proved, etc? But it shall find the
real Sign and Seal of truth within it self, as the Scripture declares, 1
John 2. 20. 27. That the unction from the holy One teaches all things;
so that no man need teach those in whom it does abide: But this knowledge,
this precious Pearl of light,
this darling of wisdom, this Garland, and Crown of Virgin Sophia, which
surpasses all the beauty and treasure, all the Pomp, Power, and pleasure of
this World: This Universal Touchstone, to try and find out the qualities and
virtues of all things, this Heavenly Tincture, this true Philosophers Stone,
this Summum bonum, which no humane tongue can express; is only obtained in
the new birth, whereby the light, and life of God is renewed in us; the
essential Word of Divine love, Christ himself is begotten and formed in us;
to the reading, and experimental understanding, of which Word of Life, Light,
and Love; the whole Scripture, and the Writings of Divine illuminate Men do
direct us, and all words, works, and Books, that proceed not from that Word,
and lead us again to that Word, are either only Astrall, outward, and
transitory; or the fantastical Idola mentis, the shadows of fancy, and
learned Pharisaicall Reason, which by its feighned words of suttlety, and
humane wisdom, enticeth men to believe strong delusions, and follow after
lies in Hypocrisy.

In our own Book which is the Image of God in us, time and Eternity, and all
Mysteries, are couched and contained, and they may really be read, in our own
souls, by the illumination of the Divine Spirit; for our mind is a true
mystical Mirror, and Looking-glass, of Divine and Natural Mysteries; and we
shall receive more real knowledge from one effectual innate essential glimps,
beam, or Ray, of light, arising from the New birth within us; then in reading
many hundred of Authors; whereby we scrape abundance of carved works and
conceits together, and frame a Babel of knowledge in the Notion, and Fancy, to
our selves; for in the true light we receive the pledge and earnest of that
Spirit, which Searches all things, yea the depths of God: let no man think
that it is now impossible; for in a Christian, newborn in Christ, Christ the
light of life, and being of Love does dwell; and in him are all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge; and he does express the same, in the humble
resigned Soul, according to the manner and measure, as he pleases; and as is
best requisite for the Time and Age.

These Epistles are not fraught with fine complementall strains, and pleasing
Notions of humane Art; or with the learned Quotations of ancient Authors, or
with the witty glances of accute Reason, trimmed up in the Scholastique pomp,
and pride of words, to tickle and delight the fancy of the Reader; neither do
they savor of a Sectarian spirit of Hypocrisy and affectation; arrogance and
Pedantick presumption, to make himself that which in reallity he is not, to
get a great Name, and to amuse and captivate men's minds, with strange
high-flowne conceits, thereby to gain a selfish confidence and approbation in
others, to make a Sect in Babel; but he has written (according to the Divine
Gift which he received) of the greatest, and deepest Mysteries, concerning God
and Nature; and has expressed them in such suitable and significant terms
and phrases, as are best apt to render them, in their own native and proper
Idea and meaning, to the understanding and capacity of others: Albeit few will
understand them according to the depth of his sense; but every one may receive
benefit according to his capacity; if his own Image-like fancy, and the
overweening conceit of his own light does not prepossesse and hinder him; and
no doubt his Writings are left unto Posterity, as a precious Talent to be
improved: Not that we should only gather a talkative Historical litterall
Notion of the Mysteries; but that in all simplicity and syncerity, we practice
the way of Regeneration in the Spirit of Christ; and Divinitize our knowledge
into an effectual working Love; and so attain the experimental and
essential being thereof in our own Souls.

It would be too large here to speak of that foundation and steadfast Or,
Ground*
Bysse which his Writings do contain, whereby true Philosophy may be restored
to its Original purity; being from those Idols of fancy, and vain Reason
that do darken and perplex it; for by the knowledge of the Center of all
Beings (of which his Writings speak) we come rightly to understand what Time
and Eternity is; and therein the Science of the Nothing, Something and All
things; whereby we may come to find out whence the inward radical Ens, working
essence, true subsistence, and full existence of every thing proceeds; and
also to what end every thing has such an Essence, life, power, virtue, form,
color; and then whither it goes, and what it shall be hereafter in Eternity;
by which we may come to see how it is, that all things proceed from God,
subsist in God, and again return to God; and therein obtain the right
knowledge of our Selves and of God in Nature; and from this Center arises the
true knowledge of the Three Principles: and also of the Threefold, or Tri-une
life in Man; whereby the deepest, darkest, and hardest Questions, and Quaere's,
that can arise within the mind of man, or come under the reach of any
Imagination or thought, may be rightly understood, and determined; and this
must needs advance all Arts and Sciences, and conduces to the attainment of the
Universal Tincture, and signature; whereby the different secret qualities, and
virtues, that are hid in all visible and corporeal things, as Metals,
Minerals, Plants, and Herbs, etc. may be drawn forth and applied to their
right natural use for the curing, and healing of corrupt and decayed nature;
and by the powerful effects and operation that will hence arise, all false
Sophisticate Artists that soar aloft in their own contrived Imaginations, and
tottering experiences, may be convinced of their unsound, sick, and sandy
foundation; and moreover this signal, fundamental, Centrall knowledge, will
quicken, and revive the life of Divinity so deeply buried in the painted
Sepulchers of Pharisaicall Hypocrisy, and Verbal formality; and settle all
Sects, and Controversies in Religion on the true ground, that so we may come to
serve God aright in the true unity of the Spirit, and each other in all
Christian Love and Righteousness.

In these Epistles there is much seasonable and wholesome Doctrine,
Instruction, and Counsel, for a Christian resigned Soul; much Consolation
for the afflicted under Christ's Cross; and also direction how a man shall
behave himself as a Christian amidst the various Sects, and their harsh
censures: Exhortation to Truth, Love, and righteousness: Dehortation from all
evil, pride, envy, covetousness wrath, malice, falsehood, and Cain-like
Hypocrisy; likewise many Prophetical Passages, and Predictions concerning the
punishment, and severe judgments that are and shall be upon Babel, and the
Antichrist, and all false, and wicked Oppressors; the most whereof are Printed
in a Treatise by themselves, called Mercurius Teutonicus.

In a word, Courteous and Christian Reader, these Epistles will serve as an
Introduction,
and right information to show thee what this Author was, and whence he had
his great knowledge; and upon what ground and center it is founded; and
likewise how thou may come really to understand the drift and meaning of his
Writings, and effectually find the excellent use thereof; for art thou learned
or unlearned, rich or poor, Master or Servant, Parent or Child; be thou of
what Calling, Profession, Complexion, Constellation, and Disposition thou will:
Thou may find such knowledge herein as may better and improove thee aright
in Christianity.

Therefore be like to the laborious Be that seeks Honey at every Flower,
and where she finds it not, there she does not leave her sharp Sting, so
likewise if thou find that which does not like thee, let it alone; and leave
not a taunting scoff, and stinging venom of scorn and rash censure behind
thee; but rather pray that God would give thee his Holy Spirit, to lead thee
into all truth; and so thou shall know God in thy Self, according to that
Divine promise, they shall all be taught of God, and know the Lord, John 6. 4,
5. Heb. 8. 11.

But let the end of all be Love; for if thou could speak with the tongue of
Men and Angels, and could Prophesse, and understand all Mysteries, and had
all Faith, yet without Love, thou were but as tinckling Brass, and a sounding
Cymball, 1 Corinthians 13. It is even this Love that distinguishes between
the knowledge of the Devils in Hell (for they know, believe, and tremble) and
the Angels in Heaven; and as true Love is a deadly poison and pain to the
Devilish nature of evil Spirits; even so is all Selfedenying Love, as a
Plague and Pestilence to all sophistical Pharisaicall Hypocrites, who pervert
the Gospel of Peace and Love, by vain Distinctions, and Heathenish practices:
Therefore beloved Reader, let thy Divine light lead thee unto a Divine life,
and so enter into the Divine Love, the bond of perfection; and so thou shall be
made partaker of the Divine nature, for God is Love.

Now therefore let us be merciful,
loving, and perfect, as our Father which is in Heaven is merciful, loving,
and perfect, that so it may be known that we are the Children of the most
High, who is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil: And the God of Love
so enkindle the fire of his Love in our hearts, that it may break forth in our
practice and conversation, to the destroying the Thorns, and tearing Briars of
vain contentions; that so we may enjoy the happy fruits of Peace, Truth,
Love, and Righteousness, in all Christian Society one among another:

Yours in all Service of Christian Love. J. E.

Toe Scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not, but knowledge is easy to
him that understands, Prove. 14. 6. A Scorner loves not one that reproves
him; neither will he go unto the wise: Prove. 15. 12. Knowledge puffs up,
but Love Edifieth: 1 COR. 8. 1. A Or Letter of Divine Wisdom.
Theosophicall LETTER, WHEREIN The life of a true CHRISTIAN is described.
Showing what a Christian is, and how he comes to be a Christian; and
likewise what a Titular, Nominall or Hystoricall Christian is, and how the
Faith and Life of each differ.

The Fountain of Jesus Christ's heart be our quickening consolation, renovation,
and eternal life.
1. BELOVED, and much respected friend in Christ. From a member-like obligation
(as one branch on the Tree is bound to do to the other) and a fellow-working
desire, I wish unto you the open wellspring of grace, which God in Christ
Jesus has manifested in our humanity; so that it may richly spring up in you,
and the Divine Sun may thereby cast the influence of its Love-beams into the
soul; and also therewith stir up, and open the great Magnetic hunger of the
soul (being the true Divine mouth) after Christ's flesh and blood, together
with bodily welfare.

2. Being I have often understood by your dear friend, D. K. and also observed
in my presence with you, that you in the drawing of the Father do bear a
peculiar thirst, and an earnest sincere longing after his life, which he, out
of his highest Love has manifested in Christ Jesus; therefore I would not
(upon the desire of Mr. D. and also of your self) omit from a member-like, and
mutual obligation to visit and salute you with a short Epistle, and so to
recreate, quicken, and refresh my self somewhat with you, in the same
fountain of the life of Jesus Christ; for it is mere joy unto me to perceive
that our Paradisicall Coral flourishes, and brings forth fruit in my
fellow members, to our eternal recreation and delight.

3. And hereupon Sir, I will declare unto you, out of my small gifts and
knowledge: What a Christian is* and wherefore he is called a Christian;
Namely, that he only is a Christian, who is become capable of this high Title
in himself; and has resigned himself with his inward ground,
mind, and will to the Free grace in Christ Jesus, and is in the will of his
soul become as a young child, that only longs after the Breasts of the
Mother, that sincerely pants after the Mother, and sucketh the breasts of the
Mother whereof it lives.

4. Even thus also that man is only a Christian, whose soul and mind
enters again into the first Mother, whence the life of man has its rise;
Viz. into the Eternal Word, which has manifested it self with the true Milk
of salvation in our humanity (being blind in regard of God) and sucketh this
Milk of the Mother into his hungry soul, whence the new spiritual man
arises; and thereby the fiery [dark, and dry] soul, proceeding from the
Fathers property, does reach and obtain the place of Gods love, in which place
the Father begets his beloved Son; and therein only the Temple of the
holy Ghost, which dwells in us, is found; and therein also the spiritual
mouth [or believing desire] of the soul, which eats Christ's flesh, and
drinks his blood, is understood, or experimentally and essentially enjoyed.

5. For he only is a Christian, in whom Christ dwells, lives, and has his
Being, in whom Christ as to the internal ground of his soul is arisen,
and made alive in the heavenly Essence, which did disappeare and depart in
Adam; even he, I say, is only a Christian that has put on Christ's Victory
(that is to say, Christ's Incarnation, Humanity, Sufferings, death, and
Resurrection, against the anger of God; and also Hell, Devil, Death, and
Sin) in his eternal ground, where the Seed of the Woman, to wit, Christ in
his conquest, does also conquer in him, and daily trampleth upon the Serpents
head in the wicked carnal will, and kills the sinful lusts of the Flesh.

6. For in Christ alone we are received to be Children of God, and heirs with
Christ, not by an outward, advent^^ou^, strange, show of a sundry select
Appropriating of Grace (I say) no^ through a strange merit of grace [or
application of promises] imputed from without [or received in an Historical
apprehension of being justified and acquitted by another, as Malefactors] but
through a child-like regenerating, innate, in-dwelling member-like, and
essential Grace: Where Christ the conqueror of death does arise in Us with
his life Essence, and power from Our death, and has his mutual ruling
influence and operation in us, as a branch on its Vine; as the Writings of the
Apostles do throughout witness.

7. He is far from a Christian, who only comfort himself with the
Passion,
Death, and Satisfaction of Christ, and does apply and impute it to himself as
a pardon or gift of favor, and yet remains still an unregenerated, wild,
[worldly, and sensuall] Beast; such a Christian is every ungodly Man: For every
one would feign be saved through a gift of favor, the Devil also would very
willingly be an Angel again by grace received and applied from without.

8. But to turn, and become as a child, and be borne anew of Gods grace-water
of love, and the holy Ghost, that pleases him not. Even so it pleases not the
Titular Christian, who will put upon himself the mantle of Christ's grace [and
apply his merits unto himself by an Historical laying claim to a promise]
and yet will not enter into the Adoption and New birth; albeit Christ says,
that he cannot otherwise see the Kingdom of God.

9. For what is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God, John 3. To be fleshly minded is enmity against God, but to be
spiritually minded is life and peace: And he only hears Gods Word, that is
borne of God, for only the spirit of grace in Christ hears Gods Word.

10. For,
no man has ever seen God; the Son alone who is in the unmeasurable bosom
of the Father, declares unto us the Word and Will of God in our selves; so
that we hear and understand his will and good pleasure within our selves, and
are willing to follow the same, yet we are often kept back by the outward
sinful flesh; so that the operation or effecting of that same Divine power
[purpose, and godly resolution in our mind] does not always come into the
outward Figure, yet it goes into the inward Figure, in the inward spiritual
World; concerning which, St. Paul says, Our conversation is in Heaven.

11. Of which also all the Saints of God, and especially St. Paul, has
complained, that they had an earnest sincere will, and did serve God with the
mind of the internal Ground; but with the flesh the Law of sin; so that the
Flesh lusts against the Spirit, which lust and evil concupiscence is daily
drowned, and mortified in the death of Christ, by the inward ground [or the
center of light regenerated in the dark abyss of the soule] but this is in
those only in whom Christ is arisen from death; and thus there is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus; who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit, etc. For the bestiall body belongs to the earth, but
the spiritual body belongs to God; but whosoever has it not, he is dead
while he lives, and neither hears, nor perceives any thing, of the spirit
of God; It is foolishness to him as the Scripture says.

12. Therefore this point is not sufficiently understood and cleared, by
teaching and maintaining only and alone an outward receiving, and application
of grace and forgiveness of sins. The pardon of sin, and the receiving of
us into filial adoption and grace, consists in the justifying blood,
and death of Christ, when Christ's heavenly blood tinctured us; and with the
highest love of the Deity in the name Jesu, did overcome the anger of God in
our soul, and inward divine ground, proceeding from the Essence of Eternity,
and did turn it again into the Divine humility, meekness, and obedience;
whereby the rent, torn, and divided temperature of our humane property [and
spirit] of obedience and good will entered again into the harmony and unity of
the properties [ Viz. into Paradisicall light, love, and life, that Real
Temperature, where variety does concenter and accord in unity.]

13. And even then the wrath of the Father (which was awaked in the properties
of our life, and had set it self to be Lord and Master in soul and body,
whereby we were dead to the Kingdom of Heaven, and become children of wrath)
was turned again into the unanimous love, likeness, and unity of God; and our
own humane will, dyed in the death of Christ, from its selfnesse, and selvish
willing; and the first humane will (which God breathed from his spirit into
Adam) did spring forth afresh through the conquest of Gods sweetness [and
love] in Christ's heavenly blood;
and then the Devil, and Hell, which held men captive, were confounded, and
made a scorn: This the dry Rod of Aaron, which budded in one night, and bare
sweet Almonds, did typifie.

14. Now as Sin came from One, and passed from one upon all, so also the
sweet grace and victory in Christ, passed, pressed, and pierced from one upon
all: Now this death and the anger [of God] was broken in pieces in that one
Adamicall soul in Christ,
and a possibility to grace was opened through the disclosing of death, through
which disclosed gate, the will of the soul may re-enter into its first Mother
(whence it came in the beginning) that is into the filiation, adoption, or
regeneration of a new life, and will; and there it may attain the sweet blood
of Jesus Christ, which in Christ did disclose or break open the gate of death,
and changed the anger of God in our humanity in himself into love, wherein the
poor captive soul drinks out of Gods fountain; and does allay, and sweeten
its fire-breath, whence the new Paradisicall budd springs forth, and there
the hunger, and desire of the soul is made substantial and essential in the
blood of Christ, after an Heavenly manner.

15. Now as the disclosing of death must be done in the person of Christ
himself in our soul, and humanity; so that the eternity in Christ (wherewith
he was come from heaven, and was also in heaven, John 3.) overcame the time (
Viz. the life and will of the time) and did change time with its will into the
eternal will of the Deity; and all this must be brought to pass in our
received humanity: So likewise the desire of our soul must receive into it
self that same eternal will in Christ (wherein time and eternity stand in
equal agreement and harmony) and through the power of the same, immerse, or
cast it self into the adoption of free grace in Christ; that the same inward
Paradisicall ground which dyed in Adam, might again spring forth in the will of
the obedience of Christ, through his heavenly, and from us assumed humane blood.

16. The atonement and expiation must be made manifest, and experimental in
our selves through that atonement which Christ once made;
indeed [the atonement and reconciliation] was once fully finished, and brought
to pass in Christ's blood and death, but that which was once wrought in Christ,
must also work in me; it must even Now also through Christ's shedding of his
blood, be brought to pass in me; Christ also does power forth his heavenly
blood into the desire of Fait^ in my poor soul, and tinctureth the anger of
God which is therein, that the first Adamicall Image of God may again appear;
and become seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting, and smelling.

17. For that same Image which dyed in Adam from the heavenly Worlds Essence,
being the true Paradisicall Image, dwells not in the four Elements; its
essence and life stands not in this world, but in Heaven (which is manifest
in Christ in us) Viz. in that one pure holy Element, whence the four Elements
sprung forth in the beginning of time; and this same inward new spiritual man
eats Christ's flesh and blood; for he is, and lives in Christ, Christ is his
stock, and he is a branch on the stock.

18. For every spirit eats of that whereof it takes its Original, the
Animal [sensuall] mortal soul eats of the spirit of this World, of the
Stars and Elements, of the Kingdom of the World, but the true eternal soul
(which was inspired out of the Eternal Word into man, being Divine life)
eats also of its Mother, Viz. of the holyessentiall Word of God.

19. But seeing it was impossible for her after her own departure and
separation from God, in her excluded condition, property, and spirit;
[to eat of the Divine Word, and live in the holy Element of love and
humility] therefore this same Word of life (being its true Mother) came forth
to the abandoned soul into the va^e of misery, and into the prison of Hell,
and infused his heavenly Essence into our humane; [to be] as a body for the
soul, and therewith did embrace and cloth our poor soul being captive, and
did open again her heavenly mouth (before dead in the anger of God) with the
tincture of love; so that the poor soul can now again eat heavenly Manna;
the eating whereof was tried in Christ's person with the humanity, which he
received from us (in the temptation of Christ in the Wilderness) where Adam in
Christ did again eat Manna from Paradise, forty days.

20. Therefore I say, that by a show and select form of grace appropriated and
imputed from without, none comes to be a true Christian; for if he be so, his
sins are not forgiven him by once speaking of a word, or appropriating a
form, or promise of absolution to himself, from without; as a Lord or Prince
in this World does freely give a Malefactor his life by an external imputed
favor; no, this avails nothing before God.

21. There is no grace or favor whereby we come to the adoption, save only in
the blood and death of Christ;
him alone God has fore ordained, and appointed to be unto him a throne of
grace, or propiciation in his own love, which he has (in the Sweet Name Jesu
out of Jehovah) infused into him: He is that only Sacrifice that God accepts
of, to reconcile hi^ ^nger.

22. Now if this Sacrifice or free offering of grace shall do me good,
then it must be wrought and brought to pass in me; the Father must beget, or
impresse his Son in the desire of my Faith; so that the hunger of my Faith
may lay hold and comprehend him; and if the hunger of my souls Faith does
comprehend him in his promised Word, then I put him on in his whole process of
justification in my inward ground, and forthwith the mortification and killing
of the anger, Devil, Death, and Hell, begins and goes forward from the
power of Christ's death in me.

23. For I can do nothing,
I am dead to my self, but Christ does it in me; when he arises in me, then I
am dead to my self, in respect of the true man, and he is my life, and in that
I live, I live to him and not to my selfehood; for grace mortifieth my own
will, and sets it self up for a Lord in the place of my selfenesse, that so
I may be an instrument of God, who does therewith what he pleases.

24. And then I live in two Kingdoms, Viz. with my newborn spirit of life, or
spiritual man, in Paradise, in the Kingdom of Heaven, in the inward
spiritual World, and with the outward mortal man, in the vanity of time, in
the Kingdom of this World, in the dominion of the Stars and Elements, in the
contrariety, and malignant discord of the properties, wherein the yoke of
sin yet lives; this Christ takes upon himself in the inward Kingdom of
the Divine World, and helps my soul to bear it.

25. For the yoke of this World, is Christ's burden which he must bear, until
he shall again deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, which he has given him;
for he said, All power in Heaven and Earth, is given to me of my Father; so
also this burden or charge is laid upon him, that he should bear Gods Anger,
Hell, death, and all Evil in us, as Isaiah says, He took on him our
diseases, and carried our sorrows; but we esteemed him stricken, smitten of
God, and afflicted.

26. And hence it is that a Christian must be a bearer of the cross, for so
soon as Christ is borne in him, the assaulting of Hell, and the anger of God
in the eternal nature begins, and then the Hell in man is destroyed, and
the Serpent is trodden under foot; whence great unquietness,
persecution, and reproach from the Devil and the corrupt World does arise
against the outward sinful man, and even then the outward sinful man must
suffer it self to be condemned, and judged to damnation by the children of
Anger, and by Gods severe justice in the anger; seeing that another man lives
in him, which is not like and conformable to the outward mortal man; and so
Gods Justice executes its judgment in the anger upon the house of sin; and
also all the Ministers of Gods wrath, do help the execution thereof.

27. And even then, Christ helps to bear the yoke, and man is Sacrificed in
Christ's process, contempt, and scorn, in his suffering and death, to the
justice of God in the anger, and becomes conformable to Christ's Image.

28. The holy Scripture witnesses in all places that we are justified from
sins by Faith in Christ, and not by the works of our merit; but by the blood
and death of Christ, which indeed is so taught by many, but rightly understood
of few that teach us so.

29. We are taught indeed an imputed grace, but what faith is, and how it is
begotten, and what it is in its Essence, real Being, and Substance, and how it
lays hold on the merit of Christ with the grace; herein the greatest part are
dumb and blind, and depend on an Historical Faith ( James 2.) which is only
a bare knowledge or literal conjecture, and therewith the man of sin does
tickle and comfort himself, and through an imagination, and blind persuasion,
does flatter and sooth up himself, and calls himself a Christian, though he
is not yet become either capable or worthy, of this so high a title, but is
only a titular Nominall Christian, externally clothed with Christ's
Purpur-Mantle; of whom the Prophet speaks, saying, They draw near to me
with their lips, but their heart is far from me: And Christ said, Not all
that say Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven but they that do
the will of my Father in Heaven.

30. Now Christ alone is the will of the Father in whom the acceptance o^
grace and adoption confisteth, and none can do the love will of the Father,
save alone that only throne of grace, Christ himself, as the holy Scripture
declares, no man can call God Lord, without the holy spirit in him.

31. For we know not, what and how to pray before God as we ought, but he,
even the holy spirit in Christ, makes intercession for us, with unutterable
sighs before God in our selves, as it pleases God; we cannot attain any
thing by our willing, and knowing; he is too deeply hidden from us, for it
lies not in any man's knowing, willing, running and searching, but in Gods
Mercy.

32. Now there is no mercy* but only in Christ, and if I shall reach that
mercy,
then I must reach Christ in me; are my sins to be destroyed in me? Then must
Christ do it in me with his blood and death, with his victory over Hell: Am I
to believe? then must the spirit, desire, and will of Christ, believe in my
desire, and will, for I cannot believe.

33. But he receives my will being resigned to him, and comprehends it in his
own will and brings it through his victory into God, and there he
intercedeth for the will of my soul in his own will before God; and so I am
received as a child of grace in his will of love.

34. For the Father has manifested his love in Christ, and Christ manifests
that same love in my will being resigned to him; Christ draws my will into
himself, and cloatheth it with his blood, and death, and tinctureth it with
the highest tincture of the Divine power, and so it is changed into an
Angelical Image, and gets a Divine life.

35. And forthwith that same life begins to hunger after its body, which
body is the degenerated fiery soul, into which the will in Christ is entered,
so that the new life in Christ does now also tincture the soul; whereby the
soul in the spirit and property of this [new] will obtains a right Divine
hunger, and is made to long after, and desire the Divine grace, and begins to
behold and consider in the spirit of his Divine will in Christ, what she is,
and how she in her propertyes, inclinations, and dispositions is departed from
God, and lies captivate in the wrath of God; and then she acknowledges her
abominations, and also her deformity in the presence of Gods Angels, and
finds that she has nothing wherewith she is able to protect her self, for
she sees that she stands in the jaws of death, and hell; encompassed with
evil spirits, which continually shoot the strong influence of their evil
desires into her, to destroy and corrupt her.

36. And then she diveth into that same newborn spirit of the will, and wholly
immerseth her self into very humility it self; and so the spirit of Christ
takes hold of her, and brings her into the spirit of this new will, so that
the soul essentially, and experimentally feels and finds him, whereupon
the Divine glymps, and beam of joy arises in the soul, being a new eye, in
which the dark fiery soul conceives the Ens and Essence of the Divine light
in her self, and thereupon hungreth and thirsts after the grace of God, and
enters into an effectual repentance and sorrow, and bewaileth the evil which
it has committed.

37. And in this hunger and thirst it receives Christ's flesh and blood, for
the spirit of the New will (which in the beginning entered into the grace of
Christ, and which Christ received into himself) becomes now substantial and
essential, by the magnetic impressure, hunger, and desire, of the soul.

38. And this essentiality is called Sophia, being the essential wisdom, or
the body of Christ; and in this the faith in the holy Ghost does consist; Here
Christ and the Soul, believe in one Ground.

39. For true Faith does not consist in thoughts, or in mere assenting to the
History:
Viz. That a man impresseth [or imagines in his minde] to himself, that
Christ is dead for his sins, [and by an Historical apprehension or blind
persuasion of a particular Election clingeth to his merits and righteousness,
without the innate righteousness of Christ, and life of God essentially
working in him, and begetting him to a new creature] for Faith is a receiving
of the promised grace in Christ, it receives Christ into it self; it does
impresse him into its hunger, with his heavenly flesh and blood, with the grace
which God offers in Christ.

40. Christ feeds the soul with the Essence of Sophia, Viz. with his own
flesh and blood, according to his saying, whosoever eats not of the flesh of
the Son of Man, he has no life in him, but whosoever eats the same, he
abides in him.

41. And herein the Testaments of Christ, and also the right Christian Faith
consist; for an unsubstantiall [unessentiall, conjecturall or verball] Faith is
as a glimmering fire smothered in smoke or moisture, which would willingly
burn, but yet has no right Ens thereto, but when a right Ens is given to it,
then that little spark of fire increases, whence a fair shining light
arises; and then it is manifest, that in the wood such a fire and fair light
lay hid, which before was not known.

42. And this is to be understood likewise in a child of God, while the poor
soul is wrapped up in the anger of God, its like a glimmering Wi^k of a Candle
o^ smoking (...)
Wi^k, that would willingly burn, and cannot, by reason of the vanity of
sins, and the anger of God; but when the soul, being a little spark of
Divine fire gets into it self Gods Love. That which lies ^id, and yet is
in (...), as well as in Potentia.
Ens, Viz. Christ's flesh and blood, then that spark grows to a great fire
and light, which shines and sends forth its light with fair virtues and
good works, and lives in great patience under the vanity of this World, and
yet grows forth as a fair flower out of the wild Earth.

43. A similitude whereof we have in the Sun and the Earth;
Namely, that if the Sun should not shine upon the Earth, no fruit could
grow; but when the Sun shines upon the Earth, and penetrates into the Ens of
the Earth, then the Ens of the Earth receives the virtue or powerful
influence of the Sun into it self; whereupon a great hunger arises in the Ens
of the Earth, after the virtue of the Sun; and this hunger impresseth, and
feeds upon the virtue and influence of the Sun, and by this hunger of the Ens
of the Earth, which eagerly reaches after the Ens of the Sun, an Herb is
drawn out of the Earth with a stalk, in which also the Ens and virtue of the
Sun ascends up along in the growth and flourishing of the Herb, and the Sun,
with his beams of light, becomes substantial in the Ens of the Earth in the
stalk, and root; and we see how through the power of the Sun and Stars in
the spirit of the World, another body arises out of the stalk, different from
the root in the Earth; also how the stalk does put forth a bud to a fair
flower, and afterward to fruit; and we see how the Sun afterward from time to
time ripeneth and sweetneth the same fruit.

44. And thus it is with man; the ground of the soul is the Divine field, when
it receives the Divine Sunshine into it self, a Divine plant springs
forth; and this is the new birth, whereof Christ speaks; now this plant must
be nourished from above, by the celestial influence, and drawn up in growth
by the Divine Sun, and by the Divine Water, and preserved by the Divine
constellation, Viz. the Divine virtue or power of God, till it comes to be a
Divine body, of a Divine, and Angelical figure, as the body on the stalk.

45. And as the body on the stalk must stand in rain, wind, and storms; in
heat, and cold, and suffer the Sun to ripen it: So likewise must a Christian
stand in this thorny World, in the awaked anger of God, in the Kingdom of the
Devil, amongst many wicked men, and suffer himself to be beaten, with scorn
and contempt, and yet he must turn his hope and confidence from all creatures
only and alone upon the Divine Sun, and suffer it to ripen him and beget him
to an heavenly fruit.

46. Not Temples or houses of stone, or humane Ordinances, and forms of Which
is bu^ lip-labor.
Word worship do beget [or regenerate him] to a newness of life;
but the Divine Sun in the Divine Constellation of the Powers of the Word of
God in the Temple of Jesus Christ, in himself, does beget him out of the
Fountain of life Jesus Christ; so that he is a branch on the Vine of Christ,
and brings forth good Grapes, which the Divine Sun ripeneth, that Gods
children, being his loving fellow members, may eat them; whereby they also
grow and flourish in and with him, which Grapes are good Doctrine, life, and
works.

47. A man must come to the practice, effectual performance, and fruitfulness
in Christianity, otherwise the new birth is not yet manifest in him, nor the
Noble branch yet born; no tickling or soothing, comforting with promises or
Scripture evidences, and boasting of a Faith, does avail any man at all, if
the faith make him not a child conformable to God in Essence and will, which
faith brings forth. Divine fruit.

48. All that men now do strive, dispute, contend, and fight about, and
thereby destroy and lay desolate, country and people, is only a mere husk
without fruit [a form without power, a Mammon without Christian mercy] aand it
belongs to the fiery World for separation [and shall be decided in the
judgment of the Lord.] There is ^o true understanding in any party, they
contend all only about the Name and the Will of God, and no Party will do it;
they mind nothing but their own glory, preferments, and pleasure of the
flesh; if they were true Christians they would have no strife, or contention.

49. A good Tree bears good fruit for every one, and though sometimes it must
suffer the wind to break off its branches and fruit, and the Sun to wither and
dry them up; yea when they are ripe, to be devoured of Swine, or trodden under
foot; yet for all this, it endeavors still to bring forth more good fruit.

50. And thus a true Christian in Christ can will nothing else, but what Christ
wills in him;
and though he must suffer his good fruit which does spring and grow forth out
of the internal Man, to be often trampled upon and spoiled by the evil flesh
and blood; and also by the Devils wind; [the wicked censure and false
interpretation of the hypocritical Luciferian Serpent] and the wickedness of
the World; yet the Tree of the new Plant in the life of Christ does still stand
and spring forth through the outward mortal Man, maugre all opposition
irresistably; as eternity springs through time and gives life and power to
time; and as the day does arise and break forth through the night, and
changes the night into day, and yet the night remains there still in it
self, and yet it i^ not known or discerned in the day; So likewise the Divine
day does spring and bud forth in us through our eternal night; and changes
the night, to wit, Gods Anger, Hell, Death, Anguish, and eternal destruction
into the Divine Day of joy and consolation; albeit the dark night, with the
Ens of the Serpent, and the poison in flesh and blood, rages and striveth
against it.

51. Therefore beloved Sir, and Christian Brother, we have more need to
endeavor for the growth and increase of the precious Coral, and how we may
come to it, then to run after the unprofitable Pratings and conjecturall
Fictions in the feigned holiness,
where one Brother despises, reproacheth, rejects, and proclaims, the
other for an Heretic, nay gives him to the Devil for an Opinion sake, which
he has made to himself.

52. I tell and declare unto you in my knowledge which God has given me; that
it is a mere deceit of the Devil, who thus does bring us poor men into
Opinions, to contemn and reproach one another (crying down, and holding one
another for Heretics and Fantasticks that binds not his conscience to our
mental Idol or Opinion) so that we strive, and wrangle about the husk, and
in the mean time lose love, and faith, and attain not the new birth.

53. Our whole Religion is but a child^like work; namely, that we wholly
forsake,
and disclaim our own knowing, willing, running, disputing [and forged
conclusions of blind hypocritical Reason, which bewitcheth the natural mind
to the form, and frame of its own wisedome] and unfaignedly and fully resolve
with our selves to enter into, and persevere in the way which brings us
again to our own native Country which we lost [in Adam when he with his
mind and full will went out of Paradise into the spirit of this transitory
World;] and so return to our Mother, which in the beginning did beget us, and
bring us forth out of her self.

54. Now if we will do this, then we must not come to her in our own self
will,
and way, in Pride, and Ostentation, in aplauding our selves, in contempt of
her children, our Fellow Christians, and fellow members; For we are the lost
Son, who is become a Swineheard, and have shamefully misspent our Patrimony
with the fatted Hogs of the Devil, and the World: We must enter into our
selves, and well consider our selves, and our Fathers house; and we must set
before us the mirror, or looking glass of the Law and Gospel; and see how
far we are departed from Gods righteousness, and also from [unseigned,
impartiall] Which loves all our brethren through ou^ enemies.
brotherly love, and well examine our heart whereto it is inclined.

55. Now, when we do this, we shall find in our selves many hundred evil
Beasts, which we have set up in Gods stead, and do honor and love the same
above God; and even then we shall see what hideous horrible Beasts were
manifest in Adam by false lust, or imagination; and wherefore God said to Adam,
The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head; to wit, the Monstrous
Beasts.

56. As first, we shall see in our Desire the proud Lucifer, who is departed
from Divine and brotherly humility, and contemns the members of his body, and
has set himself to be a God and Lord over them, in whom there is no Divine
love, to love either God, or his Brother.

57. Secondly, we shall find a Beast in our propertyes, resembling the
coveteous greedy Swine, which will take all to it self, and alone devour and
possess all, and desires more then it needs; wherewith the proud Lucifer
might be able to vapor, brag, and vaunt himself, that he is a God over Or,
Every thing.
Substance, and that he can domineer, having power and might over his fellow
branches; and we shall see how this proud Lucifer has broken himself off from
the Tree of life, and the mutual growth and increase of love, and would be a
Tree of himself; and therefore he is a withered dry branch in respect to God.

58. Thirdly, we shall find the poysonfull envious Serpent in our properties,
which teareth, and rages as a poison; I mean, Envy, which wishes no man so
well, as it self; which stingeth, rages, and rides in other men's hearts, and
slandereth them with words, and only applaudeth its own haughty Lucyfer, and
terms its falsehood [and cunning hypocrisie] an Angel of God.

59. Fourthly, We shall find in our properties, the fiery Dragon sitting in
hellish fire, I mean Anger, which (if covetousness and envy cannot obtain
that which it would have) will lay violent hands upon it, and take it by force,
and is so raging madd, that it bursteth its life for very malice and iniquity,
and breaks in pieces in fiery malice, and is a very dry branch on the Tree;
and is only fit for the fire.

60. Fifthly, We shall find many hundred evil Beasts in our Desire, which
Pride loves, and honors, more then God; and covetousness draws them to
it self for a Treasure, wherewith Pride vapoureth and vaunteth as if they were
Gods; and thereby does withdraw sustenance and comfort from his Brothers life;
so that he is forced to spend it in misery, trouble, and perplexity, by reason
of his violence and extortion.

61. Now when a man does thus behold himself* in this mirror of selfehood, and
perceives these evil Beasts; then let him rightly imagine to himself that he
is deeply guilty of them, and thereby consider the greevous fall of Adam, and
think, that all these evil desires, and vain imaginations do wholly take
their rise and original in him, from the Monster of the Serpent, through the
influence, and insinuation of the Devil into our first Parents.

62. For all the properties of the desires lay in one harmony and steadfast
unity in Adam;
and the one loved the other, and were in mutual agreement, but such false
desires are risen in Man through the envy of the Devil, who stirred up the
false lust and imagination in Adam and Eve to prove the unequality [in the
property and spirit of the mixed World] and to taste what good and evil was;
to feel heat and cold, and to try the multitude and variety of the
properties; so that now these desires do attract, long after, and desire that
which is like to themselves; and every desire of these propertyes, is a
several hunger of life in man, which has broken it self off from the
harmonious unity; and opposes the love, likeness, and mutual society of its
fellow branches, or brethren, and covetously desires to draw their life and
maintenance to it self, and to make it self a Lord over it, and will be a
Selfeist.

63. All which is contrary to the Divine will and ground, and is a perjury
against God; yea, it opposes the course and order of nature; as we see by the
Trees and Plants of the Earth; how all stand, and g^ow lovingly one by another,
and rejoice in one Mother; and how one branch on the Tree does impart its sap
and power to the other, and mutually serve each other.

64. For in such a lovely equality and harmony the life of Man ( John 1.) was
inspired out of the eternal Word into the humane Image, being out of the Limus
of the Earth: So that all the propertyes of the life stood in an equal
proportion in the temperature; in one Love, and mutually loved each other.

65. But when the Devil mixed his poison, and false desire therein; the
propertyes of life were divided into many desires: whence strife, discord,
sickness, infirmityes, the cumbersome grossness and mortal frailty of the
body is risen through the false desire, and insinuation of the Bestiall
propertyes; by reason whereof the Image of God (which was from the heavenly
Essence) disappeared; concerning which God said unto them, In that day that
thou eatest of the Tree of the knowledge of good, and evil, thou shall dye the
death: That is, thou shall dye to the Kingdom of God, as it also came to pass.

66. And we must really Or, Consider with our selves.
imagine to our selves that this Bestiall false desire in man, is the Monster
of the Serpent, and an enmity against God, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and that
we therein are only the children of Hell, and of the Anger of God, and cannot
therein inherit, or possess the Kingdom of God; neither is God manifest in
any such desire; but only his anger and the property of the dark, and earthly
World; and we live therein only to the vanity of this World, and stand
therewith only upon the abyss of the dark World and the anger of God: that
is, of Hell, which continually gapeth and hungereth after these propertyes, and
counts these propertyes its own fruits, and children, which it shall reap
and take into its Barn; for they do belong unto it by the right of nature;
for these desires are all originally from it, and have their root in the
ground of Hell and destruction, and indeed no where else.

67. Therefore said Christ, Unless a man be borne anew, he shall not see the
Kingdom of God: All these false wills and desires are predestined to
damnation; if any will see God, he must be converted, and become as a child,
and be newborn in the holy Ghost, through the water of eternal life: Viz.
through the heavenly Ens, which God has revealed in Christ; that the first
right man, which dyed in Adam (proceeding from the heavenly Worlds Essence)
might again spring forth in Christ, and become living.

68. All these evil Beasts are condemned, and must dye in us, and though their
desire does somewhat cleave and stick unto us in the flesh, yet they must all
be mortyfied during this [life] time in the soul: Viz. In the inward ground,
and the inward ground of the soul must be Tinctured by the true Tincture in
the blood of Christ; that the propertyes of the internal Ground may again
live in harmony and concord, for otherwise they cannot reach the Deity in
themselves.

69. Now when man knows this, he cannot better be rid of his evil beastiall
desires,
then that be presently at the same instant bring himself with his whole
strength into such a strong will, and earnest purpose, that he for time to come
will hate; and abandon th^se evil beasts of the Devil, seeing they are only
the Devils servants; and that he will return into his lost country, into the
adoption and atonement, and esteem, and look upon himself no otherwise, then
as the lost Swineheard [or the prodigal Sonne] for he himself is the lost
Swineheard and no whit better, and forthwith approach with the conversion of
his soul, to the Father, in deepest humility, with acknowledgement of his
unworthiness; in that he has so shamefully, and unworthily misspent and
mis-improved the free inheritance of Christ's merits, and so enter into
repentance.

70. Let him with all his strength give up his earnest will thereunto, that he
from this very time forward, will repent and amend, and no longer love these
evil Beasts; but this must be in earnest, in real sincerity without delays,
and not to think of a day, week, or year; but his mind must utterly and
continually condemn them to the damnation of death, and not will to love them
any more, but count them enemies, and so resolve to turn himself to the mercy
and grace of God.

71. When this is done (I speak as I have highly known it in the precious
light of grace) that then he may turn himself to earnest praying in humility,
and beseech God for grace; and though his heart says utterly, no; and the
Devil says, stay yet a while, it is not now good and convenient, thou will
have better opportunity to morrow; and when to morrow comes, then says he,
again to morrow, and suggesteth to the flesh, saying, Thou must first do
this, or that; gather first a treasure for thy self, that thou may not need
the World, and then enter into such a life; yet I say, the mind must remain
firm and steadfast in its purpose, and think with it felse, these suggestions
and thoughts are mine evil hungry Beasts, these I will kill, and drown them
in the blood of Christ's love;
none of them shall live any longer in me, I will have no more to do with
them, I am now in the way to my ancient Father, who ha^h sent his Son to me in
my misery and distress; saying, Come to me all ye that are weary [grieved] or
heavy laden with sins, and I will refresh you: My Father will give the holy
spirit to them that ask him for it.

72. Let him imagine and Imprint and settle it in his res^lution.
impresse this into his very heart, and come with the lost Son to the Father;
and when the Father shall see, that the mind of the soul is directed to him,
and would wil^ingly and unfeignedly turn, and yet cannot; then he will
presently meet him, and claspe the soul into the arms of his drawing, and
bring her into the passion, and death of Christ, where she through earnest
repentance and sorrow will dye from (or n^rtifie) those abominable Beasts, and
arise out of the death of Chr^^ with a new will, and a true Divine desire; and
so he will begin then to be another man indeed, and not a whit esteem that
which before he loved and held for his Treasure; and it will be to him as if
he had it, and also had it not; and afterward he will account himself in all
his power, ability, and possessions, but as a servant and Steward of God.

73. For so soon as he is able to master and overcome the proud Lucifer of
Pride, all the other evil Beasts will grow weak and faint, and lose their
^uling power and dominion; although they yet live in this [life] time in the
earthly flesh, yet they are only as an Ass, which must carry the Sack, or as
a mad Dog in a chain, their strength is broken.

74. For when Christ rises, Lucifer must lie captive; and if there be an
earnest full perseverance, such a precious Jewel would follow, as this Pen
cannot here describe; and those alone know who have been at the heavenly
Marriage, where the noble Sophia is espoused to the soul; concerning which
Christ said, That there is greater joy in Heaven ever one sinner that repents
then over ninety nine righteous: Which joy is kept also in the heaven of man,
in this espousall or marriage; this is understood by our Schoole-fellowes.

75. Dear Sir, and Christian fellow-brother, I thought it good (Christianly
and sincerely meaning well unto you) to put you in mind of this, and to lay it
forth out of my little Treasury, in a child-like simplicity, not intending
thereby to show and set forth my Self; but out of a true and hearty desire,
wishing that this might be felt also in your heart, and that I also might
recrea^e, and refresh my self a little with you, as a fellow^member, though
absent, and yet present in desire, and cooperating in the Divine gifts; and
this upon your desire, as formerly is said.

76. And if my good will should find place, and God would open the door of
his mystery; then had I yet happily some other more precious Jewels in my little
Treasury, in which Time and Eternity may be known; being ready and willing to
tender you my service therein; And so I commend you and yours, to the sweet,
and pleasant Love, Grace, and Will of Jesus Christ.

A Letter to CASPAR LINDERN, Customer at BEVTEN.
WHEREIN Is described the plain, and simple way, which the Author took for the
attainment of his high Knowledge: ALSO, His Censure, Judgment, and answer,
concerning diverse Authors of different opinions, tending to lead Christians
into the excellent and desired way of Love and Union.

1. THE open Fountain in the heart of Jesus Christ refresh us, and lead us to
himself, that we may live in his power, and rejoice in him; that so we may
Love and understand one another, and enter into one only Will.

2. Much respected and discreet Sir, my most worthy Friend in the Love, and
humanity of Jesus Christ; my hearty desires from God in Our Immanuel for
prosperity upon soul and body premised; I give you Sir to understand, that I
have received your Letter, and therein perceive that you are a Seeker, and
great Lover of the Mystery, or of the knowledge of God; and do diligently take
care, every where to pick up some Divine crumbs, bearing likewise a great desire
and hunger after them.

3. Which on my part does highly rejoice me, that God does thus draw and lead
his children; as it is written, Those, who are driven by the spirit of God, be
the Children of God; and as one branch on the Tree does rejoice in the other,
and mutually minister Sap, and assistance one to another; so likewise do the
children of God in their Tree, Jesus Christ: And at this, my simple person does
exceedingly rejoice, that God in the Fountain of his heart does draw us, (as
simple children of our Mother) to himself; even to the right breast, and
bosom of our Mother, that so we should long after him, as children after their
Mother.

4. And whereas (my beloved Sir, and brother in the love of Christ) I see and
perceive, that you do thirst after the open Wellspring of Christ, and
likewise do enjoy the same according to the will of God, yet you do enquire
after the enjoyment of your brethren, and desire (as a branch on the Tree)
mutually to recreate, refresh, and satiate your self in them; and it is also
acceptable to me, to impart my Sap, and my spirit ( in my knowledge which God
has given me) unto my brethren and members (being my fellow-branches in the
Tree, Jesus Christ) and so to rejoice in them; namely, in their sap, power, and
spirit^ for it is the pleasant food of my soul, to perceive, that my
fellow-branches, and members, do flourish in the Paradise of God.

5. But I will not conceal from you the simple child-like way, which I walk
in Christ Jesus; for I can write nothing of my self, but as of a child, which
neither knows or understands any thing; neither has ever been learned, but
only that which the Lord vouchsafes to know in me; according to the measure,
as he manifests himself in me.

6. For I never desired to know any thing of the Divine Mystery, much less
understood I the way how to seek or find it; I knew nothing of it, as it is the
condition of poor Lay men in their simplicity, I sought only after the heart
of Jesus Christ, that I might hide my self therein from the wrathful anger of
God, and the violent assaults of the Devil; and I besought the Lord earnestly
for his holy spirit, and his grace, that he would be pleased to bless and
guide me in him; and take that away from me, which did turn me away from him,
and I resigned my self wholly to him, that I might not live to my own will,
but to his; and that he only might lead and direct me; to the end, that I
might be his Child in his Son Jesus Christ.

7. In this my earnest Christian seeking and desire (wherein I suffered many a
shrewd repulse, but at last being resolved rather to put my life to utmost
hazard, then to give over, and leave off) the Gate was opened unto me, that in
one quarter of an hour I saw and knew more, then if I had been many years
together at an University; at which I did exceedingly admire, and I knew not
how it happened to me; and thereupon I turned my heart to praise God for it.

8. For I saw and knew the Being of all Beings, the The Ground or Original
^oundation.
Bysse, and And that which is without ground or bottomless and fathomlesse.
Abyss; also the birth [or eternal Generation] of the holy Trinity; the
descent, and original of this World, and of all creatures, through the Divine
Wisdom; I knew and saw in my self all the three Worlds; Namely, the Divine,
Angelical, and Paradisicall [World] and then the dark World; being the
original of Nature to the Fire: And then thirdly, the eternal, and visible
World, being a procreation, or extern birth; or as a substance expressed, or
spoken forth, from both the internal, and spiritual Worlds; and I saw, and
knew the whole Being [or working Essence] in the Evil, and in the Good; and
the mutual original, and existence of each of them; and likewise how the
Gene^^ix or fruitful bearing womb of eternity.
Pregnant Mother brought forth, so that I did not only greatly wonder at it,
but did also exceedingly rejoice.

9. And presently it came powerfully into my mind to set the same down in
writing, for a Memorial to my self; albeit I could very hardly apprehend the
same in my external Man, and express it with the Pen; yet however I must
begin to labor in these great Mysteryes as a Child that goes to School: I
saw it (as in a great Deep) in the internal, for I had a through view of the
Universe, as in a CHAOS, wherein all things are couched, and wrapped up, but it
was impossible for me to explicate and unfold the same.

10. Yet it opened it self in me from time to time, as in a young Plant;
albeit the same was with me for the space of twelve years, and I was as it
were Or, Breeding of it.
Pregnant withal* and found a powerful driving and instigation within me,
before I could bring it forth into an external form of writing; which
afterward fell upon me as a sudden shower,
which hitteth whatsoever it lights upon; just so it happened to me, whatsoever
I could apprehend, and bring into the external [principle of my mind] the same
I wrote down.

11. However, afterward the Sun did shine on me a good while, but not in a
continual constant manner; for when the same did hide it self, I scarce knew,
or well understood my own labor [or Writings] so that, man must acknowledge,
that his knowledge is not his own, or from himself, but Gods, and from God;
and that God knows [or manifests the Ideas of his Wisedome] in the soul of
Man after what manner, and measure he pleases.

12. I intended to keep this my Writing by m^, all the days of my life, and
not to deliver* it into the hands of any; but it fell out according to the
providence of the most High, that I entrusted a certain person with some of
it; by means whereof, it was published, and made known without my knowledge
and consent, and the first Book (called Aurora) was thereby By Gregory
Richter, Lord Primate of Gerlitz.
taken from me; and because many wonderful things were revealed therein (which
the mind of man was not presently capable to comprehend) I was faint to suffer
much, from Reason.

13. I saw this first Book no more in three years; I supposed that it was
dead, and gone; till certain learned men sent me some Copies of it, who
exhorted me to proceed, and manifest my Talent; to which, the outward Reason
would by no means agree, because it had suffered so much already, for it;
moreover, the spirit of Reason was very weak, and timorous, for my High light
was for a good while also withdrawn from me; and it did glow in me as a hidden
fire:
So that I felt nothing, but anguish and perplexity within me: Outwardly I
found contempt, and inwardly a fiery instigation; yet I was not able to
comprehend [that light] till the breath [or inspiration] of the most High did
help me to it again, and awakened new life in me, and then I obtained a
better style in writing, also deeper, and more grounded knowledge; I could
bring every thing better into the outward expression: which the Book, treating
of the Threefold life Or, According to.
through the three Principles, does demonstrate; and the godly Reader, whose
heart is opened, shall see [that it is so.]

14, Thus now I have written, not from the instruction, or knowledge received
from men; not from the learning, or reading of Books; but I have written out
of my own Book which was opened in me, being the Noble similitude of God, the
Book of the Noble and precious Image (understand Gods own similitude, or
likeness) was bestowed upon me, to Read; and therein I have studied, as a
child in the house of its Mother, which beholds what the Father does, and in
his child-like play, does imitate his Father; I have no need of any other Book.

15.
My Book has only three leaves, Note, what man can find in himself.
the same are the three Principles of Eternity, wherein I can find all
whatsoever Moses, and the Prophets; Christ, and his Apostles have taught, and
spoken; I can find therein the foundation of the World, and all Mysteryes; yet
not I, but the spirit of God does it according to the measure, as he pleases.

16. For I have besought, and begged of him many hundred times, that if my
knowledge did not make for his glory, and conduce to the Bettering or benefit.
amending, and instructing of my Brethren, he would be pleased to take it from
me, and preserve me only in his love; yet I found, that by my praying, or
earnest desiring, I did only enkindle the fire more strongly in me; and in
such inflammation, knowledge, and manifestation, I made my Writings.

17. Yet I did not intend to make my self known with them among such Persons,
as now I see is come to pass; I still thought I wrote for my self only;
albeit the spirit of God, in the Mystery of God, in my spirit, did sufficiently
show me to what end it was; yet outward Reason was always opposite, save only
sometimes when the morning Star did arise, and even then Reason was also
thereby enkindled, and did dance along, as if it had comprehended [the Pearl,]
yet it was far from it.

18. God dwells in the Noble Image, but not in the spirit of the Stars, and
Elements; he possesses nothing, save himself only, in his own likeness;
and albeit he does possess something (as indeed he possesses all things) yet
nothing comprehends him, but what does Originally arise and spring from him; as
namely, the soul in the similitude of God.

19. Besides, all my Writings are like unto a young Scholars, that is going to
School; God has according to his will brought my soul into a wonderful
School; and in truth I cannot ascribe, or arrogate any thing unto my self, as
if my selfehood were, or understood, any thing.

20 No man must conceive higher of me, then he sees; for the work in my
studying,
or Writing, is none of mine; I have it only according to the measure as the
Lord is pleased to give it me; I am nothing but his instrument, whereby he
effects what he wills: This I relate unto you my beloved Friends, for an
instruction, and information, least any should esteem me otherwise then I am;
namely, as if I were a man of high art and deep understanding and reason; for I
live ^in weakness and infirmity, in the childhood, and simplicity of Christ;
and my sport and pastime is in that child-like work which he has allotted to
me; yea I have my delight therein, as ^n a Garden of pleasure, where many Noble
Flowers grow; and in the mean time I will joy and recreate my self therewith,
till I shall again obtain the Flower of Paradise, in the New man.

21. But because, dear Sir, and beloved Friend, I see and perceive that you
are a seeking in this way; therefore I write unto you with diligence, my
child-like course; for I understand, that you make use of diverse Authors, and
Writings; concerning which you desire my judgment, the which I shall impart
unto you as my fellow-member, so far as God has given me to know, and that
only in a brief and short comprisall: In my Book of The threefold life you
shall find it at large; according to all circumstances.

22. And this is the Answer I give unto you: Viz. That Selfe-reason (which
being void of Gods spirit, is only taught, and instructed from the bare
Letter) does cavil,
taunt, deride, and despise, whatsoever does not punctually agree, and conform
to the Canons, and Institutions of the Universities, and high Schools; which I
do not wonder at, for it is from without, and Gods spirit is from within; it
is good and evil, is is like the wind, which is moved and driven too and fro;
it Highly priseth.
esteems man's judgment; and according as the high and great ones, who have
the respect and authority of the World do judge and censure, just so it gives
its credit, and verdict: It knows not the mind of the Lord, because the same
is not in it; its understanding is from the Stars, and it is nothing else but a
counterfeite shadow of fancy, in comparison of the Divine wisdom.

23. How can he judge of Divine matters, in whom the spirit of the Lord is not?
The spirit of the Lord does alone try, prove, and judge all things, for to him
only all things are known, and manifest; but Reason judges outwardly, and one
Reason does always square its judgment, and opinion, according to another;
the Inferior judges and censureth as his grand Superior; the Layman as the
Doctor; and yet none of them both apprehend the Sense, Mind, and truth of the
Lord, without the Spirit of God, which judges in Man; and respects no man's
person: the Layman, and the Doctor are both one to him.

24. Now whereas the Children of God have diverse and manifold gifts in
Writing,
Speaking, and judging; and they have not all one manner of expression, phrase,
and style; whereupon self Reason afterward does by artificial conclusions
draw out of them, what makes for its own turn, and frames a Babell to it
self; whence such a multitude and wearisome heap of opinions are risen; so
that men out of their Writings have forged, and invented diverse conjectures
and ways unto God; and men must be forced to go in those ways, whereby such
controversies and unchristian contentions are arisen; that men for the present
look only upon the strife of words, and disputes, about the Letter, and those
which according to their Reason and Principles do overcome by Verbal
jangling, and exchanging Scripture for Scripture, are applauded; but this is
nothing but Babel, a Mother of spiritual whoredom, where Reason enters not
in at the door of Christ, through Christ's spirit; but presses in of it self,
and climeth up by its own might, strength, and pride, being yet a stranger,
or unregenerated; and would always feign be the fairest Child in the house;
men must honor, and adore it.

25. The children of God have a diversity of gifts, according to the Rule of
the Apostle;
God gives an expression to every one as he pleases; the gifts and endowments
of men fall out according to the unsearchable will of God, and spring
altogether out of one Root; the which is the Mother of the Three Principles;
and as the spirit of every soul is Constellated in the eternal Mother, even
so is its revelation, apprehension, and knowledge.

26. For God brings not a new, or strange Spirit into us; but he opens with
his spirit our spirit;
namely, the Mystery of Gods Wisdom, which lies in every man according to
the measure, manner, and condition of his internal, hidden constellation: For
Christ said, My Father works, and I also work: Now the Father works in the
Essence of the soul, property: and the Son in the Essence of Gods own Image,
that is in the Divine Similitude, or Harmony.

27. The property of the soul belongs to the Father; For Christ said,
Father, the men were thine, and thou have given them me, and I give unto them
Eternal life: Seeing then, the property of the soul is from Eternity, of, and
from the Father; therefore he has wrought in it from Eternity, and still
works in that same Image to Eternity, light, and darkness, to either of
which the Will of the souls property does incline, and give up it self.

28. Seeing then, the Fathers property or wisdom is unmeasurable, and
infinite; and that he being the wisdom it self works, and yet through his
wisdom all things do arise; thereupon the souls of men are diversely
Constellated; indeed they arise, and originally proceed out of one only
Essence, yet the operation is diverse, and manifold; all according to Gods
wisdom: Now the spirit of Christ opens the property of every soul, so that
each speaks from its own property, of the wonders in the wisdom of God.

29. For the spirit of God makes no new thing in man, or it infuseth no
strange spirit into him;
but he speaks of the wonders in the wisdom of God through Man, and that
not from the Eternal Constellation only, but likewise from the external
Constellation; that is, through the spirit of the external World, he opens
in Man the internal Constellation of the soul; that he must Prophecy, and
foretell what the external heaven works, and produces; also he is driven to
speak through the Turba Magna; as the Prophets have many times spoken, and
denounced unto the people their punishment which by Gods permission through the
Turba Magna should come upon them for their violence and sinfulness; [and
their bitter imprecations, wicked contentions and wrathful indignation in
their envious will one against another, do awaken the Sword of Anger in the
Turba Magna.]

30. Now the spirit of God speaks in his Children, diverse manner of ways;
sometimes in one it speaks, by the internal, and eternal Constellation of
the soul, of eternal punishment, or reward; of Gods Curse or Blessing: and in
another, it tells through the external Constellation, of the Fortune or
Misfortune, of the prosperity or adversity of this World; also of the rising
and advancement of Powers and Authorities; and then likewise of the ruin and
destruction of Countries, and Cities, and also of strange and wonderful
alterations in the World.

31. And though it happens oftentimes, that the spirit of the outward World
does make its sport with its representations of fancy in Man, and from its
own Might and strong influence does infinuate it self into the spirit of man,
and shows diverse strange and mavelous Figures; which only finds place
among those, who run on in their own Reason only,
in proud self will; whence often, false Prophets arise; yet I say, that every
one speaks from his own Constellation; the one through the manifestation of
Gods spirit, really and sincerely; and the other through the manifestation of
the external Astrall spirit uncertainly by conjecture and guess; yet from the
same Constellation, but he that speaks from the mouth of another, and in like
manner judges of the Mystery, without a peculiar knowledge; he is in Babel,
and entangled in opinion, wilfully amusing himself in those things which the
heart finds not experimentally whether they be true or no: [but he pins his
Faith upon the sayings of other men.]

32. And I say further, that all those precious men, who have been illuminated
of God (some of whose Writings you may have at hand) have spoken from their
manifestation, and revelation; each according to his apprehension or the Model
of his capacity; yet the center is the soul, and the light is God; the
revelation is wrought, and brought to pass by the opening or manifestation of
Gods spirit, through the Constellation of the soul.

33. All the Prophets from the beginning of the World, have prophesied of
Christ in different forms, one thus, and another so; they have not all
concurred in one style,
phrase, and form; but each according as the spirit of God has revealed to
him in the eternal Constellation of the soul, yet they have all spoken out of
one Center, and Ground: And even so it is now adays, the Children of God
speak all from the revelation of Christ's spirit, which is Gods; and every one
according to his capacity, or that Idea of wisdom which is formed in his
mind; and therefore I put you in mind as a Friend, and exhort you not to
hearken after the vain bab^ing and prating of Reason, or to be moved at the
proud censure and judgment of the same, so as thereby to condemn or despise
the gifts of any Man; for he that does so, contemns the spirit of God.

34. These Authors which you mention, and others besides (concerning which you
desire my judgment,
whom I have not read all, but in part) I desire not to judge [or despise them]
God forbid; let that be far from me, albeit they have not all written in one
style, and form of expression: For the knowledge is diverse, and manifold: yet
it behooves me to try (according to my gifts) their hear^, and will; but seeing
I find that their heart, and spirit does flow and spring from one and the same
Center, namely from the spirit of Christ; therefore I rest my self contented
on the Center, and commend the expression to the Highest Tongue, Viz. To the
spirit of Gods wisdom, which through the wisdom, does open and reveal to
every one according to the measure and manner as he pleases.

35. I judge none, and to condemn any is a false, and Idle arrogance, and
vain prating; the spirit of God himself judges all things; if that be in us,
what need we care for prating, I much rather rejoice at the gifts of my
brethren; if they have had other manner of gifts to hold forth, then I, should
I therefore judge them?

36. Does any herb, flower, or tree, say unto the other, thou art sour, and
dark; I will not stand by thee? Have they not all one Mother whence they grow?
Even so all souls proceed from One, and all men from one; why then do we
boast, and glory to be the children of God, notwithstanding that we are more
unwise then the Flowers and Herbs of the field; is it not so with us? Does not
God impart, and reveal his wisdom to us diversely? As he brings forth and
manifests the Tincture of the Mystery in the Earth, through the Earth with
fair plants; even so in us Men; we should rather congratulate and heartily
love one another, that God reveals his wisdom so variously in Us; but he
that judges condemns, and contemns in a wicked way, he only runs on in
pride to show himself, and to be seen; and is the Oppressou^ in Babel, a
perverse stickler, that stirs up contention and strife.

37. The true Trial of Gods Children is this, which we may securely,
and safely follow; namely, an humble heart, that neither seeks nor honors
it self; but continually seeks the good of his brother in Love; that seeks
not after its own profit, pleasure, and applause; but after righteousness,
and the fear of God: The plain and single way to come unto God, is this (so
far as is made known to me) Viz. That man depart from his sinful courses;
and make with himself an earnest constant purpose never to go on any more in
those sins which he has committed; and in his forsaking, and turning away
from them not to despair, and doubt of Gods grace.

38. And albeit that reason suggesteth doubts, (whereby a sinner is terrified,
and stands amazed and astonished at the Anger of God) yet let the will only
in all simplicity and unfeigned sincerity, directly cast it self into the
mercy of God, and wholly lie down, and shroud it self in the suffering and
death of Christ, and surrender it self to God through Christ; as a child that
betakes it self unto the lapp^ of the Mother, which wills to do only that
which is the will of the Mother; it does only cry and call unto the Mother, it
always hopes to receive its refreshment from the Mother, and it only longs
after the breasts of the Mother; even so must our desire be wholly and only
turned, and directed to our first Mother, from whom we in Adam departed, and
went into Self-will.

39. Therefore Christ says, Unless you be converted and become as Children,
you cannot see the Kingdom of God: Also you must be borne again (that is, we
must wholly disclaim and depart from our own Reason, and come again into
resignation [and selfe-denyall] into the bosom of our Mother,
and give over all Disputings; and as it were stupifie, or mortify our Reason)
that the spirit of the Mother [ Viz. of the Eternal Word of God] may get a
form in us; and blow up, or enkindle the Divine life in us, that so we may
find our selves in the spirit of the Mother, in the Cradle; if we desire to be
taught, and driven by God.

40. And if we will be taught, and driven of God, then we must arise again
from the Cradle, and wholly submit and give up our selves unto him; that so
Gods spirit may be in us wholly both the will and the Deed: that we may
acknowledge the knowledge to be his, and not ours; that he only may be our
Knowing.

41. We must take no thought, or sollicitous care, what we are to know,
and how we will know, but we must merely enter into the Incarnation and birth
of Jesus Christ, and into his suffering and death, and continually with all
willingness tread in his footsteps; and follow him, and think that we are here
only upon our Pilgrams path, where we must walk through a dangerous way, and
enter again in Christ on the narrow way into our native Country, whence Adam
has led us astray; in this way only lies the Pearl of the Mysterium magnum
[or the Jewel of the great Mystery] all studying, Book-reading, seeking,
searching, and grounding [on our Received Principles, or Orthodox
apprehensions] besides, and without this way, are but dead means, and obtain
not the Virgins Crown [or the Pearl of Sophia] but gather together heaps of
thistles, and thorns, which sting, and gall the Children of God,

42. Therefore dear Sir, seeing you have desired my knowledge and judgment, I
have no better counsel and advice to impart unto you,
then to show you the way, which I my self walk in; and upon which way the
Gate was opened to me, so that I am learned, without learning aforehand; for
all Arts and Sciences come from God, he finds all things [in, and for man.]

43. I have no controversy with the Children of God, by reason of the variety,
and diversity of their gifts; Note this carefully.
I can reconcile them all in my self [I can make a good construction, and
understanding of them to my selfe] I only bring them to the Center; and there
I have the proof, and touchstone of all things: Now then if you will imitate
and follow me, then you shall find it so by experience; and afterward perhaps
better understand what I have written.

44. A real true Christian has no controversy or contention with any body,
for in the resignation in Christ, he dies from all controversy and strife;
he asks no more after the way to God, but wholly surrenders himself to the
Mother; namely, unto the spirit of Christ; and whatsoever it does with him it
is all one to him; be it prosperity or adversity in this World, life or death;
it is all alike unto him; no adversity or calamity reaches the new man, but
only the old man of this World; with the same the World may do what it
pleases, it belongs unto the World, but the new man belongs to God.

45. This is my way, my dear friend, in which I walk, and in which I must
know without my fore knowledge: I do not purpose, premeditate,
and muse, aforehand, what I am to write or speak, but I submit and resign my
self to the knowledge of God, he may know in me what he pleases; and in such
a way as this, I have obtained a Pearl, which I esteem of greater worth then
the whole external World.

46. And though it fall out many times, that the Children of God are contrary
one to another [or clash together] in their Knowledge; yet it proceeds only
from the Turba of the external Reason, which is in all men; No^^.
and God permits it, that man might be proved and exercised, and by praying
and pressing unto God, he might more earnestly and fervently enkindle his
spirit; and then the spirit of God arises in the Mystery of the Humanity, like
a burning and shining fire; and all must serve for the best to the Children of
God.

47. But concerning some persons of your Neighborhood, of whom you make
relation, which make money of all [they have] and run to the Supposed Zion; I
should rather think it better advise for them to stay at home, for Zion must be
begotten and borne in us: when they shall come to that Place; it will be with
them as formerly; and they must however live under the yoke of Christ.

48. God is in Heaven, and the Heaven is in man; and if man desires to be in
Heaven,
then must Heaven be manifest, and revealed in him, and this must be wrought,
and brought to pass by Earnest serious Repentance, and hearty Resignation, or
unfeigned self-denial; and this they may do as well at home in their own
places; that which they think to run from, they are like to run into; it would
be more acceptable to God, to walk at home in a godly Divine way; that others
might take example by them.

49. There be among them arrogant, proud, scornful, deriding People,
which do nothing but contemn and despise, and in many of them it is only a
received Form and Custom; and a spiritual pride, or selfish Pharisaicall
Devotion, as I my self can speak by experience; for I in a Christian,
brotherly, and friendly manner, besought and admonished one of them, by reason
of a Book which he put forth, wherein I found some points of great importance,
against God, and the ground of truth; and I hoped that he would become seeing,
but he answered in a proud contemptuous, and slanderous manner, and gave forth
such an answer, wherein there was no Characters or Prints of Gods spirit to be
seen; their Confession [of faith] is rather an Opinion, then a true and sincere
Earnestness, for all of them are not that which they boast and glory to be;
there may be many honest hearts among them; but many of them are only
Historical, and Titular; and desire only to show themselves, and to be
applauded, as I my self had experience of one of the chiefest among them; they
may learn at home to despise other men [without their running to an outward
supposed Zion.]

50. It is the way of the Children into Gods Kingdom, and moreover their way
is To Revoke, or Recall themselves.
Revoca; and this they themselves make show of, but privately they are, as they
were before; I would to God it were in Earnest with them,
as they pretend and give forth, and then I would commend the same also; but to
slander, contemn, and despise others, is nothing else but Babel, the World is
already full of such people, after such I run not.

51. Concerning Hans Weyrauck.
John Weyrack, so far as I can see by these his Writings, he may be one that
walks in the love of God; if this his way be held in the real sincerity of
the heart, but that he taunteth and dispraiseth others, by reason of the
knowledge of the light of nature, it shows that he has no knowledge therein,
and his gifts reach not thither; and because he has no such gift, we must
pass it over; and yet for all this, esteem of him as a true and honest
Brother; for God produces his gifts not only in simplicity, but in many in a
high strain [or in a deep grounded understanding or magical meaning:] For he
is only high, and orders, and directs all his works as he pleases.

52. In like manner, I answer to the rest of the Authors which you mention,
some whereof were endued with high gifts, but they were not sufficiently
capable to comprehend all; yet for their Time, they have done enough, but
because this present time has need of another Medicine; therefore at this time
also there are found other skillful, understanding knowers, and shewers of the
Disease, and all according to Gods loving providentiall care,
who will not that any should perish, but that all men should be helped and
cured.

53. If the same Authors were alive at this present, it may be they might have
written in some points more clearly, and in another ^orme; aloeit for their
time they have done enough, and they are in no wise to be despised and
rejected, although some points might be amended: But their Doctrine concerning
the Union of the Deity and Humanity is very clear; and we may see how Gods
spirit has been in them, but Reason turns all things to the worst; and by its
false expositions and Logical glosses, wresteth them to a perverse sense.

54. Swenckfelt.
Swenckfelt stumbleth at this point, in that he holds Christ to be no
Creature; he has not as yet comprehended the Principles, and therefore it is
impossible for him to distinguish, how and in what he is no Creature; for in
respect of the Deity he is no Creature;
but in respect of the Heavenly Essence (concerning which he said, That he was
come from Heaven* and was also in Heaven) he is in the Humanity creaturall, and
without the Humanity uncreaturall.

55. As we men live in the four Elements, and we our selves are the property
of the four Elements, and they are in Us creaturall; and without us they are
uncreaturall, and yet the unformed, uncreaturalized Elements without us in whom
we live, and the formed creaturaliz'd Elements within us are but one thing; and
so it is in the Person of Christ.

56. The whole Angelical World (which is the second Principle) is his bodily
Being or personal Essence, and as to the heavenly essentiality in the Person
of the Humanity it is creaturall, and without the Person uncreaturall;
for he is the Fathers Heart and Word, and the heart is every where in the
Father; so that where his heart is, there is also Heaven, and the Divine
essentiality environed with the complete fullness of Wisdom.

57. Concerning his soul, which he commended into his Fathers hands, and of
the which he said upon the Mount of Olives, That it was afflicted and heavy,
even unto death; the same is also of the property of our soul; for it was for
the souls sake that God became man, that he might bring the same again into
himself, and draw our will unto him again out of the earthlinesse; this same
is a Creature.

58. And the third Principle (which is the external Kingdom of this World,
which God through his Wisdom has brought forth out of Eternity) is also
creaturall in him; for the whole Deity has manifested it self in the Man
Christ: Viz.
That as God is all in the spirit, so likewise he is all in this man: we men
are likewise even so, if we be borne again of God; and this point (which does
exercise, and trouble almost all others) may be easily amended and rectified,
if it were well considered, there would not be so much condemning, and
contending; the spirit of God cares not for any controversy; he judges all
things in himself.

59. Also Weigelius.
Weigelius writes, that Mary is not the Daughter of Joachim and of Annah, and
that Christ assumed nothing from us; but that she is an Eternal Virgin; and
this indeed is true in respect of the Mark or Sign of the Covenant, according
to the Virgin of the Divine wisdom:
But what should this avail me? What should become of my soul, and my
heavenly essentiality which disappeared in Adam [which is the Paradisicall
Image] if Christ had not assumed on him the Essence of our soul, and begotten
again to life the disappeared Image; the which in my Book of the Threefold
life is set forth at large

60. Except this, Weigelius writes also of the new birth, and of the union of
the humanity in Christ, very well with us; the which to speak of here I omit,
because I have written clearly and punctually thereof; and I neither contemn
nor despise his Writings, nor those that read them.

61. Does not a Be gather Honey out of diverse Flowers; and though one Flower
is better then another, yet she sticks not at that, but takes what serve^h her
turn, and if the sap and virtue of the Flower does not like her, should she
therefore thrust her sting into it? As the despiser and mocker uses to do:
Men contend and controvert much about the Shell [or outside of knowledge and
Religion]
but regard not the precious Sap [of Love and Faith] which serves and avails
to life.

62. What good does knowledge do me, if I live not in and according to the
same; the knowing, and also the will and real performance of the same must be
in me: The mantle of Christ's suffering and satisfaction which men do now
usually put about them; shall become unto many, a snare, and hell^sh fire; in
that they will only tickle and flatter themselves with the merits and
satisfaction of Christ, and still keep their cunning hypocrisy and
wickedness.

63. It is said, You must be borne again, else you shall not see the Kingdom
of God: You must become like Children, if you will see the Kingdom of God: Not
only to contend and dispute about knowledge [and opinions] but you must become
a new man [a new creature] which lives in God in righteousness, and
holiness; the wicked one must be cast out, and Christ must be put on; and then
we are buried in his death,
in, and with him, and do arise again with him, and live eternally in him;
what need I then to contend and wrangle about that which I my self am (which I
have essentially in me, and of which no man can deprive me.)

64. I am at variance with none, but only against the wicked, and him the
spirit rebukes to his face; this I desire to let you know, and my intent is
sincere and upright toward you.

65. As for my Books you may easily get them (I suppose) if you have a mind
to them; for Christianus Bernard, Customer at Zagan, does certify me that he
has lent two of them (namely, the Book of the Threefold life, which is the
chiefest in Teaching; and then the forty questions concerning the soul) to
your Butlers Brother, if you make him acquainted with it, he will not deny you,
but if not, then I will help you to them in another way; you may also have
them of Mr. Christianus Bernard, if you desire them of him, and you cannot get
them nearer at hand, I will write unto him, that he shall lend them unto you,
for I have mine seldom at home; yet in case you get them not, I will as soon
as I can get them home, lend them you one after another.

66. The several Books, and the Titles of them are these; the first Book
called Aurora, climeth up out of infancy, and shows you the Creation of all
Beings; yet very mysteriously, and not sufficiently explained; of much, and
deep magical [cabalisticall] or parabolicall understanding or meaning, for
there be many mysteries therein, that shall yet come to pass.

67. The Second is a great Book of an hundred sheets, it treats of the Three
Principles of the Divine Essence, and of the Being of all beings; the same is a
Key and an Alphabet for all those, who desire to understand my Writings; it
treats of the Creation, also of the Eternal birth or generation of the
Deity, of Repentance, of the justification of man, of his Paradisicall life;
also of the fall, and then of the new birth, and of the Testaments of Christ,
and of the total Salvation of Man; very profitable to be read, for it is an
eye to know the wonders in the Mystery of God.

68. Thirdly, a Book of the Three fold life, the same has sixty sheets; it is
a Key for above, and below to all Mysteries, to whatsoever the mind is able to
think upon, or whithersoever the heart is able to turn, and move it self; it
shows the whole ground of the Three Principles, it serves every one
according to his (...).
property; he may therein ^ound the depth and the resolve of all questions,
whatsoever reason is able to devise and propound; it is the most necessary to
serve your turn, you would be soon weary of all contentious Books, if you
entertain and get that into your mind.

69. Fourthly, The forty Questions about the Soul, it has twenty eight
sheets; it treats of all things which are necessary for a man to know.

70. The fifth Book has three parts, the first part is concerning the
Incarnation of Christ; the second part is very deep, and profound, treating of
Christ's Passion, Suffering, and Death; and how we must enter into Christ's
death, and both dye, and arise again in and with him; and why Christ was to
dye; wholly brought forth, enlarged, and confirmed out of the Center, through
the three Principles, very deep: The third part is the Tree of Christian Faith;
also demonstrated through the three Principles, very profitable to be read.

71. The sixth Book, or part of these Writings are the six Points, treating of
the greatest depths and secrets: Viz. How the three Principles do mutually
beget, bring forth, and bear each other; so that in the Eternity there is no
strife [for contrary Enmity betwixt them] and yet each Principle is in it self
as it is in its own property, as if it were only one, and alone; and they
show whence strife and disunity do arise, and whence Good and Evil have their
Original, wholly induced out of the ground: (that is, out of the Nothing into
the Something) and all in the ground [and centre] of Nature; this sixth Book
is such a Mystery (however in plainness and simplicity it is brought to light,
that no Reason [or natural, Astrall head-peece, though never so acute, and
literally learned] can sound, fathom, or understand the same, without the
light of God, it is the Key to all.

72. Seventhly, a small Book for the Melancholy, being written for the
tempted and afflicted in spirit, showing whence sadness, and dejectedness of
soul comes, and how the same may be resisted, and remedied.

73, Eighthly, a very deep Book, De signatura rerum [concerning the signature of
all things] and of the signification of the several forms and shapes in the
Creation; and it shows what the beginning, ruin, and cure of every thing is;
this enters wholly into the Eternal, and then into the Temporal, inchoative,
and external Nature, and its form.

74. These are my Books, besides some small Treatises which I have given here
and there, and have kept no copy of them; for I have no need of them for my
self, I have enough in my three Leaves.

75. If my occasion permit me (for I must oftentimes take journeys, by reason
of my affairs) then I my self will call upon you, so soon as I come that
way; it was my full intent to have seen you at Weyko after Easter, but God
disposed it otherwise; by his providenc^^ I light upon another man, who led me
out of that intended way, to one, who had need of me; so that afterward I
understood that my way was from the Lord.

76. Mr. Balthazar Walter stayed the last Winter and Spring with the Prince
Augustus of Tanhalt at Peltzka; and has written unto me from thence: Now he is
with the Earl of Gleyken, three miles from Erford; he is his Physician, and is
to stay with him an whole year.

77. Ezekiel Meth.
Ezekiel Meth, is also at the same Court, yet they be not both of one mind, as
the Letter of Balthazar shows, which I received three weeks since: If you
have a desire to write, and there goes no Messenger this way, be pleased to
send to Christianus Bernard, Receiver at Zagan; to him I can have opportunity
to send weekly; he is a pious Christian companion.

78. If you find any thing that is too hard and dark to be understood in my
Writings, I pray set it down, and let me know it, and I will make it plainer
unto you, that you may understand it; for the wise, and full taught, who are
high, and advance themselves in their own knowledge, who can go alone, and a^e
rich aforehand, I have written nothing; but only for the Babes and Sucklings,
who suck on their Mothers Breasts, and would feign learn.

79. He that can understand it, let him understand it; but he that cannot, let
him not censure and cavil at it, for such cavillers, and deriders, I have
written nothing; I have written for my self.

80. But if a Brother thirsts, and asks water of me, to him I give to
drink; he shall experimentally find and feel, what I have given him, if the
Lord voutsafe him the drinking; and I commend my self to your Favor, and Us
all into the pleasant and gracious Love of Jesus Christ:

Dated at Gerlitz, on the day of Mary's Ascension, 1621. JACOB BEME.

The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous goes thither, and is
exalted.
A Letter to ABRAHAM of SOMMERFELD, Concerning the Book AVRORA:
ALSO, A Description of his process, and the excellency, and surpassing Virtue
of Sophia's Pearl.

Light, Salvation, and Eternal Power flowing from the wellspring of life,
Jesus Christ, be our refreshment, and comfort.
NOBLE LORD, (First wishing to you the grace of God, and all health, and
happiness) being informed that you bear a great delight, love, and affection
to my Writings, which hitherto have been unknown to you; I must answer you,
that the same likewise is a much greater delight, and surpassing joy in my
spirit; because I understand, that God does drive and carry on his work in
such great and high persons; which is not a thing commonly to be found in the
World, for the Temporal honor, and pleasure of this life is an hinderance to
it.

2. But I can very well perceive in what manner Gods spirit has touched, and
awaked your Noble heart, in token whereof you have bestowed so much pains and
cost upon this Work, which was written by a very simple, and plain hand,
without any Art, or great understanding [or large Capacity in litterall
endowments] but only in the knowledge and manifestation of the gifts of God;
and moreover over it was not the intent of the Author, that it should come into
the hands of so high Persons; because he wrote it only for a Memorial to
himself, to st^re and ro^^e up himself from the dark, and drousie sleep in
flesh and blood, and not out of an intention to make such a Work.

3. Indeed there was a fiery instigation, but without foreknowledge of this
Work, that lay hid in him as a Mystery, which the spirit of God did stir up
and awake; whereupon there arose a great longing,
and desire to write; and yet in respect of the outward man there was no
desire, capacity, fitness^, and ability in the Author thereunto; for he sought
only after the heart of God; to hide himself therein from the Storm and
raging Tempest of the Devil.

4. And he considered the evil Nature, and its working influences, and
oftentimes the deceit of the Devil, and the anger of God, and also the love
and mercy of God; where indeed many a storm and strong encounter, was held
against Reason, and also against flesh and blood, and the Devil; and all in a
powerful driving, and instigation of the spirit, till at last a most precious
Garland, or Diadem, was set upon his head, which this hand cannot set down in
writing; but I rather wish that the Reader of this Epistle might find it by
experience, and then he should understand what the sweetness of God is; and
not so much marvel, why a Layman should undertake to meddle with such things
[or write of such Mysteries.]

5. Therefore I say now, that when the precious grain of Mustard Seed was
sown; this work was brought forth to be written, which was then beheld as in
a Mystery couched very deep, without a sufficient comprehension, yet with
exceeding joy; as this Work (being the first Book) shows, where the great
Mysteries, are set down very simply, without sufficient explanation and
expression, and in much abbreviation and defect, like a sudden shower that
passes by, whatsoever it lights upon, it hitteth; even so likewise the
spirit of the Wonders.

6. For the Author was an illiterate man, and of a very small understanding,
and shallow capacity in comparison to the learned, skillful, and expert; yea,
as a mere Child in the Mysteries, who did not so much as understand the way
which it should walk in, or what might befall it, save what the spirit did
intimate and declare unto him, ash has also set down in Writing, the
persecution, disgrace, and ignominy which should fall upon himself, before it
was acted and brought to pass that Reason felt it, or experimentally knew of
it; and that so clearly, as if it had been really present, as is to be seen
in the Book Aurora, being the first part of my Writings, which was made before
my persecution; and now it is a comfort to me, in that the spirit of God did
show, and foretell me so much aforehand; so that I know what his Counsel is in
his way; and therefore I willingly and patiently yielded my self under the
Cross, and committed my cause to God, and often entreated him, that if it came
not wholly from his own Counsel, to take it from me; and not to let me know
and understand any thing in that kind, or to proceed in that way.

7. I purposed likewise (after the Persecution) not to write any more, but
only to keep my self still in Obedience to my God, and to let the Devil
roar over me with his scorn, revilement, and derision;
in which many a hard combat was fought against him, and what I endured, I
cannot well tell or declare; but it went with me as with a grain that is sown
into the Earth, which against all Reason springs up afresh in all storms and
tempests; whereas in the Winter all seems as dead, and reason says, now all
is gone: Thus the precious grain of Mustard Seed sprung up again under all
dispraise, contempt, disdain, and derision, as a Lilly, and returned with an
hundred fold increase, and also with deeper and more peculiar knowledge, and
came forth again in a fiery instigation, or forcible driving.

8. But my external man would write no more, it was somewhat discouraged and
timorous; till it came so far, that the internal man did captivate, and
overpower the external, and even then the Great Mystery did Appear; and then
I understood Gods Counsel, and cast my self upon his will; also I would not
invent, or feign any thing out of Reason; neither would I give way and place
any more unto Reason: but resigned my will to Gods will, that so my Reason
might be as it were dead; that he (the spirit of God) might do and work what,
and how he pleased; I willed nothing in Reason, that it might be alone his will
and deed.

9. And when this was done, then the internal man was armed, and got a very
faithful guide, and to him I wholly yielded my Reason; and did not study and
invent any thing, neither did I give Reason leave to dictate what I should
write,
save only, that which the spirit did show me as in a great depth, and full
Chaos in the Mystery; yet without my sufficient comprehension, for the
Creature is not as God that does, and comprehends all things at Once in his
Wisdom.

10. And there was then a purpose in me again to write something, and in the
space of nine months Three Books were made; the one concerning the three
Principles of the Divine Essence; that is, of the Being of all Beings, wherein
the great Mystery has somewhat opened and revealed it self, and therein are
many excellent things contained much deeper then in this first work [ Viz. the
Aurora] (which your Honor has sent hither for me to peruse) and it has about
an hundred sheets of Paper.

11. After this, there was one made containing sixty sheets; which treats of
the threefold life of man, and also of the whole Creation, a great open Gate of
the Mystery; and it is even a wonder that surpasses, and goes beyond the reach
of all Reason: at the which I my self in my Reason do wonder, and marvel
what God intends to do; that he uses such a mean instrument to such
weighty matters; for therein are revealed and laid forth the Mysteries about
which (since the heavy fall of Adam) the world has contended, and alwaise
fought; yet there has not been such a Ground brought to light, which
notwithstanding shall not be understood of the World, but of the Children of
God; as the same is manifest and known.

12. And then Thirdly, there were forty Questions sent to me of a Learned, and
an understanding man who also is a lover of the Mystery; and a great Friend of
the same: who exhorted me to answer them according to these gifts; and spirit;
which indeed are very high questions; and they contain in them the great
depths and secrets of the Original of the soul; and all the secrets, or
Mysteries of the Mystery, whereupon there is such an Answer brought forth, at
which the World might well rejoice, if the anger, iniquity, and malice of the
Devil did not hinder it, yet the Counsel of God must stand.

13. Now because I perceive that your Noble mind, and heart, has a singular
hunger, and thirst after such Mysteries, and regard not the World which
despises such Mysteries; therefore I acknowledge the Counsel of God herein,
and it is my bounden duty to impart the same to you; for to the Children
belongs bread, they are worthy of it,
but the P^^rle must not be cast before Swine; for my spirit and mind shows
me sufficiently, that your Honor searches not after such things out of
Curiosity, but from the instigation and guidance of the spirit, which many
times leads Peter to Cornelius, that he may tell, and declare to him the
words of Eternal life.

14. And though I am a stranger, and very simple, yet your desire, and will
does embolden me to write to your Honor, albeit with a simple hand [in a
plain and course phrase and style] (but Gods gifts are not bound to any humane
Arts) and I am the more bold with you, because I perceive, that your Noble
heart appears so low and humble, as to send to me, who am but a mean, and
abject person; but seeing it is thus, I do likewise assuredly hope, that the
spirit of God shall open the doors, and gates of the Mysteries for the soul;
and grant a right understanding to apprehend, and know his wonderful gifts,
the which I heartily wish to your Honor.

15. My Writings will seem somewhat strange to you, for in some places the
ze^le is vehement, or earnest, especially against Babel and the Antichrist, who
is known by God in his anger; [or come up in wrath to remembrance] therefore I
say that I could not, nor durst not write otherwise, then the same was given
and indicted to me; I have continually wrote as the spirit did dictate it, and
did not give place to Reason [or to the wisdom of the natural,
and Astrall spirit] I also do not acknowledge it for a work of my Reason,
which was too weak; but it is the work of the spirit, who has shown what he
means to do, and what shall come to pass, and also what is already done;
for he proceeds forth out of the Abyss into the Bysse, and searches through
all things; he tries the heart and reyns, and proves the thoughts of men;
moreover he does hereby intimate, and declare the last Judgment; that he will
try and examine every Being through the fire; and I could not, neither might I
write at all (even in the fiery instigation) except I did set it down, as the
spirit did represent it; therefore I have made it for a Memorial to my self,
I have no further intention therewith.

16. But because you are desirous to read the same, I will send it, and I pray
you to return it back again, for I will keep it for a Memorial, and I am
assured (that so far as your Noble mind shall give God the praise, and read
it diligently, and take this way to heart with a desire to understand the same)
that the Lord will open to you the door of his love in the Mystery, and crown
you with the Diadem of his wisdom, which is more precious then the created
Heaven and this World;
for the precious Philosophers Stone, the ground of all Mysteries and Secrets
does lie therein; and this same Diadem [or Garland of wisedome] is beset with
this Stone; which [Diadem and Crown of light in the holy Ghost] the soul puts
on as a Garment; being a new body, in, and for, the Kingdom of God; wherein it
is the Child of God, and wherewith it is able to staud in the fire of Gods
anger without any hurt, or grief, and can therein overcome the Devil, Death,
and this World; and therein also can rule over the Stars, the poysonfull
influences of the Constellation, and this outward life, which otherwise is a
thing impossible for Reason; for it gives that knowledge of things which no
Art [or litterall acrument from external Reason] is able to search out, or
dive into; it sees through Heaven and Earth, and it reapeth where it has not
sown; it asks not the question, Is it true or no? It has the sign of
truth, and righteousness in it self; it has all virtues lying in hope; there
is no fear of Gods anger in it, it affords a very joyful hope, and
ratifieth and assures the same; and it confirms the soul to be the Child of
God.

17. This garland is a Virgin, and a chaste purity, and divine Beauty;
a joy of the life, it comfort and rejoices the mind in affliction, it
goes along with man into death, but it has no death or dying in it; it lives
from Eternity, and it is a guide into Heaven, and it is the joy of the Angels;
its taste is more precious and pleasant, then all the joys of this World; and
he that once obtaines it, esteems it higher then all the goods and ^iches of
this World; it cannot be parrallel'd, but only with the Deity, but it lies
hid in a dark Valley; the World knowteh it not, the Devil blows against it
as a storm of wind, and does often so cover and disguise it, that Reason does
not know it; but it springs forth in its time as a fair Lilly with manifold
fruits, it is sown in tears, it grows in tribulation, and affliction; but
it is reaped with great joy; it is contemned and despised by reason, but he
that obtaines it, holds it for his best Treasure.

18. Such a Garland is set upon him that seeks after it with earnestness,
and wholly resigneth up himself unto it, but not his selfe^Reason in flesh
and blood does obtain it, as my Writings do fully testify; for what is
therein written, the Author has known by experience; there is no strange
hand, or spirit foysted in; I write not this for my own vain glory (my
boasting is only in God) but for a rule and direction to the Children of God;
and that they may know what reward God gives to those who put their trust and
confidence in him, and regard not the dispraise and contempt of the World.

19. I do likewise wonder how you, and many more in Silesia have gotten my
Writings; for I have no acquaintance with any of them; and I am so close in
respect of publishing of them, that the Citizens here about me know nothing of
them, save only of the first part, which was Per-force taken from me; which by
means of a Person in the Mystery of Babel ( who persecuted it out of envy)
was proclaimed among them for Heresy; which notwithstanding they never read,
neither was it examined ever as it was meet.

20. Indeed I never asked any man's advise about it, or ever committed it to the
censure and judgment of man to this very hour; but commended it to God; yet
hereby I know and acknowledge the way of God; and likewise I understand, that
it is not known only in Silesia, but also in other Countries, without my
foreknowledge; and I must even say, that he that has so persecuted it, he
has thereby published it, for my intent was to keep it by me as long as I
lived; and I wrote it for my self only.

21. But what God purposed in his Counsel, is now manifest; and it shall yet
appear more clearly, when the The three Principles and the three fold Life.
two last Books shall be read; at the which I my self in the external man
do exceedingly wonder, and marvel what God intends, and will do; for I
acknowledge my self to be altogether unworthy and ignorant, and yet the greatest
and deepest Mysteries are revealed to the internal man,
which I give you and other lovers of God in humility to consider of; for in
truth I cannot at all say, that it is the work of my understanding, or Reason:
But I acknowledge it to be a Wonder, wherein God will reveal great things,
whereinto my reason does speculate, and continually marvelleth at it.

22. For I never in all my life studied these Mysteries, and likewise knew
nothing of them; for I am a Layman; and yet I must bring such things forth to
light, which all the high Schools, or Universities have not been able to do;
to whom notwithstanding in comparison, I am but a Child, and have none of their
Arts or wisdom, and I must write wholly from another School; and which is
yet greater then all this, the Language of Nature is made known to me, so that
I can understand the greatest Mysteries in my own Mothers Tongue.

23. Though I cannot say that I have learned or comprehended it, but as long as
the hand of God stays upon me, I understand it; but if it hides it self,
then I know not my own Labor, and am made a stranger to the Work of my own
hands; whereby I may see, how altogether impossible a thing it is to search out
and apprehend the Mysteries of God, without Gods spirit; therefore I ascribe,
and attribute nothing to my self, it is not my Work, I desire not any humane
applause and honor for it.

24. I am only a simple mean Instrument, God works and makes what he
pleases; what God wills, that I will also; and whatsoever he wills not,
that likewise I will not; if it be his will for me to know any thing, then I
will know it; but if he wills it not, then do I so also: I will be nothing,
and dead, that he may live and work in me, what he pleases, I have cast my
self wholly into him, that so I may be safe, and sure from the Devil.

25. And though I must leave my outward body and life to the disposal of the
World, and suffer the Devil to roar against me; yet I will not trust neither
the Devil, nor the World with my internal man; neither will I do (according
to the inward man) what the World will have me; and albeit my outward man is
bound, and obliged to the World,
and in its obligation and allegiance must obey the Laws and Ordinances of the
World; and do what the outward Obligation requires of me, yet my internal
man shall only be obedient to God, and not to the World; for he is not in the
World, but has made himself dead thereto, that God might live in him, and be
both the will and the deed in him; and though I cannot say, that it is possible
to live so [in perfection] yet my will is so directed and bent; and this
neither the World, nor the Devil shall break, albeit my outward life should
faint and perish, and though Reason does oftentimes flatly gainsay it, and
temptation appears by heaps, to the terror and sadness of the external
life (where the spirit also hides it self, as if all were dead, and gone) yet
it brings forth always new fruits, and that in abundance.

26. This I have related to you at large, that you may know and acknowledge
what manner of man I am, and what the beginning, and cause of my writing is;
and from what Art and spirit it was produced, or generated; and also to what
end; namely, to keep it as a Memorial to my self; but because I perceive
honest religious hearts to thirst after it, therefore I will not conceal it
from them, [but impart] in a brotherly and Christian way, and commend and
commit it to God, that he may work, and do what he pleases in them; and
this we are bound, and obliged to do one for another.

27. Lastly, I entreat you to conceal my name among the Learned, for I know
that a mean Layman is accounted but ridiculous, and contemptible with men
Learned in Scholastique Art; and though God has his Children also among them,
yet I care not for having my Name put upon it, or authorized upon me; for the
praise belongs to God,
who is the giver; I do not seek to make my self thereby a great and
glorious Name; but Christ is my reward, my Name and glory, and I hope to have
the glory of it in the life to come before Angels and Men, and to rejoice
therein with the Saints in Christ; as my Writings sufficiently testify.

28. Concerning the Book Aurora, which your Honor has sent me to peruse, I
have read some of it over, and find that it is my Work, and well copyed out;
but some Syllables are left out, for brevity sake, and yet the sense and
meaning is not thereby diminished; I am well contented for all that, seeing (so
far as I have perused in have) I have found no addition, but the great
Mysteries are couched therein very deep; they were understood and apprehended
by the Author, but it was not very feisible for Reason to comprehend it at the
first time, although it was known in the depth well enough, yet the Author was
not accustomed to it; when the heavenly joy met him, then he only followed the
spirits guidance,
but the wild nature is not presently regenerated [or made a new creature:]
Indeed if a Kernel be sown, there grows a Tree; but if the virtue be great
[if the power of the resolution be strong, and the practice sincere and
constant] the Tree grows up the sooner, and is the sooner known.

29. In the other three Books you shall find the Mysteries more clearly, and
so throughout, the further the deeper; each Book from the first is grounded
ten times deeper; so that the fourth is a very clear mirror, wherein the
great Mystery is sufficiently, and visibly seen and understood, yet only of
its Children: Reason shall remain blind, for the spirit of God dwells not
in the outward Principle, but in the inward; and proceeds forth from the
inward into the outward [principle of this World] yet the outward does not
comprehend him.

30. But Sir, I must tell you, that the Book Aurora was not finished, for the
Devil intended to make a Bone-fire of it, because he saw that the day would
break forth in it; but for all that, the day has even overtaken the Aurora
[or morning] so that it is already clear day; there belong yet about thirty
sheets to it; but because the storm did break them off, it was not finished;
and in the mean time it is grown day light, and the morning is extinguished;
and since that time the labor has been to bring forth the day: Yet it shall
remain so for an eternal Remembrance, because the defect is restored, and
supplied in the The Book of the three Principles.
Second; the fault and blame of the defect is to be attributed to the Enemy.

31. But I will lay the fault upon none, but only the falsehood, and iniquity
of the Devil, who is an enemy to all good; he does even confound and entangle
Kings; how shall then a poor mean Man, being employed in such a work, be so
soon acknowledged and known;
if it be surely affirmed that he is a Lay man, and also unlearned; the very
wise and skillful in Arts, will be offended at the plainness and simplicity of
such a thing; when he hears one speak of such wonders and deep Mysteries in
such a mean and simple way [without Scholastique pomp of words and artificial
terms, and phrases of Logic and Rhetorick] then he thinks it is a Rapsodie:
[or some confused heap of Notions packt together, an Enthusiastic, fantastic
hotch-potch of Whimsies, or a bundle of Non-sence] for he understands not the
gifts of God, and also is not able to see into the heart of another; therefore
I will disturb no man, and desire none to trouble himself about it; but I
confess that it is Gods providence, else this Book should have yet lain in a
Corner.

32. But thus it was published without my knowledge, cons^nt, and will, and that
by the persecutors themselves, the which I acknowledge to be from the
providence, and appointment of God; for I had no copy of it for my self;
neither did I ever know those that have it, also I have it not my self, and
yet it has been copyed out; and brought to my fight and hands four times
already; so that I see that others have published it: and I esteem it a
wonderful work, that the grain grows against the will of the Enemy; but
that which is sown by God, none can let or hinder [from growing.]

33. But that which you, and others also do misconstrue in my Book Aurora
(which appears to be wrong in the apprehension, and which also needs some
clearing, and exposition) you shall find sufficiently cleared at large in my
third and fourth Book;
wherein there is an open gate of the Mysteries of all Beings; and there is
even nothing in Na^^^e but it might be fundamentally searched out, and grounded
upon this way; for it shows, and opens the Stone of the wise men unto all
the Secrets and Mysteries both in the Divine and earthly Mystery: by this
knowledge, and understanding, all the Mettalls of the Earth may be brought to
the highest degree or perfection; yet only by the Children of the divine
Magia, who have the Revelation [or experimental science] of the same.

34. I see it well enough, but I have no manual operation, instigation or Art
unto it; but I only set forth an open Mystery, whereunto God shall stir up
laborers of his own; let no man seek the work from me, or think to get the
knowledge, and operation of the Philosophers stone [or universal tincture from
me] and though it is known clearly and might be opened more clearly, yet I
have broken my will, and will write nothing; but as it is given to me: that so
it may not be my work; least I should be imprisoned in the Turba.

35. And if you will have any thing copyed out of these writings now sent to
you, it is requisite, that the Transcriber be a Learned understanding man; for
many syllables are not fully written, neither have all Grammatical autography;
and in many words some letters may be wanting; and sometimes a Capital Letter
stands for a whole word, for Art has not written here, neither was there any
time to consider how to set it down punctually according to the right
understanding of the Letters, but all was ordered according
to the direction of the spirit which often went in have; so that the pen-mans
hand (by reason that he was not accustomed to it) did often shake; and though I
could have written in a more acurate fair, and plain manner; yet the reason
was this, that the burning fire did often force forward with speed; and the
hand and pen must hasten directly after it; for it comes and goes as a
sudden shower, whatsoever it lights upon, it hits; if it were possible to
comprehend and write all [which my mind beholds in the Divine CHAOS] it would
then be three times more, and deeper grounded.

36. But it cannot be, and therefore there is more then one Book made; more
then one Phylosophicall discourse, and throughout deeper; so that what could
not be contained in the one might be found in the other, and it were well that
at last, out of all, only one, might be made and all the other done away [or
laid aside] for the multiplicity and plurality causes strife, contrariety,
averseness, and wrong apprehensions by reason of the sudden catching conceits,
and conjectures of the Reader, which knows not to try, and discern the
spirit, which uses such wonderful phrase, where oftentimes Reason supposes,
that it contradicts it self; and yet in the depth it is not contrary at all.

37 Out of which misunderstanding [or feigned glosses of Reason and litterall
outward Art upon the Writings of holy Men] the Great Babel upon earth has
been brought forth;
where men contend for nothing, but about words; but let the spirit of
understanding in the Mystery alone, but its end, and number is found and
committed to the Turba; for the beginning has found the Limit; and there is no
more any withholding and staying [of the wrath of God upon Babel] it cannot be
quasht by any power, or force of Arms.

38. I speak not of and from my self, but from that which the spirit shows,
which no man can resist; for it stands in its Omnipotence, and depends not on
our weening and willing, as the The Forty Questions.
Fourth Book of these Writings does exceeding deeply declare, which is
strongly grounded in the light of nature, and can be demonstrated in all things.

39. Further I give you to understand, that in these Writings which are now
sent you, the Author uses sometimes to speak of himself, We, and sometime
I: Now understand by the word We, the spirit (being spoken in the Plural) in
two persons; and in the word I, the Author understands himself; this I give
you for direction and information, to take away wrong apprehension and
suspicion.

40. And herewith I send you the Fourth Part, being the forty Questions, and
therein you may behold your self; and at the next opportunity I will send you
the Second and third Part, if you desire to have them; and I pray to return it
to me again by the next occasion, for I will send it to him, who framed and
sent me the Questions; and so I commend and commit you to the love of God,
heartily wishing that God would illuminate your NOBLE heart, and give you
rightly to understand the Sense and meaning of the Author in the internal
Principle; with all Temporal, and Eternal welfare:

Dated, Gerlits, 1620. Yours in the Love of J. C. J. B.
Teutonicus.
A Letter to PAUL KEYM: BEING An answer to him concerning Our Last Times.
Wherein He Treats of The first Resurrection of the dead; and of the thousand
years Sabbath. ALSO, Of the Fall of BABEL, and of the new Building in ZYON.

I. Light, Salvation, and Eternal Power flowing from the fountain of the
heart of Jesus Christ, be our quickening Consolation.
2. WORTHY, and much esteemed Sir, and good Friend in the Illumination of the
holy Spirit; and in the Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, beloved Brother; I
received of Mr. C. E. the Letter you sent me, dated about the 20. of July,
together with two small Treatises annexed; and therein I understand that you
have received, and read some of my small Manuscripts, concerning the wisdom
of God, and as you affirm, the same do rejoice you; and withal you bear a
great desire, and longing to them being in the like exercise in the wisdom of
God.

3. Which on my part does likewise rejoice me to see, that even now the time is
at hand,
that the right Divine understanding, and true knowledge of God does again
spring forth in Zyon; and that the ruinate Jerusalem shall again be built up,
and that man's true Image which disappeared and went out in Adam, does again
put forth it self in Zyon with a right humane voice, and that God does power
forth his spirit into us, that the precious Pearl in the power, and light of
the holy Ghost is again known, sought, and found.

4. Whereby then we do clearly see and understand in what blindness we for a
long time have been in Babel, going astray in carnal, evil ways; whereby we
have forsaken the true Jerusalem, and shamefully misspent our Patrimony, and
lightly esteemed our Angelical Trophee or Diadem ( Viz. the fair Image) and
wallowed in the filth of the Devil; and under a show of Divine obedience have
played with the Serpent, and walked on in mere erroneous ways: This the
Divine light does at present set before our eyes, and exhorts us to return
with the lost Son, and enter into the true Zyon.

5. Not with Historical supposals, opinions, or blind persuasions; as if we
had apprehended and understood the same very well; this is not Zyon, but Babel,
which confesses God with the mouth, and makes devout speeches to him from the
lips, but in the heart hangs unto the Great Babylonicall Whore; unto the
Dragon of self-love, pride, covetousness, and pleasure, and yet will set
forth her self as if she were a Virgin; No, this is not the Virgin in Zyon;
it must be seriousness.

6. We must be borne of God in Zyon, and know, and also do his will;
Gods spirit must bear witness to our spirit, that we are Gods Children; not
only in the mouth with knowledge, and conjectures, but in the heart in very
deed; not in an holy seeming way without power [in formal ways of
Word-worship, and rounds of Lip-labor, wherein the captivated conscience
places the power of godlinesse] this the Devil mocks at, and cares not for;
but we must put on the Helmet of righteousness and of love, also of chastity
and purity, if we intend to wage Battle against the Prince of this World; he
cares not a whit for any outward show [or for the long and loud mouth cries of
blind Devotion] it must be power that shall overcome him, and that power must
shine forth in goodness, and holy fruits of Christianity; and so we may sight
for the noble Prize, or Crown of life.

7. For we have a powerful Warrior against us,
he sets upon us in body and soul, and soon casts us down, and there is no
other way to overcome him; but with power in humility; which alone is able to
quench his poysonfull fire, wherewith he fights without us, and within us,
against our noble Image.

8. Therefore beloved Sir, and brother in Christ, seeing, you do apply your
self to the Divine wisdom, and labor in the same; it is right and requisite
that we exhort one another to be vigilant to withstand the Devil;
and continually set before our eyes the way which we ought to walk; and also
go on in the same, else we effect nothing; if we know that the World is blind
in Babel, and goes astray then we must be the first that effectually go out of
Babel, that the World may see that we are in earnest.

9. It is not enough, that we lay open, and Manifest Babel, and yet be found
doing as Bibel does; for if we do so, we thereby testify that God discovers
his light unto us,
so that we see, but we will do nothing but the works of darkness; and that
very light which enlightneth our understanding shall witness against us, that
the Lord has called us and shown us the way, but we would not walk in the
same.

10. It is well that we lay open Babel; but we must take heed in what spirit
and mind, and in what kind of knowledge the same is done;
it is good that we be zealous, but the heart must be upright toward God, else
we run without being sent; and in our course we are not known or
acknowledged of God; but so acting, the Devil mocks us, and leads us into by
paths of Error.

11. Besides the holy Scripture does declare, that our works and words shall
follow us; therefore we are seriously to consider in what spirit and knowledge
we set upon the high Mysteries, for he that will pull down a thing that is
evil, must set up a better in the room, otherwise he is none of Gods
Builders, also he labors not in Christ's Vineyard; for it is not good to pull
down, unless a man knows how to make up the Building again in a better
frame and form.

12. For God only is the Master^builder of the World; we are but servants, we
must take great heed how we labor, if we will receive reward; and also that we
have learnt his work in his School, and not run without being sent, when as
we are not yet capable of his service; else we shall be found to be
unprofitable Servants; this I speak in good affection, and in all
faithfulness to instruct and direct one another what we ought to do, that so
our labor may be accepted of God.

13. For the dark Mysteries are no other way at all to be known,
save only in the holy Ghost, we cannot make conclusions upon hidden things,
unless we have the same in real knowledge, and experimentally find in the
illumination of God, that what we aver, is the truth and will of God; and
that it is also agreeable to his Word; and grounded in the light of Nature; for
without the light of Nature there is no understanding of Divine Mysteries.

14. The great Building of God is manifest in the light of Nature; and
therefore he whom Gods light does illuminate, may search out and know all
things; albeit knowledge is not in one and the same way and measure; for Gods
wonders and works are boundless, infinite, and immense; and they are revealed
to every one according to his gifts, and he to whom the light shines has
mere joy in Gods works.

15. And also that which is old and past above a thousand years ago,
is as nigh and as easily to be known in the light, as that which is done to
day; for a thousand years before God are scarce so much as a minute, or the
twinkling of an eye is before us; therefore all things are nigh and manifest
to his spirit, both that which is past, and that which is to come.

16. And if we see in his light, then we must declare his wonders, and manifest
and praise his glorious Name, and not bury our Talent in the Earth; for we must
deliver it unto our Master with Increase; he will require an account of us, how
we have Traded with it; and without knowledge, or certain illumination from
God, no man must presume to judge, or be a Doctor, or Master in the great
Mystery; for it is not committed to, or commanded him, but he must labor to
attain the true light, and then he goes rightly to work in the School of
God.

17. For there be many Masters to be found,
who presume to judge in the Mystery, and yet they are not known or sent by
God; and therefore their School is called Babel, the Mother of Whoredom upon
Earth; they flatter on both sides, they play the Hypocrites with God, and also
serve the Devil; they call themselves the Shepherds and Pastors of Jesus
Christ; they run, and yet are not sent, much less does God own them; and
what they do, they do for their honor, and Their Livings.
Belleys sake, and they would not run neither, if they did not obtain it in
their Course of spiritual whoredom and hypocrisy.

18. They have turned the right and exceeding precious Mystery of God, to a
Mystery of their Whoredom and pleasure; and therefore the spirit calls it
Babel, a Confusion; where men do practice an hypocritical Service and worship
of God; acknowledging him with the tongue, but denying him in the power; where
men do dissemble and flatter God with the lips, but in the heart they embrace
and love the Dragon (in the Revelation.)

19. Such as these we must not be,
if we would obtain the Divine Mystery, and be capable of the light; but
wholly approve our way to God, and resign our selves up to him, that Gods
light may shine in us; that he may be our intelligence, knowing, willing, and
also doing; we must become his Children if we will speak of his Being, and
walk, or labor in the same; for he commits not his work unto a Stranger, who
has not learnt his Work, or the Mystery of his Wonders in Nature, and Grace.

20. I have read over your Books, and therein have found your great diligence
with very much labor, in that you have gathered together the Texts of the holy
Scripture in great abundance;
I understand likewise that you are in good earnest about it, and that you
would feign clearly prove and set forth thereby, the dark terms, and places
of the Scripture concerning the last Times, also concerning the first
Resurrection of the dead, and also concerning the thousand years Sabbath;
likewise you would manifest and set forth the ruin of Babel, and the new
building in Zyon of which the Scripture speaks in many places.

21 First, what concerns Babel; how it has grown up, and how it shall
again be destroyed, is sufficiently manifest; the Destroyer is already on
foot, and is now about the work; he has long since made a beginning, however
the World will not see or take any notice of it.

22. Men cry Mordio, [murder, confusion, and destruction, to there adversaries]
and yet there is no strange Enemy, but it is the Turba only which has grown
up in the midst of Babel in her wickednesses and unrighteousnesses; that has
found the limit, and destroys only that which for a long time has been
naught, useless, and selvish; the which should at all times have been
rejected: for where God should have been honored, and loved, and our neighbor
also as a man loves himself,
there men have set up in Gods stead, the abominable, and bestiall
coveteousnesse, deceit, falsehood, and wicked craft under an hypocritical show
and pretense of holiness and have minded and loved falsehood in the place of
God; and so have made of the Mystery an abominable vicious Babel full of
reproachings,
revilings, and contentions, where they have with sweet speeches, and enticing
words of man's wisdom [with feigned glosses; and expositions of Scripture]
blindfolding our eyes, and binding our consciences have led us captive in a
very deceitful way to the glory and Magnificence of the great Whore; so that
she has fatted her adulterous Brat; and domineered over our body, and soul,
goods, and estate.

23. This Bastard is now at odds with himself about the great prey, and
spoil, and does it self discover its own wickedness and great shame, so
that we may see what good ever was in her; for the great wickedness which she
has committed does plague her; and no strange thing, whereby it may be seen,
that her whoredom has been manifold; and that the Devil had beset and caught
us in manifold Nets; and that one whoredom [or Mystery of hipocricy and
iniquity] runs in opposition to another; and are malicious, biting,
devouring, destroying, and slaying each other in an hostile manner.

24. For the great Pain is come upon her,
and she shall now bring forth the great iniquity, wherewith she in become
fully pregnant, and therefore she cries out, because of her travel and woe,
which is fallen upon her; and she speaks of the child which she shall bring
forth; Viz. of Murder, Covetousness, and Tyranny, she uncovereth her fair
feature, and shows what she is in the heart, now he that will not know her,
there is no remedy for him.

25. The Revelation says, Go out from her my people, that you may not be
partakers of her Plagues; for she has filled her Cup full with the
abominations of her Whoredom in the anger of God; the same She shall drink
off, and be forced to burst Her self thereby.

26. And this is that which I say of Babel, that she is a Whore, and shall
suddenly break in pieces and be destroyed, and no stranger shall do it; the
spirit of her own mouth does strangle her, her own Turba destroys her; She
cries for vengeance, and murder upon Heresy, and yet she does it not for
Gods sake; but for her Adulterous Bratt, and Belley-God: For otherwise if it
were for God, she would enter into his Command, and will of Love; where Christ
says, Love one another, for thereby men shall know that you are my Disciples.

27. The Kingdom of God does not consist in War and revilings, or in an
external show in delicious days; herein the Children of God are not to be
found, but in Love, in patience, in hope, in faith,
under the Cross of Jesus Christ; thereby grows the Church of God unto the
Sacred Ternary: [to an heavenly Paradi^icall Essence] and the new Angelical
man hidden in the old, springs forth in God; and this is my certain
knowledge briefly comprised concerning this Article; in my Writings you may see
further of it.

28. Secondly, concerning Zyon, I speak and declare according to my knowledge,
even as the spirit shows it to me; that there shall surely come an ending and
removal of the Deceit [or Mystery of iniquity wherewith men are blinded] and
Zyon shall be found only of the Children of Faith; not in general, as if
there should be no wicked man.

29. Note.
For the Oppressor shall be a cause that Zyon is borne: when men shall see how
Babel is an Whore; then many Children shall be found in Zyon,
and seek the Lord; but the Oppressor shall dog them, and cry them down for
Heretics; also persecute and put to death, and where one is killed, there
shall ten, yea an hundred rise up in his room.

30. But the General Zyon appears first in greatest Misery; when Babel
comes to ruin, then it shall stand desolate and miserable; and the Children
of Zyon shall then say, How has the Lord forsaken us? Come we beseech you let
us seek his face; let us cease from strife and War; Have we not, alas! made
our Country desolate? Is not all store and Provision wasted and spent? Are we
not Brethren? Wherefore do we fight? We will now enter into Love and Unity,
and seek the Lord, and no more fight, and destroy our selves, we will be
content; are we not here altogether Pilgrims and Strangers, and seek our native
Country?

31. In this time a Zyon verily shall be found, and the Heaven shall drop down
its dew, and the Earth yield her fatness; yet not so, as if wickedness should
be wholly done away, for it shall continue unto the end,
of which Christ says, Think thou that when the Son of man shall come,
that there will be Faith upon the Earth? And though the Children of Zyon shall
have a fiery deliverance, that they shall remain, Maugre the will of the
Devil; insomuch that God will work great things, as at the time of the
Apostles, yet it endures not unto the end; for as it was in the days of Noah,
when he entered into the Arc, so shall the coming of the Son of man be, as it
is written.

32. But that the holy Ghost shall be in the hearts of the faithful in Zyon, I
acknowledge and I know it; for Zyon shall not be from without, but in the new
man; it is already borne, he that would seek it, let him but seek himself,
and depart from the old Adam, into a new life; and he shall find whether
Jesus be borne in him.

33. If he finds it not, let him enter into himself;
and seriously consider himself; and so he shall find Babel, and her workings
in him, these he must destroy and enter into Gods Covenant; and then Zion will
be revealed in him, and he shall be born with Christ in Bethleem Jehuda in the
dark Stable, not in Jerusalem, as reason feign would have it, that Christ
should be born in the old Ass; the old Ass must become servant, and serve the
new man in Zion.

34. But that in Four hundred years there shall be a mere golden Age; I know
nothing of it, it is not revealed to me; also the limit of the Worlds End is
not revealed to me: I cannot speak of any four hundred Years; for the Lord
has not commanded me to teach it, I commend it to Gods might; and leave it for
those to whom God would vouchsafe the knowledge of it; seeing therefore I have
not as yet apprehended it I rest satisfied in his gifts; yet I despise no man,
if he had a knowledge, and command so to teach.

35. For the fourth Book of Esdras is not sufficient as I understand to give a
positive assurance to it; yet I wait for my Savior Jesus Christ, and rejoice
that I may find my Lord; when I have him, then I hope after the death of my
old Adam fully to recreate my self in the Still rest of Zion, and to wait in
my God expecting what he will do with me in his, and my Zion; for if I have
but him,
then I am in and with him in the Eternal Sabbath; where no strife or
contention of the ungodly can any more reach me in my New man, at this I do in
the mean time rejoice in this miserable Vale of Tabernacles.

36. The first resurrection of the dead to the thousand years Sabbath (of
which there is mention in the Revelation) is not sufficiently made known to
me, how the same may be meant, seeing the Scripture does not mention it
elsewhere, and Christ also and his Apostles give not an hint of it in other
places, save only John in his, Revelation; but whether they shall be a thousand
Solar years,
or how it may be referred, seeing I have not full assurance, I leave it to my
God; and to those to whom God shall vouchsafe the right understanding of it;
till God is pleased to open my eyes concerning these Mysteries.

37. For they be Secrets, and it belongs not to man to make conclusions about
them, without the command and light of God; but if any had knowledge and
illumination of the same from God, I should be ready and willing to learn; If
I could see the ground thereof in the light of nature.

38. But seeing it behooveth me not to hide my knowledge of it, so far as I
apprehend it in the light of Nature; I will therefore set down some
Suppositions, or considerable Opinions, which are in my mind, not positively
to affirm, but give it to consideration; for good and wholesome instructions
may be drawn forth thereby, and it is also profitable for man so to search; I
will do it in all sincere uprightness, to see if we might attain somewhat
nearer the matter, and perhaps there may be some to whom God shall bestow such
a gift, stirred up thereby to write more clearly.

39. As first,
whether or no it be certain, that the World must continue Seven thousand
years* and one thousand of them should be a mere Sabbath; Seeing that God
created all in six days, and began the rest on the sixth day toward evening,
whence the Jews begin their Sabbath on Friday evening: and Elias also says,
that the World should stand but Six thousand years; and Christ likewise
declares, that the days of tribulation shall be shortened for the Elects sake,
else no man should be saved, which you apply to the fall of Babel, and to the
time of Zyon; but it seems as if Christ sp^ke of the fall of the Jews, and
the end of the World, and foresheweth an evil End.

40. Also Christ says, that it shall be at the time of his coming to
judgment, as it was in the days of Noah, where men did Marry, and were given
in Marriage; now we know very well (as the Scripture testifies) what manner of
wicked World was in the days of Noah, that the Deluge must come and destroy
them: (This would intimate, and denote a very mean Sabbath.)

41. And though a man should otherwise expound the words of Christ concerning
his coming, yet that would not be sufficient to prove it; being also that the
Disciples of Christ do always represent the End to be nigh; and Paul says,
That the end should come after that Antichrist is revealed.

42. But that the Resurrection of the dead, and the last Judgment should be
understood of both (namely that the righteous shall arise to the thousand
years Sabbath, and among them some ungodly; and that Gog and Magog at the End
of the thousand years should fight against the Saints) it seems to run quite
contrary to the light of Nature.

43. For first I cannot apprehend how the first Resurrection must come to
pass, seeing the Saints shall have their works follow them, according to the
words of the spirit; besides we know very well, that all our works are sown
into the great Mystery; that they are first brought forth into the four
Elements, and so pass into the Mystery,
and are reserved to the judgment of God, where all things shall be tried by
fire, and that which is false shall consume in the fire; and the figures shall
fall unto the Center of Nature, Viz. the dark Eternity.

44. But if men's works shall follow them in the first Resurrection as you
affirm, then God must verily move the Mystery (that is, himself) which
denotes the last Judgment.

45. For God has moved himself, but twice only from Eternity; once in the
Creation of the World; and secondly in the Incarnation of Christ according to
his heart: the first motion belongs to the Father of all beings, and the
second to the Son according to Gods heart; now the third motion of the holy
Ghost is yet to be accomplished both in love and anger,
according to all the Three Principles; where all what ever has been
corrupted shall again be restored in the motion of the holy Ghost, and each
given unto its owner.

46. How can then the dead arise in their works without the motion of the holy
Spirit both in love and anger? When as the restoration of life does only
consist in him; moreover I do not know how the first resurrection should come
to pass, whether it should come to pass in the twofold man (which cannot
otherwise be understood,) that is, in good and evil; but what perfect Sabbath
can we hold therein, was not Adam unable so to stand?

47. Now if the new man should only arise, then he would not be in the four
Elements of this World; moreover the new body in Christ need no resurrection;
it lives eternally without any want, necessity, or death, in Christ, and does
only wait when God shall move the Mystery, where he shall then put on the
Crown of his wonders and works.

48 The manner of the Resurrection is thus;
the Mystery shall restore what ever it has swallowed up; man's works shall be
put upon him, and therewith he shall Pass through the fire and it shall be
tried what will endure the fire, or not.

49. Now I cannot apprehend, how this should agree with the dwelling upon the
Earth, for if it should be after a Paradificall manner that man should arise
with the wonders, then it could not be done without the motion of the great
Mystery; for your writings say, that also some wicked men shall arise; this
shows that the Mystery must be moved, and at the motion, the inflammation, [or
last Judgment of fire] must needs be; if now the Mystery should be moved it
would not only move [awaken and raise up] some, and that in one source only;
seeing that likewise some ungodly shall arise.

50. Besides you say, that they shall all dye at the end of the six thousand
Years, then there must be a dwelling upon, or an inhabiting the Earth, where
the ungodly that arise should again marry, and build; of whom there should not
be only some as according to your opinion, but according to the Scripture they
shall be as the Sand upon the Sea shore; whence else should Gog and Magog come,
or how, should they fight against the Children of Paradise, for in the
Paradisicall Children there is no strife.

51. Also it were not necessary,
that they should dye at the END of the six thousand years if they should
arise in the twofold body, as we are now; but if they should arise in the new
body, then no ungodly man can either see, or touch them; like as we now do not
see Paradise; even such is the new body, no ungodly man can fight against it.

52. What should they fight for? Are the Saints in Paradise? Then they make no
use of the external Elements, but only of the internal Element, wherein all
the four are couched in unity; so that they have nothing to strive for, but
they are separate in the Source.

53. But should the ungodly dye, and also arise again in the sour Elements;
this seems much more strange, but if they should ^^ise in the spiritual
body, then the four Elements could not contain it, but the Abyss; and still
they would be separate as light, and darkness;
what pleasure or likeing should God have to bring the Saints again into the
combat and source of the four Elements, unto which they have been so long
dead? And yet should they then begin to fight with the wicked? Much more fit
and agreeable were it for those who here have suffered nothing for Christ's
sake; that is, for those who here upon the Earth have not lost their lives for
Christ's sake.

54. And though you would say, that they should not fight, but the Lord for
them, what liking could God take to raise up the Saints and to set them again
in the presence of the ungodly; or should not the joy in Abraham's bosom be
much greater then this in the four Elements; whence natural strife and
contention do arise; but if they should dwell in Paradise without the four
Elements, then no strife, or ungodly man can reach them.

55. Besides, to what end should the ungodly be upon the Earth, if there shall
be such a Sabbath? Their source is not in the four Elements but in the Abyss,
whither their soul goes, when the body dies.

56. Besides, should none but those dwell in the Sabbath who have dyed for
Christ's sake (of which verily there cannot be such a number as is set down in
the Revelation) that they should be sufficient to possess the Earth; and
should the ungodly also dwell upon the Earth, and hold their Hellish Sabbath?
This runs directly against the light of Nature.

57. Moreover Christ says, That they shall marry, and be given in marriage,
as in the days of Noah: Also two shall be grinding in one Mill, and two
sleeping in one bed, and the one shall be taken, and the other left; when the
last day shall come.

58. Besides,
Christ says also, That when he shall come to judge the World, All generations
and kindreds shall see him, and tremble before him; and the wicked shall wail,
and lament, and say to the wise Virgins, give us of your oil; all this denotes
a General expectation of the last Judgment.

59. For if at the last Trumpe, two shall be lying in one bed, (namely, one
holy, the other ungodly) this shows no difference, and if the Saints be mixed
with the ungodly, then verily there must needs be a poor Sabbath.

60. When we look upon the words of Christ and his Apostles, they will not in
the least manner agree thereto; and though there is mention made of a thousand
years in the Revelation, yet the same is hidden from us;
and we know not when they may begin, or whether they are begun; if the first
Resurrection be Paradificall, then it may be done without our knowledge.

61. They shall not dwell among us, also they shall not Marry; for we dye once
from Male and Female, and we shall not arise Male and Female, but we shall live
in Paradise in the form of Angels, Matthew. 22, 30.

62. Besides, the wicked shall in the appearance of Christ's coming, entreat
the wise for Oil of Faith; and you write that the fire of God (being the anger
and hellish source, shall be in them, and that they shall be tormented (here
upon the Earth in the four Elements) in the anger of God, whereas the anger of
God is not manifest in the four Elements; for therein good and evil are mixed
together.

63. But how shall he that is once dead to good, and cannot so much as have one
good thought, entreat the Saints for Faith and comfort? It much rather
declares, that when Christ shall come to judge the World,
that they shall all yet dwell together in the flesh, in the four Elements,
where the one shall be received, and the other rejected; and the sins of the
wicked shall then come in his sight at the appearance of the severe countenance
of God in the fiery zeal of the first Principle, so that he shall be
affrighted, and then would feign begin to be honest.

64. And though you mention that they shall only awake, and not arise, yet the
uncorrupted are to be understood; now you say, that they shall dwell upon the
Earth in the four Elements and the Saints in Paradise; when this comes to
be, then there will be no more any strife or controversy; but they are
Eternally separate.

65. But shall the Saints dwell upon the Earth in Paradise, as Adam before the
fall; and the ungodly be opposed to them, then they are in danger as Adam was,
that they should again eat of the forbidden fruit, whereof they should yet
once dye.

66. But shall they be hidden from the ungodly a thousand years and also from
the four Elements,
why should they then first at the end be manifest in the four Elements, that
Gog and Magog should then enter Battle with the Children of Paradise? It does
neither agree with Scripture or Reason.

67. The first Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, Chap. 15. does indeed
teach of Christ's, and also our Resurrection, yet not of a third: But first of
Christ's, and then of Ours; for he says there, That Christ is the first fruits;
and then we who belong unto Christ; this is the general Resurrection; and
though he says, That then comes the end, yet by the end he signifies no
Resurrection, but the end is our Resurrection; this is much rather to be
understood, then that he should mean by the End, another Resurrection, or
time; for just after our Resurrection comes the End of the World.

68. The dead shall first appear before the judgment, ere that the end of
this World, and the four Elements comes; for the End is the enkindling of
the fire, and the Last.

69. Also the Apostles of Christ, and all Teachers from God have always
represented the End as nigh at hand, for John himself says in his Epistle,
That we are in the End; he speaks indeed of the last hour; but if the wicked
were assured that he had yet four hundred years unto the End, how would he
seek after riches for his Children.

70. Besides we are to look unto the End, for this World is confined and
determined in the beginning of the Creation; and then into the End where the
Creation ceased; all which, was finished in six days; and in such a time the
Mystery of Gods Kingdom shall be finished, and a thousand years are before
him as one day.

71. Concerning the Seventh day of Rest, whether or no, the World shall yet be
in rest a thousand years;
the same is hidden to mankind; we cannot certainly determine, we must leave
it unto his might; I have no knowledge of it, seeing the Scripture does not
give clear evidence, when the thousand years begin, or what years they be,
or to what they have relation; therefore I let it alone in its own worth, and
will hinder none that has a certain knowledge or command so to teach; this I
give you to consider of, meaning it well unto you.

72. What I might further answer concerning this matter, you find sufficiently
in my Writings; although I could set down a large Answer about it, yet I
thought it not expedient, seeing this knowledge is not given to me; thereupon I
let it alone, for I know that I must give an account of my Works, and I se^d
you by the Bearer hereof your two Books again, and give you thanks for them.

73. Concerning the End, or limit of Babels downfall (Viz. that Babel should
be wholly destroyed about the year 1630* according to your computation, and
albeit many more be of the same mind) the same likewise is not sufficiently
manifest to me.

74. To me indeed is given to know,
that the time is nigh, and even now at hand, but the year and day I know not;
thereupon I leave it to Gods Counsel, and to those to whom God shall reveal
it; I cannot conclude any thing without certain knowledge, otherwise I should
be found a Liar before God.

75. But I wait for my Savior Jesus Christ, and will see what he will do;
will he that I shall know it, then I will know it; if not, then I will not know
it; I have committed my will, knowledge, understanding, and desire unto him; he
shall be my knowing, willing, and also doing; for without him there is mere
danger, and uncertainty.

76. Man does hardly reach that which is before his eyes, much less that which
is hidden and Mystical, except God be his light; this answer I give you out of
good affection to consider of; albeit I I am a simple mean man, and borne of
no Art in this World [or not bred up in any Scholastique Learning.]

77. But what I have, that is the gift of God, I have it not from any Art,
or Studying, but from the light of grace, which I only sought for; and though
my beginning was simple by reason of my Childish understanding; yet God has
since that time in his light, wrought somewhat in me, and opened my Childish
eyes.

78. As for the Book Aurora (which is the first) it were needful to be better
explained in many places; for at that time the full apprehension was not born
in me, for like as a sudden shower, whatsoever it lights upon, it hits; even so
it went with the fiery instigation.

79. Although I had no purpose at all, that any should read it; I wrote only
the wonders of God which were shown unto me, for a memorial to my self; and
it went abroad without my consent, and it was taken from me per-force, and
published without my knowledge; for I thought to keep it by me as long as I
lived; and had no intent to be known with all, among such high persons as now
is, come to pass.

80. But the most high (in whose hands and power all things are) had another
purpose therewith as is now manifest; and as I am informed it is known in many
Cities, and Countries; at which I do wonder, and also not wonder; for the Lord
does effect his work marvellously, beyond and above all reason; although he
should employ a Shepherd in the work: and albeit the Art, and outward Reason
will give him no Room, and place, yet however his purpose must stand against
all the Ragings of the Devil.

81. And though I have not obtained many days of pleasure thereby; yet I must
not therefore resist his will; I have written only according to the form as
it was given to me; not according to other Masters or Writings.

82. And besides my intent was only for my self, albeit the spirit showed me
how it should fall out; yet my heart willed nothing, but committed the same to
him to do therewith what he pleased.

83. I have not run with it ( not being called) and made my self known to
any; for I can say also with truth that my acquaintance knew least of it; but
what I have shown unto any, the same was done upon his entreaty and
importunate desire.

84. And then further I give you to understand, seeing that you have my
writings in hand to read, that you would not look upon them* as coming from a
great Master,
for Art is not to be seen, or found therein; but great earnestness of a
zealous mind, which thirsts after God; in which thirst it has received
great things; as the illuminate mind shall well ^ee, and without light, no man
shall rightly know, and apprehend them, as the Reader shall surely find.

85. And yet it could not be written more clearly, and ready for the
understanding; although I conceive that the same is clear, and plain enough
in such a depth; but yet if there were any thing that should seem too obscure,
and difficult; I might represent it in a more simple and plain manner if it
were mentioned to me.

86. There are yet other Books besides this, written concerning the wisdom
of God, of a very deep sense, and understanding; treating of the great depths
of the wonders of God, which at present I have not at hand.

87. But that I give you not a large answer of my judgment upon your Book
concerning the thousand years Sabbath, and the four hundred years in Zyon
(which you suppose to prove with many places of holy Scripture) is, because I
do not fundamentally and certainly know whether those Texts may be applied to
such a meaning.

88. For there be many sayings of Scripture which seem to intimate only one
General Resurrection of the dead; and they are clear, especially in the words
of Christ in the sour Evangelists, which I hold for the most certain.

89. In like manner the Cause stands with Zyon; that wickedness shall continue
to the end, and though a Zyon shall be, yet it will not be wholly Universal;
Babel shall go to ruin, and get another form; yet they shall not all be
Children of God, that are called Children in Zyon.

90. Also I have no knowledge of the thousand years Sabbath; I know not
sufficiently to ground it with Scripture; for we find one place seeming to
cross another; men may interpret the Scripture as they are disposed,
but seeing I have no command from God of it; I let it alone and leave every
one to answer for his own opinion: This I tell you syncerely out of good
affection, and am however your faithful Friend in the love of Christ.

91. In your forty second, and forty third Page, where you write of the Mystery
of the Souls departed [or separated] you bring the opinion of Theophrastus,
and others into question, and suspicion, as if they had not written aright of
the Mystery; it were better, tha^ had been left out, seeing you have not
understood their Opinion, ^s you say, and just so it seems: you shall find in
my Book of the Forty Questions [about the thirtieth Question] concerning the
last Judgment, and also in other Questions, sufficient and large information;
if the same be read and rightly understood.

92. There is no need of any further searching,
it is there clear enough, what the Mystery is, that comprizeth body and
soul; and also what condition the separated souls are in, both with their
expectation of the last Judgment; and also in the mean time in respect of
their habitation* source, life, and difference: I had thought that it was so
deeply and highly grounded, that the mind of man should be satisfied enough
therewith; and if you neither have, nor cannot set forth any thing more
fundamental; then it remains of right in its own place, the thousand years
Sabbath, and the four hundred years in Zy^^ will but find fault with all, and
bring it into suspicion; and though many objections might be made, yet they
would be of no service or esteem.

93. Moreover the manifestation of the thousand years Sabbath is not of much
importance, or concernement to the World, seeing we have not sufficient ground
of the same, it should of right rest in the Divine Omnipotence; for we have
enough in the Sabbath of the new birth; for that soul that obtaines this
Sabbath [of Regeneration] will after the death of the earthly body,
have Sabbath enough in Paradise; we may very well leave, and commend the other
unto the Divine Omnipotence, and wait on God what he will do with us, when we
shall be in him and he in us.

94. For I suppose there should be a better Sabbath in God, then in this World;
and if man should dwell upon the earth in Paradise, then must God restore that
which in his curse entered into the Mystery, as is to be seen in the forty
Questions.

95. But that you suppose that the righteous shall not be brought with their
works before the judgment, is contrary to the words of Christ, who says,
That all things shall be proved through the Fire.

96. I say not (that they shall come) into the judgment, for the judgment is
in the wicked understand the judgment of Anger, of which the Scripture says
the righteous, or as Christ says, He that believes on me comes not unto
judgment; he understands hereby, the source or pain of the judgment, his
words do hold forth, that they shall all come together before the judgment,
and every one hear his sentence; The ungodly depart hence, and the righteous
come hither, etc.

97. Also every one shall stand forth with his own works in the Mystery; and
themselves be judged according to their works; now you know very well that our
works in this World have been wrought in good and evil, and shall be proved
and separated in the fire of God; how shall they then being unseparated, follow
the Saints in the Resurrection to the Sabbath, and they hold Sabbath therein?
But if they shall follow them,
then they must be tried and separated in the Fre; and then they shall have no
more any need to come before the judgment; but if they should keep a Sabbath
without their works, then they are not perfect.

98. If we would speak of Paradise, and apprehend the same, then we must have
clear eyes to see into it; for the internal Paradificall World, and the
external World do hang one within another; we have only turned our selves
out of the internal into the external, and so we work in two Worlds.

99. Death cannot separate our works,
the fire of God must do it; for they remain in one Mystery till the
judgment of God, every one at the hour of the Resurrection shall come forth
in his own Mystery, and he shall see his works before him, and feel them in
him.

100. It is not understood that they shall answer for their selves with words,
for the Kingdom of God consists, and proceeds in Power; and albeit the ungodly
shall cry out, Woe upon his abominations, and Seducers; yet every man's work
shall be Summoned in POWER, which shall either rejoice, or torment him.

101. Now the old body of this World, is the Mystery of this World, and the new
body is the Mystery of the Divine light World, and the soul is the Mystery of
God the Father, and the Earth with the Elements has also both Mysteries, which
shall be moved through the Principle of the Father.

102. And then the doors of the Mysteries shall be set open, and each shall
give and set forth its Figures which it has swallowed up, for the Principle of
the soul must stand before the judgment with both the Mysteries.

103. Happy are they which shall have the body of Christ in the Mystery of the
wrath [or fire of Gods anger] they shall have the souls fire,
or the Principle of the Father surrounded with the light World, and illustrate
with the Majesty, they shall feel no pain, or hurt; and shall pass
unsensibly through the fire; and there the outward, or third Principle shall be
proved; and all earthlinesse or falsehood, shall remain in the fire; but the
works shall be renovated in the fire, and freed from their earthly source, and
soil; and then the earthly Mystery remains in the fire, and is a food of the
fire; whence the light arises, and the Righteous loses nothing.

104. For the works of love which were brought forth in the new body,
do pass with the spirit of the soul through the fire, and remain in the
Divine Image in the source of the light; and they of the third Principle, that
is, of this World, do remain in the firesource of the Soul.

105. But that which has been wrought and acted in an wholly evil and
malicious manner in the third Principle; and yet in this World has not been
renewed by earnest Repentance, and Reconcilment toward his Brother; that
falls unto the center of Nature; that is, the root of the dark World.

106. But the works of the ungodly shall not be able to remain in the fire;
for the fire swalloweth them down in it self to the dark Center Viz. the
Original of nature wherein the Devils dwell; and thither also goes
there-soules fire being the Fathers principle; for this fire of the soul shall
have no matter to make it burn aright; but it shall be as a quenched dark
painful sourse-fire; only as an anguish that would feign produce fire; this
is called Gods wrath (and not a principle) a death or a dying source.

107. For the principle of the father, wherein the right, and true soul
consists, is a flaming fire which gives light, and in the light is the
precious Image of God; for that light does qualify, and sweeten the burning
light with the essentialty of Love; so that it is a pleasing delight, and a
cause of nature, and of life.

108. Therefore I tell you, that you should not think it strange or
misunderstand it; when I or any other (let it be Theophrastus or who it will)
write, that man, shall stand before the Judgment with his body which he had
here: I perceive very well, that you have not as yet understood my Writings in
the Book of the Threefold life, and also in the Book of the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ (which treats of Christ's suffering,
dying, and rising again; and how we must enter into his death, and arise out
of his death) you shall find it clear enough explained, and enlarged; but
seeing you have them not yet at hand, be pleased to have patience, you may very
likely get them to read; and then you will be freed from your perplexity; and
deep searching in this manner.

109. For they lay their ground much deeper then your apprehension is in this;
do but read them right, you shall verily find what the Mystery is, what the
magical Bysse, and Abyss is, also what the Being of all Beings is; there
needs no consulting with one, or another; he that understands the great Mystery
whence all Beings have proceeded, and do still proceed; he does not encumber
himself with such large circumferences.

110. You have undertaken a very hard labor which does nothing but perplex,
eat up, and consume your life? it is wholly needless, he that finds, and
knows the great Mystery, he finds all things therein; there need no
literal demonstration; God, Christ, and the eternity with all wonders do lie
therein; the Holy Ghost is the Key to it;
are you in the new birth as you say, then there is no need of such hard
seeking, with such hard labor; seek only Christ in the Manger, in the dark
Stable, when you find him, then you shall indeed find where he fitteth at the
righ, hand of God.

111. Searching only does nothing; the Philosophers Stone is a very dark
disesteemed Stone, of a Gray color, but therein lies the highest Tincture;
would you search out the Mysterium Magnum, then take before you only the Earth
with its Metals, and so you may well find what the Magical or Cabalisticall
ground is.

112. The deep and Mystical numbers,
which otherwise no man is able to fathom or find out, lie all in the Mystery;
but he that finds it, searches not after the numbers, he takes Gold for
Earth; and does as one that has a costly Treasure lying in an obscure place;
the Manger and swaddling clothes of Christ are more acceptable to him then the
whole World with its Figures [or external pomp, and glory] he hides the
Numbers themselves, for the outward Kingdom must accomplish its wonders.

113. Wherefore should the earthly Mystery, be unvailed before the time;
enquire of the Magi.
Magists, who have understood the heavenly and earthly Magia; wherefore they
have kept the Tincture secret, and not revealed it; there is no other cause at
all, but that the World is not worthy of it; so likewise it is not worthy of
the Numbers of the Mystery.

114. Therefore God has hidden them from us, Note.

that the earthly Mystery might accomplish and fulfill all its wonders on us;
and that all the Violls of Gods anger be poured forth on us; how can a man
undertake to reveal such secret things without the consent of the Mystery;
indeed he tampereth about the outside of the Mystery, but if he comes in he
must have the will of the Mystery.

115. The outward instigation to manifest and reveal the Mystery, proceeds
from the Stars; for they would feign be freed from vanity, and they drive
mightily in the Magical Children to manifestation; therefore we must prove and
examine the instigation, whether it proceed from Gods light, from Gods spirit,
or from the Dominion or Government of the Stars.

116. For Gods spirit speaks plainly of his Mystery, he only declares the
Turba,
and lets the Numbers alone; he has once signed, and sealed the Mystery,
with the might of the first Principle in the Seven forms of Nature to the
wonders of God; and again he has signed it in the Love in the humanity of
Christ, with the Seven golden Candlesticks and lights; and therewith he
continues until the judgment; each number manifests it self in its own Age;
no creature has power to manifest the same, for he that has it, dares not;
else he transgresses the Magical order, and becomes a loathing to the Mystery.

117. And therefore the Prophets, Note.
and also Christ himself have spoken all in Parables,
after a Magical manner; and even to this day none who is capable of the
Mystery dare speak otherwise, unless there be a peculiar purpose of God, that
the Number shall be plainly revealed; as Daniel who did clearly denote the
time of Christ with its own Number; he had command so to do; this I tell you
syncerely and in all faithfulness, also in right Christian love toward you,
not out of contempt, but from my knowledge and gifts, seeing you desired it of
me; I have given you a short hint, what you are to do herein, and entreat you
to look upon it in a Brotherly way.

118. But yet what I am able to serve you in, with my few gifts, if you shall
further desire, it shall be done with a good will; provided, I shall perceive
you are in good earnest, and that it shall serve to the honor of God, and the
welfare of mankind; and so I commend you into the Love of Jesus Christ.

Dated, Gerlits, 14th. of August, ANNO DOM: 1620.
ANOTHER LETTER TO PAUL KEYM:
Concerning the way to true Knowledge, and the Regeneration in CHRIST: Likewise
concerning the thousand years Sabbath; and how the Mysteries in the Revelation
are to be understood.

Our Salvation in Christ Jesus.
1. WORTHY, and much respected Sir, and in Christ beloved Brother; I have
received your last Letter, and therein I have once more understood, and well
observed your zealous inflamed mind, in your intended labor, and hard Study;
and then your anxious earnest desire after the light of the true knowledge
thereof; and thirdly, the great thirst after the fountain and wellspring of
Christ, wherein the mind is refreshed, quickened, comforted, satisfied, and
appeased; and considering that I am a Servant to my Brethren, and no less then
a Debtor in the Love of Christ to them; therefore I shall in the same Love,
show and impart to you what I know, and what is given to me; seeing your desire
also requires it.

2. Christ said, I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that abides in me,
and I in him, shall bring forth much fruit; for without me you can do
nothing; also he that abides in me and [hath] my words [abiding] in him, he
brings forth much fruit; herein lies the whole ground, and it is the only
root or spring to the Fountain whence the Divine understanding flows; there
is no other ground to the true and reall-knowledge in the wisdom of God, no
other seeking, studying, or searching does avail, any thing.

3. For every spirit searches only its own depth; [or reaches no further
then its own natural capacity or instinct] and apprehends that wherein it
does enkindle its self; and though it does search in its own enkindling, yet
it finds no more but a type or representation of things like a shadow, or
dream; it is not able to behold the Being it self; for if it would see the
Being, then it must be in the Being, and the Being in it; that so it may be
capable of the Being, and see really in the Being it self.

4. Now then, seeing that we are dead in Adam to the Divine essence and are
become blind and estranged; we have no power in us as from our selves, we know
nothing of God in our Reason, but only the hystory, that there is a God, we
do neither feel his power, nor see his light, unless we return, and become
like unto Children, which know nothing but are guided, and ruled; and as a
Child looks upon its mother, and longs after her; and she also cherishes,
and brings it up; so must the external reason be blinded, beaten down, and
quite quasht.

5. And the desire must resign, and cast it self into the grace, and Love of
God, and not reguard the opposition, and contradiction of the outward reason,
which says, it is nothing so; God is afar of; you must search, meditate, and
represent him only to your self by your apprehension; you must seek after
his will, how he has revealed himself; How he has revealed himself in his
Word.
so he will be known, and no otherwise; thus the external, hystoricall,
Astrall reason does judge; and it rules also the whole World except a very
small number of Gods Children.

6. Christ said, you must abide in me, for without me you can do nothing; you
can neither know nor search out any thing really, and fundamentally of God? for
he that comes to me; him I will in no wise cast out; in me you shall bring
forth much fruit; now every branch grows on its own tree; and has the sap,
power, influence, virtue, and property of the tree; and bears fruit according
to the quality, kind, and property of the tree.

7. Thus likewise he who desires to be taught of God, and to have Divine
knowledge,
must stand in the tree whereinto God has engrafted us through, the
Regeneration; he must have the sap and virtue of the tree, else he brings
forth strange, unsavory, wild fruit, which has not the taste and relish of the
good tree; we must become like unto a Child which understands nothing; but
only knows its mother, and longs after her.

8. We must drink of the new milk of Christ's Incarnation; that so we may be
made partakers of his flesh, and spirit; his virtue, and sap must be our
virtue, and sap; we must become Gods Children in Divine Eating and Drinking.

9. Nicodemus said; How can it be that a man should be borne again in his old
age? Yes good Nicodemus; and good external earthly Reason, how could it be
that Adam who was a perfect Image of God, did perish in his perfection, and
became earthly; did it not come to pass by Imagination, because he induced his
desire, longing, and lust, into the outward Astrall, Elementall, and earthly
Kingdom [and did set his mind upon the Dominion of this World] whereupon he
in his desire, lust, and imagination, was forthwith impregnated, and became
earthly; and thereby he fell into the sleep of the external Magia; and thus it
is also with the New birth.

10. Through Imagination, and an earnest serious desire, we become again
impregnated of the Deity,
and receive the New body in the Old; the New does not mix it self with the
Old; like as Gold in the gross and rough stone is quite another thing, and
has another Tincture and spirit, then the rough matter in the stone; thus also
is the New man in the Old, the rough stone knows nothing of the Gold; and so
likewise the earthly Adam knows nothing of the Divine heavenly Adam; and
therefore there is strife in Man, and Man is contrary to himself.

11. The earthly Adam will see, feel, and taste, but he receives only a ray,
type, and twinkling reflex from the internal Man; where he indeed at some
times tastes somewhat of the Divine Man, but not essentially; but as the light
of the Sun does disperse, or swallow up the sad darkness, so that it
appears as if there were no darkness more at all; and yet the darkness is
really hidden in the light, which again is manifest when the light of the Sun
withdraws.

12. Thus oftentimes the New man does in the Divine Power, swallow up the Old,
that the Old man supposes that he has apprehended the Deity, whereas he is
not capable of that essence, but the spirit of God from the New man does pass
through the Old; but when the same enters again into its Mystery, then the
Old man knows not what happened unto it;
but it seeks ways to come to God, and searches after the purpose and will
of God; and yet finds nothing but invention, fiction, and opinion, and it is
very zealous in its opinions, and knows not what it does, it finds not the
root; for it is not capable or worthy of it; and this shows that it must dye
and perish.

13. But the New man,
which in an earnest serious will and purpose, arises through Imagination [or
the effectual operation of true Faith] abides steadfast in the rest of Christ,
even in the Tree (which God the Father by his motion, when he moved himself
the second time according to his heart, did ingraft into the humane soul) and
it springs forth in the life of God, and does grow and flourish in the power,
virtue, and sap of the Divine Essentiality, in Gods Love; this receives Divine
knowledge and skill, not according to the measure of the external will, what
the external man will know and search out, but according to the measure of the
internal Heaven; the internal Heaven does enkindle [and enlighten] the
external, so that the understanding or intellectual faculty of the soul does
comprehend, and understand the external.

14. For God who is a spirit, and also a Being, has manifested himself by the
external World in a similitude, that the spirit might see it self in the
Being essentially, and not so only, but that the Creature likewise might
contemplate and behold the being of God in the Figure, and know it.

15. For no Creature is able to see the Being of God without it self; the
spirit sees God in the Essence and Luster of the Majesty; and the same
likewise in its self, and its own fellow creatures like it self; for God is
himself the spirit of all Beings (understand of heavenly Beings) so that when
we see the Divine Creature, then we see an Image or likeness proceeded from
Gods Being; and when we see the will and working of that Creature, then we see
the will and working of God.

16. Thus also is the New man borne of God; what it wills and does, that is
Gods will and work, its knowing is Gods knowing, for we know nothing of God
without Gods spirit.

17. The external cannot see the internal, but if the internal draws the
external by a glimps [or influence of light in its own Idea or speculation]
into it self; then the external apprehends the mirror or resemblance of
the internal for an instruction and direction, to show that the external
World takes its rise and original from the internal, and that Our works
shall follow us in the Mystery; and that by the separation of Gods judgment;
by the sire of the Principle, they shall be set into the eternal World.

18. To which end God has created Angels, and Men, namely, for his deeds of
Wonders,
that the wisdom of the Divine Power might appear, and that God might behold
himself in the resemblan^es and Ideas of the Creatures, and have joy in
himself with the Beings created out of his own wisdom.

19. Loving Brother, take it not ill, that I speak roundly to you; you
complain that you are not always able to reach, comprehend, and keep the
Divine Mysteries; and moreover you say that many times you get a glimps of
them; and that my Writings are hard and difficult to be understood of you; I
will therefore show unto you, according to the power and ability that I have
received from God, how the being of your hidden Mystery stands, which at
present you are not able to understand.

20. Your meaning, and will is to keep [the light of the Mystery] in a
continued steadfast comprehension; this is the will of the external World in
you, it would feign be capable of the Deity, and be freed from vanity; but the
spirit of the external World, must stand in continual travel,
and earnest Seeking; sor by its seeking it finds the wonders of its own
Magia, namely, the Type and resemblance of the internal World.

21. For God does not always move himself, but the longing, and earnest
traveling of the Creature moves the Mystery, that the Image, or Idea of the
Divine wisdom may be sought and found; therefore Christ commands us to
Seek, and knock; and withal, promises to give us the Pearl or Jewel in the
seeking.

22. The external World likewise is of God, and from God, and Man is to that
end created into the external World, that he might bring the external Figures
into the internal; that he might bring the end into the beginning.

23. The more man longs after God, and the more he pants, and runs after
him,
the more he comes out of the end into the beginning; not only to Gods
wonder, but to his own edification, for the twig of the Tree continually
thirsts after the sap and virtue of the Tree, it travelleth in desire after
the Tree, and draws its sap and influence into it, and so thereby it grows
up to be a great branch; thus the anxious hunger, and earnest longing in the
Humane Mystery draws the Kingdom of God into it self; of which Christ said,
The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force to
themselves.

24. A Being or Essence that is not attractive, cannot grow up, or get a body
to it self, but it starveth and pineth away; as we see the fire of the Candle
draws, or attracteth the fat into it self, and devoureth it and yet it
affords from its devouring, a shining light; thus it is with Man, he is shut
up, and enclosed (with his first Divine Essence) in the darkness of death; but
God has again opened the same to the soul in Christ.

25. Now the poor captivated soul is this very hungry Magical fire, which
does aga^ne attract to it self out of the, Incarnation of Christ the Divine
disclosed Essence; and so it feeds on Gods Being, and takes it into it
self, and from this [spirituall and essentiall] eating, consuming, or
digesting, it gives forth a body of light, which is both like unto, and
capable of the Deity; thus the poor soul becomes clothed with a body of
light, as the fire in the Candle, and in this body of light it finds rest;
but in the darkness of this World [in its earthly carcass and clothing of
clay, wherein the Curse of God, and all evil inclinations and false desires do
stick] it has anguish, and trouble.

26 But now seeing it is so, that it has with Adam put upon it self the
earthly Image, it must therefore bear the same; as the fire of the Candle must
take its burning light from the dark lump of fat; if it had with Adam abode
in Gods being, and had not put on the earthly Image, it needed not to have
borne the same,
but now it is bound to bear it.

27. For Saint Paul says, To whom you give your selves as Servants in
obedience, his servants you are; be it to sin, unto death, or to the
obedience of God, unto righteousness: Now seeing the soul has put on the
earthly Image, which works nothing but fruit to death, and has yielded and
devoted it self a servant to Sin, it is therefore now become the sinful
servant of death.

28. Wherefore is it fallen in love with a strange Master that domineereth over
it? Had it but remained a child, and had not lusted after the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil; it needed not then to have been in subjection to
both Governments, but being it would be as God in love, and anger, according to
both the Principles of Eternity, thereupon it must now bear the Image, and
undergo the force and sway of both,
and so endure the fire-burning [the curse and anger of God enkindled in the
divided properties of Nature] till the day of Separation.

29. Therefore its called a bearing of the Cross, for when the Magical fire
arises,
it makes a Crosse-like-birth; and the one form of nature does press, and
quite pierce through the other; that is, the one is contrary to the other, as
sweet against sour, sharp against bitter, and the fire against them all.

30. And if the soul had let the body of light be only Lord and Master, and
had not imagined on the external Kingdom of this World (that is, on the
spirit of the great World in the Stars, and Elements) nor lusted after the
earthly fruit; then the wrath [or the working power of darkness in the Curse
of God, which is the departure of his love from a O, Thing.
Being] had been as it were swallowed up in it; [and would not have been
manifest or apparent] there would not have been any sense, perceivance, or
feeling of the same; but seeing it is departed from the meekness of the light
and gone out of the love of God; therefore it seeleth now the wrath, or burning
anger of the eternal Nature.

31. And therefore it must work, labor, and endeavor to obtain the light
again; whence it is that the life of man stands in such anguish, in
painful seeking, in continual abstinence, and repentance; it earnestly
desires the Divine Rest,
and yet is held back by the wrath of Nature.

32. The more the life desires to fly from the wrath [or fierceness of
Nature] the more strong and vehement the strife grows in the life, besides
that which the Devil by his poysonfull Incantations, Magical imaginations,
representations, and insinuations, does stir up, and bring into his Nest
[being the Center of the soule] he continually represents before the soul,
the Magical Image of the poysonfull Serpent, that the soul might still
imagine upon it, and kindle or inflame it self in the poison of the same,
which daily comes to pass; and thus the fire of the soul becomes an evil
poysonfull burning brimstony-fire.

33. Yet if the soul departs from the Serpent-like Image of the Devil and
rejects the evil earthly Tree [whereon the Serpent has cunningly twined
himselfe] which Tree is Pride, Coveteousnesse, Envy, Anger, and Falsehood; and
longs not after it, but makes it self as it were dead in this Figure, as if
it knew nothing of it; and casts away the very concupiscence and imagination
it self; and desires only the love of God submitting it self wholly to Gods
will and working, that he may be only its willing, working, and doing; then
the Divine light begins to shine in it, and it obtains an eye of the right
seeing, so that it is able to behold its own natural form and feature,
whereby it steppeth into plain, downright, and meek humility.

34. It wills nothing, it also desires nothing, but resigneth, and casts
it self into the bosom of its Mother;
like a Child that desires nothing but its Mother, inclining it self to her,
and longing only after her; it does not much esteem any Art, subtle Reason,
or much knowledge; and though it knows much, yet it is not puffed up, or
elevated in its own conceit by its knowledge, but leaves, and resigneth the
knowing, willing, and working, wholly to its Mothers spirit, that it might be
both the will and work in it.

35. I speak according to my knowledge,
that the Devil in the power of Gods anger does continually shoot against, and
oppose this precious sprout of the soul [or noble twig of Divine light, and
love, springing forth from the Tree of life, Christ, within us, and does cast
vain infinuations, false desires, and earthly imaginations] after the root of
nature, that is, after the forms of the fire-life in the first principle [to
enkindle them in their own natural working properties, which are selfe-pride,
covetousness, envy, anger, falsehood, hypocrisy, lust, etc.] and would
continually by all means quite destroy the precious sprout [or noble twig of
grace] He continually shoots his evil poysonfull rays into the souls
Magical fire with evil lusts, concupiscence, and thoughts; and ministers
strange matter or fuel to the souls fire to burn or feed upon, so that it
might by no means attain to a shining light; he quenches, suppresseth, and
hinders it; that his Kingdom might not be known.

36. But on the other side, the noble twig defends it self, and will none of
the fierce dark, and wrathful source; it arises, and springs forth like a
plant out of the wild earth, yet the Devil st^iveth contnually against it.

37. Therefore my dearly beloved friend* there is such strife, and contention
in man; and hence he sees the Divine light as in a mirror, and sometimes he
gets a perfect glimps thereof,
for as long as the twig of the soul can defend it self against the poison of
the Devil; so long it has the shining light.

38. For when the Magical fire of the soul receives the Divine essence (that
is the divine body, Christ's flesh) then the holy spirit does apparently arise,
and glance forth in the soul as a triumph, as he goes forth from God the
Father through the word or mouth of the son (that is, from the Heart of the
sacred Ternary) out of the Divine essentiality; and thus he goes or proceeds
forth out of the being or essence of the noble lilly-twig, which springs
forth and grows out of the fire of the soul; which (lilly-twig*) is the true
Image of God, for it is the newborn or regenerated spirit of the soul, the
spirit of Gods will; the Triumphing Chariot of the holy spirit, in which he
rides into the sacred Ternary into the Angelical World.

39. And with this twig, or Image [of God renewed in us] as is before
mentioned; we are in Christ without this World, in the Angelical World, of
which the old Adam has no understanding, or perceivance; also it knows it
not, as the rough stone knows not the Gold, which yet grows in it.

The Gate of the true knowledge of the Threefold life.
40. Man is the true Similitude or Image of God; as the precious man Moses
testifyeth;
not only an Earthly Image (for the sake whereof God would not have become
man, and put forth, unite, and espouse his heart and spirit [in deepest love]
after the fall unto it) but he is Originally out of the Being of all Beings;
out of all the three Worlds Viz. out of the innermost Nature-world, which is
also the most outward; and is called the dark World, whence the principle of
the fiery Nature takes its rise; as is declared at large in my Book of the
threefold life.

41. And secondly he is out of the light, or Angelical World, out of the true
Being of God; and then thirdly, he is out of this external World of the Sun,
Stars, and Elements; an entire Image of God, out of the Being of all Beings.

42. His first Image stood in Paradise, in the Angelical World; but he lusted
after the external World (that is after the Astrall and Elementall World)
which has swallowed up, and covered the precious Image of the internal
Heaven, and rules now in the similitude as in its own propriety.

43. Therefore it is said, You must be borne again, or else you cannot see the
Kingdom of God: And therefore it is that the word or heart of God entered into
the humane Essence,
that we with our soul might be able in the power of the word, or heart of
God, to beget, and bring forth again out of our soul, a new Twig or Image,
like unto the first.

44. Therefore the old Carcass must rot, putrify, and perish; for it is unfit
for the Kingdom of God, it carries nothing but its own Mystery into its
first beginning; that is, its wonders and works, understand, in the Essence of
the first Principle, which is immortal, and incorruptible; being the Magical
fire of the soul.

45. And not this alone, but he must bring and unite the End with the
Beginning; for the external World is generated out of the internal, and
created into a comprehensible Being; the wonders whereof belong unto the
Beginning, and they were known from Eternity in the wisdom of God; that is,
in the Divine Magia; not in the Being or essentiality, but in the mirror of
the Virgin-like wisdom of God, whence the Eternal nature does always arise
[or take its Originall] from Eternity.

46. And to this end, the poor soul stands in the prison of the Astrall and
Elementall Kingdom, that it might be a Labourer, and reunite the wonders of
the external Nature with the light World, and bring them into the beginning;
and though it must now be bruised and pressed, and endure much, yet it is the
Servant in Gods Vineyard, which prepares the precious Wine that is drunk in
the Kingdom of God, it is the only cause of the understanding, that the
desire works in the Mystery, and manifests and brings forth to light the
hidden wonders of God, as we see plainly how man does search out, and Or,
Bring forth.
reveal the wonders of Nature.

47. Therefore we must not be amazed, and strangely perplexed, when as many
times the noble Image is hid,
that we cannot receive any refreshment or comfort; but we must know, that then
the poor soul is put into the Vineyard, that it should work and bring the
fruit [to be set] upon Gods Table.

48. It has then a Twig or Branch of the wild Vine given unto it, it must
trim, and dress that; and plant in into the Divine, and Heavenly Mystery, it
must unite it with the Kingdom of God; this is to be understood thus.

49. As a plant, or grift that is set, does work so long till it puts forth
its branches;
and then its fruit; so must the twig [grift, or scion] of the soul, which
stands overshadowed in a dark valley, continually labor that it might come
to bring forth fruit, which is, the noble and precious knowledge of God, when
the same is grown in it, that the Soul knows God, then it yields its
fair fruits, which are good Instructions, or admonitions.
Doctrines, Works, and Virtues; it leads to the Kingdom of God, it helps
to plant, and build, the Kingdom of God; and then it is a right labourer in
the Vineyard of Christ.

50. And thus that of which I teach, write, and speak, is nothing else, but
the same which has been wrought in me; otherwise I could know nothing of it,
I have not scrap't it together out of histories, and so made opinions; as the
Babilonicall School does, where men Eagerly contend about words and opinions; I
have by Gods grace obtained eyes of my own, and am able in my self to work
in Christ's vineyard.

51. I speak plainly, and freely, that whatsoever is patcht together from
Conjecture, and opinion (wherein man himself has ^o Divine knowledge
whereupon he makes conclusions) that [I say] is Babel, an whoredom; for
conceit, or thinking must not do it; yea not any opinion, or conjecturall
apprehension, but the knowledge of God in the holy Ghost.

52. The Children of God have spoken, as they were driven by the holy spirit;
they have planted many and diverse Trees, but they all stand upon one root,
which is the internal Heaven, none can find the same unless he likewise
stand upon the same root, and therefore the external Heaven cannot find them
out or explain them by art.

53. The words of the holy, Children of God remain as an hidden Mystery unto
the Earthly man; and though he thinks that he understands them; yet he has no
more then a darkesome [hystoricall] glimps of them; as we see now adays how
men do wrangle and contend about Christ's doctrine, and worship, and fight
about Gods will; how he must be served, whereas he is not served or worshipped
with any opinion, but in the spirit of Christ, and in truth men serve God.

54. It depends not on what ceremonies, and manners we do use, every one
labors in his work, and gifts, from his own Constellation, and property,
but all are driven, and lead from one, and the same spirit, otherwise God
should be finite, and measurable, if the gifts were only one; but he is a
mere Wonder, whosoever apprehends him, he walks in his Wonders.

55. This I do impart unto you in all syncerity, out of a true Christian
zeal, from my Fountain, Gifts, and knowledge; and I do exhort you to Or,
Take.
understand it in a right sense as it is meant; I do not extol, or set up my
self, but I speak brotherly to your mind, to stir you up and to comfort
you; that you should not think the yoke of Christ to be heavy, when oftentimes
the external man does cloud the internal, that the poor Soul mourns for
its Image, which yet is purified, and truly begotten, and brought forth under
Tribulation [and the Cross of Christ] it is even so with me, and other
Christians besides, think not strange at it.

56. It is very good when the poor soul is in Combat, much better then when
it is imprisoned,
and yet plays the Hypocrite, and makes devout shows; it is written, That
all things shall serve for the best to them that love God.

57. Now when the combat of the soul does arise, and proceed, that it would
feign see God, and yet cannot at all times attain the same; then know, that it
fights for the Noble Trophee, of which the external man knows nothing; yea
the spirit of God fights in the natural soul, for that which is
supernatural, that so he may lead the Creature into God; he would always
feign Crown the soul with the precious Image, if the blind Reason would but
give him room, and suffer the understanding to Cooperate.

58. We must labor and strive against the external Reason, and also against
flesh and blood,
and wholly oppose the assaults and objections of the Devil, always breaking
them and casting them away, and resist the evil thoughts, motions, and
influences, and effectually [with our whole soule] with prayer, supplication,
or internal resignation, press into Gods mercy.

59. Thus the precious grain of Mustard Seed is sown, which if it be well
preserved; becomes great like a Tree, upon which Tree the fruits of Paradise
do afterward grow, on which the soul feeds, when it will Prophecy, and
speak of the Kingdom of God; when as it beholds the Divine Magia, even then
it speaks of the Wonders of God.

60. For the Being of God is undivided, it needs not any room or place, but
it arises [moveth, and flyeth] in the spirit of understanding, as the splendour
of the Sun in the air; it shoots, or glanceth into the Image, like
lightning, whereby the whole body is oftentimes enkindled, and enlightened.

61. Moreover know that we in this life are laborers and not idle persons,
for the birth of life is a continual strife and labor; the more we labor in
Gods Vineyard, the more fruit we shall obtain and eternally enjoy; and it
makes for our own edification, for our labor remains in our own Mystery
to Gods deeds of Wonder, and to our own eternal Crown and Glory before God;
as in my other Writings is set forth at large.

62. Concerning the Sabbath in this World, of which you have written, and still
continue in the same opinion, the knowledge and understanding thereof is not
given to me; also I do not know how there can be any perfect Being in the
Torment-house of the Stars and Elements; I cannot find such an understanding
thereof in the Mystery, being the first man was not able to stand, when the
heavenly Governor did rule in him, but was overcome by the Kingdom of the
Stars and Elements; Might it not therefore be still dangerous?

63. When we consider the possibility and the impossibility thereof in the
Mystery, it does then appear, as if there would be no Sabbath in the sad and
sorrowful Mirror of the Divine Being, for the Devil is a Prince of this
World, and though he should be bound for a thousand years in the dark World,
yet the fierce wrathful Stars, and also heat and cold, have their rule and
predominance in this World, and this World is nothing else but a Valley of
Misery.

64. Now if the Dominion of the Stars should not reach us, or have any
influence upon us, then we should not be in this World, but in Paradise, where
no wicked man could oppose us, or see us, for in Paradise we are swallowed, or
shut up in God.

65. As little as we with our earthly eyes see the Angels, so little likewise
shall a wicked man of this World see a new [regenerate] man in Christ; when we
attain the new man in Christ, then we are (as to that new man) already in the
Sabbath, and do only wait for the Redemption of the wicked earthly life.

66. For we are with Christ in God, we are together with him planted into his
death;
we are buried in him, and arise with the new man out of the grave with him,
and live eternally in our own Being or Essence, understand, in his corporiety;
we are with and in Christ, in God, and God in us; Where should we then keep
Sabbath? Not in this World, but in the Angelical World, in the light World.

67. And if the wicked should be tormented for a thousand years in this World,
then the place [of this World] must be translated, or withdrawn into the dark
World; for in this Sol^^ World there is not yet any Hellish Torment; but if the
Sun were taken away, then it would be so indeed; and then the wicked would be
yet far separated from the judgment; and there would be a Gulf of a Principle
interposed and fixed.

68. Moreover God is not a God of evil, that desires revenge, or Torment;
that he should out of his vengeance, Torment and plague the Wicked a thousand
years before the Judgment; the wicked Tormenteth himself in his own Life's
birth; the one form of life is enemy to the other: And that shall be indeed
his hellish Torment; and God has no blame in it.

69. He has never desired the fall of man; but the wrathful Nature got the
upper hand and the spirit of man's will (which is free, as God himself) did
freely and willingly yield it self up into the Combat, supposing to
domineere, and rule.

70. It was out of pride that the Devil sell, and man also; if they had stayed
in humility, God would have continued in them; but they themselves departed
both away from God; but God did so exceedingly love man's Image, that he
himself out of love did re-enter into the Image of man; why should he then
desire his Torment?

71. In God there is no Evil desire, but his wrath which is the dark World is
a desire of evil,
and destruction which has brought the Devil, and also man to fall; the dark
World caused the Devil to fall; and the external wrathful Nature caused Man
to fall; and yet both these are tied and bound one to another; which we should
well see, and feel, if the sun were taken out of this World.

72. Therefore I yet say; that the righteous keeps Sabbath in Abraham's
bosom, in Christ's rest; for Christ has destroyed the wrathful death for us,
that held us Captive; he has opened life; that we in a new man are able to
spring forth, blossom, and rest in him.

73. But the old man of the Stars, and Elements must abide in his own Region,
in his house of Torment and misery, till he be committed to the Earth; and then
all passes into its own Mystery again; and the soul abides in its principle
till the Judgment of God; where God shall again move, and enkindle the
Mystery; and then every thing Severeth it self into its own property; Each
world shall take in its own harvest, be it good, or bad; it shall part it
self as light, and darkness.

74. And therefore I do entreat you wholly as a brother, and a Christian, that
you would be pleased to have a care that you apprehend the Sabbath in the Rest
of Christ; and be not so moved by the enkindling of the spirit, [or servent
instigation of your minde] but search whether you be able to ground the same in
the light of Nature; if you be able to ground, and reach it in the light of the
Eternal Nature, then indeed you may go on; but show it us plainly that we
may see it, else our mind will be unsatisfied, unless it finds the ground.

75. It is not to be proved with Scriptures, which might be seemingly alleged
for it,
they give as well the contrary, and may well be otherwise applied, if my mind
had not turned it self into the LOVE and REST of Christ, I would then show it
you after the fashion of this present Controversiall World.

76. The Revelation is spiritual, and coucheth or sticks deep in the
Mystery; it requires an high illuminate mind, and understanding, which has
Power to enter into the Mystery of God; it speaks Magically: There belongs
likewise a Magical understanding about it; on this manner I find not the
Magical apprehension, for that is an Hystoricall apprehension.

77. He that will set upon the Heavenly Magia, he must know the Heavenly
Figures of the form of the internal Heaven:
Viz. The Center or lifes-Circle, whence all Beings do arise, whence this
World is produced; if he has not the Magical guide in him, then let him not
meddle with the heavenly Figures, or else Turba Magna has power to Spew him
out of the Divine Magia.

78. John the Evangelist, or whosoever wrote the Revelation, knew the Figures
of the Divine Magia, and though he says that he was ravished in the spirit and
it was shown him; yet they are Figures which remain in the Divine Magia, and
though they be revealed, yet thereto belongs such a Magist, who understands
Thesaurinella [the little Treasury of Wisdom or Cabinet of the Divine Magia.]

79. He must understand all the Three principles with their Figures; and then
he has power to open and reveal them, else his labor [writings or
expositions] fall unto the Turba; I speak syncerly; if you please, read my
Book of the Three fold life aright, and there you shall find the root of the
Magia; although there be other much deeper extant, yet I would you might but
understand that, for it has sufficient ground, else you will not be able to
apprehend the other; if it please you then to search further you may very well
obtein them, only there must be Earnestness withal, otherwise they will
remain dumb [or seem to be only a bare obscure hystory.]

80. For the ground of it is deeply magical, as the illuminate mind shall
find indeed, if it will but dive into it; therein the Revelation is very
easily to be understood, and in no other manner shall it at all be understood
save from the Mystery of God, he that is able to dive or sinck himself into
that, he finds whatsoever he does but search.

81. Accordingly I would feign have you to prove your inflammation, that you
might know the Guide of the internal World, and then also the Guide of the
external World, that so the Magical School of both Worlds might be known to
you, and then the Noble mind would be freed from Opinion, and Conjecture, for
in Conjecture there is no perfection.

82. The spirit must be capable of, and acceptable to the Mystery, that Gods
spirit may be the guide in its seeing, else it only sees in the outward
Mystery:
Viz. in the external Heaven of the Constellation, which often times does
vehemently enkindle and drive the mind of man; yet he has not the Divine
Magical School, which consists barely in a plain Childlike mind.

83. The external Guide labors and speculates only in the Glass, but the
internal speculates in the Essence, which yet it is not able to do, unless
Gods spirit guide it; therefore God makes choice.

84. Whomsoever the heavenly School takes, he is made a Magist, without his
hard running, and albeit he must run hard, yet he is taken by God, and driven
of the holy spirit.

85. Therefore man must try of what guide he is taken, if he finds that he has
the Divine light shining in his seeing, that his Guide does bring him into the
heavenly School upon the way of truth to Love and Righteousness,
and that he is thereby assured and confirmed in his mind with Divine
certainety, then he may proceed in his work.

86. But if it be in Conjecture and Doubt, and yet in a fiery driving, then the
Guide is from this World, which ought to be tried by its will and purpose,
whether he seeks Gods* or his own honor and applause, whether he willingly
resignes himself to the Cross, and only desire to labor in Christ's
Vineyard, and to seek the Good of his Neighbor, whether he Seeks God, or
^read; and accordingly must his understanding judge, and give it leave, or
reject, and ^^me it as need requires.

87. This I would not as a Brother conceal from you in a Christian
exhortation, and I entreat you, that you would accept of it no otherwise, then
as meant well unto you, as my due obligation requires; for upon your desire I
am your D^b^or in Christ, to your anxious Seeking mind, as one Member is bound
to assist another.

88. Concerning your very Christian offer, I acknowledge and accept of it as
done in Love, as one member comes to help the other in time of need; it
shall be requited in Love; be pleased to make me acquainted with what your
mind does further desire, and I shall not withhold any thing from you, so
far as God shall enable me; and so I commend you unto the Love of Jesus
Christ.

Dated Thursday senight after Martins day, 1620. Your affectionate Friend, and
Servant, J. B.

The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous runs thither and is
exalted.
THE SIXTH EPISTLE: BEING A very deep and Phylosophick Letter, WRITTEN To
Doctor GODFREET FREUDEN-HAMMERN; and to Master JOHN HEUSERN.
Concerning the Knowledge of God, and of all things. ALSO A Short Declaration
of the Falfe and True LIGHT.

The Salvation of our Lord Jesus Christ by his entrance, and Manifestation in
the humanity, work with his Love in Us all.
1. MUCH respected Sirs, and dearly beloved Brethren in Christ; when God does
open to us by his Grace, the right understanding, that we are able to know, and
understand aright the Image of God ( Viz, Man) what he is in body, soul, and
spirit, then we acknowledge that he is the visible, and also the invisible
spiritual World; namely, An Extract of all the three Principles of the Divine
Being.

2. In whom the hidden God through the expression and impression of his various
distinct Power, and eternal Wisdom has set forth himself in a visible
Image, through which he does Idea, form, and shape, in the same Being the
wonders of the expressed Word; in that the Word of his powers makes it self
essential.

3. And so in or by man he has represented, and set forth an Image of his
speaking, and out spoken Essential word, in which the Divine Science with the
various divisions of the Eternal speaking is couched.

4. And hence he has the understanding and knowledge of all things, that he is
able to understand the conjunction of Nature, and also its disjunction; for no
spirit has any higher rule, or deeper reach then in its own Mother whence it
takes its Original, and in that ground it stands or abide h^ in its Center.

5. This we see in the Creatures of the Stars, and Elements, that their
understanding and knowledge is no higher then of their Mother in whom they
live; each leads its life after the nature and condition of its Mother,
wherein it is bounded in the distinct division of the expressed Word; and no
Creature in the four Elements whose Original is not out of the Eternal
Science, is able to attain the knowledge of the hidden spiritual World of
Power, save only and alone Man, who with his soul and understanding spirit is
couched in the eternal Spiration [or generation] of the Divine power, and
various distinct division of the eternal Word of God.

6. Therefore the humane Science receives in the Center of its understanding,
good and evil, and does Idea, and shape it self both in good and evil, and
makes it self Essential therein; and so with, and by the Science does induce
it self into will, desire, and essence.

7. That so the Abyssall will out of the eternal word of various distinct
division, does bring it self in the Creaturall Word (Viz. in the Creaturall
Science of the Soul) into an Ens and Being, in manner and form as the
Spiration of God has brought it self through the various division of the
Eternal will, in the visible world, into diverse properties; namely, into good
and evil, into love and enmity; that in such a contrary, the Being might be
distinct, several, formal, sensible, and perceivable; that each thing might
in such a Contrary, find and perceive it self.

8. For in God,
all Beings are but one Being, Viz. An eternal One, or unity, the Eternal
only Good; which Eternal one without severalty were not manifest to it self.

9. Therefore the same has breathed forth it self out of its self, that a
plurality and distinct variety might arise, which variety or severalty has
induced it self into a peculiar WILL and properties; the Properties into
Desires, and the Desires into Beings.

10 Insomuch that all things visible (both Animals, Vegitables, and Minerals)
do arise from the severalty and comprehensive impressure, or formation of the
expressed Word, out of the Science of the great Mystery; every thing from the
Experience of the Severalized Word.

11. Every thing has its own separation in it self; the Center of every
thing is [a] Spirit from the Original of the Word; the separation in a thing
is a self peculiar will of its own impressure,
or forming, where each spirit brings it self into Being, according to its
Essential Desire.

12. The form and feature of bodies arise from the Experience of the will,
where the Center of Every thing (being a particle or spark from the expressed
word) does again express or speak it self forth, and brings it self into
a various distinct Particularity, in manner and form of the Divine Speaking;
[or operation of the Eternal word in its Generation, and Manifestation.]

13. Now if there were no Free will in such Speaking then the Speaking should
have a law,
and would stand Confined, and compelled and no desire or free Imagination
might arise and then the speaking would be Finite, and inchoative which is not.

14. But it is a Spiration of the Abyss, and a distinct severation of the
Eternal Stillness [or immobility] an effusion or distribution of it self
where the particularity does again stand in its own distinct Severation in a
peculiar self-will, and is again an Expressing of it self; whence Nature and
the Creaturall life take their Original and hence in every thing a self-will
is arisen.

15. That every thing does bring it self from its own experience into form,
feature, and shape, and likewise into life, and operation as it stands in its
Center, in the Universal experience; namely in the Great Mystery, in the
Mother of all Beings.

16. This we see in the Earth, which in the beginning of its Materials is
risen out of the Severation of the Divine Spiration in a Spiritual manner;
where the Severation of the word has formed it self by its own proper will
into an Ens and Being, and so by the formation, or impression it has brought
it self into the Perceivancy of the Essence.

17. In which Perceivancy or Sensibility the Magneticall Desire is arisen, that
the properties of the Severalized distinguishing, or separating will, have
brought themselves through the Desire, into bodies, according to, and from the
Nature of the three Principles of the Divine Manifestation.

18. From which Original the Earth has so many and diverse bodies good and
evil, as Earths, salts, stones, Metals, etc.; and such bodies lie mixed in the
Earth; for the three Principles are mutually in one another as one Being.

19. And they stand only in three differences or distinct degrees of Centres
(being the divine Manifestation) where each Center does make and produce out of
it self its own Spiration [expression] Nature and being; and yet all do
arise Originally fron the Eternal ONE.

20. The First Center is the breathing sorth or Spiration of the Abyss Viz.
Gods Speaking the Comprehensive impressure, and the divine perceivance of it
self, where God does bear, and begett himself in Trinity, and speaks forth
himself into Powers.

21. The Second Center, or Spiration is the Expressed Essence of the Divine
Power and it is called Gods Wisdom; through this same the Eternal word
breaths forth it self into knowledge, namely into an infiniteness of
plurality, and brings the plurality of knowledge into Imagination, and the
Imagination into desire, and the desire into Nature and Strife till it comes to
Fire.

22, Therein the Strife in the painful Agony does dye in the Consumption of
the fire, from its own Natural Right, and property; and yet no dying is to be
understood; but so the Power does bring it self into Sensibility, and by the
killing of the Selfe-desire of the properties through the dying or
Mortification of its selfenesse it brings it self through the Fire into the
Light.

23. Where, in the light, another Principle (being the Grand Mystery of the
true divine manifestation) is understood; and in the Fire the First Principle
being the Eternal Nature, is understood; and they are two in one; as fire and
light.

24. The Fire gives Soul, and the power of the light gives spirit; and in
this Power of the light of the Divine Spiration through the wisdom, through
the manifestation of the Fire (understand the Spirits-fire) the Mother of the
Eternal spirits (namely of Angels, and the souls of men,) is understood; and
so also the spiritual Angelical World, Viz. the hidden internal World of
Power, which is a Mother of the Heaven, stars, and Elements; that is, of the
External World.

25. The third Center is the Verbum Fiat (Viz. the Natural word of God) from
the Power of the first, and second Principles; being a Separatour, or Creator,
and Maker of all Creatures in the Internal, and External World, in each World
according to its property.

26. This Seperator, or Spirator of the Severation of the Divine Powers has
spoken it self forth from it self, out of the first and second Principle:
Viz. out of the fiery and light World, and also out of the impression, and
enclosure of the Adumbration; that is, out of the darkness; and with the
severation of the Spiration has modellized and formed it self, and made it
self Material, moving, and sensible.

27. Hence the third Principle, that is, the visible World with its Being and
Life is arisen; and also the whole Creation of the visible World, whose life
and Being is come out of Three into a Being and Life; Namely, out of the
eternal Nature, out of the great Mystery; that is, out of the darkness, fire,
and light; to wit, out of Love and Anger.

28. The Fire is called Anger, being a pain and enmity, and the light
signifies, or is called Love, being a sweet yielding and giving of it self;
and the darkness is a separation of the knowledge and skill, that so it may be
understood what Light and Life is, and also what is evil and painful.

29. There is a twofold Fire, and also a twofold Light to be understood;
Namely, according to the dark impression a Cold fire, and a false light
arising through the Imagination of the harsh impression, which light has its
Original only in the Imagination, and has no true Ground.

30. The second Fire is an Hot fire, and it has a fundamental true light
arising from the Original of the Divine Will, which does also bring it self
forth in Nature through the fire into the light.

31. In this twofold fire, and twofold light, two Principles, and also a
twofold will are understood.

32. For the false light out of the Imagination, arises out of the self-will
of Nature; namely, from the impression of the properties, where the properties
do prove one another, whence selfe-^^st arises, and an Imagination, wherein
nature does modellize and fancy to it self in its own desire, the Abyss;
and desires to bring it self in its own might without the will of God into a
Dominion, and Government of its own self-will and rule.

33. Where this self will refuses to ^e obedient and submissive to the
unsearchable, and Abyssall will of God (which ^^th its Original in its self
without nature, and Creature in the Eternal One) also it will not resign, and
wholly give up it self unto him, and be One will with him, but makes its
self to be its own Seperator, and Maker.

34. It draws and makes to its self a Science in it self, and severeth it
self from Gods will, as we may understand and see in the Devil, and also in
the Or, Wicked
false fallen Man; whereupon they were cast out of the Divine Separation, so
that the Devil must remain with his own will in the Separator of the dark
impression, wherein the Word does induce it self in nature, and painfulness
to sensibility; namely, in the Original of the fire-source, which
notwithstanding cannot reach or obtain the true fire, wherein the will of God
induces it self into the sensible life and nature; namely, into a shining
light.

35. For the Separator of the natural self hood has no true-Ens, wherein its
light may remain steadfast, for it draws not with its desire, out of the
eternal One; (namely, out of the meekness of God) but draws it self into
Essence, its light arises only in the own hood of Self.

3^ Therefore there is a difference between Gods light, and the false light,
for Gods light arises [or takes its Originall] in the Eternal One; namely, in
the Essence of the Divine Generation, and does bring it self through the Will
of God into Nature and Being; it is formed and brought by the Divine Separator
into an Ens, and shines in the same Nature in the darkness, John 1.

37. For the formed, or immodellized Science is (in respect of the Impression)
a darkness; but the Divine light illustrates it, so that it becomes a fiery
light, wherein the Spiration, or Speaking of God is made manifest in Nature and
Creature, and stands in a sensible or percei^able life; of which Saint John
speaks, Chap. 1. The life of man was in him [Viz. in the Word] and CHRIST
says, John 8. That he is the light of the World, that gives life to the
World.

38. For without this Divine light proceeding from the Generation of the Divine
Try unity there is no Constant true light, but only a light of the Imagination
of the Natural Impression of self-will.

39. Therefore man (being the Image of God) must open and lift up the Eyes of
the understanding (wherein Gods light does incline and tender it self to him,
and desires to shine in him) and not be as a Beast, which stands not with
its Separatour in the internal in the Eternity, but only in an External
Figure of the expressed word.

40. Which has only a Tem porall life in a finite; and inchoative Separator,
in which the Eternal Separator does represent it self as in a Glass [or
mirror of Ideas] and brings the Divine Science into forms, and Figures, like
a Pattern or Imitation of the Grand Mystery of the Spiritual World, where the
Eternal Principles do Cooperate and play in a Type or resemblance; both
according to fire, and light.

41. And yet man in respect of his external comprehensible or finite body,
stands only in such a ^litting figurative shadow, or resemblance, and with
his spiritual body he is the true essential Word of the Divine property, in
which God speaks and begets his Word, and there the Divine Science does
distribute, import, impresse, form, and beget it self to an Image of God.

42. In which Image God is manifest (in a Sensible and Creaturall being) and
dwells and wills there himself, and therefore man must break his own
will, and entirely submit himself to Gods will.

43. But if man's self-will will not do it, Note.
then he is more void of understanding, and hurtfuller to himself then the
wild earth, which yet stands still to its own Separator, and lets it form,
and make out of it what it pleases.

44. For God has made all things in his Divine pley or operation out of his
Spiration, through and in his Separator, and all things do hold, or stand
still unto him; only the false light causes the Saparator of the Creature to
bring it self into a self will, that the Creature opposes the will of God.

45. Which false light in man has its foundation from the will of the Devil,
who through the infinuation of his false desire has made man Monstrous, that
he also has assumed a false Imagination, whereby (through his own desire) he
has made the false introduced desire of the Devil Essential in him.

46. Whereupon in the humane body (which was formed out of the Limus of the
Earth in the Divine Fiat) a bestiall Separator is arisen; which has revealed
or made manifest all the properties of all Beasts, whence such manifold, and
diverse Lusts, Imaginations, desires, and wills, are in man.

47. Which false Separator has advanced it self to the height, and got the
Dominion, and attracted all the Principles unto it self, and has made a
Monster, out of Gods Order.

48. Which monstrous Image has in or with its will, and desire, whol^y turned
it self away from the will of God; from the Divine light; whereby the Divine
Ens from the being, or essence of the holy World, did vanish or disappeare in
him; and he ( Viz. man) remained only as a Monster of Heaven; and was by his
Separator made a Beast of all Beasts, which even now rules in, over, and with
all beasts; in whom the Spirit of the World with the Stars, and Elements has
obtained the Rule and dominion.

49. Therefore man now runs, and Seeks again his first right home,
or Native Country; for in this Condition, or property he stands in mere
unquietness; and sometimes he is Seeking in one thing, and by and by in
another, and supposes to bring himself to Rest in this Monster; and yet he
runs on in the false awakend bestiall will, which cannot reach the will of
God.

50. He runs now only in the false light of his selfehood, which is borne
in his Imagination with a Monstrous Separator which makes him an Earthly
Mind, wherein the Constellations have their influence, and operations; and he
has the whole visible World for his Enemy.

51. And he stands as a rose in a bush of thorns which is continually rent,
scracht, and torn by the thorns; and yet he could not be said to be a Rose,
if the Divine Grace had not come to assist and restore him, and again
inspired, and given in it self into his internal Ground, wherein the Love of
God to the new Regeneration is tendered unto him.

52. Therefore I say that it is most exceeding necessary for man to learn to
know himself, what he is; before he runs, and Seeks; for his Seeking
else, will prove only a Tormenting, whereby he tormenteth, and perplexeth
himself in a false Separator, and yet cannot obtain the Rest; and true
Satisfaction.

53. For all these Earthly wills [and wayes] wherein he thinks to bring
himself into rest and quietness, are only an adverse will, striving against
God, Viz. the Eternal One.

54. For it lies not in any man's own willing,
going, running, as Saint Paul says, but in Gods Mercy, that is in the Grace
which is inspired into him.

55. For without Grace man is dead, and blind in respect to God, and he is not
able to attain any true life; unless the Grace be stirred up, awakened and
revealed in him.

56. Moreover in these Earthly wills there can be no awakening; for they cannot
reach or obtain Grace, much less awaken it; and therefore the whole Man in
soul, and mind, must only immerse it self into the Grace and be willing to
become a nothing to it self; that desires nothing but the Grace, that Grace
might be living and working in him; and his own will be Stupifyed, overcome,
and mortifyed,

57. As the Sun breaks forth in the night [or darknesse] and changes the
Night into day; the like is to be understood concerning man; of w^^^h Christ
says; unless you turn, and become like Children you shall not see the
Kingdom of God, namely the divine Separator, whence all things are risen, and
spring Originally.

58. For no knowledge is right or fundamental unless it comes from the Divine
Science, out of the severation of the Divine Spiration from whence all things
have their Original.

59. Now if such a knowledge shall again arise in man, then the Divine
Seperator must stand in an Essence of his likeness; namely, in a Divine Ens,
wherein the Divine Word speaks, and the Divine light shines in that same
Speaking, or Spiration.

60. And even then the humane Science (which inchoatively is arisen from the
Spiration of the Word) may in that same light see, not only it self, but
likewise all other natural things according to the severation of the Word; and
after a Magical manner work in and with all things in a Divine way, nature
and property.

61. For man is blind in all Gods works,
and has no true knowledge, unless the Divine [breathing] spiration or
speaking be revealed in his internal ground, after the nature and property of
the Spiration, whence all Beings proceed Originally.

62. All the searching and seeking of Man, whereby he will find out the
ground of a thing is blind, and is wrought only in the shell or outside;
wherewith the Essence of the Tree is covered.

63. If there shall be a true finding, then the humane Science must enter into
the property of the thing, and be able to behold the very Separator.

64. Therefore it is the greatest and most toylesome misery of mankind, that
they run, annd seek altogether in blindness, and begin to seek the shell in
the bare letter, and its expression [or many forms of writings] whereas all
things are outwardly signed, as they are in their internal Ens and Essence,
and the Separator of all things has shown, and set forth himself visibly, and
formally, so that the Creator is known in and by the Creation.

65. For all Beings are but one only Being, which has breathed forth it self
out of it self, and has severized, and formized it self; and yet it
proceeds out of that same impressure or formation into a Center pecullarly
distinct; that is, with each impressure and forming of the desire.

66. Where the severized, parted, and divided will, does impresse, and form it
self into a peculiar particularity, where a Center does arise, and in the
Center a Separator, or Creator of its own Self [or Being] namely, a former of
the re-expressing, or re-spirating Will, as we see the same in the Earth, where
every Herb, has its own Separator in it self, which does so make and
severize it into form.

67. Now if Man (beings Gods Image, in whom the Divine speaking,
according to the Divine Science is manifest) will search the Creatures, and
get real understanding, and knowledge in them; be it either in Animals,
vegitables, or Metals, he must then again obtain grace from God, that the
Divine light may shine in his science, whereby he may be able to go through
the Natural light, and then all things will be opened and revealed in his
understanding.

68. Otherwise he runs on in his seeking as a blind Man that speaks of
Colors, and does neither see nor know any Color; this all States and Orders
of the World are to consider, that they all run blindfolded without the Divine
Light, only in an Astrall Sydereall imaginary fancy, according as the
Constellations of the Stars do form and frame in and upon Reason.

69. For Reason is nothing else but an humane Constellation; which is a dark
draught, or resemblance of all the Principles; it stands only in an
imaginary figure, and not in the Divine Science.

70. But if the Divine light be manifest, and shines therein, then the Divine
Word begins to speak [or worke] therein out of the Eternal knowledge
[Science, or Wisedome] and then Reason is a true mansion or receptacle of
Divine Knowledge and Revelation, and even then it may be rightly and truly
used; but being void of this it is no more then an Astrum of the visible World.

71. It is therefore declared to all lovers of Arts (whose Separator is an
Artist of Great Subtility in them) that they first seek Gods Love and Grace,
and resign up their selves to, and become wholly one with that; else all
their Seeking is but a delusion, or the Courting of a shadow, and to no
purpose; and nothing is found of any fundamental worth; unless one does
entrust another with Somewhat.

72. The which is forbidden to the Children of God, in whom the grace is
revealed, that they cast not Pearl before Swine; upon pain of Eternal
Punishment.

73. Only it is freely granted them to declare the light, and to show the way
of attaining the Pearl.

74. But to give the Divine Separator into the bestiall hand, is prohibited;
unless a man knows the way, and will of that man [that desires it.]

75. Thus my beloved brethren upon such consideration and instruction, I will
(through the permission of divine grace and the Cooperation of this present
time) a little decipher, and represent unto you the Divine Mystery, how God
through his word has made himself Visible, Sensible, Perceivable, moreover
Creaturall, and formal; be pleased to consider further of it; yet let it be
done as is above mentioned; otherwise I shall be as one dumb unto you, and the
blame thereof is not to be imputed to me.

76. God (what he is in himself) is neither nature nor creature, neither this
nor that, neither high nor deep; he is the Abyss, and the Bysse of all Beings,
an eternal One; where there is no ground or place; he is to the Creature in
its strength [or capacity] a Nothing, and yet is through all things

77. Nature is his Something wherewith he makes himself visible, sensible,
and perceivable, both according to Eternity, and time.

78. All things are arisen through the Divine Imagination, and do yet stand in
such a birth, station, or Government.

79. The four Elements likewise have such a ground [birth, or Originall] from
the Imagination of the Eternal One, concerning which I will here set down a
Table, how the one does unfold and spirate or breath it self forth out of
another.

80. In which annexed Table, the ground of all the Mysteries of the Divine
Manifestation is pourtrayed; for a further consideration of the same; the
understanding and capacity whereof, is not in Natures own ability without the
light of God; but it is easily to be understood of those who are in the Light;
and it is childlike [simple, plain.]

81. Like as my Writings do sufficiently, and largely show; and here only is
represented briefly in a Figure or Scheme.

82. And so Sirs, I commend and commit you to the salutation of the Love of
Jesus Christ; who by his aspect, and salutation, is the very Key to understand
this Table.

Dated, 11. November, 1623. J. B.

THE SEVENTH EPISTLE, TO One of the NOBILITY IN SILESIA.
Our Salvation [is] in the life of Jesus Christ in us.
1. NOBLE, and right Honorable Sir, The Divine light, and the internal Divine
contemplation of the Soul in it self, and all bodily welfare, with sincere
wishes, and cooperating desires of fellowship and Member-like society in Our
IMMANVEL, premised.

2. Seeing I have observed, that you are a lover of Divine Wisdom, and also a
growing branch in the Life-Tree of God in Christ, in whom all the Children of
God are as Members, and moreover perceived how the drawing of the Father has
brought you into an hungry desire after the true Sap, and Divine Power, and
likewise in some measure has enriched you with the knowledge of the same Tree
of Life; thereupon I have taken occasion (in a Christian and Member-like
property and desire after the same Life-Tree of Christ) once more to salute
you, and mutually to exhort one another, as Laborers set in the Vineyard of
Christ, and called to this Work.

3. Especially that we look well to our selves in this valley of darkness,
and lift up our eyes and heads, in that we see the darkness and the very
workings thereof before our eyes; and put our selves in mind, that Christ has
taught us, that Our Redemption draws near; and indeed, Go out from Babel,
which has a long time held us captive, and imprisoned.

4. And not regard the loud cry, and pratings, where they promise to us
golden-Mantles of grace, and put them about us, and comfort, ^ickle, and
flatter us with a strange pretense [or show of holinesse] as if we were
received to be Children of grace Externally
from without by a sundry particular Election; also that we look not upon, or
regard Our own Merits, or abilities.

5. All which avail nothing before God; but a new Creature in Christ, borne of
God, avails before God; for Christ is only the Grace, which availes with God.

6. Now whosoever is borne of Christ,
and lives and walks in him, and puts him on (according to his inner man) in
his Suffering, Death, and Resurrection; he is a Member on his body, from him
only flow the streams of living Water, through the powerful Word of Christ,
which as to the internal ground is become Man in him, In Spiritu Mundi.
and does, speak forth it self out of him through the Creature in the Cosmick
Spirit of the external Man.

7. For as God has manifested the grand Mystery (wherein the whole Creation
has lain in an Essential manner without formings) out of the power of his
Word, and through the grand Mystery has expressed [the word of powers] into
the Severation or variety of spiritual formings; in which spiritual forms
the Science of the Powers, have stood in the Desire; that is, in the Fiat;
wherein every Science in the Desire to manifestation, has brought it self
into a corporeal bodily Being; Even so likewise the same grand Mystery, Viz.
The Essential Word of Gods power lies in Man (the Image, and likeness of
God) both according to Eternity, and time.

8. By which Mystery the living Word of God does utter and express it self
either in Love or Anger, or in fans^e; according as the humane Mystery stands
in a moveable Desire [or affection] to Evillor Good; as it is written, With the
holy thou art holy, and with the perverse thou art perverse; also, such as the
people is, such a God they also have.

9. For in what property the Mystery in Man is excited, and awakened; such a
word utters it self from his powers, as we plainly see, that nothing else
but Vanity is uttered by the Wicked.

10. Now how should there be a good expression and will, where the Mystery to
the Speaking [and willing] is a false ground, and poisoned by the Devil in the
wrath of nature; which false Mystery can neither will, nor do any good, that
may be acceptable to God; unless it be first enkindled by God, that it obtain
a Godly will and desire; whence a divine expression, and operation of good
follows.

11. For Christ said, An Evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit; How then
will he bring forth good fruit, where a false tree stands, under a strange
show [or glittering hypocrisy?] The purple-mantle of Christ has its fruits in
it; but what is that to a false beast, that is full of poison, and will cover
himself with that Mantle and take it for his own; and yet brings forth
nothing but hellish fruit? Or what has the Titular Christian to do to boast,
and glory that he is a Christian; whereas he lives, walks, and is, without
Christ?

12. None is a Christian, unless he be Tinctured anew with the spirit of
Christ;
and sprung forth out of Gods love; that the grace of God in Christ be manifest
in the Mystery of his life as to the soul; and cooperateth and wills in the
humane life.

13. Now if he will become such a one, then he must turn from his Imagining in
the Cosmick Spirit wherewith the soul is covered and disguised, In Spiritu
Mundi.
and enters into Earthly workings, and [must] become as a Child, that only
inclines it self with its whole affection to the Mother; and draws into it
self the Mothers Milk of grace, whence a new Ens grows, in which the life
of grace arises; that is, the imputed grace must be borne, and become man in
him, as to the internal ground; without this, there is none a Christian, let
him make never such devout shows; dissemble, flatter, and do what he will,
his sins must be forgiven him only through the Divine Alloquy, or in Spiration
in himself.

14. Eor when Christ is Conceived in the inspired [inspoken] word of grace,
which the soul does take and impresse into it self from his Promise, then the
foundation is laid in the corrupt, or decayed Mystery to a Child of God; and
then the divine Or, Breeding or Hatching.
Impregnation begins and proceeds, wherein the humanity of Christ is
conceived and borne; which only is the Temple of the Holy Ghost; and from this
new birth, the fiery soul eats Gods bread, which comes from Heaven; and
without this, man has no life in him, John 6. which no Hypocrite under the
Purple Mantle of Christ can enjoy, but only that man who is not borne of flesh
and blood, nor of the will of man, but regenerate of God, in whom the Word of
God (whence the first man was created) speaks, rules, lives, and wills.

15. For the life of Man was in the beginning in the Word ( John 1.) when the
same was inspired or breathed into the created Image; but when it turned it
self from the speaking of the Word into a peculiar self willing and speaking
in good and evil, that is, into its own lust and contrived Imagination, then
the first good will in the Creature to the re-expressing, did perish; and now
he must enter again into the first Speaking Word and speak with God, or he is
eternally without God.

16. Which this present World cannot nor will not understand,
for it has wholly and fully turned it self into a selfish speaking to the
pleasure of the flesh; and it speaks forth in self-will mere Earthlinesse,
and transitory things, as Honor, might, Power, and Authority; moreover, Pride,
covetousness, Envy, and Malice; it utters nothing else but the cunning crafty
Serpent with its young, and when these her young, cannot get, and uphold that
which the self-will wills; then it speaks forth from the cunning
mischievous Malice and I^iquity, with Money, through the selfish power and
violence, many thousand Soldiers, who must maintain it by force, that the
self-will that is departed from God, may be truly upheld, as we now see
before our eyes, by which expression this self-will also is beaten down, and
kills, and destroys it self.

17. Therefore beloved Sir, and fellow member in the life-Tree of Christ, I
would entreat you in a Christian way, and stir you up (as one Member is bound
to do to another) in the present Expression [wayes and courses] of the World
(where the Turba Magna does also play, and express it self, and a great
contesting, pulling down, or degrading shall be) constantly and steadfastly to
keep your self in the internal speaking of Gods mercy, and continually to
enter into your internal ground, and in no wise to be persuaded and misled by
the Serpent to the false speaking of Brother-slaughter; but you (as a famous
Lord) continually behold your self in the Looking-glass of Christ's process
and Doctrine.

18. For this present speaking is spoken in the wrath of God through his
awakend and enkindled Anger; and it is very evil, and dangerous to have a hand
and voice therein, especially when the Punishment, or severe Execution.
Turba must be spoken; it is altogether unfaithful, and it devoures its Father
and Mother that brings it forth, and it is a Besom of Gods Anger.

19. Note.
Also there is great heed to be taken in respect of accepting, and joining to
any of the Supposed Religions, for which men contend and fight; and not to
assent with the conscience of Faith, to one Party that gets the Victory; for
there is no other true Faith which saves,
but only CHRIST IN US, he only destroys sin in us, and bruiseth the head
of the Serpents Imagination in us; and arises in Gods righteousness (which he
with his blood has fulfilled in us) from the sleep of Death.

20. Christ must arise from death in our poor soul; namely, in a new
humanity, which walks and dwells with, and in Christ in Heaven, where
Heaven is in the new man; whereout proceed the works of Love, as it is meet
and requisite for the Children of God.

21. And though the external man lives in earthly weakness and infirmityes,
yet that takes not away the Temple of Jesus Christ, for Christ in the
internal ground does continually bruise the head of the Serpent in the flesh;
and Christ must be continually stinged by the Serpent in the heel, till we be
freed of this Beast.

22. Moreover loving Sir, I do entreat you in a Christian brotherly way,
seriously to take notice of this present time, in the true fear of God; if you
be pleased to let my good meaning take place with you, it will never repent
you; for I speak that which is made known to me from the Most high, out of his
Grace, be pleased diligently to consider of i^, and let the spirit of God be
your Meditation.

23. For there shall shortly come a time, where good friends shall be sifted
and proved, that we might stand steadfast in Christ; of the which, in love, I
would put you in mind; for the time of Refreshment comes soon after, where
faithful people shall entirely love one another; after which love I
continually hunger and thirst, and it is my sincere and constant wish, that
Babel may soon come to her end, and Christ may come into the Valley of
Jehosophat, that all Nations might see and praise him.

24. I entreat you to send my three Treatises ( Viz. 1. of Repentance: 2 of the
New birth: 3. of Resignation; some whereof I gave you my self, and the rest I
sent by Mr. Rudolff) to Mr. Rudolffus of Gersdorp; for I have written to him
that he should send them me to Zagan, to Mr. Christianus Bernhard, from whom I
shall have them by one or other; or if you your self had any occasion toward
Zagan, be pleased to send them to Mr. Christianus Bernhard, dwelling upon the
Market place; a year since he was Customer; he is a young companion of the
Theosophick School; to him I have convenient opportunity every week.

25. These Treatises are very much desired of the Lovers, and may do much
good; I pray send them by the first opportunity; for it is of much concernment;
and when you shall find convenient leisure to study, I will send you somewhat
more deep, for I have written this Autumn, and Winter, without ceasing: And I
commend you unto the Love of Jesus Christ, and his gracious Protection.

Dated, 19. Feb. 1623.
THE EIGHTH EPISTLE:
An Answer upon four QVESTIONS. 1. Of the Serpent, which after the Curse must
eat Earth, and creep upon the Belly. 2. Of Paradise, and the Garden of Eden.
3. Whether the Beasts (being they were in Paradise, and moreover wholly
earthly) did also feed upon Paradisicall Fruit? 4. Whether the Beasts before
the Curse, were so wild, hairy, and rugged, as now they are?


Our Salvation in the Life of Jesus Christ in Us.
WORTHY, much respected, very Learned, and beloved Friend and Brother, in
Christ our only life; I heartily wish unto you an happy New year, that you
may begin the same in a Divine will, in the drawing of the Father to Christ,
and likewise finish it in this time, in an effectual working power of the
spirit of Christ in his Vineyard, and that many Grapes may grow in the Garden
of Christ within you, and that God would be pleased to preserve you in the
bundle of the living, in this year when the Constellation of his Wrath does
draw the Sword; as I do not doubt, but that you (as a Cooperating branch on
the Vine Christ) will show forth your self in Good, New, and Heavenly fruits.

2. For the Gate of grace and knowledge stands likewise in a peculiar motion
[and does open it self in a singular desire, and affection] that the Children
o^ Christ might also reap in their harvest [and fruits of Christian love, and
piety, as well as the Children of Babel their harvest of Envy, Contention, and
desolation] if they would but seriously labor; and not lie so faint and
sluggish in the Sleep of Antichrist; as the grace of the most High has given
me to know, and understand.

3. I intended to have spoken wi^h you again the last time at my Return; but
by the Guidance of God I was led another way; and I shall yet do it, when ever
I come that way, if occasion permit.

4. I think also of the discourse we had then at our Meeting, where many things
were put to the Question which by reason of the many objections then made
(which cause much mistaking, and confusion) could not be so well determined as
they ought, being I was also in have.

5. Yet (upon the desire of some high persons, with whom I did Converse in the
Christmasse holy days when I departed from you, where some very Learned men of
Iaver, and of Strieg, together with other brave Gentlemen, were present) I have
written a pretty large Book concerning Election; in that all those questions,
and more are set down at large and determined in the deepest ground.

6. And I hope that the same shall put an End to many contentions,
and controversies; especially, of some points betwixt the Lutheranes, and
Calvinists; and other controversiall Sects besides; for there the true ground
is set down at large before their eyes; and every ones Opinion, is satisfied,
and the two Contraries are as it were united into one body; if any shall be
able to see, know, and understand the same against the poison of the Devil, by
reason of the Earthly Imagination; as I doubt not, but that the time is at hand
that strife, and controversy shall be changed into truth.

7. Whereas yet among the true Christians, and the Children of God in all
nations there has not been any controversy, and division, for in Christ we are
all but one Tree spread forth into many branches, and twigs.

8. And controversy is hence arisen, that the World is fallen into its selvish
lust and Imagination; whereby they have rent themselves of from Christ their
Stem; in whom Christians should stand in unity but have turned themselves unto
Images [opinions mental ^dols] and questions.

9. Out of which questions such controversies, and contentions are arisen;
where the pride of the Devil has been involved in the questions, and has so
imprinted, and immodellized it self on the Image of man; that they have fought
for their Images and opinions, and have therein extolled, and advanced
themselves; and Christ's Humility, wherein we should dye in Christ from our
evil nature, is quite forgotten; so that for the present we are rather a
Monster of an Image, then a living Christendom, in spirit, and in Power.

10. For a Christian must, and ought to stand in the Tree of Christ with the
Increase and grows of Christ's life, and also live in the spirit of Christ,
and bear fruit; in whom Christ himself (as to the internal ground) lives
and is all in all in him; who continually breaks the head of the Serpents
will in the flesh; and brings to naught the works of the Devil; he must
know, will, and do from Christ; it must come to effectual doing (that is, into
the Divine working) for without this, none is a Christian.

11. Christ must wholly receive and take possession of the internal ground of
the soul; that the severe justice of God (which holds us captive in the
Anger) might be satisfied with Christ's fullness [and effectual merit] that
Christ may fulfill the anger of God in us with love, and mortify the will of
the Devil; and also the nature in the wrath of God, and wholly annihilate it is
will, that so he may dye in the love of Christ, and bring forth a new will in
the L^ve-spirit of Christ through the nature of the soul, which lives and
walks in God, as St. Paul says, Our conversation is in the Lord.

12 Lip-labor, and the Pratings of the mouth avail nothing; the same make no
Christian; a Christian must always be borne (or regenerated) of Christ; else
he is no Christian, no outward imputed righteousness, or grace helps at all.

13. All the comforting, flattering, soothing, and dissembling is but in vain;
where the purple-mantle of Christ is put upon the man of iniquity and malice,
[or the Cain-like hypocrite,] who from without will be an adopted Child of
grace.

14. For no Whore, or One that is gotten with Child.
one that is impregnated, can be a Virgin, albeit she puts on a maids Garland;
yea no Prince, or Potentate can grace her with any Virginity.

15. Thus the flattering hypocrisy, and comforting [with Christ's Merits, and
promises] is to be understood, unless we be converted, and become like
Children which hang on the breasts of their Mother, and receive and conceive in
us the Ens [or essential Power] of Christ, which destroys the Harlot; that a
new spirit may be borne in us out of Christ,
which has in it Christ's sufferings, and death; that we be borne out of his
Resurrection, and resign up our selves into the whole process of Christ,
which is the imputed grace in Christ.

16. A Christian must be begotten, and regenerated of the same grace,
that he be a christian in, and of Christ, namely, a true branch in the tree
which is Christ; that the Engrafted word of life may spring forth and become
essential, living and working in the soul; and then the merit of Christ and
the imputed grace does avail, when he is growing on the tree, as to the
internal ground.

17. Beloved friend Mr. Frederick your questions require a large declaration;
in the Treatise or Commentary upon Genesis they be all determined at large; and
if you obtain the eyes and fight of Christ, then there need not any such
questions at all in such small things; which indeed are too high for Reason; but
in Christ they are nothing but a Childlike play; but however I will answer you
briefly thus.

The First Point. Of the Serpent, which after the Curse must eat Earth, and
Creep upon the Belly.
18. First, concerning the Article of the Serpent (which after the curse must
feed upon Earth, and creep upon the Belly) [I answer] that her Shape and Form
was such, but her Body and Spirit was not so evil in the fiery Science of the
ground of nature, as after the Curse.

19. For both Tinctures of good,
and evil, of the original of the first and second principle were manifest in
her; and therefore she was so exceeding Cunning; that the nature was able to
see in her Center in the Tinctures the ground of the whole creation.

20. She was in her ground before the Creaturall original (whence she in the
Grand Mystery was put into the Severation to a creature) a fair and excellent
Ens of great power and virtue.

21. But the Devils Imaginations (when he sat like an Enthroned Prince in the
ground of nature in very high power and dominion,) poisoned this Ens; which in
the Severation formed it self into a Serpent; and therefore he made use of her
for his Instrument by the same cunning and by the same poison in which lay the
mightiest power to make Eve monstrous.

22. Ye Physicians! It behooves you doubtless well to know, and understand
the Mystery of the Serpent, and wha^ lies hid under her poison; if you take
out the same, and proceed aright in the process thereof, then you may get a
Tincture against poison, the like whereof is not to be had.

23. She was in the Ens of the Grand Mystery, before she was a Creature, a
Virgin; but after the Curse, she became an Whore; Magically [or Parabolically]
to be understood.

24. She saw in her the ground of the inward, and outward World, and therefore
one must come out of the inward World and kill her monster, which she has putt
upon Eve; and an whole Book might be written, of what the desire of the Devil
has wrought, by and through her,

25. But when she did help to deceive the Image of God; then God accursed the
same that she became blind as to the internal ground; and was also altogether
Manifest in the four Elements; and so she fell into the Earth whence the body
was taken, and moreover she fell only to the wrath [or bad part] of the Earth;
she can no more obtain or reach the good part or quality of the Earth as other
Beasts do; and therefore she must eat Earth; namely, the property of the
curse in the Earth.

26. She was a flying Worm, else nature would have provided her legs, as
other Worms have on Earth; but her nimblenesse, wily subtlety, and cunning,
made Eve to long [after the forbidden fruit.]

The Second Point. Of Paradise, and the Garden Eden.
27. Paradise was the temperature in Man, when he knew not what good and evil
was; where the Divine light did shine through Nature, and Tinctured and
tempered all things; for Paradise is revealed in us again in Christ, as to the
internal ground.

28. But when God saw and knew that he would fall, then Paradise sprung not
forth with fruit any more through the Earth in the whole World (albeit it was
every where manifest) but only in the Garden of Eden where Adam was tempted;
for that is the place; but Paradise is the quality; to wit, the life of God in
the similitude [or Harmony of the universal Being.]

The Third Point.
Whether the Beasts (being they were in Paradise, and more-over wholly earthly)
did also feed upon Paradisicall fruit?
29. Beloved Friend Mr. Frederick, every Spirit eats of its Mother; out of
what the Eeasts were of that likewise, they did eat; namely of the
Quint-essence in Spiritu Mundi.
fifth Essence of the Earth in the Cosmick spirit; for the deepest ground of
the Beasts is not by many degrees like unto Man; thus did they feed upon their
Mother; namely, the spirit of them feeds upon the Cosmick spirit, and the body
upon the four Elements.

30. God knew very well that man would not stand but fall, what use or profit
then should the Paradificall food be to the Beasts; in the Quintessence there
lies indeed a Paradificall property; upon that they feed even to this day; for
in every Beast there is a power which is incorruptible, which the Cosmick
spirit draws into it self to the Separation of the last Judgment.

The Fourth Point.
Whether the Beasts were so wild and rough before the Curse as they now are?
31. Beloved Mr. Frederick; the Garment which Adam had before the Curse when he
was yet naked, was exceeding fair, and became him very well, so likewise was
the hide of the Beasts rough and hairy, unto them; but in the Curse all things
(both in the Beasts, and in the Plants of the Earth) were deformed, and changed
into a monstrous strange form; they had indeed such a clothing, but far more
glorious in Colors, Feature, and Ornament, of the pure Tincture.

32. And I entreat you about these Queries, to look into the Or, the Book
called the Mysterium Magnum; An Exposition upon Genesis.
Grand Mystery with the eyes of Christ, in whom all the Treasures of Wisdom
do lie; and then you shall see them better in the understanding, then I can in
have briefly set down in writing; and I commit you to the Love of Jesus Christ.

THE NINTH EPISTLE.
The open Fountain of God in the heart of Jesus Christ be our refreshment,
and constant Light.
1. WORTHY, much respected, and very Learned Sir, I heartily wish unto you even
that which my very soul desires of God; namely, the real true Divine
Knowledge in the love of Christ, that God would vouchsafe to open the Center of
the Soul, whereby the Paradificall Lilly-twig in Christ's Rose-garden, might
spring forth, grow, blossom, and bear fruit; and the streams out of Christ's
Fountain might flow from you; and you might be taught of God, that his holy
spirit might drive and rule you: As it is written, Those who are driven and
moved by the Spirit of God, they are the Children of God.

2. I have received your Letter, and thereby understand that you have read my
Writings, and that you do delight in them; and I wish from my very heart, that
the sense and right meaning of the same may be apprehended and understood; and
then there would be no need of any further asking and searching.

3 For the Book in which all Mysteries lie, is Man himself; he himself is
the Book of the Being of all Beings;
seeing he is the likeness [or similitude] of God; the great Arcanum lies in
him, the revealing of it belongs only unto Gods spirit.

4. But if the Lilly in the humanity of Christ springs for^h in the new birth
out of the soul; then out of the same Lilly the spirit of God proceeds, as
out of his own original and ground; and the same [spirit] seeks and finds
all Mysteries in the Divine Wisdom.

5. For the Lilly-branch which springs forth in the new birth ou^ of Christ's
humanity (understand the newborn spirit, out of the souls ^ssence, out of
Christ's power) is the true real branch spr^nging from, and remaining in Gods
Tree.

6. As a Mother bears a child, even so is the new man borne in and out of
God; and no otherwise at all is he Gods child and heir, a child of Heaven and
of Paradise.

7. No imputed righteousness avails (a stranger cannot inherit Gods
Kingdom) but an innate righteousness out of Gods Essentiality,
out of the water and spirit of God, as Christ told us, that We must become
like unto Children, and be conceived in Gods Essence, and like new children in
God, we must spring forth, and be borne anew; as a fair flower springs out
of the wild Earth, or as precious Gold grows in a rough stone, or drossy
Oar; otherwise we cannot see, nor inherit the Kingdom of God.

8. For whatsoever will possess the internal spiritual World, must be borne
out of the same; the earthly flesh from the four Elements cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God.

9. But the Quint-essence (which is the one Element; namely, Paradise) whence
the four Elements have their rise, birth, and proceeding, that same must be
predominant, and rule over the four Elements, in like manner as the light
contains the darkness as it were swallowed up, and yet the same is really in
it; even so it must be with Man.

10. Only it cannot be so with the outward man in this time of the earthly
life; for the outward World rules ove^ the outward Man; seeing it was made
manifest in Man, which is his fall.

11. And therefore the external man must perish, as the external World
perishes and passes away; and therefore Man in this time cannot attain
perfection; but the true man must continue in combat and strife against the
earthly corrupt life, which is its own enemy* where eternity and time strive
one against another.

12. For through strife or the mutual combat in Nature, the great Arcanum is
opened, and the eternal wonders in Gods wisdom are made manifest out of the
souls Essence.

13 As the eternal God has manifested himself through the time,
and brings his eternal Wonders through the time, into combat and contest,
that through the combat [or strife] that which is hidden [and lies in the
Mysterious Nothing] might open it self and be brought to light; even so in
strife and combat, the great Mystery must be revealed in Man, where Gods anger
and love, as fire and light are in combat and strife.

14. For in the soul (which arises out of the Eternal fire out of the
Fathers property, that is out of the Eternal un-inchoative Nature, out of the
darkness) that light (which did extinguish and disappeare in Adam) must be
renewed and borne again in the incomming of Christ, and then the Kingdom of
Christ, and of God is freely given him out of grace.

15. For none can take the same unto himself unless the love of God does
again press out of grace into the Center of the soul; and brings the
divine will out of the fire of the soul as a new spro^t or new Image into the
heavenly essent^ality; as the light shines out of the fire.

16. Therefore all whatsoever Babel teaches of the external imputed
righteousness, and the external assumed Adoption, [and particular Election
and Rejection from eternity) is without foundation and footing; Christ said,
You must be borne again, else you cannot see the Kingdom of God.

17. The seeming holy flattering comfort with Christ's death, avalleth nothing,
but to enter into Christ's death; and to spring up a new in him; and to arise in
him and with him and become Christ, [or an anointed child of God] in the new
man.

18. Like as Christ has mortifyed, extinguished and overcome the World,
and also the anger of his father, (being the center of the Eternal Nature) in
the souls property, with his love, (that is, with the new love fire introduced
into the souls essence; into which, the Devil before had brought in, and
placed his Desire; even so must we in and with Christ's spirit quell and quash
the earthly Adam in Gods anger, and mortify it through Gods love, that the new
man may spring forth; else there is no forgiveness of fin, nor any Adoption
[or ^liation] nor any righteousness.

19. The Kingdom of God must be inwardly innate, and borne within us, else we
cannot see with the eyes of eternity into the angelical World.

20. All Imaginations, inventions and ways; all reading, studying, and
teachings is to no purpose, [without this way of the new birth] no art or
reason can attain it: we must enter only through the gate which God has
opened to us in Christ; and spring forth in Gods Kingdom and dye unto the
earthly will, so that it neither hinders nor sticks on us and cloggeth us;
the seed of the Woman must continually, bruise the Serpents head in us.

21. Selfe-reason cannot make a child of God; for it lies not in our willing,
running, and keeping a do, as saint Paul says; but on Gods mercy and
Compassion.

22. My selfehood cannot attain it; my selfehood must dye in Christ's death;
and fall or resign unto the nothing; and then my selfehood falls into Gods
Mercy; and is in the limit of the first man, and stands again in the word
Fiat; where Gods mercy in Christ's entrance into our humanity does make [or
recreate] the new man out of grace.

23. And therefore the corrupt earthly will must dye in a real true, upright
repentance, and enter into the Resignation; that is, into the nothing, and
wholly surrender the will of reason unto death, and neither will or know
himself any more, but enter into the mercy and compassion of God.

24. And then this saying has its place and meaning, as God speaks in the
Prophet, My heart breaks in me, that I must take pity on him, can a Mother
forget her Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her
womb? And albeit she should forget, yet I will not forget thee; Behold, I
have noted thee in my hands.

25. In this (namely, in Gods mercy) the new man does arise, and springs up
in the Kingdom of Heaven and Paradise,
though the earthly body be in this World.

26. For Saint Paul says, Our Conversation is in Heaven: Thus the new man
walks in Heaven, and the old man in this World, for the Heaven in which God
dwells is in the new man.

27. Thus (beloved Sir, and Brother) and in no other way and manner, have I
found the Mystery; I have not studied or learned the same; but if you or any
other does thirst after it, I am engaged as a Brother in my affection and love,
to show him the way how I met with it, as I have set down at large in my
Writings, chiefly in the Book of the Threefold life of Man, and in the Book
of the three Principles of the Divine Being.

28. Indeed I did it for my self, as a spiritual exercise in Gods knowledge,
in the Mystery of the great Wonders of God; which notwithstanding by Gods
providence and guidance is come so far as to be published and read; and I
would gladly that every one that earnestly desires to understand the same,
might have it; and I wish from my heart, that it may be really manifest and
made known to the Reader of this Epistle, and to every one in himself, and
then there would be no need of any further searching and seeking.

29. But seeing God has promised by the Prophets (especially in Joel) that he
will power forth his spirit in the last days upon all flesh, therefore the
time is to be considered and taken notice of.

30. I say as I have known it, Note.
that whosoever at present will dye to himself, him shall the spirit of the
Lord according to Joels Prophecy apprehend, and manifest his Wonders by him;
therefore if any be in earnest,
he shall find it by experience.

31. Yet let every one be faithfully warned, that if Gods light does arise in
him, that he continue steadfast in great humility in resignation, namely in the
death of Christ.

32. (For the Heaven shall now at last power forth its long contrived Egestum
of the Constellations which it has wrought in the humane property) least he
also be taken hold of by the starry Heaven, and go beyond the limit out of
resignation.

33. As it may be seen by the Tbe Prosolites or Disciples of Isaias Steefel,
and Ezekiel Metts, that held perfection in this outward flesh.
Metists, who came even unto the gates of the Deep, and were again captivated
by the starry Heaven, and entered into themselves, and exalted themselves, and
surceased the strife against the Serpent, and entered into a selfehood [or a
singular Luciferian conceit of their own holinesse] supposing that they were
changed into a Deity, and so they have confounded the external World with the
internal.

34. Which is unfound, and void of ground, and of which we must take great
heed, and see that we continue steadfast in deepest humility, that the seed that
is sown may grow unto a Tree, and may come to the blossoming, and the spirit
of God get a form in us.

35. For out of the Blossom arises the morning Star, that Man may learn to
know himself what he is, and what God and Time is.

36. I give you Sir out of good affection to understand, that this present time
is seriously to be taken into consideration;
for the Seventh Angel in the Revelation has prepared his Trumpet; the powers
of Heaven be in peculiar motion; moreover both Gates stand open, and light and
darkness are in great desire; as every thing is taken, so it shall go in.

37. At what the one shall exceedingly rejoice, the other shall mock at it;
whereupon follows the sore and severe judgment upon Babel.

38. And so I commit you and yours unto the pleasant and amiable Love of Jesus
Christ.

Dated, Gerlits, 27. October, 1621.
THE TENTH EPISTLE,
OF The Killing of Antichrist in our Selves, AND ALSO How we may attain unto
Divine Contemplation.

Our Salvation is in Christ Jesus.
1. WORTHY, and much respected Sir, I wish unto you the grace, knowledge, and
blessing of God in Christ Jesus; after I was informed of D. K. that you as a
Christian Brother, and fellow-member in the Lord, do stand in an hearty Desire
in the drawing of the Father to Christ Jesus; and do also labor in your mind
how you may come to Divine Contemplation and Vision in your self; therefore
upon the request of the Doctor, I would not omit to visit and salute you with a
short Epistle, and briefly to declare unto you out of my Gifts, out of
Christian love the way to Divine Vision and Feeling; and hereby to present unto
you in brotherly love the Sap of my little Coral in the spirit and life of
Jesus Christ, as one branch or twigg on the Tree is bound to do to the other;
and I desire that I might be well understood, if peradventure I might give
further occasion to your zeal.

2. Seeing that you very well perceive in your self that Antichrist in Babel
bears the sway and government in Christendom; and acts selfehood and the
lust of the flesh; and that our dear Immanuel has faithfully warned us
thereof, and said, That flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven, John 6. And yet the Antichrist seeks and desires nothing else,
but only temporal honor, might, and power, to climb up and advance
himself in the lust of the flesh; and moreover that this Antichrist has for a
long time so civilly and demurely decked and adorned himself with Christ's Or,
His seamlesse C^ate.
Purple Mantle, that men have not discerned him, but they have honored and
adored him for a Saint; the which is reasonably well revealed to me in the
Grace of the most high; and thereupon I would declare unto you in brief what a
Christian is; and also what the Antichrist in man is, for your further
consideration.

3. Christ says;
Whosoever forsakes not houses, land money, goods, wife, children, brothers
and sisters, and deny himself, and follow me, he is not my Disciple or
servant; also you must turn and become like children; or be borne a new of
water and the spirit, else you shall not see the Kingdom of God; this is not
meant that one should run out of his vocation and Or, Employment.
calling from his wife and children into a solitary Desert and wilderness, and
forsake all; but only he must forsake the Antichrist; that is, the SELF in
all [the meum and tuum, the mine and thine.]

4. Whosoever will attain to Divine contemplation and feeling within himself;
he must mortify the Antichrist in his soul, and depart from all ownehood of
the will; yea from all Creatures; and become the poorest creature in the
owne-hood [selfenesse or self interest] of his mind; so that he has or owneth
nothing any more for a propriety; be he in what estate and condition he will.

5. And though he be a King yet his mind must forsake all ownehood, and esteem
himself in his place, dignity, and Tempora^l goods no other then a Servant of
God; and that he therein ought to serve God, and his Brethren, and that he
has and possesses all that he has, not after the right of nature, as if it
were his own [to do according to his own will and pleasure therein] but that
it is his fellow-bretherens and members; and that God has set him as a Steward
and officer over it; and he must think that he therein serves his Lord, who
will require an account of him.

6. He must wholly and fully resign up in himself his own will (which drives
him to such possession of owne-hood [or selvish affection or union with the
Creature]) to the suffering and dying in the death of Jesus Christ; and humbly
beseech God in right earnest repentance and conversion, that he would mortify
this evil will to selfenesse and temporal lust, in the death of Jesus Christ,
and bring the will of his soul into the true adoption or fil^ation of God;
that so he might not will and desire any longer to his self; but that Gods
will might be in him his will and desire; that he might be dead (as to the will
of the soul,) in and to his self or owne-hood and that God in Christ might be
his life.

7. He must wholly immerse his will in deepest humility into Gods mercy,
and lay hold on such a will and resolution in the Divine promise of grace,
that he this very hour will depart from all owne-hood of the pleasure of this
World; and never enter any more therein; albeit he thereby should become the
fool of all the World; he must wholly immerse himself into the deepest
submissive lowliness and unworthiness before God with repentance; and yet in
the soul apprehend and hold fast the promise of grace, and stand therein, as a
Soldier before his Enemy, when it concerns his body, and life.


8. When this comes to pass, then his own will ( being the Antichrist will
be apprehended, and mortifyed in the death of Christ; and his soul will soon
become as a young simple child which has lost its natural understanding of
selfehood; and begins to lament before God as a young child before its
Mother, and trusts in the Mother to give what she pleases to it.

9. And this is that, which Christ said, ye must turn and become as children,
and forsake all,
and follow me; for Adam departed from Gods will into self-will; and has in
his own selfe-desire brought the insinuations of the Se^pent, and the will and
desire of the Devil into himself; so that he has brought himself and his
life's comfort (which before stood in mutual harmony' and Agreement in one only
will which was Gods) into a division, and disunion, where the properties of
nature departed from the Equal Agreement and Concordance; each property
entering into its selfe-hood (being an own or peculiar selfe-desire) when^e the
lust, and Imagination to good and evil did arise in him; and heat and cold
presently fell on him, and ^e dyed from the holy life in the equal and mutual
concordance; wherein he lived in one only pure Element, wherein the four
Elements were in him in equal weight or Temperature.

10. And of this God warned him, saying; eat not of the Tree of the knowledge
of good and evil else you shall dye; meaning thereby the death to the Kingdom
of Heaven; namely [the disappearing] of the fair Angelical Image, which dyed
presently in the false introduced desire of the Serpent; and therefore this
false will of the Serpent must first dye in Christ's death by true Conversion;
and out of this death Christ arises in his spirit again in us, in the
heavenly Image which dyed in Adam; and the inward man is regenerated and newborn in Christ's spirit.

11. This new Spirit comes to Divine vision or contemplation in himself; it
hears Gods Word and has Divine understanding, and inclination, and may
behold the Grand Mystery, in Divine and natural Mysteries; and albeit the
earthly flesh yet cleaves unto him in its inclination, yet the same hurts or
spoyle^ not [the newborn spirit] at all in him.

12. He is in this new birth as solid fine Gold in a rough drossy stone,
the drossy soil of the stone being not able to destroy or spoil the Gold;
for his right will is dead to the earthly desire, and continually desires to
kill and mortify the lust of the flesh* and does likewise kill it without
intermission, for here the Seed of the Woman, Viz. the new Man borne in Christ,
bruiseth the head of the Serpents will in the flesh [which will] is Antichrist.

13. And beloved Sir, I give you as a Christian and Brother in all
faithfulness, syncerity, and uprightness to understand, that we in our
Supposed Religion (wherein men do nothing but contend, confute, and revile one
another about the Letter [and the different Opinions thence contrived] are as
yet in the midst of Babel, and that it was never Worse then now; whereas yet
men do boast that they are gone out from Babel, and have the true Religion,
which I leave in its worth [to be well considered.]

14. But for so much as is known to me in the Lord my God, in my exceeding
precious Talent given to me of God, I say, that men indeed have dipped Christ's
Mantle with its purple color in the blood of Christ, and taken it upon them
for a covering; and therewith they have only covered the Antichristian child
of self will, and so have painted over the Antichristian Bastard with a
strange color.

15. For men do exceedingly flatter it, and cover it with Christ's suffering
merit, and death, and comfort it, that Christ has paid all for it, saying, It
ought only to [apply or] comfort it self with the merit of Christ, and
receive it in faith as a satisfaction, and thus they show us an outward imputed
righteousness.

16. But it has far another A. B. C. in the true understanding; no comforting,
selfe-willing, running, or keeping a round, avails any thing; the suffering,
the death of Christ, will not be given to the Antichristian Beast in Self, but
to them that depart from, and relinquish all the ownehood [and propriety] of
the creatures,
and wholly resign up themselves into the suffering and death of Christ Jesus;
and dye to their own will, in and with Christ, and are buried with him, and
also arise in him to a new will and obedience, and hate sin; who put on
Christ in his suffering reproach, and persecution, and take his Cross upon
them, and follow him under his Red Banner; to them I say, it will be given,
these put on Christ in his process, and become in the inward spiritual Man
Christ's members, and the Temple of God, who dwells in V S.

17. None has right to comfort himself with Christ's merits, unless he
desires wholly to put on Christ in himself; and he is also no Christian
before he has put him on by true repentance and conversion to him with an
absolute resignation,
and unfeigned selfe-denyall; so that CHRIST espouseth and betrotheth himself
with him.

18. The beginning of which comes to pass in the Covenant of Baptism, where
the child promises and swears under Christ's Red Banner, that which
afterward must follow in very deed, or real practice; or if one has turned
himself away [from the practice of what he then promised] he must in such a
conversion of his will turn himself thereinto again; and I say upon sure
ground that to many an one the Mantle of Christ will turn to hellish fire, in
that he covers Antichrist therewith, and yet remains but a Beast.

19. For a Christian must be borne of Christ, and dye to the Adamicall will; he
must have Christ in him, and be a branch or member on his flesh and spirit, not
according to the Animal Beast, but according to the spiritual Man.

20. For the spirit of God possesses not the Beast [the outward sensual
natural or rational Man] but indeed, the Temple of Christ, Viz. Christ's
spiritual flesh and blood in Us; for Christ said, Whosoever shall not eat the
flesh of the Son of Man, he has no life in himself.

21. Now there must be a mouth which indeed is proper and fit to eat it, for
it will not be given to the Beast, much less to the Ens of the Serpent; for
every spirit eats of its Mother, whence it is a^isen; which I give to every
understanding man to consider of, and here I only mention what a Christian
ought to be, if he will account himself a Christian.

22. For a Beast is no Christian, but he that is Baptized with the Holy Ghost
in the Death of Christ,
who has put on Christ, and lives in Christ's heavenly flesh and blood; who
has tasted Christ's Supper, and sits with Christ at Table; he is a Christian
that walks in Christ's footsteps, and continually mortyfieth the Antichristian
evil Beast in flesh and blood (which still adhereth to a Christian) binds it,
and depriveth it of its strength, and patiently resigneth himself up in
temptations, which many hundred ways are offered him, for his trial and
purification.

23. A Christian must learn the A. B. C. backwards, and account the wisdom
of his Reason scolishnesse, that Christ may gain a form in him, and he be
made capable of the heavenly Wisdom.

24. For the wisdom of the outward World is blind in respect of God, and
sees him not; Albeit all things live and move in God, and he himself is
through all things, and yet he possesses nothing, save that which dies from
its own will; that he must possess, and he possesses it willingly, for it
wills nothing without him, and it is in the End of the Creation, and also in
the Beginning.

25. Whereof I could further mention unto you, if occasion here did permit, the
which I have in my Writings largely described and declared out of the center,
and Original of all Essences; and here only I have hinted in brief, what a
Christians state, being, and condition is; if it should please you further to
consider of it, and to give up your self into this process, as I likewise
hope that you are already in it.

26. But for a more brotherly recreation, I thought good to visit you with a
short Epistle; and to solace my self a little with you in the hope and faith
which works, and is in Us, until we be once freed from this Cottage, and be
afterward refreshed, and quickened perfectly one with another in Divine and
brotherly Union, and Vision.

27. And this I have done upon the desire of the Doctor above mentioned, in all
syncerity and uprightness; and so I commend you to the tender Love of Jesus
Christ.

THE ELEVENTH EPISTLE: Our Salvation is in the effectual working Love of Jesus
Christ in Us.
1. DEAR Brother in the life of Jesus Christ, I wish from my heart the Divine
working Love unto you, that your noble Lilly-twig sprung forth in Christ, may
in the power of Christ, grow great, and bring forth much fruit in the Paradise
of God, to the heavenly joy of us all, and our eternal brotherly fellowship.

2. I rejoice in my soul, when I perceive that a goodly, virtuous, fair
Branch is sprung up in our Tree of life Christ; and I hope also to be a
partaker of its good fruit.

3. As one branch on the Tree does enjoy the sap and power of the other, and
they all do mutually grow, and bear fruit in one only Power; so likewise we
are in the Tree of Christ all only One, which [Tree] is CHRIST in us ALL.

4. Seeing then that you freely and unfeignedly with all acknowledgement of
heart and mouth, do approve your self to this Tree of life; and on the
contrary do renounce, and gainesay the poison, and delusion of Satan;
therefore I wish nothing more at present, then that I might be able in the
power of this Tree which is Christ, to impart and give the influence of my
power received from him unto you, that we might grow together as members in one
Power.

5. And I make no doubt, but the most High has begotten his Lilly-twig in you,
for without Divine Power we have no longing, or hunger after God, and also we
cannot know him without his spirit in us; all that we understand and know of
him fundamentally [or in reality] comes from his Revelation and Operation.

6. For albeit the World prateth and talks much of God, yet it does it only
from Custom, and receives its knowledge from the Hystory of the literal word
[by the habitual faculties of its natural reason] and yet it is void of true
knowledge.

For none knows the Father but the Son and he to whom the son will reveal
him.

7. And therefore we have no true knowledge of God, unless it be given us of
the son,
who lives in us, if we be [living] branches on the vine.

8. For Christ said, whosoever is of God he hears Gods word; and to the
Reason-learned who were only skillfull and taught in the letter, he said,
therefore you do not hear, because you are not of God; also you are not my
sheep; you are ravening wolves, and hirelings.

9. Therefore I say, that if we will speak aright of God, and understand his
will, then his words must abide in us, in a quick and living working; for
Christ said without me you can do nothing; also none can call God Lord without
the holy spirit in him; for his calling Lord must be borne of God, and flow
from the holy Ghost.

10. Nothing is pleasing to God,
and also nothing is accepted of God, but that which he himself does and
works in and through the spirit of man; therefore says Christ, all the
plants which my Heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted out and burnt
with fire,

11. Therefore my beloved brother, you do well to hold and keep your self to
the Original of life; and desire power and strength from it; you shall be well
quickened refreshed and strengthened, you are an acceptable guest to God and the
members of Christ, in [this] your purpose.

12. And if you persevere steadfastly and resist the devil, the World, and the
Earthly flesh and blo^d; and prepare your self to fight like a true Noble
Champion, for Conquest against all these; and overcome in you the Potent, and
open Enemy self-love; and come aright into our General LOVE; then you shall
certainly know, and sinde by experience that the noble and exceeding worthy
Trophee, or Crown, of Christ's conquest, which he obtained in the overthrow of
death and Hell shall be set upon you, with the Heavenly Kingdom of joy.

13. And then all the Children of Christ together with the holy Angels, shall
exceedingly rejoice more with you, then for 99 righteous ones, who have
already obtained it.

14. And the fair and noble Sophia shall be given for a spouse unto your soul,
which now at present stands at the door of your soul, and does earnestly
entreat and call you with her vo^ce; and knocks bidding you to come forth,
and hold out aright, in Battle against sin, death, Devil, and hell, and with
your earnestness or fixed resolution, to set the great Petards against the
strong Fort of nature, and she will help you to blow up, and demolish this
strong Fort.

15. And then you shall see great wonders, and at the hour of Conquest the
joyful nuptials or marriage of the Lamb shall be celebrated in Heaven in
you; and then the Shepherds Crook.
Shepherds staff shall be given by Christ, into the hand of your soul.

16. But be sure, remember to keep truly and faithfully unto the end, what you
have promised unto this chaste Sophia; it must be in right earnest and not to
look back again into Sodom, as Lots Wife;
who was turned into a pillar of Salt.

17. But you must go out of Sodom with Lot according to Gods command, and
enter into the footsteps of Christ, not at all regarding the scoffings,
reproaches, and opprobrious speeches of the World; but love the Or, Mark.
Brand of Christ more, then the friendship, honor, and goods of the whole
World, and then you may walk along with us, upon the Pilgrims path of Christ.

18. But if you do not relish this, but mind and desire rather the pleasure
and honor of the World, then you are not as yet ready and prepared for the
Marriage, and to come to your Spouse, our loving and dear Sophia.

19. Therefore consider well your self, behold and examine well your whole
heart, if you find a longing desire and drawing thereunto (as I in part
perceive and take notice of) then do not delay or put it off an hour, but go
forward, and enter with a right earnestness [or fixed minde] into repentance,
and yield up your will wholly and fully, to enter instantly thereinto, and
never to go out from it again; albeit you should therefore forsake body,
LIFE, Honor, and Goods.

20. And if you do thus then you are rightly prepared, and the true Pioneer
will come unto your soul, and do that in you which you cannot do without him.

21. And although afterward [vaine] inclinations, and great strife and
opposition in the flesh might stick and cleave unto you; and your reason call
you a Fool; yea though Gods anger should cover and cloud you in soul and
body, yet all this will not hurt you; you shall spring forth under such thorns
with a new mind, and walk with the spirit in Heaven.

22. And albeit the earthly body must be conversant with the creatures, yet it
shall be with it, as with a rough stone, in which fine Gold grows.

23. Be not at all offended at my tribulation, and persecution; neither be
afraid; for it is the marck of Christ; Look but back into the Scripture, and
see how it went with the children of God; how were they continually persecuted
and killed by those who should have taught the ways of God.

24. For I am entrusted with a precious Pearl, which God does so cover, that
the unworthy see it not, but are blind therein, and are offended at the
simplicity of the person; that so they may remain blind to themselves in the
wisdom of their own Reason; this they see, and yet do not understand it,
seeing they scorn and despise the simplicity of Christ.

25. But the time is very nigh at hand when they shall give an earnest account
for it.

26. But that God has given you to understand what it is, and from whence it
comes; be thankful to him for it, it is befallen you out of grace; for you
have humbled your self before him, and there may yet greater grace happen unto
you, if you persevere steadfast in humility, and earnest Prayer.

27. I will willingly impart unto you my Love, as a member of Christ, with
praying and cooperating; for it is mere joy in my heart so to do; albeit I
must therefore suffer bodily trouble and calamity; yet I rejoice to see what
God the Lord has done by me poor Man hitherto.

28. Satan cannot hinder the ways of God, and though it seems as if he
hindered them by his murtherous cries, yet they are thereby the more divulged
and made known, so that the Children of God do enquire after the true ground.

29. But the wicked crew is thereby hardened and hindered; but others are thereby
called, and this you shall see before a year come about; and though they kill
me, yet it must go forward; for it is from the Lord.

30. And I commit you to the tender effectual working Love of Jesus Christ;
and commend my self unto your brotherly love, favor, and affection.

Dated at Gaerlits, April 25. 1624. J. B.


THE TWELFTH EPISTLE: TO Mr. JOHN BUDOFSKY.
Our Salvation in the life of Jesus Christ.
Worthy, much respected Sir, All sincere wishes of Divine Salvation in holy
Power; and of all temporal welfare premised.
1. I Have received your Letter sent to me for Christian friendship and
refreshment, in Divine knowledge, in Divine desire, and affectionate hearty
Christian Love, and it is exceeding welcome, and acceptable to me.

2. And also I do rejoice that yet God has his children, and little flock
here and there, whereas else at present the World is deeply drowned in
wickedness, and is apprehended in the fire of Anger, which shortly shall make
a great rent in the Antichristian Christendom, as it is known and manifest.

3, And that man does very well and right, who learneth to know himself aright
what he is,
which cannot be brought to pass through Reason, and sh^rpe searching [or deep
studying and speculation in natural acruments of Reason] but in the true Or,
Following,
process of Christ, in a real resigned soul, which disclaimeth and forsakes
the Reason, and its own wit and humane selfnesse, and enters with a true
conversion from the earthly way into the highest simplicity of Christ into the
true and deepest humility under the Cross of Christ, as Christ has faithfully
taught us, and said, Unless you turn and become as Children, and be borne
anew of the water, and holy spirit, you cannot see the Kingdom of God.

4. Whereunto a true real Resignation, and renouncement of humane self does
belong;
that man wholly betaketh himself into his inward Ground, and wholly
annihilate himself in Self, and turn himself by earnest Repentance with
inward entire desire from this Worlds Being in to God, and wholly dye in the
death of Christ to his own strength and selfe-will^, and fall down or sinck
into the mercy and compassion of God; that so he may be apprehended of the holy
Spirit in the inward ground in himself, that the same may see, will, and act
through him, what is pleasing to God; who only is the true Searcher in Divine
knowledge, and the light of the soul, in which light it beholds and knows
God, and in no other way may it attain to Divine and Natural knowledge,
vision, and contemplation.

5. For the natural rational man understands nothing of the Mystery of Gods
Kingdom, for it is without, and not in God, which is plain and manifest by
the learned in Reason, in that they contend, and wrangle about the Being and
will of God, and yet know it not, for they hear not Gods Word in them.

6. And all is dead and void of understanding in reference to God, which has
not the living voice, and the Divine hearing of the new birth in the Ens of
Christ in it; that the spirit of God may give Testimony of his outward hearing
and teaching in him, in which internal seeing, God only is known, and his
Being understood, to which the outward literal, or written Word is only a
form and a prepared Instrument.

7. But the true understanding must flow from the inward ground,
out of the living Word of God (which must before be opened and revealed in
Man) and enter into the written Word. that there may be one concordance and
harmony, else all teaching of the Divine Being and Will is nothing but a
building upon the great Babylon of earthly Reason and Wonders.

8. In which internal ground all my knowledge concerning the Divine and
natural ground has taken its rise, beginning, and understanding; for I am not
borne of the School of this World [or educated in Scholastic Arts] and am a
plain simple Man; bu^ by Gods spirit and will, I am brought without my own
purpose and desire, in to Divine knowledge in high natural Searchings.

9. Which knowledge, and free gift of Grace, I shall ^eartily and willingly
impart to my dear Brethren, and fellow members in the life-Tree of Jesus
Christ, and daily make supplication to God, that their hearts might be opened
in Divine hearing and understanding* that such knowledge might be manifest, and
made known also (...) them, and we might be delivered out of the contentious
Disputing Babylon, and be brought into one brotherly love, and hear in us what
Gods will and being is.

10. And Sir, I let you understand that your acknowledgement and tendered
friendship, is of great acceptance with me; and I wish also to discourse with
you of Divine matters, and recreate my self therein, which (being we are so
from one another) cannot be done so well, and yet it may fall out; for I am
fully intended (when the days be a little lengthened, and we be somewhat
better assured of more constant weather, if God grant so much favor and time
of Peace) to confer with you and other good Brethren, and friends in those
parts by word of mouth; and then I will answer your propounded points, and
speak with you fundamentally of them, which now in haste cannot be done: And I
commend you, and yours, to the meek Love of Jesus Christ.

Dated, 13. December. 1622.
THE THIRTEENTH EPISTLE.
A LETTER Written to one In TEMPTATION, and trouble of Mind, showing whence it
arises.

Our Salvation is in the life of Jesus Christ in US.
1. DEAR Sir, my Fellow-member,
and Brother in Christ our Savior; my cordial wish and cooperating desire of
the Divine Love and Grace premised:
I desire to let you know in Christian Love, that I have considered your
condition in a Christian Sympathy and fellow-feeling; and have brought it
before the gracious compassion of the most high,
to see what he would be pleased to let me know therein.

2. Whereupon Sir, I must tell you, that I in the same gracious compassion
obtained such an insight and Vision of your condition and Temptation, that the
ground and cause of it is made known to me; and I will set it down in brief
for a Memorandum, that you may consider and ponder it seriously by your self.

3. The first cause of such strong working temptation, is the supernatural
super-abundant and unspeakable love of God; (that is, the Divine good will,
and then the creaturall will of man struggling one against another) that the
humane will refuses fully to resign and give it self up with total
confidence unto such great grace of God; which is tendered unto it out of pure
love; but seeks it self and its own love of transitory things; and loves
it self, and the Or, Things.
beings of this World more then God.

4. Therefore man's own nature (which in its own center without the love of
God, stands in mere anguish, strife, enmity, and unquiet contrariety)
tempts him; into which also the Devil snooteth his false desire, to lead man
astray from such high grace, and love of God.

5. This temptation is the greatest; and it is even the combat which Christ
maintains with his love (shed forth into the nature of man) against such
selfenesse, also against Gods anger, sin, death, Devil, and hell, in which
combat the humane Dragon must be devouted by the love of Christ, and changed
into an angelical Image.

6. And if the love of God in Christ had not its influence in you,
you should have none of this combat, but the Dragon ( Viz. The false develish
will) would maintain his natural right [and possession without any such
conflict or disturbance.]

7. Now therefore this perplexing, and distressing temptation is wrought very
sensibly in nature by the Dragon, who is in traveling anguish with his own
nature, when such great love of God comes into him and would change his
natural right into a divine [selfe denying] will.

8. For here Christ [the Serpent-stroyer] stands in man, in hell, and
stormeth, or assaulteth the strong prey-fort of the Devil, whence arises such
strife; where Christ and Lucifer fight for the soul, as God has given you to
see, and know experimentally in the first Temptation.

9. Thus Christ b^uiseth the head of the Serpent, and the Serpent stingeth
Christ in the heel,
and the poor soul stands in the midst in great trembling and sadnesses,
and can do nothing, but only stand still in hope; it is not able also to lift
up its face before God; and power forth its effectual prayers; for the Dragon
turns its face toward the vanity of this World, and shows it the beauty,
and glory of this World; and mocketh it, because it will become another
creature; and represents unto it the Kingdom in which it lives and its
natural ground.

10. And here the soul stands with Christ in the Wilderness, in the f^^ty
days ^emptation; where the might, glory, riches, and pleasure of this World is
tendered unto it; alluring it to elevate it self, and enter into its own
selfe^ will.

11. The Second Temptation of Lucifer, and the selfish Dragon of nature,
is this, that when the soul has tasted the Divine love, and has been once
illuminated, then the soul will have that same light for its own propriety,
and work therein in its own Power and ability as in its own peculiar
possession; understand, the nature of the soul, which being without Gods light
is a Dragon as Lucifer, that I say will have it for its own propriety; but
this Dragon will not resign up his natural right; he will be a maker and
disposer of the Divine power, and live therein in great joy in his fiery
[selfish] nature; and this cannot be.

12. This Dragon ( Viz. the fiery nature) must be changed with its own will
into a Love-^^re and forgo his natural right; but he is unwilling to do it;
but he in such a charge or transmutation looks for an own self power, and
yet finds none, and therefore he begins to doubt of grace, because he
sees that in such working he must forsake his natural desire and will; and
hence he continually is afraid, and will not dye in the Divine light from his
own natural Right, but always thinks that the light of Grace (which
works without such sharpness and fiery might) is a false light.

13. Whence it comes,
that the outward Reason (which however is blind [and sees nothing aright of
it selfe]) continually thinks: O! who knows how it is with thee, whether it
be true or no, that God has illuminated thee, that he is in thee? I may likely
proceed from such a Fancy; thou see not the like in other people, and yet
they think to be saved as well as thou, thou make thy self thereby only
the fool of the World, and stand in fear and trembling at Gods anger, more
then those who comfort themselves only with the promise of grace upon the
futu^e Revelation.

14. Thus it comes to pass, that then the internal ground does sigh and
pant after the inflammation and motion of the light, and feign would have it;
but the nature is able to do nothing; it is as if it were wholly rejected of
God, which is also true, as to the Self-will; for God has planted a new will
into it, it must dye to its own will, and be changed into Gods will.

15. And because the will of nature must here dye and resign up its own right
to the will of God, therefore such griev^a^ te^p^ations are therein; for the
Devil will not have his P^e^ F^rt to fall, or be demolished; for if Christ
shall live in Man, then the spirit of selfe-lust and imagination must dye, and
yet it does not wholly dye in the time of this life by reason of the flesh, but
it dies daily, and yet lives; and therefore there is such contest, which no
wicked man feels; but only those who have put on Christ, in whom Christ
fights with Lucifer.^

16. The Third Temptation is in the strong holds of the Devil,
namely, in the will, and mind, as also in flesh and blood; where the false
Centres lie in man, as a peculiar self-will to the proud temporal life, to
the l^st of the flesh, to earthly things; also many curses of men which have
been wished upon his body and soul, through his temptation; all the sins
which have grounded and concentred, and yet stand in the Astrall spirit as a
strong Fort; in which Christ now fights, and will destroy it; which strong
hold of might, pleasure, and beauty of this World, the humane will does still
esteem and hold for its propriety and best treasure; and will not resign it
up, and be obedient to Christ.

17. Therefore beloved Sir, and Christian Brother, I tell you, and give you to
understand what our loving Lord Jesus Christ has shown me in my consideration;
examine your self, what your Temptation is; our Dear Lord said, We must
forsake all, and follow him; and so we should be right Or, Truly spiritually
poor.
Christ-like poor.

18. Now if you yet stick with your mind in the self lust, imagination, and
love of earthly things, then therein (namely in those Cen^^es which yet work
in you) you have such Temptation.

19. But if you will follow my child-like counsel,
I tell you this, that when such Temptation does arise in you, you must then
imagine nothing else to your self, save the bitter suffering and dying of our
Lord, and consider his reproach and scorn, his contempt, and poverty in this
World, which he has undergone and done for us poor men; and resign your
desire and whole will thereinto, that you would very ^aine be conformable to
his Image, and with all unfaigned willingness follow him in his Or, Way of
life.
process, and patiently endu^e whatsoever is laid upon you to suffer, and that
willingly for his sake; and desire only to be conformable or like unto him;
and for his love sake and will be content to be abject, despised, in contempt,
and affliction, that you might but mainetaine and keep this his l^ve in you,
and will no longer to your self, but only what Christ wills through you.

20. Dear Sir, I fear me, there is yet somewhat in you, that is displeasing
to Christ, by reason whereof there is such strife in you, Christ wills, that
you should with him dye to your own will, in his death, and arise in his will,
and live with him; and Christ is at present in your soul, and striveth for
your soul.

21. Let all earthly will go, and resign up your self wholly and fully;
let joy and sadness, comfort and conflict, be all one unto you; and so you
shall with Christ be a Conqueror over the World, Devil, Death, and Hell; and
at last find by experience what Christ has been in you; and wherefore this
has happened unto you, which has been the process of all the children of
Christ: I speak out of Christian affection.

Dated on the day of Christ's going to his Suffering, and Dying: AN. DOM. 1623.
J. B.

THE FOURTEENTH EPISTLE. TO FREDERICK CRAUSEN, AT GOLTBERG.
The open Fountain in the heart of Jesus Christ be our refreshment and
constant Light.
1. WORTHY, Learned, and kind Sir, my Friend and beloved Brother in Christ; all
hearty wishes of the love, illumination, and blessing of God premised; your
diligent Study in the Divine Wisdom is very acceptable, and joyous to me.

2. And so much the more, in that I perceive in your Letter, that God has
opened your heart and spirit to a right understanding; and I wish from my heart
(as indeed I do not at all doubt) that the precious Coral in the humanity of
Christ might again spring forth (in the spirit of Christ, and his tender
humanity in us) from the inward man in your Paradisicall Plant withered in
Adam, and bring forth true fruits for the Table of God.

3. And that the noble, and precious branch may be fast engrafted in the vine
of Christ, and spring forth a fresh from the same; and may blossom with us
amidst this present wicked Thorny World; and help to ^oretell the Summer of
Christ in his time of the Lilly; indeed some branches out of Christ's
Rose-garden do here and there appear; and do spring forth as a wonder of God
in the midst of the fire of tribulation in Babel.

4. But that you say, my Writings have given you some direction, go to; be
thankful to God for it, who thus manifests his wonders, and deep hidden
wisdom by mean and unexercised People, and sets them for a light to the
children who in the Cradle of the World, work in their Babel, and Fable; and
that they are convinced by mean Simplicity, that their works, will, and life,
is only a carved Image, and a forged selfish invention; that has not its
foundation and root in him.

5. As at present the most high has given us manifoldly to understand whence
in short time his wonders in his hidden wisdom are [and shall] be declared to
the World in Writings for the light thereof; in which our posterity, and all
those who obtain understanding from God in them, shall not only wonder, but
exceedingly rejoice.

6. I understood by Mr Walter, that you have received some of my Writings,
which do much delight you; yet I could wish that you had the last pieces also,
which are more plain and clear, and have a Sweeter foundation, in which the
manifested God, may be known in all his wonders, and works very clearly.

7. They will in many places open more light unto you in your practice* for the
ground of nature is very clearly discovered therein; as also our very fair
pleasant Garden of Christ, of the new birth.

8. Beloved Frederick it will give you much furtherance to temporal and
eternal exercise; and I hope that you (being an engraffted cyon) shall not
break of from the tree of the Divine wisdom; for shortly there will come a
time when it shall be of needful use and you shall rejoice among the
firstlings that go out from Babel.

9. I highly thank you for your Present which I have received; and I shall, for
its recompense, carry it in my will into the Mystery of the most high; and it
shall be received as a treasure for you; and I acknowledge hereby, your true
open heart.

10, However the Pearl will not be therefore given, but for nothing; as God
has done for us in Christ; and so one member is bound unto the other; and I
commend you to the sweet, and pleasant love of Jesus Christ and exhort you
further to seek after the Pearl.

Dated, 17. July 1622. J. B.

THE FIFTEENTH EPISTLE.
The Salvation and Light of God in the life of Jesus Christ enlighten you, and
give you further to understand his will.
1. COURTEOUS Sir, and good Friend; I cannot but rejoice with you, in that you
have given up your life to [be] a plant of God; and so it springs and buddeth
sorth in the body of Jesus Christ the Son of God, who has begotten us again
to a living creature in himself, and has set us before his Father as a lovely
plant in his pleasant Paradisicall Garden, to his joy and deeds of Wonder.

2. And I find (if I consider aright) that you are not only a Plant of God
for your self, but as a pleasant Herb, and Flower does not hold its strength
and virtue within its Self, but does cast forth and diffuse its virtue for a
sweet relish unto all living Or, Things.
Essences; and freely presents it self unto all creatures, what ever become of
it, and so it does not spare it self, but continually produces its power and
smell,

3. And thus I find it to be with the soul of man, which continually grows
and freely yields its power or virtue for him to taste that desires it, and
is capable of receiving its power; be it either to love, or anger, to the life
of God in Christ, or to the life of pride, leading into the utmost drift of
misery, which in the end befalls those that are not grown in God.

4. But prai^e, glory, and honor, unto those who are regenerate in Christ,
who although they do here lose their life, and appear before the Sting of
the Tho^ny Plant as a poor useless Herb, that is trampled under foot; but as
an Herb that is out down and ^s no more seen or discerned, and reason says
it is, quite gone, but for all that it has its root in the Earth, and
springs up; thus likewise the soul of the Saints is engrafted into the holy
life of Jesus Christ, and stands in God his Father, and springs forth
again through Death.

5 At which (seeing we have known the same effectually) we do rejoice; and
therefore we esteem the life of this World, which confisteth in the source of
the Stars and Elements, as the least, and do rejoice that we are the Children
of God.

6. Seeing we know that God is really in us, and yet he is hidden to our
earthly life, therefore we know that our soul is in God, and springs up in
God, and the body is in the Dominion of the Stars and Elements, according to
the source of this World.

7 Thus we are Gods Image and likeness, who himself is all; Should we not
therefore rejoice? Who will separate us from God, if the soul be in God, where
no death or destruction is?

8. Therefore my dear faithful Friend, and Brother in Christ,
I esteem it great joy unto me, that I
have found a precious plant of God of you, of which my soul smelt, and
thereby was strengthened, when the Oppressor would have torn it out of the
Land of the living; when it lay under the Oppressors; and the Thorny Plant^ of
Antichrist intended to devour us.

9 But as God comes to help the branches which stand in him with his power
that they might not perish; albeit Devil and Death do storm against them; so
they must spring forth again through death, and the wrath or fierceness of
the anger and Sting of death; and though God bestow the most noble and precious
herb of his Garden upon it, yet his will must stand; what is sown in him,
that must grow in him.

10. This we know, in that he has given his heart ( Viz. the most precious
plant in himself) to become Man for us to a strong sweet savor of
regeneration in him; that when we were in death, we might be able to spring
forth, with, and through him out of death, in God his Father; and bring forth
the fruits of Paradise.

11. Being then we know that we are the Plants [Fruits or Nurserie] of God, let
us not fear any thing, but continually grow in the life of God, and bring
forth fruit to Gods honor, and deeds of Wonder, we shall enjoy them eternally.

12. And being we know,
that our precious life stands in great danger (between the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Kingdom of Hell; lying Captivall to both, in this time of
life) therefore we must walk warily, and circumspectly; that our Pearl may not
be broken; we must not let the Savor of Sin, iniquity
wrath into us, for to corrupt and spoil us; whereby the precious fruit is
hindered in the growth and God should complain of us; that he is like a
vine-dresser that gleaneth; and would feign enjoy the precious grapes.

13. Therefore let us be watchful to fight against the Prince of wrath; that
the precious Grapes, and fruits of God may grow in us; in which God may have
a good smell and taste; that we may be a Pleasant sweet savor to him in Christ.

14. We shall well enjoy it, when we are rid from the vanity of this life; and
then we shall live and spring up in God, and eat of the pure life of God
without defect; and he will be our food, and we his that so there may be a
pleasant mutual Paradisicall growth in one another, we in God, and God in us;
in the eternal source of the holy life in Gods Nursery; wherein is mere
perfection in pure love.

15. For which cause we labor so earnestly, and suffer the scorn and contempt
of the World, that while our earthly life springs in death, our heavenly life
may spring forth through death, that so the earthly life may appear before the
heavenly as a scorn; which indeed is not worthy to be called a life, comparing
it with the heavenly.

16. And therefore we suffer patiently in the earthly life,
and rejoice, in the heavenly, in hope that we shall be freed from vanity; and
then we shall be well refreshed with consolation; what we have been feign here
to sow in tribulation and trouble, we shall reap in great joy.

17. Wherefore my very dear Brother in the life of God, in which you stand,
you are more acceptable to me, that you have awaked me out the That is By his
writing to him to employ his Talent, for he intended to write no more after his
first B^ok was by force taken f^^m him.
Sleep, that I might go on to bring forth fruit in the life of God, and
afterward to rejoice therein with the Children of God.

18. And I give you to understand, that after I was again awakened, a very
strong Odor was given to me in the life of God; and I h^pe to bring forth
fruit therein, and to awaken the sleepy, as God has awakened me out of the
sleep wherein I lay.

19. And I entreat you for the holy life sake of God in Christ, that for the
future, you would not be faint or weary; but animate, and quicken up your life
in Christ, that our spirits may be apprehended and understood, which cannot be
without the Divine Power.

20. For every one speaks from his Essences in the Wonders of God, according
as his life is enkindled in God; N^te.
and no man can bring us to an understanding, but the only spirit Out of, ^^
p^^^eeding from G^d.
of God, which in the day of Pentecost did in the mouth of the Apostles change
the tongues of all Nations into one, that the languages of all Nations could
understand the tongues ^f the Apostles, whereas they spoke but from one tongue,
but the heart and spirit of the Hearers were opened in God, that they all
understood them every one in his own language, as if the Apostles had spoken
in their language.

21. Thus it is only (...) God that one spirit can apprehend and understand
another; (...) fear me, that in many places of my Writings I shall be
difficult (...) understood; but in God I am very easy and plain to the
Rea^^r, if (...) soul be grounded in God, from which knowledge I only W^^e.

22. For I have ve^^ (...) from the historical Art of this World, and I write
nor for the Pride and Honor sake of their Art, for I am not begotten of their
Art but out of the life of God; that I might bear fruit in the Paradisicall
Rose-Garden of God.

23. And that not for my self only, but for my Brethren, and Sisters; that we
might be one holy body in Christ to God our Father, who has loved and chosen
us before the foundation of the world was laid.

24. Therefore as Christ spared not his life,
and so also his true Disciples, but did freely Preach the Kingdom of God;
albeit they suffered scorn and death in this World for it, and that only for
the sake of the heavenly Kingdom; so must we not fear so much the temporal
scorn and death, for the heavenly life's sake, and so pray, that God would
deliver us from all evil, and give us unity in one mind.

25. But I am sorry that I am so difficult to be understood of you in some
points of my Writings, and I wish that I could impart my soul to you, that you
might apprehend my meaning.

26. For I understand that it concerns the deepest points on which the maine
depends; where I have used some Latin words, but my meaning rests in truth,
not barely in the Latin tongue; but much rather in the Language of Nature.

27. For it is opened unto me in some measure to sound out the Spirits of the
letters, from their very Original; and I would very gladly give you the
meaning and interpretation of those words which I have used, and in which you
have a misunderstanding; but seeing it will take up some room; and now (being
I am in have) it cannot be done; I am very willing to offer my self to give
you a very clear interpretation of them very shortly.

28. For I have been so busied with traveling up and down, and other
affairs, that I could not pleasure you therein: I pray have a little patience
to wait for it.

29. For I have yet so much to do, by reason of my Brothers Daughter (who is
lately dead) that I must run every week into the Country; and was also feign
to make two sore journeys, with which the time is run away.

30. If it please God, that my traveling be once over, I hope, that it shall
do many a poor soul good service in its hunger; yet what God will, be done;
as many a spile of Grass Or, withers.
perishes, when the Heaven gives not its rain; so do worldly affairs
hinder Gods Kingdom.

31. Yet I know at present no other remedy or means to maintain the earthly
body, with Wife and Children; therefore I will use all diligence, and set the
heavenly before all earthly things, as much as lies in my power; and it shall
(if you have a desire to read any thing of my Writings) be faithfully
communicated unto you; albeit I would feign learn of Gods Children, and
refresh my self also in their Writings.

32. For I account my self to be the most simple among them;
I have written only a little for my own remembrance, and Divine exercise;
but seeing you do so please to read it, I have no cause to conceal it from
you.

33. For I acknowledge your great pains, that you bestow therein; and I thank
God, that he in this World has sent me a man with whom I may boldly confer
about Gods Kingdom, whereas else all is full of such blindness and madness,
that I dare scarce open my mouth.

34. I hear the Scoffers, which come along, but care little for their scoffs;
I know what spirits Children they are; I could wish, that they had my
knowledge, and then they would leave their jeering.

35. Concerning the Transcribing of my Writings which I am to send, I cannot
tell whether they may be so safely done by N. for he cannot hold his peace, and
I often hear vain scoffing men speak of my Writings, which I suppose comes
from him, and cannot believe otherwise; for he is only a worldly man, and
borne wholly from the School of this World; we should have little fidelity or
security by him.

36. We should not at first cast the Pearls (seeing they are costly) in the
way, but stay for another time, till they be more common, least the Oppressor
devour them.

37. It may well be handed him to Transcribe, yet not the first time; but after
that it is once copied out, that so the Oppressor may not be able to destroy
the same.

38. Concerning your desire about the Affairs at Prague, where I was present
at the con^^ing in of the new Palsgrave Frederick.
King (that the same is brought into Sagan you have understood that it is
already done) he came in at the Fort upon Retshin of Shlan, and was received of
all the Three Orders with great Solemnity, as the custom has been formerly
among all Kings.

39. I exhort you to heed well what the prophet Ezekiell has written in the
38. and 39. Chapt. whether the time of the great expedition be not at hand upon
the Mountains of Israel in Confused Christendom.
Babel, especially in respect of the Bethlem Ga^^.
Seveberger who should get help from the Turck and very easily come to the
River Rine.

40. Where the great Slaughter of the children of Babel may then come to pass;
where two great rods of God shall appear; the one by War, the other by
Mortality, in which Babel shall be ruined; shows the spirit of the Lord in
all those who have prophesied before us.

41. Although I account the election of a right Germane Emperor must be yet a
little while deferred, and in the mean time great War and Contention; also
desolation of many Cities strong holds, and Potent Countries shall follow, fo
far as even now is the right time, of which the spirit prophecieth; which we
do not so punctually understand.

42. For a thousand years before God is as one day; the spirit sees all
things nigh at hand, and then the The Astrall Spirit, or apprehension of reason.
fidereall man supposes that it will be instantly, yet it stands in Gods
coun^ell.

43. However we know for certain the ruin of the City Babel to be very nigh,
and it appears to us as if the time were even instantly at hand; whereas yet
we cannot fully apprehend the Counsel of God, but as a Pilgrim, that is a day
in a Country cannot learn all, even so it is with us.

44. For God keeps the time and hour to himself; and yet shows by his
spirit, the wonders that are to come.

45. I give you to know, that H. N. has sought to copy out my desired Book;
and seeks to get the right original of the The Aurora. Being then in the
hands of the Common Counsel.
first, the which as I understand shall be effected; it may the most
conveniently be brought forth by N. N.

46. However it be; the The Worldly.
new Antichrist does mightily Triumph in the growth of the The Spiritual.
old, and burns like a fire in Juniper wood; it supposes it is joy; and [a
golden time] but it is in misery; and oppression; and The confused Christendom.
Babel is of a flaming fire.

47. At present being in have, I have no time to write more at large to you;
for there is nothing more as yet begun; yet I hope soon to begin it, as my
mind in the driving will continually shows me; I shall faithfully send it
you at the place appointed

48. And I faithfully commend you into the Meekness of Jesus Christ.

Dated, Thursday after Martinus, 1619.
THE SIXTEENTH EPISTLE.
The open Fountain in the heart of Jesus Christ be our refreshment.
1. NOble, Honored, and much respected Sir, The salutation and kind wish of
Divine love, and fullness of joy in Our Immanuel, in his wonderful sweet
power, together with all temporal prosperity of body premised; I desire to let
you know, that I am certified how you are a Well-wisher to the Text. Fons
Sapientiae.
Fountain of wisdom, and do make use of some of my Writings, and also that
you bear a great desire after the wellspring of Christ, and the Noble
Wisdom, which has moved me to write unto you seeing you have perused some of
my Writings.

2. But there are some found, who out of envy, misapprehension, and
misunderstanding of them do prate and storm against them, as may be seen by
the annexed Pamphlet, how the poor, proud, silly, man, vapoureth, and
stormeth, and yet has not the least understanding whence my writings flow.

3. Yea he puts a false and most strange sense and meaning upon them that he
might thereby only confirm his miserable opinion, for he has spread abroad
some writings concerning Gods Election of us, and thereby thinks to entangle
and snarl us in despair, and so to open a gate of all lewdness, and
wantonness.

4. And therefore he likes not the taste of the open fountain of Christ in my
writings; whereupon I have made short a declaration upon his annexed pamphlet,
and have given it only in breife to the consideration of him that reads my
Book, seeing the ground is else where sufficiently and satisfactorily to be
found in my writings; that men may see how this Carping Pamphletter thinks to
beguil, and bereave us of the chiefest treasure, on which our Eternal
Salvation and happiness depends, and that with Cunning words by alleging
and quoting of the Scripture; as a Toad that sucketh poison out of honey; even
so he Text. Pulls it about by the hair: (pulls it by the ears.)
Perverteth the Scripture; as is to be seen in his description of the Virgin
Mary and the promised seed of the Woman; how he therein falsifiyeth, and
imbittereth the Scripture whereupon he builds the Election.

5. At the which I am much grieved in my heart, that the man is so burdened;
and possessed with such an opinion, which burden is very heavy, and he cannot
get rid of it, unless he learn to understand the Center of all Beings; whence
good and evil arise; what Gods love and anger is, and learn to understand the
Three Principles, else he will not be freed from such Opinions.

6. Albeit I wonder not, that my Writings seem strange unto him; for there is
somewhat New that surpasses the reach of reason, they have another sense,
another understanding then his; another root whence they spring; for I have not
gathered them together from the Letter, neither learned I them from other men's
Writings; I was an ignorant child in that respect, as Lay men usually are; I
knew nothing of such things; I sought it not also in such a way; I sought only
the heart and open wellspring of Jesus Christ, to hide my self from the
Tempest of Gods anger, and from the opposition of the Devil, that so I might
get a guide and leader that might rule and direct me in my life.

7. But when this did press so hard upon me, and my mind forced so strongly
into the Combat against sin, and death; and toward the mercy of God; that I
was resolved rather to part with my life then to give in, or desist; such a
Garland was then set upon me, which I hope to enjoy, and rejoice in it for
ever; and I have no Pen sufficient to describe it; much less can I express it
with my mouth; and from thence my knowledge came, and also the desire to set it
down, only for my own memorial, and I was intended to keep it by me till
the last of my days, and how it came to pass [that it was published] you know
Sir, very well, by Mr. N. But Gods providence and permission herein was such,
that you and your Brother were called as Firstlings unto it, by whose means it
was propagated.

8. Therefore I exhort and entreat you for the eternal salvation sake,
to heed and mind well, the Pearl that God favors us with; for there will
come a time, that it shall be sought after, and greatly accepted of; let no
stormy gusts drive you to and fro; but look upon it aright, and pray God the
most High, that he would be pleased to open the door of knowledge, without
which no man will understand my Writings, for they surpass and transcend the
Astrall Reason; they apprehend and comprehend the Divine birth; therefore there
must also be the very like spirit, to understand them aright; no speculation
[or acute apprehension or notion of reason] reaches them, unless the mind be
illuminated from God, to the finding of which, the way is faithfully shown unto
the seeking Reader.

9. I speak in good truth and syncerity, before God and Man, and appeal also
therewith before the judgment of God, and declare; that there is no good at
all in any Disputing, without Gods light, and spirit, also nothing that is
permanent, constant, undoubtedly grounded, or well-pleasing to God, may arise
from thence.

10. Therefore he that will learn to understand the right and true way to God
fundamentally, let him depart and forsake his own Reason, and enter into a
penitent, humble, and to God resigned childlike, or filial life, and so he
shall obtain heavenly power and skill, and shall put on Christ's filial
spirit, that shall lead him into all truth; else there is no true way to God,
but this only.

11. If it come so far that the The Pearl of Sophia. The Divine illumination.
Virgins Garland be set upon him, he shall not need say any more, Teach me,
etc. For it is written, They shall all be taught of God; otherwise I have no
knowledge skill or understanding; I have been in my Writings as a young scholar
that goes to school; or as a shower that passes by, what it lights upon,
it hits; thus has my apprehension been, even to this day.

12. The Book Aurora was my first childish beginning, I wrote also contrary to
Reasons conceit, only according to the appearance of light; in a magical
[cabalisticall or parabolicall manner] I understood it very well, but it was
not sufficiently explained; it needed a more large description and exposition;
for I intended to have kept it by me, but it was taken from me against my will,
and Published, as you Sir, know; and I commend me into your favor, and us all
into the meek love of Jesus Christ.

Dated the third of July, Anno Dom. 1621.
THE SEVENTEENTH EPISTLE.
Worthy, and much respected, Noble Sir,
1. THE hearty salutation and desire of Divine love and fullness of joy in Our
IMMANVEL, in his wondrous sweet power, with all bodily and temporal welfare
premised: I give you friendly to understand, that I have entirely considered of
the conference lately held; and being I perceive you to be a zealous lover of
the truth, and Divine Mysteries, I would not omit to visit you with this
Epistle, seeing opportunity has been given me to answer somewhat, upon the
Article of a Person, who opposed me in the Article of Gods Free Grace [of]
Election; and I have sent this my Answer for you to read over.

2. But so far forth as the mind cannot rest satisfied with this little; I am
ready, and willing, if it be desired, to write such a Book, and to enlarge, and
unfold it so, out of the Center, that the heart might rest satisfied thereupon;
albeit I should suppose that Christian might find so much in this little that
he might be satisfied in reference to this, and other Articles.

3. But seeing nevertheless that this Article has perplexed many men,
and thereupon such opinions are stated and concluded, which do set open a
gate for all iniquity, unto the World, I am therefore greived at it; being it
is given me to know from the most high, that this article has not as yet been
understood from the very ground, and I wish from my heart, that it might be
understood; that we might not look so strangely one upon another as Men
Devils, but as loving brethren; and the innate, dearly purchased children of
Christ, that we might walk in a right true love one toward another, which in
such a conceit and conjecture, that God chooses one and not another, can never
be done.

4. But if I look upon my brother as my [owne] flesh and spirit, then it may
be truly effected; which the Scripture and also the Original of mankind do
powerfully testify and convince us of; and yet much more my Conscience in the
spirit of the Lord convinces me that I ought to love my brother as my own
life, or as my God; what would God command me to love [one that is] a damned
Devil? no, but [one that is] the member of my [owne] body.

5. Therefore for this cause I have taken an occasion to write unto you and
christianly to entreat and admonish you, better to consider this article, and
in that consideration, not to suffer any thing at all to possess your mind,
or take place in you, save the pleasant Name of Jesus, who is come into this
world and manifested himself in our humanity,
to seek and save us poor lost men dead to the Kingdom of God; and to restore
again, what was lost in Adam.

6. I write not this, to be a master over you, but in a brotherly manner, for a
mutual Search, and recreation with you, that our says, and confidence toward
God, may be strengthened in the Lord for we are on all sides but men, and
should of right behave our selves in Doctrine, and life toward one another, as
members; for he that finds his brother in the spirit of Christ finds
himself.

7. Much disputing is not at all profitable, it makes only confusion; go
with me in my Writings unto the Center of all Beings, and you shall see the Or,
Understanding.
original in good, and evil, and be freed from all this error, for you shall
find so much in my Writings that will give real satisfaction to the mind; so
far as the center of all beings is apprehended there arises such joy in the
mind, which surpasses a^l the joy of this World; for the noble and precious
Or, The Philosophers Stone.
stone of the wise men lies therein, and he that finds it, accounts it of
higher excellency then the outward World, with all its glory; should not that
be joy to find and know God, so that man in himself is able to see and find
all things, and what is scarce deciphered in a thousand Books; and to know it
really in every thing? with whom shall I contend and wrangle about Religion, if
the same be manifest in my heart; that I am able really to behold all things in
there root; and original.

8. I do not speak this to boast of my self; who am as nothing, and God is
all in me, but to the end that if any had a mind to seek; that he might also
seek and obtain; albeit I sought it not in that manner, also understood not,
yea knew nothing of it; I only sought the pleasant love heart of Jesus Christ
to hide my self therein, from the wrathful Anger of God, and the enemy, the
Devil; but then more was revealed to me then I understood, and sought for; and
thence I have written, not thinking to be known withal among such High People.

9. For I thought that I wrote only for my self, and intended to have kept it
by me, even to my end; yet now it is manifest, and come into many men's hands
without my knowledge and endeavor; thereupon I am urged to entreat you and
others, and to put you in mind not to look upon the simplicity or meannesse
of the Author,
or to be offended at the Person; for it pleases the most High to manifest his
counsel by foolish people, which before the World are accounted nothing, that
it may be known and acknowledged that it comes from his hand.

10. Therefore if my Writings come into your hands, I would that you should
look upon them as of a Childs, in whom the Highest has driven his work; for
there is that coached therein, which no Reason may understand or apprehend; but
it is childlike, plain, and very easy to the illuminate; it will not be
apprehended of Reason, unless Reason be enkindled with Gods light; without
that, there is no finding; and this I desire to mind you of, and all tho^ that
read them.

11. Christ said, Seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto
you:
my Father will give the holy Spirit to them that ask him for it: Herein lies
the Pearl hidden, he that will have it must thus obtain it, else there is no
finding, save only an half [lame] blind knowledge, like a delusive shadow of
fancy [or a painted sound] in the Pearl there is a living knowledge, where a
man need never ask, is it true? For it is written, They shall be taught of
God: Also, We will come unto you, and make our abode in you: Also, He that
has not the spirit of Christ is none of his: And therefore Christ says, Seek
first the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof; and then all other
things shall be added unto you: He bids us to endeavor and seek after it;
not to fit still, and wait upon Election; but To come to him, Matthew. 10. and to
labor in his Vineyard; and not wait and expect driving, but to come willingly.

12. Seeing then I have found a wise heart in you, I am the more emboldened to
write unto you, hoping that you will judge wisely; now if any thing in my
Writings should seem dark and obscure, and difficult to be understood; I pray
set it down and send it me as occasion serves; I will make it more childlike,
plain, and clear: And I commend you and yours, and my self with them, in
brotherly union, into the meek tender love of Jesus Christ.

Dated, 3. July, 1621.
THE EIGHTEENTH EPISTLE.
1. NOBLE Sir, After wishing you the Divine love and fullness of joy in Our
Immanuel, in his wondrous sweet power, and all bodily and temporal prosperity;
I friendly certify you, as now opportunity gives me leave, that I have
considered of the Conference we had lately; and being I have observed your
self and others there present in high Divine zeal, as lovers of God, and his
truth; who desire to search with earnestness the Mystery, and ground of all
Beings, and to come into the light; thereupon I would not omit to write unto
you, and put you all in mind thereof; and withal give further advantage to
such zealous seeking, and declare how the Pearl is to be sought and found.

2. For I am also among the Seekers, and it lies me most chiefly in hand, not
to hide, or bury that which God has entrusted me withal, but to set it forth,
that Gods will might be known in us, and his Kingdom might come and be
manifest in our Seeking and Desire; and we might be found as Children of the
most High, one toward another, and acknowledge one another as Members and
Brothers, and not as strangers and Outcasts; or as Devil Men one toward
another, as the Article of Election (as it has of some been hitherto handled)
does give forth and import little less.

3. And albeit we are apprehended and captivated in the heavy fall of Adam in
the Anger, that his Anger has indeed chosen us to be Children of Damnation;
yet God has bestowed his beloved heart, Viz. The Center of the Deity,
thereupon; and has manifested it in the humanity; that he might again
regenerate us in him, and manifest the life again in us.

4. And as the heavy fall came from one upon all,
and passed [or
pressed] upon all; so likewise the grace came from one and passed upon all;
and the Apostle says, that Jesus Christ came into the World to seek, and save
that which is lost; that is, the poor, lost, damned sinner, apprehended in the
wrath of God, and chosen to damnation; and not the righteous, and who with
Abel, Seth, Henoch, Noah, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are comprehended in
the Love; but the poor sinful man captivated of Gods anger; as Cain, Ismael,
Esau, and the like; [he came] to seek and call these, to return, and be
converted; as God said to Cain, rule over the sin let it not have its power; if
Cain could not have done this, God would not have commanded it him; also if it
had not been possible for Adam to have stood; then he had never forbid him the
tree.

5. But being man cannot thus absolutely conclude, demonstrate, and give
satisfaction to the mind; for it searches further after Gods Omnipotence,
thereupon there is another Study requisite; that a man learn really to know
the center of all essences, to love, and anger; what the eternal love of God,
and what the eternal anger of God is, which does harden, and devour man, and
makes him to be a child of eternal death; and how man may and is able in the
time of this life to be freed out of his prison and captivity [of Gods anger.]

6. But Seeing that I have so declared, and set it forth at large in my Books,
that I thought the mind should be satisfied; especially in the Book of the
Threefold life, and in the Three Books of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ; and
yet further and deeper in the Book of the Six points concerning the Grand
Mystery; the eternal birth of the deity; and of the three principles of the
three Worlds, ho^ they stand mutually in each other as one, and how there is an
eternal peace and agreement toward each other; and how one does beget the
other, and desire each other, also that one without the other were a Nothing; I
supposed that the mind would therein find satisfaction, seeing the same can
be demonstrated in every Being, and thing.

7. But seeing Master N. has part of these Writings in his hands, though not
all, be pleased to enquire after them; if they have a mind to them, they shall
not only find the ground of this Article concerning Election, but of all
Articles; and even of all whatsoever the mind of man turns it self unto; if
the ground be followed and attained which is there opened.

8. My Noble heart, I pray take not in jest,
what God manifests unto us out of his Love, look not upon the simplicity of
the men by whom he does this; it is his good pleasure to manifest his might in
the weak and silly, as the World accounts them; it is done for instruction to
the World; seeing all live in contention and strife, and will not suffer his
spirit to draw them, that they might know and acknowledge Gods Kingdom to be
in US; therefore the Center of his Being, and of all Beings is manifested unto
them; this is done all out of his love toward us, that we might yet depart
from the miserable strife, contentions, and wranglings, and step into a
brotherly and child-like Love.

9. Sir, seeing I have found a longing mind in you, I would not conceal from
you; that it will be a time of serious earnestness; and I say, blessed and
happy are those that are comprehended under the Sound of the Trumpet, that has
already sounded; for there comes hereafter such an earnest severity, that
Babel and contention, together with all Pride, Ambition, Falsehood, and
unrighteousness, shall drink an earnest draught, and even that which she
has filled; I entreat you for Eternal Salvation sake, further to consider of
it; it is known.

10. I am ready, so far as the mind might not find ground enough in my
Writings, for its rest and satisfaction (if the same were noted down and sent
me) so to explain, and enlarge it, out of the Center of all Beings, that I
hope the mind should be satisfied; although it lies not in Searching, for no
searching obtains or reaches the Pearl without Gods light; a penitent
humble mind is required thereunto,
that wholly resigneth it self into the grace of God; and that does not
search, or will any thing, save Gods Love and Mercy, in that arises at last
the bright morning Star, that the mind finds such a Pearl, wherein soul
and body rejoy^eth; and when this is found, then there need no further
searching or teaching; for it is written, They shall be taught of God: Such a
Pearl as this the sound of the seventh Trumpet does open in the hearts of
many; who with earnestness shall seek it in a humble, and unto God resigned
will.

11. Therefore my Noble heart, I would not conceal this from you; much
disputing, and grubling in Selfe-Reason, finds not the Pearl; but an earnest
fixed penitent will, finds the same, which is more precious and costly then
the World; and he that finde^ it, he would not give it for the riches of the
whole World; for it affords him Temporal and Eternal joy, that he is able
to rejoice, and be merry in the midst of the Dungeon of darkness, and he
accounts the goods of this World as dirt and dung in comparison of it: Christ
said, Seek, and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you: Also,
My Father will give the holy Spirit to them that ask him for it: HEREIN LIES
THE GROUND.

12. Let no man say, My heart is shut up I cannot pray; and if my heart say
flatly no, yet I will cast my self into the suffering and death of Christ; let
him cast me into Heaven or Hell, yet I will be in his death, he is made an
Eternal life to me; and then, it is said, None can pluck my Sheep out of my
hands.

13. The way to seek and know the precious Pearl is very sufficiently opened
in the Book of the Threefold life, else I would have mentioned something
thereof: And I commend me into your favor, and us all into the meek love of
Jesus Christ.

Dated, 2. July, 1621.
THE NINETEENTH EPISTLE.
1 NOBLE, Worthy, and honored Sir: All sincere wishes (through the Love of
Christ wherewith he loves us in himself by his Incarnation in us) of an
happy, and in God joyful new year, and all bodily welfare premised.

2.
I am glad of your bodily health, and yet much more glad am I, that I observe,
how the drawing of the Father in the spirit of Christ does continually stir
up and work in you a constant hunger after the precious Pearl of the Divine
knowledge, which (being it happens in the tree and growth, wherein I also
spring up and grow) does bring to me (as from a fellow-branch in our Angelical
Paradificall Coral) mere desire, and acceptable Love will; and it rejoices me
in my meditation, that the spirit of Christ has yet his Church and Temple in
the midst of the thorns, as it now appears; and I wish from my heart with
panting desires, that it might flourish and grow yet stronger; that Babel, and
the Kingdom of contention and strife might thereby be abolished and taken
away, that we might converse and walk together in love and union as the
Children of Christ.

3. I should be glad withal my heart, seeing you read some of my Writings,
that they might be understood according to my comprehension, and mind not for
a temporal praise, and glory to me, which is in Christ only, and not mine;
but for our eternal fellowship and fraternity sake, which we shall have in
General one with another after this life.

4. And I would very heartily impart to my loving brethren my Pearl which God
has given me, that they also with me might in Divine knowledge and love bring
in their fruits upon the table of God, which work and labor is more
acceptable to me then all the temporal praise, honor, and goods of the World.

5. And though I am in comparison to you as a child void of understanding, yet
my Savior has been pleased out of his love and grace to bestow his sense,
mind, and understanding upon me and to open it through himself,
that I effectually know him and his will.

6. Which [albeit it seems foolishness unto reason] is as clear as the
sunshine unto me, and it affords me joy, and desire, that I in all
temptations and afflictions from the Devil, and his confederates am able boldy
and confidently to hide my self therein; and my hope is therein stirred up and
enkindled with Gods love-fire; and I have as it were a fair Garden of roses
therein, which I do not only beteem unto my brethren to partake of; but I
also desire, and wish from my heart, that the golden roses might also blossom
in them.

7. I have understood how that you are yet solicitous and troubled in the
Article about the will of God and his Election of mankind, and are yet in a
deep conceit in reference to the Decree concerning man, as if God chose some
according to his purpose, and some again he chose not out of his decree and
purpose, and therefore he draws them not in the spirit of Christ to the
Father; or that the father draws them not in Christ; which for my part has
very often perplexed me, and I wish unfeighnedly that it might be apprehended,
how the ground is in its own property.

8. For the words of the Scripture are right, and true about Election, but they
are not understood aright; and thence comes the great Evil and Mischeife
with contending, and eager contests; when I go into the center, then I find
the whole ground; there is nothing so subtle, or profound, there is nothing
that can be asked about the will of God but it is manifest therein as clear as
the sun.

9. For I find the whole understanding both of good and evil;
of Gods love, and anger; both desires [ Viz. of the darkness and of the
light] these I set into the humanity of Christ, how God is become man; and I
consider how the forms of the humane properties in the humanity of Christ,
were wholly and universally without particularity tinctured with the love of
God in Christ, with the eternal word or voice of the deity (that is with the
Divine mercury) with Divine essentiality (namely in the blood of Christ,) and
the wrath which was manifest with Adam in the humane property was wholly
drowned* and shut up in eternal death; of which the Scripture now declares;
Hell where is thy Victory? Death where is thy sting?


10. As the Artist, or Philosopher does change Saturn, and Mars, in the
Mercury, (which in Saturn and Mars in their own fierce wrathful Or,
Strength.
might, is an evil poysonfull source or quality) into a Panacea, that is into
a Paradificall source and property, where neither Saturn, Mars, or Mercury
are perceived in their wrathful properties; but out of their fierce wrathful
Malignant property there,
is an ascension of love and great joy; thus it is now also with the evil man,
when he departs out of his wrathful, malicious will, and in resignation
wholly gives himself in the death of Christ into the Panacea (Christ.)

11. And as the sun in the Firmament shines upon the good and evil, so
likewise the desire of the Panacea Christ (being the Divine sun that shines
therein) presents it self to all men; if they would but open their will, and
depart from their selfehood, and set there desire into that, Christ would be
borne therein.

12. For the soul (as it is purely in it self) was spoken or breathed into the
humane body out of the eternal speaking word of the Father out of the fire and
light World, as out of Gods own Being, and it has both wills Free; out of the
fire (that is, out of the Fathers anger, which is the eternal nature, in which
she is a creature, in the spiritual Sulpher, Mercury, and Salt,) and out of
the light of the Divine power in the Divine sound, in which the soul is an
Angel, and an Image of God.

13. And though it has lost the light with Adam,
yet Christ has regained the same; and has again moved or awakened the center
of love, that the life of the light (if it stirs up its desire) may again in
the humanity of Christ (which passes from one upon all, as the anger passes
from one upon all) enkindle it self.

14. And though it might be said, that he enkindleth whom he pleases; yet I
declare it as a precious truth worthy of acceptance, that the Divine light is
not ingressive [or a light coming into a man from without] but it is hidden
even in the wicked man in the Center; as God is hidden in the time,
but it is Arisive [that is a light springing up or opening it self from
within] as the light of the Candle arises out of the Candle.

15. Man is not so altogether corrupt [forlorne, or decayed] that there should
not be any possibility at all left in him; and though he be corrupt, and
sp^yled; yet God (when he received and took pity on man) again stirred up, and
awakened the Center of his Love (being the true Deity which hidd it self [or
disappeared] in the Sin [or fall of Adam]) in the humane Property.

16. And as the Sin and Wrath of Adam (being yet but One) pressed upon and
into all;
so likewise passed and pressed the motion [or affection] of Gods love in
Christ humanity, and out of Christ's humanity through the whole humanity of all
men.

17. Christ is again become the heart in the Humane Tree; the Divine Sound
[voyce, or word] which has revealed it self in Christ's humanity effectually,
that sounds through Christ's humanity in the Universal humane Tree; and there
is nothing wanting, or in the way, but that the twig which is on the Tree will
not draw the Sap of the Tree into it self.

18. It happens oftentimes, that the property is too much in love with Mars,
and draws it into it self, and stirs up the heat, whereby the twigg
withers; and so the Mars of the soul draws wrath and falsehood into it
self; whereby its Mercury becomes poysonfull, and then Saturn (which is the
impression of the life's property) grows altogether obscure and dark; and as
long as the Mercury of the life, lives in such a property, he may not be
drawn of the love of God, but of the anger of God, and is chosen to damnation,
so long as he lives, or continues in that Free evil wicked will.

19. The love of God offers it self unto him, but he refuses to accept of it;
God is desirous of him; but the wrath holds dim: As Christ said, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem! How often would I have gathered thy Children, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, but you would not?

20. The unwillingnesse lies in the way; that man in his life lets himself
be kept or held of Gods anger, being the wrath in the out-spoken [or expressed]
Mercury, according to the fiery Property of the Father.

21. Dear Brother, here lies the wicked Child; learn but to know what God
Almighty is in Love and Anger; and how Man is even that same Being, and an
Image, out of the Eternal Spirit.

22. Do not say, God wills the evil; he cannot will or desire any thing
that is evil; according to the property, in which he is called God; but if I
should call this property [ Viz. of Anger] God; then I call Hell, Heaven;
darkness, light; and the Devil an Angel.

23. True, all belong unto God [or all is Gods] yet God is only understood in
the Source [or working property] of the love of the light; the Anger is in his
light a cause of the love-desire, and of the Kingdom of joy.

24. When the soul brings its fire desire out of its own selfewill into the
Love-desire of God; and goes out of its own selfenesse, and sinketh into the
mercy and compassion of God, and casts it self into the death of Christ; and
wills no longer the firesource, but desires in its fire life to be dead in
the death of Christ; then the poison of the Mercuriall life dies in the will
of iniquity, and there arises a new twigge, and budding of love-desire.

25. Loving Sir, and Brother, know, that I write not as one blind or dumb,
without knowledge; I have my self found it by Experience: I have been as
deep in your opinion as your self: yet my Savior has opened my eyes, that I
see: I do not see in my own ability or power but in his; as he knows me in
himself, and he will see; and I wish with all my heart, that you might have an
insight into my seeing; and that you might see with me out of my seeing; I
would willingly impart my heart and love to you for a propriety, and look
through this glass out of you.

26. But I perceive that I am as yet dumb unto you, and that I am not as yet
known to you, in my knowledge which is given me; and I wish from my heart,
that it may yet [once] be.

27. I entreat and exhort you as a Christian, in all humility that you would
but gather your Objections together, and send them to me in Writing; I will
deal according to my gifts, as a Christian ought, and I will declare and
explain them in such a manner, that I hope you shall acknowledge me as a
Brother in it.


28 Not that I presume to do it from my self,
but my desire which burns in me like fire, requires it of you; and I (as I am
I) hope to God that we shall both so prosper in it, that God will unite us in
his love-desire and knowledge; and it shall not prejudice you at all, with
scorn or disgrace; for I have a heart that can conceal Secrecy.

29. I exhort you in love to a filial humility in the true Resignation of
Christ; therein you may be able only to obtain and comprehend it; otherwise
my well-wishing, good intent, and beginning is to no purpose; for I can give
you nothing but my good affection, and charitable will; if you will accept of
it, it is well! If not, I protest, and testify before you, and the face of GOD
that I have begun my christian devoir aright toward you, and in you; I have
done my part; as I am bound in Conscience to do.

30. I may come to see you my self, if my affairs will permit; provided that
it may conduce to Gods Honor and man's Salvation; for I know many thirsty
souls thereabouts, with whom I might refresh my self, and they in me.

31. I have at present found a very precious Jewel, which might be profitable
not only for the soul but for the body, and good for your Patients.

32. If men would labor in Christ's vineyard, God might even now give us such a
sunshine, which might warm the Apothecaries shop, of which many honest People
have been a long time desirous; which sunshine would boldly dispell the smoke
in Babel and be a refreshment to the Children of Christ in their Oppression,
Misery, and Tribulation.

33. But in truth because men will be so Wicked and Godless, there shall be an
horrible storm of hail, and rain, at which the Earth shall quake, and many
thousand souls be drowned in the water.

34. I would gladly here mention somewhat unto you, but at this time it cannot
be; be pleased to take notice of the storm toward the East, that toward the
North, is not far from it; in the South, there is a great smoke, that causes
the eyes of those in the West, to smart.

35, Let no man say, when the storm passes by, that this man, or that man is
righteous before God; it shall go well with him because of his Religion? the
anger of God is enkindled in all, and they are all alike unto him for all their
Religion, as long as the one lives like the other.

36. The most High sweepeth out one besom with another;
but there springs up a Lilly unto all nations; happy are those, that
apprehend the same.

37. The thirsty soul must not say; the Lord has forsaken me, he has
forgotten me; as little [can God forget] as a Mother can forget her child, and
albeit she should forget; yet the Lord has not forgotten his poor exceeding
distressed and afflicted Christendom, he has noted her in his wounds peirced
with nails, his light shall shine from the East to the West for a Testimony
unto all People.

38. From the South there arises a Lilly toward the North; Note
he that gets it for a propriety [or for his owne] shall sing the song of
Gods mercy; and at that time the Word of the Lord flourishes as grass upon
the Earth and the Nations sing the Song of Babel in one Tune; for the beginning
has found the end.

39. Think upon my dark sayings, for at this time I might not be more plain;
seeing men have only sought after Pride,
and coveteousnesse, and despised the mirror of Anger; and have not repented,
but have wrought iniquity with iniquity, until iniquity devoures it self, and
the wrath of God is well satiated.

40. Humane Reason shall here hinder little with its Consultations; but blow up
the fire, and give further occasion.

41. God was good before distress; but seeing men forsake God, thereupon
follows scorn and misery.

42. Let every one have a care of himself;
but he that does not seek and preserve himself shall be sought, and
preserved: And so I commit you into the Love of Jesus Christ.

THE TWENTIETH EPISTLE.
Our Salvation in the life of Jesus Christ in US.
1. NOBLE Sir, etc. All Cordial wishes of Divine light in effectual Divine
working power, in the fountain of Love, Jesus Christ, and all temporal
prosperity premised: I thought good to visit you with an Epistle, and to put
you in mind, out of a Christian faithful intent and affection, of the
Conference between H. N. and D. S. about the Divine purpose, and will,
concerning Man.

2, And D. S. was not sufficiently answered at that time, upon his question;
being I was not exercised in their Scholastic way, in reference to this
Article in the contemplation of the internal ground, through the outward
ground; and also because such meetings by reason of the Drink (to which I am
unaccustomed) do darken,
and cloud the subtle, and pure understanding.

3. Also by reason of their Latin tongue [or Scholastique expressions] I was
hindered to comprehend the same in his ground; in so much that he began to
triumph with his received Opinion; yet without sufficient understanding of the
alleged sayings of Scripture, and also without sufficient ground of Logical
conclusions in Reason, in which verily he is excellently well exercised, in
their Scholastique way.

4. With which discourse afterward I turned my self in Divine grace to the
internal ground of Divine Vision, to prove the same; and prayed unto the Lord
that he would open the understanding of the whole ground thereof unto me, that
I might know the same in its proper and peculiar Species.

5. Whereupon it appeared so unto me, that I (by a Divine introduction into the
wonderful works of God) have sufficient cause and ground therein; whereby
also it came upon me with great desire, to set down this Ground of the Divine
will and eternal purposes in Predestination, and to bring it into a Book; the
which afterward, being it was desired of Mr. B. T. and others, I took
occasion to do.

6. Not to the intent to despise any body in his Opinion, or to undertake to
prejudice him with any unchristian disgrace, or girding taunts; but out of a
faithful real Christian affection, and brotherly imparting of my Talent, lent
me of God.

7. Which work is so deeply and profoundly grounded, Note. What is contained
in the Book of Election.
that not only the ground of this Question concerning Gods will may be
understood; but likewise the hidden God may be known in his manifestation in
all visible things, with a very clear explanation how the ground of the Grand
Mystery (which is the eternal expressed word of God, wherein the wisdom has
wrought from Eternity, and wherein all things have been seen in a Magical
manner or Idea, without any creaturall being) is to be understood.

8. And also how the same Grand Mystery has brought it self through the
expression or outspeaking of the divine Science,
through the Word of God (in the place of this World) into a severation and
comprehensibility to the Creation; and how the original of good and evil in
the Severation of the Divine Science in the Grand Mystery, in the Eternal
Principles, to the Divine manifestation, and working, is to be understood.

9. In which the hidden God, may not only be understood in his Being and will,
but likewise the whole ground of his manifestation through his expressed Word,
out of the eternal Powers of the Grand Mystery, being the Essence of Eternity;
and how the same is come into a visible, comprehensible, creaturall, external
Being; and what likewise the ground of all Mysteries is? And how the same is
sufficiently made known and manifest.

10. Also therein is a large expositive ground of the Spiritus Mundi.
Cosmick Spirit, wherein the Creation of this World lives; and withal, a very
clear ground of the internal, spiritual, Angelical, and soulish life; also
of the rise, fall, and restitution of man; and also of the Typifications of the
Scripture in the Old and New Testament, concerning the Kingdom of Nature and
the Kingdom of Grace; what Gods righteousness, and his Election, or purpose
is; how the same is to be understood?

11. Also a clear demonstration of the Line in the Kingdom of Nature, from
Adam upon his Children; and of the Kingdom of the manifestation of grace in
the inspired Grace voice of the incorporized Divine Science, in the Word of
Love, in the womb of Grace.

12. And then a clear explanation of the places of Scripture; especially of
The 9. 10. 11. Chapters of the Epistle of Paul to the Romans: On which, reason
props up it self, where a full Or, Sensible, or perceptible.
Sensall ground is demonstrated by the quotation and examination of the
Scriptures.

13. Yet not in a Logical way, as it is treated on in the Schools; where they
make only Objections and Contradictions one against another, contriving knotty
Arguments, and Dilemma's; and the one will not prove and examine the ground and
meaning of the other in a Sensall way in the understanding; whereupon they
bang, urge, judge, condemn for a Heretic, and revile one another; which
indeed is nothing else but Babel, a Mother of proud, haughty, grand Whoredom,
of errors and confusion; where the Name of God is blasphemed, and the holy
spirit is reviled and judged by Reason, in the literal Word.

14. Which I wholly disliked of to follow in my Talent; for not one jot or
tittle of the Law in the Scripture shall perish till all be fullfilled; and the
sayings of the Scripture together with there types must remain true, and be
not contrary, as reason supposes.

15. And thereupon I have taken those sayings of Scripture which seem contrary
one unto another (as, it is written; God will that all men shall be saved; and
then again God hardneth their hearts, that they understand not albeit they see
it) and so cleared and reconciled them together; that I hope to God, and his
Children; that they will see the Divine manifestation of grace, and understand
it, and depart from such strife and controversy about the will of God, and the
person of Christ, and see the Justification of a poor sinner before God; and
learn to understand it.

16. which I have faithfully and diligently done toward every one according to
my gifts, out of a christian brotherly heart; with a further Offer, that if any
should yet stick in such a conceit and opinion, and were not satisfied in his
thoughts; that he would in a Christian and friendly way set down his opinion
with his conclusions thereupon in writing, and send them to me; and he shall
receive such an answer upon his Questions and objections, that he shall see,
that I meant christianly, and that it came from a Divine gift.

17. Seeing Sir, that you together with your Brother Mr. H. S and likewise the
deep learned Doctors J. S. and J. D. K. are my very much respected Friends,
and in the Life-Tree of Christ my Eternal fellow members and Brethren in
Christ; and I as a fellow-member (from a religious heart) do rejoice also with
them, seeing God has adorned and endowed them with understanding, and
wisdom, and other Christian Virtues; whom likewise I have acknowledged
always as my favorable, charitable, and gracious Maesters; thereupon I have
taken order that they should get a copy of this Treatise among them, desiring
and entreating them to deal one with another, in a Christian brotherly way,
and communicate it to each other for the transcribing of it, by reason of
greater employments of my Talent, and that would be an hindrance to me; else I
would have sent to each a copy of it.

18. Yet if this Treatise should be intercepted and not come unto their hands,
then I will send them my own Manuscript; and I entreat them that they would be
pleased to read it over and consider it without prejudice or irksomeness; they
shall find such rich sense and meaning therein, that it will be profitable to
them in many things, but especially in the Christian exercise of the New birth.

19. And wherein I can be further serviceable to them in my small gifts, I
shall be mindful always faithfully to perform the same, as an obliged
Christian, in thankful gratefulness of their good affections, uprightness,
candor, and favors toward me.

20. And albeit I am a man of no repute, in respect of their greatness or
highness, and also in respect of D. D. yet let them but for a while a little
shut up Reason, and think that it pleases the most High to manifest his
wonders by simple people; and [such as are] accounted foolish in the Worlds
eye; as it has come to pass from the beginning of the World hitherto, when
Alterations have been to come.

21. Sirs, know for certain, that I will not be wanting in giving an answer
unto any man's high or profound questions, if they be virtuous, apt, and
Christian; for the same is committed to me in trust from the most High,
and given as a free gift of grace.

22. The which I mention in a Christian intent and affection, that if any had
yet any scruple in that opinion [to see] whether I in love could help him to
quit himself of it, and bring him into the Temperature of the mind; I should
not think any pains too much to impart my gifts and understanding to him: And
so I commend you and yours into the Love of Jesus Christ, and my self into
their favor.

Dated, 20. Feb. 1623. A POSTSCRIPT.
23. The tribulation, and destruction of Babel approaches with exceeding have,
the storm arises upon all Coasts; it shall be a soar Tempest; vain hope
deceives; for the breaking of the Tree is at hand; which is known in the
wonders.

24. The Domestic intestine.
homebread fire hurts its own native country; righteousness and truth are
troaden under foot; great heaviness trouble and Calamity grow on apace.

25. Men shall mourn for an old empty ruinous Cottage on which Salvation
relyeth not; they will be enraged for the Nest wherein Satan has hatched his
Pride, coveteousnesse, envy, wrath, and all falsehood, under an holy show of
Religion.
young.

26. The Tower of Babel is without foundation; men suppose to prop it up, but a
wind from the Lord overthrows it.

27. The hearts and thoughts of men shall be revealed; for there comes a Or,
Proof.
Proba from the Lord whereby the verbal Titular Christian shall be laid open in
his false heart, and soul; as a reed that is tossed too and from of the wind;
seeing his heart is wavering, now this, now that way; that his false ground
becomes manifest.

28. Many shall betray themselves, and ruin both body, and goods, through
Hypocrisy; the Hypocrites, and titular Christians shall quail for fear when
their false ground shall be revealed.

29. The Oriental The Turck shall turn a true Christian.
Beast gets an humane heart; and ere this comes to pass,
he helps to tear down the Tower of Babel with his Claws.

30. In the darkness of the North there arises a Sun which takes its light
from the sensall properties of the nature of all beings; from the formed,
expressed, and re-expressing word; and this is a wonder at which all Nations
do rejoice.

31. An The Emperor of Germany.
Eagle has hatched young Lions in his Nest; and brought them prey so long, till
they have grown Great; hoping that they should likewise bring their Prey to
him again; but they have forgotten that; and they take the Eagle, and pluck of
his Feathers, and bite of his Claws for unfaithfullnesse; so that he can fetch
no more prey albeit he should Starve for hunger.

32. But they fall out about the Eagles nest and tear one another in anger;
till their anger becomes a fire, which burns up the nest; and this is from
the Lord of all beings.

33. If the Rich man knew upon what foundation he stood, he would enter into
himself, and look unto his latter end.

34. The Sun gives to many things life, and likewise to many things death.

35. But he that lies still in Self-will; and gives way for his internal
ground (out of which man is originally,) to lead and guide him, he is the
Noblest, and richest upon the Earth.

36. The Postilion arising out of the ground of nature, comes, and carries
the Sword over the Earth; and has six winds for his assistants, which for a
long time have ruled upon the Earth; these break the Postilions Sword through
the Revelation of the Seventh wind, which they always kept hidden in them;
but by reason of the Postilions Power, they must call and manifest him.

37 Which Seventh wind a new fire reveals, and at this time the fountain of
grace shall flow with sweet water,
and the afflicted and oppressed shall be refreshed.



THE ONE AND TWENTIETH EPISTLE. TO FREDERICK CRAUSSEN,
DOCTOR OF PHYSIC.
Our Salvation in the life of Jesus Christ in US.
1. DEAREST Sir, Christian, and faithful Friend, I wish unto you and yours,
and all those who Desire and Love Jesus (in all faithful real Cooperating
Love-desire,) the light, and effectual working power of God in our Life-Tree
Jesus Christ; together with all bodily welfare.

2. Upon the desire of your self, and Mr. N. I have considered those sayings
of scripture, which Mr. N. set down in his Letter, which you delivered to me;
wherein I was exhorted to expound the same in Christian love, according to my
gifts and understanding; but especially the ninth and eleventh Chapter of the
Epistle of Paul to the Romans; at which Reason stumbleth; which I have not
only done willingly, and readily in Christian obligation and good affection
with expounding those alleged Texts; but I have also set down and described
the true GROUND of the Divine Manifestation in such a manner, that I hope, men
will see the truth.

3. But if there be a mind divinely bent, and addicted that can give the
honor unto God; I hope it will be understood, and taken according to my
meaning, and apprehension; and not otherwise interpreted, as was done formerly;
which I pass over, and rather prefer christian love, as we are bound in Christ
to instruct one another friendly in our several gifts and therein give God the
honor, and despise none in his Divine gifts, for he that does so, he
blasphemeth the holy spirit; and against such a one the Scripture pronounces
an hard sentence

4. Now although this Treatise be somewhat large, yet let not the Reader
account it tedious and irksome; for I thought it of little importance for me to
go about to prove and clear such a writing without sufficient ground; and
therefore I have set the alleged places of Scripture upon the inner most
ground; and shown how they Originally arise out of their center; and what
their sense and understanding is.

5. For it is not enough,
that I should gather together a great heap of scripture places for to oppose
and contradict the alleged; no, no; this avariseth nothing before God, and
the truth; for the least tittle, or letter of this Law shall not pass away
till all be fulfilled says Christ; the sayings of the scripture must remain
true, and not clash one against another; and though they seem to be contrary,
and gainsay one another; yet it is only to those, to whom the understanding of
them is not given; and are not gifted, or made capable to explain and interpret
them.

6. But he that will undertake clearly to interpret them aright, he must have
the understanding of the Accordance; that he may know how to reconcile those
places which unto reason seem contradictory; and not transfer or place them
upon a conjecture, or opinion; whether it be so or no; if he will teach
fundamentally and assuredly thereof; for from opinion and conjecture arises
only strife and controversy; upon which great Babylon is erected, Viz. the
spiritual pride, and Whoredom; where one will be an Apostle; and yet is not
sent or acknowledged of God; but he runs in opinion and in the driving [or
instigation] of the Spiritus Mundi.
Cosmick Spirit.

7. And albeit many run in the Drawing of the Father; yet if the true light
of the eternal life in the word of the Divine essence (being an expressing or
spiration of the holy, and also of the natural word in its severation, whence
the creation is arisen, and whence good and evil have their Original,) does
not appear unto, and illuminate him; he will be far from being able to unite
the supposed contraries of the Scripture-sayings, and to speak from ONE center
so, that not the least tittle be diminished in the Accordance [or reconcilement
of them.]

8. The which I set down, not to displease N. or any other; but only by
reason of the long continued opposite disagreement of reason, in which the
World runs astray, and truth lies Veiled; whereby men in this article about
the will of God do so judge, and run on in reason and its reasonings without
ground: but where Christ is borne in man, there strife cease, and God the
Father speaks his Word in Christ through the soul of man; to such
conclusions [and reasonings] there must be an inward divine light, which
affords certainty; else there is no grounding upon the reason.

9. You may get this Treatise of Mr Michael of Ender, who has now received it,
which contains in my own hand Writing about 42, sheets; and if you are
pleased to communicate the same to N, as your good friend and Kinsman, I am
content; provided, that you tell him that he would not understand it so, as if
I had written anything therein passionately against him,
or any other; for such passions or affections lie not so near in my soul,
without Urgent and great cause; albeit I am not without failings, and
declinings, yet my Savior Christ in me has shown me such grace,
that all invectives and opposite objections against me, (by one word which
proceeds out of Divine love toward n^e, where I perceive a divine
earnestness) do fall away and are rejected as a weed, which I would not
willi^gly plant in my Garden; for from thence grows nothing but a naughty
weed again.

10. Further it is again desired of N, out of christian love, that seeing upon
his desire I have expounded his alleged places of Scripture according to my
small gifts, which are known unto God; he would be pleased (if this my
exposition did dislike him, and were not in his opinion sufficiently grounded
and fundamental) to do me so much favor as to expound the alleged texts.
especially the 9. and 10. Chapter of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans and even
those very Scriptures which I have explained; together with the whole ground of
the Divine will to good and evil; how its original is in man, or out of man;
and un^old and declare them in a sensall manner,

11. And then I desire that he would declare and expound unto me, the inspired
word of grace, in the seed of the Woman in Paradise; and then the two lines;
Viz. Of the Kingdom of the Corrupt humane nature, and of the Kingdom of grace
in the in-spoken voice of grace.

12. Or if my exposition in respect of Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, and also of
Jacob, and Esav, did not like him; that he out of christian love would show his
gifts, and expound the ground of them, that I might find his gifts, and
understanding in those places; and then if I can see that God has gifted him
with a larger measure of understanding in these high Mysteries then me I will
accept it with great gladness and will love him in his gifts and give thanks
unto our God therein,
and I will rejoice with him, as a member, in our gifts, in the spirit of
Christ all which would conduce more to the profit, and benefit of our brethren,
and christian fellow members; and would be more Godly, commendable and
praiseworthy, then a raw contradiction, out off affections, for man's wilful
self sake.

13. But I pray unto my God in Christ, that he would be pleased to open his
heart that his soul may see into the ground of my gifts; for truly I am a
simple man; and I never either studied or learned this high Mystery; neither
sought I after it in such a way, or knew any thing of it; I sought only the
heart of love in Christ Jesus,
but when I had obtained that, with exceeding great joy of my soul, then this
Treasure of divine and natural knowledge was opened, and given unto me;
wherewith I have not hitherto vaunted, but heartily desired and begged of God
whether the time were yet come that this knowledge might be revealed in the
hearts of many, concerning which I obtained my effectual answer; so that I
know very well what I have hinted, and made mention of [in my writings.]

14. And though I am therefore hated by many in the World; yet men will shortly
see; wherefore God has opened and revealed unto a lay, mean [abject] man the
grand Mystery; Viz. The ground of all secrets and Mysteries; and yet I may not
reveal all that is made known unto me; but notwithstanding it might be done
unto worthy People, if I found that it were Gods will, and profitable to men,
as a while since a very precious Pearl was revealed to me, which has its time
for effectual practical use and benefit; but it is always a benefit very
profitable in my soul; and do not so much wonder and marvel at the
simplicity of what God does; for the time of the proud is come to the end.

15. Further I desire and entreat Mr N, to deal christianly and heartily, in
love, with his gifts; and not as formerly to taunt and scandalize my name;
whereby the gifts of the holy Ghost are evil spoken of; and then he shall be
answered in like modesty, mildness, and respect; but if it shall fall out
contrary to my good inten^ and hope that I be further scandalized by People, or
with writings, let him know (that if I either see or hear the same with certain
ground,) that he shall not want an answer to purpose, in a Divine gift; and he
shall have no advantage or praise thereof.

16. And I mean syncerely; and I do exhort him out of christian love and
obligation to answer; if he will not declare and explain those places in a
sensall large answer; then let him reconcile the contraries which seem to be
one against another; and so we shall mutually exchange our gifts, and bring
them into one ground, to the love and profit of our brethren.


17. And I commend you and yours, and all those who seek and desire the child
Jesus into the effectual working love of Jesus Christ [desiring] that he may
be conceived incarnate, and borne in all, and then strife and contention has
an end; when the seed of the Woman breaks the head of the Serpent, we come
again into the Temperature; and are in Christ only one; as a tree in many
boughs, and branches.


Dated, Feb. 19. Anno 1623.
THE TWO AND TWENTIETH EPISTLE.
1. MUCH respected Sir,
and loving Doctor, be pleased to give Mr. N. my Letter to read over, but not
this Note; and exhort him to Christian humility; to try if peradventure the
eyes of his soul might be opened, which I heartily and freely wish unto him,
it will be no disgrace unto him to love, and embrace the truth; for I perceive
very well what lies in the way, and holds him off; nothing else but self-love,
in that he has hitherto laid open and divulged his ground so far; and obtained
great repute and respect among many, and this my ground does not wholly agree
with him; thereupon self love drives him to the contrary; whereas he has not
as yet apprehended my Ground, and is as yet an Infant thereunto.

2. But if the Honor of God and member like love,
do take place in his affections, he has in truth nothing against me, and my
Writings; yea they might yet better and christianly improve him, but without an
affectionate will, he will remain blind in them; for no reason understands this
ground without the eternal love of God; wherein all the treasures of wisdom
are couched.

3. But what his opinion is, I pray send me word back again, in a Letter; his
hidden ground is hereby opened; I hope that he also will become seeing, being
he has otherwise a sharp reason, and has well studied the Logic;
peradventure he will search further, but if he will not, his opinion does not
abrogate the gifts of God; he cannot overthrow this my ground, especially the
Exposition of those Texts, with any Scripture; I mean syncerely toward him.

4. Moreover I would entreat you to show me this friendship, as to send the
Treatise of Election to Mr. N. to read over, seeing he is a courteous Gentleman,
and also the Disputation of this Article, came off so with him, that it is not
so to be looked upon, as if man were struck dead in ignorance.

5. But if need require, I shall so explain my self, that they shall see from
what ground I write; let them give me what Questions they please; let them be
in Nature, or out of Nature, in the Time, or in the Eternity, I will not at all
be lacking therein, in Divine Grace, but give a sufficient answer; provided
that it be done in a Christian way, and not out of affections, passion,
cavilling, or reviling; I shall in like manner deal with them.

6. In our late meeting I was ill disposed to such a Disputation, for Wine,
and sumptuous fare do hide the Pearl's ground, especially because I am not
accustomed thereunto, and at home I fare very meanly and soberly; and Mr. N.
was not sufficiently answered; but I offer to answer him, and all other that
mean Christianly; let them but give me their Questions in writing, and explain
their opinion therein, that I may see what they conclude; I will give them a
fundamental large expositive answer, and not defend my self with any Sect or
Sectarian Name, or Patronize my self therewith, in the ground of truth, not a
Flaccinian as N. supposes, but I shall stand in the ground.

7. For I teach no Self ability without Christ, to atteine the Adoption as N.
thinks, only I am not satisfied with his opinion, much less with Mr. N. N*
which wholly clasheth against the Scripture; for I am dead to all opinions in
me, and have nothing but what is given me of God to know; and I leave all you
to judge whence I know what it is; that I as a Lay, Illiterate, unexercized man
have to do with you, who are bred up in the high Schools, and must set my
self against Learned Art, and yet in my reason I know not, without Gods
knowing,
to attain thereunto, but I look upon what God does; but in the ground of my
gift^ I know well enough what I do in this purpose and intention; and yet it
is no intention in me; but thus the time does bring it forth, and thus HE, who
rules all things, does drive and order it.

8. Concerning our secret discourse (as you know) you must yet be patient to
go on in that known pro^esse a good while;
and in this beginning no other will be admitted; it may well, in the seventh
year, be accomplished in this process; for it must be opened through all the
six Properties of the spiritual Ground; albeit it is already opened through
the Sun, yet the Key is scarce come into the first or second degree of the
Center of nature; for each property among the six forms of the spiritual life
has a sundry or peculiar Sun in it, from the strength, influence, and
original of the light of nature; that is, of the Essential Sun, and are to
be opened in order, as their birth and original is.

9. First, Saturnes Sun is opened through the Key of the outward Sun; that
the Severation of nature is discerned. Secondly, Jupiters Sun is opened, and
then the powers are discerned,
as a blossoming Tree, and hither to you are come.

10. Thirdly; Mars, Viz. the fire-soule is opened, and then Virgin Venus
appears in her white robes, and plays with the soul to see if it might
move the same to the desire of Love; it goes out and in, up and down with the
soul; and lovingly accolates with it, to see whether it would introduce the
fugitive properties of self-will (where the soul departed out of the
temperature into the fugitive life, of the divided properties of the body)
again into her; that Virgin Venus might be again animated [or Soulized] and
re-obtaine the Fires Tincture, wherein its joy, and its life consists.

11. For Virgin Venus is the splendour of the white in the Sun,
understood in this place; but the ability to the shining is not its own; the
spiritual water is its own propriety, which water arises out of the fire,
where the separation begins in the Salniter in Mars his Sun, then Virgin
Venus separates it self in it self, and covers her self with a Copper
Vesture; for Mars would have her for a propriety; but he desiles her
exceedingly in his malignity; and spatters in earth and rust; for he cannot
have her as his espoused, unless he gives her his own fire will for a
propriety; and that he wills not; and therefore they strive a long time,
they are married ones, but they are faithless to each other.

12. And even then comes the Sun,
and opens the Sun of Mercury, which is the fourth Key, where you shall see
great wonders; how God has created the Heaven and the Earth; and moreover the
ground of the four Elements; and if you then rightly observe, you shall see
your own proper Genius unfolded before you, and see how the Word is become
Man, Viz. the expressed Word in the re-expressing [or speaking it self forth]
into the severation of the Powers, you will see how Virgin Venus is severed,
and how the forms of nature do take her into them, and go about in a
pitiful estate with her; and take her into their own Domination, and change
themselves in her, into a purple color; they would murder, but she is their
Baptism to the new life, in this place.

13. The fifth Key is Virgin Venus her self,
wherewith she opens her Aliter, God.
Gold, Viz. the Sun, that she gives her will and fair Garland to the
murderers; so that she stands as one impregnate [or humbled] then supposes
the Artist that he has the new child, but he is far enough from it, till the
birth thereof:

14. The sixth Key is Luna, when the Sun opens this, then Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn, must all forsake their own will, and let their fugitive aspiring
Pomp fall; for the Sun in Luna takes them into the Incarnation; then the
Artist begins to be sad, and thinks he has lost, but his hope shall not
be ashamed; for the Moon in its opened Sun is so hungry after the true Sun,
that she attracteth it with force and effect into them; whereupon Mars
quaileth in his wrath, and dies away in his own right, and then Virgin Venus
receives him, and insinuates with her love into him; whereby Mars in Jupiter
and Saturn is quick in this love of a joyful life, and all the six properties
do give their will in to Venus; and she gives her will to the Sun, and
then the life is borne, that stands in the Temperature.

15. Dear Mr* Doctor the pen is not to be trusted, yet have a care unto the
work, it will be so; and no otherwise, move it not* least Mercury be enraged
before his opening;
for outwardly he is evil, but inwardly he is good and the true life, yet Mars
is ^ne cause to life; also they proceed not so plainly and punctually in the
order with their opening,
albeit the opening is done in Order, but the sensall wheel turns it self
about and windeth inwardly, till Saturn comes with his will into the
internal ground, and then he stands in the Temperature, and produces no
longer inclinations; but all that you now see, are the revolting fugitive
spirits; and Vaunt with Virgin Venus, but they live all in Whoredom; and they
must be converted and turn into the inner ground, that they may be fixed; this
is done so long, till Virgin Venus loses her material gross [impure] water,
in which the Adulterers wantonize with her in false-will; that so she may
become holy spiritual; and then the sun shines in her; which changes the
nature into love.


16. Loving Mr Doctor, the Phylosophicall body is the spiritual water from the
fire,
and light; Viz. The power of the fire, and of the light; when it is severed
from its gross^esse, through the opening of all the properties of nature, then
it is rightly spiritual; then the Solar spirit receives no other property at
all into it self, save only that which is able to reach its sensall Sun in
the opened; for the sun takes nothing into it self, but its likeness; it
takes its Heaven out of the earth, (if you will understand me aright) for it
is its food, whence it generates a young Sun in it self, which is also called
Sol; but it is a body, therefore I say unto you, keep you diligently and
precisely to it; you shall well rejoice, if God let you live so long; if only
you have the right Father; which I have sounded for and am greatly in love with
him.

17. This is well known to me, for I have lately seen it at which I do not
only wonder but rejoice;
therein much is revealed to me, and albeit I might write somewhat more largely
yet it is not necessary in this process; also the pen is not to be trusted; it
may be done another time; and I pray you to keep this Letter secret, and in
faithfulness; if I come to you, I may entrust you with somewhat which I have
lately seen and received; yet I shall go so far as I dare if opportunity give
way and the troubles which are nigh hinder me not; then I come to Breslaw about
Shrovetide; and so I may visit you in my return.

18. Mr Doctor become seeing, read the treatise of Election with inward
deliberation [or ponderings] it has more in it in its internal ground, then
outwardly, in reference to the sayings of the Scripture [is to be expressed]
which inward ground, I dare not give, or unfold to the unwise.

19. Be faithful in the Text, In Arcanis.
Mysteries and account the wicked World not worthy of them in its
coveteousnesse; what you cannot understand Parabolically, there questions are
requisite; somewhat more shall be revealed to you; yet in order only to do
that, I am prohibited by the Prince of the Heavens; in nature and manner of the
blossoming earth, I dare well do it.

20. Therefore imitate the Bees that gather honey of many flowers;
often writing might do you service; yet what you please; God takes God, need
takes need, [each thing receives its like.]

THE THREE AND TWENTIETH EPISTLE. TO CHRISTIANUS STEENBERGER DOCTOR OF PHYSIC.
Our Salvation is in the life of Jesus Christ in U S.
1. WORTHY, Learned, Christian dear Friend; all hearty wishes of Divine Love
and Grace premised: Desiring, that the Fountain of Divine love might be opened
through the Sun of life, unto you, whence the Divine water springs; as I
doubt not but the Bridegroom has called his Bride, Viz. Your soul, to this
wellspring; seeing I understand that God has placed you under the Cross, and
Tribulation.

2. This is the first mark and sign of the Noble Sophia, wherewith she
signeth her Children; for she uses to manifest her self through the thorns
of Gods anger, as a fair Rose on the thorny Bush; so far forth as the soul
keeps it vow and fidelity, for there must be a faithful and firm Bond and
Covenant between the soul, and this fire burning Love of God.

3. Man must set upon such a purpose,
that he will enter into Christ's bitter passion, and death, and dye therein
daily to his sins, and evil vanities, and pray earnestly unto God for the
renewing of his mind, and understanding: He must be anointed and illuminated
of the holy spirit: and put on Christ, with his suffering death and
resurrection, that he may be a true branch on the vine of Christ; in whom
Christ himself works and rules, according to the internal ground of his
Spirit.

4. Which Mystery is comprehended in faith, where the deity and humanity are
then conjoined according to that same internal ground, in manner as the fire
does Or, Make the Iron red hot.
through hear the Iron, and yet the Iron retains its substance; but so long
as the fire burns therein, it is changed into a mere fire.

5. Not that the creature apprehends it in its own might; but it is
apprehended; when the will does wholly resign it self up to God; and the
spirit of God rules in this resigned will; and the will is the true Temple of
the holy Ghost; wherein Christ dwells essentially; not in an Imaginary
thought-like creaturely manner, but as the fire in the Iron; or as the Sun in
an herb, where the influentiall power of the sun does form and make it self
essential in [and with] the tincture of the herb.


6. Thus it is to be understood likewise in the spirit of man, when the holy
power of God does sorme and Image it self in man's spirit and faith; and
becomes a spiritual being [or essence] which only the souls mouth of faith,
does lay hold on; and not the earthly man in flesh and blood, which is mortal;
it is an Immortal Being, wherein Christ dwells in man; it is the Heaven of
God enstamped on the little World; and it is a Revelation of the place [Throne
or seat] of God, where the paradise does again spring forth, and bear fruit.

7. Therefore the Dragon must be first slain, and albeit he yet hangs unto
the earthly flesh, as the rind and bark on the tree; yet the spirit lives in
God, as Saint Paul says; our conversation is in Heaven, and as Christ also
said, he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood he abides in me, and I in
him, also without me you can do nothing.

8. Therefore I say, if any one be a true Christian; he is so, in Christ,
he is begotten and innate in the life and spirit of Christ; and puts on the
Resurrection of Christ, for thus the satisfaction of Christ is imparted to him;
and thus also Christ does overcome sin, death, Devil, and Hell in him; and
thus he is reconciled and united with God, in Christ.

9. For the new birth is not a grace imputed from without; that we need only
comfort our selves with Christ's Merits, and continue in the Hypocrisy of sin;
no it is a childlike inna^e grace; that God has put Christ with the
Justification, on the convert; that Christ also does redeem him in himself,
with the power of his Resurrection from Gods anger; else, he is no Christian,
let him flatter, and make devout shows in hypocrisy, as he pleases.

10. Concerning the interpretation of some words (and also of that which you
desire of me,) which are specifyed in my Book called Aurora (which have very
hidden Meanings, the knowledge whereof was given me of the most High;) I give
you to understand that at present it is not convenient to write at large and
Expressly thereof in Letters seeing the time is dangerous, and the Enemy of
Christ does horribly rage and rave; till a little time be past, yet I will give
you a short hint, further to consider of it.

11. As first, there is a twofold meaning of the Northern Crown; The first
poynteth at the Crown of life; Viz. The Spirit of Christ, which shall be
manifest in the midst of the great darkness, Viz. In the contrition [or
distresse] of the sensible nature of the Conscience; where a peculiar motion is
present; then comes the Bridegroom; Viz. The power of Christ in the midst
of such a motion.

12. The other signification is a Figure of the outward Kingdom; where the
great confusions,
entanglements and contentions, shall be when as the Nations shall stand in
controversy; There also is the figure, Viz. the Victory intimated; as it
stands in the Spiritual figure; how it shall go, and what People shall at
last Conquer, and how in the mean while, in such lamentable time of Tribulation
Christ shall be made manifest and known; and that after, and in that miserable
time the great mysteries shall be revealed, that men shall be able to know even
in Nature the hidden God in Trinity, in which knowledge the strange Nations
shall be converted and turn Christians; and therein is signified how the
Sectarian contentions in Religion shall be destroyed in such Manifestation, for
all gates will be set open, and then shall all unprofitable Praters which at
present lie as so many Bars before the Truth, be done away; and all shall
acknowledge, and know Christ, which Manifestation shall be the last, then the
Sun of life shall shine upon all Nations; and even then the Beast of inquity
with the Whore, end their days, which is signified under the Characters Ra.
Ra. Ra. P. in R. P. As is to be seen in the Revelation.

13. We dare not at present make this large Interpretation more clear, all
will show it self; and then men shall see what it was, for there is yet clean
another time.

14. Concerning the language of nature, I certify you; that it is so; but what
I understand in it, I cannot teach or give another; indeed I can give a
signification thereof, how it is to be understood; but it requires much room;
and there must be a Personal Conference and intercourse in it, it is not to be
set down in writing.

15. Also concerning the Phylosophicall work of the Tincture, its progress is
not so bluntly and plainly to be described; albeit I have it not in the
Praxis, the Seal of God lies before it to conceal the true ground of the
same,
upon pain of eternal punishment, unless a man knew for certain, that it
might not be mis-used; there is also no power to attain unto it, unless a man
first become Enter into the New birth.
that himself which he seeks therein; no skill or Art avails, unless one
give the Tincture into the hands of another, he cannot prepare it unless he be
certainly in the new birth.

16. There belong two Centrall fires unto it, wherein the might of all things
consist; which may easily be attained, if man be rightly fitted: Therefore Sir,
do not trouble and toil your self in that manner and way which you mention,
with any Gold or Minerals, it is all false;
the best in Heaven and in the World, from above, and below must be ingredient
to it, which is far off, and nigh at hand; the place is every where, where it
may be had; but every one is not fit and prepared for it, neither does it cost
any money, but what is spent upon the time and bodily maintenance; else it
might be prepared with two Four shillings.
Florens, and less.

17. The World must be made Heaven, and Heaven the World; it is not of Earth,
Stones, or Mettalls, and yet it is of the Ground of all Metals; but a
spiritual Being, which is environed with the four Elements, which also
changes the four Elements into one; a doubled Mercury, yet not Quicksilver,
or any other Mineral or Metal.

18. Read the A Book entitled, Wasser Steinder Weisen.
Water-Stone of the Wise men, which is in Print; therein is much truth;
and it is moreover clear, the work is easy, and the Art is simple, a Boy of
Ten years might make it; but the Wisdom therein is great, and the greatest
Mystery; every one must Seek it himself; it behooves us not to break the
Seal of God, for a fiery Mountain lies before it; at which I my self am
amazed, and must wait whether it be Gods will: How should I teach others
expressly thereof, I cannot yet make it my self; albeit I know somewhat; and
let no man seek more of me then I have, yet clear enough signified; and I
commend you, together with all the Children of God, into the Love of Jesus
Christ.

JACOB BEEM.

THE FOUR AND TWENTIETH EPISTLE.
In Answer to a QUESTION, WHY, The Statua of one that was Deceased, Wept, or
shed Tears?

1. TOUCHING the Question, it is dark in the understanding, and there needs a
Joseph to explain it;
for it is a Magical thing, and very wonderful; whereupon it is hard to be
answered, for it proceeds from the Magia.

2. Yet I will open and show you in very brief, what my Opinion is thereupon;
not that I would conclude and pass an absolute determinate judgment concerning
it, and leave you and other illuminate men of God, to their opinion and
apprehension in it; but whether God has given me to Or, resolve it.
prove it, that I leave to your judgment, who know the condition of the
mentioned Person better then I; for all things proceed according, to the time,
measure, and limit of that thing.

3. A hard rough Or, Statue of Stone framed by a Stone-cutter, or an Image set
up for a Monument.
Murall Stone has no life that is moveable [or active] for the Elementall
vegetable life stands mute and still therein; and it is shut up with the
first Impression; yet not in that manner, as if it were a Nothing; there is not
any thing in this World, wherein the Elementall as well as the Sydereall
Dominion does not lie; but in one thing it is more moveable, active, and
working, then in another; and we cannot say neither, but that the four
Elements, together with the Stars, have their daily operation in all things.

4. But being this is a hard Stone, therefore the Miracle is above the wonted
and ordinary course of Nature;
whereupon we can in no wise say, that it has a natural cause in the Stone;
as if the operation of the Stone should move and put forth this; but it is a
Magical motion from the Spirit, whose Image is hewn out and pourtrayed in the
Stone.

5. For a Stone consists in three things, and so all Beings consist of these
three things, but enclosed in a twofold property: Viz. in a spiritual and in a
corporal; and those three, wherein all whatsoever is in this World consist,
are Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, in two propertyes; the one Heavenly, the other
Earthly; as God dwells in the Time, and the Time in God, and yet the Time is
not God but out of God, as a pourtrayed Image of Eternity.

6. So Man likewise is out of the Time, and also out of the Eternity, and
consists of three things, Viz. of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, in two parts;
the one being out of the time Viz* the outward body, and the other stands in
the Eternity, Viz. the soul; seeing then, that Man, and the Time, as well as
the Eternity stand in one Dominion, in Man; thence we are to consider of the
Question.

7. For man is a Microcosmus ex Macrocosmo.
little World out of the great World, and has the property of the whole great
World in him, for God said unto him after the fall; thou art Earth and unto
Earth thou shall turn; that is, Sulphur, Mercury and Salt, therein stand all
things in this World be it Spiritual, or Corporal, save the soul which
stands in such a property according to the right of the eternal nature, as I
have sufficiently demonstrated in my Writings.

8. Now when man dies,
then the outward light in the outward Sulphur does extinguish and go out with
its outward fire wherein the life has burned,
and then the body falls to dust, and enters again into that, whence it is
come; but the soul which is brought forth out of the eternal nature, and
infused into Adam by the spirit of God; that can not dye, for it is not out of
the time, but out of the Eternal Generation.

9. Now if the soul has Or, Set its mind upon.
put its desire into any temporal thing, and therewith has imprinted it
self; [or strongly set its Imagination thereupon] then it has impressed the
property of that thing into its desire, and holds it magically, as if it had
it bodily; indeed it cannot hold the body, understand the elementall, but it
holds the sydereall body until the Stars also consume it, and it often
happens that People do appear after there death in Houses with there own
body, but the body is cold, dead, and number, and the spirit of the soul does
only put it on, by the astrall spirit, so long, till the body putrifyeth.

10. Also many a body is so strongly possessed of the Astrall [or starry]
Spirit,
through the Desire of the soul, that it is a long while a decaying; for the
desire of the soul does bring the sydereall spirit thereinto; so that the
Elements are as it were impressed with an Astrall life, especially if the soul
has not yet attained to rest, and that in the life of the body it had strongly
imagined upon any thing (and taken it to heart) and in the mean time the body
dyed before it had quitted its desire, and taken it out of that thing;
therefore the will does still continually run in that same Impression; and it
would fain rightly effect its cause, but cannot; and thereupon it seeks the
cause or reason of its detainment; and would fain rest in the Eternity; but the
impressed thing has its effectual working, and driving, until the stars
consume it; formerly in the Popish Religion there was somewhat handled about
it; but without sufficient understanding.

11. Now you may easily consider how it fell out, that the Engraven
Gravestone, Or, Shed Tears.
shed water, or wept, it is not done from the power or virtue of the stone, but
from the strength and might of the spirit; whose the stone is, whose Image it
bears; also it is not done from the souls own essence, but magically through
the astrall Spirit; the constellations in the Spirit of the soul have
impressed themselves, into the sydereall Spirit in the stone; all according to
the souls desire; it has hereby signified; that there was something that lay
heavy in its mind when it lived; and this sadness [or sore pensiveness of
Spirit] was yet in the sydereall spirit; for Christ said, where your heart is
there is also your Treasure; also in the Revelation of Jesus Christ it is
written, our WORKS shall follow us.

12. Dear Sir, it behooves me not to Judge further herein; consider whether
the mentioned Person had not something in her,
that lay heavy upon her, before her end; whether any had done her wrong; or
she had done wrong to any body, or whether the care about her Husband and
children (so far as she was a holy Person) did not trouble her; seeing any of
them going on in an evil course, that so through the power of the Sydereall
spirit, through the Stone, she might give such admonition for amendment: Noble
Sir, consider your self aright, I may likely among all these mentioned things
hit one; but seeing I never knew the Person, also know nothing of her, I leave
the judgment unto your Favor, you know better then I, what her condition
herein was; I write only of the Possibility, how it may be; and pass no
further judgment, or determination.

13. But that this might be laughed at, and be accounted ridiculous; I pass
not for it, I am not deceived; I understand (I bless God) this ground very
well; for such knowledge I have not learned of, or by, Man, but it has been
given me; and I would sufficiently ground it with further, and larger
exposition if I should write of the Humane Property; how Man is in Life, and
how in Death.

14. I send you the Book of the Forty Questions, there you may see further
ground, which notwithstanding is better grounded into the Center of all Beings
in the Book of the Threefold Life; and yet much more in the Book of De
signatur^ Rerum.
the Signature of all things: Furthermore I entreat you not to mention this my
jndgement and explanation of the Question, much among light people; for to a
Cow there belongs Fodder, and to the intelligent [there belongeth]
understaning; the wicked man judges wickedly; the understanding man proves
all things: I speak from a good intent and affection.

1. Jan. 1622. J. B.

THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH EPISTLE. TO Carel von Endern.
CHARLES OF ENDERN.
1. NOBLE, Right Honorable Sir, I wish and desire unto you (from the most holy
omnipresent God, who is the fullness of all things, and the power of all
Beings) a happy joyful new year, and all prosperous welfare.

2. Albeit I being a simple man, never in all my life intended to have
intercourse and converse with such high Persons, with my Gift, which God has
bestowed upon me, out of his mercy and love, or thereby to be known and
acquainted with them; but when the high light was enkindled in me, and the
fiery instigation fell upon me, then my will was only to write what I saw man
an effectual peculiar manner, and knew in the Spirit; and I intended to keep
my Writings to my Self.

3. I saw well enough what would come to pass, but that I should esteem my
self, as to have my Writings known; never as yet came into my mind; for I
esteemed my self too simple; I intended to write down the Pearle-like Garland
only for my self; and to imprint it on my heart.

4. But seeing that I (as a very simple man) did not understand or take notice
of this;
and yet I now see plainly, that Gods intention, was far otherwise then ever
came into my mind; thereupon I (...) first this consideration, That there is
no respect of Persons with God; but he that depends on him, is accepted and
beloved of him; and he drives his work in him; for he is only high, and is
pleased to manifest himself in the weak, that it may be known, That the
Kingdom and the Power is his alone.

5. And also that it lies not in humane Searchings and Reason, or depends on
the Heavens and their powers; for they do not comprehend him, but that he is
well pleased to reveal himself in the low and humble; that he may be known
in all things; for the Powers of the Heavens do also work themselves forth
continually in shapes, forms, plant^ and colors, to manifest and reveal the
holy God, that he may be known in all things.

6. Much more high and clear can the manifestation of God be made in man;
being he is not only an Essence [or Being] out of the created World; but his
power, matter, and peculiar Being, which he himself is; stands, and
assimulateth with all the three Principles of the Divine Being.

7. And there is nothing diminished from the Being of the divine creature, in
its fall, but only the divine light, wherein it should live, walk, and be in
God, in perfect love, humility, meekness and holiness; and so eat the [
Manna] or Heavenly bread of the word, and divine power, and live in perfection
like the Angels.

8. This light,
which in the second Principle shines eternally in God, (which is the only
cause of joy, love, humility, meekness, and mercy,) is withdrawn, and hidden
from man in his fall; in that the first man (when he was formed in his Mother
of the great World) did set his Imagination, lust, and longing, upon the Mother
of nature, and desired the food of the first Principle; (wherein the Original
and birth of nature; the source of Anger, and the most Anxious birth (whence
all the comprehensible things of this World are made); do consist,) whereupon
he is become capable of the same; being, he stood upon the same root.

9. Thus he is according to the body, and also according to the spirit, become
a Child of this created World, which rules, acts, and leads him; and also
gives him his meat, and drink, and has conceives in him the corruptibility,
and painfulnesse, and has gotten a Bestiall body, which must again Corrupt in
its Mother.

10. For he should not have the Monstrous form; the constellation of the great
World should not domineer over him; but he had his own Constellation in
himself, which did assimulate with the holy Heaven of the Second Principle of
the Divine Being; that is, with the rising and birth of the Divine Nature.

11. Now man is not so far broken and decayed, as if he were not any more the
first man, whom God created; only he has gotten the monstrous form, which is
corruptible, and has its beginning only and merely from the most outward and
third Principle, and has awakned and opened in him the Gate of the first
Principle (being the severe, earnest Source) which however burns in the great
created World, and is wholly enkindled in the damned.

12. But the right man, which God created; which only is the true right man,
is yet hidden in this Corrupt man, and if he denies himself in his beastiall
form, and lives not according to the acting, driving, and will of the same;
but surrenders himself to God with his whole mind, thoughts, and senses; then
this man lives in God, and God works in him the will and the deed, for all
is in God.

13. The right holy and heavenly man, which is hidden in the monstrous,
is as well in Heaven as God; and the Heaven is in him, and the heart, or light
of God is begotten and borne in him; that is, God in him, and he in God; God is
nearer to him, then the Bestiall body.

14. The Bestiall body is not his own native Country, where he is at home;
but he is therewith without Paradise; but the right man regenerate and borne
anew in Christ, is not in this World, but in the Paradise of God; and albeit he
is in the body, yet he is in God.

15. And though the Bestiall body dies, yet nothing is done to the new man,
but it then comes forth right out of the contrary Will and Torment house,
into its native Country; there need not any far removing or distance of
place, whither he supposes to go, that it might be better with him; but God
is manifest in him.

16. The soul of man is out of the first Principle of God, but in that, it is
no holy Being; but in the Second Principle it is manifest in God, and is a
Divine Creature, for even there the Divine light is borne; therefore if the
Divine light be not borne [begotten or brought forth in it [ Viz. the Soule]
then God is not in it, but it lives in the most original, earnest Source,
where there is an Eternal contrariety [enmity, or contrary will] in it self.

17. But if the light be borne, then there is joy, love, and pleasant delight
in the Creature, and the new Man, which is the Soul, is in God; How should not
there be knowledge where God is in the Creature?

18. Now it lies not in the willing,
running, and toiling of the Creature, to know the depths of the deity; for the
soul knows not the divine Center, how the divine essence is generated; but
it depends on Gods will, how he will manifest it.

19. Now then, if God does manifest himself in the soul; what has the soul
done toward it? nothing? it has only the Longing or traveling to the birth;
and looks to God, in whom it lives; whence the divine light comes
apparent, and shining in it: and the first fierce [earnest] Principle, whence
mobility does originally arise is changed into Triumphing joy.

20. Therefore it is a very unjust thing, that the World does so rage, and
rave; so Tyranize, reproach, contemn, and revile, when the gifts of God do
show themselves differently in man, and all have not one, and the same
knowledge.

21. What can a man take unto himself; if it be not borne in him? which
notwithstanding stands not in man's choice, as he desires or likes of it, but
as his Heaven is in him, so likewise is God manifest in him.

22. For God, ^^
is not a God of Destruction in the birth, [or Universal Generation] but an
illuminator, enkindler, and nourisher, and each Creature has its own Center
in it self, let it live either in the holiness of God, or in the anger of
God; God will however be manifest in all Creatures.

23. If the World were not so blind, it might know the wonderful Being of God
in all Creatures, but now that it does so rage and rave, it does it wholly
against it self and against the holy Spirit of God, at whose light, they shall
once be astonished; they shall not hinder the Son which the Traveling Mother
brings forth in her old Age, for this the Heaven declares.

24. God shall enlighten him against all the raging and raving of the Devil;
and his light [splendor or glory] shall reach from the East unto the West; I
write not of my self, but I only foreshew that this is at hand, and shall
come.

25. I would gladly have pleasured you at present with what I promised, wherein
all that is herein touched and hinted at, might be clearly explained, and also
what that good, and known Doctor Baltasar Walter. Forty Questions.
Doctor has desired touching the Original, Being, life, and drift of man, and
of his soul; and also his Final End; only it is not yet finished.

26. For the gifts which were once given me of God are not therefore quite
dead and gone; albeit they were hid by the Devil and the World, yet now they
oftentimes appear and show themselves more deep, and more wonderful.

27. And very shortly (God willing) you shall receive somewhat thereof; for
there is an higher beginning made toward it; especially of the THREE
PRINCIPLES of the Divine Being, and so forth of all the things which are
promised in my Aurora.
Book.

28. Only I am much busied with worldly affairs and employments, else a great
part might have been finished; but I will be Or, Use all care and diligence.
diligent, by Divine and earnest Exercise; what God will, shall be done: And
herewith I commend you into the Protection of the Almighty.


Dated, 18. Jan. 1618. Written in haste. J. B.

THE SIX AND TWENTIETH EPISTLE. TO Carel von Endern.
CHARLES of ENDERN.
1. THE Love in the heart of God the Father, and the light of his power, in the
life of Jesus Christ, be our refreshment; and help us to the new birth, that
the true Image may appear to Gods honor and deeds of wonder; and cause the
fair sprout of his Lilly to grow in us, in the Paradisicall Garden of Jesus
Christ.

2. Noble, Right Honorable Sir, my humble and most willing Service, with
hearty wishes of all temporal and eternal prosperity, premised; I have
received by the Bearer your Man, a measure of Corn, which you have sent unto
me, and I thank you most kindly; and I pray God Almighty Bless you in
abundance for it.

3, Being Noble Sir, you are so humble, and do not look upon, and regard what
the World does; and also you do not value the subtilty [or pert prudency] of
the high; but you seek and labor after that which the Lord of Heaven builds;
albeit it appear foolishness in this World; but it seems good in his sight
to drive on his work in mean, low, plain, and Childlike people, that he
only might be exalted; and no man might have wherewithal to boast; and you
likewise may surely hope for the same knowledge; which is more beautiful and
excellent then all pomp and riches of the World;
for all whatsoever is temporal does leave and forsake Man, but the honorable
Garland [or Trophy] of Christ does not forsake man in death; but it brings
him to the heavenly tryumphing Host of Angels, into his right eternal native
Country [or home.]

4. Now seeing we know, and exceedingly well understand that we are only
Pilgrims in this World, in a strange lodging, in very great danger, lying
captive in a sore and hard prison, and must continually fear, and expect
death; therefore Noble Sir, you do very well, and deal more wisely then the
prudent of the World, in that you look about you, and endeavor after your
Eternal native Country, and not after the Pomp, Power, and Riches of this
World, as generally the high and great Ones do.

5. I make no doubt, but that you herein shall obtain a very fair Garland
from the Virgin of the eternal wisdom of God; which if it come to pass,
will be of more value and acceptance with you, then all temporal riches, and
this whole World with all its Being and Splendour; of which [Crowne or Trophy of
Sophia] if I had no effectual knowledge, I would not write; for of the wise of
this World (who only out of self pride without Gods spirit do arrogate, and
attribute all knowledge and understanding to themselves) I have not only poor
thanks, but also nothing else but derision, and scorn; at the which I do
rejoice, the rather in that I bear reproach for the Name and knowledge-sake of
God.

6. For if my knowledge had been gotten in their School,
then they would embrace and love their own; but that it is from another
School, therefore they know it not; and moreover they despise it, as they have
done unto all the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, this shall not trouble or
turn me aside; but as I have begun, I will depend on my God and Creator, with
the greater earnestness, and fixed resolution; I will commit my self unto
him, let him do with me what he please.

7. I attribute no wisdom unto my self, moreover I rely not upon any purpose
or intention of reason; for I see most plainly, and find it as clear as the
Sun, that God goes clean another way to work.

8. Therefore if we deal in a childlike manner; and not in our reason (but
only depend one him with true desire and right earnestness; and put all our
confidence in him) then we obtain sooner the noble Virgin of his wisdom; then
in our sharp inventions, and acute reasonings; for when she comes she
brings true Wisdom, and Heavenly understanding along with her and without
the same I know nothing.

9. But seeing you have a great delight to read such Writings concerning the
highest being, (and as I hope it is Gods providence,) therefore I will not
withhold from you what the chiefest good has put me in trust withal; but
shortly I will send you something that is more full; for there is a very
wonderful and excellent Book begun concerning the life of man; which if the
Lord please to continue his hand over me, shall clearly open what man is? and
what he has to do, to obtain the chiefest good.

10. For it goes very clearly through the three Principles;
and shows the whole ground, so that a man (unless he will wilfully of
himself be blind) may know God, and the Kingdom of Heaven and also himself;
likewise our lamentable fall, and also the restoration in the life of Jesus
Christ; and it shall especially treat of the fair Lillies, which God will
bestow upon the last World; which will be very pleasant to be read.

11. And though I know not sufficiently the full and whole ground what it shall
be; yet I see it in a great depth; and I hope if God grant so much grace, not
to give over, till it be finished; and also for the future finish the promised
writings which are now kept back by the Oppressor; as also [my Exposition]
upon Moses; where the great wonders of God shall be clearly manifest to the
light of the Day; the which God will freely bestow and afford unto the last
World.

12. However at present all is in Babel, and there shall a great rent be made;
yet let none despair; for as God helped the Children of Israel with
Consolation in the Babilonicall Captivity, and sent them Prophets; even so
shall now also Lillies grow up in the midst of Thorns, and this is wonderful.

13. Also none need think, that even now the whole Destruction of the City
Babel shall come to pass; there shall verily be an exceeding great Rent, such
a one as men now do not believe; for the Antichrist is not wholly revealed,
though verily in part.

14. Men shall suppose that they have wholly rooted him out, and after some
sorrow, great joy shall follow, and they shall make Laws and Covenants,
together with severe, sharp Articles of Religion; yet for the most part, for
the advancement of their Honor and Might; and men shall suppose that the holy
spirit of Heaven speaks; and now there is a golden World; yet it sticks
full of Gods Anger, and is still in Babel, and the true Essence of the right
life in Christ is not yet therein.

15. Also the Rider on the Pale Horse shall come after, and cut off many with
the Sickle, yet in the mean time the Lilly springs in the wonders, against
which the last Antichrist shall raise Persecution; even then comes his End;
for the appearance of the Lord terrifieth him.

16. And then Babel burns up in the zeal and Anger of God, and the same is
wonderful, of which I have no Authority, or leave.
power to write more plainly; yet at that time my Writings shall be very
serviceable; for there comes a time from the LORD which is not from the
Starry Heaven.

17. Blessed is he that seeks the Lord with full earnestness, for he shall
not be found in the History, but in true affiance, and in the right resignation
into the life, and into the Doctrine of Christ:
Therein the holy Ghost shall appear with wonders, and powers, which Babel at
present in her inventions [forged hypocrisies] does not believe; yet however it
certainly comes; and is already on foot, yet hidden from the World.

18. I have sent you by Mr. Fabian, the whole work of the Second Book, but I
know not whether you have received it, for since that time by reason of my
Journey, I have not spoken with Mr. Fabian; if not, then you may demand it of
him: And so I commit you to the meek Love in the life of Jesus Christ the
Son of God.

Given in haste: Goerlits, Friday, before the Advent, 1619.

The Name of the LORD is a Strong Tower, the Righteous fly unto it, and is
exalted.
THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH EPISTLE.
TO Carel von Endern.
CHARLES of ENDERN.
1. NOBLE, Right Honorable Sir, my humble, ready, and willing Service, with
all Cordial wishes of Gods love and grace, to your new creature, in the New
man, in the body of Jesus Christ; as also all temporal prosperity and blessing
for the earthly body, premised.

2. I have considered your Noble heart,
and mind, which is enkindled and enflamed not only toward God, but likewise
toward his Children, in love; which has exceedingly rejoiced me in Christ;
and I must in a special manner consider of the true earnestness and zeal,
which I know and acknowledge; for you have endeavored much about my few
Writings of the first part, and not regarded the murdering [or confounding
cryes] of the Oppressor, but sought after it your self to read it, and to
copy it out with your own hand.

3. Which give me persuasion, that God has opened a little gate [of his
wisedome] unto you, which was fast shut to the Oppressor; being he sought for
it in Art, and Pride; therefore it was concealed to him; for he was offended at
the hand of the Writer, and did not mind what is written in the holy
Scripture; My power is mighty in the weak; and how Christ thanked his Father,
that he had hid it from the prudent and wise, and revealed it unto Babes; And
said further, Yea further! For so it has pleased thee.

4. Also I am verily persuaded and convinced in my spirit, that you have not
done it out of any Curiosity, but as it becomes the Children of God, which
seek the precious Pearl, and are desirous of it; which if it be found, is the
most precious Jewel, which man loves far beyond his earthly life,
for it is greater then the World, and more fair, beautiful, and excellent,
then the Sun; it rejoices Man in tribulation, and begets him out of darkness
to the light, it gives him a certain spirit of hope in God, and leads him
upon the right path, and goes along with him into death, and brings him forth
to life out of death; it quelleth the anguish of Hell, and it is very where his
light; it is Gods friend in his love; it affords him Reason and Discretion to
govern his earthly body; it leads him from the false and evil way; and
whosoever does obtain, and keep it, him it Crowns with its Garland.

5. Therefore, noble Sir, I have no other cause to write unto you, but from a
desire of unseighned love toward the Children of God; that I might but
refresh, and recreate my self, with them; I do it not for temporal goods or
gifts (albeit you have tendered your kind and loving favors to me (though a
stranger) in a courteous and friendly manner) but for the hope of Jsrael, that I
may highly rejoice with the Children of God, in the life to come; and my labor
which here I undergo in love toward them; shall then be well recompensed;
when I shall so rejoice with my Brethren, and every ones work shall follow him.

6. Therefore I am in right earnest, being that a Sparkle of the precious Pearl
is given to me, and Christ faithfully warns us not to put it under the table,
or to bury it in the Earth; and thereupon we ought not so much to fear man,
that can kill the body only and then is able to do no more, but we ought to
fear him that can destroy body and soul; and cast them into Hell.

7. And though in my time I shall receive but little thanks from some, who
love their Belly more then the Kingdom of Heaven, yet my Writings have their
gifts, and stand for their time; for they have a very precious worthy earnest
Birth and descent; and when I consider my self in my poor, low, unlearned, and
simple person, I do then wonder more then my very adversary.

8. But seeing I know Experimentally in power, and light, that it is a mere
gift of God, who also gives me a driving will thereunto, that I must write
what I know and see; therefore I will obey God rather then man; least my Office
and Stewardship be taken away from me again, and given unto another; which
would Eternally grieve me.

9. But seeing Sir, that you have obtained a longing and delight to read the
same, and that (as I verily hope) from the providence and appointment of God,
therefore I shall not conceal it from you, seeing that God the most High has
called you, through his wonderful Counsel, to publish the first Work; when I
thought the Oppressor had devoured it; but even then it sprung forth as a
green Twig, wholly unknown to me.

10. And though I know nothing of my Self, what God is about to do; and his
Counsel and way also, which he will go, is hidden from me, and I can say
nothing of my self; also the Oppressor might impute it to me, for a Pedentick
Pride, that I would thus only arrogantly vaunt with my small gifts (which were
of grace given to me) and thereby set forth the thoughts and imaginations of my
heart for my own vain glory, and boasting.

11. Yet I declare in the presence of God,
and testify it before his judgment (where all things shall appear, and
every one shall give an account of his doings) that I my self know not what is
happened to me, or how it goes with me, save only that I have a driving will.

12. Also I know not what I shall write, for when I write, the Spirit does
Dictate the same to me in great wonderful knowledge, so that I often cannot
tell whether I (as to my Spirit) am in this World or no, and thereat I do
exceedingly rejoice; and therein sure and certain knowledge is imparted to me.

13. And the more I seek the more I find, and always deeper, that I many
times account my sinful person too weak, and unworthy, to set upon such high
Mysteries, where then the spirit sets up my Banner, and says, Arise! thou
shall live therein Eternally, and be Crowned therewith; Why art thou amazed?

14. Therefore Noble Sir, I give you to understand in few words, the ground,
and cause, both of the will and Search of my Writings, if you have a mind to
read any thing therein, I leave it to your choice; I send you now what was
made formerly, when I was with you; namely, from the beginning of the two and
twentieth Chapter to the End, where in very deed, the noble Coral is opened,
and my mind shows me that you shall take likement and delight therein; and
herein also you shall obtain a little Pearl, if your mind be approved and
directed to God.

15. The rest (which are about some thirty Sheets) our known and good friend
has them, he shall give them to you; there are very high, and deep things
contained in the same; and are very worthy of Preservation; you shall likewise
have them, if you please to read them.

16. And albeit I set my self to keep the same somewhat still and secret, yet
it is manifest, for I hear that haughty People do desire it; by whom the Enemy
(being a destroyer) might make it away; for I know well what manner of Enemy
the Devil is that does gainsay and oppose me; therefore I entreat you to deal
wisely and carefully, I shall spedily (if need require) call for it.

17. And shortly, if God permit, more, and deeper things shall be made upon
Moses, and the Prophets; and then at last upon the whole Tree of the life, in
the Being of all Beings; showing how all things begin and end, and to what
being, each thing appears and comes to light, in this World.

18. That I hope the fair and excellent lilly promised of God, shall spring
forth in the Coral in his own spirit in the Children of Gods love in Christ;
for we find a very precious pearl yet springing, not now known to me in the
body, but blooming in the mind; and so I commend you to the pleasant love of
God.


THE EIGHT AND TWENTIETH EPISTLE. TO Carol von Endern.
CHARLES OF ENDERN.
The Light, Salvation, and Eternal power, flowing from the heart of Jesus
Christ, be our refreshment.
1. NOBLE, right Honorable Sir, all Cordial wishes of Divine Salvation, and
therein all prosperity premised; I cannot omit to salute you with this short
Epistle, seeing your Courteous and Generous heart, has bestowed a Measure of
Corn upon me, which I gladly received, and do return exceeding many thanks
for it; and I shall pray God the Creator and Preserver of all things, in whose
power all things are, to bless you in abundance for it.

2. And though I have not deserved it at your hands, and am but a Stranger to
you, therefore I acknowledge your kind heart herein toward the Children of
God; but because you are so very humble, and that for Gods and his Kingdoms
sake; and out of your highness of this World, do cast your self, with your
favor and love into the plain humility of Gods Children; thereupon I do
acknowledge it to be the fear of God; and a desire after the Communion with
the Children of God, in which [Communion and Fellowship] we are in Christ, all
one body in God, in many members and Creatures.

3. At which we should not only highly rejoice, but resign our selves up to
him, in one love, that his power may be effectual and abound in us, and his
Kingdom may be begotten and brought forth in us, and that we might be made
mutual partakers of his being, in one knowledge.

4. And it is not only plainly manifest to us in the holy Scripture but also
in the light of nature,
that if a man does good unto another, especially if it proceed from a kind
Charitable good will, heart and inclination; that his heart spirit and mind
that has received the good, is again inclined in favor and love toward his
propitious friend, an I wishes all blessing and good unto him; and in that he
presents his own wants, and condition before God, he likewise brings in his
will, mind and love, before and into God, his faithful friends condition;
which in the power of God, does Or, Draw upon the kind heart.
afford unto the kind heart, rich and abundant blessing, not only for the
earthly life, but hereby likewise, a path, and way is made into the Kingdom of
God, so that if he turns himself to God; and desires his love and grace; then
his friends love, which before has brought him in to God, does help him to
press and force his way to God; and enable him to wrestie with the Turba, with
the corrupt Infection [or poysonfull desire,] in which, the Devil holds us
captive; and so assists him to destroy the limit, or receptacle of the Anger;
which for my part I am not only obliged, but likewise wholly desirous and
willing to do.

5. Now because God has given to me out of his kind grace, a deep and high
knowledge of his will and being; therefore I am ready and willing to serve you
both with my Prayers for you toward God, and also with what I shall set down
in writing, so far as you may acknowledge, that it is from God (as I am verily
persuaded,) and that you have a sy^cere desire to read it; I shall not conceal
it from you; and also be forward to have mutual and personal discourse with
you.

6. And if you should therein find a misunderstanding, I would sufficiently
clear it and inform you about it, or if any thing should seem too difficult to
be understood, I would willingly bring it into a more ea^ understanding; or if
you are pleased to put any thing that is higher or more profound to the
question I hope to God (unto whose will I commit all things,) that it will be
granted me to manifest it, and I shall endeavor carefully in all ways, with
Prayers unto God, that I may again show my self in acceptable services of love
toward you; which I hope in God that he will not deny me of it, as my heart is
wholly given up thereunto; and does endeavor that it may make a true labourer
in the Vineyard of God, and may be manifest in God, and become a fruit in the
Kingdom of God.

7. As every tree labors to impart its sap unto its branches and twigs, that
at last it might be known by the fruit that grows on its branches; which
likewise we are all bound, and obliged to do; and I am very desirous of it,
etc.

THE NINE AND TWENTIETH EPISTLE. TO Carol van Endern.
CHARLES of ENDERN.
1. RIGHT Honorable, and beloved in Christ; I wish unto you the rich and
effectual blessing of God, in his power, that the Pearls ground in the life of
Jesus Christ may be manifest in the Divine shining light, in your own light of
life in you; and that it may bring forth abundance of fruit to Divine
Contemplation, and Eternal joy.

2. Like as I have always known you to be a Wel-wisher to the Study of
wisdom; and my whole desire is at present (that for an express of
thankfulness for my many received courtesies, and favors) I might be able to
impart to you that which the most High has in a short time given me out of his
wel-spring of Grace.

3. And albeit I have no ability to do it at my pleasure, yet my mind is so
wholly enkindled in its Center, that I would very heartily, and readily impart
it to my brethren in Christ; and I continually entreat the Lord that he would
be pleased to open the hearts of men that they might understand the same; and
that it may come in them to a right quick [essentiall] and living [effect] and
operation.

4. And from a sincere intention I would not conceal from you, that I (since
the new Year) upon the desire of some learned men and persons of quality have
written a treatise of Election or of Gods will concerning man; and so expressed
and enlarged it out of such a ground [or deep soundation] that all Mysteries
both of the outward, visible, Elementall; and then also of the hidden
spiritual World may be therein discerned; and thereunto I have in an especial
manner alleged the Or, Texts.
sayings of the holy scripture, which speak of Gods will to harden, and then
of his un-willingnesse to harden, and so tuned or harmonized them together,
that the right understanding and meaning of the same may be seen.

5. And it is so proved and demonstrated,
that I hope in God that it shall give furtherance and occasion to take away
that strife and controversy in the Churches; which is known and manifest, that
the time is nigh and at hand; that the contentions about Religion shall enter
into the Temperature, but with great ruination of the false Kingdom in Babel*
that has set up it self in Christ's stead, together with other great
alterations; concerning which, although men now will hardly believe me, yet in
a short time shall really appear, and show themselves; and this beloved Sir, I
would not, for your further consideration and christian meditation, omit to
hint unto you etc.

THE THIRTIETH EPISTLE.
IMMANVEL.
1. MY very Christian Brother and Friend,
all Cordial wishes of Divine Love, and further illumination, with true
persevering, constancy, and patience, patiently to endure the Cross of Christ,
premised.

2. God in the very beginning of your knowledge has Sealed you with the mark
of Christ unto a further confirmation; and has Crowned you to be a Champion,
that you should work as a true owner in his Service.

3. And I exhort you as a Christian, that you would with Prayer and
supplication commit the cause to God in patience, and stand qnietly under the
Cross of Christ; and be diligent in your Talent entrusted to you; you shall
see great wonders, and your Talent will be more and more pleasant and beloved,
for so Christ has also taught us, that we should forsake all for his Name
sake; and cleave only unto him; for he requires a pure, resigned soul; in
that he will dwell.

4. You have no cause to be amazed, or terrifyed, God knows well, for what
use he employeth you;
commit your self only to him in Patience, and strive against reason which
gainsayeth and contradicts; and so you will dye unto the World and live unto
Christ; and then you will exercise your warfare aright for his loves sake; and
therefrom gain the Noble Crown of eternal life, where we shall rejoice and
enjoy one another eternally.

5. God has planted him a Rose Garden in your young heart; take heed that the
Devil sow not thorns and thistles therein, there will soon come another time,
that your Rose-bud shall bring forth its fruits; strive not to be in Office,
but stand still unto the most high, to what he will have you; let the smoke of
the Devil pass away; rejoice rather at this reproach in the mark of Christ,
etc.

THE ONE AND THIRTIETH EPISTLE.

Our Salvation [is] in the life of Jesus Christ.
1. DEAR Sir, and Christian Brother; all faithful Cordial and sincere
desires of my spirit, of true Divine light, power, and knowledge, with intimate
joy in the Divine contemplation, and [in] our Eternal fraternity in the life
of Christ.

2. I have received your Letter which you sent, and I rejoice in the Lord my
God, who does so richly and abundantly impart his grace unto us; and so open
our hearts, that we, in the conjecture of our Gifts, desire to Search into his
wisdom, and wonders.

3. And your tendered friendship is very pleasing, and acceptable to me; and
according as this letter does import, I acknowledge you, for a springing, and
very desirous branch on the Vine Christ; and also for my member and fellow twig
on this Or, Tree of Pearl.
Coral; and I wish in the power of my knowledge,
that it may be a true, constant, and immovable earnestness; as I make no
doubt, but the precious Coralline branch of the new birth is begotten in you,
out of Christ's spirit and wisdom.

4. Thereupon I also would feign,
with all my heart impart my little sap, strength, and influence, out of Gods
gifts, unto my fellow-branches and twigs, and help to quicken and refresh them
in my weak power, and also receive enjoyment of their gifts; as we are obliged
and bound mutually to do for each other, both from the command of God, and
also in the right of Nature, unto which I am in an especial manner driven in
my gifts; and for which sake I have spent much time and pains, yet in great
desire, longing, and delight; and it has been continually my earnest hope, and
the very drift, and aim of my desire to serve my Brethren in the Lord, in the
Vineyard of Christ.

5. And though I am a simple man, and un-expert and un-experienced in
Scholastic Learning, and Arts;
neither have I ever been ^ayned up to exercise my self, in the works of high
masters, and to comprehend great Mysteries in my Reason, but in my outward
occupation I have been a Tradesman, wherein I have honestly maintained my self
a long time; yet my inward occupation and exercise has with very earnest
strong desire entered into the mortification of my sinful man, inherited from
the corrupt Adam, how I might dye to my selfehood, and self will in the death
of Christ, and arise in his will to a new spirit, and will of Divine renovation
of mind and understanding.

6. Thereupon I once so strongly and sixedly Presumed.
resolved rather to for one my earthly life, then to desist from this Purpose,
and Combat; and that I have suffered therein, and therefore, the Lord knows,
who so led me through his judgment of my sins; but afterward Crowned me
with the fairest tryumphing aspect of his Divine Kingdom of joy; which to
express, I have no Pen sufficient, but do willingly beteeme, and heartily
wish it to the Reader of this Epistle, and to all the Children of God.

7. And from this Tryumphing light [or joyful convincing illumination of God]
that has been given to me, which I hitherto have written for many years; for
I obtained therein so much grace as to see and know my own Book which I my
self am, Viz. the Image of God; and moreover to behold and really to
contemplate the Center of all Beings; and to understand the Formed Word of God;
also to understand the original and meaning of the compacted framed or formed
Sensall tongue of all properties; and likewise the mental, unformed, holy
tongue, wherein I have written many high Books, which in part will be
unapprehensive to Reason, without Gods light.

8. Albeit I, as an earthly weak instrument, according to the external man,
could very hardly at first (being an un-exercised unlearned man) comprehend
and bring this high work to the understanding [or fidy express it for the
understanding] as is to be seen in the Aurora, which is the first part of my
Writings; also I intended not to make it known unto any man; but I wrote it
for my memorial of the very wonderful knowledge contemplation, and seeling
illumination; and though the spirit signified to what end it should be; yet
Reason, Viz. the external man, could not comprehend it, but it saw its
unworthiness, and lowliness; and I kept these Writings ( Viz. the Aurora) by
me, till at last I spoke of it unto one, by whose means it came before the
Learned, who presently studied and endeavored, that it might be taken from me;
where then Satan thought to make a Bon-fire of it, and thereby to scandalize
and cast an Odium upon my person; wherefore I have suffered much for Christ my
Lord his sake, that so I might follow him aright in his process.

9. But as it happened to the Devil about Christ; so also it happened to him about
my Writing;
for he that desired, and intended to persecute them, he published them, and
brought me into a greater stronger and more serious exercise; whereby I was
more exercised in Judgment; and stood the stronger in opposing the Devil and
his violent assaults in the Serpentine Ens of the Earthly Adam; and did more
and more disclose and break open the Gates of the deep; [or hidden depths of
Eternity] and am come unto the clear light; insomuch that my Writings are both
far and near read with oelight, and copyed out by many very Learned Doctors,
and other persons both of high noble and of low descent, and that wholly
without my incitement, or running; through Gods providence.

10. I would have very willingly imparted some of them now unto you, but I have
them not at hand, and cannot get them so soon at present; and it is true, that
some Treatises are written; so that I hope many an hungry soul shall be
refreshed, for the latter writings, are much clearer, and better to be In a
better understanding.
understood then the first, of which you have told me; but if you would but
take so much pains as you mention, and come to me your self; and in the fear
of God converse with me in Divine wisdom; I shall be glad, and you may take
your opportunity with me as you please; for I am continually exercised in
writing, and therefore I have laid aside my Trade to serve God and my brother
in this Calling, and to receive my reward in Heaven; albeit I shall incur
displeasure and an ungrateful Odium at the hands of Babel and the Antichrist.

11. I return many thanks for Mr Nagels salutation; and other Christian
fellow members who are in the In the imitation of Christ.
Pilgrimage of Christ, as I am informed; and when your occasions give leave,
salute them from me again most kindly; Mr. Elias Teikman is not come yet unto
me, neither do I know where he is; Mr Balthazar Walter has often made mention
of him in love; but I know him not, save only in the spirit; for I have only
heard of him by others.

12. Concerning my condition I certify you upon your desire, that I am (blessed
be God) very well at present; but I see in the Spirit a great Persecution and
Alteration approaching upon the Country and People;
which is very nigh at hand, as is mentioned and foretold in my Writings; and
it is high time to go out and fly from Babel; therefore I cannot speak of
any Rest or settlement; Note.
only all will be full of misery, Robbings, Murtherings, and unheard of
Devillishnesse in Christendom; that outrageous practices of the Cessacks
breaking through Silesia among our neighboring Countries, is very likely
known unto you; which is a certain type and symptom of the anger to come upon
these Countries; and I commend you and all Christian members unto the meek love
of Jesus Christ, and my self to their, and your love and favor.


Dated the 10. of December, New Style, 1622. J. B.

THE TWO AND THIRTIETH EPISTLE.
Our Salvation consists in the effectual working Love of Jesus Christ within
Us.
1. MY very loving, and Christian Friend; I wish you the highest Peace with the
hearty Love of a fellow-member of Christ working in the desire, that the true
Sun of the effectual love of Jesus Christ may continually arise and shine in
your Spirit, Soul, and Body.

2. Your Letter dated the 24. of January, I received 14. days after Easter;
rejoicing to see in it, that you are a thirsty, fervent, and desirous,
Searcher, and Lover of the true ground [of the knowledge of Divine Mysteries]
which I perceive you have sought, and searched for with diligence.

3. But that my writings are come to your hands and please you, is certainly
caused by the appointment of God; who brings lovers to [that which they
love,] and often uses strange means whereby he satisfyeth the desire of them
that love a thing; and feeds them with his gifts, [and graces] and puts an
Or, Living Spark.
Ens of the true fire into their love that it may burn aright, and you may
rest assured that if you continue your constancy in love to truth,
that it will open reveal and manifest it self to you in its flameing love;
and make it self certainly known; but the searching of it must be begun
aright; for we attain not the true ground of Divine knowledge by the sharp
searching, and speculation of our reason from without; but the searching most
begin from within in the hunger of the soul, for reason penetrateth no further
then its own Or, Constellation.
Astrum of the outward World, from whence reason has its Original.

4. But the soul searches its own Astrum, Viz. In the inward spiritual
World from whence this visible World has its rise efflux, and production, and
wherein its ground [and foundation] stands.

5. But if the soul would search its own Astrum [or Spiritual constellation]
Viz. the Mysterium Magnum.
grand Mystery [or the eternal divine nature] it must first wholly yield up all
its power, and its will to the divine love and grace;
and become as a child, and turn it self to its Center; by repentance, and
desire to do nothing but that only which the spirit of God is pleased to
search by it, [or employ it about.]

6. And when it has thus yielded, and resigned up it self, seeking nothing
but God, and its own Salvation; and also how it may serve, and love its
neighbor; and does then find in it self a desire to have Divine, and also
natural knowledge; it may assure it self, that it is then drawn [and
inclined] to it by God; and then it may well search and find the deep ground
that is mentioned in my Writings.

7. For the spirit of God searches by that soul; and brings it at length
into the depths of the deity, as Saint Paul says, the Spirit searches all
things, yea the deep thing of God.

8. Loving Sir,
it is a simple childlike way that leads to the highest wisdom, the World
knows it not; you need not seek for wisdom in remote places or Travail into
strange Countries for it; she stands at the door of your soul and knocks;
and if she shall but find an empty resigned free place in the soul, she
will there reveal her self indeed; and rejoice therein more then the Sun in
the Elements; if the soul yield it self up to wisdom for a full possession;
then she penetrates it with her flaming fire of love and unlocketh all
Mysteries to the soul.

9. Sir you may perhaps wonder, how a plain lay man could come to understand
such high Mysteries, having never read them, nor heard them from any man; but
loving Sir I tell you, that which you have seen in my Writings, is but a glimps
of the Mysteries, for a man cannot write them; if God should account you worthy
to have the light enkindled in your soul, you would see, taste, smell, feel, and
hear, unspeakable words of God, concerning this knowledge; and there is the
true Theosophicall School of Pentecost where the soul is taught From, or by.
of God.

10. After this there is no more any need of searching, and painful toiling
[about it] for all gates stand open; a very simple mean man may attain it, if
he hinders not himself by his own willing [Imaginations] and running; for it
lies in man before hand, and needs only to be awakened [stirred up or
quickned] by the spirit of God

11. In my Talent [or Writings] (as in my simplicity I was able to describe it)
you shall easily find the way to it; especially in this annexed That is, The
Book entitled The way to Christ; containing a Treatise of Repentance,
Resignation, or Selfe-denyall, and Regeneration.
. Book,
which also is of my Talent; and but few Weeks ago was published in print,
which Sir I present to you in love; as to my Christian fellow-member, and
exhort you to read it over often for its virtue is, the more the better liked,
[or the longer the better beloved] in this Book you will see a true short
ground, acd it is a sure ground, for the Author in this practice has found it
so by experience.

12. But for the ground of the high Natural Mysteries; which you and M.
Walter, and M. Leonhart Elvern desire a further, and clearer explanation of; be
pleased to enquire of M. Walter for it; for I have sent to you and him an
explanation and other new Writings; if you shall like them you may cause them
to be copyed out, you will find very great knowledge in them, I would that all
of you ^ight truly understand it, I would feign have made it more plain; but
in respect of the great depth; and also in regard of the unworthy, it may not
be done; Christ says Math 7. 7. Seek and you shall find; knock and it shall
he opened unto you, none can give it unto another Every one must get it
himself of God; one may well give a manuduction, or direction to another; but
he cannot give him the understanding of it.

13. Yet know that A Lilly blossometh unto you the Northern Countries; if you
destroy it not with the sectarian contention of the learned; then it will
become a great Tree among you; but if you shall rather choose to contend, then
to know the true God, then the ray [or beam of light] passes by, and hitteth
only some; and then afterward you shall be forced to draw water for the thirst
of your souls, among strange Nations.

14. If you will take it rightly into consideration, then my Writings shall
give you great furtherance and direction thereto; and the Signate-star above
your pole shall help you, for its time is come about [or borne.]

15. I will freely give you what the Lord has given me, only have a care, and
employ it aright; it will be a witness for you, against the mocker; let no man
look upon my person; it is a mere gift of God, bestowed, not only for my
sake, but also for your sake, and all those that shall get to read them.

16. Let no man gaze any longer after the Time; it is already borne [begun or
come about] whom it lights upon, him it hitteth; whosoever waketh, he sees
it; and he that sleeps sees it not; the time is appeared, and will soon
appear; he that watches sees it; many have already felt it; but there must
first a great tribulation pass over, before it be wholly manifest; the cause
is, the contention of the Learned; who tread the Cup of Christ under foot, and
contend about a Child that never was worse since men were, this shall be
manifest; therefore let no honest man defile himself with such contention;
there is a fire from the Lord in it, who will consume it; and himself reveal
the truth.

17. You shall receive of Mr Walter what he has besides, especially a table
with an Exposition of it; therein the whole ground of all Mysteries is plainly
laid down and so I commend you Sir to the love of Jesus Christ.

Dated, the 20. etc.
THE THREE AND THIRTIETH EPISTLE.
Of the Persecution against JACOB BEEM, BY GREGORY RICKTER, Primate, or
Superintendent of GERLITZ.

Our Salvation and Peace in the life of Jesus Christ.
Mr. Marcus Mausern,
1. MUCH respected, and beloved Sir; all cordial wishes of the steadfast
working Love of our Lord Jesus Christ in Soul, Spirit, aad Body, premised: I
have received both your Letters, and have observed your Christian heart,
syncerely inclined in a fellow-memberlike Love, toward me and the pure truth;
and I desire that God would ratify, strengthen, and preserve you in such a
purpose, that you may grow in the Tree of life, Jesus Christ, and bring forth
abundance of good fruit.

2. Your own reason will give you to know, that the hand of the Lord according
to his will, has guided me hitherto and brought me to such knowledge;
wherewith I have again willingly and readily served many, seeing I have not
learned my knowledge in the Schools or Books; but Or, Out of.
from the great Book of all Beings; which the hand of the Lord has opened in
me.

3. Seeing then that there is in that Book a Cross of the true understanding;
therefore God signeth his Children (to whom he gives this Book to read) with
that same Cross, on which Cross the humane death is slain, and eternal life
restored.

4. I give you (as a brother) to know, that the same mark is enstamped on my
forehead with a Tryumphing Trophy, on which the Resurrection of Jesus Christ is
imprinted.

5. Which mark is dearer unto me then all the honor and goods of the World,
that God has so highly esteemed me unworthy man, as to mark me with the
Conquering sign of his beloved son Jesus Christ.

6. At which sign of conquest the Devil is terrifyed, that he must even burst
for very anger, and thereupon has raised up a great tempest out of his Sea of
death against me, and has cast his horrible floods upon me; thinking thereby
to overwhelme and drown me.

7. But his violent streams have hitherto been altogether uneffectuall; for
the conquering Trophy of Jesus Christ has defended me, and smitten his
poysonfull darting rays unto the earth; whereby Satan's pharisaicall
murdering poison, has been revualed in many hundred men, who since that time
have turned themselves to the mark of Christ; so that I see with joy that all
things must turn to the best to them that love God.

8. The report or outcry which came unto you, was nothing else but a
pharisaicall revilement and scorn by means of a scandalous reproachful lying
Pamphlet of one sheet of paper in the Latin tongue, wherein Satan has plainly
set forth and laid open the pharisaicall heart; which by Gods permission is so
come about, that the People might learn to know and fly from the Poison of
this pharisaicall heart.

9. And I confidently believe that the grossest Devil did dictate that
Pamphlet, for his claws are manifestly and plainly therein discovered; that
it may be clearly seen that he is a liar, and a murderer; and it shall be as a
warning unto many that they have a better care unto their souls; as this
Pamphlet with us is almost by all the learned ascribed unto Satan.

10. The cause of this rage and fury, was by reason of the printed Book
concerning repentance and the true resignation; which Book has been very
profitable unto many.

11. Which shrewdly vexed the pharisaicall spirit, that such a ground should be
manifested; thinking that such a doctrine and life should be looked for and
required of him also: which is not well relished, so long as men ^it in the
lust of the flesh, and serve the belly-God in carnal pleasure, and delight.

12. Know yet for a direction, that his reproach and lies, do^ but publish and
manifest my Book; insomuch that every one both of the high, learned, and low
degree, do desire to read it, and have it in great request.

13. Which Book in a short time has Or, Sounded
come through Europe and it is much made of, yea in the Prince Electors Court
of Saxony; where I am invited to a conference with high People; the which I
have consented unto, at the end of Leipfick Fa^r, to perform; who knows what
may be done; whither the mouth of the bold slaunderer may not be stopped, and
the truth made known and manifest.

14. I exhort and entreat you therefore to wait with patience, in Christian
love and joy,
for the coming, and revelation of Jesus Christ, and his appearance, which
shall soon break forth, and destroy the works of the Devil.

15. I fear not the Devil; if God will use me any longer for his Instrument,
he will no doubt defend me well enough; for the truth needs no defense, her
defense is this, as Christ speaks; when you are persecuted for my name sake;
and when they speak all manner of evil of you falsely for my sake, rejoice,
your reward is in Heaven, also he that is just let him be just still; and he
that is wicked let him be wicked still; every one shall reap, what he has
sown.

16. Seeing then my conversation is in Heaven and I as to my body and soul run
thither, where aforehand my spirit dwells in Christ; what advantage then is
temporal dignity and honor to me? I only suffer persecution in the body, and
not in the soulet

17 What need I fear the shell which covers the Spirit? when the shell is
gone, then am I wholly in Heaven That is, wholly uncloathed of this corrupt
flesh, which cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.
with a naked face; who will deprive and bereave me of this? none; why need I
then fear the World in an Heavenly cause?

18. If the cause and ma^^e^ be evil, why suffer I disgrace and reproach; and
stand in trouble misery and fear? why do I not get rid of it? but is it good,
what need I then despair, seeing I know whom I serve? namely Jesus Christ; who
makes me conformable to his Image.

19. Is he dead, Note.
and risen again; why should not I then be also willing to suffer dye and rise
with him?
yea, his Cross is my daily dying; and his Ascension into heaven is daily done
in me

20 Yet I wait for the Crown of conquest which Jesus Christ has said up, and
am ye^ in combat and wrestling as a Champion and I exhort you as my
fellow-wrestler to fight a good fight in faith, and wait in patience for the
Revelation of Jesus Christ; and still stand fast.

21. For this smoking firebrand which now smoaketh, shall shortly be consumed
in the fire; and then the remainder shall rejoice; then it will be manifest
what I could have written unto you; which for the present is slandered and
reviled, yet only by the Ignorant.

22. But the wise will observe, mark, and take notice of it; for they observe
the time and see the darkness and also the dawning of the day.

23. Beloved Mr Marcus; that you and your Father are in good health, does
rejoice and glad me; I have received the Box of comfits and return you thanks
for them.

24. I would fain write again to the Apothecary at Wildan in Livonia* ^f I had
but an opportunity to send that way, I pray let me know when you have.

25. That which my native Country casts away, other Nations shall take up.

I send to you and your Father each of you a copy of my Books; somewhat for
good friends; for I heard that formerly you had gotten some of them for you all.

27. I have none of the other writings at hand, I would gladly have sent some
of them to you, but shortly I hope to come into those parts; and then God
willing I will bring some along with me and I commend you to the kind and
gracious love of Jesus Christ.

Dated, 5. March, 1624. J B.


THE FOUR AND THIRTIETH EPISTLE. TO FREDERICK CRAUSSEN.
Our Salvation [is] in the life of Jesus Christ in Us.
1. DEARLY respected Sir;
all hearty wishes of the Divine Love, and all bodily health, and prosperity
premised: God be pleased according to his will to ease and turn away your
crasie distemper.

2. The state of my body is yet tolerable, for which I thank God; but it is
wholly besmeared with the Pharisaicall dirt of Aspersion, that the Common sort
can scarce discern or acknowledge me to be a man.

3. So wholly and gtievously is Satan enraged against me^, and my printed
Book;
and does so exceedingly rage and rave in the chief pharisee, as if he would
devour me; but yet for these three Weeks the great fire has begun to be
somewhat allayed; in the he perceives that many hundreds do speak against
him; whom he has cur^^d reviled and condemned as well as me, he has so
horribly bedawbt me with lies, that I can scarce be known.

4. Thus Christ covers his bride, and the precious Pearl by reason of the
unworthiness of men; for the anger is enkindled in them and vengence is at
hand.

5. I pray for them and they curse me, I bless, and they revile me; and I
stand in the Trial, or proof.
Proba; and beat the mark of Christ on my forehead.

6. Yet my soul is not dismayed therein; but it accounts it for the Triumphing
Victorious sign of Christ;
for so, must man be ^et aright into the process of Christ, that he may be
made like unto his Image.

7. For Christ must be continually persecuted, reviled and shine; he is a sign
which is spoken against; but upon whomsoever he falls, him he bruiseth; and
destroys the inbred malice and iniquity of the Serpent.

8. Have I taught others this way? (I must teach it,) where^fore should it be
grievous and irksome to me to walk in the same? it happens no otherwise unto
me, then I have told others that it would go; and it goes very right; for
this is the pilgrims path of Christ.

9. For true Christians are here only guest, and strangers; and they must
travel through the Devils Kingdom to their own home; through the thistles
and thorns of Gods curse; here we must wrestle steadfastly and overcome, till
we get through; and then we shall be well rewarded.

10. For those that do now judge us, shall in the day of Gods Judgment, be
set before our eyes; where we with Christ shall pass sentence upon them; what
will they then say unto us, will they not be dumb, and judge themselves, even
as they judge us now; ah that they could but consider of it here, and now
defist and return from it.

11. I desire that God would have mercy upon them, for they know not what they
do;
they are in greater misery then those whom they persecute; they are poor
imprisoned Captives and slaves of the Devil, who does so infect, torment, and
poison them, that poison is their life.

12. And therefore they rejoice, that they bring forth the thorns and thistles
of the Devil; namely fruits in Gods anger, of which the Children of Christ
whom they persecute and drive toward their native Country, ought well to
consider; that they pray unto God for redemption, not only for themselves, but
likewise for these, their miserable poor captivated, and imprisoned
fellow members; that God would likewise illuminate them, and bring them home.

13. Dear brother it is now a time of great earnestness, let us not sleep;
for the Bridegroom passes by and inviteth his Marriage guests, he that hears
it he goes along with him to the Marriage.

14. But he that refuses; and will sleep only in the lust of the flesh; he
shall be exceedingly sorry and grieved, that he has slept away such a time of
grace.

15. It seems strange unto the World, that such should be acceptable to God,
whom the scribes [the learned Priests, and Pharises] do contemn and
persecute; and it looks not back to consider what the learned did unto the
Prophets; Christ, his Apostles, and their Successors.

16. But the present Christendom,
is merely Titular and verbal [formall and hystoricall only sticking to the
lip-labor and the devout hypocricy of the mouth] the heart is worse then when
they were Heathens;
let us seriously consider of it, and not amuse our selves with them; that a
seed may remain upon the earth; and that Christ may not always be used only
as a covering [for the cunning hypocricy of iniquity.]

17. Let us exhort, and comfort one another, that we may hold out in patience;
(for there comes yet a great storm of affliction, and Tribulation;) that we
may persevere and stand steadfast.

18. For Christianity consists not only in words and knowledge, but in power;
[what are the present contentions about, but only the conjecturall knowledge,
[mentall Idols, fantastical Images and opinions of men] they wrangle and
jangle in notions, and Images [which they have blindly persuaded their mind
and Conscience to adore] but they deny the power [of Christianity.]

19. But there comes a time of trial, where it will be seen what their Text,
Images [or mental Idols.]
opinions have been [and what their formal Church-wayes of worship and blind
Cain-ike hypocrisy have been] and now they have stuck unto them; when they
shall fall from one opinion unto another, and yet have no rest or undoubted
stayednesse.

20. Ah; their opinions are nothing but the Heathenish Idols; as they were,
before they had the name of Christ.

21. The Learned,
and Rulers seek nothing but their own profit ambition and honor therein;
Note
and they have set them up in Christ's stead; but they are only
Opinion-pedlers, [Sellers of Images and mental Idols, the internal
superstitious relics of their own reason, Babylonish imaginations] which
they sell [or reach] for Money; and he that gives them much; he shall have
devout Commendations and praise; to him they will sell plausible Curious
contrived opinions,
Images; and they care not for their Souls; if they may but gain and enjoy
their temporal Goods.

22. O; dark night; where is Christianity? is she not turned to a Or,
Perfidious Whore.
faith-breaking Adultresse; where is her love? is it not wholly turned to
Copper, Steel, and Iron? whereby may the present Christendom be known? whot
difference is there between her and the Turcks and other Heathens? are not they
as good?

23. Where is her Christian life? where is the communion of Saints;
where we are but one in Christ; where Christ is only one in us all? There is
not yet one branch on the tree of Christian life like unto the other, and there
are grown mere adverse twiggs, in opposition one against another.

24. O Brother,
we that stand, let us be wary, and watchful, and get out of The confused
entanglements of Sects and opinions.
Babel; it is high time, albeit they scorn and slay us, yet we will not
worship the Dragon nor his Image; for they that do so shall be eternally
punished.

25. Be not offended at my Persecution; and though the like happen unto you;
yet remember that there is another life? and that they do only persecute our
own Enemy which we our selves hate; they can take no more from us but the
shell [or bark] wherein the The New Man.
Tree is grown.

26. But the tree stands in Heaven, and in Paradise, in the ground of
Eternity; no Devil can root it out; let the Devils stormy g^sts pass over
it: their oppressing, and tormenting is our growth.

27. I am again moved by the adversaries, through the motion of Gods anger;
that I may grow, and wax great; for now is my Talen^ published unto my native
Country.

28. The Enemies intention is evil: yet thereby he publishes and spreads
abroad my Talent; it is here mightily desired and many an hungry Soul is
thereby refreshed; albeit the ignorant sort do cast out their reproach and
scorn against it; you shall yet hear wonderful things.

29. For the time is Text, Borne.
come; of which it was told me three years since by a Vision; namely OF
REFORMATION; the end [event or time when it shall come to passe] I commit to
God; I know it not yet perfectly.

30. And herewith I commend you unto the love of Jesus Christ.

Dated, the 8. of May, 1624.
THE FIVE AND THIRTIETH EPISTLE. A LETTER From JACOB BEHMEN. Written from
DRESDEN to GERLITZ, in the Time of his Persecution; Dated the 13. of June,
1624. TO Doctor KOBERN.
Immanuel.
1. MY very dear sir, and Christian Brother; I heartily desire the continual
working of the Love of Jesus Christ in you, that your Tree of Pearl may grow
great under the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, in such stirring and exercise;
and that we may all in that power, withstand in the Faith and in the meekness
of Christ, the wrathful enemy of Christ, which at present roareth like a
raging Lion;
and sets himself mighty against Jesus and his Children; that we may with
Paul fight a good fight, and at length get the prize, Our Salvation, thereby;
and not for temporal honor and pleasure sake, deny Christ in the Truth once
acknowledged; it would be very hard to recover it again.

2. For my part, I thank God in Christ Jesus, that he has signed me with his
Marks, and daily makes me like unto his Image; whom I pray, that I may
continue steadfast; also that he would deliver my Enemies from the abominable
death of Eternal horror, wherein at present they lie captivated, and know it
not; and bring them also into the light, that they may know this way, and come
into our Eternal Fraternity.

3. Yet to speak judiciously of these things, we certainly see before our
eyes, that this way is wholly opposite to the Devil; because he rages so much
against it without cause; it is indeed a very great wonder, that he should make
so great a stir against so small a piece of Devotion,
sure it must needs not relish, but savor ill with him; whereas there are many
greater Books, full of Foppery and Folly, and partly of Idolatry, to be found,
which he does not oppose; but his spite is only against the Way to Christ,
that none might walk in that way.

4. For at this very time especially, he thinks to set up his Kingdom
powerfully, and yet he sees at present that it has breaches in it every
where: For the Assaylant breaks in hither from many Quarters, Note, This
followed in the seventh year after the Authors Death.
especially from the North, and we can do no better at present, then not to
regard this Enemy, but overcome him with Patience under the Cross of Christ,
with earnest Repentance, and so at length he will become feeble and faint, and
this Firebrand will have an end.

5. For he is but a ^fiery flash of Gods Anger, Gregory Rickter, the Primate of
Garlitz.
which must be quenched with Divine Love and humility; we must in no way add
fuel to it, to make it burn; but kill it with Christ's Victory; as Christ with
his Love overcame the wrath of God and Hell, and bruised Death, and mightily
ruled over all his Enemies; and then such Enemies in the Anger of God, shall
not long prevail; as Christ has taught us, that we should feed our Enemies
with Meat and Drink, and rejoice when they afflict us for his sake; our
recompense is in Heaven.

6. It is not good, The temporal Sword, or make War.
out of our own self purpose, to use a Worldly Sword, or Weapon against such
an enemy of Christ; for ^o he would be but the stronger; but with Patience and
Prayer we shall well overcome him: I regard not his unjust Or, Reproaches.
revilings; I have a good Conscience concerning him; the time is coming apace,
that such an Enemy will be cut in pieces by the Sword of Gods power.

7. It is fit we should consider the Time; for Babel burns in the whole
World; and there is woe in every Street; only men see it not yet; but are
blind concerning it.

8. I give you very great thanks for your Brotherly faithfulness and
Christian care,
in that you have taken of my Wife, some things into your keeping; if the High
Priest will needs assault my House, let him do it, that it may be known in
all Countries, what a maker of uproares he is; it will tend much to the honor
of him and his; he will get a great deal of credit in the Electorall Counsel,
for having stormed my House by his trusty Officers, and broken the Windows; if
others should do, or cause such a thing, the Counsel would not suffer them in
the City.

9. Therefore I much marvel that they make such an uproare in Gerlitz, and
without cause, occasion the raising such a Or, Evil report concerning the City.
Clamor abroad against the City, if the ground should be enquired after, it
will sound but odly; nevertheless it must be so; for the time is Borne: there
will suddenly come somewhat else; this is but a sign, Type, or Figure; seeing
they have so solemnly celebrated the The day of Pentecost.
Feast of the Holy Ghost; therefore he must needs powerfully assist them;
whereby it may be very well discerned, what spirit they are the Children of,
which Spirit they serve; and this will give us so much the more cause to avoid
them: I suppose it is loathsome enough, it stinketh of Pharisaicall Pitch, and
Hellish Soot: O that God would once have pity on the simple people, who are so
very blind and do pull down the judgment of God upon themselves; which will
shortly be poured forth.

10. Their stability is very well seen; that which they approve of at one
time, the same they disallow at another time: O if some Jesuits should come,
and remand the Church from Luther again; what good Papists would they make.

11. But let it go as it does; Silence is best: they hunt after a Gnat,
and think they have caught Venison; but there lies couched a small Grain of
Mustard seed of the Cross, in it, which put Christ to death, that shall burst
their Guts, and grow to be a great Tree, and this none can resist.

12. My Wife need not cause any Window-shuts to be made; if they will break
them, they may; and then the fruits of the High Priest will be seen; let her
have a little Patience: if she can not get a place in Gerlitz, I will get a
place for her some where else, where she shall have quiet enough; but let her
stay within at home and not go out, except upon necessity, and let the Enemy
rage, he will not eat her up.

13. I must wa^te yet a while here, and ^^pect what God shall please to do;
for I have but newly gotten a litt^e acquaintance among the Great ones here,
which happens daily; and I am well yet, thanks be to God; but I have not had
any opportunity to desire any thing for my Protection, from the Lords, the The
Prince Elector of Saxony.
Prince Elector being gone a Journey, and some of the chief Lords with him.

14. Though I do not rely upon any Worldly protection; but will adventure it
on Gods name, and trust him only, of whom I have received my Talent.

15. Next Sunday, there is a Conference appointed here at my Landlords, which
the Doctor Aegius Strauch.
Superintendent himself desires to have with me; and I am invited to Supper,
where some of the Prince Electors Counselors of State will be present; what
shall pass there, I shall let you know with the first opportunity.

16. For he loves my Treatise of Repentance; only he would feign ask, and
himself hear [of ^^] concerning some points which are too high for him, from
what Ground they flow; which I am well pleased with, and shall observe the li^^.

17. So I expect likewise, the Resolution of Privy Counselor Losz, to whom I
shall repair with the soonest; and what sh^^ pa^^e there, I will let you know
with the first opportunity: I hope a^l will go well;
as God will, so I will: who knows what God will have done, or what he will
do with me; I very much marvel my self, how I am lead so wonderfully without
any intent and purpose of mine.

18. By this Bearer, I send two Rixdollers to my Wife, for her occasions; if
she want any thing, she knows well where she may have it; the Key of the
Belonging to a Table.
Drawer lies in the Parlour by the Warming Pan, upon the Shelfe: Your Treatise
lies in the Drawer, you may ask for it, your Letter which you sent to Zitta,
is not yet come to my hands; if any thing happen, let me know it; and if there
be no sure Messenger at hand, send but to Mr. Melcher Berntten at Zitta, he
has opportunity hither every week; and let him know, that he may send it away,
as we have agreed.

19. Salute my Wife and two Sons from me; and exhort them to Christian
Patience and Prayer; and to purpose no self revenge; that the Enemy may have
no advantage.

20. The business with Mr. Furstenaus his Family, is indeed not good,
nevertheless it will prove no great matter; for it is the High Priests own
reproach; and it would even turn to his great disgrace, if it were well
replied to: I would his Prince did but rightly know of it, he would Protect him
with a witness, they are the good fruits of the High Priest.

21. I hope to visit you very speedily, though I should return hither again,
it will not cost me my Neck; it is but ^^ad clamor, for there is nothing in it
but the Priests Bell-Clapper which sounds so sweetly,
it is easy to judge whether it be Christ's voice or the Devils; you need not
be so deadly afraid of this Quarrel; it is not a business you need be
ashamed of; it is nothing but Babels Or, Peale.
Bell, which is rung to give warning [or to sound the Alarm.]

22. Do but stand to it stoutly in the Spirit of Christ, and then Christ's *
Bell will also be rung; God give them and us all, a good mind.

23. Pray salute Mr. Frederick Renischen; I could do nothing for him here yet;
for things go here very much by Favor, and here are many attendants when
there is any thing to be had, I would very readily serve him in Love, if I were
but able; I cannot yet counsel my self, till God help me: my [Sonne] Jacob
shall stay still at Gerlitz, that his Mother may have some comfort there, till
I can dispose it otherwise; it should be already, if I were not to stay here,
let her have but Patience: And so I commend you into the Love of Jesus Christ.

Translated into the Nether-Dutch out of Jacob Behmens own handwriting: And
out of the Nether-Dutch into English.

