THE WAY TO CHRIST Discovered.

BY JACOB BEHMEN.

In these Treatises. 1. Of true Repentance. 2. Of true Resignation. 3. Of
Regeneration. 4. Of the Super-rationall life.


ALSO, The Discourse of illumination: The Compendium of Repentance. And the
mixed world, etc.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for H. Blunden at the Castle in Cornhill, 1648.

THE FIRST BOOK Of true Repentance. SHOWING, How man should stir up himself in
mind, and will in himself: and what his earnest purpose and consideration must
be.

Written in the Germane Language Anno, 1622. BY JACOB BEHMEN.

MARK. 1. 15. The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is come near:
Repent and believe the Gospel.

Printed by M. S. 1648.

The AUTHORS Preface to the Reader that loves God.
REader, who love God, if thou will use this Book aright, and act in good
earnest, thou shall certainly find the benefit thereof; but I desire thou
may be warned, that (if thou art not in earnest,) not to meddle with the
dear Names of God, in which and by which the Most High Holiness is named,
stirred, and powerfully desired, lest they kindle the Anger of God in thy
soul. For we must not abuse the Holy Names of God; This little Book is only
for those, that would feign repent, and are in a desire to begin. Both sorts
will find what manner of words are therein, and whence they are born. Be you
herewith commended to the Eternal goodness and mercy of God.

OF TRUE REPENTANCE.
How Man must stir up himself in will and mind; and what his consideration
and earnest purpose must be when he will Or Work.
perform powerful (and effectual) Repentance: and with what mind he must
appear before God, when he will ask and obtain of him remission of sins.

WHen man will go about Repentance, and with his prayers turn to God; before
he begin to pray, he must consider his own mind, that it is wholly and
altogether turned away from God, that it is become faithless to God, that it
is only bent upon this temporal, frail and earthly life, bearing no sincere
love toward God and his neighbor; and also that it wholly lusts and walks
contrary to the commandments of God, seeking it self only, in the temporal
and transitory lusts of the flesh.

Secondly, he must consider that all this is an enmity against God, which Satan
has raised and stirred up in him, by his deceit in our first Parents; for
which abominations sake we die the death, and must undergo corruption with our
bodies.

Thirdly, he must consider the three horrible chains wherewith our soul is
fast bound during the time of this earthly life: the first is the severe Anger
of God, the Abyss and dark world, which is the Center and creaturly life of
the soul. The second, is the desire of the devil against the soul, whereby
he continually fifteth and tempts the soul and without intermission striveth
to throw it from the truth of God into vanity, viz. into pride, covetousness,
envy and anger, and with his desire blows up and kindles those evil
properties in the soul, whereby the will of the soul turns away from God
and enters into self. The third and most hurtful chain, wherewith the poor
soul is tied, is the corrupt and altogether vain, earthly and mortal flesh
and blood, full of evil desires and inclinations.

Here he must consider, that he lies close prisoner with soul and body, in
the mire of sins, in the anger of God, in the jaws of the pit of Hell; that
the anger of God burns in him in soul and body, and that he is that stinking
keeper of Swine, that has spent and consumed his fathers inheritance, (viz.
the love and mercy of God) with the fatted swine of the divill in earthly
pleasures, and has not observed the dear Covenant and atonement of the
innocent death and passion of Jesus Christ, which Covenant God of mere Grace
has Or put.
given into our humanity and reconciled us in him; also he must consider that
he has wholly forgotten the Covenant of holy Baptism (in which he has
promised to be faithful and true to his Savior,) and so wholly defiled and
obscured his righteousness with sin, (which righteousness God has freely
bestowed upon him in Christ:) that he now stands before the face of God with
the fair garment of Christ's innocence (which he has defiled:) as a dirty
ragged and patched keeper of Swine, that has continually eaten the grains of
vanity with the devils swine, and is not worthy to be called a Son of the
Father and member of Christ.

Fourthly, he must earnestly consider, that wrathful death waits upon him
every hour and moment, and will lay hold on him in his sins, in his garment
of a Swine keeper, and throw him into the pit of hell, as a for sworn person
and breaker of faith, who ought to be kept in the dark dungeon of death to the
judgment of God.

Fifthly, he must consider the earnest and severe judgment of God, where he
shall be presented living with his abominations before the judgment; and all
those whom he has here offended and injured with words and works, and caused
to do evil, (so that by his instigation or compulsion they also have
committed evil) shall come in against him, cursing him, and all this before
the eyes of Christ, and also before the eyes of all holy Angels and men: and
that there he shall stand in great shame and ignominy, and also in great terror
and eternal desperation, and that it shall for ever grieve him that he has
fooled away so great and eternal happiness and salvation for the pleasure of
so short a time, and not looked to himself better, that he might also have
been in the communion of the Saints, and have enjoyed eternal light, and
divine power and virtue.

Sixthly, he must consider, that the ungodly loses his noble image (God having
created him for his Image) and gets in stead thereof a deformed Larva or
monstrous shape.
vizard, like a hellish worm or ugly Beast, wherein he is Gods enemy and
against heaven and all holy Angels and men, and that his communion is for ever
with the devils and hellish worms in the horrible darkness.

Seventhly, He must earnestly consider the eternal punishment and torment of
the damned, that in eternal horror they shall suffer torments in their
abominations, which they have committed here, and may never see the land of the
Saints in all eternity, nor get any ease or refreshment, as appears by
[Dives] the rich man.

All this, man must earnestly and seriously consider, and remember, that God
has created him in such a fair and glorious Image, in his own likeness, in
which he himself will dwell, that he has created him in his praise for man's
own eternal joy and glory, viz, that he might dwell with the holy Angels, and
children of God, in great joy, power and glory, in the eternal light in
singing and melodious harmony of the angelical and divine Kingdom of joy, to
rejoice eternally with the children of God without fear of any end, where no
evil thoughts could touch him, neither care nor trouble, neither heat nor
cold, where no night is known, where there is no day or time any more, but an
everlasting joy, where soul and body tremble for joy, and where he should
rejoice at the infinite wonders and virtues in brightness of colors and
ornament of the infinite begetting in the wisdom of God, upon the new
christaline Earth, which shall be as transparent glass; and that he does so
wilfully lose all this, for so short and poor a times-sake, which yet in this
vanity, in the evil life of the voluptuous flesh, is full of misery fear and
trouble, in mere vexation; and it goes with the wicked as with the righteous,
as the one must die so must the other, yet the death of the Saints is an
entrance into the eternal rest; but the death of the wicked an entrance into
the eternal unquietness.

Eighthly, He must consider the course of the world, that all things are but a
play, wherewith he spends his time in unquietness; and that it goes with
the rich and mighty, as with the poor and the beggar; that all of us equally
live and move in the four Elements; and that the mouthfull or morsel of the
poor, is as relishing and savoury to him in his toil and labor, as that of
the rich is to him in his cares; also that all of us do live Or by
in one breath, and that the rich man has nothing but the pleasure of the
palate and the lust of the eye more then other men, for else it goes with the
one as with the other; for which lust of the eye, man so foolishly forgoeth so
great a happiness, and for the sake thereof brings himself into so great
and eternal unquietness.

In this consideration man shall feel in his own heart and mind (especially
if he Or model.
represent and set before his eyes his own end) that he shall Or obtain a
drawing.
get a hearty sighing and longing after the mercy of God; and will begin to
bewail his committed sins, that he has spent his days so ill, and not
observed nor considered, that he stands in this world in a field, in the
growing to be a fruit, either in the Love or in the Anger of God: and then he
will first begin to find in himself, that he has not yet labored at all in
the vineyard of Christ, and that he is a dry branch in the vine of Christ. And
then in many, (whom the Spirit of Christ touches in such a consideration)
there arises abundant sorrow, grief of heart, and inward lamentation over
the days of his wickedness, which he has spent so in vanity, without any
working in the Vineyard of Christ.

Such a one, now, whom the Spirit of Christ brings into sorrow and
Repentance; so that his heart is opened, that he can know and bewail his sins,
is very easily to be helped; he needs but to draw to him the promise of
Christ, viz. That God wills not the death of a sinner, but that he wishes
them all to come unto him and he will refresh them; and that there is great
joy in heaven for one sinner that repents: let such a one but lay hold on the
words of Christ, and wrap himself up into the passion and death of Christ.

But I will speak with those, who feel indeed a desire in themselves to
repent, and yet cannot come to acknowledge, and sorrow for their committed
sins, the flesh saying continually to the soul: stay a while, it is well
enough, or it is time enough to morrow, and when to morrow is come, yet the
flesh says again, to morrow; the soul in the mean while sighing and fainting,
conceives neither any true sorrow for the sins it has committed, nor any
comfort: Unto such a one I say I will write a process or way which I my self
have gone [that he may know] what he must do, and how it went with me, if
peradventure any be minded to follow it, and then he shall perceive what is
hereafter written.

Or a way to conversion.
A process of Repentance.
WHen any man finds in himself, by the former consideration, a hunger, that
he would willingly repent, and yet finds no true sorrow in himself for his
sins which he has committed, and yet [perceiveth] an hunger, or desire to
sorrow; being the poor and captive soul continually sigheth, fears, and must
acknowledge it self guilty of sins before the Judgment of God: such a one I
say can take no better course then this, viz. to wrap up his senses and mind,
and also his reason together, and make to himself at the same time presently
in the first consideration, (when he perceives in himself a desire to repent)
a mighty strong purpose and resolution that he will this very hour, nay, this
minite immediately, enter into Repentance, and go forth from his wicked way, and
not at all regard the power and honor of the world, and if it should be
required, would forsake and disesteeme all things for true Repentance sake, and
take such an earnest firm and strong resolution that he will never go forth
from it again, though he should be made the fool and scorn of all the world
for it: and that with his mind he will go forth from the beauty and pleasure
of the world, and patiently enter into the Passion and Death of Christ in and
under the Cross, and set all his hope and confidence upon the life to come;
and that now in righteousness and truth he will enter into the Vineyard of
Christ, and do the will of God; and in the Spirit and will of Christ begin and
finish all his actions in this world, and for Christ's Word and Promise sake,
(who has promised us heavenly reward;) willingly suffer and bear every
adversity and cross, that he may but be numbered in the communion or
fellowship of the children of Christ, and in the blood of the Lamb Jesus
Christ be incorporated and united unto his Humanity.

He must firmly imagine to himself, and wholly wrap up his soul in this, that
in this his purpose he shall obtain the love of God in Christ Jesus, and that
God will give unto him, according to his faithful promise, that noble pledge,
the holy Ghost for a beginning, that, in the Humanity of Christ, as to the
heavenly divine substance, he shall be borne a new again in himself, and that
the Spirit of Christ will renew his mind, Or in.
with his Love and Power, and strengthen his weak faith; also that, in his
divine hunger, he shall get the flesh and blood of Christ for food and drink
in the desire of his soul, which continually hungreth and thristeth after As
its nutriment.
it, and with the thirst of the soul drink the water of eternal life, out of
the sweet fountain of Jesus Christ, as Christ's most true and steadfast Promise
is.

He must also wholly and firmly Or represent or set before himself.
imagine to himself the great love of God. That God wills not the death of a
sinner, but that he repent and live; that Christ calls poor sinners so
kindly and graciously to himself, and will refresh them, and that God has
sent his Son into the world, to seek and save that which is lost, viz. the
poor repentant and returning sinner; and that for the poor sinners sake he
has given his Life into Death, and died for him in our Humanity which he took
upon him.

Furthermore he must firmly imagine to himself, that God in Christ Jesus,
will much rather hear him and receive him to grace, then he come: and that God
in the love of Christ in the most dear and precious Name JESUS, cannot Will
any evil: that there is no angry countenance [at all] in this Name, but that
it is the highest and deepest love and faithfulness, the greatest sweetness
of the Diety in the great Name JEHOVAH, which he has manifested in our
Humanity De ca^ed.
corrupted, and Or blown out.
disappeared as to the heavenly part, which in Paradise disappeared through
sin; and therefore moved himself in his heart to flow into us with his sweet
love, that the anger of his Father, which was kindled in us, might be quenched
and turned into love by it; all which was done for the poor sinners sake, that
he might get an open gate of grace again.

In this consideration he must firmly imagine to himself, that this very
hour and instant he stands before the face of the holy Trinity, and that God
is really present within and without him, as the holy Scripture witnesses
saying: Am not I he that fills all things? and in another place it says, The
word is near thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart: also it says, We will come
unto you and make our dwelling in you; also, Behold, I am with you always even
to the end of the world; also, The Kingdom of God is within you.

Thus he must firmly know and believe, that with his soul he stands really
before the face of Jesus Christ even before the holy Deity, and that his soul
has turned its back to the face of God, and [must resolve] that he will this
very hour turn the eyes and desire of his soul toward God again, and with
the poor lost and returning son come to the Father. He must with the eyes of
his soul and mind cast down, in fear and deepest humility, begin to
confess his sins and unworthiness before the face of God as follows.

A short form of Confession before the eyes of God.
Every one, as his case and necessity requires, may order and enlarge this
confession as the holy Ghost shall teach him. I will but set down a short
direction.

O, Thou great unsearchable God, Lord of all Or beings.
things; Thou, who in Christ Jesus, of great love toward us, have manifested
thy self with thy holy substance in our Humanity: I, poor unworthy sinful
man* come before thy Presence, which thou have manifested in the Humanity of
Jesus Christ, (though I am not worthy to lift up mine eyes to thee,)
acknowledging and confessing before thee, that I am guilty of unfaithfulness
and breaking off from thy great love and grace which thou have freely bestowed
upon us. I have left the Covenant, which of mere grace thou have made with me
in Baptism, in which thou have received me to be a child and heir of eternal
life, and have brought my desire into the vanity of this world, and defiled my
soul therewith, and made it altogether beastiall and earthly, so that my soul
knows not it self, because of the mire of sin, but accounts it self a
Or Stepchild.
strange child before thy face, not worthy* to desire thy grace. I lie in the
filth of sin, and the vanity of my corrupt flesh, up to the very lips of my
soul, and have but a small spark of the living breath left in me, which
desires thy grace. I am so dead in vanity, that, in this vanity, I dare not
lift up mine eyes to thee.

O God in Christ Jesus, Thou who for poor sinners sakes did become Man to
help them, to thee I complain, to thee I have yet a spark of refuge in my
soul: I have not regarded thy purchased inheritance, which thou have purchased
for us poor men by thy bitter Death, but made my self partaker of the heritage
of vanity, in the anger of thy Father, in the curse of the earth, and am
ensnared in sin and half dead as to thy Kingdom. I lie in feebleness as to
thy strength and the wrathful death waits for me: the devil has poisoned
me, so that I know not my Savior; I am become a Barren or unprofitable.
wild branch in thy tree, and have consumed mine inheritance which is in thee,
with the devils Swine: what shall I say before thee, who am not worthy of thy
grace? I lie in the sleep of death which has captivated me, and am fast bound
with three strong chains* O thou breaker-through-death, assist thou me I
beseech thee, I can not, I am able to do nothing; I am dead in my self, and
have no strength before thee, neither dare I for great shame lift up my eyes
before thee, for I am the defiled keeper of Swine, and have spent my
inheritance with the false adulterous whore of vanity in the lusts of the
flesh; I have sought my self in my own lust, and not thee. Now in my self, I
am become a fool, I am naked and bare, my shame stands before thy eyes, I
cannot hide it, thy judgment waits for me, what shall I say before thee,
who art the Judge of all the world? I have nothing else to bring before thee,
here I stand naked and bare before thee, and I fall down before thy face,
bewailing my misery, and fly to thy great mercy, though I am not worthy of it,
yet receive me but in thy Death, and let me but die from my death in thy Death;
cast me down I pray thee to the ground in my received I, that which is called I
or my self.
self and kill this self of mine through thy death, that I may live no more to
my self, seeing I, in my self work [nothing] but sin, therefore I pray thee
cast down to the ground this wicked beast which is full of false deceit and
selfe-desire, and deliver this poor soul from itsheavie bonds.

O merciful God, it is thy love and longsuffering that I lie not already in
hell, I yield my self, with my whole will, senses and mind up into thy grace,
and fly to thy mercy. I call upon thee through thy death, from that Or dying
spark ready to go out.
small spark of life in me, encompassed with death and hell, which open their
throat against me, and would wholly swallow me up in death; upon thee I call,
who have promised, thou will not quench the smoking flax: I have no other way
to thee but thy Death and Passion, because thou have made our death Life by thy
Humanity, and broken the chains of Death, and therefore I sink the desire of
my soul down into thy Death, into the gate of thy Death, which thou have
broake open.

O thou great fountain of the love of God, I beseech thee, [helpe mee*] that I
may die from my vanity, and sin; in the death of my Redeemer Jesus Christ.

O thou breath of the great love of God, quicken I beseech thee my weak breath
in me, that it may begin to hunger and thirst after thee. O Lord Jesus, thou
sweet strength, I beseech thee give my soul to drink of thy fountain of
Grace thy sweet water of eternal life, that it may awake from death and
thrist after thee. O how extreme fainting I am for want of thy strength. O
merciful God do thou turn me I beseech thee, I can not [turn my selfe] O
thou vanquisher of death, help me I pray thee to wrestle: How fast does the
Enemy hold me with his three chains, and will not suffer the desire of my
soul to come before thee! I beseech thee, come and take the desire of my soul
into thy self, be thou my drawing to the Father, and deliver me from the
devils Bonds, look not upon my deformity in standing naked before thee having
lost thy garment: I pray thee do but thou cloth my breath which yet lives in
me, and desires thy grace, and let me yet once see thy salvation!

O thou deep love, I pray thee take the desire of my soul into thee; bring it
forth out of the bonds of Death through thy Death, in thy Resurrection, in
thee. O quicken me in thy strength, that my desire and will may begin to spring
up and flourish anew. O thou vanquisher of death and of the wrath of God do
thou overcome in me Or I, or Ihood, or Inesse, that which we mean when we say
it is I.
self, break its will and bruise my soul, that it may fear before thee, and
be ashamed of its own will before thy judgment, that it may be obedient to
thee as an instrument of thine, Or Bow.
subdue it in the bonds of death, take away its power, that it may Will nothing
without thee.

O God the Holy Ghost in Christ my Savior, teach me I pray thee, what I shall
do, that I may turn to thee; O draw me in Christ to the Father, and help me,
that now and from hence forward I may go forth from sin and vanity, and
never any more enter into it again; Stir up in me a true sorrow for the
sins I have committed: O keep me in thy Bonds, and let me not loose from
thee, lest the Devil sift me in my wicked flesh and blood, and bring me again
into the death of dea h: O enlighten thou my spirit* that I may see the divine
path, and walk in it continually; O take that away from me, which always
turns me away from thee; O give me that which always turns me to thee;
take me wholly from my self, and give me wholly to thy own self. O let me
begin nothing, let me will, think and do nothing without thee. O Lord how
long! Indeed I am not worthy of that which I desire of thee: I pray thee let
the desire of my soul dwell but in the gates of thy Courts, make it but a
servant of thy servauts; O deliver it out of that horrible pit, wherein there
is no comfort nor refreshment.

O God in Christ Jesus! I am blind in my self, and know not my self for
vanity; thou art hidden from me in my blindness, and yet thou art near unto
me: but thy wrath which my desire has awakened in me, has made me dark: O
take but the desire of my soul to thee, prove it O Lord and bruise it, that my
soul may attain a Ray of thy sweet Grace.

I lie before thee as a dying man, whose life is passing from his lips, as a
small spark [going out,] kindle it O Lord, and raise up the breath of my soul
before thee. Lord I wait for thy Promise, which thou have made, saying, As I
live I will not the death of a sinner, but that he should turn and live. I
sincke down my self into the Death of my Redeemer Jesus Christ and wait for
thee, thy Word is Truth and Life Amen.

In this or the like manner every one may confess his sins, as he himself
finds in his conscience, what finnes he has brought his soul into. Yet if
his purpose be truly earnest, to use a form is needless, for the Spirit of
God, which at that instant is in the will of the mind, will it self make the
prayer for him, in his conscience; for it is it [the Spirit of God] which in a
true earnest desire works repentance, and intercedeth for the soul before
God, through the death of Christ.

But I will not hide from the beloved Reader, who has a Christian purpose,
[but shew] how it commonly uses to go [with those who are] in such a firm
purpose and resolution; though it goes otherwise with* one then with another,
according as his purpose is [more or lesse] earnest and great: for the Spirit
of God is not bound, but uses diverse Or processes.
ways, as he knows [fittest for] every one. Yet he that has been in the
wars, can tell how to fight, and inform another that may happen to be in the
like case.

Now if it so come to pass, that such a heart with a strong resolution and
purpose does thus come before God, and enter into repentance: it happens to it
as with the Canaanitish woman, as if God would not hear; the heart remains
without comfort, its sins and unworthiness do also present themselves, as if
it were unworthy of comfort; the mind is as it were Or dumb.
speechless, the soul groaneth in the deep, the heart receives nothing, nor
can it so much as pour forth its confession before God, as if the heart and
soul were shut up: the Soul would feign, but the flesh keeps it captive;
the Devil shuts it up strongly, and represents, to it the way of vanity
again, and tickleth it with the lust of the flesh, and says in the mind,
stay a while, do this or that first; gather money or goods aforehand that thou
may not stand in need of the world, and then afterward enter into an
Virtuous pious or godly life.
honest life, into repentance, it will be time enough then.

O how many hundreds do perish in such a beginning, if they go back again
into vanity, and are as a young graft broken off with the wind, or weithered
by the heat.

Beloved soul, mark: if thou will be a champion in thy Savior Christ against
death and hell, and would have thy young graft grow and become a tree in the
Kingdom of Christ, thou must go on, and stand fast in thy first earnest
purpose, it costeth thy first paternall inheritance, and thy body and soul
too, to become either an Angel in God, or a Devil in Hell. If thou will be
crowned, thou must fight, thou must overcome in Christ, and not yield to the
Devil: thy purpose must stand firm, thou must not prefer temporal honor
and goods before it; when the spirit of the flesh says, stay a while, it is
not convenient yet: then the soul must say, now is my time, for me to go
back again into my fathers [my native] Country, out of which my father Adam
has brought me; no creature shall keep me back, and though thou earthly body
should thereby decay and perish, yet I will now enter with my will and whole
desire into the Garden of Roses of my Redeemer Jesus Christ, through his
suffering and death into him, and in the death of Christ subdue thee thou
earthly body, which has swallowed up my Pearl from me, which God gave to my
Father Adam in Paradise: and I will break the will of thy voluptuousness,
which is in vanity, and bind thee as a mad-dogge, with the chain of my
earnest purpose, and though thereby thou should become a fool in the
account of all men, yet thou must and shall obey the earnest purpose of my
soul, none shall unloose thee from this chain, but the temporal death.
Whereto God and his strength help me. Amen.

A short Direction,
How the poor soul must come before God again, and how it must fight for the
noble garland, what kind of weapons it must use, if it will go to wars
against Gods Anger, against the Devil, the World, and Sin, against flesh and
blood, also against the [influence of the] stars and elements and all his other
enemies.

BEloved Soul, there is earnestness required to do this, it must not be a
mere commemoration or repeating of words; the earnest resolved will must drive
this work, else nothing will be attained. For if the soul will obtain the
triumphant Garland of Christ from the Noble Or the Divine wisdom.
Sophia it must woo her for it in great desire of love, to get it at her
hands, it must entreat her in her most holy Name for it, and come before her
in most modest humility, and not like a lustful Bull or a wanton Venus; for so
long as any are such, they must not desire these things; for they shall not
obtain them, and though something should be obtained by such in that
condition, it would be but as a glimpse. but a chaste and modest mind may well
obtain so much, as to have the soul in its noble Image (which died in Acam,)
quickened in the heavenly Corporality, as to the inward ground, and put on the
Garland, yet, if this come to pass, it is taken off again from the soul, and
laid by as a Crown uses to be, after a King is crowned with it, it is laid
by and kept: so it is also with the soul, because it is yet encompassed with
the house of sin; that if the soul should fall again, it Crown might not
be defiled. This ^ spoken plainly enough for the children that know and have
tried these things: None of the wicked are worthy to know any more of them.

Or way.
The Process.
A sober mind is there requisite which in an earnest purpose, all deepests
humility, (with sorrow for ^ sins*) comes before God, in which there is such
a resolution, that a man will not enter any more into the old footsteps of
vanity, and though the whole world should account, him a fool for it, and he
should loose both Honor and Goods, nay and the temporal life also, yet he
would abide constant therein.

If ever he will obtain the love and marriage of the noble Sophia, he must
make such a vow as this in his purpose and mind. For Christ himself says: He
that forsakes not wife and children, brethren and sisters, money and goods,
and all that even he has, and even his earthly life, to follow me, he is not
worthy of me: Here Christ means the Mind of the soul, so that if there were
any thing that would keep the mind back from it, though it have never so
fair and glorious a pretense, or show in this world, the mind must not regard
it, but rather part with it, then with the love of the Noble Virgin Sophia, in
the bud and blossom of Christ, in his tender Humanity in us, as to the
Heavenly Corporality. For this is the Flower in Sharon, the Rose in the Jericho.
Valley, wherewith Solomon delights himself, and terms it his dear Love,
his chaste Virgin, which he loved so much, as all other Saints before and after
him did, whosoever has obtained her, called her his pearl.

After what manner to pray for it, you may ^ee by this short direction
following: the work it self must be committed to the Holy Ghost, in every
heart wherein it is sought: he ^ormeth and frames the Prayer for him.

The Prayer.
I Poor unworthy person come before thee O Great and Holy God, and I lift up
mine eyes to thee, though I be no^ worthy, yet thy great mercy, viz. thy
faithful Promise in thy word, has now encoucouraged me to lift the eyes of
the de^i^e of my soul up to thee: for my soul has now laid hold on the word
of thy promise, and received it into it, and therewith it con^eth to thee, and
though ^t be but a s^^ange child before thee, which was d^s^^bedie^t unto
thee, yet now it desires to be obedient* and my soul does now i^fold it self
with its desire into that word which became man, which became flesh and blood,
which has broken (...) and death in my humanity, which has changed the Anger
of God into love in the soul, which has deprived death of its power, and hell
of its victory in soul and body; which has opened a gate for my soul to the
clear face of thy strength and power. O Great and Most Holy God; I have
brought the hunger and desire of my soul into this most holy Word, and now I
come before thee* and in my hunger call into thee, thou living fountain,
through thy word which became flesh and blood: thy word being become the life
in our flesh* therefore I receive it firmly into the desire of my soul, as my
own life: and I p^erce into thee with the desire of my soul, through the word
in the flesh of Christ; viz. through his holy conception in the Virgin Mary,
his whole Incarnation, his holy Nativity, his Baptism in Jordan, his
temptation in the wil^ernene, where he overcame the Kingdom of the Devil, and
of this world, in the Humanity: through all his powerful miracles, which he
did on earth; through his reproach and ignominy, his innocent death and
passion, the shedding of his blood, when Gods anger in soul and flesh was
drowned: through his rest in the Sepulcher, when he awaked our father Adam ou^
of his sleep, who was fallen into a dead sleep as to the Kingdom of Heaven;
through his love, which pierced through the Anger, and destroyed Hell in the
soul; through his resurrection from the dead, his ascension, the sending of
the holy Spirit into our soul and spirit* and through all his words and
promises: [one of which is] that thou O God the Father wilt give the holy
Spirit to them that ask it, in the Name and through the Word which became man.

O thou life of my flesh, and of my soul in Christ my Brother, I beseech thee
in the hunger of my soul, and entreat thee with all my powers, though they be
weak, to give me* what thou have promised me, and freely bestow upon me in my
Savior Jesus Christ, viz. his flesh for food, and his blood for drink, to
refresh my poor hungry soul, that it may be quickened, and strengthened in
the Word which became man, by which it may long and hunger after thee aright.

O thou deepest love in the most sweet Name JESUS, give thy self into the
desire of my soul, for therefore thou have moved thy self, and according to
thy great sweetness manifested thy self in the humane nature* and called us
to thee, us that hunger and thirst after thee, and have promised us that thou will ref^esh us; I now open the lips of my soul to thee O thou sweet Truth; and
though I am not worthy to desire it of thy holiness, yet I come to thee through
thy bitter passion and death thou having sprinkled my uncleanesse with thy
blood, and sanctified me in thy Humanity, and made an open gatefor me through
thy death, to thy sweet love in thy blood, through thy five holy wounds from
which thou did shed thy blood; I bring the desire of my soul into thy love.

O Jesus Christ, thou Son of God and man, I pray thee receive into thy self
thy purchased inheritance, which thy Father has given thee. I cry within me,
[that I may enter] thorough thy holy blood and death into thee; Open thy self
in me, that the Spirit of my soul may reach thee, and receive thee into it.
Lay hold on my thirst in me with thy thirst; bring thy thirst after us men,
which thou had upon the Cross, into my thirst, and give me thy blood to
drink in my thirst, that my death in me which holds me captive, may be
drowned in the blood of thy love, and that my Or disappeared.
extinguished Image, (which as to the Kingdom of Heaven dis appeared in my
father Adam through sin) may b made alive through thy powerful blood, and
cloth my soul with it again, as with the new body which dwells in heaven,
in which Image, thy holy power and word which became man dwells, which is the
Temple of thy holy Spirit, which dwells in us: as thou have promised us,
saying, we will come to you, and dwell in you.

O thou great Love of Jesus Christ, I can do no more but sink my desire into
thee, thy word which became man, is truth: since thou have bidden me come, now
I come. Be it unto me according to thy Word and Will. Amen.

A Warning to the Reader.
BEloved Reader, of love to thee, I will not conceal from thee what is here
earnestly signified to me. If thou love the vanity of the flesh still, and
ar^ not in an earnest purpose on the way to the Or Regeneration.
new birth, intending to become a new* man, then leave the above written words
in these Prayers unnamed, or else they will turn to a judgment of God in
thee. Thou must not take the holy names in vain, thou art faithfully warned,
they belong to the thristy soul: if the soul be in earnest, it shall find by
experience what [words] they are.

A Direction,
How the soul must meet its beloved, when its beloved knocks in the Center,
in the shut chamber of the soul.

BEloved soul thou must be earnest, without intermission, thou shall
certainly obtain the love of a Kiss from the Or Divine wisdom.
noble Sophia in the holy Name JESUS, for she stands however before the
door of the soul knocking and warning the sinner of his wicked way: Now if he
once thus desires her love, she is ready for him, and kisseth him with the
beams of her sweet love, from whence the heart receives joy, but she does
not presently lay her self into the Marriage bed with the soul; that is, she
does not presently awaken the extinguished heavenly image in her self which
disappeared In Paradise.
in Adam; there is danger to man in it; for if Adam and Lucifer fell, Having it
manife sted in them.
it may then easily so come to pass with man he being yet so strongly bound in
vanity.

The bond of thy Promise must be faithful, before she will crown thee; thou
must be tempted first and tried; she takes the beams of her love from thee
again, to see whether thou will prove faithful; also she lets thee stand
and answers thee not so much as with one look of her love: for before she
will crown thee thou must be judged, that thou might taste the The vinegar
or dreggs.
bitter potion which thou have filled for thy self in thine abominations: thou
must come before the gates of hell first, and there show forth thy victory for
her in her love, in that strength, wherewith she beheld thee in opposition to
the devils aspect.

Christ was tempted in the wilderness, and if thou will put on him, thou must
go through his whole Process or journey.
progress from his Incarnation to his Assention: and though thou art not able
nor need to do that which he has done; yet thou must enter wholly into his
process and therein die continually from the vanity of the soul, for the
virgin Sophia espouseth not her self to the soul except in this property
which springs up in the soul through the death of Christ, as a new plant
standing in heaven: the earthly body cannot comprehend her in this Or Time.
life, for it must first die from vanity; but the heavenly Image which
disappeared in Adam, viz. the true seed of the woman (wherein God became man*
and into which he brought his living seed, the heavenly substantiality,) is
capable of the Pearl, after the manner it came to pass in Mary in the Bound
end or full filling.
limit of the Covenant.

Therefore take heed what thou do, when thou have made thy prom^se, keep
it, and then she will crown thee rather then thou would be crowned, but
thou must be sure when the Tempter comes to thee with the pleasure, beauty,
and glory of the world, that then thy mind reject it and say; I must be a
servant and not a master in the Vineyard of Christ; I am but a servant of God
in and over all that I have and I must do with it as his Word teaches me; my
heart must sit down with the simple and lowly, in the dust, and be humble
always. What state and condition soever thou art in, humility must be in the
front, or else thou will not obtain her marriage: the free will of thy soul
must stand as a champion: for it the devil cannot Or victorize.
prevail against the soul with vanity, and if the soul will not bite at the
bait, then he comes with the souls nworthinesse and catalogue of sins,
and then thou must fight hard, and here the merits of Christ must be set in the
front, or else the creature cannot prevail against the devil, for in* this it
goes so terribly with many that the outward reason thinks that person to be
distracted, and po^ened with the devil: the devil defends himself so
horribly in many (especially if he have had a great Fortress, Castle, or den.
Fort of prey in him) that he must be stoutly assaulted before he will depart
and leave his fort of prey, here heaven and hell are fighting one against the
other.

Now if the soul continue constant and gets the victory over the devil in
all his a^^aults* disesteeming all temporal things for the love of its noble
Sophia, then the precious garland will be set* upon it for a Or ^nsigne
token of victory.

Here the virgin, (which manifests her self from the dear name JESUS with
Christ* the treader upon the Serpent, Gods anointed) comes to the soul, and
kisseth it with her sweetest love in the essence most inwardly and impresseth
her love into its desire for a token of victory: and here Adam in his heavenly
part rises again from death in Christ; of which I cannot write, for there is
no pen in this world that can express it, it is the wedding of the Lamb,
where the noble Pearl is sown with very great triumph, though in the
beginning it be small like a grain of mustard seed, as Christ says.

Now when the wedding is over, the soul must take heed that this Tree
pearl^ree or tree of faith.
often spring and grow, as it has promised its Virgin. For then the Devil will
presently come with his tempestuous storm, ungodly people, who will scoff at,
contemn and cry down this for madness, and then a man must enter into the
Process of Christ, under his cross: Here it will appear indeed and in truth
what Christians we are: here he must suffe himself to be proclaimed a foo^e
and ungodly wretch; nay his greatest friends, who favored him, or flattered
him in the lusts of the flesh, will now be his enemies, and though they know
not why yet they will hate him: thus Christ hides his Bride wholly under the
cross, that she may not be known in this world; The Devil also striveth that
these children may be hidden from the world, lest perhaps many such branches
should grow in that Garden which he supposes to be his.

This I have set down for the Information of the Christian-minded Reader, that
he might know what to do if the same should befall him.

A very earnest Prayer in Temptation:
Against Gods Anger in the Conscience, and also against flesh and blood, when
the Tempter comes to the soul, and wrestleth with it.

MOst deep Love of God in Christ Jesus, leave me not in this distress, I
confess, I am guilty of the sins which now rise up in my mind or
conscience, if thou forsake me, I must sink: have thou not promised me in thy
word, saying, If a mother could forget her child, which yet can hardly be, yet
thou will not forget me: thou have set me as a sign in thine hands which were
pierced through with sharp nails, and in thy open side whence blood and water
gushed out. Poor man that I am, I am caught in thy Anger, and can in my
ability do nothing before thee; I sink my self down into thy wounds and
death.

O Great Mercy of God, I beseech thee deliver me from the Bonds of Satan; I
have no refuge in any thing, but only in thy holy wounds and death; into thee
I sink down in the anguish of my conscience, do with me what thou will; In
thee I will now live or die, as pleases thee, let me but die and perish in thy
death, do but bury me into thy death, that the anguish of hell may not touch
me. How can I excuse my self before thee? that know my heart and reins,
and set my finnes before mine eye^, I am guilty of them, and yield my self
into thy Judgment, accomplish thy Judgment upon me, through the Death of my
Redeemer Jesus Christ.

I fly unto thee thou righteous Judge through the Anguish of my Redeemer Jesus
Christ, when he did sweat the bloody sweat on the Mount of olives for my sake,
and was scourged of Pontius Pilate for me, and suffered a crown of thorns to
be pressed on upon his head, that his blood came forth.

O Righteous God have thou not set him in my stead: he was innocent, but I
guilty, for whom he suffered, wherefore should I despair under thy wrath? O
blot out thy anger in me, through his anguish, passion, and death: I give my
self wholly into his anguish, passion and death: I will stand still in his
anguish, and passion before thee, do with me what thou please, only let me
not depart from his anguish: thou have freely given me his anguish, and drowned
thy Wrath in him. and though I have not accepted it, but am departed from him,
and am become faithless, yet thou have given me this precious pledge in my
flesh and blood, for he has taken my flesh and soul upon his heavenly flesh
and blood,] and has satisfied the Anger in my flesh and soul in him, with his
heavenly blood. Therefore receive me now in his satisfaction, and put his
anguish, passion and death in thy wrath, which is kindled in me, and break thy
Judgment in me in the blood of his love.

O Great Love! in the Blood and and Death of Jesus Christ, I beseech thee
break the Fort of prey, which the Devil has made, and built up in me, where
he resists me in the way of thy grace; drive him out of me, that he may not
overcome me, for no one living can stand in thy fight, if thou withdraw thy
hand from him.

O come thou breaker through the Anger of God, destroy its power, help my
poor soul to fight and overcome it: O bring me into thy victory and uphold me
in thee; break in pieces its seat in my vanity that is kindled in my soul
and flesh. O mortify the desire of my vanity, in flesh and blood, which the
Devil has now kindled by his false desire, by hellish anguish and
desperation: O quench it with thy water of eternal life, and bring my anguish
forth through thy death. I wholly sink my self down into thee; and though both
soul and body should this hour faint and perish in thy wrath, yet I will not
let thee go. Though my heart says utterly, no no, yet the desire of my soul
shall hold fast on thy truth, which neither death nor the devil shall take
away from me. For the Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God cleanses us from
all our sins, this I lay hold on, and let the Anger of God do what it will
with my sin, and let the Devil roar over my soul in his Fort of prey,
which he has made, as much as he will. Neither the Devil. Death nor Hell
shall pull me out of my Saviors wounds: Thou must at length be confounded in
me thou noisome devil, and thy fort of prey must be forsaken, for I will
drown it in the love of Jesus Christ, and then dwell in it if thou can. Amen.

An Information in Temptation.
BEloved Reader, this is no jesting matter, he that accounts it so, has not
tried it, neither is he His conscience is a sleep still.
judged as yet: and though it should be deferred till his last end, which is
dangerous, yet he must pass through this Trial or temtation.
Judgment. Happy is he that passes through it be times in his young years,
before the Devil builds his fort of prey strong, he may afterward prove a
Labourer in the Vineyard of Christ, and sow his seed in the Garden of Christ,
he shall reap the fruit in due time. This judgment continues a long while
upon many, for several years if he do not earnestly put on the Armor of
Christ, but stay till the judgment of temptations first exhort him to
Repentance. But he that comes of himself, of his own earnest purpose; and
endeavors to depart from his evil ways, the temptation will not be so hard
for him, neither will it continue so long, yet he must stand out valiantly,
till victory be gotten over the devil, for he shall be mightily assisted, and
all shall turn to the best for him, so that afterward when the Or Dawning.
day breaks in the soul; he turns it to the great praise and glory of God
that the driver is overcome.

Short Prayers.
When the Or eternal wisdom.
noble Sophia kisseth the soul with her love, and offers her love to it.

O Most gracious and deepest love of God in Christ Jesus! I beseech thee grant
me thy Pearl, impresse it into my soul, and take my soul into thy Arms.

O thou sweet love! I confess I am unclean before thee, take away my
uncleanenesie through thy death, and carry through the hunger and thrist of my
soul, through thy Death in thy Resurrection, in thy Triumph; cast my whole Or
selfehood.
self down to the ground in thy death; take it captive, and carry my hunger
through, in thy hunger.

O highest love, have thou not appeared in me? stay in me and enclose me in
thee, keep me in thee, so that I may not be able to depart from thee* fill my
hunger with thy love seed my soul with thy heavenly substance, give it thy
blood to drink, and water it with thy Fountain

O great love! awaken my disappeared Image in me (which as to the Kingdom of
heaven disappeared in my father Adam) by that word which awakened The Image:
it in the seed of the woman in Mary; quicken it I beseech thee.

O thou Life and Power of the Deity, which have promised us saying; we will
come to you and dwell in you: O sweet love! I bring my desire into this word
of thy Promise: thou have promised, that thy Father will give the holy Spirit
to those that ask him for it, therefore I now bring the desire of my soul
into thy Promise, and I receive thy Word into my hunger; increase thou in me my
hunger after thee: strengthen me O sweet love in thy strength; quicken me in
thee, that my spirit may taste thy sweetness; O do thou believe by thy power
in me, for without thee I can do nothing.

O sweet Love I beseech thee through that Love wherewith thou did overcome
the Anger of God, and did change it into Love and divine Joy. I pray thee
also change the anger in my soul by the same great love that I may become
obedient unthee, and that my soul may love thee therein for ever: O change my
will into thy Will, bring thy Obedience into my disobedience that I may become
obedient to thee.

O great Love of Jesus Christ, I humbly fly to thee, bring the hunger of my
soul into thy wounds, from whence thou did shed thy holy blood, and did
quench the Anger with Love: I bring my hunger into open side, from whence came
forth both water and blood, and throw my self wholly into it; he thou mine, and
quicken me in thy life, and let me not depart from thee

O my Noble Vine, I beseech thee give sap to me thy branch; that I may budde
and grow in thy strength and sap, in thy Essence: beget in me true strength
by thy strength.

O Sweet Love art not thou my Light? enlighten thou my poor soul in its
close prison, in flesh and blood; bring it into the right way; destroy the will
of the Devil, and bring my body through the whole course of this world,
through the chamber of death, into thy death and rest; that at the last day it
may arise in thee from thy death, and live in thee for ever: O teach me what I
must do in thee: I beseech thee be thou my willing, knowing, doing, and let me
go no whether without thee: I yield my self wholly up to thee. Amen.

A Prayer
For the [obtaining] the Divine Protection and Government: (showing) how he
mind should work with and in God, in Christ the Tree of Life.

O Thou living Fountain, in thee I lift up the desire of my soul, and cry
with my desire [to enter] through the life of my Savior Jesus Christ into thee.

O thou Life and Power of God, awaken thy self in the hunger of my soul, with
thy desire of love, through the thirst which Jesus Christ had upon the cross
after us men, and carry my weak strength through by thy mighty hand in thy
Spirit; be thou the working and will in me with thine own strength, blossom in
the strength of Jesus Christ in me, that I may bring forth praise unto thee,
the true fruit in thy Kingdom; O let my heart and desire never depart from
thee.

But i swim in vanity, in this valley of misery, in this outward earthly
flesh and blood, and my soul and noble Image, which is according to thy
Similitude, is encompassed with enemies on every side; viz. with the desire of
the Devil against me, with the desire of vanity in flesh and blood, also with
all the opposition of wicked men, who know not thy Name: and I swim with my
outward life in the [properties of the] stars and elements, having my enemies
lying in wait for me every where, inwardly and outwardly, together with death,
the destroyer of this vain life* and therefore I fly to thee O holy strength
of God: being thou have manifested thy self with thy love in mercy, in our
humanity, through thy holy Name Jesus, and have also given it to be a Or a^
guide.
companion in us: therefore I beseech thee let his Angels that minister to him,
attend upon our souls, and encamp themselves about us, and defend us from the
fiery darts of the desire of that wicked one, which shoots into us daily by
the curse of the Anger of God which is awakened in our earthly flesh: keep
back by thy strength the infectious rays [of the influence of the The inward
stars and costellations* in our bodies.
stars in their opposition, into which raves the wicked one mingleth himself
with his desire, to poison us in soul and flesh; and to bring us into Or evil
desires*
false desires, and also into infirmity and misery. Turn away these Rays of
Anger with the holy Name Jesus in our soul and spirit, that they may not touch
us, and let thy good and holy Angel stand by us to turn away these Rays of
Poison from our bodies.

O great Love and sweet strength IHSVH, thou fountain of divine sweetness
[flowing] out of the great Eternal Name JEHOVAH, I cry with the desire of my
soul [to come] into thee; my soul cries [to come] into that Spirit, from
whence the soul was breathed into the body, and which has formed it in the
likeness of God, my soul desires in its thirst [to get] the sweet fountain
which springs from JEHOVAH, into it self, to refresh Gods breath of Fire,
which it self is, so that the sweet Love of JESUS may rise in its breath of
Fire, through the Fountain JESUS [springing] out of JEHOVAH, and that CHRIST
the holy [one] may be manifested, and become Man, in my disappeared Image of
heavenly spiritual corporality, and that the poor soul may receive its
beloved Bride again in its Arms, with whom it may rejoice for ever.

O IMMANVEL! thou Wedding Chamber, God and Man, I yield up my self into the
Arms of thy Desire toward us, in us; it is thy self whom I desire: O blot
out the Anger of thy Father, with thy love in me, and strengthen my weak Image
in me, that I may overcome and tame the vanity in flesh and blood, and serve
thee in holiness and righteousness.

O thou great and most holy Name and power of God JEHOVAH, which have stirred
thy self with thy most sweet power JESUS, in the Gole or mark.
limit of the Covenanted promise to our Father Adam, in the woman's seed; in
the Virgin Mary in our disappeared heavenly Humanity, and brought the living
essentiality of thy holy power in the In virginali sapientia
Virgin-wisedome of God, into our humanity, which was extinguished, Or in thy
sight.
as to thee; and have given it to us, to be our life, victory, and new
Regeneration; I entreat thee with all my strength, beget a new holy life in
me, by thy sweet power JESUS, that I may be in thee and thou in me, and that
thy Kingdom may be made manifest in me, and that the will and conversation of
my soul may be in heaven.

O great and incomprehensible God* thou who fillest all things, be thou my
Heaven in which my new Birth in CHRIST JESUS may dwell; let my spirit be the
stringed Instrument, harmony, sound, and joy of thy holy Spirit: strike the
strings in me, in thy Regenerate Image, and carry through my Harmony into thy
Divine Kingdom of Joy, in the great Love of God, in the wonders of thy Glory
and Majesty, in the Communion of the holy Angelical Harmony, build up the holy
City Zion in me, in which as children of Christ we all live together in one
City, which is Christ in us, into thee I wholly Or sinck.
plunge my self, do with me what thou please. Amen.

A Prayer
In temptation under the Cross of Christ, at that time when all our enemies
assault us, and when we are persecuted and hated, For.
in the Spirit of Christ, and slandered and reproached as evil doers.

Poor man that I am, I walk full of anguish and trouble, in my Pilgrimage
into my native Country again, from whence I came [in Adam,] and go through the
thistles and thorns of this world, to thee again. O God my Father: The
thorns tear me on every side, and I am afflicted and despised by my enemies:
they scorn my soul, and despise it as an evil doer, who has broken the
faith with them, they despise my walking toward thee, and account it foolish:
they think I am senseless, because I walk in this thorny way, and go not
along with them in their hypocritical way.

O Lord Jesus Christ, I fly to thee under the Cross; O dear Immanuel receive
me, and carry me into thy self through the Path of thy Pilgrimage (in which
thy self did walk in this world) viz. Through thy Incarnation, Poverty,
Reproach and Scorn; also through thy anguish, Passion and Death. Make me like
unto thy Image: send thy good Angel along with me to show me the way through
the horrible thorny wilderness of this world: assist me in my misery; comfort
me with that comfort wherewith the Angel comforted thee in the Garden when thou
did pray to thy Father, and did sweat drops of blood: sustain me in my
Anguish and Perfecution, under the reproach of the devils and all wicked men,
that know not thee, but refuse to walk in thy way: O great love of God, they
know not thy way, and do this in blindness, through the deceit of the devil;
have pity on them, and bring them out of blindness into the light, that they
may learn to know themselves, and how they lie captive in the filth and mire
of the devil in a dark Or Valley.
dungeon, fast bound with three chains. O great God, have mercy upon Adam and
his children, redeem them in Christ the new Adam.

I fly to thee O Christ, God and Man, in this Or journey.
Pilgrimage, which I must pass in this dark valley, every where despised and
troubled, and accounted an ungodly wicked man: O Lord it is thy judgment upon
me, that my sins and inbred vanity may be judged in this pilgrimage before
thee, and I, as a curse be made an open spectacle on which thy Anger may
satiate it self, and thereby may take the eternal reproach away from me. It
is the token of thy love, and thereby thou bring me into the reproach,
anguish, suffering and death of my Savior Jesus Christ, that so I may die from
vanity, in my Savior, and spring up in his Spirit with my new life through his
reproach and ignominy, through his Death.

I beseech thee O Christ thou patient Lamb of God grant me patience in my way
of the Cross, through all thy anguish and reproach, thy death and passion, thy
scorn and contempt upon the Cross, where thou were despised in my stead; and
bring me therein, as a patient Lamb to thee, into thy victory Let me live with
thee and in thee, and convert my persecutors, which (unknown to themselves:)
by their reproaching, sacrifice my vanity and inbred sins before thy Anger:
they know not what they do, they think they do me harm, but they do me
good, they do that for me, which I should do my self before thee. I should
daily lay open and acknowledge my Or vileness.
shame before thee, and thereby sink my self down into the death of thy
beloved Son, that my shame might die in his death: but I being too too
negligent, weary, faint, and feeble, therefore thou usest My enemies
them in thy Anger, to open and discover my Or shame.
vileness before thy Anger, which thy wrath takes hold of, and sinketh it
down into the death of my Savior.

O merciful God, my vain flesh cannot know, how well thou intendest toward
me, when thou suffer my Enemies to take my vileness from me and sacrifice
it before thee: my earthly mind supposes, that thou afflictest me for my
sins, and I am extremely perplexed at it; but thy Spirit in my inward new
man tells me, that it is of thy love toward me, that thou intendest good to
me by it, when thou suffer my enemies to persecute me, it is best for me,
that they perform the work in my stead, and unfold my sins before thee in thy
anger, that it may swallow them up, that they may not follow me into my native
country: for My enemies
they are strong and lusty still in thy Anger, and therefore can do it better
then I that am feeble and fainting already in the will of vanity: this thou
know fulwell O thou righteous God

I beseech thee therefore O righteous God, since thou usest them as servants to
me, to do so good an office for me; though my earthly reason knows it not;
that thou would make them also to know my way; and send them also such
servants, but yet before hand bring them to the light, that they may know thee
and give thee thanks.

O merciful God in Christ Jesus (in my knowledge) I beseech thee, out of thy
deep love toward us poor men which thou have manifested in me, in the hidden
man, call us all in thee, to thee. O stir thy self in us yet once in this
last trouble, thy Anger being kindled in us, do thou resist thy Anger in us,
least it swallow us up both soul and body.

O thou dawning of the Or Daybreake.
Dayspring of God, break forth to the full, art thou not already risen?
manifest thy holy City Zion, thy holy Jerusalem in us.

O great God! I see thee in the depth of thy Power and Strength: awaken me
wholly in thee, that I may be quickened in thee: break off the tree of thy
Anger in us, and let thy love spring forth and bud in us.

O Lord, I lie down in thy sight, and beseech thee, not to rebuke us in thine
Anger; are we not thy possession, which thou have purchased? Forgive all of us
our sins, and deliver us from the enmity of thy wrath, and from the reproach
and envy of the devil, and bring us under thy Cross in patience into Paradise
again. Amen.

Here follows a Prayer or Dialogue between the poor soul and the noble
virgin Sophia, in the inward ground of man, viz. between the Spirit of Christ
in the new Birth out of his Humanity in us, and the soul, showing how great a
joy there is in the Heaven of the new regenerate man, and how lovingly and
graciously the noble Sophia presents her self to her Bridegroom the Soul,
when it enters into Repentance, and how the Soul behaveth it self toward
her, when Virgin Sophia appears to it.

The gates of the Paradisicall Garden of Roses.
This is understood by none but the children of Christ, who have known it by
experience.

WHen Christ the cornerstone, stirs himself in the extinguished Image of
man, in his hearty conversion and repentance, then Virgin Sophia appears in
the stirring of the Spirit of Christ, in the extinguished Image, in her
Virgines-attire before the soul: at which the soul is so amazed and
astonished in its uncleanesse, that all its sins immediately awake in it, and
tremble and shake before her. For then the judgment passes upon the sins of
the soul, so that it even goes back in its unworth inesse, and is ashamed in
the presence of its fair love, and enters into it self, denying it self as
utterly unworthy to receive such a jewel. This is understood by them who are
of our Tribe, who have tasted this jewel, and to none else. But the noble
Sophia draws near in the essence of the soul, and kisseth it friendly, and
Shines through or co^^ureth
tinctureth the dark fire of the soul with her Rays of love, and shines
through the soul with her Kiss of love: then the soul skippeth in its body
for great joy, in the strength of this Virgine-love, triumphing, and praising
the great God, in the strength of the noble Sophia.

I will set down here a short description, how it is, when the Bride embraces
the Bridegroom: for the consideration of the Reader, who perhaps has not yet
been in this place where the Bride embraces her Bridegroom; it may be, he
will be desirous to follow us, and to enter into the place where men dance with
Or the divine wisdom*
Sophia.

When that which is before mentioned comes to pass, the soul rejoices in
its body, and says, I.
Praise, thanksgiving, strength, honor and glory, be to thee O great God, in
thy power and sweetness, for that thou have redeemed me from the driver of
anguish: O thou fair Love! my heart embraces thee, where have thou been so
long? me thought I was in hell in the Anger of God. O gracious Love, abide with
me I beseech thee, and be my joy and comfort: lead me in the right way, I give
my self up into thy love; I am dark before thee, do thou enlighten me. O
noble Love, give me thy sweet pearl, put it I pray thee into me.

O great God in Christ Jesus, I praise and magnify thee now in thy truth, in
thy great power and glory, for that thou have forgiven me my sins, and filled
me with thy strength. I shout for joy before thee in my life, and extol thee
in thy Firmament [of Heaven,] which none can open but thy Spirit in thy mercy:
my bones rejoice in thy strength, and my heart Sporteth.
delights in thy love. Thanks be to thee for ever, for that thou have
delivered me out of hell, and turned death into life in me: O sweet Love! let
me not depart from thee again; grant me thy Garland of Pearl, and abide in
me: O be my peculiar possession, that I may rejoice in thee for ever.

Upon this, Virgin Sophia says to the Soul.
MY Noble Bridegroom, my strength and power, you are a thousand times welcome,
why have thou forgotten me so long, that I have been constrained in great
grief to stand without the door and knock? have I not always called thee
and entreated thee: but thou have turned away thy countenance from me, and thy
ears declined my Territories: thou could not see my light, for thou did
walk in the valley of darkness: I was very near thee, and entreated thee
continually, but thy sin held thee captive in death, so that thou know me
not: I came to thee in great humility and called thee, but thou were rich in
the power of the anger of God, and did not regard my humility and lowlynesse:
thou had taken the Devil to be thy Paramour, he has desiled thee thus, and
built up his fort of prey in thee, and turned thee quite away from my love and
faith into his hypocritical Kingdom of falsehood, wherein thou have committed
much sin and wickedness, and broken thy will off from my love, and so broken
the bond of wedlock, and set thy love and affection upon a stranger, and
suffered me thy Bride which God did give thee, to stand alone in the
extinguished substance, without the power of thy fiery strength, I could not be
joyful without thy fiery strength, for thou art my husband, my shining
[brightnesse] is made manifest by thee, thou can manifest my hidden wonders
in thy fiery life, and bring them into Majesty: And yet without me thou art but
a dark house, wherein is nothing but anguish, and torment, and an odious
horrible pain.

O Noble Bridegroom, stand still with thy countenance toward me, and give me
thy Rays of fire, bring thy desire into me, and kindle me, and then I will
bring the Rays of my love from my meekness into thy fiery Essence, and kiss
thee for ever.

O my Bridegroom, how well am I, now I am in wedlock with thee? O kiss me
with thy desire in thy strength and power, and then I will show thee all my
beauty, and will rejoice and delight my self with thy sweet love and shining
brightness in thy fiery life: All the holy Angels do rejoice with us, to see
us now married together again. My dear Love I now entreat thee to abide in
my faith, and do not turn thy face away from me any more, work thou thy
wonders in my love, for which God has raised thee up.

II. The Soul says again to its Noble Sophia, its Love, that is borne again
in the Soul.
O My Noble Pearl, and opened flame of my light in my anxious fiery life, O
how thou changest me into thy joy; O beautiful Love, I have broken my faith
with thee, in my father Adam, and with my fiery strength have turned my self
to the pleasure and vanity of the outward world, and have fallen in love with a
stranger, and had been constrained to walk in the valley of darkness in this
strange love, if thou had not come to me into the house of my misery, in thy
great faithfulness, by thy piercing through and destroying Gods Anger, Hell
and dark Death, and restored thy meekness and love to my fiery life.

O Sweet Love; thou have brought the water of eternal life out of the
fountain of God with thee, to me; and refreshed me in my great thirst: I
behold in thee the mercy of God, which was hidden from me before by the strange
Love: in thee I can rejoice, thou changest my anguish of fire to be great joy
to me. O amiable Love, give me thy Pearl, that I may continue in this joy for
ever.

Upon this the Noble Sophia answers the Soul again, and says.
MY Dear Love, and faithful treasure: thou highly rejoycest me in thy
beginning: I have indeed broken into thee through the deep gates of God,
through Gods anger, through hell and death, into the house of thy misery, and
have graciously bestowed my love upon thee, and delivered thee from the chains
and bonds, wherein thou were fast bound; I have kept my faith with thee: But
thou desire now an exceeding great thing of me, which I will not willingly
venture with thee. Thou would have my pearl as thy proper own; remember I
pray O my beloved Bridegroom that thou did carelessly loose it before in
Adam, and besides thou stand yet in great danger, and walk in two
dangerous Kingdoms. viz. in the original fire, thou walk in that Country,
wherein God calls himself a strong Zealous God, and a consuming fire. The
other Kingdom thou walk in, is the Outward world the Air, wherein thou
dwell in the vain corrupt flesh and blood, where the pleasure of the world
and the assaults of the devil pass over thee every hour, thou may perhaps
in thy great joy bring earthlynesse again into my beauty, and darken my Pearl;
thou may also perhaps grow proud as Lucifer did, when he had the pearl in
his possession, and so may turn thy self away from the Harmony of God, and
then I must afterward be deprived of my Love for ever.

I will keep my Pearl in my self, and dwell in the Heaven in thee, in thy
extinguished, but now in me revived, Humanity, and reserve my Pearl for
Paradise, until thou put away this earthlynesse from thee, and then I will
give it thee to possess. But I will readily afford, and present my countenance
to thee, and the sweet Rays of the Pearl: during the time of this earthly
life. I will dwell with the Pearl in the inner Quire, and be thy faithful
loving Bride, I will not espouse my self Or into.
with thy earthly flesh, for I am a heavenly Queen, my Kingdom is not of this
world: yet I will not cast thy outward life away, but visit it often with my
Rays of love, for thy outward humanity shall return again; but I will not
have the beast of vanity, neither did God create it in Adam with a purpose to
have it so gross and earthly, but in Adam thy desire through lust, formed this
beastiall grossness from and with all the Essences of the awakened vanity of
the earthly property wherein heat and cold, pain, enmity and Division,
corruption, or breaking asunder.
dissolution consists.

Now my Dear Love and Bridegroom yield but thy self up into my will; I will
not forsake thee in this earthly life, in thy danger; though the Anger of God
should pass upon thee, so that thou should grow affrighted and
disheartened* or should think that I had forsaken thee; yet I will be with
thee and preserve thee, for thou thy self know not what thine office is;
Thou must in this time work and bear fruit; thou art the Root of this Tree,
branches must be produced out of thee, which must all be brought forth in
anguish: but I come forth together with thy branches in their sap, and bring
forth fruit upon thy boughs: and thou know it not; for the Most High has
so ordered that I should dwell with and in thee.

Involve thy self therefore into patience, and take heed of the pleasure of
the flesh, break the will and desire thereof, bridle it as an unruly horse,
and then I will often visit thee in thy fiery Essence, and give thee my Kiss
of love, and bring a Garland for thee out of Paradise with me, for a token of
my love, and put it upon thee, in which thou shall rejoice; But I give thee not
my Pearl for a possession during this time: thou must continue in Resignation,
and hearken what the Lord plays in thy Harmony in thee: Moreover thou must
give sound and essence to thy tune out of my strength and virtue: for thou art
now a messenger of his mouth, and must set forth his praise and glory. For this
cause I have now contracted my self anew with thee, and set my Triumphant
Garland upon thee, which I have gotten in the battle against the Devil and
Death, but the Crown of Pearl wherewith I crowned thee, I have laid that
aside for thee, thou must wear it no more, till thou art become pure in my
fight.

III The Soul says further to the Noble Sophia.
O Thou fair and sweet Consort, what shall I say before thee, let me be only
commended unto thee, I cannot preserve my self: If thou will not now give me
thy Pearl, I leave it to thy will; give me but thy Rays of love, and carry me
through this Pilgrimage. Awake thou and bring forth what thou will in me, I
will from henceforth be thy own, I will or desire nothing for my self, but
what thou thy self wilt through me; I had fooled away thy sweet love, and not
keept my faith with thee; whereby I was fallen into eternal punishment: but
seeing of Love, thou art come to me into the anguish of Hell, and have
delivered me from torment, and received me again for thy Consort, I will now
therefore break my will, for thy loves sake, and be obedient unto thee, and
wait for thy love: I am satisfied now, that I know thou art with me in all my
troubles, and wilt not forsake me.

O Gracious Love I turn my fiery countenance to thee, O fair Crown, fetch me
quickly into thee, and bring me forth from unquietness, I will be thine for
ever, and never depart from thee.

The Noble Sophia answers the Soul very comfortably, and says.
MY Noble Bridegroom be of good comfort, I have bethrothed thee to me in my
highest Love, and contracted me with thee in my faithfulness: I will be with
thee and in thee always to the end of the world; I will come to thee and make
my dwelling in thee, in thy Inner Quier: thou shall drink of my Fountain, for
now I am thine and thou art mine, the Enemy shall not separate us; work thou
in thy fiery property, and I will put my Rays of love into thy working: we
will plant and manure the Vineyard of Jesus Christ; afford thou the Essence of
fire, and I will afford the Essence of light and the increase: be thou the
fire, and I will be the water, and we will perform that in this world for
which God has ordained us, and we will serve him in his Temple which we our
selves are. Amen.

To the Reader.
BEloved Reader, count not this an uncertain fiction, it is the true Ground,
and it comprehends in it all the Holy Scripture: for the Book of the Life of
Jesus Christ is plainly set forth therein, as it has been certainly known
by the Author himself, for it has been his Or process or course that he
has taken.
way [that he has gone] he gives thee the best [Jewell] that he has; God
grant his blessing [with it:] An heavy sentence and judgment is gone forth
against the Mocker of this. Be thou therefore warned [that thou may avoid the
Danger, and receive the Blessing.]

A Morning Prayer,
Commending our selves to God when we rise, before we suffer any other thing to
enter into us.

Bless me O God, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, thou only true God. I
thank thee through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, for thy protection and
all other benefits: I now commend my self both body and soul, and all that
thou have set me to do in my Or calling.
employment; into thy protection: be thou the beginning of my Sensing.
conceptions, of my seekings and endeavors in all my doings; work thou so in
me, that I may begin all things to the glory of thy Name, and accomplish them
in thy Love for the good and service of my Neighbor: send thy good Angel
along with me, to turn the venomous Rays of the Devil and corrupt nature
away from me: preserve me from the desire of all evil men, make all my enemies
favorable to me, and bring my mind into thy Vineyard, that I may labor in my
Office and employment, and work as thy obedient servant therein: and bless me
and all that I am to go about and do, with the blessing of thy love and
mercy: (continue thy grace and love in Jesus Christ upon me, and give me a
mind, cheerfully to follow thy wonders; let thy holy Spirit guide me in my
beginning, and so on to my last end, and be my willing and working, and
accomplishing, in me. Amen.

An Evening Prayer.
I Lift my heart to thee, O God thou fountain of eternal life, and give thee
thanks through Jesus Christ thy beloved Son our Lord and Savior, for that
thou have stood by me, and preserved me this Day in my condition and employment
from all mischief [that might have befallen me] I commend now to thy disposing
my condition and employment and the work of my hands; and humbly fly with my
soul to thee: work thou so in my soul, that neither that wicked enemy, nor
any other influence and desire, may come or stick fast in my soul: let my
mind only delight in thee in thy Temple, and let thy good Angel stay with me,
that I may rest safely in thy power and strength: Amen.

Revel. 21. 6. I am A and O, the Beginning and the End, I will give unto him
that is a thirst, of the fountain of the water of Life freely. He that
overcommeth shall inherit All, and I will be his God and he shall be my Son.
The End of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK TREATING OF True Resignation. How Man must daily die in his
own will, in Self: and how he must bring his desire into God, what he should
ask and desire of God: also how he must spring up out of the dying of the
sinful man, with a new mind and will through the Spirit of Christ. ALSO, What
the old and new Man is, and what either of them is in Life, Will, and Doings.

Written in the German Language, Anno 1622* By JACOB BEHMEN. Alias, Teutonicus
Philosophus.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for H. Blunden, at the Castle in Cornhill. 1647.

Matthew. 16. 24. Mark 8. 34. Luke 9. 23. John 12. 26. Christ says, He that will
follow ME, let him deny HIMSELF, and take up his Cross, and follow ME.
Matthew. 9. 27. Mark 10. 28. Luke 18. 28. Peter says to Christ, Behold, we have
FORSAKEN ALL, and followed THEE.
OF TRUE RESIGNATION.
CHAP. I.
WE have a clear example in Lucifer, and also in Adam the first man, of what
Self does, when it gets the light of nature to be its own, and may walk
with the Understanding in its own dominion: we see it also in men learned in
Arts and Sciences that when they get the light of this outward world or nature
into the possession of their reason, nothing comes of it but pride of
themselves. And yet all the world so vehemently desires and seeks after this
light as the best treasure; and it is indeed the best treasure this world
affords, if it be rightly used.

Secondly, But while Self, viz. Reason is ensnared and fast bound in a close
and strong prison, viz: in the Anger of God, and in earthlynesse; it is very
dangerous for a man to make use of the light of knowledge in self, as if it
were in the possession of Self.

Thirdly, For the Wrath of the eternal and temporary Nature will soon take
pleasure in it, and then self, and a man's own reason, will rise up in pride,
and break it self off from the true re^igned humility toward God, and will
no more eat of the fruit of paradise, but of the property of self, viz. of
that dominion of life, wherein good and evil are mixed: as Lucifer and Adam
did; who both entered with the desire of self, into the Original again, out
of which the creatures were brought forth, and entered into [the condition of
the] creatures: Lucifer into the Center and wrathful Nature, into the Or,
Vomb, which brings forth fire.
Matrix of the fire, and Adam into the earthly Nature, into the Matrix of the
outward world, viz. into the lust after good and evil.

Fourthly, Which happened to them both, because they had the light of
understanding shining in self, wherein they could behold themselves, by which
the spirit of self, went into the Imagination, (viz. into a desire to get the
Center,) that they might exalt themselves, and so grow great, potent and more
skillful: Now when Lucifer sought after the Mother of fire in his Center, and
thought to reign therewith over the Love of God, and all the Angels; and when
Adam also desired to try in the Essence, [what it was in] the Mother, from
whence evil and good did spring, and brought his desire into her, of purpose
to become skillful and full of understanding thereby; Both Lucifer and Adam
were captivated thereby in their evil Or false.
desire in the Mother, and did break off themselves from Resignation (which
proceeds from God) and so were captivated by the spirit of the will, by the
desire, in the Mother, which desire immediately did get the dominion in nature,
and so Lucifer stuck fast in the wrathful Source of fire, and that fire
became manifest in the spirit of his will, whereby the creature in its desire
became an enemy to the love and meekness of God.

Fifthly, So also Adam was immediately caught by the earthly Mother, which is
evil and good, created out of the love and anger of God, and made one
substance, upon which the earthly property immediately got the dominion in
Adam, and from thence heat and cold, envy and anger, and all malice and
contrariety against God, became manifest, and did bear rule in him.

Sixthly, But if they had not brought the light of knowledge into self, then
the Glass of the knowledge of the Center, and of the Original of the
creature, viz. of the power of it self had not been manifested, from whence
the Imagination and Lust did arise.

7 As also we see now a days it brings danger upon the enlightened children
of God, so that when the Sun of the great Presence of Gods Holiness shines,
by which the life passes into triumph, and then Reason beholds it self
therein, (as in a glass,) and the will goes on in self, viz. in its own
searching, and will try [what] the Center [is] out of which the Light shines,
and will of it self force it self into it, from whence arises abominable
pride and self love, so that The creatures.
its own reason (which is but a mirror or glass of the eternal [wisedome,]
supposes it self to be greater then it is, and then whatsoever its [Reason]
does, it thinks Gods will does it, in it, and that it is a Prophet, and yet
is but in it self, and goes on in its own desire, in which the Center of
nature suddenly raises it self a loft, and enters into that own self
desire of falsehood against God, and so the will enters into
selfe-conceitednesse.

8 And then the flattering Devil enters into Or, the creature.
it, and fifteth the Center of nature, and brings Or, false.
evil desires into it, so that a man becomes as it were drunken in self, and
persuades himself that he is driven by God: by which the good beginning,
(wherein the divine light did shine in nature,) comes to be spoiled, and so
the Light of God departs from him.

9 Yet then the outward light of the outward nature remains shiing in the
creature (for its own self throws it self thereinto) and then supposes
that it is still the first light of God, (but it is not so:) and into this
selfe-conceitednesse, in the light of its outward reason, the Devil throws
himself again (though in the first light, which was divine, he was forced to
depart) returning with a sevenfold desire, of which Christ spoke, saying, when
the unclean spirit departs out of a man, he wandreth through dry places
seeking rest and finds none, and then he takes to himself seven spirits
worse then himself, and returns to his first house, and finds it swept and
garnished, and then he dwells therein, and so it is worse with the man then
it was before.

10 This house, that is thus swept and garnished, is the light of reason in
self: for if a man bring his desire and will into God, and goes on in
abstinence from this wicked life, and desires the love of God, then that love
will manifest it self to him with its most friendly and cheerful
countenance, by which the outward light also is kindled; for where the light of
God is kindled, there all will be light, the Devil cannot stay there, he must
depart thence: and then he searches through the Mother of the Original of
life, viz. the Center, but it is become a dry * feeble place: the anger of God,
viz. the Center of nature, is in its own property altogether Or, barren.
feeble, lean and dry, and cannot get the dominion, in the wrathful property.
Satan searches through these places to find an open gate to enter with the
desire, and so sift the soul that it might [come to] exalt it self.

11 And now if the spirit of the will of the creature, do throw it self with
the light of reason into the Center, viz. into self, and enters into
selfe-conceitednesse, then it goes forth again from the light of God: and
then the Devil finds an open gate for him to enter in at, and a garnished
house to dwell in, viz. the light of reason: and then he takes to himself the
seven o forms of the property of life in self, viz. the flatterers which are
departed from God into self. And there he enters and puts his desire into
the lust of self, and evil Imaginations: wherein the spirit of the will
beholds it self in the forms of the properties of life, in the outward
light, and there that man sinketh into himself, as if he were drunk, and then
the stars lay hold on him, and bring their strong constellations into him, Into
outward Reason.
that he might seek the wonders of God there, that so they may manifest
themselves therein: For all creatures groan, and long after God. And though
the stars cannot apprehend the Spirit of God, yet they had rather have a
house of light wherein they may rejoice, then a house shut up, wherein they can
have no quiet.

12 Then this man goes on, as if he were drunk in [the light of the outward
reason: which is called] the stars, and apprehends great and wonderful
things, and has a continual guide in them: and then the Devil presently
observes, where any gate stands open for him, where he may kindle the Center
of life, that so the spirit of the will may mount aloft in pride, in self
conceit, or covetousness; from whence selfearrogancy arises, the will of
reason desiring to be honored: for it supposes it has attained the sum of
all happiness, when it has gotten * Or, of hidden my steries.
the light of reason, and can judge the o house that is shut up, which
nevertheless God can well unlocke; He now supposes, that the honor is due to
him, because he has gotten the understanding of reason, and never considers
that the Devil makes himself merry with his desire in his seven forms of
life, of the Center of nature, nor what abominable error he sets up.

13 From this understanding, false Babell is brought forth in the Christian
Church on earth; where men rule and teach by the conclusions of reason, and
have set the child (which is drunk in its own pride and selfecovetousnesse,)
as a fair Virgin upon the Throne.

14 But the Devil is entered into its seven forms of life of the Center, viz.
into its own self [conceited] reason, and continually brings his desire
into this trimmed Virgin: which the stars receive. He is her Beast on which
she rides well adorned in her own forces of life, as may be seen in the
Revelations; Thus it has taken into possession the outward glance of divine
holiness, viz. the light of Reason, and supposes it self to be the fair
child in the house, but the Devil has his lodging within it.

15 And thus it is with all these that have been once enlightened by God, and
after go forth again from true resignation, and weane themselves from the
true milk of their Mother: viz. true humility.

The way which a true Christian must follow.

16 REason will object and say: Is it not right for a man to attain the light
of God, and also the light of the outward nature and reason, that he may be
able to order his life wisely, as the Scripture says?

17 Yes it is very right, nothing can be more profitable to a man, neither can
any better thing happen to him; nay it is a treasure above all earthly
treasures, for a man to have the light of God and of time, for it is the eye of
time and of eternity.

18 But mark how thou ought to use it; the light of God first manifests
it self in the soul, it shines forth, as light from a candle, and kindles
the outward light of reason immediately: yet it yields not it self wholly up
to reason to be under the dominion of the outward man; no, the outward man
beholds himself in this, through shining luster as he does his likeness in
a looking-glass; he presently learneth to know himself, which is good and
profitable for him.

19 And when he does so, Reason, which is the creaturely self, cannot do
better then to behold it self in the self of the creature, nor to enter with
the will of the desire into the Center, in seeking it self, if it do, it
breaks it self off from the substance of God, (which rises together with
the light of God, of which the soul ought to eat, and refresh it self
therewith,) and eats of the outward substance and light, and thereby draws
the venom into it self again.

20 The will of the creature ought to sink wholly into it self with all its
reason and desire, accounting it self an unworthy child, that is no whit
worthy of this so high a grace, nor should it arrogate any knowledge or
understanding to it self, or desire and beg of God to have any understanding
in its creaturely self: but sincerely and simply sink it self into the grace
and love of God in Christ Jesus, and desire to be as it were dead to it self,
and its own reason in the divine life, and wholly resign it self to the life
of God in love, that he may do how and what he will with it, as with his own
instrument.

21 Its own reason ought not to enter upon any speculation in divine, or in
the ground, [or foundation] of humane matters; nor to will and desire any thing
but the grace of God in Christ; and as a child continually longs after the
breasts of the Mother, so must its hunger continually enter into the love of
God, and not suffer it self to be broken off from this hunger by any means,
when the outward reason triumphs in the light, saying; I have the true child;
but then the will of the desire must bow it self down to the earth, and bring
it self into the deepest humility and simple ignorance, and say; thou art
foolish, and have nothing, but the grace of God: thou must wrap thy self up
into that, with great humility, and become nothing at all in thy self; and
neither know nor love thy self; all that thou have, or is in thee must esteem
it self as nothing, but a mere Instrument of God, and then must bring the
desire only into Gods mercy, and go forth from all thy own knowing and
willing, and esteem it as nothing at all, nor must thou ever entertain any
will to enter into it again.

22 As soon as this is done, the natural with enters into weakness, and
then the Devil is not able to fifth it thus any more with his Or, false.
evil desire, for the places of his rest become very Or, fruitless, or barren.
weak and dry, and then the holy Spirit [proceeding] from God, takes
possession of the forms of life, and makes his dominion prevail, viz. He
kindles the forms of life with his flames of love; and then the high skill
and knowledge of the Center of all Essences or substances.
Things arises, according to the inward and outward Constellation of the
creature, in a very subtle drying fire, with great delight, and desire to
sinck down into that light, and esteem it self nothing; and thinks it self
to be unworthy of it.

23. And thus its own desire pierces into that nothing (viz. into that wherein
God creates,) and does what he will therein: and the Spirit of God springs
forth through the desire of the resigned Humility: And so the humane self
immediately follows the Spirit of God in trembling and joy of Humility; and
so it may behold what is in time and eternity; for all is present before it.

24. When the Spirit of God rises up as a fire and the flame of Love, then the
spirit of the soul descends, and says: Lord, glory be to thy Name, not to
me; Thou art able to take virtue power strength wisdom and knowledge: do as
thou will, I can do nothing, I know nothing; I will go no whither, but
whither thou leadest me as thy instrument, do thou in me and with me what thou will.

25. In such an humble and total Resignation, the spark of Divine power
falls into the center of the forms of life (as a spark into Tinder) and
kindles it, viz. the The. earnest zeal.
fire of the soul, (which Adam made to be a dark coal in himself,) so that
it glimmereth. And when the light of Divine power has kindled it self
therein, the creature must go on as an instrument of Gods Spirit, and speak
what the Spirit of God Or prompteth it.
tells it: and then it is no more in its own proper possession, but it is the
instrument of God.

26. But the will of the Soul must without ceasing, in this fiery-driving sink
into nothing, viz. into the deepest humility in the sight of God. For no sooner
does the will of the soul in the least measure go on in its own speculation,
or searching, but Lucifer lays hold of it in the center of the forms of
life, and sifteth it, so that it enters into Self: it must therefore continue
close to resigned humilith, as a Well does to its Fountain, and must suck and
drink of Gods Fountain, and not depart from the ways of God at all.

27. For, as soon as the soul eats of Self, and of the light of outward
Reason, it goes on in its own opinion; and then its doings, which it sets
forth for Divine, are but from the outward Constellation, which presently then
lays hold on the soul, and makes it dry, and then the soul goes on in
Errors, till it yield it self up again into Resignation, and acknowledging it
self anew to be a defiled child, resists reason, and so gets the love of
God again, which is harder to do now, then it was at first: for the Devil
brings in strong doubts, he will not easily leave his Fort of prey.

28. This may be seen clearly in the Saints of GOD from the beginning of the
world; that many who have been driven by the Spirit of God, have yet oftentimes
departed from Resignation into Self, viz. into their own reason and will, in
which Satan has cast them into sins, and into the anger of God, as appears
by DAVID and SOLOMON, also by the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, who have
oftentimes committed great errors, when they have departed from Resignation
into Self, viz. into their own reason and lust.

29. Therefore it is necessary for the children of God to know how to behave
themselves when they will learn the way of God. They must beat down and cast
away their very thoughts, and desire nothing, nor have the least will to learn
any thing, unless they find themselves to be in true Resignation, so that Gods
Spirit, leads, teaches, and guides man's Spirit, and that the humane will
which is addicted to it self, be wholly broken off from its own lust, and
resigned in God.

30. All speculation in the wonders of God, is very dangerous, for the spirit
of the will may soon be captivated therewith; unless the spirit of the will
goes or walks after the Spirit of God, and then it has power in the
resigned humility to behold the wonders of God.

31 I do not say that a man should search and learn nothing in natural Arts
and Sciences; no, for it is profitable for him, but a man must not begin with
his own reason: Man ought not only to govern his life by the light of outward
reason, which is good in it self; but he must sink with that light into the
deepest humility before God, and set the Spirit and will of God first in all
his searching, so that the light of reason may see through the light of God.
And though reason do know much, it must not arrogate to it self as if it were
in its own possession, but give glory to God, to whom alone wisdom and
knowledge does belong.

32. For the more, Reason, sinketh it self down into simple humility in the
sight of God, and the more unworthy it accounts it self in its sight, the more
it dies from self-desire, and the more the Spirit of God pierces through it,
and brings it into the highest knowledge; so that it may behold the great
wonders of God. For the Spirit of God works only in resigned humility, in
that which neither seeks nor desires it self. The Spirit of God takes hold
of whatsoever desires to be simple and lowly before him, and brings it forth
in his wonders; he has pleasure only in those that fear and bow themselves
before him.

33. For God has not created us for our selves only, but to be instruments of
his wonders, by which he desires to manifest his wonders. The resigned will
trusts God, and expects all good from him; but self-will rules it self,
for it is broken off from God. All that self-will does is sin, and against
God, for it is gone out of that order (wherein God created it) into
disobedience, and desires to be its own Lord and Master.

34. When its own will dies from it self, then it is free from sin; for it
desires nothing but that which God desires of his creature; it desires only
to do that for which God has created it, and that which God will do by it;
and though it is and must be the doing, yet it is but the instrument of the
doing, by which God does what he will.

35. For this is the true Faith in Note what true faith is.
Man, viz. to die from himself, viz. from his own desire; and in all his
beginnings and designs, to bring his desire into the will of God, and arrogate
the doing of nothing to himself, but esteem himself in all his doings, to be
but a Servant or Minister of God, and to think that all he does, or goes
about, is for God; for in such an intention the Spirit of God leads him into
true uprightness and faithfulness toward his neighbor: for he thinks thus
with himself: I do my work not for my self, but for God, who has called and
ordained me to do it, as a servant in his Vineyard: he listeneth continually
after the voice of his Master, who within him commands him what he shall
do: The Lord speaks in him, and bids him do it.

36. But Self does what outward reason from the stars commands, into which
reason the Devil brings himself flying in with his desire. All what ever
Self does, is without the will of God, and it is done altogether in the
fantasy, that the anger of God may accomplish its pastime therewith.

37. No work which is done without the will of God, can reach the kingdom of
God, it is all but an unprofitable Carved work.
Imagery in this great turmoyling of mankind: for nothing is pleasing to God,
but what he himself does by the will, [as his instrument.] For there is but
one only God in the Essence of all Essences, and all that which works with
him in that Essence, is one Spirit with him: but that which works in it self
in its own will, is in it self without [being under] his dominion; it is
indeed [under] or in that Dominion wherewith he rules every life, but not in
[or under] that holy Divine Government in himself, but in the dominion of
Nature, wherewith he governs evil and good, nothing is divine, which walks
and works not in the will of God.

38 Christ says, Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall
be rooted out, and burnt in the fire: All the works of man which he has
wrought without the will of God, shall be burnt up in the last fire of God,
and given to the wrath of God, viz. to the pit of darkness to recreate it
self withal: For Christ says, He that is not with me is against me, and he
that gathers not with me, scatters. Whosoever works, and does it not in a
resigned will, with confidence in God, he does but make desolate and scatter,
it is not acceptable to God; nothing is pleasing to him but that which himself
wills with his Spirit, and does himself by his own instrument.

39. Therefore whatsoever is done by the conclusions of humane Self, in
matters of the divine will, and knowledge, is a mere Fiction, or Fable, and it
is Babel, and is but a work of the stars, and of the outward world, and not
ackowledged by God to be his work; but it is the play of the wrestling wheel
of Nature, wherein good and evil wrestle one with the other, what the one
builds, the other destroys. And this is the great misery of vain
turmoylings, all which belongs to the judgment of God to decide the quarrel.

40. Whosoever therefore works or labors much in such turmoylings, he
works but for the judgment of God: for no whit of it is perfect and Or,
durable.
permanent, it must all be separated in the putrefaction. For that which is
wrought in the anger of God, will be received thereby, and shall be kept in the
mystery of its desire, to the day of Gods judgment, where evil and good shall
be severed.

41. But if a man turn and go forth from himself, and enter into the will of
God, then also that good which he has wrought in himself, shall be freed from
the evil which he has wrought. For Isaiah says, Though your sins be as red
as scarlet, if ye turn and repent, they shall become as wool, white as snow:
for the evil shall be swallowed up in the wrath of God into death, and the
good shall go forth as a sprout out of the wild earth.

CHAP. II.
1. WHosoever intends to work any thing that is good and perfect, wherein he
hops eternally to rejoice, and enjoy it, let him depart from himself, viz.
from his own desire, and enter into Resignation, into the will of God, and work
with God: and though the earthly desire of Self in flesh and blood cleaves to
him, yet if the will of the soul do not receive that desire into it, Self
cannot perform any work: for the resigned will continually destroys the being
of Self again, so that the anger of God cannot reach it; but if it should
happen to reach it sometime, as it may so come to pass, yet the resigned will
prevails with its power, and then it bears the figure of a victorious work
in the wonders, and may inherit the Or childship.
filiation. Therefore it is not good to speak or do any thing, when Reason is
kindled in the desire of Self; for then the desire works in the anger of
God, by which a man would suffer loss: for his work is brought into the anger
of God, and kept there to the great day of Gods judgment.

2. Every Or, false.
evil desire, whereby a man thinks craftily to gather to himself much of
the world from his neighbor, to the hurt of his neighbor; is taken into the
anger of God, and belongs to the judgment, wherein all things shall be made
manifest, and every power, and Or, being.
Essence, both in good and evil, shall be presented to every one in the
mystery of the revelation.

3. All evil works done purposely; belong to the judgment of God: but he
that turns, he goes out from them, and those his works belong to the fire.
All things, shall and must be made manifest in the end: for therefore God
brought his working power into essence, that the love and anger of God might be
made manifest, and be a representation of Gods deeds of wonder, to his glory.

4. And every creature must know, that it should continue in that [condition]
wherein it was created, or else it does run on into a contrary will, and into
enmity to the will of God, and brings it self into pain: For a creature
which is created of darkness, has no pain in the darkness: As a venomous
Worm has no pain in its venom, the venom is its life; and if it should lose
its venom, and have some good thing in stead thereof brought into it, and be
made manifest in its essence, this would be pain and death to it, and so also
the evil is pain and death to the good.

5. Man was created of, for, and in Paradise; of, for, and in the love of God;
but if he bring himself into anger, which is as a poisonous pain and death;
then that contrary life is a pain and torment to him.

6. If the Devil had been created of the wrathful Matrix, for, and in Hell,
and had not had the divine or, essence.
Ens, he could have no pain in Hell: but he being created for, and in Heaven,
and yet did stir up the source or property of darkness in himself, and did
bring himself totally into darkness; therefore the light is now a pain to
him, viz. an everlasting despairing of Gods grace, and a continual enmity;
being God cannot endure him in himself, but has spewed him out: and therefore
the Devil is angry and wrathful against his own mother, (of whose Essence and
Being he has his original,) viz. the eternal Nature, which keeps him
prisoner in his own place, as a revolter, or fallen Spirit, and sporteth it
self in him, with its property of anger and wrath. And seeing he would not
help forward the delight of the Divine joy, therefore he must now do the
contrary, and be an enemy against goodness. For, of God, and in him, are all
things, darkness and light, love and anger, fire and light; but he calls
himself God only, as to the light of his love.

7. There is an eternal contrariety between darkness and light; neither of
them comprehends the other, and neither of them is the other; yet there is
but one only Essence, Being, or Substance, wherein they subsist: but there is
a difference in quality and will, and yet the Essence or Substance is not
divided, but a Principle makes the division; so that the one is a nothing in
the other, and yet, it is there, but not manifest in the property of that thing
wherein it is.

8. For the Devil continued in his own Dominion, or Principality, but not in
that wherein God created him, but in the aching, painful birth of eternity, in
the center of Nature and the property of wrath, in the property which begets
darkness, anguish and pain. Indeed he is a Prince in the place of this world;
yet in the first Principle in the Kingdom of Darkness, in the Pit. or, Abyss.


9. But not in the Kingdom of the Sun, Stars, and Elements, he is no Lord
or Prince therein, but in the wrathful part, viz. in the root of the evil of
every thing, and yet he has no power to do what he pleases with it.

10. For there is some good in all things, which holds the evil captive, and
shut up in the thing; there he can walk and rule only in the evil, when it
stirs up an evil desire in it self, and brings its desire into
wickkednesse; which the inanimate creatures cannot do: but man can do it
through the inanimate creature, if he bring the center of his will, with the
desire out of the eternal center into it, which is an Enchantment, and false
Magic. The will of the Devil can also enter into that whereinto Man brings
the desire of his soul (which is also from the eternal) in wickedness.

11. For the original of the soul, and of Angels, out of the eternal, is the
same. But the Devil has no power more over the time, [or temporary condition*
of this world, but in the Or, Turba, magna, the Curse.
great Turba; wheresoever that kind leth it self in the eternal and natural
wrath, there he is busy, as in wars, fighting and strife, as also in great
tempests without water: in the fire he proceeds as far as the Mischief, or
hurt.
Turba goes in great showers and tempests of thunder, lightning and hail; but
he cannot direct them; for he is not Lord or Master in them, but servant.

12. Thus the creature stirs up, with the desire, good and evil, life and
death. The Humane Angelical desire stands in the center of the eternal
Nature (which is without beginning) and wherein it kindles it self, whether
in good or evil, it accomplisheth its work in that.

13. Now, God created every thing for, and in that wherein it should be, the
Angels for and in heaven, and Man for and in Paradise: if therefore the desire
of the creature go forth from its own mother, then it enters into the
contrary will, and into enmity, and it is tormented with the contrariety
therein, and so a false will arises in a good: and thence the good will
enters into its nothing again, viz. into the end of Nature and Creature, and
so leaves the creature in its own [evill, or] wickedness, as appears by
Lucifer and also by Adam, and had not the will of the love of God met with him,
and of mere mercy entered into the humanity again, there could be no good will
in man.

14. Therefore all speculation and searching about Gods will, is a vain thing,
without the mind be converted: For when the mind stands captivated in the
selfe-desire of the earthly life, it cannot o comprehend [what] the will of God
[is,] it runs on but in Self, from one way into another, and yet finds no
rest; for selfe-desire evermore brings disquietnesse: but when it sinketh it
self wholly into the mercy of God, desiring to die from it self, and to have
Gods will for a guide to the understanding, so that it acknowledges and
esteems it self as nothing, and wills nothing but what God will: and then
if the desire of anger in the earthly flesh, go along or joyneth with the
Devils imagination, and assaulteth the will of the soul, then the resigned
desire cries to God, and says, Abba, Ioving father, deliver me from the
evil: And then (though the earthly will should grow too strong in the wrath of
God by the infection of the Devil) the desire of anger would work but in, or
upon it self; as St. Paul says: Now, if I sin, I do it not, but sin that
dwells in my flesh: also, now I serve the Law of God in my mind; but in my
flesh, the law of sin. Paul means not, that the will should consent in the
will of the flesh; but sin is so strong in the flesh; viz. the awakened anger
of God in Self, that oftentimes it is brought into lust by force, through the
Or, conceive.
evil provocations of wicked men, or else by beholding worldly pomp and glory,
so that it wholly bedeafeth the resigned will, and rules by force.

15. Now, when sin is wrought in the flesh, then the wrath sporteth it self
therewith, and catches at the resigned will, and then the resigned will cries
to God for deliverance from the evil, and prays that God would remove the
sin away from it, and bring sin into the center, viz. into death, that it
might die.

16. And S. Paul says further, Now there is no condemnation to those that are
in Christ Jesus, that are called according to the purpose of God, that is,
those that in that purpose of God (in which God called man) are again called in
the same calling, to stand again in that purpose of God, wherein he created man
to be his likeness, and image of him.

17. So long as a man's own will stands in Self, so long it is not in the
purpose and calling of God, it is not called, for it is gone forth from its own
place; but when the mind turns it self back again into the calling, viz.
into Resignation, then the will is in the calling of God, viz in the place for,
and in which God created it, and then it has power to become the child of God
as it is written, He has given us power to become the children of God.

18. The power which he has given us is his purpose, for, and in which he
created Man in his Image, this God has brought again into the humanity, and he
has given power unto that power, to break the head of sin in the flesh, viz.
the will and desire of the Serpent: that is, the resigned will in Christ
treads upon the head of the desire of the sinful will of the Serpent, and
kills again the sins which were committed. This power that is given,
becomes a death to death, and the power of life to life.

19. Therefore no man can make any excuse, as if he could not will. Indeed,
while he sticks fast in himself, in his own desire, and serves only the
law of sin in the flesh, he cannot: For he is kept back, as being a servant
of sin; but when he turns the center of his mind away, and turns it into
the will and obedience of God; then he can.

20. Now, the center of the mind is [come] out of eternity, out of Gods
Omnipotence, it can bring it self into what it will, and whither it will: for
that which (...) out of the eternal, has no Law; but the will has a law to
obey God, and is born out of the mind, and it must not rent it self away from
that, out of which God created it*

21. Now, God created the will of the mind for and in Paradise, to be a
companion with him in the Kingdom of divine joy, it ought not to have removed
it self from thence; but since it has removed it self from thence, God has
brought his will again into the flesh, and in his new-brought-in will, has
given us power to bring our will into it, and to kindle a new light in it, and
so to become his children again.

22. God hardens no man; but his own will, which Or, perse. vereth.
goes on in the flesh of sin; that hardens the mind, viz. the will of Self
brings the vanity of this world into the mind, and so the mind is shut up,
and continues so.

23. God, so far as he is called God, and is God, cannot will any eivll; for
there is but one only will in God, and that is eternal love, a desire of
thatwhich is his like, viz. Power, Beauty, and Virtue.

24. God desires nothing but what is like his desire; his desire receives
nothing but what it self is.

25. God receives no finner into his power and virtue, unless the sinner go
forth from his sins, and enters with the desire into him: and he will not
cast out them that come unto him; he has given to the will an open gate in
Christ, saying, Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden with sins, I will
refresh you; take my yoke upon you, that is, the Cross of the enmity in the
flesh, which was the yoke of Christ, who must bear it for the sins of all
men. This cross the resigned will must take upon it, in the evil earthly
sinful flesh, and bear it after Christ in patience, in hope of deliverance,
and always breakt he head of the Serpent with the resigned will of the soul,
in Christ's will and Spirit, and kill and destroy the earthly will in Gods
anger, and not let it rest on a soft bed when sin is committed, thinking I
will repent one time or other.

26. No, no, the earthly will grows strong, fat and wanton upon this soft
bed: But so soon as the breath of God shines in thee, and shows sin to
thee, the will of the soul must sink it self down into the passion and death
of Christ, and wrap it self up close in it, and take the passion of Christ
into its possession, and be a Lord over the death of sin by the death of
Christ, and kill it and destroy it in the death of Christ.

27. It must die though it be never so unwilling: Be at enmity with the
voluptuous earthly flesh, give it not what it would have; let it fast and
suffer hunger till its tickling cease; account the will of the flesh thy enemy,
and do not what the desire in the flesh will, and then thou shall bring a death
into the death in the flesh.

28. Regard not any scorn of the world, think they do but scorn thy enemy,
and that it is become a fool to them; nay, do thou thy self account it thy
fool, which Adam caused thee to have in thee, and suffered to be thy false
heir. Cast the son of the bondwoman out of the house, (that strange child
which God did not give to be in the house of life in Adam at the beginning:)
for the son of the bondwoman must not inherit with the son of the freewoman.

29. The earthly will is but the son of the Bondwoman: for the four elements
should have been man's servants, but Adam has brought them into Or, childship.
filiation: Therefore God said to Abraham, when he had opened the covenant of
the promise in him: Cast out the son of the bondwoman; for he shall not
inherit with the son of the free. This [sonne of the] Free is Christ, which
God of his grace has brought again into the flesh for us, viz. a Renewed mind.
new mind, wherein the will, viz. the eternal will of the soul, may draw and
drink the water of life, of which Christ speaks, saying: Whosoever shall
drink of this water that he will give us, it shall spring up in him, and be a
Fountain of eternal life. This Fountain is the renovation of the mind of the
soul, viz. the eternal Astrum [or Constellation] of the eternal Nature, viz.
of the creaturely property of the soul.

30. Therefore I say, that all fictions and devices, to come to God by, let
them have what name soever they will, which men contrive and invent for ways
to God, are lost labor and unprofitable, without a new mind There is no other
way to God, but a new mind; which turns from wickedness, and enters into
repentance for the sins it has committed, and goes forth from its iniquity,
and wills it no more, but wrappeth its will up in the death of Christ, and
with all earnestness dies from the sin of the soul in the death of Christ,
so that the mind of the soul wills sin no more.

31. And although all the Devils did follow him hard, and did go with their
desire into the flesh, yet the will of the soul should stand still and hide it
self in the death of Christ, willing and desiring nothing but the Mercy of
God.

32. No hypocritical flattery, or outward comforting ones self avails at
all, as when men will cover sin and iniquity in the flesh, with the
satisfaction of Christ, and remain in Self still. Christ says, Except ye turn
and become as children, ye shall not see the Kingdom of God: the mind must
become as wholly new as in a child, that knows nothing of sin. Christ says
also, Ye must be born anew, or else ye shall not see the Kingdom of God.
There must arise a will wholly new, in the death of Christ, it must be brought
forth out of Christ's Or, intarnation.
entering into the humanity, and rise in Christ's resurrection.

33. Now before this can be done, the will of the soul must dye in the death
of Christ first; for in Adam it received the son of the bondwoman, viz. sin
into it. This, the will of the soul must first cast out, and the poor captive
soul must wrap it self up in the death of Christ earnestly, with all the
power it has; so that the son of the bondwoman, viz. sin, in it self, may
dye in the death of Christ.

34. Truly, sin must dye in the will of the soul, or else there can be no
vision of God; for the earthly will in sin, and the anger of God, shall not
see God: but Christ that came into the flesh. The soul must put on the Spirit
and flesh of Christ: it cannot inherit the Kingdom of God in this earthly
Tabernacle; for the kingdom of sin hangs to it outwardly, which must
putrify in the earth, and rise again in new power.

35. Hypocrifie, flattery, and verbal forgiveness, avails nothing, we must
be children, not by outward imputation, but born of God from within, in the new
man, which is resigned in God.

36. All such flattering of our selves, in saying, Christ has paid the
Ransom, and made satisfaction for sin, he is dead for our sins: if we also
do not dye from sin, in him; and put on his merit in new obedience, and live
therein, all is false, and a vain frivolous comfort.

37. He that is a bitter enemy and hater of sin, he can and may comfort
himself with the sufferings of Christ; he that does not willingly see, hear,
nor taste sin, but is at enmity with it, and would willingly always do that
which is well and right, if he knew but what he ought to do: he that is such a
one, I say, has put on the Spirit and will of Christ.

38. The outward flattery of being accounted a child of God by imputation or
external application, is false and vain: the work done in the outward flesh
only, does not make the child of God, but the working of Christ in the Spirit,
makes, and is the child of God; which working is so powerful in the outward
work, that it shines forth as a new light, and manifests it self to be the
child of God in the outward work of the flesh.

39. For if the eye of the soul be light, then the whole body is light in all
its members. Now if any boast himself to be the child of God, and yet suffers
the body to burn in sins, he is not yet capable of being a child, but lies
captive in the fetters of the Devil, in great darkness: and if he do not
find in himself an earnest will burning in him, of well-doing in love; then
his pretense is but an invention of Reason, proceeding from Self, which cannot
see God, unless it be born anew, and show forth in its power and virtue, that
it is his child: For there is no fire but has light in it: and if the divine
fire be in the mind, it will shine forth, and the mind will do that which God
will have done.

40. But perhaps thou will say, I have a will indeed to do so, I would
willingly do it, but I am so hindered, that I cannot?

41. Yes, thou vile man, God draws thee to be his child, but thou will not;
the soft cushion in evil, is dearer to thee then so; thou preferrest the joy
of wickedness before the joy of God, thou wholly stick'st fast in Self still,
and live according to the law of Sin, and that hinders thee: thou art
unwilling to dye from the pleasure of the flesh, and therefore thou art not in
the filiation, and yet God draws thee to it, but thou thy self wilt not.

41. O how fine a thing would Adam think it to be, if he might be taken into
heaven with this will [of the voluptuous flesh.] and to have the child of
wickedness, that is full of deceit, set upon the Throne of God. Lucifer also
would fain have had it so, but he was spewed out.

42. It is a troublesome thing to mortify the evil will, none are willing to
have it so: we would all willingly be the children of God, if we might be so
with this Or, fleshly lust.
garment, but it cannot be. This world passes away, and the outward life must
dye; what good can the childhood in the mortal body do me?

43. If we would inherit the filiation, we must also put on the new man, which
can inherit the filiation, which is like the deity. God will have no sinner in
heaven, but such as are born anew, and become children, which have put on
heaven.

44. Therefore it is not so easy a matter to become the children of God, as
men imagine. Indeed it is not a burdensome thing to him that has put on the
filiation, whose light shines; for it is joy to him. But to turn the mind, and
destroy Self, there is a strong continual earnestness requisite, and such a
purpose, that if the body and soul should part asunder by it, yet the will
should persevere constantly, and not enter again into Self.

45. A man must wrestle so long, till the dark center that is shut up so close,
break open, and the spark in the center kindle, and from thence immediately the
Noble Or, Lillytwig.
Lilly-branch sprouteth, as from the divine grain of Mustard seed, as Christ
says. A man must pray earnestly, with great humility, and for a while become a
fool in his own reason, and see himself as void of understanding therein,
until Christ be formed in this new incarnation.

46. And then when Christ is born, Herod is ready to kill the child, which he
seeks to do outwardly by persecutions, and inwardly by temptations, to try
whether this Lilly-branch will be strong enough to destroy the kingdom of the
Devil, which is made manifest in the flesh.

47. Then this destroyer of the Serpent is brought into the wilderness, after
he is baptized with the holy Spirit, and tempted and tried whether he will
continue in Resignation in the will of God: he must stand so fast, that if need
require, he would leave all earthly things, and even the outward life, to be a
child of God.

48. No temporal honor must be preferred before the filiation; but he must
with his will, leave and forsake it all, and not account it his own, but
esteem himself as a servant in it only, in obedience to his Master; he must
leave all worldly propriety. We do not mean that he may not have, or
possess any thing; but his heart must forsake it, and not bring his will into
it, nor count it his own; if he set his heart upon it, he has no power to
serve them, that stand in need, with it.

49. Self only serves that which is temporary, but Resignation has rule
over all that is under it. Self must do what the Devil will have it to do
in fleshly voluptuousness and pride of life: but Resignation tteadeth it under
with the feet of the mind. Self despises that which is lowly and simple; but
Resignation sits down with the lowly in the dust: it says, I will be simple
in my self, and understand nothing, lest my understanding should exalt it
self and sin. I will lie down in the Courts of my God at his feet, that I may
serve my Lord in that which he commands me: I will know nothing my self,
that the commandment of my Lord may lead and guide me, and that I may only do
what God does through me, and will have done by me: I will sleep in my self
until the Lord awaken me with his Spirit: and if he will not, then will I cry
out eternally in him in silence, and wait his commands.

50. Beloved brethren, men boast much now-a-dayes, of faith, but where is that
faith? The modern faith is but the History. Where is that child, which
believes that Jesus is borne? If that child were in Being, and did believe
that Jesus is born, it would also draw near to the sweet child Jesus, and
receive him, and ^urse him.

51. Alas! the Faith now a days is but Historical, and a mere knowledge of
the story, that the Jews killed him, that he left this world, that he is not
King on earth in the animal man: but that men may do what they list, and need
not dye from sin, and their evil lusts: All this the wicked child Self
rejoices in* that it may fatten the Devil by living deliciously.

52 This shows plainly, that true faith was never weaker and feebler since
Christ's time, then it is now, when nevertheless the world cries a loud, and
says, we have found the true says, and contend about a child, so that there
was never worse contention since men were on earth.

53. If thou be Zion, and have that newborn Child which was lost and is
found again; then let it be seen in power and virtue, and let us openly see the
sweet Child JESUS brought forth by thee, and that we may see that thou art his
Nurse: if not, then the children in Christ will say, thou have found nothing
but the History, viz. the Cradle of the Child.

54. Where have thou the sweet child Jesus, thou that art exalted with the
History, and with thy false and seeming faith? O how will the Child Jesus visit
thee once in the Fathers Or, property of anger.
property, in thy own Turba which thou have fatted. It calls thee now in
love, but thou will not hear: for thy ears are stopped with covetousness and
voluptuousness. Therefore the found of the Trumpet shall once shiver thee with
the hard thunderclap of thy Turba, and awaken thee, if perhaps thou will yet
seek and find the sweet child Jesus.

55. Beloved brethren, this is a time of seeking, of seeking and of finding: It
is a time of earnestness, whom it touches it touches home: he that watches
shall hear and see it; but he that sleeps in sin, and says in the fat days
of his belly, All is peace and quiet; we hear no sound from the Lord, he shall
be blind. But the voice of the Lord has sounded in all the ends of the earth,
and a Is the trouble that is upon the face of the earth light in his children.
smoke rises, and in the midst of the smoke there is Is the Divine
a great brightness and splendour. Ha le lu-Jah. Amen.

Shout unto the Lord in Zion: For all Mountains and Hills are full of his
Glory: he flourishes like a green Branch, and who shall hinder it? Ha le lu --
JAH.
The end of the 2d Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF REGENERATION, OR, The New Birth. Showing how he that
earnestly seeks salvation, must suffer himself to be brought out of the
confused and contentious Babel by the Spirit of Christ, that he may be born
anew in the Spirit of CHRIST, and live to him only.

Written in the German Language, Anno 1622, By JACOB BEHMEN. Alias, Teutonicus
Philosophus.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for H. Blunden, at the Castle in Cornhill. 1648.

REVEL. 18. 4. Come out of Babylon, my people, that ye be not partakers of
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues: For her sins have reached
unto Heaven, and God has remembered her iniquity.
THE AUTHORS Preface to the Reader.
THough I have in my other Writings set down a clear Description of
Regeneration, or the New Birth, from the ground thereof: yet because ery one
has them not, neither has every one the capacity to understand them; I have
therefore, as a service, to the simple children of Christ, here set down a
short-summe concerning the New Birth.

But if any desire to search the deep Ground from whence all flows, and have
the gift to understand it, let them read these Books following.

I. The there Principles of the Divine Essence. II. The threefold life of Man.
III. The 40 Questions of the Original Essence, Substance, Nature, and Property
of the Soul. IV. The Incarnation and Birth of Jesus Christ the Son of God;
also of his suffering, death and resurrection. V. The six points treating of
the three words, how they are in one another as one; and yet make three
Principles, viz. three Births, or Centers. VI. The Mysterium Magnum, [which is
an Interpretation] upon Genesis.
And in them he shall find all that he can ask, and that as deep as the mind of
man is able to reach. I have written this for the true Israelites, (that is for
the hungry and thirsty Hearts that long after the Fountain of Christ) who are my
fellow members in the Spirit of Christ: But not for the Ishmaelites and
Scorners: For they have a Book within them, wherewith they vex, persecute, and
suppress the children of Christ that are under the Cross; and yet though it
be against their wills, they must be servants to the children of Christ; though
indeed they do not understand so much.

OF REGENERATION,
CHAP. I. Showing how Man should consider himself.
1 CHRIST said, Except ye turn, and become as children, ye shall not see the
Kingdom of God: Again, he said to Nicodemus, Except a man be born anew, of
Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: for that
which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is
Spirit. Joh. 3. 5, 6.

2. Also the Scripture witnesses plainly, that the fleshly Natural Man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them, or conceive them.

3. Now, seeing that all of us have flesh and blood, and are mortal, as we see
by experience; and yet the Scripture says, that we are the Temple of the holy
Ghost, who dwells in us; and that the kingdom of God is within us; and that
CHRIST must be formed in us; also, that he will give us his flesh for food, and
his blood for drink: and says further, Whosoever shall not eat of the flesh of
the Son of Man, he has no life in him. Therefore we should seriously
consider, what kind of man in us it is, that is capable of being thus like the
Deity.

4. For it cannot be said of the mortal flesh, that turns to earth again,
and lives in the vanity of this world, and continually Iusteth against God;
that it is the Temple of the holy Ghost: much less can it be said, that the
Newbirth comes to pass in this earthly flesh, which dies and putrifieth,
and is a continual House of sin.

5. Yet seeing it remains true, that a true Christian is born of CHRIST, and
that the New Birth is the Temple of the' holy Ghost which dwells in us, and
that the new Man only, that is born of Christ, partaketh of the flesh and
blood of Christ; it appears that it is not so easy a matter to be a
Christian.

6. And that Christianity does not consist in the mere knowing of the History,
and applying the knowledge thereof to our selves only, in saying, that Christ
died for us, and has destroyed death, and turned it into life in us, and that
he has paid the ransom for us, so that we need do nothing but comfort our
selves with this, and steadfastly believe that it is so.

7. For we find in our selves, that sin is living, lusting, strong, and
powerfully working in the flesh: and therefore it must be somewhat else (that
does not cooperate in the flesh of sin, nor wills sin,) that is the
New Birth in Christ.

8. For St. Paul says, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus. And further, should we, that are Christians; be yet sinners? God forbid,
seeing we are dead to sin in Christ.

9. Besides, the Man of sin cannot be the Temple of the holy Ghost; and yet
there is no man that sins not: For God has shut up all under sin. For the
Scripture says, No one living is righteous in thy sight, if thou imputest his
sins to him. The righteous man falls seven times a day: and yet it cannot
be meant, that the righteous falls and sins, but his mortal and sinful
man.

10. For the righteousness of a Christian in Christ, cannot sin: For St.
Paul says, Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we expect our Savior
Jesus Christ. Now, if our conversation be in heaven, then heaven must be in us:
Christ dwells in heaven, and then if we are his Temple, that Temple, Heaven,
must he in us.

11. But for all this, seeing sin tempts us within us, whereby the Devil
has within us an access to us, therefore hell also must be in us too: for
the Devil dwells in hell; wheresoever he is, he is in hell, and cannot come
out of it. Yes, when he possesses a Man, he dwells in hell, viz. in the
Anger of God in that man.

12. Therefore we ought to consider well, what Man is, and how he is a Man;
and then we may perceive, that a true Christian is not a mere Historical New
Man, as if it were enough for us outwardly to confess Christ, and believe that
he is the Son of God, and has paid the ransom for ns; for righteousness
avails nothing if it be imputed from without, that is, by believing only
that it is imputed: but an innate righteousness, or the righteousness born in
us, in which we are the children of God, that avails.

13. And as the flesh must die, so also the life and will must dye from sin, and
be as a child knowing nothing, but longs after the mother which brought it
forth: so must also the will of a Christian enter again into its mother, viz.
into the Spirit of Christ, and become a child in it self in its own will and
power, having its will and desire inclined and directed only toward its
mother, and a new will and obedience in righteousness, which wills sin no
more, must rise from death out of the Spirit of Christ.

14. For that will is not born anew, which desires and admits vanity into
it self: and yet there remains a will which longs after vanity, and
sins in the Newborn, or Regenerate Man. Therefore the Image of man must
well be considered, and how the New Birth comes to pass, seeing it is not
wrought in the mortal flesh; and yet truly and really in us in flesh and
blood, in Water and Spirit, as the Scripture says.

15. We should therefore rightly consider what kind of man it is in us, that is
the member of Christ, and Temple of God who dwells in heaven: And then also
what kind of man it is, that the Devil Rules and drives; for he cannot
meddle with the Temple of Christ, nor does he care much for the mortal flesh;
and yet there are not three men in one another; for all make but one man.

16. Now, if we will consider this rightly, we must consider Time and Eternity,
and how they are in one another; also light and darkness, good and evil: but
especially the original of man.

This may thus be considered:

17. The outward world, with the Stars and four Elements, wherein Man and
all creatures live, neither is, nor is called God. Indeed God dwells in it,
but the substance of the outward World comprehends him not.

18. We see also, that the light shines in darkness, and the darkness
comprehends not the light, and yet they both dwell in one another. The four
Elements are also an example of this, which in their original are but one
element, which is neither hot nor cold, nor dry nor moist, and yet by its
stirring, severeth it self into four properties, viz. into Fire, Air, Water,
and Earth.

19. Who would believe that fire Or, genera* teth.
produces water? and that the original of fire could be in water? if we did
not see it with our eyes in tempests of thundering, lightning and rain; and did
not find also, that in living creatures, the essential fire in the body
dwells in the blood, and that the blood is the mother of the fire, and the
fire the father of the blood.

20. And as God dwells in the world, and fills all things, and yet
possesses nothing: and as the fire dwells in water, and yet possesses it
not: also, as the light dwells in darkness, and yet possesses not the
darkness; as the day is in the night, and the night in the day; time in
eternity, and eternity in time: so is man created according to the outward
humanity, he is the time, and in the time, and the time is the outward world,
and it is also the outward man.

21. The inward man is eternity, and the spiritual time and world; which also
consists of light and darkness, viz. of the love of God, as to the eternal
light; and of the anger of God, as to the eternal darkness: whichsoever of
these is manifest in him, his spiirit dwells in that, be it darkness or
light.

22. For light and darkness are both in him; but each of them dwells in it
self, and neither of them possesses the other; but if one of them do enter
into the other, and will possess it, then that other loses its right and
power.

23. The passive loses its power: For if the light be made manifest in the
darkness, then the darkness loses its darkness, and is not known or
discerned. Also on the contrary, if the darkness arise in the light, and get
the upper hand, then the light and the power thereof is extinguished. This is
to be considered also in man.

24. The eternal darkness of the soul, is hell, viz. an aching source of
anguish, which is called the anger of God: but the eternal light in the soul,
is the kingdom of heaven, where the fiery anguish of darkness is changed into
joy.

25. For, the same nature of anguish, which in the darkness is a cause of
sadness, is in the light a cause of the outward and stirring joy: For the or,
original.
source in light, and the source in darkness, is but one eternal source, and
one nature, and yet light and darkness.
they have a mighty difference in the source: the one dwells in the other,
and begets the other, and yet is not the other. The fire is painufll and
consuming, but the light is yielding, friendly, powerful, and delightful, a
sweet and amiable joy.

26. This may be found also in man, he is, and lives in three worlds, One is
the eternal dark-world, viz. the center of the eternal nature, which
generateth, or begette. h.
produces the fire, viz. the Or, property.
source of anguish.

27. The other is the eternal lightworld, which begets the eternal joy,
which is the Divine Habitation, wherein the Spirit of God dwells, and wherein
the Spirit of Christ receives the humane substance, and subdueth the
darkness; so that it must be a cause of joy in the Spirit of Christ in the
light.

28. The third is the outward visible world, in the four elements and the
visible stars; though indeed every element has its peculiar constellation in
it self, whence the desire and property arises, and is like a mind.

29. Thus you may understand, that the fire in the light is a fire of love, a
desire of meekness and delightfulness: but the fire in the darkness is a
fire of anguish, and it is painful, irk some, enimicitious, and full of
contrariety in its essence. The fire of the light has a good relish, or taste,
but the taste in the essence of darkness, is unpleasant, loathsome and
irksome: For all the Or, properties in the eternal nature*
Forms till fire, are in great anguish

CHAP. II. How Man is created.
30 HEre we are to consider the creation of Man. Moses says, God created Man
in his Image, in the Image of God created he him. This we understand to be both
out of the eternal and temporal birth, out of the inward spiritual world,
which he breathed into him, into the created Image; and then out of the
substance of the inward spiritual world, which is holy.

31. For as there is a nature and substance in the outward world: so also in
the inward spiritual world, there is a Nature and Substance which is
Spiritual; out of which the outward world is breathed forth, and produced out
of light and darkness, and created [ Or, into.
to have] a beginning and time.

32. And out of the substance of the inward and outward world, Man was created
out of, and in the likeness of the birth of all Or, things.
substances. The body is a a coneoction, or a kind of seed, which contains
aell the thing has from whence it is.
Limbus of the earth, and also a Limbus of the heavenly substance: for the
earth is or, out-spoken, or expressed.
breathed forth out of the dark and light world. In the word Or, creating word.
Fiat, viz. in the eternal desire, man was taken out of the earth, and so
created an Image out of time and eternity.

33. This Image was in the inward and spiritual element, from whence the four
elements proceed and are produced. In that one element was Paradise; for the
properties of nature from the fire-dark-and-light-world, were all in Or,
concordance
harmony, in like agreement both in number, weight, and measure, none of them
was manifested eminently more then another: and so there was no fragility
therein; for one property was not predominanr ovet another, neither was there
any strife or contrariety among the powers and properties.

34. Into this created Image God breathed the Spirit and breath of
understa^ding out of all the three worlds, as one only soul; which Or,
consists.
is in the inward dark and fire world, of the eternal spiritual nature,
according to which God calls himself a strong zealous God, and a consuming
fire.

35. And this now is the eternal creaturely great soul, a magical breath of
fire; in which fire consists the original of life, from the great power of
variation: Gods anger, and the eternal darkness is in this property; so far
as sire reaches, without giving light.

36. The second property of the breath of God, is the Spirit of the source of
light, proceeding from the great fiery desire of love, from the great
meekness, according to which God calls himself a loving merciful God; in
which consists the true Spirit of understanding and of life in power.

37. For as Light shines from fire, and as the power of understanding is
discerned in the light: so the breath of the light was joined to the breath of
the fire of God, and breathed into the Image of man.

38. The third property of the breath of God, was the outward air, with its
Or, Astrnm
Constellation; wherein the life and Constellation of the outward substance and
body did consist: This he breathed into his Nostrils; and as time and eternity
hang together, and as time is produced out of eternity, so the inward breath of
God hung to the outward: and this threefold soul was at once breathed into man.

39. Each substance of the body received the Spirit according to its property:
thus the outward flesh received the outward air and its constellations, for a
rational and vegetative life, to the manifestation of the wonders of God: and
the light-body, or heavenly substance, received the breath of the light of the
great divine powers and virtues, which breath is called the holy Ghost.

40. Thus the light pierced through the darknesst, viz. through the dark breath
of sire, and also through the breath of the outward air, and its Or, astrum
constellation; and so deprived all the properties of their power, that neither
the anguish of the breath of Fire in the inward property of the soul, nor heat
and cold, nor any of all the properties of the outward constellation, might or
could be manifested.

41. The properties of all the three worlds in soul and body, were in equal
harmony or concordance.
agreement and weight: That which was inward and holy, ruled through the
outward, viz. through the outward parts of the outward life, of the outward Or,
Constellation.
Stars, and the four Elements, and that was the holy Paradise.

42. And thus Man was both in heaven, and also in the outward world; and was
Lord over all the creatures of this world, nothing could destroy him.

43. For such was the earth also, till the curse of God was: The holy property
of the Spiritual world, sprung up also through the earth, and brought forth
holy Paradisicall fruits, which man could then eat in a Magical Paradisicall
manner.

44. And had neither need of teeth nor Stomach and guts.
entrails in his body. For as the light swalloweth up darkness, and as the
fire devoureth water, and yet is not filled therewith; just such a center man
also had or, in
for his mouth [to to eat withall] according to the manner of eternity.

45. And in such a manner he could also Or, Beget.
generate his like out of himself, without any dividing or opening of his body
and spirit, as God did generate the outward world, and yet did not divide
himself; but did in his desire, viz. in the word Fiat, manifest himself, and
brought it into a figure, according to the eternal spiritual birth; so also
man was created such an Image and likeness, according to time and eterntiy,
out of both time and eternity, yet in and for an eternal immortal life, which
was without enmity and contrariety.

46. But the Devil, having been a Prince and Hierarcha in the place of this
world, and having been cast out for his pride, into the dark anguishing
painful, and hostile property and source, into the wrath of God: He therefore
envied man that glory, of being created in and for the Spiritual world, the
place which he himself had, and therefore brought his imagination into the
Image of Man, and made it so lusting, that the dark world and also the outward
world, arose in Man, and departed from the equal agreement and harmony, and so
one over weighed the other.

47. And then the properties were every one made manifest in it self, and every
one of them lusted after that which was like it self, viz. that which was out
of the birth of the dark world; and also that which was out of the birth of the
light world; would each of them eat of the Limbus of the earth, * See Limbus
before.
according to its hunger, and so evil and good became manifest in Adam.

48. And when the hunger of the properties went into the earth, from whence the
properties of the body were extracted, then the Fiat drew such a branch out of
the earth, as the properties could eat of in their aw^kened vanity: for this
was possible.

49. Being the spirit of the strong and great magical power of Time and
Eternity was in Adam, from which the earth with its properties was breathed
forth: and so the Fiat, ^ viz. the strong desire of the eternal Nature,
attracted the essence of the earth. And thus GOD let the Tree of knowledge of
good evil grow for Adam, according to his awakened properties: for the great
power of the soul and of the body, caused it.

50. And then man must be tried, whether he would stand and subsist in his own
powers, before the Tempter, the Devil, and before the wrath of the eternal
Nature; and whether the soul would continue in the equal agreement of the
properties in true Resignation, under Gods Spirit, as an instrument of Gods
Harmony, a tuned instrument of divine joyfulnesse for* the Spirit of God to
strike upon. This was tried by this Tree here, and this severe commandment was
added, Thou shall not eat thereof: For at that day thou eatest thereof, thou
shall dye the death.

51. But it being known to God, that Man would not stand, and that he had
already imagined and lusted after good and evil, God said, It is not good for
man to be alone: We will make him an Help meet for him.

52. For God saw that Adam could not generate Magically, having entered with his
lust into vanity. Now therefore Moses says, God caused a deep sleep to fall
upon him, and he slept; that is, seeing man would not continue in obedience of
the divine harmony in the properties, submitting himself to stand still as an
instrument of the Spirit of God: therefore God suffered him to fall from the
Divine Harmony, into an harmony of his own, viz. into the awakened properties
in evil and good, the spirit of his soul went into these,

53. And there in this sleep he dyed from the Angelical world, and fell to be
the share of the outward Fiat, and then bad farewell to the eternal Image,
which was of Gods begetting. Here his Angelical form and power lay on the
ground, and fell into a swound.

54. And then by the Fiat, God made the woman out of him, ex matrice Veneris,
of the matrix of Venus, viz. out of that property wherein Adam had the
begettresse in himself; and so out of one body he made two, and divided the
properties of the Tinctures, viz. the watery and fiery Constellations in the
Element, yet not wholly in substance, but in the Spirit, viz. the properties of
the Watery and Fiery Soul.

35. And yet it is but one thing, but the property of the Tincture was divided,
the desire of Self-love was taken out of Adam, and formed into a woman
according to his likeness; and therefore man now so eagerly desires the
Matrix of the woman, and the woman desires the Limbus of the man, viz. the
Fire-element, the original of the true soul, by which is meant the Tincture
of fire: For these two were one in Adam, and therein consisted the Magical
begetting.

56. And as soon as Eve was made out of Adam in his sleep, both Adam and Eve
were at that instant ordained, and constituted in the outward natural life,
having the members given the^ for Bestiall and animal Or, propagation
multiplication, and also the earthly That which when we are dead is meat for
worms
Carcass into which they might put their vanity, and live like beasts.

57. Which the poor soul, that is captivated in vanity, is at this day
ashamed of, that its body has gotten a bestiall monstrous shape, as is
manifest: And from hence came mankind to be ashamed of their members and
nakedness, and to borrow their clothing from the earthly creatures, having
lost the Angelical form, and is changed into a Beast.

58. This clothing shows man sufficiently, that having this awakened vanity,
and heat and cold, seizing upon him, he is not at home with his soul therein:
For the vanity, together with this false clothing, must perish. and be severed
from the Soul again.

59. Now, when Adam awaked from sleep, he beheld his wife, and knew that she
came out of him: For he had not yet eaten of vanity with his [outward] mouth,
but with the imagination, desire and lust only.

60. And it was the first desire of Eve, that she might eat of the Tree of
vanity, of Evil and Good, to which the Devil, in the form of a Serpent,
persuaded her, saying, That her eyes should be opened, and she be as GOD
himself, which was both a lie and truth.

61. But he told her not that she should lose the divine light and power
thereby: he only said, her eyes should be opened, that she might taste, prove,
and know, evil and good, as he had done: he did not tell her neither, that
heat and cold would awake in her, and that the property of the outward stars or
astra.
constellations would mightily domineere in the flesh and in the mind.

62. His only aim was, that the Angelical Image, viz. the Substance which
came from the inward spiritual world, might disappeare in them; for then they
would be constrained to live [in subjection] to the gross earthlinesse, and
the Or* Stars.
Constellations, and then he knew well enough that when the outward world
perished, the soul should then be with him in darkness: for he saw that the
body should dye, which he perceived by that which God had intimated: and so he
supposed yet to be Lord to all eternity in the place of this world in his false
shape which he had gotten; and therefore he seduced Man.

63. For when Adam and Eve were eating of the fruit, evil and good, into the
body, then the imagination of the body received vanity in the fruit, and then
vanity awaked in the flesh, and the Dark-world got the upper hand, and dominion
in the vanity of the earthlinesse; upon which the fair Image of heaven, [that
proceeded] out of the Heavenly divine world, instantly disappeared.

64. Here Adam and Eve dyed to the Kingdom of heaven, and awaked to the
outward world; and then the fair soul in the love of GOD, disappeared as to
the holy power, virtue, and property; and in stead thereof, the wrathful
anger, viz. the Darkfire-world awaked in it: and so the soul became in one
part, viz. in the inward Nature, a half Devil, and in the outward part of the
outward world, a beast.

65. Here are the bounds of Death, and the gates of Hell; for which cause God
became man, that he might destroy death, and change Hell into great love again,
and destroy the vanity of the Devil.

66. Let this be told you, ye children of men, it is told you in the sound of
the Trumpet, that you should instantly go forth from the abominable vanity;
for the fire thereof burns.

CHAP, III. Of the lamentable fall of Man, and of the means of his Deliverance.
67 NOw when Adam and Eve fell into this vanity, then the wrath of Nature
awaked in each property, and in the desire, impressed the vanity of the
Earthlinesse and wrath of GOD into it self.

68. And then the flesh became gross and rough, as the flesh of another beast,
and the noble soul was captivated in the essence therewith, and saw that its
body was become a beast; and it saw also the bestiall members for
multiplication, and the stinking Carcass into which the desire would stuff
the loathsomeness which it was ashamed of in the presence of GOD, and therefore
they hid themselves under the Trees of the Garden of Eden; heat and cold also
seized on them.

69. And here the Heaven in Man trembled for horror, as the earth did quake in
wrath, when this anger was destroyed on the Cross with the sweet love of God;
there the anger trembled before the sweet love of God.

70. And for this vanities sake, which was thus awakened in Man, God cursed the
earth, lest the holy Element should Or, shine forth.
spring forth any more through the outward fruit, and bring forth Paradisicall
fruit; for there was no creature could then have enjoyed it; neither was the
earthly Man worthy of it any more.

71. God would not cast the precious Pearls before Beasts, an ungodly man in
his body being but a mere gross beastiall creature; and though it be of a
noble Essence, yet it is wholly poisoned and loathsome in the sight of God.

72. Now, when God saw that his fair Image was spoiled, he opened himself
before them, and had pity on them, and promised himself to them for an
everlasting possession, and that with his great love in the received humanity,
he would destroy the power of the Serpentine property, (viz. of vanity in the
wrath of God) with love. And this was the breaking of the head [of the Serpent,
which he would perform] viz. he would destroy the dark Death, and subdue the
anger with his great love.

73. And this covenant of his incarnation, which was to come, he put into the
light of life; to which Covenant the Jewish sacrifices pointed, as to a Or,
Limit.
mark, to which God had promised himself with his love: For the Faith of the
Jews entered into the Sacrifices and offerings; and Gods imagination entered
into the covenant.

74. And the offering was a figure of the Restitution of that which Adam had
lost; and so God did expiate his anger in the humane property, through the
offering in the limit of the covenant.

75. In which covenant, the most holy sweet Name JESUS, [proceeding] out of the
holy Name, and great power JEHOVAH, had incorporated it self: so that he would
again move and manifest himself in the substance of the heavenly world, which
disappeared in Adam, and kindle the holy divine life therein again.

76. This mark or limit of the covenant was propagated from Adam and his
children, from Man to Man, and did go through, from one upon all, as sin
also, and the awaked vanity, did go through from one upon all.

77. And it stood in the promise of the covenant at the end, in the root of
David, in the virgin Mary, who was in the inward Kingdom of the hidden
humanity, (viz of the essentiality that disappeared, as to the Kingdom of God)
the daughter of Gods covenant, but in the outward, according to the natural
humanity, she was begotten by her true bodily father Joachim, and her true
mother Anna, out of the Essences and substance of their souls and bodies, like
all other children of Adam, a true daughter of Eve.

78, In this Mary, from the Viz. The wisdom of God.
Virgin in the promised limit of the Covenant, of which all the Prophets have
prophesied; the eternal speaking Word, which has created all things, has in
the fullness of time, moved it self in the name of JESUS, according to its
highest and deepest love and humility: and has brought living, divine, and
heavenly substantiality into the humanity of the heavenly part, (which was
disappeared in Adam, from which he dyed in Paradise) into the seed of Mary,
viz. into the Tincture of love, viz. into that property wherein Adam should have
propagated himself in a Magical and heavenly manner, viz. into the true seed
of the woman, of heavenly substantiality, which disappeared in Paradise.

79. And when the Divine Light in the heavenly Essence was extinguished, the
Word of God, viz. the divine power of the divine understanding, did bring in
heavenly and living Substantiality, and awakened the disappeared Substantiality
in the seed of Mary, and brought it to life.

80. And so now Gods Substance, wherein God dwells and works, and the
disappeared Substance of man, are become one person: For the holy Divine
Substantiality, did anoint the disappeared, therefore that person is called
CHRISTUS, the anointed of God.

81. And this is the dry Rod of Aaron, that blossomed and bare Almonds, and the
true high Priest; and it is that humanity of which Christ spoke, saying, that
he was come from heaven and was in heaven; and that no man could ascend into
heaven but the Son of man which is come from heaven, and is in heaven, John 3.
13.

82. Now, when he says, He is come from heaven, it is meant of the heavenly
Substance, the heavenly Corporality: for the power and virtue of God needs no
coming [any whither] for it is every where altogether unmeasurable and
undivided: But Substance needs coming; the power or virtue needs to move
it self, and manifest it self in Substance.

83. And that substance entered into the Humane substance, and received it; and
not that part only of hevenaly substantiality, which disappeared in Adam, but
the whole humane Essence in soul and flesh, according to all the three Worlds.

84. But the awakened and impressed vanity, which the Devil by his imagination
brought into the flesh, by which the flesh did commit sin: he has not
received that, nor taken that upon him; he has indeed received the awakened
forms of life, as they* were gone forth from their equal agreement each of
them into their own desire.

85. For herein lay our infirmity, and the death which he was to drown with his
heavenly holy blood: Herein he took upon himself all our sins and infirmities,
also Death and Hell, in the wrath of God, and destroyed the Devil in the
humane properties.

86. The wrath of God was the Hell into which the Spirit of Christ went, when
he had shed that heavenly blood into our outward humane blood, and tinctured it
with the love, and changed that hell of the humane property into heaven, and
reduced the humane properties into equal agreement, into the heavenly Harmony.

CHAP. IV. How we are born anew, and how we also fall into Gods anger again.
87.

NOw here we may rightly understand what our New Birth and Regeneration is, and
how we may be, and continue to be the Temple of God, though in this [lifes]
time, according to the outward humanity, we are sinful, mortal men.

88. Christ in the humane essence has broken up and opened the gates of our
inward heavenly humanity, which was shut up in Adam: so that nothing remains
wanting, but that the soul bring its will out from the vanity of the corrupted
flesh* and bring it into this open gate in the Spirit of Christ.

89: Great and strong earnestness is required here, and not only a learning
and knowing, but a hunger and great thirst after the Spirit of Christ: For to
know only, is no Or, belief.
faith, but an hunger and thirst after that which I desire; so that I imagine
it to my self, and lay hold on it with the imagination, and make it my own:
this it is to believe.

90. The will must go forth from the vanity of the flesh* and willingly yield
it self up to the suffering and death of Christ, and to all the reproach of
vanity, (which scorneth it, because it goes forth from its own house wherein
it was born) and minds vanity no more, but merely desires love of God in Christ
Jesus.

91. In such a hunger, and desire, the will impresseth into it self, the Spirit
of Christ, with his heavenly corporality; that is, its great hunger and desire
takes hold of, and receives the body of Christ, viz. the heavenly
substantiality, into its disappeared Image, within which the word of the power
of God is the working.

92. The hunger of the soul brings its desire quite through the bruised
property of its humanity in the heavenly part; which disappeared in Adam: which
humanity, the sweet fire of love in the death of Christ, did bruise, when the
death of that heavenly humanity was destroyed.

93. [And so] the hunger of the soul received into it, into its disappeared
corporality, through the desire the holy heavenly substance, viz. the heavenly
corporality. Christ's heavenly corporality, which fills the Father all over,
and is high unto all, and through all things: And through that, the disappeared
heavenly body rises in the power of God, in the sweet name Jesus.

And this raised heavenly spiritual body is the member of Christ, and the
Temple of the holy Ghost, a true mansion of the holy Trinity, according to
Christ's promise saying, we will come to you, and make our abode in you.

95. That essence of that life eats the flesh of Christ, and drinks his
blood: For, the Spirit of Christ, viz. the Word (which made it self visible
with the humanity of Christ, out of, and in our disappeared humanity, through
the outward* man of the substance of this world:) swalloweth its holy
substance, into its fiery; every spirit eats of its own body.

96. Now if the soul eat of this sweet, holy, and heavenly food, then it
kindles it self with the great love in the Name JESUS; whence its fire of
anguish becomes a great triumph [and glory] and the true Sun* arises to
it, wherein it is born to another will.

97. And here is the wedding of the Lamb, which we heartily wish that the
Titular and Lip-christians might once find by experience, and [so passe] from
the history into the substance.

98. But the soul obtains not the pearl of the Divine power and virtue, for
its proper own during the time of this life, because it has the outward
bestiall flesh sticking to its outward man.

99. The power of which espouseth it self in the wedding of the Lamb, sinketh
it self down into the heavenly Image, viz. into the substance of the heavenly
Man, who is the Temple of Christ, and not into the fire-breath of the soul,
which is yet, during this whole life's time, fast bond to the outward Kingdom,
to the bond of vanity, with the breath of the air, and is in great danger.

100. It darteth its beams of love, indeed very often into the soul, whereby
the soul receives light: but the Spirit of Christ yields not it self up to
the fire-breath in this [lifes] time, but to the breath of light* only, which
was extinguished in Adam, in which the Temple of Christ is, for it is the true
and holy heaven.

101. Understand aright now, what the New Birth or Regeneration is, and how it
comes to pass, as follows: The outward earthly mortal man is not born
anew in this [lifes] time, nor the outward flesh, nor the outward part of the
soul: they continue both of them in the vanity of their wills which awaked in
Adam: they love their mother, in whose body they live, viz. the Dominion of
this outward world: and therein the birth of sin is manifest.

102. The outward man in soul and flesh, (we mean the outward part of the
soul) has no Divine will, neither does he understand any thing of God, as the
Scripture says, The natural man perceives nothing of the Spirit of God* etc.

103. But the Fire-breath of the inward world, if it be enlightened once,
understands it; It has a great longing, sighing, hunger and thirst after the
sweet fountain of Christ: it refreshes it self, by hungring and desiring,
(which is the true faith) in the sweet Fountain of Christ from his new body,
from the heavenly substantiality, as a hungry Branch in the Vine Christ.

104. And the cause why the fiery soul cannot attain to perfection during this
[lifes] time, is because it is fast bound with the outward bond of vanity,
through which the Devil continually casts his venomous Rays [of influence]
upon it, and so fifteth it, that it often biteth at his bait, and poysoneth it
self: from whence misery and anguish arises, so that the Noble Sophia hides
her self in the Fountain of Christ, in the heavenly humanity; for she cannot
draw near to vanity.

105. For she knew how it went with her in Adam, when she lost her Pearl,
which is of grace freely bestowed again upon the inward humanity: therefore she
is called Sophia, viz. the Bride of Christ. See the 3 prinples, cap. 16. from
verse 47. to verse 51.


106. Here she faithfully calls to the fiery soul, viz. to her Bridegroom,
and exhorts him to repentance, and to the unburthening of himself, or going
from the abomination of vanity.

107. Here war assaulteth the whole man, wherein the outward fleshly man
lusts against the inward spiritual man, and the Spiritual against the
fleshly: and so man is in continual warfare and strife, full of trouble,
misery anguish and care.

108. The inward says to the fiery soul: O my soul: O my love! turn I
beseech thee, and go forth from vanity; or else thou losest my love, and the
noble Pearl.

109. Then says the outward Reason, viz. the bestiall soul; Thou art foolish,
will thou be a fool, and the scorn of the world? Thou need the outward
world to maintain this life: beauty, power and glory is thy chiefest Treasure,
wherein only thou can rejoice and take delights. Why will thou cast thy
self into anguish, misery and reproach? Take thy^ pleasure, which will do
both thy flesh and thy ^mind good.

110* With such filth the true man is often defiled; viz. the outward man
defiles himself, as a Sow in the mire, and obscureth his Noble Pearl: For
the more vain the outward man grows, the more dark the inward man comes to
be, till at length it disappeareth together.

111. And then the fair Paradificall Tree is gone, and it will be very hard to
recover it again: for when the outward light, viz. the outward soul is once
enlightened, so that the outward light of Reason is kindled by the inward light;
then the outward soul commonly uses to turn hypocrite, and esteem it self
divine, and though the Pearl be gone, which sticks hard to many a man.

112. And so the tree of Pearl in the Garden of Christ, is often spoiled;
concerning which the Scripture makes a hard knot, [or conclusion] viz. That
these who have once tasted the sweetuesse of the world to come, if they fall
away again, they shall hardly see the kingdom of God.

113. And though it cannot he denied, but that the gates of grace do yet stand
open; yet the seeming light of the outward Reason of the soul, so keeps them
back, that they suppose they have the Pearl, and yet live to the vanity of
this world, and dance with the Devil after his pipe.

CHAP. V. How a man may call himself a Christian, and how not.
114. HEre a Christian should consider wherefore he calls himself a
Christian, and ponder well whether he be one or no: For surely my learning to
know and understand that I am a sinner, and that Christ has killed my sins on
the Cross, and shed his blood for me, does not make me a Christian.

115. The inheritance belongs only to the children: A maidservant in a
house knows well enough what the Mistress would have to be done, and yet
that makes her not an heir of her Mistresses goods: The very* Devils know
that there is a God, yet that does not change them into Angels again. But if
the Maidservant in the house shall be married to the Son of her Mistress,
then she may come to inherit her Mistresses goods. And so it is to be
understood also in our Christianity.

116. The children of the History are not the heirs of the goods of Christ,
but the legitimate children, regenerated of the Spirit of Christ: For God said
to Abraham, Cast out the son of the Bond woman, he shall not inherit with [the
son of] the Free: For he was a scorner, and but a Historical son of the
faith and spirit of Abraham: and so long as he continued such a one, he was not
a true inheritor of the faith of Abraham, and therefore God commanded he should
be cast out from inheriting his goods, which was a type of the Christendom
which was to come.

117. For the promise of Christendom was made to Abraham; therefore the type
was then also represented by two brethren, viz. Isaac and Ishmael, [shewing]
how Christendom would behave it self, and that two sorts of men would be in
it, viz. true Christians and lip Christians, who under the Title of
Christianity would be but mockers, as Ishmael and Esau was, who also was a type
of the outward Adam, as Jacob was a type of Christ, and his true Christendom.

118. Thus every one that will call himself a Christian must cast away, and
out, from himself the son of the Bondwoman, that is, the earthly will, and
be evermore killing and destroying of it, and not settle it in the inheritance.

119. Nor give the Pearl to the Bestiall man, for him to spo^^ himself
withal continually in the outward light, in the lust of the flesh: but we must
with our Father Abraham* bring (...) son of the right will to Mount vooria,
and be willing in obedience to God, (...) offe^ in up* always willingly dying
from sin in the death of Christ* gi^^ng no place to the Beast of vanity in the
Kingdom of Christ, nor* ^^ff^ring it to grow wanton, proud, covetous, envious,
and malicious; all these are the properties of Ishmael the son of the
Bondwoman, whom Adam begat in his vanity, of the wanton whore the false
Bondwoman, by the Devils imagination, out of the earthly property in flesh and
blood.

120. This Mocker and Titular-Christian is the son of a whore, he must be
cast out: for he must not inherit the inheritance of Christ in the Kingdom of
God: he is not fit, he is but Babel, a confusion of that one language into many
languages: he is but a talker, and a wrangler about the inheritance, he means
to get it to himself by talking and wrangling, by the hypocrisy of his lips,
and seeming holiness, and yet he is but a blood-thirsty murderer of his
brother Abel, who is a true heir.

121. Therefore we say what we know, that he that will call himself a true
Christian, must try himself, and [find] what kind of properties dr^^e and rule
him, whether the Spirit o^ Christ drives him to truth and righteousness, and to
the love of his neighbor: so that he would willingly do good, if he knew but
how to perform it.

122. Now if he find that he has such a hunger after such a virtue, then he
may surely think that he is drawn. And then he must put it in practice, and
not have a will only without doing: The drawing of the Father, to Christ,
consists in the will, but the true life consists in the doing: for the
right Spirit does that which is right.

123. But if there be the will to do, and yet the doing follows not, then the
true man is [shut up] in vain lust, which keeps the doing captive, and he is
but an hypocrite and an Ishmaelite, he speaks one thing and does another, and
witnesses that his mouth is a liar; for he himself does not that which he
teaches, and so he only serves the Bestiall man in vanity.

124. For he that will say, I have a will, and would willingly do good, but
for the earthly flesh which I have, which keeps me back that I cannot; yet I
shall be saved by grace, for the merits of Christ: I comfort my self with his
merit and sufferings, he will receive me of mere grace, without any merits of
my own, and forgive me my sins; such a one I say, is like him that knew what
food was good for his health, yet did not eat of it, but eat poison in stead
thereof, from whence sickness and death would follow.

125. What good does it the soul to know the way to good; if it will not walk
therein, but go a wrong way that leads not to God? What good will it do the
soul to comfort it self with the filiation of Christ, with his passion and
death, and so flatter it self, if it will not enter into the filial birth,
that it may be a true child, born out of the Spirit of Christ, etc. out of his
suffering, death and resurrection? Surely, the tickling and flattering of it
self with Christ's mirits, without the true innate childship, is falsehood and a
lie, whosoever he be that teaches it.

126. This comfort belongs only to the penitent sinner, who striveth against
sin, and the anger of God. When temptations come, and the Devil assaulteth
the soul; then the soul must wholly wrap it self up in the passion and death
of Christ, and in his Merits.

127. Christ indeed has merited [redemption for us] alone, but he has not
merited it as such a merit (for upon a Merit a Reward is given) that for his
own proper merits sake he would outwardly freely grant us his childship, and so
receive us for children [when we are none.] No, he Note Christ is the merit.
himself is the merit, he is the open gate [that leadeth] through death,
through that gate we must enter: But he receives no beast into his merit, but
those only that turn and become as children: those children that come to him,
are his reward, which he has merited and deserved.

128. For thus he said, Father the men were thine, and thou have given them to
me, [as my reward] and I will give them eternal life. But the life of Christ
will be given to none, unless they come to him in his Spirit, into his
humanity, suffering, and merit, and in his merit be born a true child of the
merit.

129, We must be born of his Merit, and put on the merit of Christ in his
passion and death: not Or, ab extra.
outwardly with verbal flattery, with bare comforting [of our selves] and still
remain aliens and strange children, of a strange Nature, or substance, or seed.
Essence. No, the strange Essence inheriteth not the childship, but the innate
essence inheriteth it.

130. This innate essence is not of this world, but in heaven, of which St.
Paul speaks, saying, Our conversation is in heaven; the filial essence
walks in Heaven, and Heaven is in man.

131. But if heaven in man be not open, and a man stand without heaven
flattering himself, and say, I am still without, but Christ will receive me in
by his grace, is not his merit mine? Such a one is in vanity and sin with the
outward man, and with the soul in Hell, viz. in the anger of God.

132. Therefore learn to understand rightly what Christ has taught us, and
done [for us:] he is our heaven, he must get a form in us, or else we shall
not be in heaven. Thus then, the souls inward man, with the holy body of
Christ, viz. in the Newbirth, is in heaven; and the outward mortal man is in
the world, of which Christ spoke, saying, My sheep are in my hand, and none
shall pluck them away, the Father, which gave them to me, is greater then all.

CHAP. VI. Of the right and of the wrong going to Church, receiving the
Sacraments, and Absolution.
133. BEloved brethren, we will tell you faithfully, not with flattering lips,
to please the Antichrist, but from our The virtue, power, or Spirit of Christ.
Pearl from a Christian essence and knowledge, not from the husk and History,
but from a filial Spirit, from Christ's knowledge, as a Branch [growing] on the
Vine Christ, from the measure of that knowledge which is opened in us,
according to the counsel of God.

134. Men tie us now-a-dayes to the History, to the Material Churches of
stone, which were indeed good in their kind, if men did also bring the Temple
of Christ into them. And men teach, that their absolution is a forgiving of
sins, etc. That the Supper of the Lord takes away sin: Also, that the
Spirit of God is infused into men by the Ministry. All this has a proper
meaning, if it were truly expounded, and if men did not cleave merely to the
Husk.

135. Many a man goes to Church twenty of thirty years, hears Sermons,
receives the Sacraments, and some hear Absolution read, or declared; and yet
is as much a Beast of the Devil and vanity, at the last, as at the first. A
Beast goes into the Church, and to the Supper, and a Beast comes out from
thence again.

136. How will he eat that has no mouth? How will he hear that has no
hearing? Can any man eat that Food which is so shut up that he cannot get it?
How will he drink that can come by no water?

137. What good does it to me to go to the material Churches of stone, and
there fill my ears with empty breath? Or to go to the Supper, and feed
nothing but the earthly mouth, which is mortal and corruptible? cannot I feed
and satisfy it with a piece of bread at home? What good does it to the soul,
which is an immortal life, to have the beastiall man, observe the form of
Christ's Institution, if it cannot obtain the Jewel of the Institution? For St.
Paul says of the Supper, You receive it to judgment, because ye discern not
the Lords body.

138. The covenant stands firm, and is stirred in the use of the Institution:
Christ proffereth his Spirit to us in his Word, (viz. in his preached Word) and
his Body and Blood in the Sacrament; and his absolution in a brotherly
reconciliation [one to another.]

139. But what good does it to a Beast, to stand and listen, and yet has no
hearing to [receive] the inward living Word, nor any Or, ground
vessel wherein to lay the Word, that it may bring forth fruit, of whom Christ
says, the Devil plucketh the Word out of their hearts, least they believe and
be saved. But how can he do so? Yes, being the word finds no place in the
hearing to stick fast in.

140. And thus it is with Absolution, what good does it me for one to say, I
pronounce [or declare] to thee, the absolution of thy sins, when the soul is
wholly shut up in sin? Whosoever says thus to a sinner so shut up, erreth;
and he that receives it without the voice of God within himself, deceives
himself. None can forgive sins but God only.

141. The mouth of the Preacher has not forgiveness of sins in his own
power; but it is the Spirit of Christ in the voice of the Priests mouth that
has the power, if he be also a Christian.

142. What good did it do to those, that heard Christ himself teaching on
earth, when he said, Come unto me all ye that are weary, and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest? What good did it to those that heard it, and yet
labored not, nor were heavy laden What became of the refreshment, or rest
then? being they had dead ears, and heard only the outward Christ, and not
the word of the Divine power; surely they were not refreshed: and so much good
the bestiall man has also of his absolution, and so much good also the
Sacraments do him.

143. The covenant now is open in the Sacraments, and in the Or, Ministry.
office of teaching also, the covenant is stirred: the soul does enjoy it, but
in that property the mouth of the Soul* is of.

144. That is, the outward Beast receives bread and wine, which it may have as
well at home. And the fiery soul receives the Testament according to its
property, viz. in the anger of God it receives the substance of the eternal
world: but according to the property of the dark-world, as the mouth is, so is
the food also which belongs to the mouth; he receives it to his own
judgment or condemnation. And after that manner the wicked shall behold Christ
at the last judgment as a severe Judge; but the Saints shall behold him as a
loving Immanuel.

145. Gods anger stands open in his Testaments toward the wicked, but
toward the Saints, the heavenly loving kindness and in it the power of Christ
in the holy name JESUS, stands open. What good does the holy thing do to the
wicked, that cannot enjoy it? And what then is it, that can take away his
sins, when his sin is but stirred and made manifest by it?

146. The Sacraments do not take away sin, neither are sins forgiven
thereby; but it is thus: When Christ arises, then Adam dies in the the
essence of the Serpent: when the Sun rises, the night is swallowed up in the
day, and the night is no more: so sins are forgiven.

147. The Spirit of Christ eats of his holy substance, the inward man is the
receiver of the holy substance: he receives what the Spirit of Christ brings
into him, viz. the Temple of God, Christ's flesh and blood: But what does this
concern a Beast? Or what does it concern the Devils? Or the soul that is in the
anger of God? these eat of the heavenly body, that is in the heaven they dwell
in, which is the Abyss, or bottomless pit.

148. And thus it is in the Or, Ministry.
Office of Preaching, the ungodly hears what the outward soul of the outward
world preaches; that he receives. viz. the History, and if there be straw or
stubble in that which is taught, he sucketh the vanity out of that, and the
soul sucketh the venomous poison, and the murdering cruelty of the Devil
from it, wherewith that soul tickleth it self, in hearing how to judge and
condemn others.

149. And if the Preacher be one that is dead, [and has no true life in him]
but sows venom and reproach, proceeding out of his affections, then it is
the Devil that teaches, and the Devil that hears; such teaching is
received into a wicked heart, and brings forth wicked fruits, by which the
world is become a Murdering Den of Devils; so that if you look among the
Teachers and Hearers, there is nothing to be found but revilings, slanderings,
and reproachings: also contention about words, and wrangling about the H^sk.

150. But the holy Ghost teaches in the holy Teacher, and the Spirit of Christ
hears through the soul, and the Divine house of the Divine Or, voice.
sound in the holy Hearer; the holy man has his Church in himself, wherein he
hears and teaches.

151. But Babel has a heap of stone, into that she goes with her seeming
holiness, and hypocrisy: there she loves to be seen in fine clothes, and
there makes a very devout and godly show; the church of stone is her God, in
which she puts her confidence.

152. But the holy man has his church about him every where, and in himself:
for he always stands, and walks, and sits, and lies down in his
church: he is in the true Christian church, in the Temple of Christ: the Holy
Ghost preaches to him out of every creature: whatsoever he looks upon, he
sees a Preacher of God therein.

153. Here now the scoffer will say, I despise the Church of stone, where the
congregation meets: but I say I do not: for I do but discover the
hypocritical Whore of Babylon, which commits whore ome with the church of
stone, and terms herself a Christian, but is indeed a Strumpet.

154. A true Christian brings his Holy Church [within him] into the
congregation: His Heart is the true Church, where a man must practice the
service of God. If I did go a thousand times to Church, and to the Sacrament *
Forgivenes or remission of my sins.
every week, and heard absolution declared to me every day, and have not Christ
in me, then all is false, an unprofitable fiction, and graven Image in Babell,
and no forgiving of sins.

155. A Holy Man does Holy works from the Holy strength of his mind: the work
is not the expiation, or reconciliation, Or, Satisfaction*
but it is the building which the true Spirit builds in his substance: it is
his habitation: but the fiction and fancy is the habitation of the false
Christian, into which his soul enters with dissimulation. The outward hearing
reaches but to the outward, and works in the outward only: but the inward
hearing goes into the inward, and works in the inward.

156. Dissemble, roar, cry, sing, preach and teach as much as thou will, if
thy inward Teacher and Hearer be not open, then all is nothing but Babel, a
fiction, and a graven Image, whereby the Spirit of the outward world does
model and make a graven Image in resemblance to the inward.

157. And makes a Holy show therewith, as if he did [performe some Divine or]
Holy service to GOD; whereas many times in such service and worship, the Devil
works mightily in the imagination, and very much tickleth the heart with
those things which the flesh delights in, which indeed not seldom happens
to the children of GOD, as to their outward man, if they do not take great
heed to themselves, the Devil does so ^ift them.

CHAP. VII. Of unprofitable opinions, and strife about the Letter.
158. A True Christian, who is born anew in the Spirit of Christ, is in the
simplicity of Christ, and has no strife or contention with any man about
Religion: he has strife enough in himself, with his own beastiall evil flesh
and blood: he continually thinks that he is a great sinner, he is afraid of
God; but the love of Christ pierces through and expels that fear, as the
day swalloweth up the night.

159. But the sins of the ungodly man rest in the sleep of death, and bud
forth in the pit, and bring forth fruit in hell.

160. The Christendom [that is] in Babel striveth about knowledge, how men
ought to serve God, and glorify him; also how to know God, and what he is in
his essence and will; and they preach peremptorily, that whosoever is not one
and the same in every particular with them for knowledge and Opinions, is no
Christian but a Heretic.

161. Now I would feign see how any can bring all their Sects so to agree, in
that one which might be called a true Christian Church, when all of them are
scorners, every party of them reviling the other, and proclaiming it to be
false.

162. But a Christian is of no Sect, he can dwell in the midst of Sects, and
also appear in their services, and yet adhere and be addicted to no Sect: He
has but one knowledge only, that is Christ is him. He seeks but one way
which is the Desire, always willingly to do and teach, [that which is] right:
and he puts all his knowing and willing into the life of Christ.

163. He sigheth and wishes continually, that the will of God might be done in
him, and that his Kingdom might be manifested in him: He, daily and hourly
kills sin in the flesh: For, the seed of the woman, viz. the inward man in
Christ; continually breaks the Head of the [Serpent, viz. of the] Devil,
which is in vanity.

164. His Faith is a Desire to God [and goodnesse] which he wrappeth up into a
sure hope, and therefore ventureth it upon the words of the promise; and lives
and dies therein: though, as to the true man, he never dies.

165. For Christ tells us, saying, whosoever believes in me shall never dye,
but has pierced through from death to life; and Rivers of living waters shall
flow from him, viz. good Doctrine and works.

166. Therefore I say, that whatsoever fights and contendeth about the
Letter, is all Babell: The Letters [of the word proceed from, and] stand all in
one Root, which is the spirit of God: as the many flowers stand all in the
earth, and grow by one another: None of them fight with the other about their
colors, smell, and taste: they suffer the Earth, the Sun, the Rain, the Wind,
the heat and cold to do with them as they please, and yet every one of them
grow in their own Essence and property.

167. And so it is with the children of God* they have various gifts and
knowledge, yet all from one Spirit: They all rejoice at the great wonders of
God, and give thanks to the most High in his wisdom: why should they long
contend about him, in whom they live and have their being, and of whose
substance they themselves are?

168. It is the greatest folly [that is] in Babel, for people to strive about
Religion, as the Devil has made the World to do; so that they contend about
Opinions of their own forging, viz. about the Letter: though the Kingdom of
God consists in no Opinion, but in Power and Love.

169. As Christ said to his Disciples, and left it to them at the last; saying,
Love one another, as I have loved you; For thereby men shall know that you are
my Disciples: If men would as fervently seek after Love and righteousness, as
after Opinions, there would be no strife on Earth: and we should live as
children in our Father; and should need no Law or Ordinance.

170. For God is not served by any Law, but only by Obedience. Laws are for
the wicked, which will not embrace Love and Righteousness, they are compelled
and forced by Laws.

171. We all have but one only Law or Ordinance.
order, which is, to stand still to the Lord of all Beings, and resign our will up
to him, and suffer his Spirit to play [what music he will] and work and make
in us what he will; and we give to him again, as his own fruits, that which
he works and manifests in us.

172. Now, if we did not contend about the various fruits, gifts, and
knowledge, but did acknowledge them in one another, like children of the Spirit
of God, what could judge us? For, the Kingdom of God consists not in our
knowing and supposing, but in power.

173. If we did not know half so much, and were more like children, and had
but a Brotherly [minde or good] will toward one another, and did live like
children of one. [and the same] mother, and as branches of one tree, taking our
sap all from one root, we should be far more holy, [then we are]

174. Knowledge serves only to this end, to learn to know, (we having lost
the Divine power in Adam, and so now are inclined to evil) that we have evil
properties in us, and that doing of evil pleases not God, so that with our
knowledge we might learn to do right: Now if we have the power of God in us,
and desire with all our powers to do, and to live aright, then our knowledge
is but our sport wherein we rejoice.

175. For true knowledge is the Manifestation of the Spirit of God through the
eternal wisdom: He knows what he will, in his children: He powers forth
his wisdom and wonders by his children, as the Earth [produceth] its various
flowers.

176. Now if we dwell one with another, like humble children in the spirit of
Christ, one rejoicing at the Gifts and knowledge of another, who would judge
[or condemne] us? who judges [or condemneth] the birds in the woods, that
praise the Lord of all Beings, with various voices, every one in its own
Essence? Does the Spirit of God reprove them, for not bringing their voices
into one harmony? does not the sound of them all proceed from his power, and
they sport before him.

177. Those men therefore that strive and wrangle about knowledge and the will
of God, and despise one another, for that, are more foolish, then the birds in
the woods, and the wild beasts that have no true understanding: they are more
unprofitable in the sight of the Holy God, then the flowers of the field, which
stand still quietly [submitting] to the Spirit of God, and suffering him to
manifest the Divine Wisdom and power through them: yes those men are worse
then Thistles and Thorns [that grow] among fair flowers, for they stand
still: indeed those men are like the ravenous Beasts, and Birds of prey, which
fright the other birds from singing and praising God.

178. In sum; they are Or, branch bud or sprout.
the growth of the Devil in the anger of God; which must by their pain yet
serve the Lord: for by their plaguing and persecuting, they press out the
sap through the Essence of the children of God so, that they move and stir
themselves in the Spirit of God, with praying and continual sighing: in which
the Spirit of God moves himself in them.

179. For thereby the Desire is exercised, and so the Children of God grow
green, flourish and bring forth fruit: for the children of God are manifested
in Tribulation, as the Scripture says: when thou chasti^est them, they cry
fervently to Thee.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein Christian Religion consists, and how men should serve
God and their Brethren.
180. ALL Christian Religion wholly consists in this, To learn to know our
selves; First, what we are, and whence we are come, how we are gone forth from
the Unity into dissension, wickedness, and unrighteousness, how we have
awakened and stirred up these things in us.

181. Secondly, how we were in the Unity when we were the children of God in
Adam before he fell. Thirdly, how we are now in dissension and disunion, in
strife and contrariety. Fourthly, whither we go when we pass out of this
corruptible Being; whither we go with the immortal, and whither with the
mortal part.

182. In these four points our whole Religion consists, viz. to learn to
come forth from disunion and vanity, and to enter again into that one Tree,
Christ in us, out of which we are all sprung in Adam.

183. We need not strive about any thing, we have no contention: Let every one
exercise himself, in learning how he may enter again into the love of God and
his Brother.

184. The Testaments of Christ are nothing else but a loving Bo^d, or Or, we in
him.
brotherly covenant, wherewith God in Christ binds himself to us, and * us
to him: All teaching, willing, living, and doing, must aim at that. All
teaching and doing otherwise whatsoever, is Babel, and a fiction, also a mere
graven Image of pride in unprofitable judgings, a disturbing of the world, and
an hypocrifie of the Devil, wherewith he blinds simplicity.

185. Every one whatsoever, that teaches without the Spirit of God, and has
no divine knowledge, and yet sets himself up for a Teacher in the Kingdom
of God, and will serve God with teaching, [that teaching] is false, and does
but serve the belly, his Idol, and his own proud and insolent mind, in
desiring to be honored, and accounted a Divine in holy orders.
holy: he bears an office to which he is set apart and chosen by the children
of men, who do but flatter him, and for favor have ordained him thereunto.

186. Christ said; Whosoever etreth not by the door into the Sheepfold, that
is, through ME, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
murderer, and the sheep follow him not.

187. For they know not his voice; he has not the voice of the Spirit of God,
but the voice of his own Art and learning only; himself teaches, and not the
Spirit of God: But Christ says, Every plant which my heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be plucked up by the roots.

188. How then will he that is ungodly plant heavenly plants, that has no seed
[alive] in its power in himself? Christ says expressly, the sheep hear not
his voice, they follow him not.

189. The written Word is but an Instrument whereby the Spirit leads [us to
it self within us.] That Word which will teach, must be living in the literal
Word: The Spirit of God must be in the literal sound, or else none is a
Teacher of God, but a mere Teacher* of the Letter, a knower of the History,
and not of the Spirit of God in Christ.

190. All that men will serve God with, must be done in faith, viz. in the
Spirit: the Spirit makes the work perfect and acceptable in the sight of God.
All that a man begins and does in faith, he does that in the Spirit of God,
which Spirit of God does cooperate in the work^, and that is acceptable to
God, for he has done it himself, and his power and virtue is in it, it is holy.

191. But whatsoever is done in Self, without faith, is but a figure and Or,
Husk.
shell of a true Christian work.

192. If thou servest thy brother, and do it but in hypocrisy, and give
him unwillingly, then thou servest not God; for thy faith proceeds not from
love, nor enters into hope, into thy gift. Indeed thou servest thy brother,
and he for his part thanketh God, and he for his part also blesses thee; but
thou blessest not him: for thou give him a Or, churlish.
grudging spirit in thy gift, which enters not into the Spirit of God, into
the hope of faith; therefore thy gift is but half given, and thou have but
half thy reward for it.

193. The same is to be understood of receiving a gift: if any gives in faith,
in Divine hope, he blesses his gift in his faith; but he that receives it
unthankfully, and murmureth in his Spirit, he curses it in the use or
enjoyment of it. Thus every one shall have his own, whatsoever he sows, that
he shall also reap.

194. And so it is in the Office of teaching: what ever a man sows, that also
he reapeth: For if any man sow good seed from the Spirit of Christ, it
sticks in the good heart, and brings forth good fruit; but in the wicked
that are not capable of it, the anger of God is stirred.

195. If any sow contentions, reproaches, misconstructions, all ungodly people
receive it into them, it sticks in them also, and brings forth fruit
accordingly, so that men despise, revile, slander, and misconstrue one another,
out of which [Root] the great Babel is sprung and grown; where men, out of
mere pride and strife, contend about the History, and the justification of a
poor sinner in the sight of God; and thereby make the simple err and
blaspheme, insomuch that one brother despises and curses the other, [and
excommunicateth] or casts him to the Devil, for the History and the Letters
sake.

196. Such Railers and Revilers fear not God, but to raise the great building
of dissension; and seeing corrupt lust lies in all men in the earthly flesh
still: therefore they raise and awaken abominations even in the simple children
of God, and make the people of God, as well as the children of Iniquity to
blaspheme: and so are master builders of the great Babel of the world, and are
as useful as a fifth wheel in a Wagon: and beside that, they erect the hellish
building.

197. Therefore it is highly necessary for the children of God, to pray
earnestly, that they may learn to know this false building, and go forth from
it with their minds, and not help to build it up, and so themselves to
persecute their fellow-children of God; whereby they keep themselves back from
the kingdom of God, and are seduced.

198. According to the^ saying of Christ to the Pharisees, Woe unto you
Pharisees: For you compass Sea and Land to make one Proselite; and when he is
one, you make him twofold more the child of Hell then your selves: which truly
comes to pass after the same manner, in these modern Factions and Sects
among these Cryers and Teachers of strife.

199. I desire therefore, out of my gifts which are revealed to me from God,
that all the children of God that intend to be the members of Christ,
faithfully be warned to depart from such abominable contentions, and bloody
firebrarnds, and to go forth from all strife with their Brethren, and to
strive only after love and righteousness toward all men.

200. For he that is a good Tree, must bring forth good fruits, and must
sometimes suffer Swine to devour his fruits, and yet must continue a good tree
still, and be always willing to work with God, and not suffer any evil to
master him: And then he stands and grows in the Field of God, and brings
forth fruit [to be set upon Gods Table; which he shall enjoy for ever. Amen.

All that has breath praise the Name of the LORD. Ha le lu- JAH.
Finished by Jacob Behmen 24. Junii, 1622.
A Table of the Contents of the Chapters.
CHap. 1. How Man ought to consider himself, from verse 1. to 29. Chapter 2. How
man is created, from 30. to 66. Chapter 3. Of the miserable fall of man, and how he
is delivered again, from 67. to 86. Chapter 4. How we are born anew, and also how
we fall into the wrath of God again; from 87. to 113. Chapter 5. How a man may call
himself a Christian, how not, from 114. to to 132. Chapter 6. Of right and wrong
going to Church, receiving of Sacraments, and Absolution, from 133. to 157. Ch,
7. Of unprofitable opinions, and contention about the Letter, from 158. to 179.
Chapter 8. Wherein Christian Religion consists, and how men must serve God, and
their brethren, from 180. to 200.
THE Authors Letter to his faithful Friend, Dr Balthazar Walter.
1. MY writing to you, is to exhort you, from a deep Christian consideration
and good will, not to commit my writings into the hands of every one, for they
belong not to every one.

2. Also none should cast the Pearl into the way, to be trodden under foot;
whereby the highly precious Name of God might be blasphemed: For I know very
well what Satan intends to do; but it is signified to me, that his purpose
shall be brought to naught.

3. Yet there is a thick darkness to be feared: in the time whereof, the light
shall first spring up in the hearts of men, when they shall be in great
distress and want, and quite forsaken: And then they shall seek the Lord, and
he will be found.

4. My Writings are not for those whose bellies be full, but for the hungry
stomach: they belong to the Children of the hidden Mystery, because in them
many precious Pearls lie locked up, and some are manifest.

5. I have made my Writings neither for the simple nor the wise; but for my
self, and for those to whom God shall give the understanding of them.

6. That Bud, or Branch, is in Gods power, or hand: therefore I my self
acknowledge it, not to be a work of my Reason, but to be the revelation of
God: and therefore nothing ought to be ascribed to me at all in it; neither
ought any to regard my Person, as if it were some wondrous thing; for he shall
find nothing but a very mean simple man: for my knowledge is hidden in God.

7. And though I know much, and that a great manifestation is given me, yet I
know also well, that I shall be as one that is dumb, to all those that are not
born of God: and therefore I entreat you to manage my writings wisely.

8. Also to conceal my name, till at length the dark night shall come, as is
signified to me, and then the Pearl shall be found: For so long as my
beloved is full, and satisfied, she slumbreth, and lies in the sleep of this
world.

9. But when the LORD shall awaken her with his storm, and that she shall be
in anxiety, she will then, in her trouble, cry to the LORD, and awake from
sleep, then shall my Writing stand forth, and the Pearl will be sought in them.

10. I desire, and also entreat, that none go about to have them printed
without my consent; for that shall first be after the tempest.

11. But let them be made known to the hearts of the wise only, whom thou
know that they love GOD: To others it will not he profitable at present:
For many seek after them for nothing but evil will, and pride, and out of
false wisdom, or subtle cunning. that they may appear to be some body:
therefore I entreat you to manage them wisely.

12. Many will receive them with joy, but having an evil Root, yet think to
be honest, and to amend their lives, but suffer the Devil to deceive them
still: and then afterward come to be despisers and scorners of these
manifestations. This I tell you for good will; not from a conceit, opinion, or
supposition, but even from my present and certain knowledge.

13. There is somewhat very high and deep, begun in a new Book; but there is
strong opposition made against me by the Prince of wrath; which has so
hindered me till now, (but I hope it will be written shortly) for it is an
herb which the Devil will not relish: yet the will of God must stand.

14. I hope your self shall come to me, and then we will rejoice together. The
grace of Jesus Christ be our Or, greeting.
salutation and refreshing. Dated June 7. 1620.

Jacob Behmen.

THE FOURTH BOOK A Dialogue between a Scholar and his Master, Concerning The
Super-sensuall life. Showing how the Soul may attain to Divine Hearing and
Vision: and what its Childship in the Natural and Supernatural life is, and
how it passes out of Nature into God, and out of God into Nature and Self
again: also what its salvation and perdition is.

Written in the German Language, Anno 1624, By JACOB BEHMEN. Alias, Teutonious
Philosophus.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for H. Blunden, at the Castle in Cornhill. 1648.

1* Cor. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. We speak the hidden mystical wisdom of God, which
God ordained before the world, to our glory; which none of the Rulers of this
world knew, etc. But as it is written, Esaias 64. 4. That which no eye has
seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, that which
God has prepared for them that love him: but God has revealed them to us by
his Spirit: For the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God,
etc.
OF The super-sensuall life, or the life which is above sense.
In a or conference.
Dialogue between a or diciple.
Scholar and his Master.

The Scholar. 1. THe Scholar said to his Master: I. How men may come to the
supersensual Life.
How may I come to the super-sensuall life that I may see God, and hear him
speak?


The Master. His Mast^r said: when thou can throw thy self but for a moment
into that, where no creature dwells, then ^^ou hear what God speaks.


The Scholar. 2. Is that near at hand, or far off?


The Master. It is in thee, and if thou can or an hour.
for a while cease from all thy Thinking and willing, thou shall hear
unspeakable words of God.


The Schoalr. 3. How can I hear, when I stand still from thinking and willing?


The Master. When thou stand still from the thinking and willing of Self:
then the Eternal hearing, seeing and speaking will be revealed in thee; and so
God hears and sees through thee: thine own hearing, willing, and seeing
hinders thee, that thou do not see nor hear God.


The Scholar. 4. Wherewith shall I hear and see God, being he is above Nature
and creature?


The Master: When thou art quiet or filent, then thou art that, which God was
before Nature and Creature, and whereof he made thy nature and creature: then
thou hear and see, with that, wherewith God saw and heard in thee, before
thy own willing, seeing, and hearing began.


The Scholar. 5. What hinders or keeps me back, that I cannot come to that?


The Master. Thy own willing hearing and seeing: and because thou strivest
against that out of which thou art come: thou breakest thy self off with thy
own willing, from Gods willing, and with thy own seeing thou see in thy own
willing only; and thy willing stops thy hearing with thy own thinking of
earthly natural things, and brings thee into a ground; and overshadoweth
thee with that which thou willest, so that thou can not come to that which is
super-naturall and super-sensuall.


The Scholar. 6. Being I am in Nature, how may I come through Nature, into the
super-sensual ground without destroying of Nature.


The Master. Three things are requisite here'* the first is, thou must resign
thy will to God, and sink thy self down to the ground in his mercy. The
second is, thou must hate thy own will, and not do that, whereto thy own
will drives thee. The third is, thou must submit thy self under the Cross,
that thou may be able to bear the temptations of Nature and Creature: and if
thou do thus, God will speak into Thee, and bring thy resigned will into
himself into the supernatural ground; and then thou shall hear what the Lord
speaks in thee?


The Scholar. 7. I must forsake the world, and my life too, if I should do thus.


The Master. If thou forsakest the world, thou come into that whereof the
world is made: and if thou losest thy life, and come to have thy own power
faint, then thy life is in that for whose sake thou forsakest it, viz. in God,
from whence it came into the body.


The Scholar. 8. God has created man in and for II. How men must and may rule
over all creatures, and can be like all things.
the natural life, to rule over all creatures on Earth, and to be a Lord over
all things in this world, and therefore it is reason he should possess it for
his own.


The Master. If thou rulest over all creatures outwardly only; then thy will
and ruling is in a Beastiall kind, and is but * an imaginary transitory
ruling: and thou bring also thy Desire into a Beastiall Essence, whereby
thou becommest infected and captivated, and gettest also a Beastiall condition:
but if thou have left, the Imagelkie.
imaginary condition, then thou art in the Imagelike.
super-imaginarinesse, and rulest over all Creatures, in that ground out of
which they are created, and nothing on Earth can hurt thee, for thou art like
All-things, and nothing is unlike to thee.


The Scholar. 9. O loving Master: pray teach me how I may come the shortest way
to be like All-things?


The Master. With all my heart; do but think on the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, when he said: unless ye turn and become as children, ye shall not see
the Kingdom of God: now if thou will be like All-things, thou must forsake
All-things, and turn thy Desire away from them, and not desire them, nor
extend to possess that for thy own, which is something: For, as soon as thou
take something into thy Desire, and receivest it into thee for thy own, then
that something is the same with thy self, and it works with thee in thy
will, and then thou art bound to protect it, and to take care for it as for thy
own Being: But if thou receive nothing into thy Desire, then thou art free
from All-things, and rulest over All things at once: for thou have received
Nothing for thy own, and art Nothing to all things, and all things are also
Nothing to thee: thou art as a Child which understandest not what a thing is:
and though thou do understand it, yet thou* understandest it without touching
thy perception, in that manner, which God rules and sees all things in, and
yet nothing comprehends Him.

Thou did also desire, that I would teach thee, how thou might attain it,
therefore consider the words of Christ, who said; without me you can do
nothing: In thy own power thou can not come to such rest that no creature
should touch thee, unless thou give thy self wholly up to the Life of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and resignest thy will and desire wholly to him, and willest
nothing without him, then with thy body thou art in the World, in the
properties; and with thy Reason under the Cross of our Lord CHRIST; but with
thy will thou walk in Heaven, and art at the End from whence all creatures
are proceeded, and to which they go again: and then thou may behold all
things outwardly with Reason, and inwardly with the Mind, and rule in all
things, and over all things with Christ, to whom all power is given both in
Heaven and on Earth.


The Scholar. 10. O Master, the creatures that live in me withold me, that I
cannot wholly yield and give up my self as I willingly would?


The Master. If thy will goes forth from the Creatures, then the creatures are
forsaken in thee: they are in the world, and thy body only is with the
creatures, but spiritually thou walk with God: and if thy will leaves the
creatures, then the creatures are dead in it, and live only in the body in the
world: and if thy will do not bring it self into them, they cannot touch the
soul, for St. Paul says, Our conversation is in Heaven: also, you are the
Temple of the holy Ghost, who dwells in you; so then, the Holy Ghost dwells
in the will, and the creatures dwell in the body.


The Scholar. 11. If the Holy Ghost dwell in the will of the mind, how may I
keep my self so, that he do not depart from me?


The Master. Mark the words of our Lord Jesus Christ: If you abide in my
words, then my words abide in you. If thou do abide with thy will in the
words of Christ, then his word and Spirit abides in thee: but if thy will
goes into the Creatures, then thou have broken off thy self from him, and
then thou can not any other way keep thy self, but by abiding continually
in resigned humility, and entering into continual Repentance, so that thou art
always grieved, that creatures live in thee: if thou do thus, thou stand
in a daily dying from the creatures, and in a daily ascending into Heaven in
thy will.


The Scholar. 12. O loving Master, pray teach me III. How men may come to
continual repentance, and subsist in temptation.
how I may come into such a continual Repentance.


The Master. When thou leavest that which loves thee, and love that which
hates thee; then thou may abide continually in Repentance.


The Scholar. 13. What is that which I must thus leave?


The Master. Thy creatures in flesh and blood, and all other things that love
thee, love thee because thy will Feeds, nourishes, or preserves.
entertaineth them: the will must leave them and account them enemies: and the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ with the reproach of the world hates thee,
which thou must learn to love, and take for a daily exercise of thy
Repentance; and then thou shall have continual cause to hate thy self in the
creature, and to seek the eternal rest, wherein thy will may rest, as Christ
said: in me you have rest, but in the world you have Anxiety.


The Scholar. 14. How may* I recover in such a Temptation as this?


The Master. If every hour thou do once throw thy self beyond all Creatures,
above all sensual Reason into the meerest mercy of God, into the sufferings of
our Lord, and yieldest thy self thereinto, then thou shall receive power to
rule over Sin, Death, and the Devil, over Hell and the World, and then thou
may subsist in all Temptations.


The Scholar. 15. Poor man that I am, what would become of me; if I should
att^ine with my mind to that, where no Creature is?


The Master. His Master said to him very kindly: loving Scholar: If it were,
that thy will could break off it self for one hour, from all creatures, and
throw it self into that, where no creature is, it would be over-cloathed with
the highest splendour of Gods glory, and would taste in it self the most sweet
love of our Lord Jesus, which no man can express: and it would find in it
self, the unspeakable words of our Lord concerning his great mercy; It would
feel in it self, that the Cross of our Lord CHRIST would be very pleasing to
it, and it would love that more then the Honor and goods of the world.


The Scholar. 16. But what would become of the Body, since it must live in the
Creature?


The Master. The body would be put into the imitation of our Lord Christ, who
said, his Kingdom was not of this World; it would begin to dye from without
and from within: from without, from the vanity and evil deeds of the world, it
would be an utter enemy to all Pride and Insolence: from within, it would dye
from all evil Lusts and Envy, and would get a mind and will wholly new, which
would be continually directed to God [and Goodness.]


The Scholar. 17. But the World would hate and despise it for doing so: seeing
it must contradict the World and l^ve and do otherwise then the World does.


The Master. It would not take that as any harm done to it, but would rejoice
that it is become worthy to be like to the Image of our Lord Christ, and be
willing to bear that Cross after our Lord, merely that the Lord might bestow
the Influence of his sweet love upon it.


The Scholar. 18. What would become of it, when the anger of God from within,
and the wicked world from without should assault it, as happened to our Lord
Christ?


The Master. Be that unto it, as unto our Lord Christ, when he was reproached,
reviled, and crucified by the World and the Priests, he commended his soul
into the hands of his Father, and so departed from the anguish of this world
into the Eternal joy. So also it would get forth from the reproach and anguish
of all the world, and penetrate into it self, into the great love of God, and
be sustained and refreshed by the most sweet Name JESUS, and see and find in
it self a new world springing forth through the anger of God: then a man
should wrap his soul up therein, and account all things alike, and whether the
body be in (...)
Hell or on Earth, yet his mind is in the greatest love of God.


The Scholar. 19. But how would his body be maintained in the world, and how
would he maintain those that are his, if he should incur the displeasure of
all the world.


The Master. He gets greater favor then the world is able to bestow; for
he has God, and all his Angels for his friends, they protect him in all
dangers and necessities: Also God is his blessing in every thing; and though
sometime it seem as if God would not [bless him] it is but for a Trial [to
him,] and the drawing of [Gods] love, that he might the more pray to God, and
commit all his ways to him.


The Scholar. 20. But he loses all his good friends, and there will be none to
help him in his necessity.


The Master. Yes, he gets the hearts of all his good friends into his
possession, and loses none but his enemies, who before loved his vanity and
wickedness.


The Scholar. 21. How is it that he gets his good friends into his
possession?


The Master. He gets the souls of all those that belong to our Lord Jesus,
to be his brethren, and the members of his own life: for the children of God
are but one in Christ, which one is Christ in all: therefore he gets them
all to be his fellow members in the body of Christ: for they have the heavenly
goods common, and live in one [and the same love of God, as the branches of a
Tree [spring] from one [and the same] sap: Also, he cannot want outward natural
friends neither, as our Lord Christ did not want such: For though the high
Priests and Potentates of the would would not love him which belonged not to
him, nor were his members and brethren: yet those loved him that were capable
of his words: so likewise those that love truth and righteousness, would love
that man, and associate themselves to him* as Nicodemus did to Christ, [who
came to him] by night, and in his heart loved Jesus for the truths sake, yet
outwardly feared the world, and thus he shall have many friends that are not
known to him.


The Scholar. 22. But it is very grievous to be despised of all the world.


The Master. That which now seems hard and heavy to thee, thou will afterward
love it most of all.


The Scholar. 23. How can it be that I should love that which hates me?


The Master. Though thou love the earthly wisdom now, yet when thou art
overcloathed with the heavenly [wisdome] thou will see that all the wisdom of
the world is but folly, and that the world hates but thy enemy, viz. the
mortal life; and when thou thy self come to hate the will thereof, then
thou also wilt begin to love that despising of the mortal life.


The Scholar* 24. But how may these two stand together, viz. that a man should
both love and hate himself?


The Master. In loving thy self, thou love not thy self, as thy own; but as
given [from] the love of God thou love the Divine ground in thee by which thou
love the Divine wisdom, Gods works of wonder, and thy brethren: But in hating
thy self, thou hate only that which is thy own, wherein evil sticks
close to thee: and this thou do, that thou may wholly destroy in thee
[that which thou call thine (when thou say I or my self do this or
that) this thou would wholly destroy] in thee, that thou may become a
ground wholly divine. Love hareth [Self, or] that which we call I, because it
is a deadly thing, and they two cannot well stand together: for love possesses
heaven, ^c dwells or, by
in it self; but that which I call I, possesses the world, and worldly things,
and also dwells in it self, and as heaven rules the world, and as eternity
rules time, so love rules over the natural life.


The Scholar. 25. Loving Master, pray tell me, IV. How love and sorrow stand
together in one, and what Love is, what its power, virtue, height and goodness
is, where it dwells in man, also the near est way to attain it
wherefore must love and trouble, friend and foe be together, would not love
alone be better?


The Master. If love dwelt not in trouble, it could have nothing to love; but
its substance which it loves, viz. the poor soul, being in trouble and pain,
it has cause to love its own substance, and to deliver it from pain, that it
self also might be beloved again: neither could it be known what love is, if
it had not something which it might love.


The Scholar. 26. What is the virtue, power, height, and greatness of love?


The Master. Its virtue is that nothing [whence all things proceed,] and its
power is [in and] through all things: its height is as high as God, and its
greatness is greater then Here is meant the manifestation of the Deity in the
glorious eternal Light of the Divine Ess^^^^
God: whosoever finds it, finds nothing, and all things.


The Scholar. 27. Loving Master, pray tell me, how I may understand this.


The Master. That I said, its virtue is that nothing, thou may understand
thus: when thou art gone forth wholly from the creature, and art become Nothing
to all that is Nature and Creature, then thou art in that eternal One, which
is God himself, and then thou shall perceive and feel the highest virtue of
Love.

But that I said, its power is [in and] through all things, thou perceivest and
find, that in thy own Soul and Body, when this great love is kindled in
thee, it will burn more then any fire can do: Thou see also in all the works
of God, that love has powered forth it self into all things, and is the most
inward and most outward ground in all things: Inwardly, in the [vertue and]
power, and outwardly in the [figure, form or] shape [of every thing.]

And that I said, Its height is as high as God, thou may understand this in
thy self, in that it brings thee to be as high as God himself is: as may be
seen by our beloved Lord Christ in our humanity; which humanity love has
brought into the highest throne, into the power of the Deity.

But that I also said, Its Greatness is greater then GOD; that is also true:
for love enters into that where God dwells not: as when our beloved Lord
Christ was in hell, hell was not God, but love was there, and destroyed death.
Also, when thou art in anguish or trouble, God is not the anguish or trouble,
but his love is there, and brings thee out of anguish into God: when God
hides himself in thee, love is there, and makes him manifest in thee

Also, that I said, whosoever finds it, finds nothing and all things; that
is also true: for he finds a supernatural, super-sensuall abyss, having no
ground, where there is no place to dwell in; and he finds also nothing that is
like it, and therefore it may be compared to nothing; for it is deeper then any
thing, and is a as nothing to all things; for it is not comprehensible: and
because it is nothing, it is free from all things, and it is that only Good,
which a man cannot express, or utter what it is.

But that I lastly said; He that finds it, finds all things, is also true,
it has been the beginning of all things, and it rules all things: If thou
fi^dest it, thou come into that ground from whence all things are proceeded,
and wherein they subsist; and thou art in it, a King over all the works of God.


The Scholar 28. Loving Master, pray tell me, where dwells it in man?


The Master. Where man dwells not, there it has its seat in man.


The Scholar. 29. Where is that in a man's self, where man dwells not?


The Master. It is [in] the soul, [that is] resigned to the ground, where the
soul dies to its own will, and wills no more [of] it self, but only what
God will: and there Love
it dwells: for, so much of the soul, as its own will is dead to it self
in, so much place love has taken up therein: for where its own will sat
before, there now is nothing; and where nothing is, there the love of God is
working alone.


The Scholar 30* But how may I comprehend it without the dying of my will?


The Master. If thou will comprehend it, viz. in thy own will.
it flies away from thee; but if thou yeeldest thy self wholly up to it, then
thou art dead to thy self in thy will, and love will then be the life of thy
Nature: it kills thee not, but quickneth thee according to its life; and then
thou live, yet not to thy own will, but to its will, for thy will becomes
its will, and then thou art dead to thy self, but live to God.


The Scholar. 31. How is it, that so few find it, when all would so feign have
it?


The Master. They all seek it in something, viz. in an Imaginary opinion, in
self-desire, whereto almost all have a peculiar natural Lust [or Inclination]
and though Love should proffer it self to them, it would find no place in
them, because the Imaginarinesse that is in their own will has set it self in
the place thereof; and so the Imaginarinesse of selfelust would have the love
in it: but love flies away; for it dwells only in Nothing, and therefore
they find it not.


The Scholar. 32. What is the Office of it in Nothing?


The Master. Its office is, to penetrate without intermission into something,
and if it find a place in something which stands still, then its office is
to take possession thereof, and to rejoice therein, with its flaming fire of
Love, more then the Sun in this world: and without intermission to kindle a
fire in something, and to consume the something, and to over-enflame it self
therewith.


The Scholar. 33. O loving Master! How shall I understand this?


The Master. If it may but kindle a fire in thee, thou shall feel how it
consumes thy [selfe which thou call,] I: and rejoices so exceedingly in
thy fire, that thou would rather suffer thy self to be killed, then to enter
again into thy something; Its flame also is so great, that it would not leave
thee, though it should cost thy Temporal Life, it would go with thee in its
fire into Death; and if thou wentest into Hell, it would break Hell in pieces
for thy sake.


The Scholar. 34, Loving Master, I can no more endure any thing should divert
me; how shall I find the nearest way to it?


The Master. Where the way is hardest, there walk thou, and take up what the
world rejects; and what the world does, that do not thou: walk contrary to
the world in All things, and then thou come the nearest way to it.


The Scholar. 35. If I should walk contrary to every thing, I must needs be in
mere misery and unquietness, and I should also be accounted a fool?


The Master. I do not bid thee do harm to any, but because the world loves
only deceit and vanity, and walks in false [and wicked] ways; therefore if
thou will act a clean contrary part to the ways thereof in all things, walk
only in the right way: for the right way is contrary to all the ways of the
world.

But that thou ^aist, thou should be in mere anguish [and trouble] that
indeed will be so, according to the flesh, and it will give thee occasion of
continual Repentance, and in such Anxiety the Love must willingly kindle its
fire.

That thou say also: thou should be accounted a ^illy fool, is true; for
the way to the love of God is solly to the world, but wisdom to the children
of God: when the world perceives this fire of love in the Children of God, it
faith they are turned fools: but to the children of God it is the greatest
Treasure, [so great] that no Life can express it, nor Tongue so much as name
what the fire of the inflaming love of God is, it is Or, Brighter.
whiter then the Sun, and sweeter then any thing, it is far more powerful,
virtuall, or strengthening
nourishing then any meat or drink, and more pleasant then all the joy of
this world: whosoever gets this, is richer then any King on Earth, more
noble then any Emperor can be; and more potent and strong then all [Authority]
and Power.


The Scholar. 36. Then the Scholar asked his Master further, saying: whether
goes the soul when the body dies? be it either V. whither the blessed and
damned souls go when they depart, and how Heaven and Hell is in man.
saved or damned?


The Master. His Master answered: It needed no going forth, only the outward
mortal life with the body do separate themselves from the soul, the soul
has Heaven and Hell in it self before, as it is written; The Kingdom of God
comes not with outward observation, neither shall they say, Lo here or Lo
there it is, for behold the Kingdom of God is within you: and whether of the
two, viz. either Heaven or Hell shall be manifested in it, in that the soul
stands.


The Scholar. 37. Does it not enter into Heaven or Hell as a man enters into a
house, or as a man goes through a hole, [door or window] into another world?


The Master. No, there is no such kind of entering: for Heaven and Hell are
present every where; and it is but the turning in of the will either into Gods
love, or into his anger; and this comes to pass in this life; according to
that of Saint Paul; Our conversation is in Heaven: and Christ says also: My
sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give them the
Eternal life, and none shall pluck them out of my Hand.


The Scholar. 38. How comes this entering of the will into Heaven or Hell, to
pass?


The Master. When the ground of the will yields it self up to God, then it
sinketh down from it self beyond all ground and place where GOD only is
manifest, works and wills: and then it becomes nothing to it self, as to
its own willing, and so God works and wills in it: and God dwells in this
refigned will, whereby the soul is sanctified, and so comes into Divine
Rest. Now when the body is dead, the soul is thoroughly penetrated all over
with the love of God, and thoroughly enlightened with the light of God, as the
fire thoroughly enflameth a [bright shining hot] iron, whereby it loses its
darkness: and this is the hand of Christ, where the love of God thoroughly
inhabiteth the soul all over, and is a shining light, and a new life in it; and
then it is in heaven, and a Temple of the holy Ghost, and is it self the very
heaven of God in which he dwells.

But the ungodly soul will not in the time of this life, enter into the Divine
Resignation of its will, but goes on continually in its own lust and falsehood,
in the will of the Devil: it receives into it self nothing but wickedness,
lies, pride, covetousness, envy, and anger, and yields its will into them;
and so this vanity also becomes manifest, and working in the soul, and
thoroughly penetrateth it all over, as fire does [a burning hot] Iron; and this
soul cannot come to Divine rest: for Gods anger is manifested in it. Now when
the body parts from this soul, eternal grief and despair begins; for
it perceives and finds, that it is become a mere tormentive abomination,
and is ashamed to strive to enter with its false will into God, nay it cannot:
for it is captivated in the wrath, and is it self mere wrath, and has shut
it self up therewith by its Or, evil.
false desire which it has raised up in it self: And since the light of God
shines not in it, and that his love touches it not, it is a great darkness,
and an aching anguishing source of fire, and carries hell in it self, and
cannot see the light of God. Thus it dwells in it self in hell, and needs
no entering [into it;] for wherein soever it is, it is in Hell: and though it
should cast it self many hundred thousand miles from its [present] place, yet
there it is in the same property, source and darkness [it was in.]


The Scholar. 39. How comes it then, that a holy soul in this [lifes] time,
does not perfectly perceive that light and great joy, nor a wicked soul feel
hell, when both of them are in man, and one of them of necessity works in him?


The Master. The Kingdom of Heaven in the Saints is working and sensible in
their faith, they feel the love of God in their faith, by which the will
yields it self up into God: But the natural life is compassed with flesh
and blood; and in the contrariety of Gods anger, is compassed with the vain
lust of this world, which continually does thoroughly penetrate the outward
mortal life, where the world on one side, the Devil on the other, and on a
third the curse of the anger of God in flesh and blood, thoroughly penetrateth
and ^i^teth the life, whereby the soul is often in anguish, when hell thus
assaulteth it and would manifest it self in the soul: But the soul sinketh
down into the hope of Divine grace, and stands like a fair Rose in the midst
of Thorns, till the Kingdom of this world falls off from it in the death of
the body: and then the soul becomes first truly manifest in the love of God;
having nothing more to hinder it: but the soul during the time of this life,
must walk with Christ in this world, and then Christ delivers it out of its
own hell by thoroughly penetrating it with his love, and stands by it in hell,
and changes its hell into heaven.

But that thou say, Why do not the wicked feel hell in the time of this
life? I answer, he feels it indeed in his false [or wicked] conscience, but
he understands it not: for he has earthly vanity yet, with which he is
enamoured, and in which he takes delight and pleasure: also the outward life
has yet the light of the outward nature, and so the pain cannot be revealed;
but when the body dies, the soul* cannot enjoy such temporal pleasure any
longer, and the light of this outward world is also extinguished to it: and
then it stands in eternal hunger and thirst after such vanity as it was in
love withal here [in this ^^e,] yet it can reach nothing but that false will
which it * imprinted [in Impressed.
it self,] which it had too much of in this life, and yet was not contented;
but then it has as little of it, which makes it to be in everlasting hunger
and thirst after vanity, wickedness, and [vile] lewdness; it would fain do
more evil still, but it has not wherein or wherewith to perform it, and
therefore it performs it onein it self. And this hellish hunger and thirst
cannot be fully manifested in it, till the body dies, wherewith the soul has
played the wanton in voluptuousness, and which has ministered to the Soul
what it lusted after,


The Scholar. 40. Heaven and hell being in us in VI. where the Angels and
Devils dwell in this [worlds] time, how far Heaven and Hell are asunder; and
what and whence the Angels and souls are.
strife in this [lifes] time, and God being also thus near us, where do the
Angels and Devils dwell?


The Master. Where thou do not dwell as to thy self and thy own will; there
the Angels dwell with thee, and every where all over: but where thou dwell
as to thy self and thy own will, there the Devils dwell with thee, and every
where all over.


The Scholar. 41. I understand not this.


The Master. Where the will of God wills in any thing, there God is Or,
Revealed.
manifested, and in that manifestation the Angels also dwell; but where God in
any thing wills not with the will of the thing, there God is not manifested
to it, but dwells in himself, without the cooperating of the thing; in that
thing its own will is without GODS will, and there the Devil dwells, and
all what ever is without God.


The Scholar. 42. How far then is Heaven and Hell from one another?


The Master. As [far as] day and night, something and nothing [are one from
another:] they are in one another; and they do cause joy and trouble one to
another. Heaven is through the whole world, and without the world all over,
without being divided or included in a place, and works through the Divi^^
Manifestation but only in it self, and in that which comes into it, or in
that wherein it becomes manifest, and there God is revealed: for heaven is
nothing but a manifestation of the eternal One, wherein all works and
wills in quiet love.

Hell also is through the whole world, and dwells and works also but in it
self, and in that wherein the foundation of Hell is manifested, viz. in Self,
and in the false, [or evill] will. The visible world has both [Heaven and
Hell] in it: Man, as to his Temporal life, is only of the visible world, and
therefore during the time of this life, he sees not the spiritual world: for
the outward world, with its substance, is a cover to the spiritual world, as
the soul is covered with the body: But when the outward man dies, then the
spiritual world, as to the soul, is manifested either in the eternal light,
with the holy Angels, or in the eternal darkness with the Devils.


The Scholar. 43. What is an Angel, or the soul of a man, that they may be
manifested thus either in Gods love or anger?


The Master. They came from one original, they are a Or, piece, or slip, or
grift, or sience.
Branch of the Divine Sience of the Divine will, sprung from the Divine Word,
and made an object of the Divine Love, they are [come] out of the ground of
eternity, from whence Light and Darkness spring, viz. Darkness consisting in
the receiving of Self-desire; and Light consisting in willing the same with
God, and there the love of God is in the working: but in the receiving of Self
in the willing of the soul, Gods will works in pain, and is a Darkness,
that the light may be known: They, [Heaven and Hell] are nothing else but a
manifestation of the Divine will, either in Light or Darkness, according to
the properties of the spiritual world.


The Scholar. 44. What then is the Body of VII. What the body of man is: and
why the Soul is capable of receiving good and evil.
a Man?


The Master. It is the visible world, an Image and essence of all that the
world is; and the visible world is a manifestation of the inward spiritual
world, [come] out of the eternal light, and out of the eternal darkness, out
of the spiritual weaving, [twining or connection:] and it is an object or
resemblance of eternity; wherewith eternity has made it self visible; where
self-wil, and resigned will, viz. evil and good, work one with another: and
such a substance the outward man also is; for God created man of the outward
world, and breathed into him the inward spiritual world, for a soul and an
understanding life, and therefore in the things of the outward world, man can
receive and work evil and good.


The Scholar. 45. What shall be after this world, VIII. Of the perishing of the
world, of man's body in and after the Resurrection: where Heaven and Hell shall
be: of the last Judgment, and wherefore strife in the Creature must be.
when all things perish?


The Master. The material substance only cease, viz. the four elements,
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and then the inward world will be wholly visible
and manifest: But whatsoever has been wrought by the Spirit in this time,
whether evil or good, I say, every work shall separate it self there in a
spiritual manner, either into the [eternal] light, o^ into the eternal
darkness: for that which is born from each will, penetrateth again into that
which is like it self. And there the darkness is called Hell, and is an
eternal forgetting of all good; and the light is called the Kingdom of God,
and is an eternal joy, and an eternal praise in the Saints, that they are
delivered from the false.
evil pain.

The last judgment is a kindling of the fire both of Gods love and anger; in
which the matter of every substance perishes, and each fire shall attract its
own into it self, viz. the substance that is like it self; that is, Gods fire
of love draws into it whatsoever is born in the love of God, in which also it
shall burn after the manner of love, and yield it self up into that substance
But the pain draws into it self what is wrought in the anger of God in
darkness, and consumes the false substance; and then there remains only
the painful [or aking] will in its own form, Image and figure.


The Scholar. 46. What Matter and Form, [or shape] shall our bodies rise with?


The Master. It is sown a natural gross and elementary body, which in this
[life] time, is like the outward elements; and in this gross body there is the
subtle power and virtue; as in the earth there is a subtle good virtue, which
is like the Sun, and is one and the same with the Sun; which also in the
beginning of time, did spring and proceed out of the Divine power and virtue,
from whence all the good virtue of the body has been received: this good
virtue of the mortal body shall come again and live for ever in a kind of
transparent Crystalline material property, in spiritual flesh and blood: as
also the good virtue of the earth [shall,] when the earth also shall be
Crystalline, and the Divine light shine in every thing [that has a Being,
Essence or Substance:] And as the gross earth shall perish, and not return; so
also the gross flesh of Man shall perish, and not live for ever. But all
things must appear before the judgment, and in the judgment be separated by
the fire; yes both, the earth, and also the ashes of the humane body: For when
God shall once move the Spiritual world, every Spirit shall attract its
spiritual substance to it self, viz. a good Spirit and soul shall draw to it
self its good substance, and an evil one its* evil substance. But we must
here understand such a substantial material power and virtue, whose substance
is mere virtue, like a material such a thing as has all figures, colors,
and virtues, and yet transparent.
tincture, whose grossnesse is perished in all things.


The Scholar. 47. See the 40. questions of the soul, 21. question, 12. verse.
Shall we not rise again with our visible bodies, and live in them for ever?


The Master. When the visible world perishes, then all that which has come
out of it, and has been external, shall perish with it: there shall remain of
the world only the heavenly Crystalline Nature and Form, and so there shall
remain of Man also, only the spiritual earth: For man shall be then wholly
like the spiritual world, which as yet is hidden,


The Scholar. 48. Shall there be also husband and wife, or children and kindred
in the spiritual life, or shall one associate with another, as they do in
this life?


The Master. Why art thou so fleshly minded? There will be neither husband nor
wife, but all will be like the Angels of God, viz. Masculine Virgins: there
will be neither son nor daughter, brother nor sister, but all of one kind,
all are but ONE in Christ, (as a Tree and its branches, are one) and yet
several creatures, but God All in All. Indeed there will be spiritual
knowledge of what every one has been, and what he has done, but no or,
receiving or using, or enjoying.
possessing or desire of possessing such things any more.


The Scholar. 49. Shall they all have that eternal joy and glorification alike?


The Master. The Scripture says, Such as the people is, such is their God:
Also it says, With the holy thou art holy, and with the perverse thou art
perverse. And Saint Paul says, In the resurrection they shall excel one
another, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, therefore know, they [the blessed] shall
indeed enjoy Divine working, but their virtue and or illustration,
illumination shall be very different: all according as they have been endued
in this [life] time, with power and virtue in their painful working: For the
painful working of the creature in this [life] time, is the opening and
begetting of Divine power, by which Gods power is made moveable and working.
Now those that have wrought with Christ in this [life] time, and not in the
lust of the flesh, shall have great power and excellent glorification in them,
and upon them: but others who have only expected and relied upon an imputed
satisfaction, and in the mean while have served their Belly-God, and yet at
last have turned and obtained grace; those, I say, shall not have so great
power and illumination; so that there will be as great a difference between
them, as is between the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and as is between the flowers
of the field in their beauty, power, and virtue.


The Scholar. 50. How shall the world be judged, and by whom?


The Master: With the Divine stirring [or Motion] by the Person and Spirit of
Christ: Christ, by the word of God which became Man, shall separate from
himself, all that belongs not to Christ; and he shall wholly manifest his
kingdom in that place where this world is: For the separating motion works
all over through all at once.


The Scholar. 51. Whither shall the Devils, and all the damned be thrown, when
the place of this world is the kingdom of Christ, and when it shall be
glorified? Shall they be cast out of the place of this world? or shall Christ
have, and manifest, his Dominion without the place of this world?


The Master. Hell shall remain in the place of this world every where; but
hidden to the kingdom of heaven, as the Night is hidden in the Day; the light
shall shine for ever in the darkness, and the darkness cannot comprehend it.
And thus the light is the kingdom of Christ, and the darkness is Hell,
wherein the Devils and the wicked dwell; and so they shall be suppressed by the
Kingdom of Christ, and made a footstool, viz. a reproach.


The Scholar. 52. How shall all people and Nations be brought to judgment?


The Master. The eternal word of God, out of which every spiritual creaturely
life has come, will move it self at that hour, according to Love and Anger
in every life which is [come] out of the eternity, and will draw every creature
before the Or, sentence.
judgment of Christ, to be sentenced by this motion of the Word; the life will
be manifested in all its works, and every one shall see and feel its judgment
and sentence in it self: for the judgment shall immediately, in the departure
of the body, be manifested in the Soul. The last judgment is but a return of
the spiritual body, and a separation of the world, when the evil shall be
separated from the good in or upon.
in the substance of the world, and in the body, and every thing enter into its
eternal reservatory; and is a manifestation of the mystery of God in every
substance and life.


The Scholar. 53. How will the sentence be pronounced?


The Master. Here consider the words of Christ: He will say unto those on his
right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world; For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat;
I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in;
naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick and in prison, and ye visited me, and
came unto me.

Then shall they answer him, saying; LORD, when saw we thee hungry, thirsty, a
stranger, naked, sick and in * served or helped.
prison, and ministered unto Thee thus?

Then shall the King answer and say unto them; In as much as ye have done it
unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me.

And unto the wicked on his left hand he will say, Depart from me ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: For I was
hungry, thirsty, a stranger, naked, sick and in prison, and ye have not
ministered to me.

And they shall also answer him and say; When have we seen thee thus, and have
not ministered to thee?

And he will answer them, Verily, I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have not done
it unto one of the least of these, ye did it not to ME.

And they shall depart into everlasting punishment; but the righteous into life
eternal.


The Scholar. 54. Loving Master, pray tell me why Christ says, What have you
done to the least of these, you have done it to me: and what you bave not done
to them, neither have you done it to me? And how does a man this to Christ so,
as he does it to himself? * See the latter end of the answer following.



The Master. Christ dwells really and essentially in the faith of those that
wholly yield up themselves to him, and he gives them his flesh for food. and
his blood for drink; and so possesses the ground of their faith, according to
the or the inward man.
inwardnesse of Man; and therefore a Christian is called a branch of the vine
Christ, and a Christian, because Christ dwells spiritually in him, and
whatsoever any shall do to such a Christian in his bodily necessities, that is
done to Christ himself who dwells in him: for such a Christian is not his
own, but is wholly resigned to Christ, and is his peculiar possession, and
therefore it is done to Christ himself. Therefore also whosoever shall
withdraw their hand from such a needy Christian, and will not serve him in his
necessity, they thrust Christ away from themselves, and despise him in his
members. When a poor person that belongs to Christ, asks [any thing] of
thee, and thou deniest it him in his necessity, then thou have denied it to
Christ himself. And whatsoever hurt any shall do to such a Christian, they
do it to Christ himself. When any mock, reproach, revile, or reject, or thrust
away such a one, they do all that to Christ himself: but he that receives
him, gives him meat and drink, cloatheth him, and assisteth him in his
necessities, he does it to Christ himself, and to the [fellow] members of his
own Body; nay thus, he does it to himse^fe if he be a Christian: for we are One
in Christ, as a Tree and its Branches are one.


The Scholar. 55. How then will those subsist in the day of that judgment, who
torment and vex the poor and distressed, and deprive him of his very sweat,
necessitating and constraining him by force to be subject to their wills, and
account them their footstool, only that they may domineere and spend his
sweat [labour and pains] in volup^uousnesse, pride, and vainglory?


The Master. Those do it to Christ himself: and that which they do,
belongs to his severe sentence and judgment; for in so doing, they lay
violent hands on Christ, and persecute him in his members. And besides, they
help the Devil to augment his kingdom, and by such pressing and constraining
them, they draw the poor off from Christ, and make him seek a lewd and
unlawful way to fill his belly: Nay, they do the very same which the Devil
himself does; who, without intermission, resists the Kingdom of Christ,
[which consisteth] in love. All these, if they do not turn with their whole
heart to Christ, and Or, serve him.
minister to him, must go into Hell fire, where there is nothing but such
mere self [as that which he has exercised over the poor.]


The Scholar. 56. But how will it fare with those, and how will they subsist,
that in this time do so contend about the Kingdom of Christ, and persecute,
reproach, slander, and revile one another for it, [viz. for their Religion?]


The Master. All those that have not yet known Christ, and are also but as a
type or figure of Heaven and Hell, striving with each other for the victory.

All rising, swelling pride, [which makes striving about opinions, is an Image
of Self; and whosoever has not Faith and Humility, nor is in the Spirit of
Christ, [viz. love] is only armed with the Anger of God, and helps forward
the victory of the Or, Imagelike, or graven Image.
Imaginary Self, viz. the Kingdom of Darkness, and the anger of God: For at
the day of judgment, all Self shall be given to the Darkness, and all their
* unprofitable contentions, in which they seek not after love, but merely after
their (...). Acts. 19. 19.
Imaginary self, that they may boast themselves in their opinions, and stir
up Princes to wars, for such Imaginary and conceited opinions sake; and so by
those Images they lay wast and desolate whole Countries of people. All such
things belong to the judgment which will separate the false from the true, and
then all Images or opinions shall cease, and all the children of God shall walk
in the love of Christ, and He in Us.

All whosoever in In the time from the fall to the resurrection
this time of strife, are not zealous in the Spirit of Christ, and desirous to
further love only; but seek their own profit in strife, are of the Devil, and
belong to the pit of Darkness, and shall be separated from Christ: for in
heaven all serve God their Creator in humble love.


The Scholar. 57. Wherefore then does God suffer such strife and contention to
be in this time?


The Master. The life [it selfe] stands in strife, that it may be made
manifest, sensible, and palpable, and that the wisdom may be made separable
and known; and it makes the eternal joy of the victory [to be:] For there
will arise great praise in the Saints from hence, that Christ in them has
overcome Darkness, and all self of Nature, and that they are delivered from
the strife; at which they shall rejoice eternally, when they shall know how the
wicked are recompensed. And therefore God suffers all things to stand in a
freewill, that the eternal Dominion both of Love and Anger, of Light and of
Darkness, may be made manifest and known, and that every life might cause and
raise its own sentence in it self. For that which is now a strife and pain to
the Saints in their misery, shall be turned into great joy to them; and that
which has been a joy and pleasure to ungodly persons in this world, shall be
turned into eternal pain and shame to them. Therefore the joy of the Saints
must arise to them out of Death, (as the light arises out of a Candle by the
dying and consuming of it in its fire;) that so the life may be freed from the
painfullnesse of Nature, and possess another world.

And as the light has quite another property then the fire has, for it gives
[and yields forth] it self: but the fire takes [in] and consumes it self:
so the holy life of meekness springs forth through death, when self-will
dies: and then Gods will of love only rules, and does all in all. For thus
the eternal One has attained feeling and separability, and brought it self
forth again with the feeling, through Death, in great joyfulnesse, that there
might he an eternal delight in the infinite Unity, and an eternal cause of
joyfulnesse, and therefore painfulnesse must now be the ground and cause of
this motion [or stirring to the manifestation of all things.] And herein lies
the mystery of the hidden wisdom of God.


Every one that asks receives, every one that seeks finds, and to every
one that knocks it shall be oned. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost, be with us all, Amen.
HEB. 12. 22, 23, 24. Thank ye the Lord, for ye are now come to Mount Zion, to
the City of God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the innumerable company of
Angels, and to the general assembly and Church of the first born, who are
written in heaven:

And to God the Judge of all, and and to the Spirits of just men made perfect,
and to Jesus the mediator of the new Testament, or Covenant.

And to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel.
Amen.

Praise and glory and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and
might, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, our GOD and the Lamb, for ever
and ever.


Amen.
The Contents of this Treatise in brief, divided into eight parts..
I. From the 1. to the 7. question. How men may come to the super-sensuall
life. II. From the 8. to the 11. question. How men must and may rule over all
Creatures, and can be like all things. III. From the 12. to the 24. question.
How men may come to continual repentance, and may subsist in temptation. IV.
From the 25. to the 35. question. How love and sorrow stand together in one,
and what love is, what its power and virtue, height and greatness is, and
where it dwells in man.. Also the nearest way to attain it. V. From the 36.
to the 39, question. Whither the blessed and the damned souls go when they
depart, and how heaven and hell is in man. VI. From the 40. to the 43.
question. Where the Angels and Devils dwell in this [worlds] time: How far
heaven and hell are asunder; and what and whence the Angels and souls are.
VII. The 44. question: What the body of man is, and why the soul is capable of
receiving good and evil. VIII. From the 45. to the 57. question. Of the
perishing of the world, of man's body in and after the resurrection, where
heaven and hell shall be: of the last judgment, and wherefore the strife in the
creature must be.
A DISCOURSE BETWEEN A Soul hungry and thirsty after the Fountain of Life, the
sweet love of Jesus Christ, and a Soul enlightened: Showing which way one Soul
should seek after and comfort another, and bring it in its knowledge into the
Paths of Christ's Pilgrimage, and faithfully set before it as a looking-glass,
the thorny way of the world, in which the fallen Soul walks, which leads
into the Abyss, or pit of Hell. Composed by a Soul which loves all that are
the Children of JESUS CHRIST under the Cross.

Written in the German Language, Anno 1624, By JACOB BEHMEN. Alias, Teutonicus
Philosophus.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. 1648.

The Way from Darkness to true Illumination.
THere was a poor Soul wandered out of Paradise, and came into the Kingdom of
this World, and there the Devil met with it, and asked, Whither do thou go
thou Soul that art half blind.

The Soul said, I would go see and speculate the Creatures of the world,
which the Creator has made.


The Devil said, How will thou look upon them, when thou can not know their
Essence and property: thou will look upon the outside only, as upon a graven
Image, and can not know them thoroughly.


The soul said. How may I come to know their Essence and property?


The Devil said, Thy eyes would be opened, [to see them throughly] if thou
did but eat of that from whence the creatures are come to be good and evil,
and thou would be as God himself is, and know what the creature is.


The soul said. I am now a noble and holy creature, but if I should do so, I
should dye, as the Creator has said.


The Devil said, No, thou should not die at all, but thy eyes would be
opened, and thou would be as God himself, and receive [or possesse] good and
evil. Also, thou shall be mighty, powerful, and [very] great, as I am: all
the subtilty that is in the creatures, would be made known to thee.


The soul said, If I had the knowledge of Nature, and of the Creatures, I
would then rule the whole world as I listed.


The Devil said, The whole ground of that knowledge lies in thee: do but turn
thy will [and desires] from God [or goodnesse] into Nature and the Creatures,
and then there will arise in thee a lust to taste, and so thou may eat of the
Tree of knowledge of good and evil, and so come to know all things.


The soul said, Well then, I will eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and
evil, that I may rule all things by my own power, and be a Lord of my self, on
earth, and do what I will, as God himself does.


The Devil said, I am the Prince of this world, and if thou would rule on
earth, thou must turn thy lust toward my Image, [desire to be like me] that
thou may get the cunning, wit, reason, and subtilty that my Image has. And
thus the Devil did present to the soul, the The power that is in the fire, or
root of the Creature, by which it is what it is: by which the
Mercury in Smith, Artificer, or workman does work.
Vulcan, that is, the fiery wheel of Essence, [or Substance] in the form of a
Serpent.


The soul said. Behold, this is the power which can do all things, how may I
do to have it?


The Devil said, Thou thy self also art such a fiery Mercury, if thou do
break thy will off from God, and bring thy desire into this Art, then thy
hidden ground will be manifested in thee, and then thou may work in the same
manner also: But thou must eat of that fruit, wherein each of the four
elements in it self rules over the other, and are in strife, the heat striving
against the cold, and the cold against the heat; and so all the properties of
nature work feelingly: and then thou will instantly be as the fiery wheel is,
and so bring all things into thy own power and possess them as thy own.


The soul did so, and what hapened upon it.

And when the soul broke its will thus off from God, and brought its desire
into the Vulcan of Mercury, viz. the fiery wheel: there presently arose a lust
to eat of the knowledge of good and evil, and the soul did eat thereof.

As soon as it had done so, or the Artificer in the fire
Vulcan did kindle the fiery wheel of its Substance, and so all the properties
of nature did awake in the soul, and exercised their own lust and desire.
First then, there arose the lust of pride, to be great, mighty, and powerful,
to bring all things under subjection at command, and so be its own Lord without
control, to despise humility and equality, to esteem it self only prudent,
witty, and cunning, and account all folly that is not according to its way.

Secondly arose the lust of covetousness, a desire of getting, which would
draw all things to it self, into its possession: for when the lust of pride
had turned away its will from God, then the life [of the soule] would not trust
God any further, but would take care for its self, and therefore brought its
desire into the creatures, viz. into the earth, metals, trees, [and other
creatures,] and so the kindled fiery life became hungry and covetous, when it
had broken it self off from the unity, love, and meekness of God, and
attracted to it self the four Elements and their essence, and brought it
self into beastiality, and so the life became obscure, dark, void and
wrathful, and the heavenly virtues and colors like a ^andle extinguished*
went out.

Thirdly, there awaked a stinging thorny lust in the fiery life, viz. envy, a
hellish poison, and a property which all Devils have, and a torment which makes
the life an enemy to God, and to all creatures: Which envy did rage furiously
in the desire of covetousness, as a sting of poison in the body: Envy cannot
endure, but hates and mischieveth that which covetousness could not draw to
it self, by which the noble love of the soul was smothered.

Fourthly, there awaked in this fiery life a torment, like fire, viz. anger,
which would murder and destroy all that which would not be subject to this
pride. Thus the ground and foundation of hell, which is called the anger of
God, was wholly manifested in this soul, and thereby it lost the Paradise of
God, and the Kingdom of heaven, and became such a worm as the fiery Serpent
was, which the Devil presented to the soul in his own Image and likeness.
And so the soul began to rule on earth in a beastiall manner, and did all
things according to the will of the Devil, living in mere pride,
covetousness, envy and anger; and having no true love toward God any more;
but there did arise in the stead thereof an evil beastiall love of filthy
Lechery, wantonness and vanity, and there was no pureness more in the heart:
for the soul had left Paradise, and taken the Earth into its possession, the
Mind thereof was only bent upon cunning knowledge, subtilty, and getting a
multitude of natural things: no righteousness nor virtue remained in it at
all: but whatsoever evil and wrong it committed, the soul covered it
cunningly and subtly under the cloak of its power and authority [Law] and
called it by the name of Right and Justice, and accounted it good.

The Devil came to the soul.

Upon this the Devil drew near to the soul, and brought it on from one vice
to another; for he had taken it captive in his Essence, and did set joy and
pleasure before it therein, and said to the soul: Behold now thou art
powerful, mighty and noble: endeavor to be greater, richer, and more
powerful still: use thy knowledge, wit, and subtilty, that every one may fear
thee [and stand in awe of thee] and that thou may be respected, and get a
great name in the world.

The soul did so.

The soul did as the Devil counseled it, and yet knew not that it was the
Devil, but thought it was its own knowledge, wit, and understanding, and that
it self did very well and right [all this while.]

Jesus Christ met with the soul.

The soul going on in this course of life, our dear and loving Lord Jesus
Christ (with the love and wrath of God) who was come into this world to destroy
the works of the Devil, and to execute Judgment upon all ungodly works; at a
Time he met with the soul, and spoke, by a strong power, viz. by his Passion
and Death, into the soul, and destroyed the works of the Devil in it, and
discovered the way to his Grace to the soul, and did shine upon it with his
Mercy, calling it back to return and repent, and then he would deliver it
from that monstrous deformed shape, vizard or Image which it had gotten, and
bring it into Paradise again.

How Christ wrought in the soul.

Now when the spark of the [love of God or the] Divine light was manifested in
the soul, it presently saw it self with its will and works to be in Hell,
in the wrath of God, and found that it was a misshapen ugly Monster in the
presence of God, and the kingdom of Heaven; at which it was so affrighted, that
the greatest anguish awaked in it, for the judgment of God was manifested in it.

What Christ said.

Upon this the Lord Christ spoke into it with the voice of his grace, and said,
Repent and forsake vanity, and thou shall attain my grace.

What the soul d^^.

Then the soul in its ugly misshapen image, with the de^^ed (...) of vanity,
went before God, and entreated for grace and the pard^^ of its sins, and was
strongly persuaded in i^ self, that the satisfaction and ^tonement of our Lord
Jesus Christ did belong to it: But the evil properties of the Se^pent formed
in the Astrall Or, Aerial Spirit, or thereason of the outward man.
Spirit* would not suffer the will of the soul to come before God, but brought
their Lusts and Inclinations thereinto: For those evil properties would not
dye to their own Lusts, nor leave or forsake the world; for they were come out
of the world, and therefore they feared the shame of the world in case they
should forsake their worldly honor and glory.

But the poor soul turned its countenance to God, and desired grace from God,
viz. that God would bestow his love upon it.

The Devil came to it again.

But when the Devil saw that the soul thus prayed to God, and would enter
into Repentance, he drew near to the soul and thrust the inclinations of the
Earthly properties into its prayers, and disturbed the good thoughts [and
desires] which pressed forward toward God, and drew them back again to earthly
things, that they might have no access to God.

The soul sighed.

The will of the soul sighed after God, but the Thoughts arising in the Mind,
that should penetrate into God were destroyed [scattered and distracted] so
that they could not reach the power of God; the poor soul was more affrighted
at this, that it could not bring its desires into God, and began to pray more
earnestly: but the the Devil with his desire took hold of the
Mercuriall-kindled-fiery wheel of life; and awakened the evil properties so,
that evil or false inclinations arose and went into that thing, wherein they
had taken pleasure and delight before.

The poor soul would very fain go forward to God with its will, and therefore
used all its endeavors: but all its thoughts fled away from God into earthly
things, and would not go to God.

The soul sighed and bewailed it self to God, but it was as if it were quite
and clean forsaken, and cast out from the presence of God, it could not get so
much as one look of grace, but was in mere anguish, and also in great fear and
terror, and supposed every moment that the wrath and severe judgment of God
would be manifested in it, and that the Devil would take hold of it [and have
it] and so fell into such great heaviness and sorrow; that it became weary of
all the joy and pleasure it took in temporal things, though it were never so
delighted with them before.

The Earthly natural will desired those things still; but the soul would
willingly leave them altogether, and desired to dye to all temporal Lust and
Joy, and longed only after its first native Country from whence it came
originally, but it found it self to be far from thence, also in great
distress and want, and knew not what to do: yet resolved to enter into it
self, and still stir it self up to pray more earnestly.

The Devils opposition.

But the Devil opposed it, and withheld it that it could not bring it self
into any greater fervency or Repentance.

The Devil awaked the earthly lusts in its heart, that the inclinations might
still keep their Or, false na turall right.
evil nature, and set them at ods against the will and desire of the soul:
for they would not dye to their own will and light, but would still maintain
their temporal pleasures, and so kept the poor soul captive in their evil
desires, that it could not stir, though it sighed and longed never so much
for the grace of God: for whenever the soul prayed, or offered to press
forwards toward GOD, then the iusts of the flesh swallowed up the rays and
ejaculations that went forth from the soul, and brought them away from God
into earthly thoughts, that the soul might not partake of divine strength; and
then the soul thought it self forsaken of God, and knew not that God was so
near it, and did thus draw it. Also, the Devil drew near it, and entered into
the fiery Mercury, or fiery wheel of its life, and mingled his desires with
the earthly lusts of the flesh, and mocked the poor soul, and said to it in
the earthly thoughts: Why do thou pray? Do thou think that God knows
thee, or regards thee? Consider but what thoughts thou have in thee in his
presence; are they not altogether evil? thou have no faith or belief in God
at all; how then should he hear thee? He hears thee not, leave off,
wherefore will thou thus needlessly torment and vex thy self? thou have time
enough [to repent at leasure] will thou be mad? Do but look upon the world, I
pray thee, a little, does it not live in jollity and mirth, yet it will be saved
well enough for all that. Has not Christ paid the Ransom, and satisfied for
all men? Thou need do no more but persuade and comfort thy self that it is
done for thee; and then thou shall be saved. Thou can not possibly in this
world come to have any feeling of God: therefore leave off, and take care for
thy body, and look after temporal glory: what do thou suppose will become of
thee, if thou turn to be so melancholy and senseless? Thou will be the scorn of
every body, and they will laugh at thy folly, and so thou will spend thy days
in nothing but sorrow and heaviness, which is pleasing neither to God nor
Nature. Prithee look upon the beauty of the world: for God has created thee in
the world to be a Lord over all creatures, and to rule them; gather store of
temporal goods before hand, that thou may not stand in need of the world: and
when old age comes, or that thou growest near thy end, then prepare thy
self for Repentance; God will save thee, and receive thee into the heavenly
Mansions, there is no need of such ado, in vexing, bewailing, and stirring up
thy self as thou make.

The condition of the soul.

In these and the like thoughts, the soul was ensnared by the Devil, and
brought into the lusts of the flesh, and earthly desires; and so, as it were,
bound with ^etters and great chains, and did not know what to do, it looked a
little back into the world, and the pleasures thereof; but still felt in it
self a hunger after Divine grace, and would rather always enter into
repentance, and come into favor with God: for the hand of God had touched it,
and bruised it; and therefore it could rest no where, but always fighed in it
self after sorrow for the sins it had committed, and would feign be rid of
them, but could not get true repentance, much less the knowledge of sin* and
yet had such a hunger and longing desire after repentance and sorrow for sin.

The soul being thus heavy and sad, and finding no remedy nor rest, bethought
it self where to find a place to perform true repentance in, and when it might
be free from business, cares, and the hindrances of the world: also, by what
means it might obtain the favor of God; and therefore purposed to betake it
self to some private solitary place, and give over all worldly employment, and
temporal things, and thought in being bountiful and pitiful to the poor,
that God would have mercy upon it, and sought out all kind of ways to get
rest, and to get the love, favor, and grace of God again. But all would not
do; for all its worldly business followed it in the lusts of the flesh, and
it was ensnared in the net of the Devil, now, as well as before, and could not
get rest; and though for some little while it was a little cheered with earthly
things, yet presently it fell to be as sad and heavy again; for it felt the
awakened wrath of God in it self, and knew not how that came to pass, nor
what it ayled: for many times great fear and temptations fell upon it, which
made it comfortless, sick and ^aint with very fear, so mightily did the first
bruising it with the Ray or Influence of the stirring of grace work upon the
soul, and yet it knew not that Christ was in its the wrath and severe Justice
of God, and sought with Satan that spirit of Error, that was incorporated in
soul and body; and understood not that the hunger and desire to turn and
repent, came from Christ himself, by which the soul was drawn in this manner:
neither did it know what hindered that it could not yet attain to Divine
feeling; it knew not that it self was a monster, and did bear the Image of the
Serpent, in which the Devil had such power and access to the soul, and in
which [Image] he had confounded all its good [desires,] thoughts [and motions]
and brought the^ away from God [and goodnesse] concerning which Christ said,
the Devil snatcheth the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and
be saved.

An enlightened and regenerate soul met the distressed soul.

By the providence of God an enlightened and regenerate soul met this poor
afflicted and distressed soul, and said,

The enlightened soul said, What aylest thou, thou distressed soul, that thou
art so restless and troubled?


The distressed soul answered, The Creator has hid his countenance from me,
so that I cannot come to his rest, and therefore I am thus troubled, and know
not what I shall do to get his loving kindness again; for great Cliffes and
Rocks lie in my way to his Grace, that I cannot come to him, though I long
after him never so much, yet I am kept back, that I cannot partake of his
power, virtue, and strength, though I sigh and long, and wait for him.


The enlightened soul said; Thou bear the monstrous shape of the Devil,
viz. the Serpent, and art clothed therewith, in which the Devil has an
entrance into thee, being his own property, and therein he keeps thy will
from penetrating into God; for if thy will might penetrate into God, it would
be anointed with the highest power and strength of God in the resurrection of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and that unction would then break [in peeces] that
monster which is in thee, and thy first Image of Paradise would be manifested
in thee again, and then the Devil must lose his power in thee, and thou would
become an Angel again. And because the Devil does envy thee this [happinesse]
he holds thee captive in his desire in the lusts of the flesh, from which if
thou be not delivered, thou will be separated from God, and can never
enter into our society.


The distressed soul terrified.

At this speech the poor distressed soul was so terrified and amazed, that it
could not speak one word more, when it perceived it was in the shape and Image
of the Serpent, which separated the soul from God: and that the Devil was so
nigh it in that Image, and did mingle evil thoughts in the will of the soul,
and had so much power over it thereby, and that it was so near damnation, and
stuck fast in the Abyss or bottomless pit of hell, in the anger of God, that
it would have despaired of the grace of God: but that the power [vertue and
strength of the first stirring of the grace of God] that bruised the soul,
upheld it that it despaired not: and so the soul wrastled in it self between
hope and doubt, whatsoever hope built up, that doubt threw down again, and so
was in such continual disquietnesse, that at last the world and all the glory
thereof was loathsome to it, neither would it enjoy the pleasures of this world
any more, and yet for all this, could not come to rest.

The enlightened soul came again.

At a time the enlightened soul came again to this soul, and finding it in so
great trouble, anguish, and griese of mind, said to it: what do thou? will thou destroy thy self in thy anguish and sorrow? why do thou torment thy
self in thy own Power and will; who art but a worm, seeing thy torment
increases thereby more* and more? yea, if thou should sink thy self down
to the bottom of the Sea, or could fly to the uttermost coasts of the
Morning, or raise thy self up above the Stars, yet thou would not be
released, for the more thou greevest, tormentest, and troublest thy self, the
more painful thy nature will be, and yet thou can not come to Rest: for thy
power is quite lost, and as a dry [withered stick burnt to a] Colewort.
cole, cannot grow green and spring afresh by its own power, nor get sap to
flourish again, with other Trees, [and Plants:] so thou also can not reach
the place of God (by thy own power and strength) and transform thy self into
thy first Angelical Image again, which thou had; for, in respect of God,
thou art withered and dry, (like a withered dry Cole-wort, [or plant] that
has lost its sap and strength) and so art become a dry tormenting Hunger: thy
properties are like heat and cold, continually striving one against the other,
and can never agree.

The distressed soul said, What then shall I do, to bud forth again, and
recover my first Life which I had, wherein I was at Rest before I became an
Image.


The enlightened soul said, Thou shall do nothing at all but forsake thy own
will, viz. that which thou call I, or thy self: and thereby all thy evil
properties will grow weak and faint, and read e^to die, and then thou will
sink down again into that (one thing) from which thou art sprung Originally:
for now thou lie captive in the Creatures, and if thy will forsakes them, the
creatures, with their evil inclinations, will die in thee, which for the
present, stay and hinder thee, that thou can not come to God: but if thou
do th^s; thy God will meet thee, with his infinite love, which he has
manifested in Christ Jesus in the or humane Natre.
Humanity; and that will impart sap, life, and vigor to thee, that thou may
bud, spring, and flourish again, and rejoice in the living God: [as a branch
growing upon his true vine:] and so thou will recover also the Image of God,
and be delivered from the or vizard.
Image of the Serpent, and then thou shall come to be my brother, and have
fellowship with the Angels.


The poor soul said, How can I forsake my will, that the creatures which
lodge therein may die, seeing I must be in the world, and also have need of it,
so long as I live.


The enlightened soul said, Now thou have temporal honor and worldly goods,
which thou possessest as thy own [to do what thou will with them] also the
pleasure of the flesh; and thou regardst not what thou do therein, or how
thou gettest them: and though thou see the poor and needy, who wants thy
help, and is thy brother, yet thou helpest him not, but layest heavy burdens
upon him [by requiring more of him then his necessities will beare] and vexest
him in forcing him to take pains, and labor for thee, and thou take
pleasure therein: and besides, thou art proud, and infultest over him, and art
rough, crabbed, and stern to him, and exaltest thy self above him, and make
small account of him in respect of thy self: and then that poor vexed brother
of thine comes, and figheth toward God, that he cannot take the benefit of
his labor and pains, but is forced by thee to live in Misery: and so with
his sighings and groanings, he raises up the wrath of God in thee, which
makes thy flame and unquietness [or thy unsatisfied desire] greater and
greater: These are the creatures which thou art in love with, and have broken
thy self off from God for their sakes, and brought thy love into them [or set
thy love upon them: and so they live in thy Love, and thou nourishest and
keep them by thy continual receiving them into thy Desire, for they live
in, and by thy receiving of them [into thy mind:] in that thou bring the
lust of thy life into them, which are but unclean, filthy evil beasts, which
in thy receiving of them in thy lust, have gotten an Image, and formed
themselves in thee; and that Image is a Beast having four evil inclinations,
First Pride. Secondly Covetousness. Thirdly, Envy. Fourthly, Anger. and in
these four properties the foundation of Hell consists, which thou carriest
in thee, and about thee, and it is imprinted and engraven in thee, and thou art
quite taken captive therewith: for these properties live in thy own life, and
thereby thou art severed from God, neither can thou ever come to God, unless
thou so forsake these evil creatures, that they may die in thee.

But since thou desire I should tell thee, how to forsake thy own perverse
creaturly will, that the creatures might die, and that yet thou mighst live
with them in the world: I tell thee, that there is but one way to do it, which
is narrow and strait, and it will be very troublesome, and irksome to thee at
the first beginning, to walk in it, but afterward thou will walk in it
cheerfully.

Thou must rightly consider, that in the course of this worldly life, thou
walk in the anger of God, and in the foundation of Hell, and that this is
not thy true native Country: and that a Christian should, and must live in
Christ, and in his walking truly follow him; and that he cannot be a
Christian, unless the Spirit and power of Christ so live in him, that he
becomes wholly subject to it: now being the Kingdom of Christ is not of this
world, but in Heaven, therefore thou must always be in a continual ascension
toward Heaven, if thou will follow Christ, though thy body must dwell among
the creatures and use them.

The narrow way to this perpetual ascension into Heaven, and the Imitation of
Christ, is this: thou must despair of all thy own power and strength (for in
and by thy own power thou can not reach the gates of God) and firmly
purpose, and resolve wholly to give thy self up to the mercy of God, and also
resolve to sink down with thy whole mind and reason, into the Passion and
death of our Lord Jesus Christ, always desiring to persevere therein, and to
die from all thy creatures therein: also thou must resolve to turn away thy
mind, and lusts from all receiving of evil [into them] and not suffer thy
self to be held fast by temporal honor, and Or, goods.
profit, and thou must resolve to put away from thee all unrighteousness, and
whatsoever else may hinder thee; thy will must be wholly pure, and thou must
be in such a Resolution* that thou will never return to thy evil creatures
any more, but that thou will that very instant leave them, and separate thy
mind from them, and that thou will immediately enter into the sincere way of
Truth* and righteousness; and follow the Doctrine of Christ: and as thou now
do purpose, to forsake the Enemies of thine own nature, so thou must also
forgive all thy outward enemies, and resolve to meet them with thy love, that
there may be no creature at all, that might be able to take hold of thy will,
and stay thee, but that thy will may be sincere and purged from all creatures:
and also, that if it should be required, thou must be willing, and ready to
forsake all temporal Honor and profit for Christ's sake, and regard nothing
that is earthly, to love it, but to esteem thy self in whatsoever state,
degree, and condition thou art, for temporal honor, or Riches, and worldly
goods, to be but a servant of God, and of thy Fellow Christians, as a Steward
of God in thy office, [which he has set thee in.] The lofty looks, and self
love, must be humbled, brought low, and so destroyed, that no creature may stay
in the mind, to bring the thoughts, or Imagination to be set upon them.

Also thou must firmly imprint in thy mind, that thou shall partake of the
promised Grace, in the merit of Jesus Christ, viz. of his out-flowing love
[which is in thee] which will deliver thee from thy creatures, and enlighten
thy will, and kindle it with the flame of love, whereby thou shall have
victory over the Devil: not as if thou could will, or do any thing, but
enter into the suffering, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and take them to thy
self, and with them assault, and break in pieces the Kingdom of the Devil
in thee, and mortify thy creatures; and thou must resolve to enter into this
way, this very hour, and never to depart from it, but willingly to submit thy
self to God, in all thy endeavors and doings, that he may do with thee what
he pleases.

When thy will and purpose is thus prepared, it has broken through its own
creatures, and is sincere in the presence of God, and clothed with the merits
of Jesus Christ, and then it may freely go to the Father with the Prodigal
Son, and fall down in his presence, and pour forth its prayers, and put all
its strength forth in this Divine work, and confess its sins and
disobedience, and that it has turned away from God: and that must be done not
with bare words, but with all its strength, which is but a strong purpose, and
resolution to do it; for the soul it self has no strength, nor power to
effect it.

And when thou art thus ready, and that thy eternal Father shall see thy
coming and returning to him in such repentance and humility, then he will
inwardly speak to thee, and say in thee, Behold, this is my son which I had
lost, he was dead and is alive again; and he will come to meet thee in thy
mind with the grace and love of Jesus Christ, and embrace thee with the beams
of his love, and kiss thee with his Spirit and strength: And then thou shall
receive strength to power out thy confession before him, and to pray
powerfully. And this now is the right place where thou may wrestle, in the
light of his countenance; and if thou stand resolutely here, and shrinkest
not back, thou shall see or feel great wonders: For thou shall find Christ in
thee assaulting hell, and crushing thy beasts in pieces, and that a great
tumult and misery will arise in thee: also that thy secret unknown sins will
then first awake, and labor to separate thee from God, and to keep thee back;
and thou shall truly find and feel, how death and life fight against one
another; thou shall also find what heaven and hell is. At all which be not
moved, but stand resolutely, and shrink not; and then at length all thy evil
creatures will grow faint. and weak ready to dye: and then thy will shall wax
stronger, and be able to subdue and keep down the evil inclinations, and so
thy will and mind shall ascend into heaven every day, and thy creatures dye
daily, and thou will get a mind wholly new, and begin to be a new creature, and
be changed into the Image of God again, and be rid of the beastiall monstrous
Image, shape, or vizard. And thus thou shall come to rest again, and be
delivered from thy anguish.


The poor souls practice.

When the poor soul began to practice this course with such earnestness, it
conceived it should get the victory presently; but the gates of heaven were
shut against it in its own strength and power, and it was as it were, left and
forsaken of God, and received not so much as one beam, look, or glimpse of
grace; and then it thought in it self [and said to it selfe] surely thou have
not sincerely submitted thy self to God; desire nothing at all of God, but
only submit thy self to his judgment [sentence and condemnation] that he may
kill thy evil inclinations: sink down into him beyond the limits of Nature and
Creature, and submit thy self to him, that he may do with thee what he will;
for thou art not worthy to speak to him. Upon this the soul took a resolution
to sink down and to forsake its own will: and when it had done so, there fell
upon it the greatest repentance for the ^innes it had committed, and it
bewailed bitterly its ugly shape, and was very sorry that the evil Creatures
did dwell in it. And because of its sorrow it could not speak one word more in
the presence of God, but in its repentance did consider the bitter passion and
death of Jesus Christ, viz. what great anguish and torment he had suffered for
its sake, that he might deliver it out of its anguish, and change it into the
Image of God; and in that consideration it wholly sunk down, and did nothing but
complain of its ignorance and negligence, and that it had not been thankful
[to its Redeemer] nor had once considered so great love, but had so idly
spent its time, and not regarded to consider how it might come to partake of
that grace; but in the mean while had formed in it self the Images and figures
of earthly things, with the vain lusts and pleasures of the world, from which
it had gotten such beastiall inclinations, that now it must lie captive in
great misery, and for very shame dares not lift up its eyes to God, who hides
the power [or light] of his countenance from it, and will not so much as look
upon it. And as it was thus sighing and crying, it was drawn into the Abyss or
pit of horror, and as it were at the gates of hell, and should there perish.
Upon which the soul was, as it were, bereft of sense, and wholly forsaken, and
thereby did forget all its doings, as if it would wholly yield it self to
death, and cease to be a creature any more; and so did yield it self to death;
and desired nothing else, but to dye and perish in the death of its Redeemer
Jesus Christ, who had suffered such torments and death for its sa^ke: and in
this perishing it began to sigh and pray in it self very inwardly to the mercy
of God, and to sink down into the meerest mercy of God. Upon this there
appeared unto it the amiable countenance of the love of God, and penetrated
through it as a great light, by which it grew exceeding joyful, and began to
pray aright, and to thank the most high for this grace, and to rejoice
exceedingly, that it was delivered from the death and anguish of Hell; and
there it tasted of the sweetness of God, and of his promised truth. And in
that very instant, all evil spirits which had afflicted it before, and kept it
back from the grace, [love and inward presence] of God, were forced to depart
from it: and the wedding of the Lamb was kept and solemnized, with the
espousing or contracting of the Noble Sophia with the Soul, and the Seal-ring
of Christ's victory was impressed [or printed, or set upon its substance or]
into its essence; and it was received to be a child and heir of God again.

When this was done, the soul became very joyful, and began to work in this
power, and to celebrate with praise the wonders of God, and thought henceforth
to walk continually in this power, strength, and joy; but it was assaulted from
without, or outwardly, by the shame and reproach of the world; and within, by
great temptation, so that it began to doubt whether its ground were from God,
or no; and whether it had really and truly partaken of the grace of God, or no;
for the Accuser, [or Satan] went to it, and would lead it out of this way, and
make it doubtful [of its way] and said to it inwardly:

The Accuser, or Satan spoke to the Soul, saying, It is not of God, it is but
thy Imagination.

Also the Divine Light retired in the soul, and shone but in the inward
ground, as light in Embers [or fire raked up in ashes,] so that Reason was
solly to it self, and thought it self forsaken, and the soul knew not what
had happened to it self, nor whether it were true, that it had tasted the
Divine Light of Grace, or not, and yet it could not leave off [strugling] for
the burning fire of love was sown in it, by which there arose in it a great
hunger, and thirst after the Divine sweetness and now at length began to pray
aright, and to humble it self in the presence of God, and to examine and try
its evil inclinations in its thoughts, and to put them away: by which the will
of reason was broken, and the evil inbred [innate, or native] inclinations
were killed, and destroyed more and more: And this was very woeful to the
nature of the body; for it made it faint, feeble and weak, as if it had been
very sick, and yet it was no natural sickness that it had, but it was the
Melancholy of the eatthly Nature of the body, because its evil lusts were
destroyed.

And when the earthly Reason found it self thus forsaken, and the poor soul
saw that it was derided outwardly, and despised by the world, because it would
now walk no more in the way of the wicked, and ungodly; and that it was
inwardly assaulted by the Accuser [ Satan] who also mocked it, and continually
set before it, the beauty, Riches, and glory of the world, and esteemed the
soul foolish, [that embraced them not,] which made the soul think thus with
it self; O Eternal God! what shall I now do, to come to Rest?


The Enlightened soul met it again.

While it was in this consideration the enlightened soul met with it again,
and said.

What ailest thou my brother, that thou art so heavy and sad?

The distressed soul said. I have followed thy counsel, and thereby attained
a ray, look, or glimps of the Divine sweetness, but it is gone from me
again, and I am now forsaken, and outwardly have very great trials, and
afflictions in the world: for all my good friends forsake me, and scorn me,
and also inwardly I am assaulted with Anguish, and doubt, and I know not what
to do.


The enlightened soul said, Now I like thee very well; for now our beloved Lord
Jesus Christ walks in his Or, journey.
pilgrimage on earth with thee and in thee, as he did himself when he was in
this world, being always reviled, slandered, and evil spoken of, and had
nothing of his own: and now thou bear his mark or Ensign: but do not
wonder at it, nor think it strange; for it must be so that thou must be tried,
refined and purified. In this anguish and distress thou shall have often cause
to pray, and hunger after deliverance, and in thy hunger and thirst thou
attractest grace to thee from within and from without: For thou must grow from
above and from beneath to be the image of God again. And as a young plant is
stirred by the wind, and must stand in heat and cold, drawing strength and
virtue to it from above and from beneath by that stirring, and must endure many
a tempest, and undergo much danger before it can come to be a tree, and bring
forth fruit, for in that stirring, the virtue of the Sun comes to move in
it, whereby the wild properties of that plant come to be penetrated and
tinctured, [or qualified] with the virtue of the Sun, and grow thereby.

And now is the time wherein thou must behave thy self as a valiant Soldier
in the Spirit of Christ, and cooperate with it thy self: For now the eternal
Father by his fiery power, begets his Son in thee, who changes the fire
of the Father, [or the wrath] into the flame of love; so that out of fire and
light, [viz. wrath and love] there comes to be one Essence, Being or
Substance, which is the true Temple of God; and now thou shall bud forth out of
the vine Christ in the vineyard of Jesus Christ, and bring forth fruit in thy
life, and teaching of others, and show forth thy love in abundance as a good
Tree: For paradise must thus spring up again in thee, through the wrath of God:
and Hell be changed into Heaven in thee: Therefore be not troubled at the
temptations of the Devil; for he striveth for the kingdom which he had in
thee, and having lost it once, he must be confounded and depart from thee; and
therefore he coveres^ thee outwardly with the shame and disgrace of the world
that his own shame may not be known, and that thou may be hidden to the
world; for with thy Newbirth, [or regeneration] thou art in the divine harmony
in heaven, therefore be patient, and wait upon the Lord, and whatsoever shall
befall thee, take it from the hands of the Lord, as [intended] by him for thy
best [good] And so the enlightened soul departed from it.


The distressed souls course.

This distressed soul began its course now under the patient suffering of
Christ, and entered into hope in Divine confidence, and from day to day grew
stronger and stronger, and its evil inclinations dyed mo^e and more in it, so
that it came to be set in a great [dominion] or kingdom of grace, and the
gates of the divine revelation, and the kingdom of heaven were opened and
manifested in it, [viz. in the soul.]

And thus the soul (in faith) returned to its true rest, and* became a child
[of God]* again; to which God help* us all. Amen.

The end.
THis foregoing Discourse concerning Illumination, is called by the Author, A
Dialogue between the enlightened and the unenlightned Soul, as it is set down
in the Catalogue of his works.

AN APPENDIX to a large treatise of ELECTION: Which Treatise is dated February
9. 1623. This Appendix is A Compendium of Repentance. OR, A short Description
of the Key which opens the Divine Mysteries, and leads to the knowledge of
them. Dated also February 9. 1623.

Written in the German Language, Anno 1624* By JACOB BEHMEN.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for H. Blunden, at the Castle in Corne-hill. 1648.

To the Reader.
IN The Authors Treatise of Election, the ground of all doubts in any Soul
about Election is laid down, which will resolve them all, that they may see
their condition, and find the way to attain the election, if they have not yet
atained it.

And in this short Treatise is the practice of every soul in repentance set
down, which will lead to the understanding of Divine mysteries in such a way,
as that the soul may get so much of the heav^ly divine treasure hidden in
them, as it shall perceive it stands in need of.

To that end this labor is taken for thee, by

J. S.

A Compendium of Repentance.
Whosoever will attain to divine vision in himself, and speak with God in
Christ, let him follow this course, and he shall attain in.

1. LET him gather all his thoughts and reason together, and all his mind into
this one imagination, and take a strong purpose and resolution in himself, to
consider what he is, being the Scripture calls him the the Image of God, the
Temple of the holy Ghost, who dwells in him; and a member of Christ; and
offers the flesh and blood of Christ to him to be his meat and drink.

2. He must consider himself in his life, whether he be capable of so great
grace, and worthy of so high a Title as that of a Christian, and begin to
examine his whole life, and think with himself what he has done, and how he
has spent all his time; and examine whether he finds himself to be in
Christ, whether he has a godly will or holy desires in him or no, or to what
he is inclined, or whether he find at any time in himself a will or desire
heartily panting after God [and goodness,] and so would fain be saved.

3 And if he find in himself a will, [never so weak] deeply hidden, which
would fain turn to the grace of God if it could; let him know, that that will
is the or the love of God shed abroad in all our hearts.
ingrafted, incorporated, and in-spoken word of God, in Paradise, after sin
was committed, and that the God JEHOVAH, viz. the Father does draw him
[thereby] still to Christ: for in self we have no will at all to obedience.

4. But that drawing of the Father, viz. the ingrafted, incorporated, inspoken
word, draws all, eveu the most ungodly, (if he be not altogether a Thistle)
if he will but stand still from his evil working for a moment.

5 So that none have cause to doubt of the grace of God, if at any time he once
find in himself a desire [or inclination] to turn.

6. And let that party not defer his turning one moment, but as it is written,
To day when you shall hear the voice of the Lord, harden not your ears and
hearts.

7 For that desire [or inclination] once to turn, is the voice of God in man,
which the Devil covers and shuts up by the [Species, representations, or]
Images which he brings into the mind, whereby turning is delayed, and put off
from one day to another, and from one year to another, till at length the
soul comes to be a very Thistle, and can reach grace no more.

8 But let him that finds a desire to turn, take it into his he^rty
confideration, to examine his whole course [of life] and lay it to the ten
commandments, and to the love which is required by the Gospel, which
commands him to love his neighbor as himself, and consider that he is a
child of grace only in Christ's love, and see how far he is departed from it:
and what his daily practIce, desire and inclination is; and then that drawing
of the Father will bring him into the righteousness of God, and show him the
Images that are imprinted in his heart, which he has loved in stead of God,
and still accounts them to be his best treasure.

9 Which Images he shall find to be, 1. Pride, in liking and loving himself,
and desiring to be honored by all others also: an image inclining him to get
power and dominion in his pride, that he might be honored above all others. 2.
An Image of a Swine, Covetousness, which would have all to it self only, and
if it had the whole world, and heaven too, yet it would have the dominion in
hell also, desiring more then this temporal life has need of; and has no
faith toward God in it, but is a defiled Swine, that desires to swallow all
things into it self. 3. An Image of Envy, stinging the hearts of all others,
envying and grudging that any other should have more temporal goods and honor
then it self has. 4. An Image of anger, which when envy as a poison dwells
in it, will upon any very little or frivolous occasion, storm, fight, wrangle,
and be furious, and will revenge it self. Also, there will be found a
multitude, yea thousands of earthly beasts to be in him which he loves [and
fostereth.] sor he loves every thing that is in the world, and has set it in
the stead of Christ, and honors it more then he does God. Let him but
observe the words of his mouth, and see how his lips slander, upbraid, and
speak evil of others secrerly, and sets them forth in the worst sense, [and
giving others the worst character] to their fellows, [associats, and familiar
friends*] and often back bite without any sure ground or cause, rejoicing at
his neighbors mishap, or the evil that comes upon him, and wishing it to
him. All which are the paws and ginnes, slights or tricks of the Devil, and
the Image of the Serpent, which man bears in him.

10. And let him compare all this with the word in the Law and in the Gospel:
and he shall find that he is more a beast and a Devil, then a man, and shall
clearly see how these here ditary, imprinted, [ingraved or graven] Images keep
him back, and lead him astray from the Kingdom of God; so that many times when
he would fain repent and turn to God, these paws and Talons of the Devil keep
him off, and keep him back, persuading the poor soul that this Monster is
holy, and so the soul enters again into the lusts thereof, and so sticks
fast in the anger of God, and at length goes into the Abyss or bottom less
pit, when the grace and drawing of the Father cease.

11. We tell this man our way that we have gone, and which we have tried; that
as soon as he shall discover these beasts, he should that very hour and moment
take a resolution, and bring himself into a will to depart from the bestiall
will, and by true repentance turn to God [and goodness:] and being he cannot
do it by his own power, let him take the promise of Christ into him self,
when he said, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.
No son asks bread of his father, and he gives him a stone, or an egg and
he gives him a Scorpion: And if you that are evil can give good gifts to your
children, how much more shall my heavenly Father give the Holy Ghost to them
that ask him for it.

12. Let him imprint this promise in his heart, (for it is poison and death to
the Devil, and all hereditary innate, and imprinted beasts) and let him
immediately that very hour come with these words of promise imprinted in his
mind, and prayers, into the presence of God, and let him first confider with
himself, all these abominable beasts which are in himself, and let him think
no otherwise of himself, but that he is that silthy keeper of swine. who has
spent all his Fathers [portion] of goods [that he bestowed upon him] and his
Birthright upon those Swine of the world, viz. those evil beasts in himself:
and also that now he stands in the presence of God, as a miserable, naked,
forlorn, ragged Keeper of Swine, that has spent and cast away his Fathers
Inheritance in whoredom, with these worldly beasts [or graven] Images; and
has no more right to the grace of God, neither is in the least measure worthy
of it, much less ^o be called a Christian, or the child of GOD. Let him also
despair of all the good works that ever he did; for they proceeded but from
an hypocritical, seeming, or outside holiness, for which the Man [that is
inwardly] a Devil, would be accounted an Angel; for without Faith it is
impossible to please God, as the Scripture says.

13 But let him not despair of the Divine grace [that is in him] but of
himself only, and of his own power and strength; and let him with all the
power and strength he has, bow down himself in his soul, in the presence of
God. And though his own heart be utterly against it, and say to him, Do it
not, stay a while, it will not be convenient to day: Or, if it say, Thy sins
are too too great, it cannot be that thou should attain the grace of GOD;
and so he comes into such anguish. that he cannot pray to God, and receives
no comfort nor strength in his heart, but is as if his soul were quite blind,
and dead to God, [and goodness,] yet he must be resolnte, considering the
promise of GOD is a certain infallible truth; and with a submissive heart sigh
to the grace of God, and in his great unworthiness wholly resign himself
thereto.

14 And though he do esteem himself unworthy, as a stranger and alien to whom
the inheritance of Christ does not any more belong, he having lost his right:
yet he should steadfastly rest upon that which Christ said, [knowing, that what
he says, is certainly true,] that he came to seek and to save that which was
lost, viz. the poor sinner that is blind and dead to GOD: He must firmly
imprint this promise in himself, and take to himself such a strong purpose
and resolution, that he will not go forth from the promised grace of GOD in
CHRIST, though Body and Soul should be broken to pieces; and though he
should get no comfort in his heart all the days of his life, or the least
assurance of the remission of his sins, considering that the promises of God
are more s^re and firm then all comfort whatsoever.

15. Also let him purpose to himself, and shut up his will so firmly in this
Resolution, that he will no more enter into the former beastiall Images and
vices again, though all his swine and beasts [in him] should lament to the
death the loss of their food, and pasture; and he himself should be a fool
in the account of all the world for so doing, yet he would be constant in his
purpose [in cleaving] to the promised Grace of God: and if he [must come to]
be a child of Death, he would desire to be so in the Death of Christ, to die
and live to him at his pleasure: and let him order and direct his purpose in
continually praying, and fighing to God, and commit all his endeavors and
doings, in the works of his hands, unto God, and cease from the Imagination,
or thought of Pride, covetousness, or Envy; let him but deliver up these
three Beasts, and the rest will soon become weak, faint, and ready to die:
for Christ will soon get a form, in the words of his Promise, which that man
imprinteth in himself, and cloatheth himself withal, and so come to life,
and begin to work in him, whereby his Prayers will be more powerful, and he
be more and more strengthened [and confirmed] in the Spirit of Grace.

16. And as the seed in the Mothers womb, undergoeth the casualties of Nature,
and many outward accidents in growing to be a child, till it gets life in
the Mothers womb, so here, the more a man goes forth from himself out of
these Images [through much opposition] the more he enters into God, till at
length Christ comes to be living in the incorporated Grace; which comes to be
so, in the great earnestness of his purpose: upon which there presently
follows the desponsation, espousing, or contract with Virgin Sophia, (viz:
the worthy humanity of Christ) where the two Lovers [viz: the soul and the
humanity of Christ] embrace one another with joy; and together with most inward
desire, penetrate into the most sweet love of God; and presently the marriage
of the Lamb is ready: where Virgin Sophia (viz: the worthy humanity of
Christ) is espoused [or united] to the soul: now what is done at it, and what
joy is celebrated, Christ intimates saying: there is greater joy in the Heaven
which is in man, and in the Angels, in the presence of God, for one sinner that
repents, then for nintie nine righteous that need no Repentance.

17. But we have no pen, nor words that can write, or express what that
exceeding sweet Grace of God in the humanity of Christ is; and what they
enjoy, that come worthily to the marriage of the Lamb: which we our selves
have found by experience in this our way and course, and know for certain, that
we have a sure ground from which we write: and we would from the bottom of our
heart willingly Or, impar^.
communicate it to our brethren in the love of Christ: and if it were possible
that they would believe our faithful childish Counsel; they would find by
experience in themselves, from whence it is that this simple hand knows, and
understands these great Mysteries.

18. But having heretofore written a Treatise at large of Repentance, and
Regeneration, therefore here we forbear to write more then this short
direction; and refer the Reader to those Treatises; as also to The Mysterium
Magnum,
the great work upon Genesis, and there he shall find the ground of whatsoever
he will, or can ask, sufficiently laid down: and we christianly admonish him,
that he will follow our way and course, and then he shall attain the Divine
vision in himself, and hear what the LORD through Christ speaks in him: and
hearewith we commend him to the love of CHRIST.

Dated the 9. of February. 1623.
The XV. Chapter, taken out Of the threefold life of Man.
Concerning the mixed World, and the wickedness thereof; what it now i^, and
how it rules: which is a Glass, wherein every one may behold himself; and
find, what kind of Spirits Child he is: from the Seal of the WONDERS.

1 CHrist said Mat. 23. 37.
O Jerusalem Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together,
as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, but ye would not? Also; Oh
Jerusalem thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee. Also: We have piped unto you, but you have not danced. Also, what should
I do more to this stubborn [or perverse] Generation, which will not suffer my
Spirit to reprove them any more? Also: their mouth is full of cursing, and
bitterness, the poison of Asps is under their lips; and their hearts are never
at unity. O! how feign would I eat of the best grapes! But I am as a
Vinedresser that gleaneth: I am altogether a stranger to my Mothers children:
they that eat of my bread, tread me under foot.

2. Thus did the Or, the Word, or wisdom of God crying in the streets.
Mother, then lament, and complain of the wicked children of men: but what
should she do now in these times? she is now in great sorrow and lamentation,
and has turned her face away from these wicked children, and will not endure
them in the garment they are now clothed with all any more: she cries, and
there is none that hears her: she is in great sorrow, weeping and wailing,
over the wickedness of these evil and unruly children: yet every one runs
after that Whore, Covetousness; which is full of all vice, wickedness, and
abominations: This does the Shepherd, and also the sheep: It is a time of
highest and greatest calamity, which if it should not be shortened none could be
saved.

Thirdly, It is a time of which all the Prophets have prophesied: and thou
supposest it to be a golden time: but consider thy self, thou blind man;
whither thou art gone: do thou think that this wickedness, and falsehood
which thou practisest, is the Ordinance of God? wait but a while, and thou
shall soon see, that it is the time of the last Seal, in which the Anger of
God pours forth its vialls, so that the Wonders of Hell are come to light
[and known:] Let this be told you; we have known it in Ternario sancto. [or
we have understood it in the heavenly substantiality in the Angelical world.]

4. For the Mother has rejected [the wicked child of] this [time] and will
endure the abominations [thereof] no more: she is with child, and brings
forth a Sonue in her old age, who shall shorten the days of iniquity: Let
this be told you: whosoever persevereth, or goes on in his iniquity, shall
have great shame thereof.

5. Are not the little boys, and children that run up and down playing
together, now a days, full of venom and devilish wickedness, and do not
all vices and abominations appear in them? do they not mock and scorn,
blaspheme, curse, swear, cheat, and lie, and so are fully fitted to serve the
Devil in all shameless vices: lascivious impudence is Or, their Latin which
they speak.
Eloquence and fine Language with them; they know readily how to jeere the
simple with all manner of scornful and scoffing Jests; all theeving
filtching, and stealing is counted a great piece of Art and skill with them,
deceit, and sly tricks are a credit to them: they mock honest people without
any regard: One that fears God they hout, and wonder at, as if it were an
Owl, and count him for a fool: and this the old ones, and their parents see,
and take delight and pleasure in it, that their children are so expert in
insolence and vanity: and when their children readily scoff and jeere at
honest people, their hearts are tickled at it: what they dare not do
themselves they teach their children to do it, that they may have their own
hearts lust fulfilled. All this the Devil teaches them, and so rides in
their hearts domineering over soul and body.

6. They that can cozen, slander, despise, and betray their neighbor; and
overthrow his honor, or good name, blemish his reputation, diminish, or hinder
his estate, take great delight therein: All impudent wanton laughter, or
unseemely words, and gestures, are counted wit, dexterity, and Art: he that can
out-jeere, or laugh another to scorn, is master of the game or place: all
these are the Devils tricks and feats; and so he leads the poor soul in a
string, and man understands it not.

7. Youths both male and female, learn the Devils trade, and handicraft
before they learn any other thing; Despitefull, scornful, wicked disdain,
pride, and insolence, is the first work they learn; and this their Elders
help them forward in, and count it civillity, manners, gallantry, and Art.

8. And if they grow to be a little elder, then the desire of beastiall lust,
and lasciviousness is the next work they learn, to which one sex provokes
another: Youths yield their heart for the Devil to dwell in, in their first
springing growth, that the Devil may make his nest in it, and so he ensnareth
one by the abominations of the other, the Male by the Female, and the Female by
the Male.

9. If a man send his son to the University, to have him learn somewhat that
is good, that he may be serviceable to God and the Commonwealth: there he
learneth Pride, bravery, and cunning crafty subtlety, and how he may deprive
the simple of his goods, which he has gotten by his sweat and labor, and
cloak their doings with that which they call their Jura.
Right, they may do it by Law: but the cloak is the Devils, and the false
deceitful heart is his servant: if he can smatter a little of any strange
language; then no plain man is good enough for him, his pride and haughtiness
does so overflow: his stinking carcass must be trimmed and decked with
trappings and fooleries: scortation and deflouring of Virgins is a high
accomplishment with them: they are a kind of people, that can complement and
behave themselves finely; and so often procure the worm that grows to awake
in the heart, and conscience of many a Mothers Daughter.

10. These are they that are entrusted with Churches, Schools, and
Universities, and ordained, and accounted to be the Shepherds of Christ: and
yet they lodge the Devil in their hearts: these also are preferred to Civil
Government, and place of Authority in the Commonwealth, and then they rule
just as he that harbors in their heart would have them: And thus the
Superiors commit the greatest wickedness, and the Infetiours learn of them:
the superior devises how to get the goods, or Estate of the Inferior to
himself with subtilty, under pretense and color of Law: he lays Taxes and
impositions, and says they are for the good of the Commonwealth: he
constrains the poor and silly to take hard pains, and be his slave, to
satisfy his own Pride: he threatens the* simple with harsh, and rugged words,
he takes his sweat and labor from him, and afflicts his body: he brings
all he can to be in bondage under him; and yet himself has nothing for his
own, but one only soul, and is but a stranger, and a sojourner in this world:
the needy must consume all his sweat for him, and his pleasure; there is no
pity, ease, nor rest to be had from him; his dog has a better life, then the
needy soul under his roof; and all this he accounts equal, just, and
right: though it be not grounded upon nature, but in the Dark abyss, or
bottomless pit, where one form [or property of Darkenesse] afflicts,
vexes, tormenteth, and tortureth the other, and where the life is an Enemy to
it self.

11. Such things the Inferior learneth of his Superior, and maintains
himself also with craft, cozening covetousness, and knavery: for if he did
not so, he could not fill his belly in Righteousness: and then his reason
tells him he is forced to do so; to exact more work, profit, and commodity,
and so extort from his neighbor his sweat, pains, and care, without love and
Righteousness only to fill his belly: He learneth riotousnesse, luxury, and
Junketings of his Superior, and a true beastiall life: But what the Superior
does in state and delicacie, that the Inferior does in a Beastiall swinish
manner of life: thus wickedness is wrought by wickedness: and the Devil
continues Prince on Earth, both over body, and soul.

12. How will thou be able to subsist, when God will judge the secrets of men
in his zeal? for then the cause of every thing [that every wicked man has had
to do with all] shall appear, and curse him: every thing will set its own
cause before him, and he shall feel it in his Conscience: How will thou
Superior be able to endure, when thy Inferior shall cry, woe, woe, woe to
thee, for giving him occasion to be lewd, and unrighteous: [and say] thou have
bereft him of his sweat, and so forced him to yield himself to do
unrighteously, and to embrace vanity: how will thou be able to render an
account of thy Office wherein thou have been set and placed, that thou
should hinder injury and unrighteousness, and keep the wicked in awe by
reproof, correction, and punishment: but thou have not regarded to prevent his
wicked course, thou have only regarded thy own covetousness, how thou
might deprive him of his sweat; thou have not sought the good of his soul,
but his sweat and labor, for in other things he might do what he would
himself: Thou have gone before him in wicked examples, so that he has looked
upon thee, liked thee, and followed thy course; cursing, blaspheming, Ambition,
and defying others, has been thy course, and he has learned to do so too,
and so continually blasphemeth the name of God; but thou have not regarded
that, thou have looked after his money, and not after the good of his soul.

13. And when the severe Judgment of God shall appear, and that all works
shall be manifested in the fiery essences, when all things shall be tried in
the fire; what do thou think? shall not all such works remain in the fire?
And then the poor soul will cry out against its ungodly accursed labor,
words, and works, and one will curse another for giving him occasion to do
such evil; and the torment of falsehood will boil up in the soul, and gnaw
him, [for it will be great anguish to him] that he has fooled away so great a
Glory for so frivolous vanity, and false delights sake.

14. All malice, scorn, covetousness, pride, and deceit, will boil up in the
soul, and one torment, will continually kindle and gnaw the other, that caused
it: [for example where Pride, or Covetousnes have caused unrighteousness,
there the unrighteousness will gnaw, tear, and curse that which caused it]
and then the soul will consider, if it were not for this abomination, I might
attain Grace: and when it shall thoroughly weigh and consider it self, it will
find that one abomination has always begotten and brough forth another; and
shall perceive, that it self is nothing but a stinking, loathsome abomination
in the presence of God: and then it will cast it self in its anguish and
torment inwards, into its Center, and curse God for having created it to be a
soul; and the deeper it desires to throw it self, the deeper its fall is;
and yet it must still be in the place of its Abominations; it cannot get out
from thence: the hellish Matrix, [wombe, or mother] holds it captive; and so
it must feed it self with aching, anguish, cursing, abominations, and
bitterness, even with those things which the heart has wrought here [in this
life] in which at last it despaireth, and that is its everlasting food.

15 All earthly food and pleasure perishes at the end of days [or time,] and
all return again into the Ether, [Sky, Sea, Abyss, or Receptacle:] but the
will, and the desire in the will, remains for ever.

16 Therefore old and young, Parents and children, Superiors and Inferiors,
mark and observe: you have filled the mother of Nature full of abominations,
[or with all manner of wickednesse] the fierce wrath of God is at hand, the
last judgment is at the door; God will purge or sweep the earth with fire,
and give every one his due reward: the harvest comes, this crop shall not
stand: every thing will be gathered and carried into its proper Barn; He that
will take no counsel let him go on, he shall soon feel what the seventh
Seal brings with it in its center, [or ^t the end thereof.]

17 When Reason looks upon things, it says, I do not see that things are
now otherwise then they formerly were: and besides, the world has always had
good and bad in it, as histories tell us, and men must do as they do,, or
else they will be made very fools, and laughing stocks to the world, and must
must be forced to starve.

18 If a man should not give his children liberty to learn the fashions and
dealings of the world, they would be nothing but derided and despised: also, if
a man should not be somewhat like in his carriage, and take some state and
bravery upon him, he should not be regarded: and except he use some device to
get by, he cannot maintain that: for with truth, and love, and righteousness,
says he, I am sure to get nothing [but shall dye a Beggar:] I must do as
others do, and then I may be able to live amongst them. Why should I only be
the fool of all the world? If I do commit sin, God is gracious and merciful;
has not Christ slain finne and death upon the cross, and taken away the power
of the Devil? I shall once repent well enough and be saved.

19 This is the Rule that the world goes by, this is the course both of
superior and inferior, of the shepherd and of the sheep. Christ's passion and
suffering must be the cloak for their knavery: every one would be accounted a
Christian, and wear the Mantle of Christ, when the poor soul plays the
whore with the Devil; if with the mouth they can but confess themselves to be
Christians, and cover their knavery with the purple mantle of Christ, then all
is well, and so we are brave Christians with our lips under the mantle of
Christ, and yet we lodge the whore of Antichrist in our hearts.

20 O ye false Shepherds of Christ; you that climb up into the sheepfold by
the door of Robbers; why do you tickle [or comfort] the knave [of
wickednesse] with the sufferings and death of Christ? Do you think that Christ
was such a one? [For none should wear his mantle but such as are like him.]
Search the center [or ground] of Nature, and show the people the Abyss that is
in their hearts, show them the snares of the Devil, which we lie entangled in,
that they may no more look after the cursed course of the world, but that they
may learn to fight against flesh and blood, and also against the Devil, and an
hypocritical life, that they may go forth from the pride of the Devil, and
enter into righteousness, love and humility.

21 The passion of Christ will benefit none, unless they turn from their evil,
false and wicked purposes, and repent, and enter into the Covenant of God: to
such a one the sufferings of Christ are very powerful and profitable. The
hypocrites they seemingly carry themselves so, that they may have the Name of
Christ put upon them; but they thereby abuse the Name of God, and must give a
strict account of that.

22 O ye Antichristian Shepherds of the new Order, you that with with false
hypocrisy (for the favor of men, or for your own Idols sake, the belly) cast
the garment of Christ's sufferings over the hypocrites and deceivers, who are
but seeming Christians; how will you answer it when Christ shall require an
account of his sheep from you, you having wittingly and wilfully, for favor,
money, riches, honor, and reputation] covered Wolves in whom the Devil
dwells, with the purple mantle of Christ: why do you not break the Nut
shell and look upon the kernel and heart that lies within it, and tell the
superior as well as the inferior, of his abominations and wickedness? If you
be the Shepherds of Christ, why do you not as Christ did, who told every one
the truth to his face: he did both bruise and heal, not for favor, or respect
to the person of any, but according to the will of his Father: the shepherds
of Christ ought to do so too.

23 O beloved Reason! thou walk very wisely in the way of this world, as
far as concerns the outward body: but what becomes of the poor soul?
this outward body is* not its home, it is not its eternal native country.
What will it avail thee to take thy pleasure here a very little while, and
suffer eternal loss? Or what profit will it be, to suffer they children to
follow [their own will in] bravery, luxury, and insolence, [or what ill they
please] for a little while in this world, and for thee to take delight in their
despising of the poor and needy, when after this life thou shall lose them for
ever? Thou supposest thou love them and do them good, [when thou have so
brought them up] that the word commends their cunning fetches, deceit and
gallantry, and it likes thee well; but the Devil takes that to himself, and
thou art the murderer of thy own children, and art their greatest enemy: for
children look upon their parents at every turn; and when they see their [idle,
unhappy, waggery, and] roguish tricks, do please them, then the children play
their tricks the more, and grow stouter, [hardened] bold [and brazen-faced in
their villainy. These will cry out at the last judgment day against their
parents, for not withholding [and restraining] them from vanity and their
wicked course, by nurturing them, correcting them, and bringing them up in
virtue, and in the fear of God.

24 If thou love thy life, and thy children, then lose thy life and thy
children, as to the iniquity of this world, that they neither walk nor be
therein; and then thou shall find them and thy life again in heaven, as Christ
says, Whosoever loves his life shall lose it; but whosoever loses his life,
his goods, his credit, for my sake, he shall find them again in the kingdom of
heaven. Also, when the world despises, persecuteth, and hates you for my
sake, then rejoice, your reward is great in the kingdom of heaven. Also, what
will it profit a man to enjoy temporal pleasure, and honor here in this life,
that endures but for a moment, and lose his soul that endures to eternity?

25 Loving children in Christ, let every one consider in what soil he grows
here; we must not stay a fitter season for the bettering of our life; but to
day, to day, when the voice of God sounds, let every one enter into himself,
and search and try himself; let none regard the broad way of the world, if he
do, he will go into the Abyss to the Devils: for the way to the kingdom of
heaven is a very strait and narrow way, whosoever will walk therein, must not
carry till the Devil quite grateth [or stoppeth] up the door; he must not
regard the course of this world, he must only enter into himself, and seek or
search himself: the time will come that he shall think that himself only is
left alone; but God has always his seven thousand with Elias besides
himself, whom he knows not of.

26 For a sincere earnest Christian does not altogether know himself, he sees
nothing but his vices and faults, in which the Devil fights against him,
they are always in his sight; but he knows not his own holiness in this
world; for Christ hides it under his cross, so that the Devil sees it not:
Therefore be always sober and watchful, and resist the crafty and subtle
Devil, that ye may live for ever. Amen.

A Letter or Epistle FROM JACOB BEHMEN to a good friend of his.
Our Salvation [or Redemption] consists in the working [of the] love of JESUS
CHRIST [that is] in us.

1. MY very loving and Christian Friend, I wish you the highest peace, with the
hearty love of a fellowmember of CHRIST, working in the desire; that the true
Sun of the effectual love of JESUS CHRIST, may continually rise and shine in
your Soul, Spirit and Body.

2 Your letter dated the 24 of January, I received 14. days after Easter;
rejoicing to see in it, that you are a thirsty, fervent, and desirous searcher
and lover of the true ground [of the knowledge of Divine mysteries,] which I
perceive you have sought and searched for with diligence.

3 But that my writings are come to your hands, and please you, is certainly
caused by the appointment of GOD, who brings lovers to [that which they]
love, and often uses strange means, whereby he satisfies the desire of them
that love a thing, and feeds them with his gifts, [and graces] and puts an
Ens [or Substance] of the true fire, into their love, that it may burn aright;
and you may rest assured, if you continue your constancy in love to truth, that
it will open, reveal, and manifest it self to you in its flaming love; and
make it self certainly known: but the searching of it must be begnn aright: for
we attain not the true ground of divine knowledge by the sharp searthing of our
reason [fro^ without:] but the searching must begin from within in the Hunger
of the soul; for Reason pe^etrateth no further then its own A^rum, or
Constellation] of the out^ard world, from whence Reason ha^h ^ts original.

4 But the soul searches in its own Astrum [or Constellation,] viz. in the
^nward spiritual world, from whence ^his visible world has proceeded and ^own
forth, and was produced, and wherein its ground [or Root] stands.

5. But then if the soul would search its own Astrum [or Spiritual
Constellation,] viz. the Mysterium Magnum, [or the eternal Divine Nature,] it
must first wholly yield up all its power and its will to the divine love and
grace [within it] and become a child, and turn it self to ^ts Center by
Repentance, and desire to do nothing but that only which the Spirit of God
desires to search by it.

6 And when it has yielded and resigned it self thus, seeking nothing but
[goodnesse, and the glory of] God, and its own salvation, and also how it may
serve and love its neighbor; and does then find in it self a desire to have
divine and [also] Natural knowledge; then it may know [or be sure] that it is
drawn [or inclined] to it by GOD, and then it may well* search that deep
ground* which is mentioned in my Writings.

7 For the Spirit of GOD searches by that soul, and brings it at length
into the deepes of the Deity, as Saint Paul faith; The Spirit searches all
things, yea, the deep things of God.

8 Loving Sir, it is a simple childish way that leads to the highest wisdom,
the world knows it not: You need not [travell into far Countries] to seek for
wisdom in remote places; she stands at the door of your soul and knocks;
and if she shall find an empty, resigned, [free] place in the soul, she will
there reveal her self indeed, and rejoice therein more then the Sun in the
Elements. If the soul yield it self up to wisdom for a full possession, then
she penetrateth through it with her flaming fire of love, and unlocketh all
mysteries to the soul.

9 Sir, you may perhaps wonder, how a plain Layman could come to understand
such high things, having ever read them, nor heard them ^om any man. But,
loving Sir, I tell ^ou, that which you have seen in my ^ritings, is but a
glimpse of the my^eries; for a man cannot write them: God* shall account you
worthy to ^e the light kindled in your soul, ^u would see, taste, smell,
feel, and ^eare, unspeakable words of GOD, ^oncerning this knowledge: And ^ere
is the true Theosophicall School ^ Pentecost, where the soul is taught from
or by.
of God.

10 After this there is no more need ^ searching and painful toyling [a^out
it] for all [doores or] gates and open: a very simple silly man ^ay attain it,
if he do not hinder* ^imselfe by his own willing and run^^ng: For it lies in
man before^nd, and needs only to be awa^ned [stirred up, hatched or quick^d]
by the Spirit of GOD.

11 In my Talent [or Writings] ^s in my simplicity I was able to de^ribe it)
you shall easily ^ind the way ^ it, especially in this This fore^ing Book that
the Author mentions, is the ^^ok of Repentance, the Book of Resignation, and
^e Book of Regeneration; for no more of them ^ere printed in his life time.
foregoing book, which also is of my Talent, and but for few weeks ago
published in print; which, Sir, I present to you in love, as to my Christian
fellow-member, and exhort you to read it over often, for its virtue is, Or, the
longer the better beloved
the more the better liked. In this Book you will see a true short ground, and
it is a sure ground: For the Author in his Praxis.
practice has found it so by experience.

12 But for the ground of the high Natural Mysteries, which you and Mr.
Walter, and Mr. Leonhart Elverne desire a further and a clearer explanation of;
be pleased to enquire of Mr. Walter for it: for I have sent to you and him an
explanation, and other new writings; if you shall like them, you may cause them
to be copied out, you will find very great knowledge in them. I old that all
of you might truly understand it; I would fain have made it more plain; but in
respect of the great depth, and also in regard of the unworthy, it may not be
done. Christ says, Matthew. 7. 7. Seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you. None can give it to another, every one must get it himself of
GOD: One may well give a manuduction, or direction to another; but he cannot
give him the understanding [of it.]

13 Yet know this, That a Lilly blossometh to you, ye Northern Countries.

If you do not destroy it with the Sectarian contention of your learned Men,
it will grow to be a very flourishing or great Tree among you. But if you
rather choose to contend [dispute and wrangle] then to know the true God, the
Ray [or Influence] will pass over you, and touch but some few; and then
afterward you will be forced to fetch water from strangers for the thirst of
your souls.

14 If you shall rightly observe it, my writings will give you great
furtherance in it, and the Signat-Starre above your Pole will help you, for its
time born [or begun.]

15 I will freely and readily give you what the Lord has given me: but look to
it, and bestow it aright, it will be a witness for you against the Mockers,
[Scorners or Despisers:] None ought to look upon my person, it is the mere
gift of God, given not for my sake only, but for your sakes also, and for all
theirs that shall get to read viz. my writings.
it.

16. Let none gaze any longer after the time, it is already borne or [begun]
whomsoever it hitteth, him it hitteth; he that watches sees it, and he that
sleeps sees it not: the time is already appeared, and shall suddenly
appear [more] he that watches he shall see it: many have already felt it;
but a very great tribulation and calamity must pass over, before it be wholly
manifested. The cause of which [misery and calamity] is, the contention of the
Learned, who tread the cup of Christ under their feet, and contend about a
child, with a contention, then which there was never worse since men were: that
must be manifested* therefore let no honest man defile himself with such
contentions, there is a fire from the Lord therein, that shall consume them,
and himself reveal the Truth.

17. You shall receive of Mr. Walter, what he has more; especially a Table,
with an Exposition [of it] wherein the whole ground [of all Mysteries] is
plainly laid down.

And so I commend you sir, to the love of JESUS CHRIST.

Dated the 20. of April. Anno 1624. Your Servant in the love of CHRIST. JACOB
BEHMEN.

AN EXPLICATION OF Some words in the writings of JACOB BEHMEN.
Turba Magna.
1. THE Turba Magna [the great Turba] is the stirred and awakened wrath of the
inward ground, when the foundation of Hell is made manifest in the Spirit of
this world: from whence great plagues and diseases arise: And it is also the
awakened wrath of the outward nature, as may be seen in great tempests of
Thunder, and lightning, when the fire is manifested [or generated] in water. In
brief it is the effusion of the Anger of God; by which Nature is disturbed.

Ternarius.
2. By the word Ternarius [the Ternary, or number three] in the Language of
Nature we understand, the Divine Birth, [or Propagation] in the six forms [or
properties] of Nature, which are the six Seals of God.

Ternarius Sanctus.
3. The Ternarius Sanctus [or holy Ternary] is the Inward heavenly working
power in that Substance wherein the Trinity of God works: and so I understand
thereby an Essential power, and the Number Three, [or Trinity] in the seven
forms, [or Properties] wherein also the Angelical world is comprehended.

Tria Principia. The three Principles.
Primum Principium. The first Principle.
4. By the first Principle is meant the Eternal Darkness, which consists in
the receivingnesse of the Properties, whence feelingnesse arises, and its
ground extends as far as to Fire [in order of the seven Properties, fire
being the fourth property into which its ground reaches:] by which ground we
mean the Eternal Nature, and the wrath of God: [according to which God is
said to be a zealous Angry Jealous God, and a consuming fire.]

Secundum Principium. The second Principle.
5. By the second Principle is meant the Light, and the Angelical powrefull
World; in which the effluence of the Divine Power and Will, does manifest it
self by the Magical Fire in the Light, with the flaming fire of love: by this
is meant the Kingdom of God [according to which God is said to be a loving
merciful God, and the Eternal goodness and Light.]

Tertium Principium. The third Principle.
6. By the third Principle is meant, the visible, produced, and created world,
with all its hosts: which is an effluence out of the first and second
Principle, [caused] by the motion, and breathing forth of the Divine Power and
will: in which the spiritual world, as to Light and Darkness, is represented,
and come to be a creature.

Tincture.
7. By the Word Tincture is meant, the power and virtue of Fire, and Light; and
the stirring [up or putting forth like a bud] of this virtue is called the holy
and pure Element: [the virtue of the Sun is the Tincture of all things, that
grow and live in the visibility of the world: so also the color is the
Tincture of the ground: Christ ^s the Tincture of the soul; in brief; the
Tincture is the life, and the perfluent, and informing virtue, by which any
thing does subsist: for without the Tincture that proceeds from the Sun,
Gold were no Gold: and so also the Image of God in the soul without the true
Tincture [the Eternal Sun of Righteousnesse] were not the Image of God.

CHRISTUS. Christ.
8. By the Word Christ is meant, the inward new man, in the Spirit of Christ;
understood inwardly.

Satan.
9. By the word Satan is meant, the Spirit of error [in us] and not always a
creaturely Devil, but the property of such an erroneous Spirit.

The end.
COncerning the Authors life, the Reader may find some information in the
Preface to his 40. Questions of the Soul in English. And at the end of that
Book, a Catalogue of his other Writings.


