A VIEW OF THE THREATS AND PVNISHMENTS Recorded in the Scriptures,
Alphabetically composed.

With some brief OBSERVATIONS upon several TEXTS.

By ZACHARY BOGAN of C.C.C. OXON.

Number. 32. 23. -- Be sure your sin will find you out.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall for R. Davis. 1653.

TO MY HONORED FATHER Mr WILLIAM BOGAN.
SIR,
IT is too well known to you, how for no less then four or five years, (by
the just hand of God upon me for my many Sins; and, perhaps, more especially,
for my presumption upon my power over my passions, and my fancy; which I have
most prefidently expressed, whenever my friends bade me beware, how I yielded
to them) I have been in a manner buried alive in melancholy, and spent my days
in vanity. My distemper was such, as did not only render me indisposed, by
study to gather more knowledge then I had before, (being not able for whole
months together, to persuade my self to take a book in hand; and for
several years, if I had read any thing, to tell you what I had read:) But
also made me to loose a very great part of that which I had already gathered.
And therefore I doubt not, but my Acquaintance and Country men, what ever they
may think, and say too, sometimes, against me for idleness: yet after a very
few serious thoughts, do abundantly excuse me. It is true, It was one of those
things, which in my melancholy, my dejected spirit dwelt longest upon, that I
had done God, and my brethren no service, having lived so long. But after a
year or two, It pleased the Lord (who, I cannot say, did ever hide himself in
my trouble, or despise my affliction; but was ready to know me in all my
adversity) to set me in a way, wherein I might spend my time better, and pass
through with more ease, some of the rest of those wearisome days, which he had
appointed for me. He gave me a subject to meditate upon (wherein he dealt
suitably with my distemper, as well in the employment, as the subject: being
fitter for meditation, then reading) The Mirth of a Christian Life, (in
opposition to those who disparage it with reports of melancholy and sadness.)
Which accordingly I undertook, and committed my meditations (such as they
were) to paper. When some years were past: you may remember, that the last
winter, you told me in your letter, that my mother desired much to see those
meditations printed. I resolved, considering the sickly condition she was then
in, thoug^^ they were never so unworthy the public view, to satisfy her
desire. But before ^ had set upon the business, it thus happened. Being in a
Booksellers shop, and looking upon a treatise of God's Promises; I asked the
Bookeseller, whether he knew of any Treatise of his Threats Being answered
(contrary to my expectation) that he knew of none; I was the more earnest to
inquire further. And so I did; but could hear of none. VVhereupon I told my
Bookeseller, that I resolved forthwith to read over the Bible, and make a
collection of them my self; and, if it pleased God to encourage me in it, to
print them. Now the Lord did encourage me, and that exceedingly (as I shall
show you in my preface to the Reader;) so that I have finished my work
quickly, and brought you savory meat, such as, I hope, you love. You had had it
long since, had it not been longer in the Printers hands, then it was in mine
own. But I hope it is not too late now. I had another reason, besides natural
and civil obligation, why I chose to dedicate this book to your self. And
that was this, viz. because I conceived the contents of it more proper for your
family, then for any that I knew; in regard we have had more mercies then other
families, and as I fear, have abused them to security. The truth is, a book
of this nature is very proper for the whole Nation; because there have been so
many judgments of God in the Earth, and in our own Land; and yet we have not
learned righteousness. The Lord grant, that as many as yet remain, may hear
and fear, and may henceforth commit no more such evils, as they have
committed. But I have held you too long. And therefore I will conclude, with
this humble request, that as often as you meet with any faylings in this book,
you will bear with them in that manner, as you have been wont to bear with
them in the author: so as never the less to accept of the unworthy gift of

C.C.C. Jun. 29, 1652. Your obedient Son ZACHARY BOGAN.

Christian READER.
GIve me leave to show thee, what course I took in Composing this Book. It
was in very little more then a fortnight's time, that by the help of God I read
the Bible over: and reduced every thing that I observed, to a certain head, in
Alphabeticall order. After this, I examined every place of Scripture, by the
Original, and the most noted Translations. Some few Texts, besides those which
I observed my self, I met with afterward in other Books. Those books I knew
not of before I had done reading the Bible. Which I much rejoiced for; both
because of other things, which in reading I took in, together with those that
were for this purpose: and because of the abundance of time and labor, which I
should have spent, in examining quotations; which are usually heaped up without
choice, or judgment. It cost me not a little pain, to examine only those
Texts, which they had, and I had not: out of fear, lest they had been applied
to a wrong head, (a thing too ordinary in most Common place books.) But before
I go any further, now I have spoken of pain, give me leave to tell thee of
(that, which I took abundance of comfort in, and which I may not conceal) the
mavelous encouragement, which it pleased God to afford me all along in this
work. Whereas ever since my sickness, I have not been able to read above a
quarter of an hour at a time, without a great deal of weariness and pain:
In reading the Scriptures, although I read the same places ten times over, I
was, I know not how, supplied with a constant delight in what I did, and a
desire to go further. If at any time I was weary, (as sometimes I was quite
tired, through infirmities of body, and want of spirits:) as soon as I had but
turned aside, but a few minutes, I found a sudden supply of desire to follow my
business again, as fresh as ever. Thus it was most commonly, when I was thus
weary. and when it was not so, and I had noe appetite at all to the business:
If I did but once take my bible in hand, to try how it would be then, and read
a line, or two; I presently recovered my appetite again; as bodies filled with
wind use to get a stomach by eating. And these things I look upon as great
encouragements. whereunto I add the health which I had, all the while I was
doing this thing, better then I had these many years; yea though I used no
exercise, or recreation. But a diuerticulo, to show thee in what manner I have
done every thing.

1 I have produced only those texts, wherein mention is made, either of a
punishment inflicted, or threatened for a sin, wherewith God punishes it; or
of an evil fruit, and effect of it, whereby it punishes it self. The
Attendants and Consequents of it, I meddle not with, except such as are
necessary, or ordinary, and whereof there are several examples also in
Scripture.

2 In the titles of the chapters, when the chapters speak only of punishments
threatened; I have written, Threatened. When of punishments Inflicted, or of
fruits and effects; punished, (or, have cause to fear.) When of both;
Threatened, and punished.

3 The subject threatened or punished, for the most part I make the Sin; but
sometimes the Sinner (as Proud men etc: viz:) when the punishments mentioned
were indeed inflicted upon such a sinner; but of some of them, it is not so
particulary expressed, that they were inflicted for that Sin.

4 Sometimes I seem to repeat one title twice: as in Oppression, Oaths, etc.
And my reason is, Because I find Scriptures speaking sometimes in general
against Oppression, and sometimes but particularly of only such and such
oppression, and I would not willingly missapply any threat.

5 In the Conclusion of many chapters, after I have showed, what is expressed
in Scripture, concerning punishments; I do show you what may be gathered from
the Scripture, concerning the odiousness, or concerning the danger of it:
either by the names that are given it, or the manner that the Scriptures speak
of it. And sometimes I show you, what may be conjectured from the nature of the
sin: or from comparison of the like things among men.

6 Some more notable threats, and punishments, as Being left to our selves etc.
I have inserted, although the cause be not mentioned: as taking them to be of
use also, as well as the rest. not only because the greatest sort of
punishments may be the just reward of the least sin: but because reading of
such a fearful punishment, without finding for what sin it was inflicted,
may make men wary of committing any sin, for fear of committing that.

7 Some prophecies of sins, as Apostasy etc. I have inserted for Threats:
because those sins are punishments too, as well as sins; and are so spoken
of, viz. in a threatening manner: and because there can be no greater
punishment, then to be left to the Commission of them.

8 In setting down the places of Scripture I have not followed the order of
the Bible, but of the punishments; placing them after God's method of mercy,
from less to greater. But in mentioning the sins, where there are several
titles under one subject, (as in Ministers, Parents, etc.) I have observed the
contrary order, the less after the greater: the more to set forth the worth of
that Subject, and the greatnsse of the respect due to it.

Having in this manner digested my Collections, I intended so to print them,
without saying any thing my self upon any place of Scripture: till by the
persuasion of a friend, whom I very much esteemed, I was induced to the
contrary. But I must earnestly entreat thee, to bear with my weakness,
whenever thou discoverest it. And if upon any subject, I have suffered my pen
to run on too far (as in the chapters of Covetousness. Company-keeping.
Blasphemy etc,) bear with that too. And if thou have not the patience to read
through; pass to the next Chapter, and be not angry. And so likewise do, when
thou meetest with any critical observations on the Greek or Hebrew: if thou
do not like them or can not understand them; yet keep the book still in thy
hand, and pass on to other things. I speak in this manner, because I know how
unwilling men are to read of threats, and punishments: and how forward, and
saucy they are to catch at the promises. I shall desire thee likewise, when
thou meetest with any thing that does not satisfy thee, or like thee; to
suspend thy judgment, till thou have read the Appendix.

I will but wipe off an aspersion or two, and then dismiss thee. The first is,
that I was too bold, to venture abroad so young; unless I had more learning
and Judgment. And I confess, this was once my own objection to my self. But
I thought it sufficently answered by replying, It was not I, that went abroad
so much, as the Scriptures; or I, and the Scriptures before me. The second
aspersion is, that I was too hasty in printing a thing so suddenly attempted,
and performed in so little time; as is declared in the former Epistle. To this
I answer 1 That there was not so much need of longer time; most of the book
being Scripture, and not mine own invention. 2 I thought upon the want of a
book of this nature, and the usefulness of it. 3 I understood, at every
opportunity of hearing from my friends, their earnest desire of seeing what I
had done. 4 I thought that although I had made such have, yet I might boldly
say, there would be found but little sign of it. perhaps, thou will meet with
some oversights in the printing: but not many material; and those I have
affixed to the Appendix.

5 I though upon the Cic, lih. de clar. orator.
saying, Nihil est inventum simul and perfectum, that never any thing was
perfect at the first, though there were never so much time spent about it.
Well, I weigh not to censures. So ten may read me, I will give a hundred leave
to censure me. Under a good Conscience, I care not what it cost me to convert a
sinner. My prayer to God is, that he would incline thy heart to read the
judgments of God written in his book: and when thou have done to humble thy
self under his mighty hand, that so he may exalt the main^ thing, which in the
Composing of this book was aimed at, by

Thy Servant in Jesus Christ Z. B.

THE TABLE.
A
ADultery. Affliction threatened. Non Affliction. Ambition. Angels. Anger.
Antichrist. Apostasy threatened. Apostasy punished. Apparel. See also Clothes.
Ashamed of Christ and his religion.
B
Blasphemy against God. See also Appendix. Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.
Blessings turned into curses. Boasters of holiness. Bribery.
C
Carnal men. Ceremonies and commandments of men. Christ. Such as reject
Christ. Such as forsake Christ. Such as deny Christ. Enemies of Christ. Such as
to whom Christ is a Scandal. Threats and Examples of his being a scandal, see
Appendix. Such as have no union or communion with Christ. Church not heard.
Clothes of men and women promiscuously worn. Communicating unworthily. Company
of wicked men. Company of any too much kept. Non-Confession of sins. Copulation
with beasts, as likewise with men and women too nearly related. Covenant
breaking with God. Covetousness. Cruelty. Curiosity. Cursing of Blessings by
God. Cursing of Rulers. Cursing of any. Cursing of Parents. See Parents.
D
Deceitfulness. Delight in sin. See Sin. Desertion. Despising. Discord.
Threats of Discord among all sorts. Discord among the wicked as a punishment,
and for the good of the godly. Threats to Discord, or to those that cause and
maintain it. Discouraging of men in holy exercises. Distrust. Divination. Not
Doing what we hear. Doubting in prayer. Drunkenness. Duties of Religion, Such
as perform them with resolution to retain their sins.
E
Enemies of God's children. Envy. Escape of Malefactors suffered. Evil.
Calling it good. Rendering it for good. Extortion.
F
False Prophets. Threats to false Prophets. Threats of false Prophets. Threats
or Prophecies of being seduced by false Prophets or false teachers. Fear
threatened and inflicted upon the wicked. Fear of men, and fearefullnesse out
of distrust of God's goodness. Flatterers with God, with themselves, with
other men. Forgiving one another. Frowardness.
G
Giving to the rich. Glory given, or taken to a man's self. Gluttony. God,
speaking ungodly for him. Gospel opposed. Governors, Such as reject them,
Such as do contrary to their sentence. Such as did not serve them, although
heathen. Such as persuade men to revolt from them. Such as do not endeavor to
preserve their lives. Threatening and punishing with unfit Governors. With
wicked Governors. Threatening and punishing of wicked Governors. Grace
refused.
H
Hardening of the Heart. Hardness of heart. Hastiness, See Rashness. Hatred.
Hearing the word. See Word. Not helping the godly. Helping the wicked. Heresy,
See False teachers. Hinderers of the good works of others. Hinderers of the
conversion of others. Hire detained. Holiness. Not being humbled under judge
ments.
I
Idleness. Idolatry. Ignorance. (or Blindness) threatened and inflicted.
Ignorance threatened and punished. Impatience and murmuring. Impenitence.
Impudence threatened and punished. Incorrigiblenesse under punishments
I
Incest. Injurious dealing. Injustice Insensiblenesse under punishments.
Instruments of punishing, punished. Intemperance. Judging of others. Judgment
day, putting it far away.
K.
Kings and governers threatened, and punished.
L
Law-Righteousnesse. Leaving of men by God. Libertinisme. Love of life more
then Christ. Lovers of the World. Lukewarmnesse. Lying.
M,
Marriage with Idolatars. Means of grace continued in Anger. Means of grace
not profited by. Men pleasers. Mercies Not bettered by, See Unthankfulness,
Security and Prosperity, Ministers their Duty, Such as are scandalous, such as
teach false doctrine. Such as are covetous daubers, and menpleasers, Such as are
idle and neglect their duty. Such as ordain them Ministers their due
Persecuters of them Such as Mock them Such as Despise or slight them Such as
Believe them not Such as will not suffer them to reap their carnal things Such
as do not stand by them in persecution Ministry, Such as intrude upon the
work thereof Bad Ministers threatened for a punishment Mirth i. e. worldly
mirth Mockers of the godly Mockers at those that denounce Gods judgments
Mockers at those that suffer them
O
Oaths not kept, or taken falsely Old men their Duty Their Due Opportunities of
grace neglected Oppressors of the poor, of the fatherless, widows,
strangers, and servants
P
Parents, their Duty Their Due Such as curse them Such as mock them Such as
slight them Such as are disobedient to them, and incorrigible Such as do not
honor them Peace-breaking. See Discord Persecution, threatened, and punished
Pity not showed Pledges kept Politicians, see also Wisdom Prayer not heard
Praying amiss Not-praying Preaching of the word threatened to be removed Such
as hinder it Preparation neglected Presumptuous sins. See in Sin Presumption
of perseverance Pride, see Proud men Professors in hypocrisy, see also
Hypocrites, and Religion only in show Prosperity abused, see also Unthankful
sinning Punishments, Such as are (...) bettered by them. see also
Incorrigiblenesse
R
Rashness Reconciliation Regeneration Rejoicing at other men's miseries
Relapsing. see also Apostasy Religion and Religious Actions used for a cloak
Religion only in show Repenting late Reported well of by all Reproaching
Reproof not given Not taken Revenging Riches wrongfully gotten Trusted in Loved
too much Rich and wicked.
S.
Sabbath breaking Sacrilege Scandalizing and Being Scandalized Scorning
Scriptures not known, Wrested Scrupling at Gnats, and swallowing Camels
Security as to Enemies as to Evil Seducers and Seduced Self conceited men
Selfe-destruction ^elfe-Feare ^elling deceitfullly ^in in general, as sin
threatened ^inning deliberatly and with delight With a high hand Against
knowledge Enticing or causing others to sin Gods leaving of men to sin
Slanderers, or False aecusers
T
Talebearers Talkativenesse Temple of God Tempting of God Thieves Thoughts of
wickedness Treacherous dealings Trusting in the arm of flesh Not-trusting in,
and distrusting of God
V
Unbelief as to promises As to the Gospel Uncharitablehesse to men in want
Unfruitfulnesse Unthankful sinning Voluptuousness
W
War VVatchfull Weary in well doing Whoremongers Wickedness in General.
more notable texts against it Will worship Wisdom neglected Wisdom i.e.
carnal wisdom punished, see also in Politicians Word of God not obeyed Not
believed Not heard Words idly spoken Works of our own neglected Works of God
not regarded World loved Worship of God neglected.
FINIS
SEVERAL THREATS AND PUNISMENTS for several Sins.
Adultery.
WHen the Punishments, and Threats for this sin, are mentioned, the
Scriptures speak either in general, and then the punishment is aggravated,
first with certainty; Whosoever touches her shall not be innocent, Prove. 6.
29. (or rather, unpunished, according to the use of the Hebrew word, Jer. 25.
29. and elsewhere, for he is not innocent already:) secondly with severity; for
God telling the Jews how severely he would deal with them, says, I will
judge thee, as women that break wedlock, and shed blood are judged, Ezekiel. 38.
16. Or else speaks in particular, and then the punishments mentioned are first
death Beza (upon Matthew. 19. 9) says that this law was not executed in Christ's
time, because then Christ would not have spoken of putting away, I see not how
it does necessarily follow, for doubtless the husband might put away his wife,
and the law might put her to death too; he might do it; though he need not do
it, which is all that Christ would have in that place.
both of the adulterer and of the adulteress, by the law of God: This Law was
expressed in general terms, against married women. If a man be found lying by
a woman married to an husband, then they shall both of them die, Deu. 22. 22.
the Rabbines indeed say it is to be interpreted of It is said John 8. 5. Moses
in the Law commanded us that such should be stoned, which I know no need Grotius
had to take such pains to reconcile with this opinion, for first it is but (...)
such; and I hope, (...) betrothed woman is such. And secondly, for ought that
appear the woman-taken in adultery was a betrothed woman, (...) the word (...)
adultery will bear it well enough, according his own opinion upon Gal. 5. 19.
strangling, and so they say of every other law for putting the offender to
death where no mention is made by what kind of death, that it is to be meant of
strangling (which was the easiest kind of death in use among them) because (say
they) where the law for punishments does not determine, we ought to give the
most favorable exposition. which however is not so, if the verse of Ezekiel
but now quoted be to be interpreted by the next save one; for then it might be
as well stoning, and running through with swords o^ javelins, which manner of
punishment i^ there expressed ( viz. verse. 40.) and with the latter whereof
Zimri and Cozhi were punished by Phineas, Number. 25. 6. But against women who
were but betrothd, it was specified by stoning. If a Damsel that is virgin be
Grotius agreeing with the Jews (as he does too often) in the opinion above
mentioned gives this reason why the betrothed woman's punishment was greater,
because (says he) she was not in her husbands custody: as stealing a sheep
out of the field, is punished worse then stealing him out of the fold; but he
might as well have given such reasons as these: first she gave away her
virginity, which her husband most esteemed: secondly, she brake her promise,
viz in so doing: see Deuteronomy. 22. 13. to 18. thirdly, she wrought folly in her
fathers house. Deuteronomy. 22 19. (where the Scripture it self seems to go about
to aggravate her fault.) Fourthly, she was not only dishonest to her husband
in her first love, but she dishonored also her first borne, (whose honor and
privilege among the Jews was very great) nay and God himself, to whom the
first born belonged Number 8. 17. To conclude, you cannot say her punishment
should be less, because she was not another man's wife for she is called a
neighbors wife, Deuteronomy. 22. 24. and therefore is it said verse 22. married to an
husband, as if the party were her husband before. See also for this purpose,
Deuteronomy. 20. 7. chapter 28. 30. Ezekiel. 23. 3, 8.
betrothed unto an husband and a man find her in the city, and lie with her.
Then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of the city, and ye shall
stone them with stones that they die. Deuteronomy. 22, 23, 24. and by burning with
fire, If she were a Priests daughter. And the daughter of a Priest, if she
profane herself by playing the whore, she profaneth her father, she shall be
burnt with fire, Levit. 21: 19. There is one, The later Jonathan.
who (herein a Para^phrast if in nothing else) expounds it of hot Lead powered
into her mouth, which indeed was practiced in after times In imitation of Gods
manner of punishing by fire, which (they say) was by burning the parts within,
and not hurting the outer part of the body: as in that example of Nadab, and
Abihu, and others.

The punishment of Adultery by death had been executed by God, before this Law
was made, if the sin had been committed: as it seems by what he said he would
do to Abimelech, If thou restore her not, know that thou shall surely die,
thou and all that are thine, Genesis 20. 7. Speaking of Sarah; And by what he did
to Pharaoh whose house he punished with great plagues for detaining her in his
house, though (as it is probable) he knew her not, and though he knew not that
she was Abraham's wife. Genesis 12. 17. It seems those people hated Adultery more
then The Septuagint (in the old Roman edition though not in the Complutensis)
in translating the Commandments set down Adultery before Murder, and so do
Mark, chap. 10. 19 Luke, chap. 18. 20. and Paul To. 13. 9.
Murder: For it is said that Abraham gave out that Sarah was his sister, lest
otherwise they should have killed him, that so they might have the better
liberty to enjoy her without adultery. It was executed upon the Shechemites
when Simeon and Levi put all their male to the sword for Shechems lying with
their sister Dinah, Genesis 34. And it was executed upon the Benjamites of Gibeah,
for abusing the Levite's Concubine when he lodged there: for the Israelites
slew of the Benjamites five and twenty thousand, and burnt the city, Judge.
cap. 8. and cap. 9. Judah being told that his daughter Tamar had played the
harlot, gave sentence to have her burnt, before he knew that it was with
himself, Genesis 38. 24. See the punishment of Zedekiah and Ahab for this, and
other sins, Jer. 29, 22. 23. It has been executed upon the child begotten in
adultery, as upon the child begotten by David upon the wife of Vriah. The Jews
say these were the men that would have abused Susanna; and that they were put
to death by the King's command, and not by the Jews. The Gemara says, that
they suffered for enticing the King of Babylon's daughter this sin
Because by this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord
to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die. 2. Sam.
12. 14. Disgrace, and Infamy is the least evil that befalls such children. In
Job cap. 31. 10. where he says, Let my wife grind unto another man, and let
others bow down upon her (...) the Septuagint render the last words (...), Let
my children be abased. It has been observed, that the posterity of Adulterers
are usually short-lived, see Wisd. cap. 3. 16.

If those that commit adultery escape death, a thousand to one that they escape
these ensuing punishments, viz.

2. Retaliation, or being done to as they have done to others thus David was
punished, Thus says the Lord, behold I will raise up evil against thee out of
thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes and give them unto
thy neighbor, And he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of the sun 2 Samuel:
12. 11. this threat was fulfilled by one that was his neighbor with a
witness; for his own son Absalom lay with his concubines upon the top of
the house in the sight of all Israel, cap. 16. 22. Job even in the chapter of
his justification, acknowledges it had bin justice for him, if he had been
guilty of adultery, to be thus dealt withal, c. 31. 9, 10. For in this sense
the old Latin translation renders viz. Scortum alterius sit ux or mea. but
Vatablus had rather have it meant of being made a slave. indeed grinding was an
usual employment and punishment for slaves amongst most nations. See Isai 47 2.
Let my wife grind, etc.

3. Continual fear. They know not the light, for the morning is to them even
as the shadow of death; if one know them, they are in the terrors of the
shadow of death. He is swift as the waters. Their portion is cursed in the
earth: he beholds not the way of the vineyards, Job. 24. 17, 18. He always
goes swiftly for fear of being overtaken, and he never goes in usual ways,
for fear of being seen.

4. Disgrace. A wound, and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not
be wiped away, Prove. 6. 33.

5. Wasting of the body. It was Lemuels advise, Give not thy If that he not
rather meant of the strength of a man's wealth or state.
strength to women, nor thy ways to Solomon knew this by his own experience
some say, these are his words, Lemuel being one of his eight names: but he had
them from his mother Abiah the daughter of Zachariah.
that which destroys Kings, Prove. 31. 3. In Job cap. 31. 12 that which we
render a fire that burns to destruction, the Septuagint render (...), a fire
that burns in all the members. The women under the law found experience of
this punishment, if they had been guilty of the sin and had drunk of the
bitter Made of holy water and dust with the washing of the book in which the
curse was written: so that herein her end was as bitter as wormwood. Prove. 5.
4.
water. It was given for trial in case of jealousy: and at the drinking
thereof the priest pronounced this curse. The Lord make thee a curse, and an
oath amongst thy people, when the Lord does make thy thigh to rott, and thy
belly to swell, Number. 5. 31. Galvin says, by the thigh in this place is meant
the power of childbearing, because o^ the contrary it is said, if she were not
guilty, she should conceive seed, verse. 28. 50. Pareus upon Rev. cap. 19. 16.
where it is said he had on his thigh this name written King of Kings, says
hereby is showed that Christ's name should be propagated by a long posterity.
Both cursing others unlawfully, and being cursed lawfully (as by
excommunication) the Jews thought it had great effects upon men's bodies; See
the chapter of cursing the Cabbalists observe upon the word Cherem a curse,
that the letters thereof being one way transposed make it Rachem mercy, because
if he that is cursed do repent, it proves a mercy to him; but being placed
another way they make the word Ramach a dart, the letters of which word will
stand for 248. which they say is the number of members in a man's body; because
(say they) if he do not repent, the dart or the curse pierced through all his
members: through all his members, say they, and I may add, especially through
his Liver by consumptions, etc. for so the Jews expound that place in the
Proverbs, c. 7. 23. he goes after her straightway till a dart strike through his
liver, saying, that lust is chiefly lodged in the liver, and that it is Gods
usual manner in punishing offenders, to make them suffer most in those parts
wherewith they have committed most sin.

6. Wasting of the estate. It is a fire that consumes to destruction, and
would root out all mine increase, Job. 31. 12. See Whoredom.

7. Hell. But he knows not that the dead are there, and that her guests are
in the depth of hell, Prove. 9. 18. Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor adulterers etc. shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, ^ Cor.
6. 9, 10. See the threat against (...) (if it be not meant of spiritual
adultery) Rev. 2. 22. and Heb. 13, 3. Tertullian in his book de pudicitia,
says that those Churches which admitted into Communion those who had fallen
after baptism, notwithstanding excepted adultery, murder, and Idolatry, and
therefore complains of Zepherinus the Bishop of Rome for admitting adulterers.
But yet the Romish Church, excluded them till after long penance, and likewise
if they fell the second time.

The greatness of this sin, and the odiousness of it in the sight of God,
may be further gathered out of the Scriptures, first by the names that are
given, either to the sinner as of a dog (as they usually expound it Deuteronomy. 23.
18. not (...) but (...)) and of an When Ishbosheth accused Abner of lying with
his fathers concubine, he replied, Am I a dog. Sam. 3. 8.
oven heated by the baker If the meaning be not of spiritual adultery.
Hos. 7. 4. or to the sinn^ it self, as uncleanness, Numb. 5. 19. Abomination
Ezekiel. 22. 11. Neighing Like horses. it is a saying in one of the Jewish
Writers, he that lies with another man's wife, his soul enters into a camel.
Buxtorf. in Floril. which yet agrees not with the opinion of the Pharisees, who
held transmigration only of good men's souls* Joseph. de bello lib. 2. cap. 12.
Jerem. 5. 8. and cap. 13. 27. Secondly, by the use of the word (...) which
signifies only sinful, to express adulterous or whorish, as if such a one
were more sinful then others. So Luke 7. 37. (according to Beza.) by that
place it appears that the Jews accounted an idolatrous person ( any sinner, it
cannot be, for then they must touch no body) such an unclean thing, that they
made it religion so much as to be touched by him: for the Pharisees concluded
Christ to be no Prophet, because then he would have known that she was an
adulteress that washed his feet and not have sufferd her to have touched him.
(...), and (...), adulterous and sinful stand like words of the same sense in
Mark. cap. 8. 38.

3. Thirdly, by the use that is made of the name of adultery viz: for
aggravation, to express the greatness of other abominable sins, as if it were
greater then they, thus it is applied to forsaking God (who vouchsafes to be a
husband to his Church) especially in the commission of Idolatry, Ezekiel. 16, 32,
36. and elsewhere. And to loving the world, Jam. 4. 4. Ye adulterers and and
adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship, (or love of the world) is enmity
with (or hating of) God: Certainly the Apostle being to reprove such a base and
unworthy sin as that, if he could have thought of worse names then adulterers
and adulteresses he would have been sure to have used them, So our Savior
calling the Jews an adulterous generation seems to have taken it for the
worst term that he could have given them Mat. 19. 39. and cap. 16. 4; but
especially Mark. 8, 38. for there he seems to speak more angrily using the
demonstrative, This: This Which we commonly use when we speak in anger, as when
we say, this same naughty fellow, or the like.
adulterous and sinful generation. There is no sinner so likely to be punished
as an adulterer (with another man's wife, especially because he seldom has
repentance to prevent it, and none so likely to be severely punished, because
he has no excuse to mitigate it; and therefore Chrysostom compares the
adulterer to a Pilot that casts away a ship in the haven, and the unmarried
fornicator to him that casts her away abroad in the brunt of the weather, where
it is hard to avoid it.

First, this sin is the most secret sin to men (committed by the body) and
such as they who commit it not only never think they shall suffer, but think
they shall never suffer for (because the hand of man can seldom reach them)
and therefore is it the more likely to be discovered by God, Matthew. 6. 4. 6.
David prays that God would cleanse him from secret faults. Ps. 19. 12.
and more sure to be openly punished. The most secret goodness, and the most
secret wickedness, have usually the most public, and the greatest reward.

Secondly, it is a sin that is soonest forgotten by men, See Prove. 30. 19. 20.
because it leaves no footsteps behind it, and therefore it is the surer to be
remembered by God. Under the Law the Sacrifice which was offered for the woman
suspected of adultery was called mincha ziccaro^, an offering of memorial,
because it was not offered to put away the sin, but to find it out, and to
bring it to mind, if it were committed, Number. 5. 15.

Lastly, this sin is a most pleasing sin to men, and therefore also the
more likely to be punished; because usually such sins as are most pleasing to
us, are most displeasing to God: as on the other side, such things as are most
displeasing to God, a^ through the cunning of the Devil, mad^ most pleasing to
us. I say the sins that a^^ most pleasing are most dangerous, and the sins that
are most dangerous the Divel^ makes most pleasing. he is like a cunning fisher:
he will put the best bait upon the be^^ hook Sweetest things, turn soonest to
bitterness, and yet stolen waters none Prove. 9. ^9.
so sweet Beware therefore of believing thine enemy the Devil: his good news
is still too goo^ to be true. Mistrust him always, but especially then when he
comes with Timeo Danos and dona fere^tes.
gifts. Thi^ thou know, that he would have thee do nothing but what shall
do thee hurt, an^ consequently, that what he is most earne^ to have thee do,
that will do thee mo^ hurt. Therefore as he increases his tentations, so do
thou thy suspicion; and b^ Gods assistance thou shall be able to wors^ him. I
have been the longer upon this si^ because I see it is thought upon so slightly
committed so greedily, and lamented so sparingly.

Affliction Threatened
In the world ye shall In the orig. it is ye have. you are as sure to have it, as
if you had it already, or you have it allotted for you: the present tense is
usual for the future, we say in English what has such a one this year? etc.
have tribulation, Joh, 16, 33. Seneca himsrlfe could say of God, bonum virum
in deliciis non babet, experitur, indurat, sibi illum praeparat: he does not
pamper a good man, but tries him, and hardens him, and fits him for himself.
Sen. lib. Cur bonis mala fiant.

Threats of non-affliction, and to non-afflicted.
Why should ye be stricken any more? Isa 1. 5. it seems to be a threat, as if
he had said, ye shall not be stricken any more: but the Chaldee paraphrase
makes as if God did blame the Jews for not saying, why are we stricken? or not
considering the cause why God did punish them. I will correct thee in measure
Like this. Be angry and sin not, Ephesians. 4. 26.
, and will not leave thee altogether unpunisht, Le Misphat in the same sense (I
think) that Bemisphat, with judgment, c. 10.
says God to Jacob, Jerem. 30. 11. as if this were a great mercy, and as if
it were a great punishment to be left unpunisht. so c. 46. 28. and therefore c
10. 24 the Prophet if he prays not for correction, does not pray against it,
when he says O Lord correct me but with judgment, etc. I will be quiet, and
be no more angry, says God to Jerusalem, Ezekiel 16. 42. For some think it to be
spoken in anger, as well as that in Hosea 4. 14. I will not punish your This
doubtless was a token of Gods anger with them as well as a punishment upon
their Fathers and husbands.
daughters when they commit whordome, nor your spouses, etc. It seems the
Septuagint doubted not but God was angry when he spoke these words, for they
translate (...), not I will not be angry but I will trouble my self no more:
which is as much as if he had said, I am very angry with the^. add hereunto
that the words before these which we translate make my fury toward thee to
rest, are the same in Hebrew with those chapt. 24. 13. which we translate, See
chap. 5. 13. and 21. 17.
cause my fury to rest upon thee (...) which the Septuagint render (...), I
will fully execute mine anger upon thee. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion,
Amos 6 1. Woe to you that are rich for you have received your consolation, says
our Savior, Luke 6. 24. Some of the Heathen themselves accounted freedom from
all manner of misery the greatest misery and slaverie, for Seneca Lib. Cur
bonis mala fiunt.
says it was the saying of Demetrius, nihil videtur infelicius eo cui nihil
unquam evenit adversi, nothing more unhappy then he who was never unhappy.
Plutarc.
Philip King of the Macedonians hearing of a race won by his Coach horses at
the Olympicks, of the birth of a son, and of the overthrow of the Dardanians
by his Leiutenant General Parmenio, all at one time, presently cried out with
his hands lifted up to heaven (...), Oh give me a little bad news in the other
scale, or else I shall sink to the ground. And therefore I think Annibal Live.
l. 3^
gave his enemy Scipio very friendly advice, telling him, Maximae cuique
fortunae minime credendum est, take heed of trusting fortune when she is over
kind. Tacitus says it was a saying of Tiberius, Quanto plus adeptus foret
tanto se magis in lubrico, the less rubs he met with the more slippery was his
condition, and consequently the greater danger of falling, and the greater fall
if he fell. It Is with fortune as it is with men: if she speaks me over kind, I
have cause to fear she flatters me; and if she flatter me, I have as much
cause to fear she means to do me hurt: and therefore I am of Attalus his
mind, malo me fortuna in castris suis, quam in deliciis habeat; I had rather my
Father would give me but a little now and then, and retain me in his love then
give me a great deal at once and bid me be gone and come no more near him. I
am not so hasty; I had rather have my portion paid me in the world to come;
for then I am sure to have most, and I am sure that none but reprobates have
their portion in this life, Ps. 17. 14.

Ambition.
1. The ill effects, and punishments of it mentioned in Scripture are 1.
Ejection out of heaven. The Angels which kept not their first estate, but left
their own habitation, her has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness
unto the Judgment of the great day, Jude. 6.

2 Ejection out of Paradise, as in Adam and Eve: for doubtless; ambition had a
great stroke in making them hearken to those words of the Serpent, (wherewith
their hearts were presently tickled being left to themselves) God does know
that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and you shall
be as Gods, Genesis 3. 5.

3 Miscarriage in designs; as in the builders of Babel, whose ambition may be
seen in their words, Let us build us a City and a Tower whose top may reach
unto heaven, and let us make us a name lest we be scattered For God had
commanded them to be gone from that place where they were then says Jo^phus.
abroad upon the face of the whole earth, Genesis 11. 4. and likewise in Adoniah
who exalted himself to be King against his brother Solomon, 1. King. 1. 5. see
his success verse. 50. and his end, c. 2. 25. for Solomon caused him to be put
to death,

4 Abasement. He that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted, Luke 14. 11. To be ambitious, and to exalt one's
self, when God does not exalt him, is as if a man being invited to a feast,
should take up his place himself at the higher end of the table; and you know
what our Savior says of such a one, that he may with shame begin to take the
lowest room, Luke 14. 9. Let ambitious men take notice of what the Prophet
Habakuk says, Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house,
that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of
evil, Hab. 2. 9.

Add hereunto, if not the punishments, the sad effects of ambition 1.
Unbelief, in those that have not believed. How can ye believe which receive
honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God alone Joh.
5. 44 which receive honor etc. (...) Beza renders, cum captetis, which catch
after honor. Ego captandi vocabulo uti malo ubi do studio and conatu agitur.
To show their ambition; for else it had been no fault in them, only to receive
honor, as it had been no dishonor to Christ, only to receive his restimonie
from men, verse. 34. and therefore Beza in that place also renders (...),
testimonium non capto, not, I receive not, but, I do not catch after, or
affect the testimony of men. Doubtless Christ did not so much forbid the Jews
to be called Rabbi, as to be ambitious to be called so, Mat, 23. 8. as sitting
uppermost at feasts was not the thing which he disliked, but their desire, or
ambition to sit uppermost, V. 6.

2 Being ashamed of Christ in those that have believed. Among the chief Rulers
also many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess
him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue: for they loved the praise of
men, more then the praise of God* Joh. 12. 42. 43. or at least, Being
disobedient to his doctrine. I wrote unto the Church, but Diotrephes, who
loves to have the preeminence among them, receives us not. John ep. 3. 9. Be
the more careful to avoid this sin, by how much there seems the less reason:
for as it had no name among some of the Heathen, so among many Christians, it
has not the name of a sin: but on the contrary is oftentimes commended under
the name of Arist. Eth. l. 5 c. 4.
(...) gallantry Or neatness.
; and the virtue opposed to it, usually disparaged by the name of (...)
baseness of spirit.

Angel.
Such as should provoke the Angel whom God would send before the Israelites in
their journey to Canaan, are thus threatened. Beware of him, and obey his voice,
provoke him not, for he will not pardon Or he will certainly punish, for so is
meant (as I think) by not pardoning in more places then one. Jer. 5. 7. 2.
Kings 24, 4 etc.
your transgressions, for my name is in him, Exodus 23. 21.

Anger.
Angry men are threatened.

1 With punishment, sure enough, and often enough. A man of great wrath shall
suffer punishments, for if thou deliver him Some understa^d this of the Fathers
not punishing the child, tra^slating the next words in the third person, he
will do it again. i. e. sin again, but then it cannot be for if, and I think
(...) is seldom But if.
, yet thou must do it again. Prove. 19. 19. He will bring himself into danger
a hundred ways, and the same way a hundred times; for he is so blinded with
passion, that he cannot see the stone on which he formerly stumbled. Indeed
anger being brevis furor a madness for the time, makes such a change in a man,
that he is not himself; having neither his understanding, nor his senses, no
not so much as his natural faculties exercised: for says one out of the
Talmud, See Buxtorf floril.
An angry man tastes not what he eats, and understands not what he does. I
remember the Poet says of Latona, that when she was denied a little water to
quench her thirst, distulit ira sitim, out of anger she forgot her thirst.

2 Committing of follies, not only against God (for be angry and forbear
sinning if you can, Ephesians. 4. 26.) but against themselves, he that is soon angry
deals foolishly, Prove. 14. 17. it is a saying among the Jews, whosoever is
angry, if he be a wise man, his wisdom is taken from him; if a Prophet, his
prophecy. Belike it was for fear hereof that Cotis the King of Thrace, was so
careful to keep himself from anger: for when a neighbor prince had sent him
a present of most curious glasses, he presently brake them all to pieces
himself, lest if any of his Servants should happen to do it, he might be
moved to anger* a man when he is drunk which passion, is as apt to betray
himself, * According to the Hebrew proverb Bekis Bekos, Be Kahhas, the purse,
the cup, and wrath will show what heart he has.
as when he is drunk with drink.

3 Hurting himself, either by vexing and fretting: as Bildad said of Job c.
18, 4, he teareth himself in his anger: or else by some other way, as by
laying hands on himself, or provoking others to do it. one way or other (as
we have often seen by experience) wrath kills the foolish man, Job 5. 2. if
he had no other executioner but his own wrath, I Will warrant you he would be
sufficiently tormented. Cicero in his Consolation Cap, 21.
to Polybius upon the death of his friend, going to prove that his friend was
happier now, then before, begins with non ira eum torquebit. Anger shall not
torment him, Seneca * compares anger ruinis to ruins, L, de Ira cap. 1.
or ruinous walls, quae super id, quod oppressere, franguntur, which perhaps
may bruise the ground a little upon which they fall, but break themselves into
pieces: and therefore among other reasons which he brings, why a man should not
be angry for an injury, this is one, plus Cap. 25.
mihi nocitura est ira quam injuria, my anger will do me more hurt then my
injury. Indeed how can it choose but hurt a man exceedingly, putting him so
much out of order: for he boyles As any other passionate man does, Sed
cu^subsedit cupiditas, Seneca, l 2. de Ben. c. 14
within till he be ready to be skimmed, and yet he is so cold without that he
cannot forbear shaking. Or foam^ as angry men are no better then raging waves
of the sea foaming out their own shame. Jude 13.
In Hebrew as there is one word (...) which signifies to boil, and to be
angry; so there is one word (...) which signifies to shake and to be angry. An
angry man is all in a flame, but it is within, and he burns no body but
himself: he sets his own house on fire about his ears to roast his eggs, or
to get a little revenge. M. Leigh in his Critica Sacra observes, that the Heron
being a hot and angry creature, has his name in Latin Ardea, from ardeo to
burn, and in Hebrew Anaphah, from anaph to be angry. For the names I know not,
but for the nature, I dare believe him; for I have known the keeping of those
Birds tame, and have often seen them when they have been angerd, to throw up
all the meat which they had eaten a little before. The Jews have a saying.
There is nothing comes into an angry man's hands, but anger* no passion so
unprofitable to a man, as this passion. there is nothing but anger: neither
pleasure nor gain: anger, and only anger, while it lasts and only anger for
his anger when it is over.

4 Being exposed to, and taken by their enemies; like a city that is broken
down and without walls. He that has no rule over his own spirit is like a city
that is broken down, and without walls. Prove. 25. 28. It Is worse with a man
when he is angry, then it is with a beast in this respect: for the proverb is,
Let him not anger a Bird that means to take it.

5 Judgment from God, certainly to be executed. Whosoever is angry with his
brother without a cause, judgment shall take hold of him Mat. 5. 22. For
perhaps (...) may be rendered better so, then if you render it, shall be in
danger of judgment: damnas judicii, according to Beza; rather then reus
judicio, according to the Vulgar; or obnoxious, according to Erasmus: for if
there were no more meant by (...), then being liable to, or in danger of it,
would not have been (...) in the future tense, but (...) in the present tense;
for he is as liable to be condemned before judgment come, as he is sure to be
condemned when it comes, without repentance. Let me exhort you therefore, as
Job did his friends, Be ye afraid of the sword, or take heed of being angry,
(...) for wrath brings the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there
is a judgment Job. 19. 29. (punishments) so it is to be rendered if the word
hanoth come from hanah: but if it come from havah, thus, wrath is the
iniquities of the sword. either way, it will be bad enough for angry men: for
if anger be a compound of sins, or a The Hebrew uses to express the greatness
of a thing by putting the word in the plural number.
very great sin; it will have a compound of punishments, or a very great
punishment. Beza in his annotations upon Mat. 5. 22. renders those words,
scelus gladii, that is, a capital crime, (at least, at Gods tribunal) or a
crime to be punished with the sword. Whatever you do therefore, be slow to
anger, and imitate God who is (...) (...).
Ex. 34. 6. Long ere he be angry in both his nostrils, or (as the Rabbis
observe, because it is in the duall number) in both his angers, viz. both in
his anger with the godly, and in his anger with the wicked: or if it be not
long ere you be angry, if your passion be like a hasty servant to run away
before he has all his master's ( viz. reason's) directions, be sure it be not
long that you are angry; Arist. Eth. l. 7. c. 6.
if you be naturally (...) easily provoked; let your nature yield to grace, and
be not (...) bitter, or (...) hard to be reconciled. For shame be not
out-stript by heathen men: for of some of them Plutarch. de Frat. Am.
( viz. the Pythagoreans) it is reported, that if they happened at any time to
be angry, at what time of the day soever it were, they were not so stiff in
their bow, They were not (...) as Aristotle's word is, Eth. l. 4. c. 5.
but (...) they were suppl'd or slackened before the Sun went down If they
were now living among us, we must needs blush to look upon them; because we
live no better after the Apostl's rule, viz. Let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath Ephesians. 4. 26. There is no keeping like the keeping of anger: in so much
that in Hebrew, in the Scriptures, the word, ( viz. Natar) which signifies to
keep, is used for keeping of anger, without any other word, Jer. 3. 5. Ps. 103.
9. Lev. 19, 18. If it be but for thine own sake (because perhaps thou do not
care for displeasing God) have as little anger as possibly thou can: for thou
can never live a merry life with it. * Buxtorf. Rab. Lex. in voe. (...)
The saying of the Jews is very true for the most part, There are three whose
life is no life, the overpittifull man, the angry man, and the sad man,
especially the angry man that will be a long time angry: for such are (...),
their own greatest tormenters. Aristotle, though he would not say of anger, as
he said of the rest of the passions, that it was (...) sorrow (for he speaks
little in discommendation of this passion in his Rhetoricks l. 2. c. 2.
, and somewhat in commendation of it in his Ethics lib. 7. c. 6.
,) yet he could not say but it was (...) with sorrow: and more then so, he
adds (...), that it is usually for a seeming slight, or neglect: now if the
cause may be a small matter, (but a slight) and that which is only seeming so;
and if small matters be many, and that which is seeming be subject to be
multiplied and increased; how can it otherwise be, but the angry man's sorrow
must needs be much, and his punishments, many?

Antichrist.
Then shall that wicked one be revealed, who^ the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Destroyed he will be, sure enough, and to the purpose; and
therefore he is called (...), the son of destruction, or perdition, verse. 3.
yet perhaps not so much because of a decree As Beza says of Judas upon Matt.
17. 12. exitio destinatus and devotus, though I think it be more then
perditus, as Erasmus translates it (making the Hebraisme to be only in the
Genitive case) for then it had been no more then (...), the man of perdition,
nor yet so much.
of his destruction, as if he were a child, to whom his father had allotted
destruction for his portion; for as to that (I think) though the word be Son,
the sense may as well be Father; because his destruction came at first from
himself, according to that of Peter 2. ep. 2, 1. (spoken of such as he is)
Shall bring upon themselves swift destruction. He may be so called for other
reasons, as

1. Because of the certainty of his destruction: as David said, The man that
has done this thing, shall be (...) a son of death, or (as we render it) shall
surely di^ 2 Samuel 12. 5. The end may be as certain, where there is no
intention, as where there is, upon supposition that such means are used: as I
may say, when I see a Father let his child alone to his own will; that such a
child is a son of destruction, because he is sure to be spoiled; though his
father should intend never so well to him. And no doubt, many places of
Scripture are meant only of the end, or the issue, which we take to be meant of
the intention.

2. Because of the greatness of his destruction: as if we might say (after the
Hebrew fashion) in the plural number, he shall come to destructions, or (...),
misere periturus est he shall be miserably destroyed Matthew. 21, 41. thus the
Hebrew uses the words Ben, son, and Sera, seed, with the Genitive case of
that thing, the greatness, or abundance whereof is intended to be expressed:
as Beni Belial, Sons of wickedness Children of transgressions, Isay 57. 4.
. 1 King. 21. 13. Ben Schemen, a Son of I say fatness and not oil (according
to the vulgar, filius olei) because otherwise the vineyard would have been an
olive yard.
fatness, or as we render it, a very fruitful field Isa 5. 1. and Sera
Shaked, a seed of falsehood. Isa 57. 4.

3. Because of the destructive things that are in him, and committed by him,
and the destructive For it may be understood in an active sense as well as in a
passive.
courses which he takes: which Saint Peter calls destructions (...) 2 Pet. 2.
2. Speaking of false teachers, whose destruction is begun already, and
slumbreth not; for they shall never leave destroying (...). 2. Pet. 2. 12 they
shall perish in their own corruption.
, and being destroyed, till they be destroyed for all eternity. What some
deliver concerning the place where Antichrist shall be destroyed, viz. on the
mount of Olives; I know no firm ground they have for it in Scripture; no more
then they have for assigning the time when Christ shall come to judgment, viz.
five and forty days after Antichrist's destruction.

Apostacy
threatened.
Now the spirit speaks expressly, that in the later times some shall depart
from the faith, 1 Timothy 4. 1. See Epist. 2. c. 3. and 2 Pet. 2. 1. Even while
our Savior was yet upon the Earth, many of his Disciples went back, and went
no more with him, Joh. 6. 66. Depart from the faith --, we translate, and not
from faith, because (as Beza also says) it is meant of the faith or belief of
the Gospel: and not of faith, or belief of election, and salvation. They that
have this faith cannot lose it (though sometimes it may be to^ seeking) because
they cannot be lost: and they cannot be lost, because by it they are tied fast
unto God, as by a chain that cannot be broken; and kept as safe as in a
garrison that cannot be taken; for such a kind of comparison Peter's word in
the greek seems to intimate, (...). 1 Pet. 1, 4.

Apostasy See also Christ denied, and Relapse.
punished.
Apostates, even whole nations may justly fear, 1. Gods heavy wrath. Ezra told
the King of Babylon, the hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek
him, that is, that seek him constantly, for it follows, but his power and his
wrath is against all them that forsake him, Ezra 8. 22. his power and his wrath
etc. If Gods wrath edge his power, and his power back his wrath; then woe to
that man, or nation with whom he is angry. See also Psalm 78. 57. 58. where
they are compared to a broken bow.

2 Unavoidable punishment, though their apostasy be never so secret. If we have
forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange God,
shall not God search this out? For he knows the secrets of the heart Ps. 44.
20, 21. And yet sometimes Gods anger against this sin is so great, that as if
punishment were too good for it, he resolves to throw away the rod, and not to
punish, which is the worst punishment of all; They have forsaken the Lord, they
have provoked the holy one of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward,
why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more, Isa. 1. 4. 5.

3 Being deprived of Gods ordinances, and public worship. God appeared to
Solomon in a vision by night, and told him, But if ye turn away and forsake my
statutes and commandments which I have set before you, and shall go and serve
other Gods, and worship the^ then will I pluck them up by the roots (them
instead of you; Mark how he Such changes are usual in threatening expressions.
changes the Pronoune, as if he were so angry at the very mention of this sin,
as to turn away from them) out of my land which I have given the^; and this
house which I have sanctified for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and
will make it to be a Proverb, and a byword to all nations, 2. Chron. 7. 19.
20. It was said to the Angel of Ephesus. Nevertheless I have somewhat against
thee, because thou have left thy first love. Remember therefore from whence
thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, or else I will come unto
thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou
repent. Rev. 2. 5.

4 God forsaking of them. ( which is but retaliation for their forsaking of
him) God said to Moses concerning the Israelites, When thou art dead, this
people will forsake me, and break the covenant which I have made with them:
Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day; and I will forsake
them, and I will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, etc. Deuteronomy.
31. 16, 17. The spirit of God in Azariah thus spoke to King Asa: The Lord is
with you, while ye be with him, and if ye seek him, he will be found of you;
but if you forsake him, he will forsake you, 2. Chron. 15. 2. See chap. 12. 5.

5 Conquest and Captivity. In the book of Judges, in most places where there
is mention made of any Conquest had over the Israelites, you shall find this
mentioned for a reason, viz. that the people forsook, or forgot the Lord their
God. See chap. 3. 7. and chap. 10. 6, 7. 9, 10. 11. etc. When Rehoboam had
establishd the kingdom, and had strengthened himself, he forsook the Law of
the Lord, and all Israel with him: and it came to pass that in the fifth year
of Rehoboam, Shishak King of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had
transgressed against the Lord. 2. Chr. 12. 1. 2. See verse. 5. So the spirit of
God in Zachariah told King Ioash, and his Princes, Because ye have forsaken the
Lord, he has also forsaken you, 2. Chron. 24. 20. and according to his word,
the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men, and the Lord
delivered a very great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the Lord
God of their Fathers: So they executed The Latin translation ignominiosa
exercuere judicia, executes disgraceful judgments for because of his
Apostasy, he was buried only with his fathers, as other ordinary men were, and
not in the sepulchers of the Kings, 2. King. 12. 21.
judgment against Israel, verse. 24.

6 Destruction. Thou have forsaken me says the Lord, thou art gone backward;
therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary
Laboravi rogans (the Latin translation) I am weary of entreating, as if they
were the Prophets words resolving to entreat no more for their peace, See v, 5.
with repenting. Jeremiah. 15. 6. It Is spoken to the Jews. so chap. 16. 11. the
Prophet is bid to answer the people, if they asked him the reason of Gods
judgments upon them, thus, Because your Fathers have forsaken me, says the
Lord and have walked after other Gods, and have served them, and have
worshipped them, and have forsaken me, and have not kept my law: Forsaken me is
repeated; as if it went very near Gods heart to be forsaken by a people whom
he had chosen: or as if going to other Gods, did not anger him so much as going
from him, or forsaking him. Under the old Testament, when God made the Law that
if any one enticed another to worship Idols he should be stoned to death, he
added this for a reason of the punishment, or at least for an aggravation of
the sin, viz: because he has sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God
which brought thee out of the land of Egypt from the house of bondage, Deuteronomy.
13. 10. See the words of Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 29. 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 13. 27.

Particular persons, as Kings and others, have been punished or threatened.

1 With being murdered. And he forsook the Lord God of his Fathers, and walked
not in the way of the Lord. And the servants of Amon conspired against him, and
slew the King in his own house, 2. King. 21, 22, 23. Speaking of Amon King of
Israel. After the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the Lord,
they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish: but
tbey sent to Lachisb after him, and slew him there 2 Chronicles: 25, 27.

2 Being left to ruin themselves in their own ways. The back slider in
heart shall be filled with his own ways Proverbs, 14, 14.

3 Impenitency, and incurablenes. It is impossible For these words especially
the Church of Rome (who was more mild toward those that fell, then other
churches) for a long time refused to admit the Epistle to the Hebrews into the
number of Canonical books: for it was their practice to receive into
Communion again after long repentance such as had fallen after baptism,
though they had committed Idolatry: which occasiond the schism of Novatus, and
Novatianus
for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
and were made pertakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted the good word of
God, and the powers of the world to come. ( who have gone so far, and received
so many good things) If they shall fall, to renew the^ unto repentance Hebr: 6,
4, 5, 6. If they shall fall etc. (...), not fall forward viz: remaining still
in the right way: but fall aside, into another way: fall off, or fall away viz:
by a total defection, and revolting By which name the sin of apostasy is
usually called. Esa: 31, 6. Jer: 5, 23. etc.
from the Faith. for otherwise, if it should be meant of only sinning again as
the Syriack translation renders, (unless it mean that great sin whereof we
speak called in Hebrew Maal, a Sin, and usually renderd by the Septuagint
(...) 2 Chr: 28, 19, c. 33, 19. and (...). ch: 29, 19.
* Apostasy) it were a very hard saying, and who could hear it?

4 Rejection. -- if thou continue in his goodness: otherwise thou shall be
cut God's (...).
of. Romans 11, 22.

5 Noe pardon (if they sin wilfully and against knowledge) For if we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice Gro^ius upon this place smells of Poland and Rome too: per
nullas victimas alias as bonam frugem revocabuntur, ut veniam consequi possint.
for sin. Heb: 10. 26. and so verse. 38 If any man draw (...) pull away the
shoulder: Zach: 7. ^1. Like a backsliding heifer in the yoke Hos: 4. 16.
back my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. David in his charge to his Son
Solomon told him, If thou seek him he will be found of thee; But, if thou
forsake him, he will cast thee of for ever: 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.

6 Destruction temporal, and eternal. Consider this, ye that forget God,
least I tea^ you in pieces and there be none to deliver Ps. 50 22. We are not
of them that draw back to perdition Heb: 10. 39. Those wandering stars (to
whom is reserved the blacknesse^ of darkness for ever Jude. 13.) are by the
gloss interpreted Apostates; and it (...) thought to be meant of the
Corpocratian^ who deny the Divinity of Christ. No^ only if a man do return
back* (...) signifies also the things that are behind, for thou^^ they be
good, we should with Paul forget them, and be still pressi^ and stretching
forward toward the goal: Phil: 3. 14.
but if h^ do but look back, it may be as much a^ his life is worth (as it
was with Lots wife Remember Lot's wife. Luke. 17. 32.) Noe man having put his
hand to the Plow, and looking back, if fit for the Kingdom of God Luke the 9.
62. How grevious a thing Apostatizing, or back sliding, is in the sight of God,
may be gathered by his angry expressions concerning it; especially such as we
find in the Prophets directed to the Jews calling them grievous revolters
(...) Chiefest of revolters or their Princes are revolters as Hos. 9. 15. if
the first (...) be for (...) else revolting revolters:
Jerem: 6, 28 and, Treacherous Judah, four times in one chapter, viz: chap: 3.
v. 7. 8. 10. 11. verse 20. He compares them to a wife that leaves her husband:
And therefore his anger against this sin being exceeding great is usually
called by the name of Jealousy (which is the greatest anger that can be, Prove.
6. 34. for Jealousy is the rage of a man therefore he will not spare in the day
of vengeance.
and the hardest to be appeased) as you may see in an hundred places Deuteronomy. 32.
16. etc. The very heathen their constancy to their Idols, will rise up in
judgment against them that forsake God, Has a Nation changed their Gods which
are no Gods? But my People have changed their glory The Called. Paraphrast, But
my people have forsaken my worship, for which I bring glory to them. It seems
in his time it was (...) their glory, but at first ( they say) it was (...) my
glory; the Jews having thus alterd it, lest the glory and majesty of God
should be vili^id, So Chebodam for Chebodo Ps. 106, 20.
for that which does does not profit. Jer. 2. 11.

I will punish all such as are clothed in strange apparel: Zeph. 1. 8. Se Isa
3. 18, to the end. Jonathan the Chaldee Paraphrast makes these words to have
been spoken of Idolatry: says he, (...) translated, qui perstrepunt ad cultum
Idolorum that make a noise at the worsbip of Idols. I believe he means
shouting and clapping of hands and such like expressions of exultation and joy,
in use, not only amongst the Gentiles, but among the Jews themselves, when
they went about Divineworship. Psalm 55. verse, 14, where we translate, we
walked into the house of God in Company; the Septuagint, (...), with consent;
the Vulgar, in terrore, infeare; the anonymous Paraphrast, in have; the word in
the Original is of the same root with the word which this Paraphrast here
uses: viz. (...), which signifies also noise and it is not unlikely that the
Prophet meant it of no other noise then (...), shouting and clapping of hands,
that which he so often speaks of ( make a joyful noise unto the Lord etc. Ps.
66. 1. Ps. 95, 1, 2. Ps. 98, 4, 6. Ps. 100, 1. Ps. 47, 15.) I believe we may
do well if we join the exposition of this Paraphrast (for such his Paraphrase
is many times, being nothing near so bare a translation as that of Onkelos)
with our translation, and thence gather a reproof both of Idolatry, and and
wearing strange apparel together: In regard it is not unlike that the Sea
Clothes.
Jews had learnt of the Gentiles to worship the Moon (whom they both called
the Queen of It is not unlikely, that by Malcheth ha* Shamaiim which signifies
Queen of Heaven: Jer: 7, 18. was meant the moon, who was called also Baaleth
and (...), which signifies, Lady. nor that by Molech which signifies King, and
Baal which signifies Lord, was meant the Sun. Macr. Sat l. 3. cap. 5.
Heaven;) the men in women's, and the Woman in Men's apparel: the reason
whereof was, because they took the Moon, whom they made the same with Venus,
to have been both a man and a woman (for she is as well one as the other,) and
you shall find in old Authors Lunus as well as Luna.

Ashamed of Christ and religion See Christ denyd' etc.

Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this
adulterous and sinful generation ( then we ought to be lest ashamed, when we
are apt to think we have most cause) of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed when he comes in the Glory of his Father with the Holy Angels. Mark 8,
38. Luke has almost the same words cap: 9, 26. This sin is in part very
often committed by many godly men in conversing with the men of the world. they
are asham^ to set them upon praying or hearing o^ reading; fearing or thinking
it absurd ((...) word that occasions many a sin, and hinders many a good
duty) to interrupt their filthy communication with godly discourse* They are as
much ashamed to talk o^ God and Christ, as they would be to go^ into company
that have gaudy clothes with a torn suit. But take heed of doin^ worse then he
who said, he knew not t^ man, by thus disowning Christ, as if he we^^ a
contemptible man, now he has made it appear that he is a powerful God. nay
th^^ can not sin less, to be ashamed of Christ notwithstanding his
greatness, and after (...) exaltation, then the Jews did to scor^ him for his
meannesse in the time of his ^^miliation. Thou never loved'st thy fre^^ truly,
if thou art ashamd to own him^^ any company whatsoever.

Beloved Sins
see Sins.

Blasphemers against God not pardoned Not pardoning is often us^d in Scripture,
where I believe the meaning is only not leaving unpunisht according to the use
of theword (...) for both senses*
in this world, but punished with
Death: for God made it a law that they should be stoned to death, upon
occasion of the blasphemy spoken by the son of the Israelitesse woman, Lev.
24. He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death
and all the congregation shall certainly stone him, verse. 16. He that
blasphemeth, etc. (...) he that does expressly name, say some; according to the
use of the word, Number. 1. 17. and Genesis 30. 28; and the translation of the
Septuagint (...), he that names the name of the Lord* the Chalde^ Paraphrast
goes further and says, (...) he that shall any way express* which yet me
thinks does not so well agree with what the Jews commonly speak of the Schem
Hamphorash (whereby they mean the name Jehovah) as if it were a thing
allowable, Pherosch, to imparle, or express the name Jehovah in other words,
but not, Neko^, to pierce it through and through (as I may say) or speak it down
right. As for them, perhaps they gather something (though I have not read so
much) for this distinction of Pherosch, and Nekob, from those words of this
chapter, verse. 12. where the word, Pherosch, is used for the text says they
put him in ward (...) which they may render (according to their Rabbinisme)
that it might be expounded to them according to the word of God, etc.
expounded, I say; for even the witnesses against such (...) Blasphemer, when
they testified what he said, were not to speak the name as he spoke it, but
only to explain it or expound it some other way. Now they explained it or
paraphrased it, Sometimes by his other names, as Adonai or Elohim (which are
names derived from his power and strength, and not from his very essence, and
therefore allowed to be used, and applied likewise to Angels and Men.) Pet,
Galatinus l. 2. c. 18. de arcanis catholicae veritatis.
Sometimes by a certain number of Letters, made into one or more names^ and
sometimes by several words, wherein the letters of the name were contained:
which were used only by some certain men of the wiser sort, and by them
privately conveyed by mouth to their own posterity. Such receipts of words and
letters, the modern Jews say their Fathers made use of as charms and spells
for the defense of themselves, and annoyance of their enemies. you may call
their practice, the (...) Septuagint. Lev. 24. 4.
naming over a man the name of Jehovah (or the schem Hamphorash) as it is said,
the Jewish exorcists named the name of the Lord Jesus over these that had evil
spirits, Act. 19. 13. With such a charm they say Moses slew the Egyptian Exodus
2. 11. (whose son they report this blasphemer above mentioned to have been) and
they ground their opinion up-these words in the 14 verse. (...) which we render
intendest thou: but the words signify speak thou to kill me as thou
killedst the Egyptian? and whereas it is said verse. 12. that Moses looked this
way, and that way, and when he saw there was no man he slew the Egyptian, they
say he feared, if there had been some body present, hearing what he said, he
might speak the same to him and kill him in the like manner. Now as I told you
before, how that sometimes they used a certain number of Letters; so they say
Moses at that time made use of two and forty; which they have no other ground
for, but because the letters of the word Lebaddo Alone (spoken of the name
Jehovah, Ps. 148. 13. his name alone is excellent) will stand for that number
in Arithmetic. In like manner, they say, that Elisha made use of two and forty
letters when he cursed the children, 2. King. 2. 24, because there were so many
children killed, a child for every letter* and more then so, they say that
generally in the Scriptures where it is said, that an Angel smote such or such,
it is not meant of the smiting of the hand or the like; but of smiting by the
virtue of the name Jehovah, or that Schem Hamphorasch. Some of the Jews say
that our Savior Christ did his miracles by using this name; which me thinks
might be retorted, as an argument against them, that he came from God. for
otherwise, though he might have used the name, yet he would not have been able
to do any thing with it; but rather on the contrary, those, in whom the evil
spirits were which he endeavored to cast out, would have fallen upon him, and
overcome him, and prevailed against him, as they did against those Conjurers,
Act. 19. 16. At least they must confess thus much, that if he had not Moses
or Elisha's spirit, yet he was a man of no ordinary spirit; because they say,
that only such men as were not of an ordinary spirit, had the privilege of
using this name, and doing miracles with it.

Now because they thought there was a virtue or power in the name Jehovah, so
used: as likewise out of a superstitious conceit common to them with other
nations, of the I have seen some in my own country use the names of Paul and
Peter at the turning of a five, for the finding of things that they have lost,
suppposing that they have been stolen.
virtue and power of other names also, (viz. of Prophets, Apostles, and
Martyrs, both true and false) when any one did any strange thing, they
imagined it was by the virtue, and power of some name; and hence perhaps was
it, that they asked Peter and John, The Jews since Christ's time (and the
Egyptians too) when they go to cast out Devils ando. they use the name of the
God of Abraham Isaac, and Jacob. Origin. lib. ad Celsum. And sometimes the name
Adonai* and the God of Tzabaoth
when they had cured the lame man, Act. 4. 7, By what power or by what name,
have ye done this? For although the Apostles when they did, or said, they did,
such a thing in the name of Christ, or God, had no conceit of any virtue, or
power in the name it self; and though I know that by doing a thing in the name
of Christ, is meant the doing of it either by the power, or in the steed, or in
the behalf, or upon the account of Christ, and for his sake; yet thus much me
thinks I fancy, that both the Jews for the most part did nse those words
superstitiously and that the Apostles many times alluded to this superstition
of theirs, when they used this expression.

He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord etc. or (say the Jews) he that
names the Tetragrammaton, i. e. the name, which in Hebrew consists of four
letters, viz. Jehovah. For this name of God they forbear to expres with as much
superstition as the Heathen did the names of the Tutelar Gods of their Cities
and Countries (for fear their enemies might by sacrifices and enchantments call
them out, and so conquer the place.) Whence it is that many times without
adding any thing else, unless it be, Ithbareck (blessed be it, or as we say,
blessed be his name) they express it by saying (...) the name, by way of
excllency, without adding any more: for so in this chapter, though in the
sixteenth verse where God speaks, (who might name his own name) the word
Jehovah be expressed; yet where Moses speaks, viz. verse 11. that which we
render, the Name of the Lord, in the Hebrew is only (...) the So likewise in
the translation of the Septuagint it is only (...), the name.
name. The Jews make the naming of this name to have been a worse sin, then
cursing: And so they might, if by the word, Nokeb, only naming, were meant; but
the contrary appears clearly, in that when Moses gave order to have this
blasphemer put to death, vid. v. 23 he called him not, hanakeb, which they
render, him that names; but, hamkallel, which they can render no otherwise
then, him that cursed; And therefore methinkes, for shame, though the word,
Nakab, should signify, blaspheme, or curse, no where else (for, Ekkob, in Job.
cap. 5. 3. they say comes from the radix, kabab,) yet however in this place,
they should have expounded that which is not plain, which they acknowledge by
their own different translations to have more senses then one, by the sense of
that which is plain, and which they cannot render otherwise then they do.
However, so it has been with them; insomuch that by their superstitious
tradition, or traditionary superstition touching this name, (according to their
practice in other things, and according to the complaint of our Savior Matt.
15. 6.) they came at length to make the Commandment of God of none effect; for
they held it that if a man cursed his father or mother, unless he named this
name, he was not to suffer Death, (as the Law prescribed, Levit. 20. 9.) but
only to be whipped. To say a little more yet, (now that I have gone thus far;
and because that I have said that already which necessarily requires, I should
say a little more) They called the name Jehovah, Shem hamphorash, from its
being separated apart from common use, as well as for being to be separated in
parts in any use: as if it came from paros to separate, or lay apart; as well
as from parosh to explain or lay abroad. Hence is it that they never speak of
it without some Epithete of reverence: such as Hannibdal the separated,
Hamiiuchad the proper, Hannickbod the glorious and the like. Nekob to pierce
this name through (as I might say) or to pronounce it down right, was permitted
to none but the high Priest; and that but once in a year, viz. at the feast of
expiation; when he pronounced the solemn Benediction, in every member whereof
the name Jehovah was plainly expressed; as you may see, Number: 6, 24, The Lord ( or
Jehovah) ble^e thee, and keep thee The Lord make his face to shine etc. The
Lord lift up his countenance.
25, 26. and therefore (they say) it is added, v: 27, they shall put my name
upon the childeren of Israel: my name, that is, my proper name, or that which
may not be applied to others besides my self (as the rest of my names are)
that which is my name for ever, and which denotes my everlasting Essence, Exodus:
2, 15. And as it was pronounced only by one man, and but once a year: so
likewise but in one place viz: in the Temple at Jerusalem: and therefore, ever
since the destruction of the Temple, and City, by Vespatian; the Jews have not
known the pronunciation of this Name. Simeon Justus, being the last that was
High Priest, was the last Jew that pronounced it. But to return to the Son of
the Israelite woman (for that is all the name he has here) Some think the
Spirit of God purposedly, because he had dishonored God so much by expressing
his name, refused to honor him so far as to Naming from Superiors, is a
sign of honor to inferiors: as not nameing, from inferiors, is a sign of
honor to superiors.
name, his. And you may observe how the Scripture in several places make it an
expression of Gods exceeding great anger against a man, to threaten to blott
out his name from under heaven Deuteronomy. 29. 20. etc. I have been so long in
relating the Jew's excess of revereverence to the name Jehovah, for these
reasons First that I might reproove the Christian's defect of reverence to the
names of God, the Lord, Jesus, Christ, and the Spirit, which we too often use,
either when we should not, or as we should not; either not thinking of them at
a^l, or not thinking of them as we should. The verb Nekob which the Jews
translate to name, Signifies also to pierce: and though I would not be guilty
either of their Kabalisme or Judaisme, yet this I believe, that those who
pollute, and profane those names, and make them contemptible, either by false,
and frequent swearing, or by irreverent and careless mentioning, Piercing,
both in Hebrew and Greek is applied to pain and vexation Job. 30. 17 1 Timothy 6.
10. especially to that which is: caused by blasphemous, and reproachful
Speehes. Prove. 12. 18. which are therefore by David called Arrows, Ps. 64, 3.
and the teeth of such as use them, Spears and Arrows; and their tongue a sharp
sword. Ps. 57. 4.
pierce the heart of Christ with such practices, as bad as the Soldier pierced
his side with the spear John. 19. 34. In Zachary chap. 12. 10. it is said They
shall look upon me, whom they have pierced. They have pierced) etc, John in
the chapter but now named speaks but of one Soldier that pierced him with a
spear; and therefore, (besides that it is translated, Me, and not Him,) it may
be applied to, and it is not improbable, that it was meant of piercing, by the
reproach and blasphemy of others, as well as by the spear of that Soldier.
Add hereunto that though some Greek translators read the original, Dakern,
and translate (...), pierced; which translation of it John uses, applying the
place to Christ, (as some Moses Hadarshan upon Genesis 18. but then it is the Son
of Joseph and not the Son of David which they mean, which are, their two
Messiahs. one of* them a mean man, and the other a King.
of the Jews do also to the Messiah) yet the Septuagint read it Rakedu, and
translated, (...), which is a word that comes from, (...), to leap, or to
dance: I may render it Insulted. There is nothing more piercing to any man,
then Insulting over him. Suidas paraphrases this word by (...) which signifies,
naso suspendere, to jeere and snuff at a man; and by (...), when a man has
seen Divine Mysteries and rites celebrated in secret, to go out and divulge
them, and make a sport of them. What can be more piercing and cutting, either
to God or to man, (especially if he be in power and authority) then to be
snuffed Mal: 1, 13.
at, and scorned? to God, to have his Isa 48, 11.
name polluted; and his Zeph: 3, 4.
Sanctuary, and his most holy Ezekiel: 22, 8.
things evulg'd and profaned: to man, to have his name (which he stands more
upon then his life) reproched; and those things which he would have kept with
secrecy, and respect, divulged with derision. The like difference of
translation is there Ps. 22, 16: For where we translate pierced (my hands and
my feet) Aquila translates (...) shamed, and might as well translate (...)
insulted over: for ( Charu from Charar to leap) is as like to have been the
original word, if ours be not, as any Aquila could have, of that signification.
That place, Psalm. 105. 18, where it is said of Joseph, that iron entered into
his soul, is interpreted of the grief which Joseph took at the reproach of
adultery cast upon him by Pharaohs wife, which doubtless pierced his very
soul. And so likewise those words of Simeon to Mary, Luke 2. 35. A sword shall
pierce through thy own soul also, are interpreted of the grief, she also
should take at the scorns, and reproaches which should be offered to her
Son; which should cut, and pierce her to the heart. And it may very well be
so, because of the very last words of the verse immediately going before, which
say of Christ that he should be For a sign which shall be spoken against. It
is as grievous to a man's spirit, to be made a sign, and a proverb Ezekiel. 14 8.
, and a wonder Ps* 71. 7. I am as a wonder unto many.
, for misery; as it is to suffer the misery it self. For a man to come from
far, to his own pain and cost, to reveal a most certain and necessary truth,
merely out of love, and yet to be, not only (...) Luke 10* 16.
made to come to no purpose; but contradicted, almost by every body, (as our
Savior was) what can be more grievous? The Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, endeavoring to stir them up to patience by Christ's example, bids them
Consider him who endured such contradictions of sinners, c. 12. 3. such
contradictions. there is as much grievousnesse in evil speches as in any
thing; nay more, to the mind of a man, then in evil actions: though I do not
say, that by contradictions, there is no more meant then evil speeches. I am
confident that the Jews their mocking at our Savior, and crying to him, Hail
King of the Jews, when they crowned him with thorns, pierced a great deal
deeper into his heart, then the thorns did into bis head. How many complaints
has David in the Psalms, (whom we take to speak very often in the person of
Christ) of scoffing, and reproachful speeches! And how many such speeches, and
actions, have we related by the Evangelists of the Jews against our Savior
Christ! Blaspheming, and vilifying, and reviling of him, was that which the
Jews were more guilty of then any thing else. See the complaint of David Ps.
123, 3, 4. and the Prophecy of Isaiah, c. 53. 3. It was the sin which they
oftnest committed, and that which they never left committing, till they had
killed him out of the way. Contempt of Christ for the meanness of his condition
(that whereby chiefly he became a scandal to them, and for which they rejected
him) was indeed The sin of the Jews, and that which occasioned all the rest.
The second end which I had in thus lengthning my discourse of the Jews
religion toward the name of God, was (as Paul said, he would do to them by
the conversion of the Gentiles, Romans 11. 14.) that I might (...) provoke the
Gentiles to a due reverence to it, even for indignation) by their superstitious
reverence The third and last end was to make us take heed that their
superstitious reverence to the very name of God do not rise up in judgment
against us for our contempt of God himself. I will now proceed (according to
my main intention, when I began this chapter, and according to my sole design
when I began this work) to produce the punishments and threats which I find
in the Scriptures concerning the sin of blasphemy. Sennacherib King of Assyria
sent letters full of blasphemy to Hezekiah King of Judah. 2 Chr. 32. 17.
Hezekiah praying against him, to make God the more angry with him, (...) It Is a
wonder, if the Jews have not somewhat to say upon this: as if he meant in this
manner only Pharosch to explain by spreading the letters, and not to express
the name Jehovah, as Sennacherib in those letters had expressed and blasphemed
it. Which he did (say the Jews) by virtue of that name which Sennacherib had
blasphemed, R. Bechai Sect. 1.
spread the letters before him, Isa. 37. 14. an answer was presently returned,
that God had taken notice of his blasphemy to punish it: which accordingly came
to pass; for an Angel came that very night, and slew of his army a hundred
fourscore and five thousand, 2 Kings, 19. 35, and he himself afterward was
miserably murdered in the Temple of Nisroch (who^ he had Idolatrously worshiped
instead of the true God, whom he had blasphemed) by his own sons, Isa. 37. 38.
a fit recompense; that the sons should murder their father that begat them,
seeing the father had blasphemed* the God that made him. Benhadad the King of
Syria, though he had such an exceeding great army, yet because he blasphemed
the Lord in saying that he was God of the Hills and not of the Valleys (wherein
he was best able to fight, his strength consisting chiefly in Horse) was
overthrown by Ahab's little army (which being parted in two, was but like two
little flocks of Kids 1. King. 20. 27.
) and an hundred thousand of his men slain; besides seven and twenty thousand
more, afterward killed by the fall of a wall, 1 Kings 20. 28, 29, 30. At your
leisure you may see diverse other examples of God's judgment upon blasphemy, in
the Apocryphal books, as 1. Nicanor, who being slain in battle by Judas, had
his blasphemous tongue cut in pieces, and given to the fowls, 2 Mac. 15 5. 33.
2. Olophernes, beheaded by Judith, (a woman, and a Jew) as he lay in his bed,
Jud. 6, 3. and cap. 13. 8. 3. Antiochus, dying of a most Loathsome disease, 2
Mac. 9. 9. 38. 4. Some that were burnt alive at the taking of the city Gazara,
2. Mac. 10. 34, 35. 5. Others that were miserably slaughtered at the taking of
Caspis. c. 12. 14. They that commit this sin must not look to escape
unpunished; if they who do but give occasion to others to commit it, may not;
as it is certain they may not; for the Prophet Nathan thus threatened David*
Because by this deed, (speaking of his adultery with Bathsheba) Thou have given
occasion Chald. par. Thou have opened the mouth of the enemies, the Sept. Thou
have provoked the Lord in the enemies. it is a sin as frequently committed, as
it is seldom thought of: I mean this provoking God in others; when by
scandalous living we occasion their contempt of God and his truth.
to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is borne unto
thee shall surely dye, 2. Sam. 12. 14. It is thought that Hezekiah forbad the
people to answer Rabshakeh, when he was speaking blasphemy, 2 Kings 18. 36*
for fear they might occasion him to speak the more. though others say he did
it upon the same ground that we would forbid ignorant men to dispute with such
as maintain Erroneous opinions. viz. for fear of betraying and disgracing the
truth, as if it could not be better defended: which will come almost to the
same with the former; for disgracing Gods truth, is disgracing God, and
disgracing Isa. 65. 7. that which we render blasphemed me, in the original is
disgraced me or reproached m^ (...)
God, is blaspheming him.

The Jews when they heard any one blaspheme etc. See the APPENDIX.

Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost never pardoned.
But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness
(or shall Or is never to be forgiven, as the participle (...), he that
perishes, for, he that is to perish. so in the gospells and epistles; and so
other participles of the present tense in profane writers ane used for
participles of the future tense; as we say in English, such a one does such a
thin, or such a one suffers such a thing, for such a one is to do, or to
suffer.
never have forgiveness, (...) for (...) usual in the Evangelists) but is in
danger of eternal damnation, Mark. 3, 29. is in danger of eternal damnation,
(...): so we: but the vulgar translation (abused by the Adorers thereof, the
Papists, for the maintenance of their venial sins and Purgatory) renders, is
guilty of an eternal sin. And indeed (I speak it without any good will to the
Popish opinion) methinkes, it were better to read as the ancient greek copies
read viz: (...), sin, rather then (...) damnation. for first, (...), is no
where else (that I remember) applied to (...); only once it is applied to
(...), and that in the Epistle to the Hebrews, which is questioned, whether it
were originally written in Greek or no. Neither (if we consider it) is the
English more proper: viz: Eternal damnation: then, Eternal sin; though at
the first view, it seem so: noe more then if we said, eternal Condemnation,
or sentence. Secondly, In other places where we render the word, (...), in
danger, (...) is put in the Dative case, and not in the Genitive, as Mat: 5.
21. and (...) in the Accusative case with the praeposition (...) verse 22. If
we will render (...) in danger, why may not (...), sin, be taken for the
punishment of sin, in imitation of the Hebrew? Genesis 4. 13. etc. lastly it
seems proper enough in any Language, to affirm that Sin to be eternal, the
guilt whereof shall never be taken away. The Language of the Scripture
concernnig sin (as a thing that abides, till it be taken away) accords very
well with this expression, not only in the Greek in the New Testament; as when
it says Your sin remains John 9, 41. He that delivered me unto thee has the
greater sin John 19, 11. Ye shall die in your sins chapter 8, 21, speaking
conerning Sin not pardoned: and so when it says Takes away the sins of the
world John 1, 29* Your sins may be blotted out Acts 3, 19. To putt away sin
Heb. 9, 26; speaking of the pardon of sin: But also, in the Hebrew, in the
Old Testament; as when it says Sin lies at the door Gen: 4. 7. died in if we
render it in, as we do, and not for, whcih perhaps is better; and the Hebrew
preposition is used for both.
his own sin Number: 27, 3. My sin is sealed up in a bag Job 14, 17.
Usually spoken of him that was to suffer death for his sin, and therefore
Christ is said to bear the sins of many Isa: 53* 12. because he suffered death
for them.
shall bear his sin Number. 9, 13. speaking concering sin not left unpunished;
and so on the other side, when it says, Whose sin is covered Ps. 32. 1.
Removed our transgressions Ps. 103, 12. Blotteth out thy trangressions Isa 43,
25. Speaking of the pardon of sin.

Sin is not a thing that is only so long as it is in acting; like the actions
of natural creatures, or like the indifferent actions of rational creatures.
good and bad actions even toward men (as courtesies and injuries) will be such
an hundred years hence, if you let them alone. So will good and bad actions
toward God, be good and bad actions for ever: for both he that turns not
away from his righteousness, and he that turns not away from his
wickedness, their righteousness and their wickedness endures for ever.
There is a Book of remembrance for them that fear God Mal. 3. 16: and they
that fear him not, their Iniquity is marked before him Jer: 2, 22. They shall
in no way lose their reward, for they shall have it for certain, and enjoy it
for ever. Sin is a debt (though it is not to be understood as when we say, pay
your debts; for then sin should be a duty, for which the word debt is many
times used, as that to which we are engaged, not* which we have incurred) and a
debt both is as much, and is as much a debt for ever after, till the due be
paid or the debt forgiven, as it was at the first minute of default of payment.

Sin is visible for ever, if it be not covered; legible for ever, if it be
not blotted out; and durable for ever, if it be not taken away. I have been the
longer in this point because I hear so often those expressions of wicked men
when they are told of such and such sins which they have committed, O, That
is past and gone now! That was in my younger years, and the like; not
considering that God's book still is, and their bones also may be (to use
Job's expression, ch: 20, 11.) Full of the sins of their youth, before they
die. In vain does the Adulterous woman wipe her mouth; and the murderer wash
his hands; and the Drunkard sweep away his vomit; looking the world in the face
with boldness, as if they had done nothing; and presuming of impunity, because
sentence is not presently Eccles. 8. 11.
executed. They shall one day find, that Sin has too wide a mouth, to be
stopped with the narrow hand of a man: and that it is of too deep a die, to be
gotten out only with wiping and washing. Yea they shall find, that not only the
sin of the Blasphemer is; but even the lest of theirs, let it seem never so
venial, without true repentance will (...) eternal sin, (...)

Blesings turned into curses.
If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart to give glory to my
name, says the Lord of hoasts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will
curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it
to heart, Mal. 2. 2. these words are spoken to the Piests; and so perhaps the
meaning may be rather of actions then things (though in that sense also, it
will serve for my purpose) viz. that the Priests for not giving glory to God's
name (perhaps it is meant by Confession of sins, which is usually expressed
by giving glory to God, Josh. 7, 19. 1 Samuel 6, 5.) should lose that privilege
of Benediction which good Priests and Prophets were wont to have, viz: that
those whom they blessed should be blessed, and those whom they cursed should be
cursed As Balak told Balaam Number. 22, 6.

The prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Prove. 1, 32, of fools, etc. it
is an ordinary thing with fools (i. e. wicked men) to have that which David
either prays for, or prophecies of, fulfilled upon the^: Let their table
become a snare before them, and that which should have been for their welfare,
let it become a trap, Ps. 69, 22. eve^ spiritual blessings In that place of the
Psalm last quoted, The Chaldee parap. renders Schelomim Sacrifices. Christ him
self to the Jew became a snare, Isa. 8, 14.
shall become thus unto them; for to such has Paul applied those words in the
epist. to the Romans c. 11. v. 9. as appears by the words before and after that
verse. Indeed Grotius, who perhaps sometimes makes too much use of that
excellent vain which he had of finding out the literal sense (as in exponding
that place of Isaiah, A Virgin shall conceive etc. of Hezekiah's wife, who was
once a virgin: for which Rivet In hi^ examen Animadversionu^ Hugonis Grotii;
and in his Grotianae discussionis Dialysis.
has sufficiently taxed him: and likewise in expounding many other places)
says, that David speaking of those familiar friends (of whom he complained
before, Ps. 41. 9.) who being entertained at his table, like true parasites,
and psycophants, made his freedom of entertainment a snare to entrap him, and
carry tales to Saul; does in those words wish the like usage to them again,
viz. that their table also might become a snare and a trap to them, as his was
to him; and this by way of punishment, or (...), for a just It seems to be as
much as (...).
reward to them for their ill rewarding him. but under correction, he
interprets neither David's, nor Paul's words; nor does he set them down; for
he leaves out the conjunction (...), and, and reads (...), Let their table etc.
be made a stumbling block, for a recompense: and so it is easy enough for any
one to interpret. for it is not indifferent whether, And, be there or not;
seeing the removal thereof, both changes the use of the preposition (...) for,
(as if it were (...), that they may be rewarded) and* also the relation of the
word recompense; (...) is the word in the Septuagint
which, whereas before it was related to table only, now is related to the
whole prayer. But Beza, methinks, expounds this (...) or recompense, otherwise
For interpreting, Table, of the Law; and saying that David in those words
prophesied, rather then prayed (as he does no doubt many times in such
expressions, where the word Let is used) that As Beza upon Romans 11, 9.
the birds are allured unto death by that in which they seek their life; so the
Jews, seeking life in the Law, and rejecting the Gospel, should by that means
be ensnared and destroyed; he may seem to have made (...) to signify as much
as a bait laid before a snare; or as a baited snare laid in the way (...) which
suits well with stumblingblock.
before a creature to take it. But to give you in a few words my own conceit,
by way of comparison. That piece of flesh wherewith the Faulconer couzens his
hawk, and takes him off from the bird, that he may Lest they should hear etc.
Mat. 13, 15.
not eat it, me thinks, may well be said to be (...) to such a hawke. So may
any thing which we put before a man's eyes, to keep him from seeing another
thing which we would not have him were blinded Rom: 11, 7.
see. If a man should give his child, or his servant his choice, either to take
such a certain portion, or so much wages in hand; or else to trust to his
courtesy; with an intention hereafter to give him a great deal more then such
a portion or wages comes to, if he refuse it, but to give him no more if he
take it. If a friend, or a servant having done such a courtesy, or such a
service, and being given to his belly, accept of a dainty dinner (given perhaps
of purpose to gull him) for satisfaction. If a child take a glittering piece of
brass, to part with a piece of silver; Either of these things, which I have
named, may be said to be (...) for a recompense, or reward to the party that
takes it. And indeed it is a very great punishment, for a man to have any thing
from Gods hands now, as a reward: as it is the greatest punishment of all, to
have his reward, or his portion, in this life: for so the wicked have, Ps. 17,
14. Who have their portion in this life; Whose belly thou fillest with thy hid
treasure. The wicked, filled with the things of this world, are like one that
has filled his bellyupon courser meat (set before him first, it may be, for
that purpose) so that he has no stomach (either of strength or desire) to eat
of finer. Seeing they are for this worlds goods, they shall have their belly
full, but it is their reward, and they must look for noe Habeant sibi
more. God seems to have spoken to the Israelites (when they murmurd for want
of flesh) after this manner. Seeing you are so much for flesh, and loath my
Manna, you shall have enough of it, even till it come out of your nostrills:
But you shall have it for a reward; you shall have it instead of Canaan, and
die as soon as you have eaten it. Number. 11, 20.

This having a man's reward now, our Savior used as a scar-crow, to affright
men from showing liberality to the rich: and he used also the same word that is
here used by the Apostle viz: (...), which we translate recompense. (...) least
they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee Luk: 14, 12. he says
(...) without (...), and without relation (as I conceive) of the word (...) (
made) to what was spoken before: whereby the evil of having a man's reward now,
is more fully expressed; as if he would have Mat. 6, 2. they have their reward;
or, all that they are lik to have.
a man by all means take heed of having, or desiring, or being content with a
reward in this present world. But to give you all that I have to say of those
words of the Psalmist; I observe that not only the noune (...) (for so it is
likely that the Septuagint red it) signifying recompense, is more especially
meant of the recompense of bad works, as in Isaiah chapter 34. 8. and else where;
but also the verb (...) signifying to reward, is diverse times so used as if it
were properly appliable only to rewarding by punishment, as Prove. 11. 31. Psalm.
31, 23, etc.

Blindness see Ignorance.

Boasters of Holiness.
Boasters of holiness have cause to fear, 1 God's not justifying them because
of their justifying themselves (for both can never be.) The Pharisee said; God
I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
or even as this Publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that
I possess, Luke 18. 11. 12. But our Savior says of the Publican (who would
not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying,
God be merciful to me a sinner) I tell you this man went down to his house
Grotius would have it approvd ( because he did not like justified in our sense)
but pray what is Gods approving, other then counting us for probos, good, and
not reprobous? ( for there is none that is so himself, and a man may take what
money he pleases) which is that which we mean by justifying,
justified rather then the other, verse. 13. (...), Rather (according to Beza's
potius) not More, either magis, (as Austin translates) or plus (as Hierom) or
prae (as Erasmus) to show that the Pharisee was not justified at all, but
rather condemned: which may be gathered also by the words immediately following.
For every one that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that abaseth
himself shall be exalted, v. 14. The connection of these words with the former
is such (as appears by the conjunction, For,) that as it is here said of
exalting and abasing, so I may boldly say of justifying, and condemning; For
every one that justifies himself shall be condemned, and he that condemns
Se 1 Cor. 11. 3^.
himself shall be justified. Theophylact puts the question, why the Pharisee
should be thus condemned for speaking but a few words in justification of
himself, and there should be no notice any where taken of Job for speaking so
many. But the answer may be this. First, a sin of the old Testament is not the
less for not mentioning in the New. 2. The Pharisee spoke to God, and without
any provocation: whereas Job spoke the most of what he spoke to men, to clear
himself of their false accusations. 3. It appears that Job condemned himself
afterward for his justifying himself; and that God hereupon accepted him Chap.
40. 4, 5. and c. 42. 3. 9.

2. God's being exceedingly displeased with them: for thus he speaks of the
Jews, ( who despised the Gentiles for their barrenness, as Hagar did Sara,
Genesis 16. 4. notwithstanding the prophecy, that the children of the desolate
should be more then the children of ehe married wife, Isa, 54. 1. which perhaps
for that reason was the sooner fulfilled) which say, stand by thy self, come
not near me for I am holier then thou; these are a smoke in my nose, ab fire
that burns all the day Behold, it is written before me; Chalde Par. Their
vengeance shall be in Geenna, which was a place without the city of Jerusalem,
where the fire never went out, but was kept continually burning to consume the
filth of the city.
I will not keep silence, but will recompense Or (if you will) I have
recompensed and will recompense. The Hebrew is Shillamti Veshillamti.
and recompense into their bosom, Isa. 65. 5, 6.

Bribery.
Bribery is threatened See Injustice and Oppression.
,

1. With punishment unavoidable. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions,
and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof ( speaking of
Judah) because they sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of
shoes, Amos 2, 6. I take it to be as much, as if he had said, There be many
other sins which I mean to punish the Jews for, but I will especially make
them smart for this. viz because their judges have condemned him that had right
on his side, and him that had poverty to plead for him; only for love of a
little gain.

2. A Curse. Cursed be he that takes reward to slay an innocent person. Deuteronomy.
27, 25.

3. If not the destruction of them and their family, at lest, the consumption
of that wealth which they have gotten by See Riches wrong fully gotten
Bribery. Fire shall consume the tabernacles of Bribes and injustice shall be
blotted out Ecclus 40. 12.
bribery, Job. 15. 34. Tabernacles of bribery, or of a bribe*, So the Chaldee
Paraphrase: understanding thereby tabernacles, or houses and estates purchased
with money taken for bribes; which is a more plain setting forth of the
punishment of this sin (being this way most severely, and most usually
punished) then if we translated (after the 70) (...), the tabernacles of those
that receive bribes. for then they might be punished notwithstanding for some
other sin: and God's anger against a sin is never more visible, then when he
punishes the offender in that member, or in that creature, (by taking it away,
or making it hurtful, or troublesome or useless) with which he committed it.

4. The desolation of that country where it is practiced. The heads thereof
judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the Lord and say, is not the
Lord among us? none evil can come upon us Therefore shall Zion for your sakes
be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, etc. Mic. 3. 12. See
also Ezekiel. 22. 12. 13, 14, 15. It were good therefore, to prevent this sin,
that those laws were observed which ordain that none shall be a judge, or in
place of power and authority, but such as have a competent estate; or at least
that none who are in places of power and authority might be without a competent
estate. Those words in the Proverbs, The King by judgment stablisheth the
land, but he that receives gifts overthrows it, Prove. 29. 4. the Talmudists
(says Buxtorf) interpret thus, When the judge is a King and needs nothing,
then he establishes a land; but when he is as a Priest For that which in the
translation is, he that receives gifts in the original is Isch Therumoth a
man of offerings i. e. apriest, to whom they paid such offerings or first
fruits. Terumoth is properly the first fruits of the dough, and the threshing
flore. Number. 15. 20.
and beggs at every man's barn, he destroys it. The Rabbis say that those six
Lions placed upon each side of the six steps that went up to Solomon's judgment
seat, 1 King. 10, 9. had every one of them in one of their paws, a precept, and
the other he held open as it were ready to tear: to show that if he that sat
in that seat neglected his duty, the hand of God was ready to punish him and
tear him in pieces. Now one of those six precepts was (...) Thou shall not
receive a gift; which they say the crier was to proclaim as the Judge was
going up, when he came to the second step: and so the rest, when he came to the
rest.

The very taking of a gift (though it be not a reward, and though thou do not
promise or resolve to give him the cause, who gave thee the gift) is as likely
to hurt thee afterward by punishment from God, as it is hurtful to thee at the
present by punishing thee it self; I mean with blindness of judgment; which
it will do, though thou had never so good a sight. Thou shall take no gift,
for a gift blinds the wise (or the seeing (...) Those that are open, either
for hearing, or seeing: quick or cleeresighted.
) and perverteth the words of the righteous, Exo. 23. 8.

The Thebans Plut. de Isid.
painted Justice without hands or eyes: 1 To show that a Judge should accept
neither gifts nor persons. 2. To show how hardly justice can consist with
receiving gifts. 3. To show the danger of taking gifts; for if she had been
painted with hands, though they had painted her with an hundred eyes, she would
have put them all out with her hands.

Carnal men punished.
1 With not pleasing God. They that are in the flesh cannot please God Rom: 8,
8.

2 Corruption, and death. He that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption Gal: 6, 8. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye Rom: 8, 13. See
verse 6.

Ceremonies and commandments of men:
He that observes them more then the Commandments of God, that man's religion
is vain. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
command'ments of men. For laying aside the Commandments of God, ye hold the
tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups: and many other such like
things ye do Mark 7, 7, 8.

Christ
Such as reject Christ.
When the Lord of the Vineyard comes, what will he do unto those husbandmen?
our Savior asked this question of the Priests and Elders concerning those
husbandmen in his Parable that killed the Heir when he was sent to receive the
fruit Mat: 21, 40. And they answered him v. 41. He will miserably destroy those
wicked men and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen.

Those mine enemies which would not I should reign over them, bring hither and
slay the^ before me: our Savior thus spoke of the people (in the Parable) who
rejected the noble man that came to reign over the^ Luk: 19, 14, 27.

Such as forsake Christ punished See ashamed, apostasy, and relaps.
.
1 With excommunication in the highest degree. If any one love not the Lord
Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha 1 Cor. 16, 22. It is spoken (I
suppose) of such who once loved Christ, but now had left their first Rev. 2, 4.
love: for what had Paul to do to judge those who were without c. 5, 12? and
some conceive it meant of such, who had not only left the love of Christ
themselves, but would teach men so. Buxtorf makes those words Love not, a
Hebraism for, hate bitterly, for so the Hebrew by a negative added to a thing,
uses to express the extremity of the contrary.
It seems to be as much as if he had said, Let him be accursed to the utmost,
till the Lord himself come Let him be so (...) or excommunicated, as to have no
more to do with him.
, For we have done with him. For other things, so long as a man kept the faith,
the Church did but deliver him to Satan, 1 Cor. 5 5. 1 Timothy 5. 20.
c or exclude him from the public enjoyment of God's ordinances, trying and
hoping by humiliation and prayer to restore him: and they ought to do no other;
neither ought they to count him These. 3. 35.
an enemy. But if once he denied the Faith, they even delivered him to Maran;
not to Satan but to the Lord (for so the word Maran signifies) and were at
liberty to pray, or not to pray for him, 1 John 5. 16.
as one whom they had discharged their hands of; giving him over for desperate.
The practice of the Christians toward him who apostatized from the Gospel Was
like to the practice of the Jews toward him who apostatized from the Law (if
the Jews were not more severe) for whereas, if a heathen man desired to be
sacrificed for, they would do it; if he were an apostate, (which is the reason
why they hate a Samaritane worse then a Gentile) they esteemed them selves not
only not bound to do it, but bound not to do it. The Christians excluded such a
one from their society, not only in the Church, but in any other This (...) or
separation ( for so they called excommunication, both the greater and the
less) was like the separation of an unclean person under the law, who might
not be touched.
place; refusing not only in public meetings to pray for him, (which they
used to do for him who was excommunicated for lesser sins) but when they met
him in private, to salute him, or to bid him Joh. 2. ep: 10.
God speed. Much more might have been spoken upon occasion of these words
Anathema Maranatha; but perhaps I have diverted too long already* see a little
in the chapter of Covetousnes.

2 Not bearing of fruit. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, I mean
I insert this as Bezadoth, id est. to show that the words following are only
declaratory of those before: that so you may not think, that, if you abide in
Christ, you can bear fruit of your selves.
except it abide in the vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me John 15, 4.
Without me ye can do nothing John 15, 5.

3 Withering away, and being fit for nothing but the fire. If a man abide not
in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withred, and men gather them and
cast them into the fire and they are burned John 15, 6.

Those that deny Christ are threatened
With being denied by him again. Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will
I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven Matt. 10, 33. I will deny him,
not only when I come in Judgment, but now; while I am before my Father and
while I am an Advocate with him. when he prays, I will not own him, nor
mediate for him; but leave him to my Father, and let my Father alone to do
what he will with him. See 2 Timothy: 2, 12 Peter aggravates this sin shall I
call it (methinks the name is too little) or rather abominable and capital
crime (as having that in it, then which nothing aggravates any fault more viz:
Ingratitude) by calling it denying the Lord that bought them 2 Pet: 2, 1. for
what a base detestable act should we our selves account it for one whom we have
any way freed out of captivity or prison, (though he were to continue in it
but a few years) and taken into our service; to run a way from us. But
especially if we bought him; if we were at cost to free him: at great cost: at
the cost of a great deal of gold or silver only* But Christ has redeemed us
from an everlasting captivity and was at an unspeakable greater cost. For we
were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and Gold, but with the
precious blood of Christ, says the same Apostle 1 Ep: c. 1, 18, which words he
uses as an argument to persuade Christians to be holy, as he that has called
them, having also dearly bought them, is holy; verse 15. And therefore in the
place first cited, as he aggravated the sin; so he aggravated the punishment,
in these words: and shall bring upon them selves swift destruction. They are in
a worse condition then those that never knew Christ: For, it had been better
for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have
known it to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them 2 Pet: 2, 21.

Those who are Christ's enemies are thus threatened
He that sits in the heavens shall laugh The Lord shall have them in
derision Ps. 2, 4. Oh fearful threat! how sad is the conditon of those men at
whose calamity God rejoices! or at whose wickedness he laughes! suffering
them to run on in their sins because he sees that their day of punishment is
coming Ps. 37, 13. Give me any anger, rather then a laughing anger, whether of
God, or man. See the threats Ps. 59, 8. Prove: 1, 26.

Those to whom Christ is a scandal.
Whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken Mat. 21 44. In Luke you
have the same words cap. 20. 18. The like threat you have in Isaiah cap. 8. 15.
Many among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be
taken.

Blessed is he (says Christ himself) whosoever shall not be offended in me
Mat. 11, 6. If a man shall be blessed, only for not being offended at, or not
disliking, him whom he is bound to like; and whom it is for his own good to
like; and whom he has no cause to dislike: how can his condition be better
then cursed, who notwithstanding all this, is offended at him and disallow's
him, and rejects him, as unsit to build upon?

Those who have no Union or Commumunion with Christ.
Verily verily I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you Joh: 5, 3. Ye have, (according to
Beza's translation,) and not ye shall have, (according to Erasmus, and the
Vulgar) because (says Beza) otherwise, it may be thought that Christ did not
give life to us, but only keep it for us. I apply not this to those who do not
imitate Christ (especially in his passion) as Grotius does, for as upon most
other places he endeavored to be as little mystical, and spiritual, as he
could be: so I think upon this, he was more Socinian then he should be See
Rive^ Apolog: and Dial: where he is sufficiently proved to have been of that
Sect.
for thus he speaks: Hoc ergo est edere and bibere, Christi uti exemplo
Christi perfestisimum est exemplum tum virtutum aliarum, tum praecipue
dilectionis, quam imitari Compendium est praeceptorum. Nam sicut cibus and
potus in corpus admissi, hominem nutri^nt; ita bona exempla in animum admissa
eum mirabiliter confirmant. But whereas he says Christ was a most perfect
example of love; and makes imitation of him to be the highest thing intended in
the Gospel (for doubtless eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blood was
expressed as the highest and most principle of christianity) let me ask,
wherein this love which he ackowledges did appear? I believe I shall not be
answered by those of his mind, in his dying a Sacrifice for us: for then,
certainly example and imitation cannot be the thing he came for. And yet that
in this chiefly both his love and the love of the Father did consist, appears
by the words of John: Herein is love not that we loved him, but that he loved
us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. 1 Ep: 4, 10. To
conclude, If eating Christ's flesh, and drinking Christ's blood, be imitating his
example; how did our Fathers imitate him who were before him; and yet did all
eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink (for
they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was
Christ?) 1 Cor: 10, 3, 4.

Church not heard.
If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a
publican, Says our Savior to his Disciples concerning one Christian offending
another Mat: 18. 17.

Clothes of men and Women promiscuously worn.
The woman shall not wear that which pertains to a man, neither shall a man
put on a woman's garment; for all that do so are an abomination to the Lord thy
God. Deuteronomy. 22, 5. Some do make this prohition to belong to the second
Commandment, and for these two reasons: First because the word which we
translate abomination, is usually spoken of Idolatry: but this is no reason,
for it is as usually spoken of other things, both in the Proverbes, and
elsewhere. Secondly, Because Maimonides says, it was the custom of Idolatrous
Jews, if they were men, to stand with the ^mbrodered garments As th^^e was a
chang of apparel, so it is not unlike, there was (...), a change of the
natural use of the Sex spoken of Wised. 14. 26. Romans 1, 16.
of women Why the woman should worship, or wear men's clothes in the worship of
Mars, I know not: but the men might wear the women's clothes in the worship of
Venus, because she was esteemed both a man and a woman, Macrob. sat. l. 3. c.
8. for, for such a one she was worshipped in Cyprus: and perhaps the people of
that Isle, and the Phenicians, and the Israelites had this Idolatry from the
Moabites, whose god was called Peor. (Number. 25, 3.) from thence in the feminine
gender Aphorith, and from ^hence (if you will) (...) Venus.
before the star Venus; and if they were women, with men's armor before Mars
(another of the Planets) in imitation of the Heathen. That there was such a
custom, is very likely: and there seems to be somewhat spoken in ^avour of
this report, in Deuteronomy, chapter 17. because in the second verse, both sexes
are mentioned. If there be found, etc. man, or woman, etc. and in the verse
immediately following, there is mention made of worshipping the Sun, or Moon,
or any of the host of heaven: as if it had been said, or any of the Planets:
such as Mars and Venus, and the rest. but however, if they make the prohibition
to relate to this custom, only because they think the word (...) translated
here that which pertains to a man, to signify nothing but armor; I shall
not take this for a reason neither: for they cannot deny that this word has of
it self a more general signification, even as general almost, as when we
say, a man's or woman's things; as may appear by twenty places. which being so,
methinkes, it is far better to make the more special word used for the
woman, viz. garments, to expound this; rather then this, which is a more
general word, to exclude that: at least let it be that which contains armor,
and clothes too. viz. the Habit of a man.

Communicating (or partaking of Christ's body in the Sacrament) unworthily.
It is threatened with being held guilty of the body and blood of Christ: as if
he, who does not care to remember him in the best manner he can now he is dead;
if he had lived, when he did, would have been little troubled to have seen him
put to death* Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty, (or shall be held guilty: for he is guilty already
of himself) of the body and blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11, 27.

It has been punished with sickness Anselme speaks of some in his time, and
sic hodie multi variis morbis corripiuntur, quia indigne corpus domini
acceperunt.
, and death: For this cause many are weak, and sickly among you; and many
sleep, 1 Cor. 11, 30. Chrysostom In epist. ad Tim. Homil. 5.
speaks of some possessed with the devil after it; and Cyprian has recorded
diverse examples of men thus punished. one way or another (for the most part)
they were sure to have (...) verse. 29.
some judgment, or (...) verse. 31, 32.
to be judged or punished. and it was well for the Saints they were: for it may
be otherwise they might have been verse. 32.
(...) quite and clean condemned, or damned, as the men of the world were.

Company of wicked men, those that keep it threatened
With their punishments. Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked
men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest you be consumed in all their sins,
Number. 16, 26. Moses thus spoke to the people concerning Dathan and Abiram. Elihu
when he would convince Job of being justly punished by God, told him of this
sin; as reckoning it for a very heinous one: What man is like Job, Who
drinks up scorning like water; who goes in company with the workers of
iniquity, and walks with wicked men Job 34, 7, 8. Solomon thought that those
who kept drunkards company, had cause to fear their punishments: for
otherwise, that were no argument, which he brings to diswade a man from it: Be
not among wine bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh: For the drunkard and
the glutton shall come to poverty Prove. 23, 20, 21. The servant, that shall eat
and drink with the drunken, is threatened, that his Lord shall come in a day
when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall
cut him in sunder and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites Mat. 24, 42,
49, 50, 51. Hypocrites; such as he himsefe was: for if he had been sincere, he
would have loathed the very garment Jude 23.
spotted with the flesh.

John says that he heard this voice from heaven concerning Babylon: Come out
of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sin, and that ye receive not
of her plagues Rev: 18, 4. Partakers of her sins; so it is rendered: But so
they might be, if they were partakers only in the guilt, viz: by not reprooving
them, or not greiving, and mourning for them; though they did not commit the
like themselves. and therefore methinkes it may very well be rendered,
partakers in their sins viz: by approving of them, and joining in them. The
words in the original are (...), which will imply as much. For so is the same
verb used by Paul with (...) works. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
(...).
works of darkness, but rather reprove them Ephesians. 5, 11. where there cannot
be so little meant by (...), as not reproving only; as there cannot be so
little meant by (...) communicating with my affliction Phil. 4, 14. as the
Philippians their not adding affliction only to Paul's bonds. I think, that
when a partakeing of that thing which an other has, is understood, the thing
is put rather in the genitive case with the adjective (...): as (...) Rom: 11,
17. (...) Phil: 1, 7. Besides, to be partaker of men's sins in that manner
spoken of before, is expressed by the simple verb only, as (...) Is partaker of
his evil deed's 2 ep. John: 11. spoken of him who does but bid the person God
speed. Now this a man shall quickly do, I mean bear a part also with wicked
men in sinning; if he once yield to bear them company: because their disease
is so catching. Sin will hang to a man's heart, as bad as pitch will to his
fingers. I may say of most sorts of sinners, as the Son of Syrach says of the
proud man. He that touches pitch, shall be defiled with it; and he that has
fellowship with a proud man will be like unto him Ecclesiasticus 13 1. The
Rabbines have a saying (...) Every one that is profane makes profane: which
may be interpreted as well of society, as otherwise: as in the Law, whosoever
touched him that was unclean was unclean also. The infectiousnesse of sin is
prettily expressed by Seneca in the word allinit besmeareth, applied to the
persons with whom we converse: as if they were like new-whited walls, which a
man rubs along by and thinks not o^ it. He uses this word in his Epistles; and
I think it not amiss to tell you part of what he has in in those Epistles
delivered against using much company and for this reason, because of being
drawn into sin. He says we are drawn into sin in company especially these
two ways: First, By our being pleased with other men's sins, Nemo non aliquod
nobis vitium, aut commendat, aut imprimit, aut nescientibas allinit Epis. 7.
Secondly by seeing them pleased with ours; especially if we are vain glorious,
Rom: 12, 2.
and desirous to be conformed * to the world, and loath to be absurd (as they
call it) or displeasing to our company: irritamentum est omnium in quae
insanimus admirator and conscius: ubi testis ac spectator abscessit, vitia
subsidunt, quorum monstrari and conspici fructus sit* In many sins our only
aim is to please men; and if no body saw us we would not commit them, ep: 49.
Which was the reason, why Pericles knowing himself to be addicted to vain
glory, abstained altogether from feastings, and merry meetings (...). Plutarch,
in his life. I am not of their opinion who say A proverb among the Jews (...)
aut societas, aut mors: either society, or death. Seeing therefore there is
so much danger in company, either be alone without company, or (according to the
same Pilosopher's advise) as much as possibly thou can, be alone while thou
art in company: tunc praecipue in teipsum secede, cum esse cogeris in turba
Epist: 25. Be continually reflecting upon thy self; keep thy heart, with as
much fear and care as thou would thy face, if thou were a midst a swarm of
bees: watch over it and guard it with as much solicitude, as any Soldier does a
fort, when he looks to be assaulted by his enemies every moment.

Company of any too much keeping it
punished with hatred: Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house lest he be
weary The French have a proverb: Aller and, parler peut on; boire, and manger
non.
of thee, and so hate thee Prove: 25. 17.

Not confessing of sins punished.
If out of ignorance, 1. With not preventing of judgments. Thy Prophets have
seen vain and foolish things for thee, and they have not discovered thine
iniquity, to turn away the captivity: 2. Not obtaining of requests. Solomon
when he consecrated the Temple, and entreated God to hear those that should
pray toward it, entreated for such only as should know every man the plague of
his own heart, before they spread forth their hands toward it. 1 Kings 8, 38.
See, 1 Chr: 6, 29. Ezekiel. 20, 3, 4.

If wilfully, (by hiding them when they know them) with Not prospering. He
that covers his sins shall not prosper Stant nulla diu deceptis gaudia divis.
Sil: Ital: l. 2. He can no more p^osper, then a sick man can be cur^d, that
will not discover his disease. Vitia sua consiteri sanitatis indicium est Sen.
ep. 55.
Prove. 28, 13. The way to have sins covered, is, not to cover them. by
covering sin, thou robbest God of his glory, whose glory it is to conceal a
matter Prove. 25. 2. Thou shall not prosper viz: by loosing not only thy labor
(for thou can not hide any thing from God) but thy pardon also. Job in his
Justification, reckoned it among those things, which If he had been gulity of;
he would acknowledge his punishment to have been just. If I covered my
transgressions as Adam (or as a man; for a mere natural man can make no true
confession) by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom Job 31. 33. Especially if we
do not only not confess our sins, but love them too, and hide them in our
bosom.

If thou can not discover all, be sure to hide none. deal so with those thou
can not find, as the Jews were wont to do with their leaven. for their
custom was two or three days before the feast of unleavened bread, to search
every corner of the house for leaven; and when thy had done; for fear there
might be any yet left, to pronounce a general execration against it. Even so
do thou: when thou can not find every sin, acknowlede all: for that is the
way to be charged with none.

Copulation with beasts, as likewise with men or women too nearly related.
Ye shall not commit any of these abominations Levit. 18, 28. (viz: Those
mentioned from verse 6, to 23.) that the land spue not you out) like a stomach
that is overburden'd or has eaten some unwholesome meat) as it spued out the
nations that were before you. See more chap: 20. from v. 9, 10, to 22. where
the punishment of some is to be put to death, of some to bear their iniquity,
of some to be childlesse.

That Soul shall be cut off with men. See Oath.
from his people; That is, say the Jews, shall dye before he be 50. year old;
and they say it was observed that such as were not circumcised live not to that
age
he has broken my covenant, (speaking of one not That is say the Hebrews, if
he were past thirteen year old, for whereas before his parents or the
Magistrate ought to see it done, hence forward he was bound to see it done
himself. the Septuagint add (...) the eighth day and so Austin cites it.
circumcised) Gen: 17, 14. Because circumcision was a condition or act of
obedience on the Jews part, before which indeed God had made his covenant with
them, but without which he would not bind himsele to keep it. If ye shall
despise my statutes, or if your soul shall abhor my judgments; so so that ye
will not do my command'ments; But that ye BREAK MY COVENANT: Lev. 26, 15. I
will also do this unto you; I will appoint over you terror etc. v. 16. So
verse. 17. I will set my face against you etc.

These have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds; wherefore a Lion
out of the forest shall destroy them etc. Jer: 5, 5, 6. concerning the Jews.

Covetousness.
Covetous men are threatened and punished
First with not being satisfied. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied
with silver, nor he that loves abundance* with increase Eccles. 5. 10. The
Hebrew in Scripture expresses a covetous man by (...) This word* if it
signify gain, it signifies covetousne^^e too, as it does Exodus 18. 21. which
is enough to raise my observation upon.
(...) (...) signifies also to cut, and when it signifies to be covetous, it
is properly meant of being covetous of gain by cutting off from another, or by
another's loss: as (...) does signify in Greek not so much to desire to have
simply (...) more, as to have more then another; or rather to have more by
another having the less, and by our means: and therefore it is used with the
Accusative of the person whom we overreach, or are too hard for (viz. by
cunning or cozening) out of love of gain, as you may see in diverse places in
the Epistles of Paul; insomuch that it is sometimes applied to any other
out-witting and going beyond a man to his hurt: as (...), 1 These. 4. 6. to
gain upon, or to gain advantage of a brother. So in 2 Cor. 2. 10. (...), lest
Satan get an advantage of us, viz, by his cunning. This is a thing too much
delighted in by too many politicians of these times.
he that coveteth a covetousness, as Jer. 6, 13. and chap. 8, 10. Hab. 2, 9.
because there is no more end of his coveting, when he has what he coveted,
then before; but he covets, and covets without end. when he has gotten, what
he coveted, he has not enlarged his estate, so much as his desire; and that he
enlarges like hell, and the grave, Hab. 2. 5. The Apostle Paul 1 Timothy 6, 10.
(as one might think though there be no necessity for it) had allusion either to
this Hebrew expression, or to this quality of covetuousnesse; when having said
that (...) the love of money is the root of all evil, he added (...) which
while some coveted after; that is, not which money, but which love of money; as if
he meant to show the covetousness of covetousness.

The love Crescit amor number mi quantu^ ipsa pecunia crescit.
of money grows as the money grows; and I believe if money did leave growing;
the love would also in little time, There is no slavery so endless and
importunate as the service of Mammon Mat. 6, 26. There is no sin which after
a man has once begun, is so hard to leave, as covetousness: because of the
unsatisfying nature of the things which are coveted; or rather indeed, because
of the unsatisfiablenesse of the soul which covets. For according as that is
well or ill disposed, never so little is much enough, and never so much is too
little. This, Not being satisfied, I look upon as a heavy punishment from God
for the sin of coveting: and such it is reckoned for, in the Scriptures: See
the chapter of gluttony Sect: 2.

2 Many sorrows. For the love of money is the root of all evil, which while
some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves
through with many sorrows. 1 Timothy: 6, 10. Have pierced themselves (...) have
pierced themselves all round, or on every side; on that side on which they
loose; on that side on which they spend; on that side on which they do not
gain; nay lastly on that side on which they do^ gain; because they have not
their desire, though they have what they desired. (...) themselves have pierced
themselves; which aggravates the misery: For a man is never more vexed, then
when he is vexed by himself; and never more hurted, then when he hurts
himself. It Is an usual way with God of punishing the wicked, to fill him with
his own ways See Self destruction.
: and I think a covetous man is as much punished this way, as any other. Nulla
enim avaritia sine poena est quamvis satis sit ipsa poenarum, there is no
covetousness without punishment, although it be punishment enough it self
Sen: epist: 1. 15. He that desires to be still loading himself with wealth, is
like a bird that loades himself with dirt, till he cannot fly upward for the
weight: and therefore, says the Prophet Habakuk, Woe to him that ladeth
himself with thick clay chap: 2, 6. The Septuagint translate (...) against
himself; because thereby he hurts himself most.

(...), have thrust themselves through with many sorrows: there must needs be
(...) many sorrows* where there are (...) many lusts, (as there are wherever
there is covetousness) verse 9.

3 Many foolish and ungodly actions to their own hurt. the Apostle in the
before quoted chapter v: 9. They that will be rich fall into temptation and a
snare, and many foolish and hurtful lusts which draw men into destruction and
perdition (destruction, and perdition.)

So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain, which takes away the
life of the owners thereof Prove: 1, 19,

What made the men of Shechem so foolishly to yield to be circumcised, whereby
they became so weak, that two men ( Simeon and Levi) put them all to the sword;
but only covetousness? For it is said they hearkened to Hamor and Shechems
persuasion thereunto, as soon as they heard this argument Shall not their
cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs be ours? Gen: 34, 23.

Thus they would be punished, if God took no notice of them: But are they
threatened with nothing from him? yes they are threatened.

1 With his Hatred. -- and blesses the covetous whom the Lord abhors Ps:
10, 3.

2. His anger, and also punishment; very great both, as may be gathered by his
expressions. For the iniquity of his covetousness, I was wroth, and smote him;
I hid me and was wroth. Isa: 57, 17. For the iniquity of his covetousness: the
iniquity of covetousness is much; and commonly there is much iniquity also
goes with it: especially in men that exercize trades; or are in places of power
and trust.

I will stretch out mine hand upon the Inhabitants of the land, says the Lord;
for from the least of them even to the greatest of them every one is given to
covetousness Jerem: 6, 13. In the eighth chapter verse: 10. he shows how he
would punish their coveting to have more, with the loss of what they had; and
their wronging others, with being wronged themselves (which is an usual
punishment of covetous men) I will give their wives unto others and their
fields to them that shall inherit the^: (...): that shall disinherit them, may
seem a better translation; (for so the Hebrew word is used sometimes with the
accusative case of the person as Zach^ 9, Where the word is (...)
4. and elsewhere) so that them shall relate to the men, and not to the fields.
unless you had rather say to their heirs; that is, to the heirs of those
that marry their wives: so the vulgar and the Chald: Paraphrast.

3. Exclusion out of the company of the Saints in this world ( or
excommunication) for so Paul would have them punished. I have written unto you
not to keep company, If any man that is called a brother be a fornicator or
covetous etc. With such a one no not to eat. This excommunication the Jews
called Herem. He that was thus excommunicated by them was not to converse or
commerce, unless it were in buying his victual. for in eating he might not.
there were two other excomunicattions: one less then this called niddui, and
the other greater called schematha by them, by the Christians Maranatha.
1 Cor. 5, 11.

4. Exclusion from their company in the world to come; Nor thieves nor covetous
men nor drunkards etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God 1 Cor: 6, 10. The very
rust of their money which they have greedily gathered, and niggardly kept, if
their own consciences would not confess their covetousness, will come in
judgment against them and testify it to their faces: Your gold and silver is
cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat
your flesh as it were fire; ye have heaped treasures together for the last
days Jam: 5, 3.

Covetousness must needs be severely punished if it be Idolatry, as the
Apostle says it is, Col: 3, 5. Indeed it may well be counted so, rather then
other sins; yet not so much because covetous men love their wealth more then
God; (for so the gluttons love their belly, and voluptuous men their pleasures,
and other sinners other things) as because usually they put their hope and
confidence According to that of Job, If I have made gold my hope, or have said
to the fine gold, thou art my confidence c: 13, 24. If I have said etc. i. e.
If I have not only inconsiderately trusted to; but if I have deliberately
trusted in my wealth.
in it, (which are acts to be exercised upon nothing but God) and because they
think their life consists in the abundance of things which they possess; for
so much our Savior intimated in affirming the contrary, when he charged the
people so earnestly to beware of covetousness, doubling the caveat: Take heed
and beware of covetousness; for a man's life consists not in the abundance of
things which he possesses: Luke 12, 15. doubtless those who are guilty of
this sin have cause to fear God's severe punishment: for else our Savior
had never spoken in this manner. I might produce many instances of severe
punishments of other sins, of which this sin was the occasion: as Samuel's
sons, 1 Samuel 8. Saul chap. 15. Nabal chap. 25. and Ananias and Sapphira Acts 5.
But of these in their places.

Cruel men are threatened and punished See Oppression, and not Pitying.
.
1 With hurting themselves. The merciful man does good to his own soul, but
he that is cruel troubles his own Sept. (...), destroieth his own body.
flesh Prove. 11, 17.

2 A Curse (or the prayers of godly men against them.) Jacob, a little before
he died, thus cursed Simeon and Levi (for being brethren, not only in blood,
but in bloods, or bloudy-mindednesse and cruelty toward the Shechemites)
Cursed be their anger for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel. I
will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, Genesis 49, 7. for thus
joining in sin, division and scattering shall be their punishment The Levites
(all agree) had no portion, but were scattered among the other tribes, and
lived by the Altar. the Simeonites, the Scripture says, had a portion Josh.
19. 1. but such as was taken out of Juda's portion, verse. 9. but the Hebrews
say, they had no portion, but lived scattered among the rest of the tribes, and
got their living by teaching children.
.

3 Like Cruelty from others. Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs and
their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I have done,
so God has requited me. Thus Adonibezek himself (a heathen) confessed, when
the Israelites of the tribes of Judah and Simeon took him prisoner, and cut
off his thumbs and toes Judge. 1, 6, 7.

4 Gods anger. Hear me therefore and deliver the captives again which ye
have taken captive of your brethren; for the fierce wrath Or the fury of the
anger. heb. (...)
of God is upon you. thus spoke Oded the Prophet to the Israelites for keeping
the Jews (whom they had Which Pekah King of Israel made with Ahaz King of
Judah.
taken in war) in slavery. 2 Chronicles. 28, 11. and so verse. 9. he tells them,
that in the battle also they had exercised such cruelty as called to heaven
for vengeance. Ye have slain them in a rage that reaches up to heaven Though
this expression is used sometimes when it cannot be meant of calling for
vengeance as 1 Samuel 5. 12. Jer. 59. 9. but only to signify the greatness or
extremity of a thing*
.

5 Certain punishment without remedy, though the cruelty be exercised upon
wicked men. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Edom, and for
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because he did pursue his
brother with the sword, and did cast off (...) this (...) or tearing is
elsewhere used of anger, as Job 18. 4. (...)
all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, he distroyed his bowels, which
by mere for^e of nature would otherwise have rolled toward them.
and he kept his wrath for ever. Amos 1, 11. and thus the Moabites chapter 2, 1.
Thus says the Lord, for three transgr^ssions of Moab, and for four, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof, because they burnt the bones of the King
of Edom in Lime. Some say that that Son whom the King of Moab killed and
offered for an offering upon the wall 2 Kings 3, 27. was the King of Edoms Son
(whom he had taken prisoner when he endevourd to break thorough his army) and
apply this threat to him; adding to this act of his cruelty here expressed
(that he burnt his bones into lime) one more So the Chaldee Paraphrast. See
Vatablus.
viz: that he made use of this lime to plaster his palace withal.

6 Severe punishment without mercy; to cry him quits: He shall have judgment
without mercy that has showed no mercy James 2, 13. Where it is added, For
mercy rejoices over judgment. as mercy rejoices over judgment^, and love
covers a multitude of sins; so judgment shall rejoice over cruelty; and
where hatred is, not one sin of a multitude but shall be discovered.

Cruelty, even toward malefactors, how odious it was among the Jews, appears
both by what they required in those that were to be Judges, and by what they
allowed to them. it was required among other conditi^ions that those who were
Judges, should neither be Eunuchs, nor such as had never any children; because
such were more likely to be cruel: and it was allowed the malefactor, even
after he was sent to execution, if he had any thing more to say then what he
had said already, to come back again four or five times.

Curiosity (especially in Divine things)
Threatened.
The Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people lest they break through
unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish Exodus: 19, 21. Charge the people
-- in Hebrew (...) testify to them, or command them before witnesses; for there
being no law to forbid this act, they will say they were too severely dealt
with, unless there be some to witness that it was forbidden by God: Then
again, charge them before witnesses, to show that I am resolved to do what I
say; as Joseph did his brethren Gen: 43, 3. Lest they break through unto the
Lord: it may be rendered lest they destroy themselves for God, viz: Out of
desire to look and pry, or out of curiosity to see him.

Punished.
And he smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they looked into the Ark of the
Lord: even he smote of the people fifty thousand, and threescore and ten men 1
Samuel 6, 19. wicked men commonly are more desirous toknow the things of God in
a way of curiosity Herod was desirous to see Christ Luk 9, 9. c. 23, 8. and so
were the Greeks John 12. 21. they that cared most to see him, cared lest to
beleve in him. blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed c.
20, 29.
then godly men; and it is one great vanity of the eye (both of the body and
the mind) to delight in seeing strange sights: which many times make them turn
aside from God: Moses, when the Angel appeared to him in a flame o fire in a
bush, seeing the bush burnt and not consumed, left the Angel to turn aside,
and see this great sight, why the bush was not burnt. Exodus: 3, 3. But God loved
him well, and therefore restraind him. You know how Jacob was reproved by the
Angel for asking his name Gen: 32, 29. and Manoah in the like manner Jud: 13.
17. Tacitus, speaking of Hercules his pillars, of which it is questioned
whether Hercules went thither or not, says, Sanctius and reverentius visum de
actis deorum credere, quam scire. For things said to be done by the gods, I
think it more religion, and reverence to believe them, then (as we say) to go
seek the proof of Lycaon in the fable had better believed Jupiter was a god,
then have sought the proof of it, as he did, by setting man's flesh before him
to eat Ov^ met: l. 1.
them. Yet some are as hard to believe, that God is God, without too diligent
inquiry, as Thomas was to believe, that Jesus was Jesus John 20, 25. But we may
not be too busy: there are some secret things, which belong only to God, Deuteronomy.
29. 29. It was a saying of Heraclitus (...), nature loves to be hid, and the
god of nature more then her. Ignorance in such things, though it be not a
mother, is a very great helper of devotion: and curiosity on the contrary, a
very great hinderer. (...). says Themistius, speaking of God, whom we
reverence, and admire the more, because the knowledge of him is not easy and
trivial, and ready to every man's hand.

Curiosity in humane things, has been an occasion of many sad accidents. Lot's
wife. Gen: 19. out of curiosity to observe and gaze upon the destruction of
Sodom (contrary to the) Angel's command v: 17) stealing a time when her husband
did not see her, looked back from behind him, and was presently turned into a
pillar of salt v. 26. 2 Dinah (Jacobs daughter) gadding abroad (forsooth) to
(...) (not simply (...)) to gaze upon them and observe very earnestly their
feature, and fashions and behavior. (the Septuagint. translate it (...) to
learn) which is a practice too common among women.
see the daughters of the land* Gen: 34, 1. was deflowred by Shechem, and
became the occasion of all the sin, and misery, all the cruelty, acted and
sufferd, by Simeon and Levi, and the people of Shechem. verse 25. 3 David's
curiosity Joab asked him why he took delight in this thing verse. 3.
and desire only to know the number of his people, cost the Israelites the
death of no less then seventy thousand men by the pestilence. 2 Samuel: 24, 15.
For when he commanded Joab to number them, all the reason he gave why he would
have it done, was, That I may know the number of the people verse 1.

Cursing of blessings.
See Blessings.

Cursing of Rulers.
It has been punished with death, a long time after: Behold ( says David to
Solomon in his charge before he died) thou have with thee Shimei the Son of
Gera, who cursed me with a grievous curse etc. Now therefore hold him not
gniltlesse: for thou art a wise man, and know what thou ought to do unto
him: but his hoary head bring thou down to the grave with blood 1 Kings 2, 8,
9.

Cursing of any It is usually punished,,
First, with Gods blessing those, who are cursed, the more for it. David says
of Shimei, It may be, the Lord will look upon mine affliction, and that the
Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day 2 Samuel: 16, 12. And so he
says of others, Let them curse, but bless thou: or, they will curse, (...)
and thou will bless (meaning God) Psalm. 109, 28. Thus the Israelites were
blessed the more for it, when Balak sent for Balaam to curse them; as Balak
himself complained. I look thee to curse mine enemies and behold thou have
blessed them altogether: or, thou have blessed Or, thou did purposedly
bless them (...)
a blessing Number: 23, 11. At the consecration of the new wall of Jerusalem, when
it was read in the Law, how the Ammonites and Moabites hired Balaam against the
Israelites to curse them (whereupon at that time they ordered the separation of
the mixed multitude) this passage of Gods providence was observed by those that
read it: Howbeit (said they) our God turned the curse into a blessing Neh: 13,
2. No punishment will vex such dispositions as are given to cursing, worse then
this: and therefore ought the more notice to be taken of it.

2 With returning the curse upon the authors: He clothed himself with
cursing, like as with a garment: so let it come into his bowels like water like
that bitter water which she that was suspected of Adultery did drink, when the
Priest pronounced the curse against her Number 5, 21 S. James compared cursing to
bitter water c: 3, 11.
and like oil into his bones Ps. 109, 18. Nothing so usual, as for such
arrows to fly back in the face of him that shot them.

Cursing of Parents
see Parents.

Deceitfullnesse.
Deceitful men are threatened 1 With God hatred. Thou shall not have in thine
house diverse measures ( some to sell with and others to buy with) but thou
shall have a perfect and just weight; a perfect Not too lttle
and just Not too great.
measure shall thou have, that thy days may be lengthened in the land which
thy Lord thy God gives thee. ( as if otherwise they should be shortened) for
all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are an abomination to
the Lord Deuteronomy: 25, 14, 15, 16.

2 Excommunication ( out of men's houses at least.) He that works deceit shall
not dwell in my house Ps: 101, 7.

3 Grief, and vexation, after they have done their work: Bread of deceit is
sweet unto a man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel Prove.
20, 17.

4 Being deceived themselves, by other men or by God: and taken in their own
snare. He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it, and who so breaks a hedge a
serpent shall bite him. Who so removes stones shall be hurt therewith, and he
that cleaves wood shall be endangered thereby Eclles: 10, 8, 9. Some expound
that place in the Prove: cap. 20, 26. A wise King brings a wheel over the
wicked, thus: As a wheel turns round; so, by the wisdom of a King, the
mischief intended by wicked men to others, is brought about upon their own
heads.

5 Being deceived by themselves, i. e. by their own deceit, which makes them
believe they shall prosper, but tells them a lie: Thou have trodden down all
them that err from thy Statutes; for their deceit is a lie (or falsehood) Ps.
119, 118.

6 Shortness of life: Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their
days Ps. 5, 6. By bloody men is usually meant (in Scripture) not so much
downright murderers, who take away the life of another; as any other wrongful,
or unconscionable and unjust dealers; who take away that which is many times
called their life viz: their livelihood. in Deuteronomy: 24, 6. he that takes a
millstone, is said to take a man's life, to pledge. Thus oppressors, and unjust
judges, are said to have their hands full of blood Isa: 1, 15 with v. 17. See
what butcherly actions are ascribed to them Mic: 3, 2, 3, 4. There are very
many places to this purpose in the Prophets.

7 Punishment by the hand of God, not to be prevented: in most dreadful
expressions. for the Prophet Amos having complained of some that asked, When
will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn, and the Sabbath, that we may
set forth wheat, making the Ephah The measure.
small and the Shekel The weight.
great, and falsifying the balances with deceit? Ch: 8, verse 5. in the
seventh verse he adds: The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob surely I
will never forget any of these works. So in Micah chap: 6, 11, 12, 13. Shall I
count them pure with the wicked balances and with the bag of deceitful
weights? For the rich men thereof are full of violence and the inhabitants
thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth:
therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee desolate
because of this sin. Notwithstanding all these threats, (and which it grieves
my heart to see) this sin of deceitful dealling is swallowed with ease, and
looked upon as a small sin by those that strain at violence, and abhore to
commit it. contrary to the judgment even of an heathen man; who says he looked
upon it as the wo^se crime of the two; fraus quasi vulpeculae, vis leonis,
utrumque alienissimum, sed fraus odio digna majore: Couzening is for a fox, and
violence for a Lion; both are very inhuman things; but of the two, couzening is
the more odious. Cicero lib. 1. de Off.

Delight in Sin,
see Sin.

Desertion.
1 Spiritual desertion. I go my way and ye shall seek me, and shall die in
your sins, says our Savior to the Pharisees Joh, 8, 21.

2 Either spiritual, or temporal, or both (for the expressions are very
dreadful) I have forsaken my house, I have left mine heritage, I have given
the dearly beloved of my soul into the hands of her enemies Jer. 12, 7. the
Prophet had a little before spoken of their Hypocrisy toward God, viz. verse.
2. (as well as toward himself verse. 6.) and therefore that sin See Hypocrisy.
is to be thought the main cause at least, why this punishment was threatened.

I have taken away my peace from this people, says the Lord, even loving
kindness, and mercies, Jer. 16, 5. my peace. so that I will be their enemy. if
it had been but their peace, that is, peace among themselves, or with men: or,
their prosperity: it had not, deserved the name of a threat in comparison of
this. loving kindness and mercyes: or goodness, and bowels (or pity) so the
original (...). as proper expression of desertion and anger, as may be: if God
had removed only (...) his goodness, So (I think) the word properly
signifies.
or beneficence, by not doing them good; yea if he had afflicted them with
never so great judgments: yet if he had retained his bowels, See Cruelty Sect.
5
to pity them in their misery, (and such mercy is properly meant by (...)
bowels) their condition had been hopeful. Oh it is a sad thing when God strikes
a man, and goes away and leaves him; when he shows his back and not his face,
in his calamity! And yet thus are the same people threatened, against whom the
former threat was denounced c. 18, 17. And both these threats were for the same
sin viz: Idolatry; as you may see verse the 15 of this chapter and chap. 16,
11.

In Hosea also, you have the like threat of Desertion, and for the same sin:
For the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of my house* I will
love them no more. chapter 9, 15. now this wickedness was Idolatry; as is to be
seen by those words in the same verse, All their wickedness is in Gilgal (as
if their other wickedness were no wickedness compared with Idolatry which
they committed in Gilgal c. 12, 11.)

I will forsake them, I will* hide my face from them Deuteronomy: 31, 17; for the same
sin, verse 16.

Despising. Despisers punished.
Hagar ( Abraham's maid) despising her mistress Sarah, because she had
conceived by her master, when her mistress had not: was by her master
delivered up to the will of her mistress; who used her so hardly, that she
was feign to run away. Gen, 16. 5, 6.

Gaal, despising Abimelech, and saying to the Schechemites (whom he had caused
to rebel against Abimelech and to be in subjection to himself) Who is
Abimelech that we should serve him? (Judge: 9, 28.) when Abimelech came against
the town, his army was overthrown; and himself by Zebul ( Abimelech's deputy
governor of the place) expelled the city, verse. 39, 41.

Nabal despising David, when he sent to him for provision; saying, Who is
David? and, Who is the son of Jesse? (this question, it seems, was usual in
way of Contempt; for otherwise, you may see, he knew well enough who he was)
had not his wife appeased this son of Jesse (as contemptible as he made him)
with a present; both himself and all his family had been put to the sword, 1 Samuel 25, 10, 34.

Sheba (who drew away the ten tribes into rebellion against David) in the same
manner despised him, calling him, in contempt, The son of Jesse. but mark
his end: for God used a far more contemptible instrument to destroy him, then
the son of Jesse: and it was done in a very contemptuous manner. for being
besieged in Abel; by the advice of a woman, his head was cut off, and thrown
over the wall to Joab. now, whereas this fellow, when he stirred up the people
to revolt, cried to them Every man to his tents, jeering, as if they might go
every one to his home, and take no more notice of the son of Jesse: when this
was done, it is said (as if the Scripture meant to show how it pleased God to
fulfill those words one way, which he intended in another) that they retired
every man to his tent, 2 Samuel 20, 1, compared with v. 22.

Goliath (the Champion of the Philistines) despising David, and threatening him
(as we say) to make hawks meat of him, 1 Samuel 17, 42, 44. was slain by him in
a very contemptuous manner, viz: only with a little stone flung out of a
sling; and afterward beheaded by him with his own sword, verse. 49, 50.

Benhadad the King of Syria, at the siege of Samaria, when he was told that
some of the Israelites were coming forth of the city; in a careless scornful
manner gave order, whether they came for peace, or war, to take them alive.
now those that came forth were in number but 232, and they were young men of
the Princes of the Provinces chosen out of purpose by the advice of a Prophet:
but as few as they were, and though the King of Syria made so little reckoning
of them, they fell upon the Syrian army, and slew every man his man, and put
the King and his whole army to flight, 1 King 20, 14, 15, 18, 20.

Discord.
Threats OF Discord among all sorts.
By the prophet Jeremy: I will dash them The latin translation, ^ separate them
one from another; which the Hebrew (...) will hardly bear; yet ours and that
do very well agree: for things must be first separated before you can dash them
together.
one against another, even the Fathers and the Sons together Jer: 13, 14.
(concerning the Jews.)

By our Savior: Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on Which seems to be
intimated, and an emphasis to be in the words (...) on earth being placed in
the end, apart from (...) peace.
earth, (no, my business is to give peace in heaven, and reconciliation with
God:) I tell you, nay, but rather division Luke 12, 51. You may see those words
in part fulfilled at Iconium, upon Paul's preaching there Act: 14, 4.

of Discord among the wicked, as a punishment, and for the good of the godly.
Every man's sword shall be against his brother (concerning Gog) Ezekiel: 38: 21.

A great (...) the Septuagint, or madness: wherein the hand of God is eminent;
viz. when men fall out on a sudden, and they know not wherefore, as in Jud. 7,
22. where it is also (...); but there they translate it (...) confusion, and
the vulgar caed^s slaughter.
tumult from the Lord shall be among them, and they shall lay hold every one on
the hand of his neighbor and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his
neighbor Zac: 14, 13. Concerning those that had fought against Jerusalem.

With this punishment God punished the Midianites when they fought with Gideon,
Judge. 7, 22, where it is said, THE LORD set every man's sword against his
brother, as it was above, a great tumult from THE LORD: and indeed the Lord's
hand is especially seen in this punishment; because there is a work to be
wrought upon the heart; which the power of man cannot so well reach.

In this manner the Philistines likewise were panished, when they fought with
Saul 1 Samuel 14, 20. and the Ammonites, and the Moabites when they fought with
Jehoshaphat 2 Chr. 20, 24. See more in the chapter of The Enemies of the Church.

THREATS TO Discord (or to those that Cause and maintain it.)
1 Of Confusion, and every evil work, So S. James says, Where envying and
strife is, there is confusion (or an unquiet Inquieta vita. Beza.
life) and every evil work, Jam. 3, 16. The Greek is (...): Like (...) in
Greek: and as we say in English, such a one does well, for prospers, or is
well.
but (I think) it may not be meant so much, every evil, or sinful work, or
action (which is best expressed by (...), or (...)) as every evil or hurtful
thing: not so much the evil Sin, as the evil of it. neither is (...) here a
sin; as it is in 2 Corinthians. 12, 20. (for then there might have seemed to have
been a Tautologie) but a punishment; as it is in 2 Cor. 6, 5. (...).
The evil actions, which are the fruits of strife are many; but, I believe the
evil things, which are the punishments, and ill consequents of it, are a great
many more: for commonly, when men agree worst, they live best. enemies being
(as they are called in Hebrew, (...)) observers, do make men forbear many
sins, either for fear, or shame, or even for spite it self: and the want of
an enemy makes them (...). Themist. orat. 12.
loose and careless.

The fruits of strife, both miseries, and sins, must needs be many, for these
two reasons: 1 Because men at variance will not onel y not help one another;
but will do all that they can to hurt one another: 2 Because men at variance,
are for the most part in passion: now passion (usually) considers not what is
profitable, and cares not what is lawful. which way soever you interpret the
words of the Apostle, they may very well be attended with those words of
Solomon, The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water: therefore
leave off contention before it be modled with, Prove. 17, 14. This many seem to
be better translated, thus: Leave off contention before thou have In the Hebrew
it is (...)
entangled thy self: for before it be medl'd with, it cannot be left off. In
like manner chap: 20, 3, I should render it, every fool will entangle himself:
instead of, will be meddling; because, what ever it be that is there meant, it
seems to be opposed to ceasing from strife, expressed in the former part of the
verse: which a man cannot so well be said to do, unless he has already
medl'd, or begun.

Strife is like a snare; which at first, when a man falls into, if he go
gently to work, he may draw his foot out again: or, i^ it be tied, if he be
not too hasty, but go wisely to work, he may untye it again: but if once he
fall to striving; the more he strives, the faster he is tied. So one word
draws another, and the next is still worse then the former; and each party
more angry then before* when men are far in, they resolve to go on; either
because they think they cannot come off with cred^t; or because they will not
come off without it.

3 Destroying one another. But if ye bite, and devour one another, take heed
that ye be not consumed one of another Gal: 5, 15.

These evils are the natural effects of the sin it self: but can it be
threatend with nothing from without viz. from God, or from men? Yes it may be
threatend:

1 With Gods hatred. for, him that sows discord among brethren, Solomon has
put for one of his seven things, which, he says are an abomination to God
Prove: 6, 16, 19.

2 Excommunication, (or a worse matter) I would they were cut off that trouble
(...) Those who dissettle you; it may be meant de statu dejicientes, who make
you to be of another mind: as it is v: 10. by whom they were removed from him
that called them to liberty v: 13. and chap: 1, 6.
you Gal: 5, 12. (Spoken of them that caused division among the Galatians by
urging circumcision) I would. he does but wish it; for his authority among the
Galatians, was not so great as it was among the Corinthians (for if he were not
an Apostle to others yet doubtless he was to them: as he says 1 Cor. 9, 2.)
but among the Corinthians, I believe, he meant to see it done indeed, when he
told them I fear lest when I come I shall not find you such as I would, and
that I shall be found unto you such as I would not; lest there be debates,
envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whispering, swellings, tumults. (behold
discord's numerous and viperous brood) 1 Cor. 12, 20.

3 Ruin of families, cities, and kingdoms our Savior used it as an argument
against he Pharisees to prove, that he did not cast out one devil by an other
(as they said he did) because, says he, Every kingdom divided against it
self is brought to desolation: and every city, or house divided against it
self shall not stand: and if Satan cast out Satan he is divided against
himself; how shall then his kingdom stand. Mat: 12, 25, 26. Where Discord is
sown for the seed, the harvest must needs be destruction. Pallas (whom the
Poets fain the goddess of wisdom) thought that Cadmus intending to make
himself King of Boeotia, could not take a wiser course to destroy his enemies
Those that were for Draco, whom having slain he usurped the Kingdom of
Boeotia.
, then to sow this seed among them (which the Poet Ovid l. 3. Met. fab: 1.
describes by the sowing of vipers teeth in the ground) which accordingly had
its effect.

A viperous and poisonous seed indeed it is; as destructive in the body of a
commonwealth; as any poison can be in the body of a man. Livy.
Id unum venenum, eam labem civitatibus opulentis repertam, ut magna imperia
mortalia essent; it is the only mortal dissease that a Kingdom can be sick of.

4 Exclusion out of the kingdom of God Hatred, variance, emulation, wrath,
strife, seditions, heresies, envyings etc. ( what a company of names You may
observe. both in this and the rest of the Epistles, there are more names for
this sin, than any other.
this sin has, or what a compound of sins it is!) of the which I told you
before, as I have also told you in times past, ( he could never tell them too
much of it) that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of
God Gal: 5, 20, 21.

Follow peace therefore with all men, if not the peace of freindship, the peace
of good will. Even the most wicked men, although thou do not seek peace with
them; yet if they seek it with thee, let them be sure to find it. Though the
Israelites might not seek the peace of the Ammonites Deuteronomy: 23, 6. yet might
they not distress the^ c. Some make these places to stand in need of a
Reconciler; but, I believe, there needs none; for in the first place doubtless
by peace is meant their good and prosperity; as the text it self will expound
it.
2, 9. Though they might not seek the peace of the Ammonites with themselves,
(that is, make a mutual league of amity and association) yet they must seek
their own peace with the Ammonites (that is, not begin to contend with them in
battle) Follow your own peace ( love and good will) with all men, though not
their peace with your selves: because it must not be gotten with enmity with
God; and it cannot be had without it.

Discouraging See Hindering.
of men in Godly enterprises.
It is like to be Severely punished; For, The men which Moses sent to search
the land, who returned, and made all the congregation to murmur against him by
bringing up a slander upon the land; Even those men, that did bring up the
evil report upon the land ( the sin is repeated, to show how great it was
esteemed) died by the plague before the Lord, Number: 14, 36. -Before the Lord.]
as if the Lord was so earnest to have this sin punished, that he would stand
by and see it done himself.

Disobedience to God (either merely Disobedience without any other sin; or,
as being the maine provoking part of other sins) threatened and punished.
1 With God's Anger: The anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses Exodus: 4,
14. (and it is likely it had burnt him, if he had still stood it out, and not
obeyed at last) for denying to go to Pharaoh, three several times, when God
bid him ver: 1, 10, 13. Even Artaxerxes himself was sensible how it provoked
God, to be Disobeyed: and therefore, when he gave commission to Ezra to build
the Temple, he gave this charge: Whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven,
let it be diligently done: for why should there be wrath against the realm of
the King and his Sons? Ezra 7, 23. and his Sons] he feared it would not be
forgotten; but that God would visit such an iniquity of the Fathers, even upon
their Children after them.

2 God's Curse: I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; a blessing,
if ye obey etc. and a curse if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord
your God, says Moses, Deu. 11, 27, 28. See Jer: 11, 8. Thus were Adam and Eve
punished cheifely, if not merely for Disobedience; at least in the act it self
was nothing sinful but Disobedience. for what sin could there be in in
eating of a little fruit, unless God had commanded them to the contrary? And
therefore when God pronounced judgment against them, all that he laid to their
charge, was that they had eaten of the Tree of which he commanded them, that
they should not eat Gen: 3, See what he says to the woman v. 11. and likewi^e
to the man verse. 17. (almost the same words) When Paul would show how we were
made sinners in Adam, he says not, by the Vnholynesse, or by the Intemperance,
or by the pride, or the like; but by the Disobedience of one man many were made
sinners Rom: 5, 19. so on the other side, he says not, we were made righteous,
by Christ's holiness; or by his patience, or by his meekness, nay nor by his
sufferings, (for he might have suffered See Heber: 5, 4, 5.
without command, and then he had merited nothing at his Fathers hand) but by
the Obedience of one shall many be made righteous (in the same place) Adam's
Disobedience was as pure disobedience as could be; and Christ's Obedience. What
Christ did, or suffered, was neither duty (in it self) nor desert; but merely
(as he said) to do the will The pharisees preferred their (...) law dilivered by
mouth ( th^ugh it it were but the mouth of men) before the written Law, Mar: 7,
8. but therein they erred.
of God, or to perform what the father had imposed upon him.

3 God's Setting himself against them. If ye will not OBEY the voice of the
Lord, but rebel against the commandment of the Lord; then shall the hand of
the Lord be against you, says Samuel to the Israelites 1 Samuel: 12, 15. voice:
and commandement] or, as it is in the original, mouth; (...) rebel against
(or provoke) the Mouth of the Lord; the aggravation is in the word, mouth. for
if they should do things not according to his mind, it were not so much; but
when they shall do them against his mouth, when he has given them a charge
with his own mouth That is, not so great: or they would have said they had not
had sin.
to the contrary; this is unanswerable. as our Savior says, If I had not
come, and spoken unto them they had not * had sin, but now have they no
cloak for their sin John 15, 22. In Jeremy yon may see the sin of
Disobedience often aggravated by these expressions: I spoke unto you rising
early and speaking but ye heard not c: 7. 13. and I have spoken unto you rising
early and speaking; but ye have not hark^ned chap: 25, 3. and so chap: 35, 14.
you have the same words, Oh lit must needs anger God exceedingly (as it would
any earthly Father) to speak, and speak, and speak, and no body regard to
hearken to him.

Then shall the hand of the Lord be against you:] His power shall be employed
only against you, to hurt you; and not at all for you, to protect you. O heavy
Judgment!

4 In Kings, (in their Heirs For Saul was King all his life: hut after his
deatb his Kingdom ceased, or continued no longer in his name and blood; for
then David had it.
) with the Loss of their Kingdoms. Samuel told Saul, Thy Kingdom shall not
continue etc. Because thou have not kept that which the Lord commanded thee. 1 Samuel: 13, 14. Ye read of no other fault reproov'd, but mere Disobedience to
one command only of the Prophet's. viz: To tarry seven days for him at Gilgal
chap: 10, 8. This (perhaps) he thought was a matter indifferent; or he thought
that he would not come: or that he had obeyed his command, having tarried till
seven days were fully come, As the word is in the Acts (...). cap. 2, 1.
(which is enough in Scripture-account to make it so many days.) but yet
because he did not that which doubtless he knew was the Prophet's meaning viz:
tarry out the full seven days; it argues, he cared little to obey his command,
or follow his council; and therefore he must suffer accordinly. So again
chap: 15, 23, he tells him thus, Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubbornness is as iniquity * and Idolatry: Because thou have rejected the word
of the Lord, he has also rejected thee from being King. Rejected] or,
Slighted, ((...)) as if he had said thus: Thou would be thought to hate
Witchraft, and Idolatry, as most abominable crimes: But I tell thee, in
Disobeying God's express command, thou do Slight and Reject God, as much as
he that does worship an Idol, or go to a witch: which appeared to be so
indeed afterward when he went to the witch of End or.
and therefore God has also Slighted thee and thought thee unworthy to be King
any longer. Here we read of no other fault but Disobedience neither, viz: in
sparing Agag the King of the Amalekites, and the best of the spoil verse: 9,
whereas he was commanded to destroy every thing without exception v. 3. Yet
(perhaps) he thought to do God better service in reserving some for sacrifice;
therefore some observeupon the word (...), (englished Idolatry verse 23. but
signifying Images which they used to divine, and know things by) and the word
(...) (englished stubbornness, but, as they say, signifying to sin by adding
The Chaldee Par: translates it adds to the sayings of the Prophets.
to God's command, and serving him another way then he commands) that in the
verse before mentioned, Saul was told thus much, viz: That by serving God one
way, wben he commanded another, (as if he knew better himself what way was
best to serve him) he was as bad as they that neglecting to seek to God, sought
to their Images or Teraphim But his serving of God in his own way when God
commanded another, was but will worship; and I may say of obedience, as God
himself says of mercy Hos: 6. 6 I desired mercy and not sacrifice; and the
knowledge of God more then burnt offerings.
God desires obedience and not sacrifice. even knowledge only (as it is in the
same place) he desires MORE then burnt offerings; but, he desires obedience
and mercy, and NOT sacrifice. If you have no knowledge, I shall accept your
offerings the worse; but, if you do not perform obedience to me, I will not
accept of your sacrifices or your prayers at all. And therefore (as Solomon
says Eccles: 5, 1,) Be more ready The vulgar renders multo melior est
obedientia quam stulrorum victima.
to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools. you will but play the fool
and loose your labor in offering sacrifices, so long as you refuse to hear
and obey:

5 In whole nations, Conquest and Captivity. The King of Assyria did carry away
Israel unto Assyria 2 Kings 18, 11 and it follows v. the 12. Because they
OBEYED not the voice of the Lord their God.

They were DISOBEDIENT, and rebelled against thee etc. Therefore thou
deliveredst the^ into the hand of their enemies etc. thus said the Levites in
their prayer at the time of the fast, after the return to Jerusalem Neh: 9.
26, (speaking concerning the old Israelites.)

6 Cutting off from the congregation, (by the Leviticall Law) Whosoever eats
that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation
of the Israel Ex: 12, 19. surely it must be only for Disobedience to a strict
command; for otherwise, doubtless, such an action was in it self indifferent.

7 Destruction and death. God told the Israelites by Moses, before they went
into Canaan As the nations which the Lord destroys before your face, so shall
ye perish because, you would not be obedient to voice of the Lord your God.
Deuteronomy: 8, 20. and he told the same people by Jeremy, after their return from
captivity, If they will not OBEY, I will utterly pluck up and destroy that
nation Jer: 12, 17. Readiness one Disobedience, in sparing Agag, and the spoil,
is mentioned for the chief cause of his death: So Saul died for his
trangression (as if it were said, that his grand transgression of Disobedience)
which he committed against the Lord, even against the word of Lord which he
kept not 1 Chr: 10, 13. against the Lord even against the word of the Lord.]
for if it had not been against the word of the Lord (that is, if the Lord had
not commanded him to do, what he did not) it had not been against the Lord.

What fault was there but Disobedience, in the Prophet of Judah, in eating and
drinking with the old prophet of Bethel? 1 Kin: 13, 21. and yet it is there
said, that while they sat at table the word of the Lord came to the man of God
that came from Judah saying, For as much as thou have DISOBEYED the mouth of
the Lord etc. thy carcass shall not come unto the Sepulchers of thy Fathers
verse 20, 21, 22. and accordingly, a Lion met him, and killed him (v: 24.) but
he was not suffered to eat him (v. 28.) belike, lest such an example of Gods
anger against Disobedience, might be too soon forgotten.

What other fault could there be in him who refused to smite the Prophet, when
the Prophet himself bad him? 1 King: 20, 35 and yet, that Prophet, because he
bad him in the name of the Lord, told him, Because thou have not OBEYED the
voice of the Lord: behold, as soon as thou art departed from me, a Lion shall
tear thee. which accordingly came to pass, verse. 36.

Even of the righteous, when God has made use of affliction to open their
ears to discipline, Job says, If they OBEY NOT, they shall perish by the
sword, and they shall dye without knowledge Job 36, 12. without knowledge (...)
the Septuagint renders (...), * See Isa: ^, 13.
because being instructed, they would not learn, or, were Disobedient.

Lot's wife was to blame indeed, for her curiosity; but there is no fault of
hers mentioned, besides Disobedience to the Angel's command of not looking
back Genesis 19, 17. and yet she was turned into a pillar of salt, verse, 26.

Jonah, for refusing to go to Nineveh, when God commanded him, was made to lie
for it no less then three days in the belly of hell Jon. 2, 2.

Lastly, Those who were destroyed by the Flood, it seems Disobedience had a
great part of the cause of their punishment; for the term that S. Peter gives
them is (...), which sometimes were Disobedient, 1 Epist. 3, 20.

Disobedience to God's command, in some cases, is threatened worse, then in
others: according to the quality of the person, by whom it was delivered etc.
If the command were delivered by the mouth of a Priest, it is threatened with
Death. The man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken to the Priest,
etc. eve^ that man shall die Deuteronomy. 17, 12.

If it were delivered but by the letter of an Apostle, with Excommunioation. If
any man OBEY NOT our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no
fellowship with him, that he may be ashamed, 2 These. 3, 14.

How tenderly God takes it to be Disobeyed, may be gathered by his upbraiding
the Jews with the Obedience of the sons of Rechab. who, because their father
commanded them not to drink wine, though he spoke but once, and were now dead,
obeyed his his command for ever: whereas the Jews, though they had been
spoken to so often, and that by the Lord of Hosts *, and the God of Israel Jer.
35, 17.
, to leave their Idols, yet would never obey. See Jerem. 35, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Nothing (in the Scripture) is spoken so often, and with so much emphasis, in
the praise or dispraise of a man, as doing, and doing not, as the Lord
commanded; or, according to the commandment of the Lord. as might be showed in
an hundred places.

Distrust threatened See also Unbelief, and Trust.
.
When the Israelites would have stoned Joshua and Caleb, for persuading them to
go, into Canaan against the advice of the rest of the spies, the Lord said
unto Moses, How long will this people provoke me, how long will it be ere they
believe me, for all the signs that I have showed amongst them? I will smite
them with the pestilence, and disinherit them, Number. 14, 11, 12.

Provoke mee] or slight (or despise) me; so the Hebrew word also signifies
(...)'. No greater Slighting of a man, then to think him not worthy to be
believed. The Latin Translation renders it detrahet mihi, detract from me,
or, bring a slander upon me. and indeed nothing does more detract from the
honor and reputation of God or man, then not to believe him, or to refuse to
trust him (as we say) without ready payment.

For all the signes] or In all the signs: so it is in the Hebrew (...): as if
they might be ashamed, in the midst (as it were) of so many signs of his
fid^lity, and being compassed about (as it were) with so great a cloud of
witnesses of his truth, yet notwithstanding not to trust him.

Disinherit them] Destroy, or consume them: So say the vulgar, Septuag: and
Chald par.

Divination.
Diviners are usually punished.
With Infatuation, and madness, and being made liars; for it is said to be one
of Gods proper works so to punish them. I am the Lord that frustrateth the
tokens of the liars, and makes diviners mad, and turns wise men backward,
and makes their wisdom foolish Isa: 44, 24, 25. Their sin appears to be
very grievous to God, in that Samuel, when he would aggravate the sinfulness
of Disobedience, said it was as ba^ as Divination: rebellion is as the sin of
Divination 1 Samuel: 15, 23. (for so the word (...) signifies, as well as The
Latin transl. peccatum ariolandi. the Sept (...).
Witchraft.)

Such as seek to them are threatened or punished*
1 With Cutting off: The soul that turnet^ after such as have familiar
spirits, and after wisards We usually call the^ Cunning women.
to go a whoring after them: I will even set my face against that soul, and
will cut him off from amongst his people Levit: 20, 6.

Wisard's] the Hebrew word is Jiddehonim, which signifies, knowing; and
therefore no doubt, the threat is of large extent: insomuch, that unless
Astrology shrink it self into a narrower compass then usually it does, I do
not see well how it can avoid it. Indeed Jonathan (the Later) in his
translation, and the Jew's in their Talmudicall fables, make this word to
signify only such as inquired at the mouth of the creature called Jiddoah
(whose head they put into their mouths: and after that, they say, it spoke)
But however, to me the word seems in its genuine signification to import, all
such as are over earnest and curious to know. either such as seek to know
things which Divine wisdom has reserved for it self to know; which later
sort (perhaps) are more especially called Diviners.

2 Death: So Saul died for his transgression etc. and also for asking council
of one that had a familiar spirit to enquire of it (well might rebellion be
said to be as the sin of Divination; for after Saul had committed that, it was
not long ere he committed this; and he that makes no conscience of one, wili
make little scruple of the other) and inquired not of the Lord; wherefore he
slew him. 1 Chr: 10, 13, 14.

And also for asking] it is not said, he died for his transgression, and for
asking; as if he should not have been thus punished, if he had committed but
one of these sins: but, he died for his transgression, and also for asking, or
he died also for asking, etc. as if it had been said. He was justly thus
punished, for his Disobedience: nay, he had been justly thus punished, without
that sin; or if it had bin only for his asking council of one that had a
familiar Spirit. Nay (perhaps) there may be thus much intimated in these words,
viz: that he was punished with the loss of his life, rather for this sin,
then for the former (for, for that he was more peculiarly punished with the
loss of the Kingly government; which was a fit punishment for his rebellion
against the King of Heaven,) for these reasons. First, because the sin is
aggravated with variety of expressions; such as, asking; to enquire of it; and
inquired not of the Lord. Secondly, because the punishment is repeated
presently after the mention of it; for it was said v. 13, he died etc. and it
is said again v. 14. wherefore he slew him.

He (that is God) slew him] which accords with the words of the threat before
mentioned, I will cut him off, I, my self: not only the people shall cut him
off from among the Congregation (by Excommunication) but I my self will cut
him quite off from amongst his people, by some extraordinary judgment.

Ahaziah (King of Israel) seeking to Baalzebub to know whether he should
recover of his sickness, received it both for his punishment, and his answer,
Not to recover, 2 King. 1, 6.

Not See Word
Doing what we hear.
Every one ( says our Savior) that hears these sayings of mine, and does
them not, shall be likened to a foolish man, which built his house upon the
sand. And the rain descended, and the floods came and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house, and great was the fall of it, Matthew. 7. 26, 27.

Doubting in Prayer.
-- He that wavereth is like a wave of the sea, driven with wind, and tossed.
Let not that man think, that he shall obtain any thing of the Lord, James 1,
6, 7.

He that wavereth] (...) Mar. 11, 23.
Romans 4, 20.
he that sometimes believes, and sometimes believes not. we may not look to
have God's blessings descend right upon us, unless we stand steady to receive
them.

Drunkenness.
Drunken men, and Drunkards are punished or threatened.
1 By the sin it self. 2 By men. 3 By God. ( hat is, more immediately, or
more notoriously by him.)

They are punished By the Sin it self 1 With Committing of sins when they
are drunk, which at other times they abhorred. Lot, when his daughters had
made him drink wine, lay with them both, and at two several nights, and at
two nights immediately following one the other Genesis 19, 33, 34. one would have
thought, he would have remembered how he had been deceived in his drunkenness
so little while before; but that drunken men are likewise punished 2 With
Senselessness, even of things present, much more of things past: so that they
can neither abstain, nor repent. He porceived not when she lay down, nor when
she arose, Gen: 19, 33, 35. (it is spoken of Lot and his Daughter.)

3 Shame, and yet Shamelessness. He drunk of the wine, and was drunken, and was
uncovered within his Tent ( Concerning Noah) Gen: 9, 21. was uncovered] in the
original, it is (...) was uncovered by himself. When he had most shame, he had
none at all. The Latin verse holds true of all Secrets, both of nature, and
council, viz: That they are discovered by Drunkenesse.

Quid non ebrietas designat? operta recludit.

4 Folly, and yet a Conceit, that they are wise. Wine is a mocker, and strong
drink is raging, and he that is deceived thereby is not (or shall not be) wise.
Prove: 20, 1. In Hosea, it is said, Whordome, and wine, take away the heart that
is, the understanding Hos: 4, 11. some int^^pret it in this sense: but the
meaning may rather seem to be, that those things had stolen their hearts ( as
we use to say) that is, their affections, from God: so that they loved them,
more then him.

5 Danger, and yet Security ( for this is the misery of his misery, viz. to be
senseless of it: and there cannot be greater misery) Thou shall be as he that
lies down in the midst of the Sea, or as he that lies upon the top of a mast
Prove: 23, 34.

6 Ignorance, and Error; whereof mention is made five times in one verse. They
have erred through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way, the
Priest and the Prophet have erred Where the wine was quits with them.
through strong drink; they are swallowed up of wine: they are out of the way
through strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judgment. Isa: 28,
7.

In the Leviticall Law God forbad the Priests to drink any wine, or strong
drink when they went into the Tabernacle; and he added this for a reason, viz.
That ye may put difference between holy, and unholy, and between unclean and
clean. Lev: 10, 10. as if otherwise they could not.

The eyes, both of the body, and the mind in Drunken men, are so distorted
(...). Soph:
(like the eyes of mad men) that usually they seem to see those things which
otherwise they never saw, and which never were presented to them One thing
seems many -- ut semel icto ac cessit fervor capiti numerus que lucernis Horat.
Sermon: l 2. Sat. 1.
: (...) strange things: So the Chalde^ Paraphrast, and Vatablus translate that
word in the proverbes, which we translate strange women: Thine eye shall behold
strange women, (or strange things) and thine heart shall utter perverse things
Prove: 23, 33. Solomon brings it as an effect of too much drinking: and it may
very well be applied to what I said but now, of the perversion and corruption
both of the understanding, and the outward senses; seeing he speaks of the
eye, and the heart.

7 Sickness, Vexation, and Sadness, and an hundred other ill consequents
afterward; besides the hurt which they usually take by fightings, foolish
speeches, and mischances, while their Drunkenesse lasts. Who has woe? who has
sorrow? who has conte^tion? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause?
They that tarry long at the wine etc. Prove, 23, 29, 30. The wise man seems by
his manner of enumeration, to have made it difficult to tell, how many
punishments they have of this sort; and by his manner of interrogation, to have
thought, that no other sinners were punished with so many: or so much with this
sort of punishments, as Drunkards: and therefore well might he add that
exhortation which he adds, backing it with that reason: Look not on the wine
when it is red, when it gives its color in the cup, when it moves it self
aright. At the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder Prove:
23, 31, 32 like an Adder (...) which is a kind of Serpent that will not be
charmed Jer: 8, 7. to show the inevitably hurtful and poisonous quality of
Drunkenesse. Some have a conceit, that there is an affinity betwixt the two
Hebrew words (...) wine and (...) howling (because the letters of both words
signify the nmmber of 70) and thence observe the affinity betwixt Drunkenesse,
and Sorrow. See (at your leisure) Ecclus 31, 29, 30.

THEY are punished or threatened by men: First, with Excommuication (at least as
to the use of temporal blessings) by Saint Paul's sentence: I have written to
you not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother (for he that is
not only called a brother, but is one indeed, will never be a Drunkard) be a
fornicator etc. or Drunkard etc. with such a one, no not to eat. 1 Cor: 5, 11.

2 Conquest. Benhadad King of Syria, as he was drinking himself drunk at the
siege of Samaria, was assaulted and overthrown, even by those whom he besieged
1 Kings 20. 16.

3 Murder. Elah King of Israel was murdered by his servant Zimri, as he was
drinking hlmselfe drunk in his Stewards house 1 Kings 16, 9, 10. So Ammon was
murdered by Absalom's servants, at the command of their Master, when his heart,
was merry with wine (for those are the words) 2 Samuel: 13, 28. in the original
it is (...) when his heart was good The world uses to call good natures and
boon companions, those who are this way given.
: when he was so over- good, as to suspect no hurt, if a man offered to kill
him. All good, with men in that condition; so that they fear no evil, to
avoid it; and hate no evil, to abstain from it.

In like manner, it is said, in the story of the Maccabees, that Simon and his
Sons, when they had drunk largly, were murdered by the Captain of Jericho
(who invited them into his Castle for that very purpose.) 1 Mac: 16, 16. It is
likely enough, had not Vriah been Drunk when he was with David (who therefore
made him Drunk that he might do his business the better) he might have smelt
out somewhat of his design against him. 2 Samuel: 11, 13.

THEY are threatened and punished BY GOD, in general, with Woe. Woe to the
crown of pride, to the DRUNKARDS of Ephraim Isa: 28, 1. So chap. 5, 11. Woe
unto them that rise up early in the morning that they may follow strong drink
etc. See verse 22.

In particular 1. Either with Loathing of those creatures which they have
abused, or Using them without delight, or Not being able to use them at all
(either of these punishments is notable, and the hand of God especially
observable in them) They shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall
be bitter to them that drink it Isa: 24, 9. So as he punished their gluttonous
desire of flesh viz: with making it loathsome to them Number: 11, 20. I believe
this is a usual punishment with Drunkards, before they die.

2 Want of those creatures. Isaiah having spoken those words above mentioned
(c. 5, 11) afterward adds, Their honorable men are famished, and their
multitude dried up with thirst verse 13.

3 Poverty, and want of other creatures also For the Drunkard and the Glutton
shall come to poverty Prove: 23, 21. come to poverty] in the original it is (...)
from (...) which signifies also to be dispossessed or disinherited. but with
this punishment wine it self will punish them, disposessing them of themselves,
disinheriting them of their natural estate of reason, and causing their
Parents to disinherit them of their civil estate. Sometime they are, and it
were good if they were oftener punished thus, by their Parents.

The word in the Hebrew (viz: (...)) which signifies wine, seems to be
compounded of two other Hebrew words (viz: (...)) which signify, thou shall be
Poor. of these two words, for that which signifies poor, some put another like
it viz: (...) which signifies Chief. the word will admit of both etymologies;
in like manner, as wine produces both effects, acording as it is well or ill
used. The richest wine is most dangerous in this regard, because it has most
power to tempt thee to tarry long at it. and therefore, as I would have thee to
come to all pleasant meats, and drinks, with Fear: so especially would I
have thee be afraid, to Look upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his
color in the cup, when it moves it self aright Prove: 23, 31.

5 Sudden Death (if Priests, and when they went about their office) Do not
drink wine nor strong drink, thou nor thy Sons with thee, when ye go into
the Tabernacle of the congregation, least ye die: It shall be a statute for
ever throughout thy generations Lev: 10, 9. Some think that Nadab, and Abihu
were Drunk, when they took common fire instead of consecrated, (as you may see
verse 1. of that chapter) and that this Law was made upon that occasion,
because it is mentioned presently after. now their punishment was also death,
viz: by fire from the Lord: as you may see verse 2.

Either Sudden death, or Surprizall by the day of judgment. But and if that
evil seravnt shall say in his heart, my Lord delaieth his coming ( such
speeches of security are common with Drunkards) and shall begin to smite his
fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the Drunken; the Lord of that
servant shall come in a day that he looks not for him etc. Mat: 24, 48, 49,
50. shall begin] If ^e be thus threatened, for but beginning to drink etc. what
must he expect, if he have practiced this wickedness for many years?

6 Exclusion out of heaven. Nor thieves, nor coveteous, nor DRUNKARDS, shall
inherit the Kindome of God 1 Cor: 6. 10. See Mat: 24, 49, 51.

Such as make others Drunken are thus threatened.
Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink: that put thy bottle to him,
( the Prophet could not forbear to come from the third person to the second,
for anger; which is best expressed in that person) and MAKE HIM DRVNKEN also,
that thou may look on their nakedness. Thou art filled with shame for
glory; drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the Lords
right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spuing shall be on thy
glory. Hab. 2, 15, 16.

Duties of Religion etc.
Duties of religion, such as perform them with resolution to retain their
sins.
THEY are threatened: First with non-acceptance as 1. in Fasting and
humiliation. When the Jews demanded of God, Wherefore have we fasted, and thou
see not? wherefore have we aflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge?
He made them this answer, Behold in the day of your fast you As we say when we
have other work in hand, to find a time, or steal a time for our own
busine^e: or as we say, find a man, that is maintain him.
find pleasure, and exact all your labors. Isa: 58, 3. 2. In Prayer or seeking
to God Y^ pollute your selves with all your Idols, even unto this day: and
shall I be inquired of by you, O house of Israel? as I live, says the Lord
God, I will not be enquired of by you Ezekiel: 20, 31. By you] in the original
it is (...) for you; which will expres both senses, and more anger* I will
neither hear you, nor any body else for you. See Zach: 7, 5, 6, 7. Mic: 6, 6,
7, 1. So Amos 5, 22, 23. Though ye offer me burnt offerings, I will not accept
them etc. But let judgment run down as water etc. verse 24. As if he had said,
though you offer me never so many offerings etc. I will not accept them, as
long as you do not execute judgment. See Jer: 7, 9, 10. 3. In Believing God's
word, or believing in God (or in preaching or reading) But unto the wicked God
says, what have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should
take my Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my
words behind thee Ps: 50, 16, 17. God's house is not a Den for thieves etc.
Jer: 7, 11. and as long as we reject his ordinances to obey them, we have
nothing to do with his ordinances to enjoy them.

2. Severe punishment. For every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger
that sojourneth in Israel, which separateth himself from me etc. And comes
to See also verse. 4.
a Prophet to enquire of him concerning me: I the Lord will answer him by my
self; And I will set my face against that man, and will make him a sign and
a proverb etc. Ezekiel: 14, 7, 8. Samuel told Saul, ( for all his sacrificing to
the Lord) because he disobeyed his command, in not tarrying at Gilgal till he
came: Thou have done foolishly, thou have not kept the commandment of the Lord
thy God which he commanded thee: For now would the Lord have established thy
Kingdom upon Israel for ever: But now thy Kingdom shall not continue. 1 Samuel:
13, 13, 14.

God's Altar was not allowed for a refuge for him that slew his Brother with
guile Exodus 21, 14.

An earthly Father, though his Son behave himself never so respectfully, and
show him never so much reverence in his language and deportment; yet if he be
Disobedient, is so far from accepting of it, that he likes him the worse.

Enemies of God's Children.
Enemies of God's children threatened and punished:
First with God's enmity against them (especially when his children are
dutiful) for thus he speaks to the Israelites, concerning the Angel whom he
would send before them, If thou shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that I
speak, then I will be an Enemy unto thine Enemies, and an adversary unto thine
adversaries, Exodus 23, 22.

Secondly, a Curse. Isaac, when he blessed Jacob, thus spoke, Cursed be every
one that curses thee, and blessed be he that blesses thee, Genesis 27, 29.

CURSED be] in the Original it is only (...) cursed: neither Be, nor Let, nor
Shall; whereas it was before, LET people serve thee, or, people SHALL serve
thee, and Nations bow down to thee: BE Lord over thy Brethren etc. to show,
that those who hate and curse God's Children, are cursed with God presently (
ipso facto) though they may not appear so to them; and though as yet, for
matter of their temporal prosperity against them, it be in the future tense.
They SHALL SERVE thee, and they SHALL bow down to thee: but they ARE CVRSED,
or, they are cursed already.

Thirdly, The Increase of those whom they endeavor to diminish. It is said of
the Israelites in Egypt, But the more they afflicted them, the more they
multiplied. Ex: 1, 12. the original (word for word) speaks thus: As they
afflicted them, SO they multiplied: as if God were so punctual, and so ready
in this way of avenging the godly, that presently as soon as ever men have done
them Hurt one way, he does them good another. Many things grow the thicker for
cutting short: and there is no readier way to make the godly grow, then to sow
their blood upon the ground (though for the present it may seem to be but
spilt) Sanguis Martyrii est semen Ecclesiae.

Fourthly, Vexation and Grief thereupon: as it is afterward said in the
forementioned verse, and they were GRIEVED because of the Children of Israel.
The Psalmist, having spoken before of the good man's exaltation, adds in
abundance of passion The wicked shall see it, and be GRIEVED, he shall gnash
with his teeth, and melt away, the desire of the wicked shall perish, Psalm:
112, 10.

Fifthly, Non-successe. Balaam (upon Balak's earnest importunity) having tried
his Number: 24, 1.
enchantments several ways, at several times, and in several places, to
curse the Israelites; and being still told by God, that it was to no purpose to
endeavor it, because he was resolved to bless them; at length sitts down, and
concludes, Surely, there is no enchantment The Sept. render it (...) IN Jacob,
but the other passages of the story, and what is said chap. 24. 1. seem to
speak the contrary^
against Jacob; neither is there any divination against Israel Number: 23, 23.

Sixthly, Conquest ( at least, at the last) These shall make war with the Lamb,
and the Lamb shall overcome them: For he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
and they that are with him, are called, and faithful, and chosen, Rev: 17, 14.

Seventhly, Shame. Isaiah in his Song-They shall see, and be ashamed for their
envy at the people; yea the fire See Isaiah 50, 11.
of thine enemies shall devour them chap: 26, 11.

Eighthly, Punishments, many, and sure, and notoriously by the hand of God. That
they are many, this whole chapter shall declare. and, that they are sure, is as
sure, as God is just, in Paul's opininion. his words are these: Seeing it is a
righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you 2
These: 1, 6. insomuch that as he makes the persecution of the godly to be (...)
a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, who must in justice render
tribulation to them that trouble; and rest to them that are troubled 2 These: 1,
5, 6, 7. So in like manner in an other place, he makes the malice of wicked men
in persecuting of them, to be (...) an evident token not only of their
punishment, but perdition, or destruction Phil: 1, 28.

Sure: and also speedy, especially if God's children be earnest with him in
prayer. for our Savior, having told his Disciples a parable of a Judge, who
neither feared God, nor regarded man, and yet resolved to avenge a widow of
her adversary, because of her importunity: asked them, whether they thought
that God could be more hard-hearted then a wicked man? and shall not God avenge
his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with
them? I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily; Luke 18, 7, 8. Bear long,
and yet speedily, for he counts not slacknesse, and speediness; long, and
short, as we do; because with him one day is as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day, 2 Pet. 3, 8, 9.

Because the Amalekites withstood the Israelites in their journey into Canaan:
the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse
it The Original put it into his ears: How careful God is not to suffer the
Enemies of his Church to go unpunished
in the ears of Joshua: for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek
from under heaven. Ex. 17, 14. So careful was he, lest it might be forgotten.
and therefore in Deuteronomy. 25, 17. he charges the Israelites, to Blot out the
remembrance of the Amalekites themselves, rather then the remembrance of their
injury. REMEMBER (says he,) what Amaleck did unto thee by the way, when ye
were come forth out of Egypt: and verse 19. Thou shall blot out the remembrance
of Amalek from under heaven: thou shall not forget it.

Rejoice O ye Nations with his people, for he will avenge the blood of his
Servants, said Moses in his Song, Deuteronomy: 32, 43. (...), So the Septuagint, and
after them Paul Rom: 15, 10. ( though some translate, Rejoice ye Nations, which
are his people) It seems to me as if he had said: Ye Nations, which have not
yet showed your selves ENEMIES TO THE PEOPLE OF GOD, come in, and take part with
them, and congratulate their delivery from those that persecute them: for, if
you take their course, you are like to fare as they have done, and God will
surely punish you.

Smite through the loins of them that rise against him, said the same Moses in
his prayer for Levi, before his death Deuteronomy: 33, 11. Now (in the Scriptures) the
Prayers of men inspired with a Prophetic Spirit, whether for the godly, or
against the wicked, have most of them, the nature of prophesies, and (without
doubt) were so spoken, or intended; so that many of them are not to be imitated
by us. Many such there are of David's, in the Psalms, to be rendered (or
interpreted at least) rather by shall, then let: as Ps: 69, 27, 28. etc. See
Deborah's prayer Jud: 5, 31.

Joshua prophesied to the Israelites peremptorily, when they had put their feet
upon the necks of the five kings at Makkedah, Fear not, nor be dismayed: for
thus shall the Lord do to all your Enemies against whom ye fight, Josh. 10,
25. So much for the certainty of God's punishing the Enemies of his Church: I
proceed to the manner; such as wherein it may be more clearly seen, it is He.

THE hand of God notoriously appears in the punishing of the Enemies of the
Church, severallwayes:

First, When he produces unnatural, and unusual effects, upon their Minds:
such as first, a strange Hatred, and Anger against one another from whence many
times proceeds Either Killing of one another. Thus Sennacherib, king of
Assyria, was murdered by his own sons 2 Kings 19, 37. The Assyrian Officers
helped the Jews in the slaughter of their own Nation. Esth. 9, 3. Haman was
hanged by his own kings command, whom he had advised to slaughter the Jews,
Esth. 7. 10. but see more to this purpose in the chapter of Discord. Or (at
least) Suspending their malice against those, whom they persecute. When the
Scribes and Pharisees fell out, upon occasion of Paul's mentioning the
Resurrection: the Scribes who (held the resurrection, which the Pharisees deny)
spoke to have him acquitted Acts 23, 7.


Secondly, A strange Pertinacie in prosecuting their malice: and with this they
are punished, that they may be punished the more. So the Canaanites were
punished. There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel,
save the Hivites, the inhabitants of Gibeon; all other they took in battle.
For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, that they should come against
Israel in battle; that he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have
no favor (for, favor they were to show them, if they had made them answers of
peace, when they were summoned, Deuteronomy. 20, 11.) but that he might destroy them,
as the Lord commanded Moses Josh. 11, 19, 20. In like manner was the King of
Egypt punished that he might be punished the more (as God professed, it was his
intention before hand Exodus 10, 1.) again, and again, but especially at the
red Sea, when he resolved to pursue the Israelites. For certainly, he could not
think that he, who was for them, was for him too: and if he were not, it was
strange he would not think, that having made the water to stand on a heap
against nature, to preserve his friends, he could, and would make them return
to their natural course, to destroy his Enemies.

Thirdly, A strange Fear, when they come to act their designs, even of those
whom before they esteemed contemptible; whereof they can give no reason.

It was Moses his viz. in his Song presently after the passage through the red
Sea.
Prophecy (concerning the Canaanites) FEAR and DREAD shall fall upon them, by
the greatness of thine arm (for the greatness of Gods arm (or power)
appears most in his working upon the heart, (as by sudden passions, or
otherwise) They shall be as still, as a stone, till thy people pass over, O
Lord: till the people pass over, which thou have purchased Exodus 15, 16. FEAR
and DREAD] so Deuteronomy 2, 25. The FEAR of thee, and the DREAD of Thee: and chap.
11, 25. The FEAR of you, and the DREAD of you: to show, it should be a mere
fear, whereof they could give no cause, being greater in number, and strength.
Therefore it is said, it should fall upon them: that is, come upon them, they
knew not from whence, nor wherefore. See Josh. 2, 9. and Esth. 9, 3.

It was God's Promise: I will send my Fear before thee Ex. 23, Austin and
others interpret the hornet^ spoken of v. 28. of the sting of Fear.
27. repeated Deuteronomy. 2, Where it is said, (...) they shall be afraid like women
in travel ( we render it, shall be in anguish because of thee) according to
that Ps 48, 6. Fear took hold of the^ there, and pain, as of a woman in
travel.
25. and chap. 11, 25.

This Prophecy, and Promise, were fulfilled and performed: according to
Rahab's confession to the spies, I know that the Lord has given you the Land,
and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the Inhabitants of the
Land faint, because of you Josh. 2, 9. The like had God done for their Fathers
before them: viz Jacob and his sons, when they journeyed from Shechem to
Bethel. For, although they had lately killed the Shechemites, (and so had more
cause to be afraid themselves of revenge) and although they were flying from
Esau; yet it is said, that the Terror of God was upon the cities that were
round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob Genesis 35, 5.
The terror of God] the Fear of the Israelites, but the terror of God, or a
terror from God (...) i. e. A Consternation sent from him. Indeed it might be
rendered, a Great Consternation (or terror) Such as could come from no less
power then God's (it was so great:) or such as could come from none but God
(there being no cause of fear from man) such as this was, because the power of
man was so small. It is usual (you know) in Scripture, when the intention is
to express the greatness or strength of a thing, to add the word (...) In
which name of his is chiefly employed his strength or power, as who would say,
all the strongs are in him alone; or, he is All-Mightie.
(or (...)) i. e. of God: as you may see Gen: 30, 8. 1 Samuel: 14, 15. Psalm: 36,
7. Jon: 3. 3. etc.

There are other very notable examples of this terror; as, 1 The Philistines:
for though they knew that (unless it were with Saul and Jonathan) there was
neither sword nor spear found in the hand of the people 1 Samuel: 13, 22. (which
was, because they would not suffer them to have any Smiths, that might make
them) yet it is said of them chap. 14, 15 that (as soon as Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer had made an assault upon the garrison) there was trembling in the
Host, and in the field, and among all the people: the garrison and the spoylers
they also trembled, and the earth quaked, so it was a very great trembling. And
the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah looked, and behold they melted away, and they
went on beating down one another (perhaps not knowing what they did, out of
extreme fear) 2 Saul, who was afraid of David, before ever he went from the
court, or had any with him to help him. For, it is said 1 Samuel. 18, 12. Saul
was AFRAID of David, because the Lord was with him, and was departed from Saul.
This is also an example of the like fear without cause: for I take the reason
which is added, viz. Because the Lord, etc. to be given by him that wrote this
book, and not as Readiness reason; for had it been so, it is likely, it would
have been said, Was departed from HIM, ( sibi reciprocally) and not FROM SAUL.
3 The Assyrians. For it is said of the Jews, (when Ahasuerus had given them
leave to kill those who would have murdered the^, in comparison of whom,
doubtless, they were of a very contemptible number) And no man could withstand
them, for the FEAR of them fell upon all ( Perhaps better so then if you
render it, all people.
the) people Esth. 9. 2. But (that which is more strange yet) it is said, verse
3. of the same chapter, that the FEAR of Mordecai (of one single Jew, whom
even now they had appointed to be hanged) fell upon all the Rulers of the
Provinces, and the Lievtenants, and the Deputies, and Officers of the King.
Lastly, Judas, and his company of soldiers: who, when they came to apprehend
our Savior, As Soon as he said unto them, I am He, went backward, and fell to
the ground John 18, 6. I may say of all these, in the words of David, There
were they in great fear, where no fear was Psalm. 53, 5. no feare] that is, no
cause of fear. A cause of fear there was indeed, (for, as he says, Psalm. 14,
5. God is in the generation of the righteous) but none in their account.

I might produce many places out of the Prophets, and elsewhere, which speak
largely of God's way of punishing his Enemies with fearfulness: but I will
only refer you to these three, which you may read at your leisure: viz. Isa
19, 17. Mic. 17, 17. Zach. 12, 2. 2 Chr. 14, 14.

Fourthly, Strange Sottishness, and want of understanding, (so that they have
not the wit to do hurt) In this manner (at least) was Nebuchadnezar punished
Dan. 4, 33.

Fifthly, Strange Madness. In this manner the Enemies of Jerusalem are
threatened to be punished: In that day, says the Lord, I will smite every horse
with astonishment, and his rider with MADNESS Zach. 12, 4.

Sixthly, Strange Delusion: as 1 By Sights. Thus the Moabites, that fought
against Jehoram, and Jehoshaphat, were punished; For, the water (wherewith the
valley, in which the Israelites lay, was fiilled without wind or rain 2 Kings
3, 17.) by reason of the Sun shining upon it in that morning, seemed to them to
be bloody; (verse. 22, 23.) which made them to think they had slain one
another, and so run thither with confidence to take the spoil. But the
Israelites rose up, and smote the Moabites, and they fled before them v. 24.
And thus the Midianites were deceived by the pitchers with Lamps in them which
Gideon and his three hundred men brake in pieces, when they fell upon them at
Moreh. For at the sight of them it is said, that, all the host r^nne, and
cried, and fled Jud. 7, 21. 2 By Reports; thus the Syrians were deceived, at
the siege of Samaria (when Joram was King of Israel) For, the Lord made the
host of the Syrians to hear a noise of Chariots, and a noise of horses, even
the noise of a great host: and they said one to another, Lo, the King of Israel
has hired against us the Kings of the Hittites, and the Kings of the
Egyptians, to come upon us. Wherefore they arose, and fled in the twilight, and
left their tents, and their horses, and their asses, and the camp as it was,
and fled for their life 2 Kings 7, 6, 7. And likewise the Assyrians, at the
siege of Jerusalem, (when Hezekiah was King of Judah) for God says of
Sennacherib their King: I will send a blast (...) the Septuagint render it
(...) a Spirit.
upon him, and he shall hear a rumor, and shall return to his own Land; and
I will cause him to fall in his own Land. 2 Kings 19, 7.

A Second way, wherein the hand of God is notoriously seen in the punishing of
the enemies of the Church, is, When he produces unusual effects upon their
Bodies: such as 1 Blindness: So the Sodomites were punished, when they came to
demand the Angels that lodged in Lots house; insomuch that they could not find
the door Gen: 19, 11. And so the Syrians, upon the prayer of Elisha, at
Dothan; (whither they were sent by the King of Syria, to apprehend him)
insomuch that, promising to direct them to the man whom they sought, he led
them quite home into Samaria 2 King 6, 19: 2 Diseases: So the Egyptians were
punished with Boyles, Ex 9. The Philistines with Emrods 1 Samuel: 5. Gog, and his
men, have been, or shall be, with the Pestilence, Ezekiel: 38. 22. 3 Strange, and
violent, and untimely Death's, inflicted Sometimes more immediately by the hand
of God; as when all the first borne in the land of Egypt were slain in one
night Exodus: 12, 29, And, when Jehoram King Judah (who had slain his brethren
of his Father's house that were better then him self 2 Chr: 21, 13.) died of
such a disease in his bowels, that his bowels fell out verse 15. Hitherto may
be reduced that Deep Sleep from the Lord, which fell upon those that were with
Saul 1 Samuel: 26, 12. (insomuch that David took away his Spear, and his Cruse of
water, close by his bolster where he lay; and no body knew of it) Sometimes by
the hand of men; but in such a manner, as that the hand of God may be never the
less notoriously seen.

Either, when it is done by those whom they most trusted: as, when Jezebel was
thrown out at window by her own Eunuchs 2 Kings 9, 33.

Or, when it is done by those, to whom they intended the same death themselves;
as, when those, who got a Commission of King Ahasuerus, to kill the Jews,
were slain themselves by the same Jews, and by the same authority Esth: 8, 11.
c. 9, 5.

Or, when it is done in the same manner; as when Haman was hanged on the
gallows, which he made for Mordecai Esth: 7, 10. and those that accused Daniel,
and caused him to be cast into the den of Lions, were by the Kings command,
thrown in themselves, and devour^d Dan: 6, 24.

Insomuch that I think, for the most part, what Abigail 1 Samuel 25, 29.
said to David, of his enemies, may be as truly said to any of the Children of
God: of theirs, The souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out of
the middle of a sling: or, he shall violently, and hastily snatch them away, as
in a passion:

A THIRD way, wherein the hand of God, more notoriously appears in punishing
the Enemies of his children, is, when he makes use of noisome creatures for
instruments; or, renders them noisome, by changing their nature, or increasing
their number, or prolonging their continuance, or making them act after a
strange, and unusual manner. Thus it was seen upon the Egyptians, in Turning
their water into blood, Ex. 7. 19. In causing an excessive number of Frogs
chap. 8, 6. Of Lice, v. 17. Of Flies v. 24. Of Locusts c. 10, 13: Upon the
Assyrians (sent to inhabit Canaan, after they had carried the Israelites
captive) by destroying them with Lions 2 Kings 17, 25. Upon the Egyptians, in
causing an exceeding great darkness to continue three days together verse. 22.
Upon the Canaanites, by destroying them with Hornets Exodus 23, 28. Josh. 24,
12. Upon the five Cananite Kings (when they fought with Joshua at Gibeon) by
destroying them with hailestones, wherewith there were more slain, then with
the sword, Josh. 10, 11. as likewise upon the Egyptians Exodus 9, 23. See Ezekiel.
38, 22. Upon the two Captains, and their companies of fifty (sent by King
Ahaziah, to apprehend Elijah) by destroying them with fire from heaven, 2 King.
1, 10. so upon the Egyptians Exodus 9, 23. and so it has, or shall be upon Gog
and Magog Ezekiel. 38, 22. Revel. 20. 9. Upon the Philistines that fought with
Samuel at Mizpeh, by Thunder 1 Samuel 7, 10. according to Hannah's words in her
song, Out of Heaven shall he thunder upon them etc. cap. 2, 10. and so upon the
Egyptians, Exodus 9, 23. Upon those Five Kings formerly mentioned, by causing
the Sun, and Moon to stand still, at the prayer of Joshua; that so it might
not be dark, till the people had avenged themselves of their adversaries, who
might have escaped in the night Ps. 21, 21 Ecclus 46, 5.
Josh. 10, 12. At that time, the Sun and Moon may be said to have fought for
God's people, though not in their courses (for their courses were stopped) as
Deborah said in her Song, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera,
Jud. 5, 20. The Jews some of them say, that the Stars had so overheated the
ground, that, with the heat the horses hoofes fell off. Some, that they had so
heated the men, that going into Kidron to cool themselves, they took cold and
died. Others, that the Stars caused Cui militataether, Claudian ( speaking of
Theodosius fighting with Eugenius.)
winds, and other Meteors, in such extremity, that they could not fight.

A Fourth way, wherein the hand of God is more notoriously seen in punishing
the Enemies of his Church, is, when he makes use of contemptible, and unlikely
means: such as were 1 A sling, and a stone, wherewith little David slew great
Goliath, and put the Philistines to flight 1 Samuel 17, 49. 2 Rams horns, at the
sounding whereof the walls of Jericho fell down, Josh. 6, 20. 3 An Oxe-goad
For in his time there was not a Shield not spear seen among fortty housand in
Israel. Judge. 5, ^.
, wherewith Judge Sha^gar is said to have slain no less then six hundred
Philistines, and delivered Israel, Judge. 3. 31. It is likely, that Readiness army,
when they went against the Philistines etc. 1 Samuel 14. had but little better
weapons, then such tools. for they had no Smiths of their own; and those
Smiths which they went to of the Philistines, (doubtless) durst not make them
any other things, then Axes, and Mattocks, and such other tools, as belonged
to husbandry, chap. 13, 20. 4 One only woman, and with nothing but a hammer
and a nail: for therewith Jael (the wife of Heber) slew no less man then
Sisera, the King of Canaan's General, Jud. 4, 21. 5, A mean man of no quality:
such as Gideon, who was of the poorest family in all the tribe of Manasseth,
and the least man in that family Judge. 6, 15. and yet God sent him, to save
Israel from the hand of the Moabites verse. 15. and also told him, that he
should smite the Midianites as one man, verse. 16.

A FIFTH way, wherein the hand of God more notoriously appears in punishing
the enemies of his Children, is, When he makes use of Angels: in that manner,
as he did when he punished Sennacherib the King of Assyria for besieging
Jerusalem (in the time of Hezekiah) For the Angel of the Lord went out, and
smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and
when they arose early in the morning behold they were all dead corpse 2 Kings
19, 35. It is not unlikely, that use was made of Angels at other times also,
when it is said that God smote, or the Lord saved, and the Lord discomfited,
such or such a people: for you may observe, that for the most part it is so
said, See Ex. 12. 29. 2 Chr. 14, 12. 1 Samuel 14, 23. etc.
when the number of men was so little, that it could not be done, unless God's
hand did eminently show it self either this, or some other, extraordinary way.
I will instance in one place especially viz: Jud: 4, 15. where it is said, that
the LORD DISCOMFITED Sisera, and all his Chariots, and all his host, with the
edge of the sword before Barak now it is probable, that in that fight God made
use of Angels, because Deborah in her Song of Thanksgiving for the victory
says: * Id. est, coelestes. Vatablus.
They fought from Heaven chap: 5, 20. As also because it is said verse. 23.
(...) which we translate, They came not to the help of the Lord; to the help of
the Lord against the mighty: but others translate it thus, They came not to our
help: The Lord was our help, even the Lord with (or in) his mighty ones,
meaning by Mighty ones, Angels: according as we translate (...) (which
signifies, the bread of strong or Mighty ones) the Bread of Angels Ps. 78, 25.
Paul calls them (...), the Angels of his power, or (or as we render it) his
mighty Angels. However, I must confess, it is sometimes thus spoken, when, it
is like, the intention was, only to denote the just judgment of God upon those
that were smitten, for their sins: as in Judge: 20, 35. and elsewhere. This is
certain, that Persecuters of God's Children have just cause to fear the help
which they have of Angels, in regard that (as contemptible as they make them)
they have allowed them, Angels of their own, * Id est, ( says Be-za) Ange-los
ipsis peculiari-ter adhibi-tos custo-des, etc.
provided of purpose for them, continually attending upon God in their behalf,
and looking but for the word to execute vengeance upon any that shall wrong
them. I say unto you, their Angels do always behold the Face of my Father
which is in Heaven, says our Savior, Mat: 18, 10. And therefore was it, that
in the words immediately before, he bade them take heed how they did but
despise, though it were but one of those little ones, that believed in him. See
Hebr: 1, 14. Eccles: 5, 6. and likewise Acts 12, 15. for there it is said,
that, when Peter knocked at Mary's door, in the night; the people of the house
being confident it could not be Peter himself, (whom they knew to be in prison
the day before) said, it is his Angel: which they seem to have spoken in such a
manner (not using many words; for they might have said, it is an Angel sent
from God about some business concerning him) as if it were a thing then
commonly believed, and known by experience, for God's Children to have Angels
for their Guardians. But (to say more yet) God's Children have not only each of
them his Angel (as Peter had) but they have had, and I doubt not, they may have
again (if occasion require) Mahanaim an army of Angels: such as Jacob had for
his guard, when Esau was coming to meet him in his way homewards from Haran
Gen: 32, 2: And such as ('it is likely) Elisha had for his, when an army of men
was sent by the King of the Syrians to take him. for when his Servant began to
be afraid of the many horses, and Chariots, which he saw of the Syrians; it is
said, that, upon Elisha's prayer, the Lord opened the eyes of the young man (so
it is God must open our eyes by faith, before we can see the help which he
has laid for us, upon Jesus Christ, who is mighty to save) and he saw, and
behold the mountain was full of horses and Chariots of fire round about
Elisha. So that for horses and Chariots against him, there are horses and
Chariots for him, even horses and Chariots of fire: 2 Kin. 6, 17.

Besides what I have here produced, the Tenderness of God's love toward his
Children, and the Bitterness of his hatred against those that persecute them, may
be further gathered out of the Scriptures, by the Tenderness, and Bitterness,
of his expressions therein, concerning them. I will produce only two places:
One is in Matthew, where mention is not made of persecuting them, but only of
offending them. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones (an expression
of most tender love) which believe in me, it were better that a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the midst of the Sea Mat.
18. 6. The other is in Isaiah, where God calls the slaughter of their enemies,
a Sacrifice (as he does also elsewhere, viz: Jer: 46, 10. etc.) and he seems by
his manner of expression, to speak of it with abundance of delight and
complacency: The sword of the Lord is filled with bood, it is made fat with
fatness, and with the blood of Lambs, and Goats, and with fat of the kidneys
of rams, for the L^nd has a Sacrifice in B^zrah, and a great slaughter in the
land of Idumea: chap: 34, 6. To conclude, It is God's word, and I may speak it
with confidence, let the wicked plot against the just, as much as he will, and
gnash upon him with his teeth* (Ps: 37, 12) till his teeth break; all the
wicked, first or last, shall perish; and the enemies of the Lord shall be as
the fat of lambs: they shall consume, into smoke shall they consume away:
Psalm: 37. 20. It will not be done in an instant, neither are they burnt away
suddenly in a flame: you must tarry God's leisure; and if you believe, you will
not make have. The enemies of the Jewish Church in Canaan were not destroyed at
once: no more will the enemies of the Church in General. Be sure, they shall
by degrees wast away, as in a smoke; and drop away like fat, by the fire of
God's anger. At the Feast of Tabernacles, in seven days the Israelites were to
offer seventy bullocks: for the first, thirteen; for the second, twelve; for
the third, eleven; and so forward: every day diminishing the number by one. and
the reason thereof, some Jews conceive to be this, viz: To show, how the
Seventy Nations (for whom they say those Sacrifices were offered) should still
grow less and less, till all were subdued to the government of the M^ssias
Jesus Christ. Doubtless the time shall come, when that prophecy, which is
twice related in the Book o^ Isaiah, shall be fulfilled: They shall not hurt,
nor destroy, in all my holy Mountain: Isa: 11, 9. chap: 65, 25.

I have been the longer in this chapter of the punishments of the enemies of
God's children, because I see that God's children have so many enemies, and
because I see how light a matter men make it, to wrong them, and persecute them.

Envy.
Enviers are punished, 1 With Not having their desire: although (I must
confess) it be proper rather to emulation, then Envy, to desire (for envy is
properly sorrowing at that which an other man has, not because I have it not,
but only because he has it: whereas Emulation is, because I have it not, or
because I have it not as well, as he) and therefore in the text which I am
about to cite, after (...) The greek copies read (...) kill; and so the vulgar
and Syriack translate, but Erasmus and Beza read it (...) envy, because else
the Apostle fell too much in his expression, viz. from kill, which is greater,
to, desire to have which is less.
ye envy, before the words (...) and cannot obtain, you have, (...) ( ye
emulate) and we translate it, desire to have: Ye lust and have not: ye envy,
and desire to have, and cannot obtain James 4, 2.

Add hereunto, that their envy is seldom to any purpose. many times those
whom they envy, have the more for it; and from Esek and Sitnah, they come to
Rehoboth. This name Isaac gave to that well, in the digging whereof, the
Philistines, who envied at him for his prosperity, and therefore strove against
him in digging of his wells before, (called therefore Esek and Sitnah, both
which names signify, contention) when they saw it was to no purpose, forbear
to st^ive any longer: Because (said he) now the Lord has made ^ome For so the
word signifies from whence that name comes.
for us, and we shall be fruitful in the Land Gen: 26, 19, 20, 21, 22. I
remember a saying of Alexander's to Meleager (who was angry with him, for
bestowing a thousand Talents of Silver upon a Barbarian prince) Invidos homines
nihil aliud quam ipsorum esse tormenta, Envious men are merely their own
tormenters, and nothing else. Q. Curt: l. 8.

Nay, perhaps, (for having an evil eye, because God's eye is good) they may
not only be forced to be contented with that which is their own, but be bid to
be gone too; as the serva^t was in the parable (because he envied at those who
wrought but one hour, and received a penny, as well as he:) Take that thine
is, and go thy way, I will give unto this last even as nuto thee. Matt: 20, 14.

2 Not having Content of mind, though they have never so much: which I take to
be a very great punishment. And Haman told them ( viz: his friends, and his
wife) of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his Children, and all
the things wherein the King had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above
the Princes and Servants of the King. Haman said moreover; Yea, Esther the
Queen did let no man come in with the King unto the banquet, that she had
prepared, but my self, and to morrow am I invited unto her also with the King:
Yet all this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at
the Kings gate. Esth: 5. 11, 12, 13. Though Elkanah were kinder to Hannah, then
he was to Peninnah; yet because Peninnah had children, and she had none, she
remained in bitterness of Soul, and refused to eat her meat. 1 Samuel 1. 7, 10.

3 Consumption of their Bodies (which punishment they owe to themselves, and
their own sin; as there are scarce any sinners, but are filled with their own
devices Pro: 1. 31.) Solomon says, Envy is the rottenes Which is worse then
what the Poet says, Intactis vorat ossibus medullas: See Ovids description of
Envy. Metam. l. 2. Fab. 12.
of the bones. So David, (speaking of me^ envying the prosperity of the
righteous) They shall g^ash with their teeth and melt away. Ps: 112. 12.
Elipha^ told Job, Envy slays the silly one Job 5. 2.

When Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no Children, Rachel envied her Sister, and
said unto Jacob, give me Children or else I die Gen: 30. 1. ( or, I am a dead
woman, for so is the Hebrew (...))

If Envy be so much in the eye, (as I believe it is, Horace uses oculo
irretorto, Of him that does not envy; and Ar^sto phane says of an ^n vious man
(...).
) it must needs cause a great deal of pain, because it is in a very tender
part It is expressed in Scripture, (as we usually expound it) by the name of an
evil eye: although that expression may be meant also of being niggardly, or
hard-hearted, or not Good, and righteous is often so to be meant in Scripture
translation.
good (that is merciful, liberal, or charitable) see Matt: 20. 15. Prove. 23.
6. and the Appendix.

4 Destruction both of Body and Soul. Envyings, Murders etc. Of the which I
tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal: 5. 21. I might give you
many instances of severe punishments, inflicted perhaps for other sins; but
upon such sinners, who were primarily, if not chiefly incited by envy to do
what they did. I will mention only two or three. 1 The King of the Egyptians,
who took up his resolution to persecute the Israelites (for which he suffered
all those fearful plagues) upon this motive, Behold the people of the
Children of Israel are more and mightier then we Exodus: 1. 9. 2 Dathan and
Abiram, and their company. They envied Moses also in the Camp and Aaron the
Saint of the Lord, says the Psalmist Ps: 106. 16. (viz: for being above the
rest of the congregation Number. 16. 3.) and it follows immediately in the next
verse: The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of
Abiram.

3 The Ephraimites: who envying Jephtha, for conquering the Ammonites without
caling them, made war against him, and were overcome by him and the
Gileadi^es, with the loss of no less then two and forty thousand men Jud: 12.
6.

Paul threatens the Corinthians well, if he found them guilty of this sin, 2
Cor. 12, 20. but what he meant to do to them I know not.

Escape of malefactors suffered.
King Ahab, for making a covenant with Benhadad King of Syria after he had
conquered him, was thus threatened. Because thou have let go out of thine hand,
a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for
his life, and thy people, for his people, 1 King. 20, 42.

Evil.
Calling it Good.
Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for
light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter
Isaiah 5. 20. This may be meant of Judges only, (who say unto the wicked, Thou
art just, Prove. 24, 24. or, Justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him: as it follows here v. 23.) And it may
be, it was spoken only to Priests and Prophets: but this I am sure, it is a
fault too common now, both to Ministers and others, in very many things.
Separating from wicked men is called schism: pride, neatness; and neatness,
pride: covetousness, frugality; and frugality, covetousness; and twenty such
other mis-namings there are: whereby we see, men are very much encouraged in
evil, and discouraged from good; being naturally apt to regard more, what they
are esteemed to be, then what they are.

Rendering it for Good.
In the Proverbs, you have this threat, Who so rendereth evil for good, evil
shall not depart from his house chap: 17. 13. Jeremiah, in that prayer of his
against those that conspired his death, chap. 18. (wherein are such bitter and
passionate expressions) the first and maine thing, that he complained of, was
their rend'ring him evil for good viz: by endeavoring to destroy him,
although he had prayed to God to preserve them, v. 20. The heinousness and
desert thereof, you may gather by his interrogation, Shall evil be recompensed
for good? v. 20. The Dangerousnesse thereof, and the punishment like to ensue,
by his prayer immediately following: verse. 21. to the end of the chapter. There
are not many prayers like it; for it begins with Remember, and concludes with
Forgive not.

Extortion.
Extortioners are threatened with
1 God's grievous anger. In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood: thou have
taken usury and increase, and thou have greedily gained of thy neighbors by
extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord God. Behold therefore, I have
smitten my hand at thy dishonest gain, which thou have made, etc. Ezekiel. 22,
12, 13. Thou have greedily gained of thy neighbours] or, thou have gained of
thy neighbor by Extortion (or, Oppression) (...) for greedily gaining of any
one is naught: and I think, the word (...) though it be chiefly, yet it is not
necessarily meant of ungodly gaining; as may be conjectured by the addition of
(...) Evil, Hab. 2, 9. Woe unto him that coveteth an evil covetousness (or
gain:) as if some such gain as is expressed in that word, were not evil. So
likewise here, there seems to be an Emphasis in the word (...) The word comes
from (...) to feed, and it seems properly to signify my familiar companion,
that does eat of my bread (as it is Psalm. 41, 9.) Conviva a Com-panion.
thy neighbors (or thy friends and familiars) as if else, For unless the man
were poor, the lender was not bound to release, Deu. 15, 4.
it had not been such a matter, simply to gain. at least there is an
Emphasis, (and indeed, I think that it is All) in the word (...) by Extortion
(or, Oppression) for this, I conceive, is the only thing, besides poverty,
(now that I may call any one my neighbor, and must call nothing common, or
unclean) that makes Usury unlawful. As for that usual distinction, making
(...) (which signifies simply increase) to be the lawful excrease, and (...)
(which signifies b^ting Indeed oppressing and exacting is usually described in
the Scriptures by eating, and devouring: See Psalm. 14, 4. ^ic. 3. 3. Hab. 3,
14. Matt. 23, 14. When one asked Cato, quid est soenerari? his answer was quid
est occidere? Cic. l. 2. de Offic.
the unlawful, it seems to me to be taken away, by the placing of the same
words in the text above quoted; for if this were necessarily worse, and an
aggravation of the other, I think, it would have been put after it, rather
then before it. Besides this, the Septuagint translating the first (...), and
the Vulgar, Superabundantiam, (or, superabundance) seem to take it for a worse
thing then this: viz. not, for a bare increase of that which is lent; but an
increase of such an increase, or a multiplying excessive increase, or Usury.

2 Exclusion out of Heaven, for the Apostle says peremprorily, -- nor
revilers, nor * Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6, 10.
Which I believe is the English of (...) in Lutine, rapaces, Quis in rapacitate
avarior? Cic.


False Prophets.
THREATS To False-Prophets, or, False-Teachers, and Seducers.
They are Punished, or Threatened

1 With being Deceived themselves (though they deceive others.) But evil men,
and seducers, shall wax worse, and worse: deceiving, and being deceived, 2 Timothy
3. 13. For, as (in general) none hurt themselves more, then they who hurt
others, most: so none are more deceived, then such deceivers. They are deceived
by the Devil, when they do what they should not; and they are deceived by
God, when they suffer what they would not; which they are sure to do.

2 Impenitencie, and growing worse and worse. Worse in sin, and worse in
misery. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3, 13. (
as you had before)

Evil men] for such are evil in grain, wickedly (or maliciously) wicked, who
do not only hold false doctrines themselves, but teach men so. In Matthew chapter
24 we read, that after our Savior had said to his Disciples, There shall be
false Prophets (verse. 11,) he presently added, And because iniquity shall
abound, (...) verse. 12. That grand Deceiver (Antichrist, whose coming is with
all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 10.) is called (...), The
(or, that) wicked one, (as the devil is called (...);) as if none were so
wicked as he, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 8. Seducers] in the original, (...), that is,
jugglers, or witches. The Apostle in his Epistle to the Galatians (chapter 3, 1.)
asked them, (...); who has bewitched you? as if he thought it impossible for
them, unless they were bewitched, having had Jesus Christ so evidently set
forth before their eyes (as evidently, as if he had been crucified among them)
yet nevertheless, to be drawn aside from the truth, and be made to see
another Gospel: which indeed was not another gospel (as it is chapter 1, 7.) but
only those juggling fellows, by their delusions (dazzling their eyes with witty
arguments, and specious pretenses) made it seem so to them, who had but a
weak sight. So in the 8 verse of this chapter, he compares them to Jannes and
Jambres, who (they say) were two of the chief of the Egyptian witches. It is
said of Simon Magus (Acts 8, 9.) that he used sorcery, and bewitched the people
of Samaria. you may translate, By using Sorcery he bewitched etc. as if instead
of (...)) it were (...): for so it (...) expressed verse. 11. and so it is
usual in the Scripture (both the Old and New Testament) to join the effect to
the cause, with the conjunction And, and in the same Syntaxis, were it not so,
we could not render (...) bewitched. for the word most usually signifies,
putting a man De statu mentis dejicere.
out of his wits, or making him mad: (at least, for a time, as in an ecstasy)
so that you may render it, By sorcery he set the Samaritans beside themselves.
For although the word seem to me to be very well rendered (according to
Cicero's translation in admirationem For so the passive (...), is used for to
admire, verse. 13. of that Chapter, and elsewhere.
tr^ducens, drawing the people into admiration of him, viz. by doing miracles
and signs (by his witchcraft) as it is v. 13. (as usually those do, who
practice such things:) yet because it appears, it was no ordinary admiration
to which they were drawn, but an Amazement In my Country we ^^ll them maz^d,
who are out of their wits.
even to stupifying (and therefore Beza translates it obstupefecerat:) and
because the word, for the most part, is so used; and because Erasmus, and
likewise the Vulgar (in the 11 verse) have so translated it, (not without
Beza's liking) such a translation cannot be much misliked. Had not that people
been given up to madness, it was impossible* 1 That they could have been
deceived so many of them: To whom they all gave heed from the least to the
greatest verse 10. 2 That they could have been deceived so long a time; Of long
time he had bewitched them v. 11. 3 That they could have been deceived in so
gross a manner, as to believe that this man was the great power of God: for so
he Dicebat se sublimissimam esse virtutem hoc est eum qui sit super omnia pater
Irenaeus.
called himself, and so they also esteemed of him, saying, This man is the
great power of God, verse 10. (In their own words confessing him to be a
man.) Beza upon the word (...) (formerly mentioned) says, id est, ita sibi
conciliarat suis praestigiis, ut coeco quodam furore amentes, toti essent illi
addicti, that is, he had so won them over to him by his juggling tricks, that
in a blind fury, like so many mad men, they were wholly addicted to him. There
has been very often experience of the like madness in many countries; and
there is still. For Seducers and falseteachers, although they deliver never so
strange, and absurd opinions, yet you shall have the people, who were but even
now of another mind, presently run after them, and hang upon them, even to
the hazarding of their lives and fortunes, in such a manner, that you would
think they were bewitched; even as bad as when a man is bewitched to love a
deformed woman, whom formerly he loathed, by the strength of a potion which she
has given him, It is said of the whore of Babylon, that all Nations were
deceived, (to commit fornication with her) by her sorceries, Rev: 18, 23. And
that she has in her hand a Golden cup; (as if she bewitched them by such a
potion,) chap 17. 4.

The Apostle could not have had a better word for these men, then (...),
jugglers; for such kind of fellows they do notably resemble, both in
couzening and cheating men of the truth, as they do of their moneys; and in
being as good at slight of tongue, as jugglers are at slight of hand. But they
may not think to carry the matter so, for they are threatened.

3 With Discovery of their errors. But they shall proceed no further, for
their folly shall be manifest unto all men. 2 Timothy: 3. 9. Folly] in the
Original, (...), want, (or corruptnes) of judgment; as it is verse 8, (...),
(which we render, men of corrupt minds) whereby they become (...) (as it is in
the same place) not so much repro bates, as repro bants concerning the faith:
such as have (...), a pallat. or judgment out of taste, that will not (...),
Rom: 1. 28. i. e. relish and approve of the truth, or savor the things of God.
Matt. 16. 23. Ezekiel told the false Prophets in his time, that the
foundatition of the wall, which they had built and daubed wih untempered
mortar, should be discovered, Ezekiel: 13. 14. And the pillows, which the false
Prophetesses sewed under men's arms, torn of, verse 20.

4 A Curse. Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach othewise unto yon ((...),
(...)) then we have preached, let him be accursed, Gal: 1. 8. And again
verse. 9. As we said before, so say I now again; if any man preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him he accursed. in the first
verse it was (...), in the next (...): as if he had said, whosoever tells you
any thing, or preaches to you any point of Doctrine different from mine, let
him be Anathema; but especially, if he teach you, as an Evangelist, some new
Doctrine, altogether different; if he go about to Gospel you, or principal
you clean another way.

5 Shame In Isaiah c. 45. 16. where we translate, They shall go to confusion
together that are makers of Idols. The Latin translation renders, fabricatores
errorum, makers of errors. our Hebrew is (...)
; ( when their vizard is taken off, and every one sees their falsehood) And it
shall come to pass in that day, that the Prophets shall be ashamed every one
of his vision, when he has prophesied: neither shall they wear a rough
garment, to deceive. But he shall say, I am no Prophet, I am a husbandman; for
man taught me to keep cattle from my youth. Zach: 13. 4, 5.

6 Death. It was the punishment appointed appointed by the Law. But the
Prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not
commanded him to speak; or, that shall speak in the name of other God's, even
that man shall die, Deuteronomy: 18, 20.

Shall presume to speake] in the Hebrew it is (...) shall be so proud as to
speak: and so verse. 22. where we render presumptuously, in the Hebrew it is
(...) i. e in pride. what greater pride, or arrogance, then for a man, either
to take upon him the person of a King, and to be an Ambassador when he has no
commission; or, if he have a commission to be an Ambassador, to go beyond his
commission, and speak what he pleases on his own head?

It was the punishment threatened by Isaiah, Therefore the Lord will cut off
from Israel head and tail, branch and root in one day; The ancient and
honorable, he is the head: and the Prophet that teaches lies, he is the
tail, Isa. 9. 14, 15.

It is the punishment prophesied by Zachary ( to be executed by their own
parents) And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophecy, then
his father and mother, that begat him, shall say unto him; Thou shall not live:
for thou speak lies i^ the name of the Lord: and his Father and Mother that
begat him, shall thrust him through when he prophecieth: chap. 13. 3.

Hananiah, for prophesying to the captive Jews, their return from Babylon
within two years, was threatened by Jeremie to die within a year after, and
dyed accordingly Jer: 28. 16, 17. There is abundance of anger to be read in the
expressions, which the Prophet used, when he threatened him: The Lord (says he)
has not sent thee, but thou make this people to trust in a lie. Therefore
thus says the Lord, Behold I will cast thee off from the face of the earth
verse 16. I will cast thee] in the original it is (...) I will Send thee; as
we say, I will send thee going with a witness. as if he had said, For going,
when thou wast not sent, thou shall be sent, when thou woudst not go. I have
elsewhere observed, that it was usual with the Prophets in their threats, to
make use of such words, wherewith they had expressed the sin, which they
threatened; even as it was usual with God in punishments, to make them have a
resemblance, with the nature of the sins which he punished.

Shemaiah prophesying in the same manner, both he, and his whole family were
threatened to be cut off chap. 29. 32.

Ahab, and Zedekiah prophesying in the same manner (and dissuading the Jews
from obedience to the King of Babylon) were by Nebuchadnezzar roasted to death:
c. 29. 22. And after their death, it became an usual curse among the people,
whom they had thus endeavored to deceive: The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and
like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire, verse 22.

When the Council of the Jews would have put the Apostels to death as being
false Prophets, Gamaliel advised them to forbear; as reckoning, that if they
were such indeed, they would be sure to perish, though they should do nothing
to them* he produced also his examples for it; as first, Theudas; There were
two of the name. see Beza.
who was slain (says he) and all that obeyed him were scattered, and brought
to naught, Acts 5. 36. Secondly, Judas of Galilee, he also perished; (says he)
and all, even as many as obeyed him, were dispersed, Acts 5. 37. This Judas was
otherwise called Judas the Gaulonite, and those that adhered to him,
Gaulonites, or Galileans. Some of his sect were slain by Pilate, as they were
sacrificing for themselves; because they forbad sacrificing for the safety of
the Roman Empire; and therefore it is said: He mixed their blood with their
Sacrifices Luke 13. 1. The first beginning of this sect, was at the time when
Cyrenius was sent from Augustus for raising of a tax in Syria and Judea: For
Judas then dissuaded the people from paying it, telling them, they were
tributary to none but God. Joseph. l. 7. de bello, c. 28.


You have read of the death of 450. prophets of Baal at one time 1 King. 18.
And you may read of the miserable end of Arrius, and diverse other such
Heretics.

6 Speedy destruction (if not damnation, for so the English translations
renders the word (...).) Whose judgment now of along time lingreth not, and
their damnation slumbreth not 2 Pet: 2. 3. Lingreth not] not, as if time could
go away faster; or that time, when their judgment should be executed, come any
sooner: but to show, that the long suffering of God, which had waited a great
while, and not pronouncd judgment till he saw they would not repent, resolved
now to tarry no longer. God may be said to hasten a thing in 'its time (or
although it have an appointed time) Ezekiel: 60. 22: because he does not defer
it, although men fear, or hope that he will. Lingreth not Hence forward their
judgment lingreth not, or, is not idle. (...) in the Genev: translation was
long ago not afar o^^.
It is not at a stand, either in going or growing; but grows greater, and
greater, according as they treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. By their
Destructive courses which they take, or their Doctrines (...) v. 1.
which they teach, if they do not upon others, they certainly bring upon
themselves swift destruction verse 1. I say destructive courses; for so I think
(...) may well be rendered in the verse following; though it signifies
destructions, and we render it, pernicious ways. In the Spanish edition (says
Beza) and in six manuscripts, it is (...), and the vulgar translate it luxurias;
we may english it lascivious courses. now as Beza says, that this reading
agrees well with the description which follows in this chapter of lascivious
Nicolaitans, so do I say, it agrees very well with the practice of most of
your false teachers of these times, both in this and other countries; most of
them walking after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, verse 10.

Swift destruction] (...), or destruction in a short time, as it is chap. 1.
14. (...), which signifies word for word, the leaving of my Tabernale is swift.
But we translate it, shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle.

Bring upon themselves swift destruction] any hurt that men bring upon
themselves must needs be swift, because they do not use the means to prevent
it.

In Ezekiel. 13. 14, it is said to those false Prophets, that daubed up a wall of
security for the Jews, (bearing them in hand, that they should be safe enough
from their enemies, whatever God had threatened to the contrary) So will I break
down the wall that ye have dawbed of untempered mortar, and bring it down to
the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered, and it shall
fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I
am the Lord. So that they shall die suddenly, as with the fall of a wall: or if
they died not when the wall fell, they should not live long after. In the ninth
verse they are thus threatened; And my hand shall be upon the Prophets that see
vanity, and divine lies: They shall not be in the assembly of my people,
neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither
shall they enter into the Land of Israel, and ye shall know that I am the Lord
God. For whether by being written in the writing of the house of Israel, be
meant, being written by God before, among those that should return again to
Canaan out of Babylon (as God seems to have had a book of those who should
enter into it, in the time of Moses Exodus 32. 32.) or whether it be meant of
being written afterward by men, among those who did return again out of Babylon
(as you may see an account taken by Ezra: Ez: 8. and as there was an account
taken by Moses, when they came out of Egypt Number: 2.) or whether somewhat more
then so, be meant in those words, I know not: but it is clear by the words
following (which it may be are but an interpretation of the^), that those
Prophets, who bare the people in hand, there would be no captivity, should
suffer most by it, and never return into the Land of Israel.

If there had been nothing threatened in Scriptures against such men, yet you
may guess their end and punishment to be bad enough, by the names which they
have given them in the Scriptures: as of Thieves and Robbers Joh: 10. 8. (for
of such Austin, and Chrysostom think those words to be spoken.) Nay, of
Wolves, Matt. 7. 15, and Foxes, Cant: 2. 15. These names they very well
deserve, in regard of their manner of hunting after souls (as those creatures
do after sheep) to make a prey of them; for this speech is used concerning the
False Prophetesses Some think they were men, so called because of their
effeminatenes.
in Ezekiel, chap 13. 18. Now we know how such beasts are used, if they are
taken; and therefore many of these are sure to be destroyed, because they are
sure to be taken. Saint Peter says, they are as natural bruit beasts, made to
be taken and destroyed 2 Pet: 2. 12. It is but talio, like for like, that they
should be so punished; because they destroy others. for if he, who takes away
the life of the body, be punished in the same manner; why not also he, who
takes away the life of the Soul? In like manner, we might guess by the name
that is given to their doctrine, being called a Gangrene, 2 Timothy: 2. 17. Now
where a Gangrene is, that part of the body must be cut off; and so Paul wished
they were, who with false doctrine had troubled the Galatians, chap. 5. 12.

THREATS Of False-Teachers.
Peter says, that under the Old Testament, there were false Prophets among the
people 2 Pet: 2. 1.

John says, that under the New Testament, even in his time, many false
Prophets were gone out into the world, 1 Epist 4. 1. ( gone out, like Foxes out
of their holes to make a prey of the Souls of men.) and therefore he bids them
not believe every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God, as it
is in the same verse Every spirit] For a spirit they will all pretend, and a
spirit is all they do pretend. A spirit it is that moves the^, but it is an
unclean spirit; and therefore let the^ take heed how they miscall it, and so
blaspheme against the Holy Ghost. It was presently after our Savior had
reproved the Pharisees, for saying he did cast out devils by the prince of the
devils (whereas he does it by the Spirit of God) that he added these words,
Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy, it shall be
forgiven unto men, but the sin and blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven unto men. Mat: 12. 13. If it be not The blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, I am sure it is a blasphemy against it, as well to say, that the spirit
of the devil is the Spirit of God, as to say the Spirit of God is the spirit
of the devil; or to say, that what is done by one, is done by the other. Nay,
methink, it brings more disgrace (or blasphemy) upon the Spirit: because all
those wicked actions, which such men commit, will be said to proceed from that
spirit, which they pretended. I am sure, if the Spirit of truth be not, the
word of truth is very much evil spoken off (or blasphemed) by reason of such
men, 2 Pet: 2. 2.

Luke, in the Acts of the Apostles, instances in some, that taught circumcision
In detestation of this doctrine Junius ( in parall:) says it was that the
believers at Antioch gave themselves the name of Christians instead of
Nazarens: which was the common name that the Jews gave to all believers, and
not as some say to the sect of circumcision, for in Acts 25. 4. Paul, who
taught the contrary, is called the ringleader of the Nazarens.
at Jerusalem, chap 15. 5, and some, that came from Judea and taught it in
Antioch verse: 1.

Threats and prophesies, that there shall be false teachers, The Apostles have
more then one. There shall be false teachers among you, who shall privily bring
in damnable heresies, 2 Pet: 2. 1. Privily bring in] or bring in by the by,
(...), together with some truths as one would make bad money pass with good,
and as it is said in Isaiah, The Lord has mingled a perverse Spirit, chap: 19.
14. They do their work slily, not breaking open houses, or going into them
openly; but creeping (...).
, and slipping in with others, that are honest, 2 Timothy: 3. 6. Insomuch that it
is a very hard thing, not to be couzend by them: and therefore the times, when
such men shall abound, may well be called, (...), difficult, for so they are,
verse 1. (though I say not for this reason.)

From our Savior's own mouth, we are threatened twice in one chapter, Matt.
24, And many false Prophets shall arise, verse: 11, and so again verse 24.
There shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets. Shall arise] or shall be
raised, (for so the Greek word (...) signifies.) viz: by the power of the
devil, and God's permission, like so many spirits (for by this name they are
called, 1 Timothy: 4. 1. 1 John: 4. 1.) conjured up, to trouble the world* but this
I speak not, as if I were ignorant that the word, raising, is applied also to
good Prophets, both in the new Testament. Matt: 11. 11. And in the Old, Deuteronomy:
18. 18. As likewise to Priests, and Kings, 1 Samuel: 2. 35. 1 Kings 14. 14.

THREATS, or PROPHESIES. Of Being seduced by False-prophets or False-teachers.
Paul says, Some shall be seduced: Now the spirit speaks expressly, That in
the latter times some shall depart from the faith, 1 Timothy: 4. 1. And this they
shall do with a Love to error (we see daily how greedily men drink in any
thing that is erroneous) (...), giving heed to seducing spirits (as it is in
the same verse,) The word (...), which we render taking heed, expresses as
great Diligence, as (...) does Constancy, in adhering to any one. it is used of
those that followed Simon Magus Act 8. 10. Nay they shall do it with a
Loathing of the truth, such as a diseased body has of wholesome food. For the
time shall come, when they will not endure sound (or wholesome) Doctrine ((...))
but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having
itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall
be turned unto Fables 2 Timothy: 4. 3.

Peter says, Many. And many shall follow their pernicious ways 2 Pet: 2. 2,
And so our Saviourhad said before him (even of such as should believe an other
Christ) many shall come in my name, saying: I am Christ, and shall deceive many
Matt: 24. 5. There have been diverse false Prophets, who have not only taken
upon them to come in Christ's name, but have taken Christ's name upon them; as
Dositheus, Simon, Theudas, Manes, (who had his twelve Apostles) The Anabaptists
of Munster, David George etc.

Now their being seduced proceeds: First, from their own Hypocrisy, viz:
Because they never loved the truth truly, or because they received not the love
of the truth, when they received the truth, 2 Thessalonians: 2. 10. Secondly, from the
hypocrisy and cunning (for usually they go together) of the Seducers (as the
Apostle says) speaking lies in hypocrisy 1 Timothy: 4. 2. I say cunning: For, as
it is said of Antichrist, that he shall come: So it may be said, of most false
teachers, that they do come (...) Yea and (...) as it is in the ninth verse:
but perhaps it is not meant so much, with all power, as with all sorts of
miracles and strange works.
2 Thessalonians: 2. 10, that is, not only with all deceivablenesse, (as we render it,
meaning thereby deceitfullnesse) for so they come even to the Elect, who are
not deceivable; but with actual deceit (as those words literally signify)
(...), to those that are to perish.

Had not the Elect, the Spirit to lead them, and the word to light them, they
would never be able to avoid their snares; for our Savior says of some of
them, And shall show great signs, and wonders, insomuch that if it were
possible, they shall deceive the very Elect Matt: 24. 24. Thirdly, from God
justice upon those who are seduced, for their hypocricy: Because they received
not the love of the truth etc. And for this cause, God shall send them strong
delusions, that they should believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians: 2. 10, 11. Strong, delusion
or, the efficacy of delusion (for so the (...).
words in the Original signify) i. e. Delusion, that shall prevail with
them. Them] that is, those that perish (or those that shall perish) for with
the Elect and sincere Christian it shall not prevail I might name a great many
more causes, or occasions of men's being seduced, but that I am loath to go
beyond my bounds. There is one, which I cannot forbear to name* because there
has been so frequent experience of it in these times; and that is
Covetousness. according to the words of Paul, For the love of money is the root
of all evil which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith
etc. 1 Timothy: 6. 10.

The End, for which God permits men to be thus seduced, is said to be, That
they which are approved (and are not hypocrites as they are, but sincere) may
be made manifest, 1 Cor: 11. 19. which, it seems, is so resolutely intended to
be effected by this means, that it is there said, not (...), there shall be,
but (...), there must be heresies among you. That those which are approved etc.

They, who are thus seduced by them,

Shall have this punishment, if they have no other, viz: To be befooled and
decieved by them, and receive no good at all of them, as they expected. God
says of the false prophets, They make you vain (or they deceive you, so
Hierom, and the Chald: par.) Jer. 23. 16. and so verse 32, They shall not
profit this people at all.

FEAR Threatened and inflicted upon the wicked.
1 Of God. It is said, that, when Jehosaphat fell to teaching the people the
Law of God, The fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the lands that
were round about Judah, so that they made no more war against Jehosaphat 2 Chronicles. 17. 10. Because, though they did not acknowledge him themselves; yet
this they knew, that whoever he was, if he were able, he would protect those
that did acknowledge him, when they were obedient to him, see Chron. 20. 29.

2 Of The Godly: Egypt was glad when they departed, for the fear of them fell
upon them Ps 105. 38. So that the favor, which they had in the sight of the
Egyptians, to borrow their Jewels (Exodus: 11. 3.) seems to have had more fear
in it then love; which made them to lend, not so much to furnish them for their
journey, as that they might be the sooner rid of them. For what love is so
great, as to make a man lend another a great deal of money, just as he is
running away. Observe therefore God's wonderful manner, of making the enemies
of his Children serviceable to them.

3 Of Such as themselves are. Behold I will bring a fear upon thee, says the
Lord of Hoasts, from all those that be about thee. Jerem: 49. 5. to the
Ammonites. and so of the Elamites verse 37. For I will cause Elam to be
dismayed before their enemies. I will] indeed this work is very proper to God,
and very much to be observed; especially when we see it in such men as were
otherwise bold and fearlesse.

4 Of Any thing, and for nothing. With this fear God threatened the Israelites
themselves, if they persisted to walk contrary to him: And upon them that are
left alive of you, I will send a faintness into their hearts in the lands of
their enemies, and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them, and they shall
fly as flying from a sword, and they shall fall when none persueth Levit: 26.
36. So Deuteronomy: 28. 65, 66, 67. The Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart,
and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind etc. Certainly this fearefulnes was a
greater punishment to them, then their captivity: and is as great a punishment
almost, as can be inflicted; as may be guessed by the Emphasis, and estimate,
which seems to be set upon the blessing that is contrary to it, viz: when none
shall make us afraid. For this blessing was promised to the Israelites, if they
would be obedient, in the Chapter of Leviticus above quoted verse 6. It was
promised by Job to the godly man chap. 11. 19. And it was promised and
prophesied by the Prophets to believers, in the time of the Gospel, Ezekiel: 34.
28. Jer: 30. 10. etc. Neither has the punishment of fearfulness been only
threatened, to the wicked; or the blessing of boldness only promised to the
godly; but constant experience has made it good, that the wicked are seldom
free of their punishment; or the godly to seek of their blessing. Bona
conscientia prodire vult, and conspici; ipsas nequitia tenebras timet Sen:
Epist: 97.
which I cannot render in better english, then this: The wicked fly, when noe
man purfueth, but the righteous is bold as a Lion. Prove. 28. 1.

Fear of men, and Fearfulness, out of distrust of God's goodness.
The fear of man brings a snare, Prove: 29. 25. A snare] to make men fall
into mischife, and misery, (for it follows, Who so puts his trust in the
Lord shall be safe) as well as, or because, it is a snare to make them fall
into mischeife and sin; even as it was to Saul, when he was commanded to
destroy all the Amalekites, according to his own words* I have sinned, for I
have trangressed the commandment of the Lord, and thy words, because I feared
the people, and obeyed their voice 1 Samuel: 15. 24. I say, according to his
words* because by these words, it may be gathered that this fear, was the
cause of his sin: but otherwise, that which is immediately intended in them,
seems to be a Confession of that fear, as a sin it self: for the same word
is prefixed to transgressed, and to feared (...) because I transgressed, and
(...) because I feared. And indeed, they that are fearful of men, if they be
so out of distrust of God's providence, and doubting of his faith fulness
Such fear, as is forbidden Isa: 8, 12, 13 Matt: 10. 28. 1 Pet: 3. 14.
(no question) do sin very grievously. In the Revelation, you have this
threat: But the fearful and unbelieving etc. Shall have their part in the
lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Chap: 21. 8.

Flattery.
Flatterers with God See Hypocrifie.
punished
With Destruction, without God's exceeding great mercy, even multiplied mercy;
as may be gathered by what the Psalmist says Ps. 78. 36, 37, 38. Nevertheless
they did but flatter him with their mouth: and dissembled with him in their
tongue. For their hear^ was not right with him: neither were they steadfast in
his Covenant. But he being full of compassion fogave their iniquity, and
destroyed them not: Yea, many a time turned he his anger away. Yea many a time
turned he etc] In the Hebrew it is, (...) He multiplied to turn away his
anger; to intimate, how much their Hypocri^ie provoked him; as if he had said,
His hand was up again and again; and had he not multiplied to pardon, they
must needs have been Destroyed.

Flatterers with themselves punished,
1 With certain and severe punishment. And it come to pass, when he hears
the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall
have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to add drunknesse
to thirst. The Lord, will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man; and all the curses that are written in
this book, shall light upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from
under heaven, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. He shall find, that he did but curse himself,
when he thus blessed himself: and this shall be a great addition to his
punishment, viz.

2 Vexation, upon discovery of their folly: He flattereth himself in his own
eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful Psalm. 36. 2. But this,
perhaps, is not t^ll they have eaten of the fruit of their folly, and are
punished.

3 With being made more miserable by those courses, in which they thought
themselves happy. Let them ( or, they shall) be taken in their own devices: For
the wicked boasts (...)
of ( or commends) his heart's desire, Psalm. 10, 2, 3. The last verse, in the
Latin Translation, is thus rendered. Quia laudavit impius desiderium animae
suae: and avarus applaudens sibi blasphemavit Dominum: Because the wicked has
praised the desire of his soul; and the covetous man, applauding ( or In Hebr.
(...) we translate, blesses the covetous whom the Lord abhors.
blessing) himself, has blasphemed God.

This sin is as dangerous, as it is common, and it is very common; for (as
one says Sen. de tranquil. anim. c. 10.
) Quis sibi verum dicere ausus est? men are afraid to tell themselves the
truth. That, they think, will beget nothing but vexation, and sorrow, and
hatred; (as usually the best chirurgian puts a man to most pain in a dangerous
wound;) and therefore they resolve rather to heal Jer: 6. 14.
the wound slightly, then be troubled to cure it. But alas! what foolish
courses do men take! they are desirous (and threfore most wicked;) but they are
unable, (and therefore most unhappy) to deceive Jam: 1. 22.
their own selves. They can gain no more by so doing, then if a man should
play at chesse with the right hand, and win the game of himself with the left.
They cannot act behind the curtain to themselves; unless they could stand on
both sides the curtain; which they can never do. Though thou have burnt 1 Timothy: 4. 2. quorum conscientia cauterio resect^ est; so Beza.
off the hand of thy conscience, that it cannot strike thee; thou can not put
out the eye of thy conscience, that it cannot see thee. And therefore the
saying of Cato Major was excellent, (...) Every man ought to reverence himself
most, because no man can ever be out of his own sight.

Flatterers of other Men are punished.
1 With Being looked upon as enemies, by those whom they flatter. He that
blesses his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be
counted a curse to him Prove: 27. 14.

2 Being hated and cursed by every one else. He that says unto the wicked,
thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, and nations shall abhor him
Prove: 24. 24, for though these words, by the verse that goes before If there be
any regard to be had to what lies upon, and what lies under, in a heap of
proverbs.
, must be interpreted only of Judges; yet, by the verse that follows, they may
be interpreted of any other men.

3 Being cut off* especially such as as flatter great men, to do others
mischeife (such as I believe the Prophet meant) The Lord shall cut of all
flattering lips Ps: 12. 3. Of this sin in Ministers, see in the chapter of
Ministers.

If there were no Scripture at all for it, I make no question of it, that
flatterers shall be severely punished, because they are so much I say not,
partakers, but causers, and encouragers of other men's sins; causers of pride,
idleness, security, and of all the sins that follw them; and encouragers of
any besides. When one told Demaratus, that Orontes had not used him well, to
give him ill language, he made answer (...), he has not offended me at all,
for, I count, those that please a man, hurt him; and not those that displease
him.

Neither is Flattering of others the occasion of much sinning only in them, but
in our selves also. For as Truth, or the virtue of Telling Truth (for which we
want a name as well as the Grecians; Graecia mendax. Juven.
) so in like manner Flattery (or the vice of Lying to a neighbor) being an
homiletick habit, is versed in actions, as well as in words. So that the
flatterer, whether it be Aristot. Eth. l. 4. c. 6.
(...) he that makes pleasing his only end, or (...) he that makes profit his
end, and pleasing the means, (being not able to please without complying) must
do, as well as speak, to please him whom he flatters. he must do as he
does, and do as he will have him, if it be never so bad. Therefore, as I
approved of what Demaratus said, viz: that those who please most, hurt most: So
am I also of Thrasias In Tacitus.
his mind, to say, plura peccantur dum demeremur, quam cum offendimus, that
those who please most, do likewise Sin most. Never less care not to offend
God, then when there is too much fear to offend men.

Forgiving one another.
If we Forgive not one another, we must expect God's not forgiving us. We owe
our King ten thousand talents, and if we will not forgive a fellow servant, a
debt of an hundred pence (for the greatest offense that we can commit against a
man, bears less proportion to an offense committed against God, then an
hundred pence does to ten thousand talents) how shall we expect, nay do we not
confess, that we do not expect, that he should forgive us a debt that is so
much greater? Our Savior having said of him, who imprisoned his fellow servant
for debt, And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormenters, till he
should pay all that was due to him, Mat. 18. 34, presently added, v. 35. So
likewise shall my heavenly father do unto you, if ye from your hearts (for
you may profess it with your mouths, as the most malicious of us do, and
never think of it, in the formal use of the Lord's prayer; and as no doubt,
that servant would have promised his master, if he had put him to it) forgive
not every one his brother their trespasses. Herein does the greatness of this
sin appear, that, if you are guilty of it, though God or Christ have
forgiven you all that is past, (as it is, Mat, 18. 27. Ephesians. 4. 32. Col: 3.
13) yet for the future, neither this, nor any other sin, shall ever be
forgiven you. Not forgiving others is a debt, which we shall never be forgiven,
for it implies no repentance; and without repentance, there can be no remission
of sin.

Frowardness. He that is froward, either toward God, or toward those that
instruct him, is punished
1 With Missing a great deal of good which he desired, and consequently
vexation for it afterward. He that has a froward heart, finds no good,
Prove. 17, 20. How many good things does a self-willed man fail of, which else
he might have had? the Froward man is most in his own light, and (for any hurt
that he can do) is no bodies foe but his own. He can never do well. he has
not the wit to advise himself, for then he would not; and he has not the
goodness to be advised by others, for then he could not, be Froward.

2 Meeting with many mischiefs, and falling frequently. Thorns and snares are
in the way of the froward, Prove. 22. 5. He that goes many ways, must needs
meet with cross ways; and he that is out of the right way, must needs go
many ways: especially if he left the right way, out of Frowardness. for he
takes no way upon a reasonable choice; and any way pleases him, so it be not
the right, because he loves Jer. 14* 10.
to wander.

3 Meeting with great mischiefs, and falling desperately. Who so walks
uprightly shall be saved; but he that is perverse in his ways, shall fall at
once, Prove: 28. 18. at once (...)] in one way, some translate; as if it could
not be, that he who is perverse, and wanders so many ways should be long safe;
but if he fall not one way must needs fall another. fall desperately, I said; for
so he must needs, if God let go his hand of protection; as he that is led by a
string one way, and draws with all his force another: or like a blind horse
that is full of metal: as usually froward men are full of brutish passion,
and nothing else. If it be but a frowardness of language, it is thus threatened
He that has a perverse tongue shall fall into mischief Prove: 17. 20.

4 God's hatred. They that are of a froward heart, are an abomination to the
Lord, but such as are upright in the way, are his delight Prove: 11. 20. We see
it in earthly parents; no child is so much hated by them, as he that is froward
toward them, though he be never so faultlesse otherwise, and have never so
many excellent endowments. I believe, frowardnes is a maine ingredient in all
wickedness; and I think both with David, and his Son after him (viz: in the
Psalms, and the Proverbs) not only a Fool, and a wicked man; but a froward
man, and a wicked man is all one. Doubtless were not a wicked man exceeding
froward, he would not be so foolish; and were he not exceeding foolish he would
not be so froward; and were he not both foolish, and froward, he would not be
wicked at all* For what is it else, but mere folly, and frowardness, when God
directs us one way, which will certainly be for our good, and in which we
know he does direct us merely for our good; and that he himself is never the
better for it (for our goodness extends not unto him, be it never so much Ps.
16. 2. Zech 7. 5, 6) yet not withstanding, to take another way, which will
necessarily be to our hurt. What desperate frowardness, and folly is it, to
forget God, who was our Maker; who is our Father, that bought us (which is a
greater expression of love, then to say, our Father, that begatt us; who is our
Preserver, and not only willing to be so still if we own him, but able to be
our destroyer, if we do not own him? And therefore Moses when the Israelites
had forgotten God, notwithstanding these relations, in accusation of their
frowardness, and foolishness, thus spoke. They are a perverse, and crooked
generation. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? Is not
he thy Father that bought thee? has he not made thee, and established thee?
Deuteronomy: 32. 5, 6. You may guess, he was very angry when he thus spoke, by his
changing of the person, (which is commonly a token of it, and very usual in
Scripture.) What desperate folly, and frowardness is it, not to believe the
Gospel, or, not to believe in God? Even like the frowardness of one that is
sick, and will not take physic. nay worse, like the frowardnes of a child,
that is fallen, and will not be lifted up; or one that stands in need of a
friend, whom he knows to be very able and willing to help him, and yet will
not apply him self to him. I remember, in one or two places of Scripture,
frowardness, and unbelief are* complained of together: as in Mat: c. 17. 17.
O faithless and perverse generation: (and so Luk 9. 41.) In Deuteron: ch: 32.
20. They are a froward generation, children in whom is no faith I confess the
Hebrew (...) seems to ^e better translated faithfulness or constancy: which
cannot consist with Frowardness.
The affinity between folly, and frowardnes appeared prettywell in Nabal. as
for the first his very name signifies a Fool: and I think, he was little
better by nature; for the Scripture seems to intimate so much, when as
commending his wi^e above him, it says She (as if it had said, she for her
part) was a woman of good understanding 1 Samuel: 25. 3. And for his frowardness,
his own wife complained of him; that he was so froward that one could not
speak to him verse 17.

Yet such a root of bitterness there is, in the best of us; such an enmity and
contrariety of our wills to God's will. Gens humana rui^ per vetitum nefas: we
presently lust, if the Law say, we shall not covet, though we never lusted
before To: 7. 7. We are like some froward self-willed children, who when their
Mother has provided a thing for them, which they loved; or bids the^ go to a
place where otherwise they would rejoice to go, yet in their froward humor,
refuse to take the thing, or go to the place, because it was not of their own
choice, and because they cannot endure to do any thing after the will of
another. I am confident, many duties would be done, and commended, if they were
not commanded; and many sins forborne, if they were not forbidden. which puts
me in mind of what Tacitus says of the Germans concerning usury, Foenus
agitare and in usuras extendere ignotum, ideoque magis spernitur quam si
vetitum esset, that it was not so much as known among them; and that it was
more scorned then it would be, if it were forbidden.

If it be but a froward mouth, it has the same threat. Pride and arrogance
(which are usual companions of frowardnes) and the evil way, and the froward
mouth, do I hate Pr. 8, 13.

5 God's walking contrary Lev. 26. 23, 24. If (...) i^ the 23 verse do not
signify, contrary (but as it hits, or, carelessly) yet (...) in the 24 ver.
very likely does.
to them, for their walking contrary to him. With the pure thou will show thy
self pure, and with the froward thou will show thy self froward, Ps. 18. 26.
as if he had said, As he deligh^s to cross me, so will I delight to cross
him: or, Let him take what course he will, he shall not prosper. If it be but
children that are Froward toward their parents, nay or any others that are
Froward toward those that advise them, you may observe, that almost always
they are crossed in those courses, which they take against Command, or Advice.

Thou will show thy self Froward] the original (...) signifies also, thou will wrestle (for as any wrestling is opposing, so any opposing may be called
wrestling.) Woe to him, with whom God wrestles. He that wrestles with God, may
prevail as Jacob did; but if God wrestle with him, he is sure to have the
worst. In this manner God seems to me to have purposed to wrestle with that
strong, and head strong antagonist of his, Sennacherib, when he told him,
Because thy rage against me is come up into my ears, therefore I will put my
hook into thy nose* and my bridle into thy lips, and I will turn thee back
by the way by which thou came, 2 Kings 19, 28. And so with the King of Egypt
Ezekiel: 29. 4. A froward man will get no more by his frowardness, then a dog in
a string, by refusing to go where he is led; or an Ox in a yoke, by drawing
the contrary way viz: only pain and weariness, and it may be death the
soonner.

If it be only a froward tongue, there is a threat for it, viz. that it shall
be cut out, Prove: 10. 31.

6 Destruction (though God should let them alone) through their own
willfulness. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the
perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them Prove: 11. 3. All
trangressours, if there were no Judge to punish them, would punish themselves
by their own transgression; (as it follows in this chapter, v. 5, but the
wicked shall fall by his own wickedness; and verse 6, but trangressours shall
be taken in their own naughtiness:) But the maine thing that makes them do
it, is perverseness and frowardness.

The odiousness of this sin to God, and the dangerousnesse of it to men, may
be gathered out of the Scriptures yet more ways, as First, in that they give
wickedness the name of this sin; as if thereby it were sufficiently
aggravated. It was the height of Moses his Complaint of the Israelites, to call
them a crooked and perverse generation. Deuteronomy: 32. 5. and, I believe, our
Savior, and Saint Paul, when they used the same names, had a mind to make use
of bad, and so took them for the worst. Matt: 17. 17. Luk 9. 41. Philip: 2.
15. Secondly, in that they give this sin the name of wickedness; as if it were
The wickedness, or as if, when wickedness is mentioned, there need be nothing
else added to expres what is meant. Abigail said of her husband Nabal, He is
such a Son of Belial (i. e. such a Son of wickedness) that a man cannot speak
to him, 1 Samuel: 25. 17. In the Proverbs chap. 6. 12, the froward man is in
Hebrew called Adam Belial; we render it, a wicked man. In other places of that
book, you shall find The evil man (or the naughty man, or the wicked man) and
the froward man, going hand in hand: as chap: 2. 12. etc. and so the evil way,
and the froward mouth chap: 8. 13. It is said of Nabal, The man was churlish
and (...) in this place, and elsewhere (when it is in relation to men) may be
that which we call ill-natured or ill-conditioned.
evil in his doings, 1 Samuel: 25. 3. In all these three places which I have
quoted, for evil, the Hebrew word is (...). that is, not (...) wicked, viz:
out of lust, or for some selfe-ends; but evil i. e. purely evil, out of
malice, and perverseness merely to be contrary, and because a man will be
evil; as those to whom David (Ps. 59, 5.) prays to God not to be merciful.
(if (...) be as we render it, wicked transgressors, and not Idolatrous: the
word being used also for an Idol, and the prophet having spoken of the heathen
immediately before) 3 In that it is made such a punishment, to be left to this
sin: for it seems to be put as a token, or a fruit of God's exceeding great
anger: as you may see in Isaiah, chapter 57. for there God first tells the Jews, I
hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart, v. 17.
But afterward adds, as a promise of mercy, that for the future, being
reconciled unto them, he would not suffer them to do so, but would in a loving
manner lead them in the way wherein they should walk, verse. 18. Solomon,
speaking of the good to be gotten by wisdom, as if frowardness were not so
much a sin, as a misery, (or if it were a sin, such a one as would inevitably
cause misery) said not only, it shall keep, or restrain, but shall Deliver thee
from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaks froward things, Prove.
2, 12.

Giving to the Rich. Giving to the rich is Threatened
1 With Poverty here. He that appresseth the poor to increase his riches, and
he that gives to the rich, shall surely come to want Prove: 22, 16.

2 No recompense hereafter, for having had it now, and sad* is their condition
who have Mat. 6, 2
their reward. When thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends nor
thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich* nieghbours, least they also
bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee Luk 14. 12. And a recompense be
made thee] (...). Christ seems to speak it, as if it were a bad matter, which
he would have us endeavor to avoid.

But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind,
and thou shall be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shall be
recompensed at the resurrection of the just. ver: 13. 14. as if otherwise he
should not be blessed, nor recompensed. This sin reigns very much every
where; and therefore I desired to tell you as much as I could find against it
in the Scripture, though it be never so little; neither would I have you think
it to be a little sin, because there is little said in the Scriptures against
it; for the greatest sins there are least spoken of.

Glory. Those that give it to themselves are threatened
1 With God's great displeasure, and severe punishment. mark his angry
expressions to the King of Egypt. Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh King
of Egypt, and prophecy against him, and against all Egypt, speak and say. Thus
says the Lod God, Behold I am against thee Pharaoh King of Egypt, the great
Dragon that lies in the midst of his rivers, which has said: My river is
mine own, and I have made it for my self. But I will put hooks in thy Jaws,
and I will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales etc. Ezekiel: 29
2, 3. Those Hooks ( as it is likely) were the Chaldeans; by whom the King of
Egypt was taken; and all his Subjects, like fish, Which they might well be
compared to, the river ^ilus over flowing all their Country once every year.
destroyed together with him.

2 Severe punishment, and the taking away of their glory. I will punish the
fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high
looks: for he says, by the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my
wisdom; for I am prudent etc. Isa: 10. 12, 13. and it follows verse: 16,
under his glory he shall kindle a burning etc. The Jews say, that the Angel
smote his army with a secret fire which burnt their bodies without hurting
their clothes, or their arms; and that there were not ten men that escaped
alive. Hierom. See Jer. 50, 29, 30.

3 Discovery of their weakness and frailty, by suffering from others. Will thou yet say before him that slays thee, I am God? but thou shall be a man,
and not a God, in the hand of him that slays thee, Ezekiel. 28, 9.

Those that take it, when it is given them by other men, and do not turn it
off to God,

Have cause to fear severe punishment: for, it is said of Herod, when the
people gave a shout, (after he had made an Oration to them, and said, It was
the voice of a God, and not of a man;) that, immediately the Angel of the Lord
smote him, because he gave not God the glory; and he was eaten up of worms,
and died. Act. 12, 23. Gave not God the Glory] (...), that Glory, viz. which
the people gave him. (...), Not-giving THE Glory, or, not refusing Glory
already made and given, must not look to be unpunished (being wilful sin,
and nearer to sacrilege, then receiving stolen goods is to theft) if (...),
not-giving glory to God (or, not-bringing Glory to God of our own making) have
been so severely threatened and punished. For so it was, First in the Israelite
priests, with Cursing of their blessings: If ye will not hear, and if ye will
not lay it to heart, to give glory to my name, says the Lord of Hoasts, I will
even send a curse upon you, and will curse your blessings See Blessings.
: yea I have cursed them already, because you do not lay it to heart, Mal. 2,
2. 2 In Belshazzar, with The loss of his Kingdom: at least it had a great
hand in that punishment; for Daniel, when he told him of his sins, whereby he
had provoked Gods anger against him, as soon as he had said, The God in whose
hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, thou have not glorified:
presently added, THEN was the part of the hand sent from him, and this writing
was written, Dan. 5, 23, 24.

Gluttony. Gluttons are punished, or threatened
1 With Inconsiderate, and selfe-hurtfull actions. Esau was so greedy of, and
so gluttonously taken with the curious red red So it is in the Hebrew (...)
pottage, which his brother had made, that he sold him his birthright for a
mess of it, Genesis 25, 30. whence he was afterward called Edom, i. e. Red, and
his posterity Edomites.

2 Loathing of that which they loved. The full soul loatheth the honeycomb
Prove: 27. 7.

3 Sickness. The Israelites (wherein their God was their belly, for they chose
to serve that, before God) although they had no worse fare then the Angels. Ps:
78. 25, like so many sw^ne, snuffed at the pearl, and as if they had been in
such a lamentable case, ready to starve for want of meat, fell a weeping, and
crying, who shall give us flesh to eat? Number: 11. 4. But how did God answer
the^? it is true, he gave them their Ps: 78. 29. they did eat and were well
filled (...) over well filled.
own desire; but as the Sabines did Tarpeia, who, when she had desired of
the^, what they had in their left hands To betray the Capitol of Rome Live: l. 1.
( meaning no more then their rings) put upon her, rings, and shields and all,
and pressed her to death with the weight. For thus was Moses bid to answer
them; Seeing ye are so earnest for flesh, ye shall have flesh; but you shall
have it with a vengeance; for ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five
days, nor ten days, nor twenty days, but even a whole month, until it come
out at your nostrills, and it be loathsome unto you, v. 18. 19. 20. I believe
this punishment was inflicted upon them, in a (...), or an unsatisfied craving
of the stomach in eating. It is often threatened to the wicked in Scriptures
(perhaps sometimes in another sense) in these words, ye shall eat and not be
satisfied* as Levit 26, 26. Isa: 9. 20. Mic: 6. 14. as, on the contrary, it is
promised as a blesing to the Godly, to eat and be satisfied, Deuteronomy: 14. 29. Ps:
22. 26. and the reason is, because they have other food to eat with it,
heavenly food with which a man may be satisfied if he have no other, and
without which, nor food, nor any thing else will satisfy a man.

4 Taking away, or, Marring of those creatures which they have abused. When the
Israelites gathered Manna, if any were so greedy, as to gather more then they
could eat, that, which was left till the next morning, bred worms and stank.
Exodus: 16. 20.

5 Hunger, and want. For the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to poverty,
Prove: 23. 21; The Prophet Isaiah, having told the Jews of their Feasts, which
they kept in honor to their Idols, chap: 65. verse. 11. in the 13 verse thus
threatens them, Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold my servants shall
eat, but ye shall he hungry; behold my Servants shall drink but ye shall be
thirsty. Our Savior says, Woe unto you that are full, for ye shall hunger,
Luk 6. 25. and so it came to pass in the Prodigal Son, who wasted his
substance in riotous living, Luk 15. 13. for afterward, it is said (v. 16.) he
would feign have filled his belly with the husks, that the swine did eat, and
no man gave unto him.

6 Shortness of life. Ordinarily, by their own intemperance, breeding
diseases in their bodies: and this every man sees, and knows, See Ecclus 37.
30, 31. Extraordinarily, by the hand of God. thus Hophni and Phinehas, (who out
of gluttony and greediness, violently took what they pleased of the flesh of
the offerings, while it was raw, to roast it) were punished, not only in
themselves, by dying both, and shortly after, and in one day, 1 Samuel 2, 34. but
in their posterity also, For, thus says God to Eli, There shall not be an old
man in thine house, v. 31. which threat is repeated v. 33. with this
augmentation, for ever; as if God himself took this for a great punishment;
and would have him take notice how greatly he had offended, by the greatness
of his punishment. A short life has been always counted among the Jews for
a very great punishment from God: and therefore it is, that to this day they
have a custom, when they come to 60 years of age, to hold a Feast: because at
that time, they say, old age begins; the number of 60 being contained in the
letters of the word (...) used in Job, chapter 5, 26. where it is reckoned for a
peculiar blessing of the godly to come to his grave, (...) in a full age, like
as a shock of corn comes in his season.

7 Untimely death. Job's sons and daughters thus suffered. While he was yet
speaking, there came also another and said, Thy sons, and thy daughters were
eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers house; And behold, there came
a whirlewind from the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house,
and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead: Job 1. 18, 19. If they were
not gluttons, then they, who are gluttons, have the more cause to fear the
like punishment. No sooner had the rich man said to his soul, Eat, drink,
and be merry Luke 12. 19: but God said to him, Thou fool, this night thy soul
shall be required of thee, v. 20.

It is said of the Israelites before mentioned, Numb. 11. 33: While the flesh
was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was
kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the people with a very great
slaughter. Whether they died of a disease contracted by eating too much of the
flesh; or whether it were by a more immediate hand of God, it is not expressed:
but the former seems to be more likely, from those words before mentioned,
verse. 19, 20. That gluttonous lust of the Israelites was so odious to God,
that, as if there were no other, or, as if it were the worst lust of all, his
spirit has set it down under the general name only of lust: They lusted a
lust v. 4. And so, to make the sin the more odious to men also, the place,
where they buried the men that were punished with death for this lusting, was,
called Kebroth-hattavah i. e. the graves of lust, because (says the text)
there they buried the people that lusted v. 34.

Among the Jews, the Son, that was to be stoned to death upon the complaint of
his parents, the only vices to be mentioned in the complaint (besides
stubbornness) were gluttony, and drunkenness (which is a kind of gluttony, or,
as they call it, intemperantia circa humidum (Deuteronomy 21. 20, 21.

8 Surprisall by the day of judgment; or, The worse usage when they are
surprised. Take heed to your selves, least at any time your heart be
overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so
that day come upon you unawares Luke 21. 34, see Mat: 24. 39.

But especially have Gluttons cause to fear God's wrath, if they are such in
times of mourning, and public calamities, for then they are sure to be
punished without hope of pardon. In that day did the Lord God of hoasts ( and
yet they were not afraid to disregard him) call to weeping, and to mourning,
and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth. And behold joy and gladness,
slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; Let us eat
and drink for to morrow we shall dye. And it it was revealed in my ears by the
Lord of hoasts; surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die,
says the Lord God of hoasts. Isa: 22. 12, 13, 14.

God. Speaking ungodly for him
Shall have no thanks; but anger, and punishment also, unless the anger be
appeased For thus God spoke to Eliphaz ( one of Job's friends, who unjustly
accused him in the defense of God's justice,) My wrath is kindled against thee,
and against thy two friends, for ye have not spoken of me the tbing that is
right, as my servant Job has. Therefore take unto you now seven Bullocks, and
seven Rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt
offering, and my servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept: lest I
deal with you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me, the thing
which is right, as my Servant Job has, Job 42. 7, 8. Seven Bullocks and seven
Rams] A great offering, and therefore doubtless they had Sinned greatly. Folly]
There is much of this foolish hypocritical Zeal amongst professors; both
doing and speaking more then they should in defense of religion. In that ye
have not] God repeats the fault, and therefore certainly he was much offended
with it. Observe how sharply Job took up his friends for their uncharitable
Zeal, c: 13. Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him?
verse 7.

Gospel. Such as oppose it
They are in the same condition with Selfemuderers. For Paul said to the Jews
that opposed him at Corinth, Your blood be upon your heads, I am clean etc.
Act: 18. 6. Nay, with fighters against God, (who are sure not only to have the
worst, but to be beaten also for fighting.) Gamaliel told the council of the
Jews, when he dissuaded them from meddling with the Apostles, If it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it; lest happily ye be found to fight against God, Act: 5.
39.

They are punished 1. With corporal blindness, Elymas Barjesus (the sorcerer)
resisting Paul and Barnabas, and dissuading Sergius Paulus (the Deputy of
Paphos) from harkening to them, was imediatly stricken with blindness Act: 13.
11. What fearful expressions did Paul use, when he denounced this judgment
against them! O full of all subtilty and all mischeife, thou child of the
Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the
right ways of the Lord? verse. 10. He that would keep the light from another,
was justly punished not to see the light himself.

Spiritual darkness, both by the removal of the light of the Gospel, as in
the place before quoted. From hence forth I will go unto the Gentiles Act: 18.
6: and by utter rejection of the men themselves; for so much seems to be
employed, in Paul's shaking his raiment to the Jews of Corinth, that opposed
him, (in the same place.) As if he had said with all. So God shake off you, and
every one that withstand the truth; even thus let him be shaken out and
emptied. For such words Nehemiah used, when he shook his lap Which puts me in
mind of what Q. Fabius did when he went in an Embassage from the Romans to the
Saguntini. For making a lap of his gown, he told them that he there carried
peace, and war, and they should take which they would. When they answered, he
should give what he pleased, sinu effuso, (says my Author) he shook out his
lap, and told them that he gave them war Live. l. 23.
in the same manner (in indignation against the Jewish Usurers, that detained
the morgaged lands Neh: 5. 13.) It Is likely, shaking off the dust As if they
said withal, we do shake you off, we will have no more to do with you, or
any thing that is yours, insomuch that we will not carry away your dirt with
us: we renounce you.
of the feet, had the like signification. It was used by Paul and Barnabas, at
Antioch, where they were persecuted by the Jews, Act: 13. 51, and prescribed,
or at least permitted, to the Apostls by our Saivour, not only in case of
resisting, but in case of not receiving them, Mat. 10. 14.

4. Indignation and wrath. But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey
the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath Rom: 2. 8.

Governors.
Such as resist them
They will certainly rue it one way or other: for that is the least that can be
meant by the words of the Apostle, They that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation, Rom: 13 2. The word which we translate damnation, is (in Greek)
(...), which signifies judgment. See 1 Cor: 11. 29. 1 Timothy: 5. 12.

They have been punished; 1. With Conquest* Thus the five Kings were punished,
that rebelled against Chedorlaomer, Gen: 14. The Moabites, who paid tribute to
King Ahab, but rebelled against Jehoram, 2 King: 3. 5, and 25. Yea though the
Governers were heathen, and the Subjects the people of God: for so was Hosea
King of Israel punished, and the Israelites carried away captive; viz. because
he made himself servant and triburary to Shalmaneser the King of Assyria, and
yet afterward denied him tribute, and sent to the King of Egypt to join with
him against him, 2 Kings 17. In like manner Zedekiah King of Judah was
punished; as yon may see, 2 Kings 25. 1, etc It is said of him, Through the
anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast
them out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the King of Babylon
2 Kings 24. 20. Nabuchadnezzar against home he rebelled, took his City, and
led him away captive, and put out his eyes chap: 25.

2 Untimely death. Sheba, who rebelled against David, and drew all the ten
tribes after him, was besieged by him in Abel, and had his head cut off by the
advice of a woman, and thrown out to him, 2 Samuel 20, 22. Amasa, who was
General to Absalom in his rebellion against his father, was treacherously
slain by Joab, pretending to kiss him, verse. 10. The Amalekite, that said, he
had slain Saul, though he had not slain him, and though he said, that Saul
bid him, and though Saul were no righteous person (as David says of Ishbosheth
in opposition to Saul, 2 Samuel 4. 11.) and though he were David's mortal enemy,
was notwithstanding presently put to death at the command of David, saying thus
unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the
Lord's Anointed? 2 Samuel 1, 14. And here I cannot but add also, David's words
in his Epicedium upon Readiness death, (because Ambrose and others think it to be
a curse: and that those hills of Gilboe, where Saul was slain, were accordingly
barren ever after) Ye mountains of Gilboa, Let there be no dew, neither let
there be rain upon you, nor fields of offerings. For there the shield of the
mighty is vilely cast away; the shield of Saul, as though he had not been
anointed with oil chap. 1. 21. See in the Title of Murder, examples of such as
seek their places by murdering them, murdered themselves: for it cannot be
safe when our spirit rises against them, to take their places, if when their
spirit rises up against us, we may not forsake our own places (but of this by
and by) Eccles 10, 4. If the spirit of a Ruler rise up against thee, leave not
thy place, etc.

Jeroboam indeed, prospered against Rehoboam, and got away ten of the Tribes to
be subject to him, 1 Kings 12. but God had revealed thus much to him before, by
the Prophet Ahijah 1 King. 11, 31. otherwise, perhaps, he would hardly have
ventured: for notwithstanding this his success against the son, we have these
words of the father still upon record, which we own for Scripture, viz. My
son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given
Novarum rerum studiosis The Sept: it is likely, did read it (...) for they
translate (...) i. e. nor disobey either of them.
to change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knows the ruin
of them both? Prove. 24, 21, 22 Such as resist Powers, and the Ordinances of
God, though in appearance they resist but men, yet indeed they resist God, and
shall be accordingly punished. The murmurings of the Israelites against Moses,
are both spoken of, and punished as murmurings against God, and Moses tells
them, they were accounted no other, Ex. 16. 8. So Number. 20, 13 it is said, The
people chode with Moses for water: and yet v. 13 it is said, that the water was
called the water of Meribah, because the children of Israel strove with the
LORD. Hananiah persuaded the Jews to revolt from the King of Babylon only;
and yet it is said, that he taught rebellion against the LORD, Jer. 28. 16. You
may not speak wickedly, though it be for God, Job 13, 7. and I would wish you
beware of striking rulers, especially or although, it be for equity, Prove. 17,
26.

Such as speak against them
Have cause to fear severe punishment, for Miriam was punished with Leprosy,
for speaking against Moses Number. 12. 10. At first indeed she spoke against him,
for that which might seem to be justly blamed (as usually in such things the
first pretenses are the best) viz. his marriage with an Ethiopian woman verse.
1. But afterward, for appropriating that to himself, which she said, was
common also to her and Aaron, viz: to be the mouth of God, verse. 2. But mark
how quickly God was moved herewith: And the Lord spoke suddenly unto Moses,
etc. verse. 4. Suddenly] as it was said before, their calamity shall rise
suddenly, Prove. 24. And mark how much he detested it, so that he could not
endure to tarry in the place with them: The anger of the Lord was kindled
against them, and he departed, and the cloud departed from off the Tabernacle
verse. 10. This Leprosy, as it was no ordinary disease, so it is conceived, it
was no ordinary Leprosy, (such as others now have;) but peculiarly inflicted
by God upon the Jews, when they had committed some notorious crime, and
especially disobedience to the Priests, and Levites: as it seems by what is
said in Deuteronomy. chapter 24, 8. Take heed of the plague of Leprosy, that thou observe
diligently, and do according to all that the Priests, and Levites shall teach
thee. OF Leprosie] (not In, as we translate:) so the vulgar, and the Chaldee
Paraphrase, and perhaps better, for these two reasons: First, because the
charge is to the people, viz. to do as the Priests shall teach them in other
things: whereas for those things that are to be done in the business of the
Leprosy, the charge is directed altogether to the Priests, Lev. 13. 2 Because
it follows in the next verse, Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam,
verse. 9. who was stricken with Leprosy, for her murmuring against Moses, who
was no Priest.

In Exodus chap 22. 28, where we render, Thou shall not We do not usually take
revile in this sense, but perhaps in propriety of speech it imports the same,
coming from vile. The Chaldee word is (...)
revile ( the Gods;) the Chaldee Paraphrase says, Thou shall not vilify We
do not usually take revile in this sense, but perhaps in propriety of speech
it imports the same, coming from vile. The Chaldee word is (...)
and for curse ( the ruler,) the Septuagint (...).
say, speak evil against. By speaking evil against them, is not only meant,
speaking evil against them to their faces, but any speaking evil of them,
behind their backs, in any manner (...), as Peter calls it, 2 Ep: 2, 10. i. e.
word for word to blaspheme glorys, and to speak indignely of dignities, or to
disgrace them who are in places of honor. Jude says, that Michael, although
he were Archangell, yet durst not do so, to the very Devil himself. Jud: 9.
to whom we have nothing to say, unless it be to defend our selves from him. In
that place of the Proverbs before quoted, for, Them that are given to change,
the Latin renders, Detractours. and whereas it is added, the ruin of them both,
Upon Ezekiel.
Hierome interprets it thus, both of him that detracts, and him that willingly
hears him: So that he makes it reach further, even to the hearer. See
concerning Korah in the chap: of Ministers.

Such as do contrary to their Sentence
Are threatened with Death. And the man that will do presumptuously, and will
not hearken unto the Priest, that stands to minister there before the Lord
thy God, or unto the Judge, even that man shall die, and thou shall put away
the evil from Israel, Deuteronomy: 17. 12.

Such as did not Serve them, though they were Heathen
With sword, and famine, and pestilence. And it shall come to pass, that the
Nation and Kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezar the King of
Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the King of
Babylon; that Nation will I punish, says the Lord, with the sword, and the
famine and with pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand Jer: 27. 8.

Such as persuade men to revolt from them
Are punished with Death. So those Prophets who spoke to the Jews, of breaking
the yoke of Subjection to the King of Babylon* as namely Ahab and Zedekiah, who
were roasted to death by Nebuchadnezar, Jer. 29, 22.

Shemaiah, whose whole family was likewise extirpated. v. 32. Hananiah, who was
threatened by the Prophet Jeremy to dye the same year, and died accordingly, c.
28. 16, 17. and besides this, the wooden yoke was turned into an iron yoke v.
13, 14.

Such as do not endeavor to preserve their lives.
In David's opinion are sons of death. For thus he spoke to Abner, and the rest,
that were with Saul, (when he took away his spear, and his cruse of water, as
they lay asleep) This thing is not good that thou have done, as the Lord
lives, ye are worthy to die* (or, according to the Hebrew, ye are sons of
death) because ye have not kept your Master the Lord's anointed, 1 Samuel 26, 16.

I have been the longer upon this subject, chiefly for these two reasons, 1 To
show that, however the true religion be accused of sedition and faction, (and
perhaps there are too many of those that profess it, that are sons of Belial,)
yet it does not defend them. 2 That those who are not of the true religion,
might no longer be scandalized, as they have been; (for prevention whereof our
Savior himself paid tribute, which else he was not bound to do, Matthew. 17,
27.) nor the name of God, and his doctrine blasphemed, as it has been very
much by such practices, 1 Timothy 6, 1.

Threatening and punishing with Unfit Governors.
I will give children to be their Princes, and babes shall rule over them,
Isaiah 3. 4.

With Wicked Governors.
In the 2 Book of the Kings, chapter 17. after complaint of the disobedience, and
Idolatry of the children of Israel, you have these words in relation of their
punishment for it: And the Lord rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted
them, and delivered them into the hand of the spoylers, until he had cast them
out of his sight. For he rent Israel from the house of David, and they made
Jeroboam the son of Nebat King, and Jeroboam drove Israel from following the
Lord, and made them sin a great sin, verse. 20, 21.

Threatening, and punishing Of Wicked Governors.
With punishing their Subjects. Because thou obeyed'st not the voice of the
Lord etc. Moreover, the Lord will also deliver Israel with thee into the hand
of the Philistines 1 Samuel 28. 18, 19. That three years Famine, which was in
Israel, in the reign of David, the Lord himself said, was for Saul, and for
his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21. 1. See 1 King. 14.
16. Other ways of punishing them, may be seen in the chapters of their Sins,
especially Injustice, and Oppression.

Grace. Refusing of it, threatened and punished
1 With Conquest by enemies. Our Savior told Jerusalem. The day shall come
upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side: And shall lay thee even with the
ground, and thy children with thee, and thou shall not have in thee one stone
upon another, because thou knew not the time of thy visitation, Luke 9. 43,
44.

2 Desolation, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets and
stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not? Behold your house is left unto you desolate, Mat. 23. 37, 38. it is
likely, by, house, is meant, the Temple; and by being Desolate, having no more
Prophets, and messengers from God; (because he adds verse 39 For ye shall not
see me henceforth etc.) which if it be, you may apply this place to the
punishment which immediately follows, viz.

3 Denial of the means of grace, such as Preaching etc. Paul and Barnabas
told the Jews at Antioch It was necessary, that the Word of G^d should first
have been spoken unto you: but, seeing ye put it from you, and judge your
selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles, Act. 13. 46.
Imagine they had said thus, We were commanded to speak to you, first, whether
you would hear Ezekiel. 2. 5.
, and whether you would forbear; you were to have the refusal of the Gospel.
and we had commission withal, if any were not worthy to let our peace return
to us, Matt. 10. 13. now as for our parts, we did not judge you unworthy, We
judge nothing before the time, 1 Cor. 4. 5. but seeing, by rejecting our
letters of pardon, you yourselves have therein judged your selves to be those,
who are unworthy, we take the word: we are now at liberty to go to the
Gentiles.

4 Denial of Grace it self. If thou had known, even thou, at lest in this
thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace: but now they are hid from thine
eyes, Luk: 19. 42. They are the words of our Savior to Jerusalem.

So in John chapter 12, 35. he says to the Jews, Walk while ye have the light,
lest darkness come upon you. What a madness is it, for a man that is walking
in the dark, when another comes by with a lantern, to stand still, and not
make use of the opportunity! but especially if that party freely offer to light
him home. How can such a man either expect that that party should tarry for
him, having elsewhere to go; or find any fault in providence, if he loose his
way, or meet with a fall. Our Savior says, that it is The condemnation of
those that believe not the Gospel, (or the maine condemning thing in that their
sin) that they are so froward, as, when Light is come into the world, to love
darkness rather then light, Joh. 3. 19.

5 Denial both of GRACE and glory. Our Savior in his parable of a man, that
made a Supper, and invited diverse, who pretending worldly business, refused to
come, brings in the master of the feast, speaking thus, I say unto you, that
none of those men that were bidde^ shall taste of my Supper, Luke 14, 24. Those
men which were bidden] (...), THOSE men; and (...), Those men which were
BIDDEN: it seems to be spoken with an Emphasis of much anger, and detestation.
Doubtless, Christ would be much displeapleased, when he knocks at a man's
door, not to be let in to suppe with him. Rev. 3. 20. but woe to that man who
is invited to supper with Christ, and scorns to go. How shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2. 3.

Hardening of the Heart.
There is a Hardening of a man's heart by himself, which is a sin, and not a
punishment; as that of Pharaoh, which is spoken of Exodus 9. 34. And there is a
Hardening, which is the effect of sin, and not the reward; as past feeling in
a man's hand, is an effect of putting it into the fire too often: (such as that
which the Author to the Hebrews bids us beware of, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin, cap. 3. 13) But the hardening, which I
mean, is that, which is inflicted by God, as a punishment; which the Scripture
often mentions.

With this punishment have been punished: 1 Pharaoh. And he hardened Pharaoh's
heart, that he hearkened not unto them, Exodus 7. 13. according as he had said,
he would before, verse. 3. See chap. 9. 12. chap. 10. 1.

2 Sihon King of Heshbon, who refused to let the Israelites pass through his
country. For the Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart
obstinate, Deuteronomy. 2. 30.

3 The rest of the Heathen, who most obstinately refused to make peace with the
Israelites, all except the Hivites of Gibeon. For it was of the Lord to harden
their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle Josh. 11. 20.

4 The Jews themselves. Go, and tell this people, hear ye indeed, but
understand not, see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people
Being Fat, and waxing Fat, is often used in Scripture, to express of brutish
use of prosperity, only for the pampering of the body, whereby men become as
unfit, and unwilling to serve God, as beasts are to run, or draw in the yoke,
when they have been suffered to lie too long idle, and are grown unwieldy and
wanton. See Deuteronomy. 32. 15. and chap. 31. 20. Psalm. 119. 70. Jer. 50. 11.
fat, and their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert,
and be healed, Isaiah 6. 9, 10. Hear ye indeed] as if he had said, You have
not been willing to hear hitherto: henceforward, therefore, hear as much as
you will (as you shall be sure to have enough Hearing ye shall hear: is an
Hebraisme, for hear^ng much: as the Jews did, (especially when Christ himself
was come) more then any other people in the world.
spoken to you, according as he speaks to Jeremy c. 7, 27.) But you shall not
be able to believe, or understand. The words of the first verse might seem to
be a prophecy only of a Sin, and not a threat of a punishment: because, in
the Latin translation you have for, understand not, non intelligetis, which may
be rendered, Ye will not understand; and our Savior citing this place calls it a
Prophecy. But (to say nothing, that the word (...) prophecy, is of far
larger signification, then barely foretelling of a thing to come) the
translation of the Se^tuagint, the quotation (...).
of Matthew, and Luke, ( Mat. 13, 14. Act. 28. 26.) and the Latin translation
it self in the next verse, speak the contrary. for though the Septuagint
seem to have made that verse a complaint of a Sin, translating (...), is
waxen fat, (with whom those agree who take the Hebrew word in the Infinitive
mood, understanding the preposition (...) or (...)) yet does that translation,
and the Chaldee Paraph. agree with ours, to read the word (...) rather in the
Imperative mood. and I believe the Septuagint also may well enough be
interpretted of a punishment, or an act of God's, thus, The heart of this
people is now grown fat; or, I have made it fat: and therefore, if they hear
never so much, they cannot understand. Besides, John in his Gospel brings in
our Savior citing the Prophet, as if he had peremptorily said concerning God,
He has blinded their eyes, and hardened As it it had been (...) in Isaiah.
their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understa^d with
their hearts, and be co^verted, and I should heal them, Joh. 12. 40. And
therefore, in the verse before, he said, (...), they Could not believe. So
that, as I said before, for being unwilling to hear, they were made unable to
believe. Theophylact following Chrysostom (who was overmuch addicted to the
opinion of Free will) has paraphrased it, noluerunt, they were not willing (to
believe.) Which indeed is true too, for (as Beza says) at^ adeo haec est
propinqua incredulitatis ipsorum causa, their unwillingnesse was the immediate
cause of their not believing sed altius ascendit Evangelista but the Evangelist
(says he) goes higher, and names a more remote cause, viz. Their inability to
turn their stubborn wills* for (says he) reprobates, as they are not willing
to believe, so are they not able to be willing. To conclude, What the Prophet
says, and what the Septuagint say; and so what Matthew, and Luke say, and what
S. John says, agree all well enough in this, viz. that there was in the Jews
both a hardening by themselves, complained of, as the desert; and a hardening
by God, threatened and inflicted, as a reward. Because they (...), shut their
eyes, when they had their sight; God (...), blinded their eyes, so that they
had not their sight, when their eyes were open: because, as Matthew (says,
(...), their ears were dull of hearing; therefore, as John says, (...), he
hardened their heart, so that what they heard, came in at one ear, and went
out at the other.

The Jews were threatened with this punishment in Isaiah's time; they lay under
it, in our Saviors time, and in Paul's time: and so they have ever since, till
our times. But as they neither did, nor do lie under it all of them, so they
shall not always. for, as Paul says, (...) blindness has happened to
Israel, but in part. To. 11. 25. In part] Whether it be meant, for some TIME;
so that the words following (viz. till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in)
shall be exegeticall to expound these: or, to some MEN; so that the blindness
happening thus in part, (whereby there came to be, (...), a diminution of
believers among the Jews, as it is v. 12.) shall be opposed to the (...), or,
fullness of the Gentiles, when they shall be all converted. For when the Jews
see this, it shall (...) (as the Apostle's words are,) so exceedingly provoke
them, that for mere emulation, they shall come in, and have their fullness
too, (as it is verse. 38.) and never be rejected any more. So that what seems
to be spoken to the Gentiles, may be applied also to the Jews, in regard of
rejection and restoration, viz. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for
a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the
Lord thy Redeemer, Isaiah 54. 8.

There are diverse other places of Scripture that mention this punishment, as,
Isa: 63. 17. Rom: 1. 24. etc: More also might be spoken concerning the manner
of God's punishing men therewith, and his justice therein; but these waters are
so deep, that (unless I were taller) if I should venture to go further, I
should either be drowned, and do nothing, or be forced to swim, and do it
superficially. I will hasten out, with the words of the Apostle, (whether it be
Jew or Gentile, and whether it be this Gentile, or that Gentile) God has mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens, Rom: 9. 18.

Hardness of Heart.
For this, men are punished
1 With Taking away of the means of Grace, to make them Vn-saveable. It is
said of the Ephesians, and Paul, When diverse were hardened and believed not,
but spoke evil of that way before the multitude: he departed from them etc*
Act: 19, 9.

2 Renewing of the means of Grace, to make them Inexcusable. This is a most
heavy punishment, and with it some of the Jews were punished, Jer. 7. 26, 27.
Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear; but hardened their
necks: they did worse then their fathers: Therefore thou shall speak all these
words unto the^, but they will not hearken unto thee; thou shall also call unto
them, but they will not answer thee. A master will be angry, if his servant do
not hearken to him, when he does but speak to him, of his duty to come and
wait upon him; much more, if he refuse to come, when he is peremptorily called:
and much more yet: if he refuse to give him an answer. Doubtless, God was very
angry, when he spoke those words: and you may clearly perceive so much, by the
expressions used in the rest of that chapter: for I think there are as great
expressions therein, of Gods anger against the Jews, as in any other chapter
throughout the prophecy: and among them the greatest is that, wherein he
forbids Jeremy to pray for them, verse. 16.

3 Loss of Dominions. Nebuchadnezzar, when his heart was hardened in pride,
was deposed from his Kingly Throne, Dan. 5. 20.

Hardened in pride] there is nothing will harden a heart so much as Pride, and
stoutnesse: for it is that whereby men strengthen, themselves in their
wickedness, Psalm. 52. 7. Ezekiel. 7. 13. and as the same word, viz. (...)
signifies to be strong, and to be proud: So the same word viz. (...) signifies
to strengthen, and to harden. Pride makes us obstinate in our malice against
men: and it is pride that makes us obstinate in our sinning against God.

4 Captivity and desolation. Behold I will bring upon this city, and upon all
her towns, all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have
hardened their necks, that they might not hear my words, Jer. 19. 15. They
would not only not hear, but they would not so much as turn about their
heads, lest, by that means, they might hear: and therefore seeing they have
thus hardened their hearts, not to hear my words, I will also harden my heart,
not to depart from my Word; but to bring upon them all the evil that I have
pronounced against them: for in such a manner he speaks by another Prophet,
The house of Israel are Impudent, and hard hearted. Behold I have made thy face
strong against their faces: and thy forehead strong against their foreheads,
etc. Ezekiel. 3. 7, 8, 9.

5 Death. Pharaoh, hardening his heart, and not yielding to let the Israelites
go out of his Country, was after a great many fearful punishments, at last
drowned in the red sea, he and all his army, Ex. 14. 28. And it seems, it was
God's design upon him before, through his obstinacy to bring him to this end.
Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and
bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of Israel out of the land
of Egypt, by great judgments, chapter 7. 4. See chapter 10. 1. If a thing be not hard,
it will yield, or bow; and it cannot be broken: and if it be hard, it must be
broken, if it meet with a stronger. Had not God made Pharaoh's heart heavy (as
the word (...) which we render, hardened, signifies, Exodus 10. 1.) he had never
made him sink as lead Exodus 15. 10.
in the midst of the sea. Be afraid therefore, when thou perceivest never so
little ^callus, or, hard flesh growing upon thy heart, lest God have a design
to suffer thee to be still sinful here, that so thou may be for ever
miserable hereafter.

Sihon King of Heshbon (of whom I have spoken before) through hardness of
heart not yielding to let the Israelites pass thorowhis country, was
overthrown in battle at Jahaz; and he, and all his people, men, women, and
children, put to the sword, Deuteronomy. 2. 33, 34. And it was God's desigue upon him
too, to have it so: for it is said, The Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and
made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, says Moses
to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 2. 30.

Those Heathen (formerly mentioned,) through hardness of heart, not yielding
to let the Israelites dwell in their country, were utterly destroyed. And that
it was God's design upon them likewise, to bring them to destruction this way,
appears more fully by the asserting of it twice in one verse. There was not a
city, that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the
inhabitants of Gibeon; all other they took in battle. For it was of the Lord
to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle: that
he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favor, (for then
neither God's purpose could have been fulfilled, nor his command obeyed;) but
that he might destroy them, as the Lord commanded Moses, Josh. 11. 19, 20. That
he might destroy them] As a man cannot be saved, with hardness of heart: so he
cannot well be destroyed, without it. For if his heart be (...) hard, he will
repent; and if he repent, he has a promise of mercy, Ezekiel. chap. 33. v. 11.

6 Death eternal. But after thy hardness, and impenitent heart (for they are
inseparable) treasurest up wrath (such a treasure of it, as will never be
spent) against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God, Romans 2. 5. A man with a stony heart can never be saved; for whom God
saves, he gives him a heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. He that has a face
that is harder then a rock, (Jer. 5. 3.) can never blush, (for the blood will
not run in it.) he that has a neck, that is an iron sinew, (Isa. 48. 4.^) can
never turn. He that has a hard heart, has both: so that he cannot be ashamed
of his former way, nor turn into another way, and therefore must needs perish
from the right way. A Hard heart is no more capable of glory, then it is of
Grace; and it is no more capable of grace (till it be softened) then hard wax
is of an impression (till it be molten.) It Is with men, that are waxen fat See
the marginall note in the chapter of Hardness.
, as it is with Bullocks, that are fatted: they are fit for nothing else; and
it is a sign, they are intended for nothing else, but slaughter and
destruction, Till a man be hardened in sin, God may lay his hand upon his
sword, and take it off again several times. he may threaten, and threaten,
to punish; and yet repent, and repent. but if once he sees a man's heart
hardened, it is a thousand to one, but then he is weary of repenting Jer. 15. 6.
(as a man will be of striking upon a hard piece of wood, which his axe cannot
enter;) and his hand will take hold of judgment, Deuteronomy. 32. 41. God did not
leave repenting with the Israelites, till they left repenting first. Before
they had hardened their hearts in sinning against him, he did but say, what he
would do: but when once their hearts were hardened, he takes up a resolution,
not to alter his resolution, and swears unto them in his wrath, that they
should not enter into his rest, Ps. 95. 11. And indeed those Israelites, of
who^ those words are spoken (who rebelled against the Lord Number. 13. and 14.
, and refused to go on in their journey upon the evil report of a few
cowardly spies) who had heard and seen so many threats, and punishments, so
many promises and mercies (those men which have seen Number. 14. 22.
my glory, and my miracles which I did in Egypt, and the wilderness: and have
tempted me now these ten times) that they notwithstanding, should harden
themselves to Verse. 9.
rebel against the Lord, now at last, when they were come so near their
journeies end; it was such a provocation, as God could not possibly put up;
Surely they shall not see the land (or, If they do etc. then I am not God)
which I swear unto their fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me,
see it, Number. 14. 23. And therefore in the Psalm but now cited, (in the 8
verse) David bade the Jews take heed, how they hardened their hearts, as those
their forefathers did, lest God's anger should kindle against them also, in the
like resolute manner, so as never to be appeased.

What ever thou do, do not provoke God by hardening thy self against him. 1
Because it cannot possibly do thee any good. It is in vain to think, we are
stronger then he, 1 Cor. 10. 22. Who has hardened himself against him, and
prospered? Job. 9. 4. 2 Because it will necessarily do thee hurt. Happy is the
man that fears always: but he that hardens his heart, shall fall into
mischief, Prove. 28. 14. Labor above all things to be tenderhearted; and be
wary how thou crossest a tender hearted father: for none more angry then such a
one, if he be once exasperated. Especially when he corrects thee, be sure to
yield, and amend; for hardness at such a time provokes him insufferably. A
father that corrects his child, if he neither weep, nor so much as seem to
care for it, will be grieved to the heart: he shakes his head, and throws away
the rod, and a thousand to one, but he resolves never to look any more after
him.

Hastiness,
See Rashness.

Hatred.
For this men are punished. 1. With Need of their help whom they hate. The
Gileadites, who hated their brother Jephtah, and turned him out of doors for
being the Son of a Harlot. Judge: 11. 2; afterward, when the Ammonites made
war with them, were feign to send to him, to be their General, verse: 6. 7.
Surely had men but so much Policy, as they should have, they would avoid hatred
and enmity. First, because there is no body so selfe-sufficient, but one time
or other he may stand in need of another man's help. Secondly, because there is
no body so insufficient, but one time or other, his help may stand another man
instead. And thirdly, because there is no body, but his necessities are so
various, that, seeing God has so variously endowed men with abilities, such a
man's help may stand him in steed, when no bodies help but his will serve.

2 God's doing good to those whom they hate; then which there can be no greater
punishment, because there can be no greater vexation, then to be so punished.
When the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel was
barren, Gen: 29. 31. If Joseph's Brethren Hate him, for dreaming a dream; he
shall dream again, notwithstanding that, and dream better. Instead of having
obeisance made, only by their sheafes to his sheafe; he shall have it made by
the Sun, and the Moon, and eleven stars to his own person, Gen: 37. 5, 7,
8, 9: which was a more plain revelation of his future preferment. Malicious
prosecuting men with hatred, is like a succeslesse assault made upon a weak
Fort: which does but cause the enemy to make it the stronger, and guard it the
better. God very often does, as I have seen many Parents do, when they see one
of their children hated by his brethren, viz: If they hated him, love him; if
they loved him, love him better, and resolve to give him the more. Me thinks
therefore, thou might forbear to hate another, were it but for mere envy
to him.

3 Their own hurting themselves. viz: By not believing, or refusing to ask,
or follow, the advice of those whom they hate. Ahab said to Jehoshaphat, There
is yet one man Micaiah, by whom we may enquire of the Lord; but I hate him, for
he does not phophecie good concerning me, but evil, 1 King. 22. 8. and
therefore refusing his advise, viz. Not to go up to Ramoth Gillead, he went
up, and was there wounded, and died of his wound. v. 35. It Is as strange to
see, as it is common to be seen, how men take, and refuse, such and such
courses, to their own ruin, merely to be contrary to one, whom they do not
like. displicet Author Ovid Met: lib. 8. Fab. 4.
the Author dislikes me, is all they can say. But yet so it is; our hatred to
others, is stronger then our love to our selves. Justin l. 12. c. 11. So^ l.
18. c. 5. (speaking of the Thessali) tanto odio Phocensium ardentes, ut obliti
cladiu^ suarum perire ipsi quam non perdere eos praeoptarent.
says of Alexander, plus loetitiae cognitis mortibus duorum aemulorum regum,
quam doloris amissi cum Sopyrione exercitus suscepit, He tookemore joy at the
death of two Kings his confederates, whom he emulated, then then he did sorrow
at the loss of his army.

4 Not-having their prayers heard, or any duty, that they perform accepted,
though it be never so good, though it be as a gift, or freewill offering; as
may be gathered, by our Savior's forbidding the Jews to offer a gift, till
they were in charity with their Neighbors: If thou bring thy gift to the
Altar, and there remembrest, that thy Brother has ought against thee; Leave
there thy gift before the Altar; (we must not, as it is our common practice,
forbear duties, because we are not in charity; because it is our duty to be
in charity, that we may not forbear) and go thy way, first be rconciled to
thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Agree with thine adversary
quickly etc. Mat. 5. 23, 24, 25. Be reconciled to thy brother] (though his
brother had somewhat against him, and had therefore most need of being
reconciled) and, Agree with thine adversary, (...), be well minded toward him;
or, bear him love and good will; do but do this, and then come, and welcome.
If it be possible, reconcile thy brother to thee: if not, be sure be reconciled
to him, and be friends with him. For doubtless, not for my adversasarie's not
being friends with me, (although I have wronged him;) but only, for my not
being friends with him, my offering and prayers cannot find acceptance: and
this, I believe, was that which Christ required. See 1 Pet. 3. 7.

5 (If it be toward a brother) The same, that those, who LOVE NOT GOD. If a
man say, I love God (for this every one will say, though he be the most wicked
wretch that ever lived) and hates his brother, he is a liar, 1 John 4. 20. If
he, that is the world's friend, be God's enemy; he that is his brother's enemy,
cannot be God's friend, James 4. 4.

6 The same, that MURDERERS, and Such as have not passed from death to life.
Who so Hates his brother, is a murderer: and ye know that no murderer has
eternal life abiding in him, 1 John 3. 15. Surely his punishment must needs be
damnation. For he that lives this life in a death of sin, must needs live the
next, in a death of misery. Now he that loves not (much more, he that Hates)
his brother, abides in death, verse. 14. or, he has not yet passed from the
life of the old man, which is but death (in comparison,) to the life of the new
man, or the life of Christ; which only is life indeed.

Hearing the Word.
See Word.

Not-Helping the Godly. Or, Not-Helping men in the ways of God,
There is cause, why we should exceedingly fear God's anger against us for it;
in regard that such who have been faulty this way, have been punished, or
threatened.

1 With Excommunication Which (...) properly of those only, who have
Communicated.
shall I call it? or, non-communication, viz: with those whom they thus
neglected to help. An Ammonite, or Moabite shall not enter into the
Congregation of the Lord; even to the tenth generation, shall they not enter
into the Congregation of the Lord for ever. Because they met you not with bread
and with water in the way when ye came forth out of Egypt, and because they
hired against thee Balaam etc. Deuteronomy: 23. 3, 4.

An Ammonite, or Moabite] that is, say some, only an Ammonite or Moabite-man:
for a woman (they say) of either of these Nations might enter into the
Congregation of the Lord, viz: by marrying with an Israelite man although a man
might not by marrying with an Israelite woman. Their reason is, because Ruth a
Moabite-woman, was married to Boaz an Israelite man Ruth 4.
, and that with the Consent of the Elders, and all the people that were in the
gate Verse. 11.
, To which they might add also this, for a confirmation of their opinion viz:
that it was the practice of the Israelites, to marry with their women; (as may
be gathered by Nehemiah's complaint only of such marriages, as if they had
forborne others Neh: 13. 23, and likewise by the marriages permitted with the
Benjamite women, when it was not suffered to be with the men Jud: 21. 16, 18.)
and that chiefly (as I conceive) upon these grounds: 1. Because uncircumcision
was the maine thing in a Gentile, that offended them, (as you may see Gen: 34.
14.) which they could not except against in women. 2 Because if they married
only with their women, there was no fear of building up strange families: for
(according to the etymology of the Hebrew word Naschim signifying, women,
coming from Nascha, to forget,) the children being named after the Father, the
Families from whence they came, would be soon forgotten. But, notwithstanding
this instance of Ruth, and the practice of the Jews, it may be answered that
the prohibition was general: 1. Because Ruth had been sanctified, 1 Cor. 7. 14.
There are many insta^ces of actions otherwise unlawful, but extraordinarily
commanded or tolerated by God, where a mystery was intended; as if he meant not
to bring to pass extraordinary things, but by extraordinary ways, and means:
or as if in so doing, he would have had men to take the more notice and so to
look further into the matter.
as I may say, by marriage with an Israelite before, c: 1. 4. or rather indeed,
by leaving her religion, and becoming a Proselyte, c: 3. v. 11. 2 Because,
there was in this marriage, a Mystery, * intended by the Author of the
prohibition himself, (who had power to dispense:) to signify, that, when
Christ should come, (who was to descend from David, Ruth's great grandchild,)
the middle wall of partition between the Gentiles and the Jews, was to be
broken down; and the Gentiles to be no more Srangers and Forreiners, but
fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God (Ephesians. 2. 14. 19.)
both by corporal, and by spiritual marriage, and communion. Insomuch that,
though the Apostle say of the Israelites, (in setting forth their dignity) Of
whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came, Rom: 9. 5: yet he might have said
the same of the Gentiles also. and he does as good as say so, when he says of
Christ, Ephesians: 2. 15, having abolished in his flesh, the enmity, and v. 16. That
he might reconcile both unto God in one body: in one body, viz. which descended
both from a Jew, and from a Gentile.

3 Because it appears, that, though the Israelites (according to the objection
(seem to have looked upon it as a thing allowed for their men to marry with
strange women, yet Nehemiah was of a another mind. For, as soon as he had heard
those words (of the text above mentioned read by the Levites,) at the
dedication of the new wall, presently he fell to separating all the mixed
multitude, and made them swear by God, saying: Ye shall not give your
Daughters unto their Sons nor take their Daughters unto your Sons, or for your
selves; chap: 13. 3. 25, You see, he forbids marriage with their Daughters more
punctually, and with larger caution; adding, or for your selves, for fear they
should take that liberty, which otherwise they might think they had. And if
any one say. Nehemiah did thus upon his own discretion only, viz. because he
saw they had been by this means tempted to Idolatry before; and to prevent it
for the future: (as may be conjectured by what he says of Solomon, v. 26. That
his wives had caused him to sin) and not that there was any such thing intended
in God's prohibition at first, it may be answered, that the contrary is a great
deal plainer from the 27, v. where it is said, Shall we then hearken unto you,
and do all this evil to trangresse against our God, in marrying strange
wives. To transgress etc. In marrying] not, to be made to transgress, or to
transgress because of our wives; but in or, by the very act of marrying.

But to return. It was said above, An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into
the Congregation] that is, to marry or enjoy their priveledges; as the
Israelites are forbid to come among the Nations, Josh: 23. 7. Even to the tenth
generation.] Wherein they were esteemed seven times worse, then Egyptians; for
their children might enter in the third generation v. 8. Even to the tenth
generation for ever,] it might be interpreted, This prohibition (of not being
admitted till the tenth generation) shall be in force against them for ever.
But because in Nehemiah (c. 13. 1, where this law is recited) the words, for
ever, only are mentioned, it seems rather to be interpreted, This prohibition,
(viz. simply, of entering into the Congregation) shall be for ever. So that
these words shall be either exegeticall, to expound those next before
(according to the opinion of those, who expound that of a bastard's not
entering till the tenth generation, (v. 2,) of not entering for ever) or else
auxeticall, as an accession to the former. wherein God's anger against the
Moabites, for their unkindnes to his people, appears the greater; in that he
could not forbear, after he had named how he would punish them, (as I may say)
in the same breath, to increase the punishment. As if we would say, such a one
shall not come again to my house for this twelve month; no, never. With this
interpetation agrees the proverb (in use among the Jews, in their ordinary
commerce) Beware of a Proselyte, (i. e. a Gentile turned Jew) even to the tenth
generation. which puts me in mind of adding another argument, of the greatness
of God's anger for this sin of the Moabites, viz: That the punishment was
without exception, even of turning Proselyte, and embracing the Jewish religion.

Because] In the original it is (...), for that thing; or (as one would say)
for that same odious thing, of the Ammonites and Moabites, their not coming
forth to help the Israelites with provision, for that word, which is put here
to signify because, is often so used; and yet seldom, but then, when the
thing spoken of, is a maine cause, or the cause is a maine thing, as Ps. 79. 9.
etc.

Because They.] Though this pronoune benot in the Hebrew, yet may I put an
Emphasis on it in the English, to denote the Ingratitude of these people; in
regard they were they alone, whom God had given a strict charge to the
Israelites, not to fight with, Deuteronomy: 2. 19, who in obedience to that command,
passed by them without meddling with them, although they conquered Sihon (who
conquered the Moabites Nu^ 21^ 26, to 30.
.)

Because they met you not with bread and with water, when you came forth out of
Egypt] one would have thought they had been sufficiently excluded, by the
prohibition of Bastards, in the verse immediately going before; as being the
children of those who were incestuously begotten, viz: by Lot upon his
Daughters, Gen: 19. 36: but as if God accounted that no exception at all, in
comparison of this, all the reason urged for their exclusion from the
Congregation of the Israelites is, Because they met the^ not with bread etc.

Shall not enter into the Congregation etc. Because they met you not] as if he
had said, because they came not to you, to help you in your necessity, they
shall not come among you to be helped by you, in your prosperity. I have often
observed in this book, how God makes the punishment to have a resemblance with
the sin.

Met you not] or, prevented you not. not, because they denied it you, when you
asked them, but because they brought it not out first of their own accord.

With bread and with water when you came forth out of Egypt] viz: to
congratulate so great a deliverance, as that was, when you were delivered from
Egyptian bondage: even as the King of Sodom came forth to meet Abraham; and
the King of Salem came forth to meet him, with bread and wine; to congratulate
his success, when he had conquered the Kings, Gen: 14. 17, 18. Deiodate thinks
this complaint is only of some of the Moabites, because in the second chap: of
this book v. 28, 29, it is said that those Moabites who dwelt in Ar (which God
gave to the Children of Lot) did give the Israelites meat and water: but, I
may answer, it was for money (v. 28.) which was no preventing, such as is here
expressed.

Because they met you not etc. And because they hired against thee Balaam
etc.] It Is not said, Because they met you not, and they hired against thee; (as
if only both faults together were counted sufficient reason of this their
excommunication, and not either of them singly) but Because they met you not,
And because they hired against thee Balaam. the word (...), Because, is
repeated.

There is in this chapter besides this, yet more punishment for these Ammonites
and Moabites: for the Israelites are forbidden, not only to seek their affinity
by marriage; but to seek their peace, or their good, any other way, v. 6. Thou
shall not seek their peace, nor their prosperity all thy days for ever.

2 A Second thing, wherewith we find not-Helping God's people threatened in the
Scripture, is a Curse. Curse ye Meros, (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye
bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord,
to the help of the Lord against the mighty, Judge. 5. 23. If you will, you may
read the latter part of this verse, thus, Because they came not to help: If it
had been (...) it had been of the Lord without question: but it is (...)
The Lord was our help; even the Lord in those that fought for us: for so the
Septuagint render it (agreeably enough with the Hebrew which we read) (...).
(See the chapter of the Enemies of God's children. in the Section concerning
Angels) These words are in the Song of Deborah and Barak, which they made after
they had conquered Jabin, and Sisera.

3 A third punishment, that the Scripture reports to have befallen men for this
sin, is Death. The Israelites (after their fight with the Benjamites)
according to the oath (...) a great oath.
, which they had made, that whosoever came not up to Mispeh to join with them
in revenging the abuse of the Levite's Concubine, Judge. 19. should be put to
death, Judge. 21. 5. when they found none of the city of Jabesh-Gilead there,
they presently sent thither twelve thousand men and put them all to the sword,
men, women and children, verse. 10. only fourehundred virgins were suffered to
live, whom they gave for wives to the Benjamites (upon their coming in to
them; v. 14.) because they themselves had every one sworn before, not to give
his daughter to a Benjamite, v. 18. Nabal (that churl) denying to help David's
army with provision, was threatened with the slaughter, both of himself, and
all his family, 1 Samuel 25, 10, 22. And although David were restrained by the
entreaty, and liberality of Abigail (his wife) from avenging him with his own
hand, v. 33. yet in a very little while after, the hand of God found him out,
and stroke him to death. And it came to pass about ten days after, that the
Lord smote Nabal that he died, v. 38.

Certainly Not-joyning with the Godly (in their godly designs, and especially
those which they undertake upon God's command) God cannot take it well, and it
is a thousand to one, but he punishes it, in whomsoever it be. Methinkes, I
hear Moses, angrily expostulating with the Reubenites, and Gadites, for
desiring leave to take up their abode on this side Jordan, and not go over the
river with the rest of their brethren. Shall your brethren go to war, and
shall ye sit here? And wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of
Israel from going over into the land? Number. 32, 6, 7. How angrily does God, by
the Prophet Ezekiel, threaten, and in his threat aggravate by expressions, the
Egyptians their not helping Israel, according to their promise? And all the
inhabitants shall know (shall know, viz. by sad experience) That I am the Lord,
(and therefore have power, and authority to revenge) because they have been a
staff of reed to the house of Israel: when they took hold of thee by the
hand, thou did break, (he changes the person for anger) and rend all their
shoulders: and when they leaned upon thee thou brakest, and made all their
loins to be at a stand, cap. 29. 6, 7. Though he punished the Israelites for
trusting in the Egyptians, Isa. 30. 3. yet will he punish the Egyptians for not
being trusty to the Israelites. Another man's wickedness is no excuse for
mine. Paul prayed for those that forsook him, when he came to his answer
before Nero, that it might not be laid to their charge, 2 Timothy 4. 16. and
therefore surely he feared that it would. The words in the Original ((...))
seem to import as much: as if it had been said I would (or Oh if) it might
not: or, I should be glad it might not, be laid to their charge; but I fear it
will.

I have been the longer upon this subject, because I perceived what an odious
sin the Scripture made it in the Ammonites and Moabites: and because I see how
the best of us, make it a very little, or no sin at all, not to help God's
people, so long as we do not hurt them.

Helping of the Wicked.
Helpers of the Wicked are punished, or threatened
1 With God's anger. Jehu the Seer told Jehoshaphat, for helping of Ahab:
Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is
wrath upon thee from before the Lord, 2 Chr. 19. 2. That hate the Lord.] The
Septuagint translate, whom the Lord hates. If we may not hate, I am sure, we
must not love, those whom the Lord hates: I mean, we must not (...) (as their
word is) associate with them in friendship. We usually take it unkindly, to see
our friends loving to them that hate us. Do not I hate them, that hate thee?
says David, Ps. 139. 21. Yea I hate them with a perfect hatred, v. 22.

2 Non-successe in other designs. Then Eliezer, the son of Dodonah of
Mareschah, prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou have joined thy
self with Ahaziah the Lord has broken thy works: and the ships were broken,
that they were not able to go to Tarshish, 2 Chr. 10. 37.

Heresy,
See False Teachers

Hinderers of the good works of others.
Are as sure to be punished, as they, that do those works, are to have their
prayers heard: and surer too. Nehemiah prayed, that God would think upon The
Sept. (...) etc. Remember me in relation to Tobias, viz. to punish them for
what they did unto mee^
Tobias and Sanballat, only for endeavoring to affright him (from building
the wall of Jerusalem) with reports that his enemies conspired to kill him,
Neh. 6. 14.

And as they are sure to be punished for their sin: so (for the most part)
they have no success in their endeavors. That Baalzephon spoken of Exodus 14.
2. is thought by the Jews Fagius in Exodus The Eye (they say) has a great hand
both in Witchcraft and poisoning. Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat
agnos. we say, such a one has over-looked such a thing. Number. 23. 23.
, to have been an Idol, made by the Egyptian witches; and placed in the
wilderness, to hinder the Israelites in their departure from Egypt. But it
seems it could do nothing upon them, for all it is looking * and staring, (for
the name comes from Tsapha, to look or watch) but the Israelites out looked
him* and had a special command from God, to encamp just over against him, as
it were on purpose to show they cared not for him. Surely there is no
enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel, or
any other of God's people: especially, when they are going to the land of
Canaan, or are doing that, for which they have God's commission, and command to
warrant them. Read the history of God's severe punishing the Philistines, for
detaining the Arc, 1 Samuel 5.

Hindering Conversion.
Hinderers of the Conversion of others Threatened
With Woe. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites: for ye shut up the
Kingdom of heaven against men, for ye neither go in yourselves, neither
suffer them that are entering, to go in, Mat. 23. 13. Ye affright them from
being my Disciples, by your censures of Excommunication: and ye keep them from
the knowledge of the Messiah, by not permitting the reading of the Prophesies
to any, but your selves, (for this was the practice of the Scribes, and
Pharisees.) Beza thought, that Christ in these words, alluded to that sort of
traditions amongst them, which the Talmudists call Sig Lethorah, that is,
sepimentum legis, the hedge, (or fence) of the Law; because forsooth, by the
use of them, they kept men from transgressing the Law: whereas, it was rather a
Blind, to keep them from the knowledge of the Law. And indeed there seems to
be the more ground for this conceit of his, because our Savior calls them
Hypocrites; as if he had reproved their Hypocrisy, in carrying the keys, and
pretending to keep the Law for the people, when they kept it from them. Just as
the dog that lay in the manger, kept the horse's oats for him: and just such
key-keepers are the Papists.

You have the like threat in Luke, Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken
Perhaps he alludeth to their custom of delivering him a Key, whom they
admitted to the reading of the Law.
away the key of knowledge, etc. c. 11. 52. They took the key, and that was
all: for they made no use of the key* at lest not to open the door, but to shut
it.

There is no sin more Devilish, or wherein in men show themselves more like the
Devil, then this, of Hindering goodness. Neither is there any thing wherein
the Devil shows himself more truly Satan, that is, an enemy. Then is the
Devil truly Satan, when he resists Joshua, Zac: 3, 1: and when he takes
away the word that is sown in men's hearts, Mark 4. 15. Where he is called
Satan.
And then are men little better then Devils, when they are a hindrance to
others from that, which may be for the good of their Souls. When Peter would
be (...), a block in Christ's way to Jerusalem, (whether he went to do the
will of his Father, which if he had not done, we had perished to all eternity)
he calls him Satan, Mat. 16. 23. Get thee behind me Satan. When Paul was stopped
in his intention to come to the Thessalonians, by the Epicureans, and others at
Athens; he said that Satan hindered him, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. and when Bariesus
sought to turn away the Deputy Governor of Paphos from the faith, he called
him the Child of the Devil, and enemy of all unrighteousness, Acts 13. 10.
But is this all, that we have to say to such men, to call them enemies? Noe:
for, as for that Jew, which I mentioned, you may read, how he was stricken with
blindness, v. 11: and for the rest of the Jews, who forbade the Apostles to
speak to the Gentiles, 1 Thessalonians: 2. 16, it is said of them in the same place,
The wrath is come upon them to the utmost. I could wish we were all of us so
wise, as to count all them for no better then our enemies, who either hinder us
from goodness, or entice us to wickedness.

Hire. Those that detain it
1 Their punishment is certain. Thou shall not oppress an hired Servant, that
is poor and needy, whether he be of thy Brethren, or of thy strangers that are
in thy land within thy gates. At his day thou shall give him his hire, neither
shall the Sun go down upon it, for he is poor, and sets his heart upon
it; least he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin in thee, Deuteronomy: 24.
14, 15.

Thou shall not oppress an hired Servant,] or one that works for wages, (...)
In Malachi, (chap. 3. 5. a participle of the same verb ( hashak to oppress) is
joined also with (...) hire (...) those that oppress the hire, The Greek word
(...) (which signifies to to keep back that, which another should have) is
after the same manner joined sometimes with the thing; as by the Septuagint in
their translation of those places, (...) etc. and sometimes with the person; as
by Paul 1 Cor: 6. 8. and c. 7. 4. (...), etc. But perhaps by oppressing the
hire, may be meant, an oppressing of the hireling, not so much by keeping his
hire altogether, as by diminishing his hire, or not giving him it so soon as
the master ought, or as he agreed, (and therefore it is said, v 15. At his
day,) using tricks and evasions to deceive him. Accordingly, some say that the
word Hashak properly signifies oppression by cunning, and fraud; as Gasal does,
oppression by violence: which if it do, it is very well expressed by (...),
which properly signifies (and our translation very well renders it so) to
defraud* Hashak or (...), is such a sin in paying another too little, as
Batsah, or (...), is in making another pay too much, and that not by violence,
but by cunning and deceit. It is a sin as frequently committed, and as lightly
esteemed of by us now, as it was by the Jews of old; who, as in this, so in
other sins, which were not point blank contrary to the letter of the Law, cared
not how much they offended. If they were never so outrageous with their brother
calling him fool, Raca, and all the bad names of the world, so long as they
did not kill him, Mat. 5. 21. If they lusted never so much, so long as they did
not commit adultery, v. 27. and so, if they defrauded never so much by keeping
back, so long as they did not steal by taking away, they thought (or would
have others to think) that they did not break the commandments. But our
Savior sufficiently told the^, that the meaning of God, and the Commandments,
was larger then so, as you may see, Mat. 5. And as for this sin whereof we
speak, when he showed the young man the commandments, he did not only tell him
(...), thou shall not steal, but (...), thou shall not defraud: for so Mark
has it, c. 10. 19. though Matthew and Luke mention it not.

Whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers] Though he might make a
stranger pay him more the^ a brother (for usury, Ch: 23. 20.
) yet he himself might not pay to a stranger less then to a brother (for
wages.) However (I believe) if he so defrauded a brother, it was a worse sin,
the^ if he defrauded a stranger; according to the words of the Apostle, You do
wrong, and defraud, (...), and that your brethren 1 Cor. 6. 8.
.

Neither shall the Sun go down upon it] There are two things which the
Scripture forbids us to let the Sun go down upon: A grudge that we owe to our
neighbor Ephesians. 4. 26.
; and the wages that we owe to a hireling. For a man to go to bed, either with
a grudge in his stomach, or the wages of a hireling in his pocket, is as
dangerous to his soul, as it is hurtful to his body, to sleep before his meat
is concocted. He that does either of these, is as one that lies all night with
his doors open upon him. And it is to be attributed to nothing but God's
forbearance; if such a sin (or the punishment thereof) which lies at the
door as much as any, do not come in and surprise him, ere he see the light of
another day. He that sleeps with dues unpaid, and sins unrepented of, is like
him that sleeps upon the top of a mast, Prove. 23. 34.
or in the sides of a ship, Jonah. 1. 5.
when it is like to be cast * away. To conclude, he is like one that angers his
enemy, and casts away his weapon: or a garrison that makes a sally, and
presently throws down the works.

For he is poor etc.] the Scripture has every where very high, and tender
expressions of five sorts of people especially viz: the Poor, the Fatherless,
the Widow, the Stranger, and the Hireling; making the oppressing of such
people, as great a sin, as we count it little; or as great, as we count
drunkenness, and swearing: for we hardly count any other sins great. See the
Chapter of oppression, and Poor.

And sets his heart upon it] The Chaldee paraphrast renders, ventures his
life for it: as if it had been said, he puts his body and soul, and all his
strength to it, to earne it, and therefore do not detain it from him, seeing
he pays so dear for it. The Hebrew indeed signifies, He carries his life or
soul to, or for it: and so it may have the same signification with that
phrase, shum nephesh be Chaph, to put a man's life in his hands, used in Judge.
12. 3. and 1 Samuel 28. 21. That, for which a man ventures life: or that,
wherewith he sustaines life: any thing that concerns life, take heed of
meddling with it. That, for which a man ventures life; because it were an
argument of an Hard heart. David, though he longed so earnestly, for some of
the water of the well of Bethlehem, (where the Philistines had a garrison;)
yet, when it was brought by the three mighty men, who brake through the
Philistines army to fetch it, he refused to drink it, because it was the blood
of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives 2 Samuel: 23. 17. That, with which
a man sustaines life; because it would be an argument of a Cruel heart. In
this chapter of Deuteronomic v. 6, where a man is forbidden to take a millstone
for a pledge, the reason added is, Because he takes life to pledge. we render
it man's life, but in the Original, it is only life; which does more
emphatically set forth what account God makes of life, and how careful he is
to have it preserved, whosoever the man be. The Septuagint seem to fetch the
force of the reason from this last sort of things, translating the words above
quoted, (...), because he has his hope in it; it is all he has to trust to,
or, it is that which he depends upon for his maintenance. But, methinkes,
however, they had done better, if they had gone as near the original as they
could, at lest as to the preposition, and translated (...), or (...), to (or
of) it: which would have suited well with the litterall signification of the
other word, he lifts his soul, or, as our translation very well paraphrases
it, sets his heart (upon it.) And it is a very good argument to be used to a
man, to make him pay the hireling his hire, viz. because it is that which he
agreed for first; and it is that, which his mind and his hopes ran upon, all
the while he was working: And therefore be not so hardhearted, and cruel, to
let him lose his hope and expectation, than which there can be no greater cause
of grief, and vexation. As the desire of the slothful kills him, Prove. 21.
25. ( viz. because he cannot enjoy it:) and as hope deferred makes the heart
sick, chapter 13. 12: so it must needs be a grievous heartbreaking to a poor
man, (and consequently cruelty in his master, whose fault it is) to have
labored hard and long, perhaps cheerfully in hopes of a little reward, and to
be deceived at last* surely, if God hear not such a man's prayer to avenge
him; yet doubtless he will see his master's oppression to punish him
accordingly; for it follows, Lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be
sin unto thee.

Cry against thee.] And so the Septuagint, (...). for as the Scriptures (as I
told you before) have very high, and tender expressions of the Poor, the
Fatherless, the Widow, the Stranger, and the Hireling: so it may be gathered
out of them, that God has a special eye to their conditions, to pity them,
and a special ear to their prayers to hear them, and grant their desire. I
cannot wish mine enemy a worse thing, then to have any one of these pray
against him. Their praying to God, when they are oppressed, is usually
expressed in Scripture by, Crying; because it is so loud; and their crying,
because of oppression, is in God's ears, like so much praying. every cry of
the oppressed, is a powerful prayer; and every prayer a loud cry. This
defrauding the poor hireling of his livelihood, is a murderous and bloody
sin, and therefore sure to be puished. As God said to Cain, The voice of thy
brothers blood cries unto me from the ground, Genesis 4. 10: So James says, to
the rich oppressors, Behold the hire of the laborers, which have reaped down
your fields which is of you kept back (...).
by fraud, cries (...).
; and the cries (...).
of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears Like that of David Ps.
18. 6. My cry came before him, even into his ears.
of the Lord of Sabbath, James 5. 4. as if he had said, The Lord will surely
hear them, and punish you. The Lord of Sabaoth] (or the Lord of Hoasts:) he
names him by the same name, that Malachy does, when he speaks of the same
sin, Mal: 3. 5. to show, that God will come as a God of power, and in a
terrible manner, against such as are oppressors.

And it be sin to thee (...),] or, there be punishment against thee; for
(besides that the same preposition is used to signify, against, as well as in,
or unto, as Genesis 16. 12. Exodus 14. 25.) the same word is used both for sin
and punishment; (see the chap. of Sin;) and it comes all to one, to render it
either way. For as long as a thing is sin to a man, or as long as it is not
pardoned, (for when it is pardoned it is taken away,) so long it is certain,
there shall be punishment. you have the like expression chapter 15. 9. joined also
with the other expression here used, (viz. and he cry unto the Lord against
thee) and upon the like occasion, viz. of covetousness, and hardheartednesse,
in refusing to lend to a brother in want, so chapter 23. 21.

2 As the punishment of such men is certain, so it is likely to be speedy. And
I will come near to you in judgment, and I will be a swift witness against
the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against Falseswearers, and
against those that oppress the Hireling in his wages, the Widow and the
Fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not
me, says the Lord of Hoasts, Malac. 3. 5.

The reason, why I have been so long in this chapter, is, because I love to
speak most of those sins, of which the world speaks least, and think most
slight of.

Holiness.
There is no getting into heaven without it. Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

Not being Humbled by Judgments.
Such as are not Humbled by See Punishments.
God's Judgments upon themselves or others,
Have cause to fear The inflicting of more punishments; as may be gathered by
these ensuing instances.

1 When Daniel told Belshazzar the King of Babylon, of the taking away of his
Kingdom; the first sin, that he mentioned, after he had related the heavy
judgments of God upon his father Nebuchadnezzar, was this, And thou his Son,
O Belshazzar, have not humbled thy self, though thou knew all this, Dan. 5.
22. The Septuagint render it, Did thou not (...).
know all these things? as if it were such a strange thing; or such a shame; or
such a crime; to know of so many fearful judgments of God, inflicted by
reason of sin, upon his own father; and yet not to lay it to heart, or be
any whit moved for it.

Knew.] If a man do but know, or be but told of God's judgments upon
another, God expects he should Humble himself thereupon.

2 Had not Jeroboam, and the Princes of Judah, Humbled themselves, when Shishak
King of Egypt had taken their fenced cities, and was come to Jerusalem; instead
of being only plundered by him, and made his servants, doubtless they had
been destroyed altogether: for God himself mentions it, as a reason why he
did not permit their destruction; and there is no other reason mentioned, 2 Chronicles, 12. 6, 7, 12.

3 It is likely, Manasseh, had he not Humbled himself, and that greatly
(having greatly sinned) during his imprisonment in Babylon; though he had
prayed never so much, had never been brought again to Jerusalem, 2 Chr. 33,
12, 13. It is that, which the Spirit of God commends in him afterward, when
he speaks of his son Amon, whom he discommends for the contrary, saying, that
he Humbled not himself before the Lord, as Manasse his father had Humbled
himself, v. 23. which perhaps is added to show, that the punishment intended
by God against him, and mentioned presently after (in these words, And his
servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own house, v. 24) was
therefore executed, because he used not those means to prevent it, which his
father had used, to remove his.

2 It is not unlikely, that Josiah himself, though he did that which was
rig^ht in the sight of the Lord, had not his heart been tender, and had he not
Humbled himself before the Lord, when he heard what he spoke against
Jerusalem, and the Inhabitants thereof; he had suffered those miseries
himself, which his successors afterward suffered by the King of Egypt, and
the King of Assyria. For this reason God himself mentions (and none else) why
he deferred his punishments, 2 King. 22. 19, 20.

Doubtless, Not-being Humbled by Judgments, (either our own, or of others)
is a sin, wherewith God is exceedingly provoked. And it may be gathered by
this, that he is so well pleased with being Humbled, though in an Hypocrite; as
you may see in the example of Ahab 1 King. 21, 29. See complaints of not being
Humbled, concerning Zedekiah, 2 Chronicles. 36, 12. and concerning the Jews, Jer.
44. 10.

But especially if the Judgments be our own, and whilst they are yet upon us
(or for a while after, before God be gone out of sight, as it were,) if we are
not Humbled, this is a most confronting sin* and therefore in other places in
the Scriptures, where mention is made of not Humbling ones self, it is
aggravated with these words. Before It is added also to being humbled, 2 King.
22. 19. etc. (...). Jam. 4. 10.
the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 33. 23. etc. as if he must needs be a most desperately, and
maliciously hardhearted, and impudent wretch, who is not Humbled Before the
Lord, (or while he is under such a mighty hand as God's, 1 Pet. 5. 6.) but is
ready to laugh in his face. Our Humiliation is one of Gods maine ends in
punishing; and it angers him to miss of it, as much as it will a master, to
miss his blow by a boys running away from him, when he is going to strike
him. Humiliation, and It is called afflicting the soul, Number. 30. 13. Le. 16.
29. 31. Isa. 58. 3.
Afflicting of our souls by our selves; and the Humiliation and Affliction of
our bodies by God, must go together. The same word in Hebrew (viz. Hanah) is
used for both: and so is (...) in Greek, Jam. 4. 9. (...) Be afflicted, or
behave your selves like men afflicted: (like (...) be subject, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
that is, behave your selves like those that are subject.) Being afflicted in
prosperity, pleases God as much as any thing; and Not being afflicted in
adversity, displeases him as much as any thing, for it is possible to be not
afflicted, in the midst of affliction; and not to receive Jer. 5. 3.
correction, though a man have it. Likewise (...), is thus used Jam. 4. 10. 1
Pet. 5. 6. Luke 1. 48.

I will conclude with a Promise and a Threat together: And the afflicted people
thou will save, but thine eyes are upon the haughty, that thou may bring
them down, 2 Samuel 22. 28.

Hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy is See more in Professors.
in general threatened with Woe,
In the Old Testament thus, Woe unto them for they have fled from me;
destruction unto them, because they have transgressed against me: though I have
redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me. And they have not cried
unto me with their The Sep: (...) their hearts cried not unto me.
hearts when they howled upon their beds, Hos: 7. 13. 14. They have spoken lies
against me,] or to me: for the Hebrew preposition (...) will bear it, being
many times thus used, but so, as that withal, it signify against. Now, I
conceive the Prophet, as in other places of this chapter, so likewise in those
words now mentioned, to have especially reproved the Israelites, of Hypocrisy;
which may very well be thus described, by speaking lies, or lying to God; and
(I believe) is usually so described in the Scriptures; as likewise by
flattering: as you may see Ps: 78. 36, see Rev: 2. 2, chapter 3. 9. The reason is,
because Hypocrites speak to God, or promise him, one thing; and not only do
afterward, but mean another all the while. They draw near unto him, with
their mouth, and honor him with their lips, but remove their heart far from
him: this is God's complaint concerning the Jews by Isaiah chap: 29. 1, and
therefore you may see in the next chapter v. 9, he calls them Lying Children. In
like manner Hypocrisy toward men, is thus expressed by lying, as Ps: 62. 4.
They delight in Lies, For I suppose David in that place complains, not so much
of his enemies telling Saul, what he never did; as of their telling him, what
they never meant: and the words immediately following are a good ground for my
supposition, viz. They bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Now
the proper work of Lying, is to deceive; and therefore Idols, which deceive
those that trust in them, are called Lies Isa 44. Rom: 1. 25.
20, and (as I think) Lying vanities Ps: 31. 6. Jon: 2. 8. And so likewise, any
child of man in whom we put confidence Ps: 62. 9. The Hypocrite toward God
also, does what he can, to deceive him: and therefore in the sixteenth verse of
this chapter of Hosea, the Ephraimites are compared to a deceitful Bow: and so
they are by David, Ps: 78. 57. and the reason is, because they bind them selves
to God by Covenants, and promises, to do much for him; but their Spirits are
not steadfast with God, verse 8.
and when they come to use, and trial, they deal verse. 9.
unfaithfully, like those Ephraimites; turning back in the day of battle.

In the New Testament, thus: Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, for
ye are like unto whited Paul calls Ananias whited wall Acts 23. 3.
Sepulchers As the Hypocrite to God, is a Close Sepulcher, so the Hypocrite to
man, is an Open Sepulcher Ps: 5. 9, because when he opens his mouth to speak
you fair, his meaning is to swallow you up, as the expression is Ps. 56. 2,
57. 3.
, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but within are full of dead men's
bones, and of all uncleanness, Mat. 23. 27. You have Woe pronounced to the
Scribes and Pharisees, no less then eight times, in this one chapter* and
every time save one, they are called by the name of Hypocrites; as if their
Hypocrisy were the sin that most of all offended God, and deserved such a
threat. And indeed (in our Savior's time especially) the Hypocrisy of the
Scribes and Pharisees was grown to a very great height: so that there was
little else, but a white outside of religion (consisting in wearing broad
Phylacteries, washing of hands, and cups, superstitious fasting, and separating
from the rest of the people, and such like shells) to be found amongst them.
Insomuch that there is not any sin so often repeated, as Hypocrisy: or any
name named so often, and with so much indignation, as the name of Hypocrites,
in any one of the Evangelists.

The Particular evils, wherewith the Hypocrite may be Threatened out of the
Scripure, or is therein said to be punished, are

First, Fearfulness. The sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness has
surprised the Hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire?
etc. Isa. 33. 14. The hypocritical Jews, out of fear of the Assyrian, would
have left their religion, and revolted to him. There is nothing whereby a
hypocrite is better discovered, then by fearfulness and distrust in times of
danger. for, a man that is conscious to himself, and remembers, that he has
been false to God, cannot with any confidence hope that God will stand by him:
whereas he, that has a good Conscience, has always a Good courage.

2 Want of comfort, when he thinks of God; as likewise want of Boldness to
go to God in Prayer upon all occasions, (both which, a sincere Christian
has?) Will he delight himself in the Almighty, will he always call upon God?
Job 27. 10. Will he delight himself in the Almighty.] The Sept. say, (...),
has he any Boldness before him? for so we translate (...) Ephesians. 3. 12. etc.
but more properly Confidence By whi^ we usually mean bold^nesse to speak;
whence we^ say, such a^ one is a ve^ confident^ man.
, Heb. 10. 35. They use this word in several places (sometimes joining it with
(...), Prove. 1. 20.) in the same sense, as it is used in the Epistles, viz.
either for a boldness, and freedom OF speaking a man's mind at all times: (so
in Ephesians. 3. 12. it seems to be interpreted by (...), access with
confidence:) or, for a boldness, and freedom IN speaking, to speak what one
will, as to ones friend whom he loves, and with whom he may be bold; such as
Paul says he had toward the Corinthians (...), I have much Boldness of
speech to you-ward, 2 Cor: 7. 4. Now such Boldness, (of either sort,) a
Hypocrite can never have. For if a Hypocrite toward his Brother, although he
know, he knows not of the malice which he conceales in his heart, yet out of
conscience thereof, be not able to look directly in his face; how much less
shall a Hypocrite toward God, be able to seek his face, and look up to him
with boldness, when he knows him to be a trier of hearts, and a searcher of
reins?

3 God's not hearing his prayer, when he does pray; and when he stands in
need. Will God hear his prayer when trouble comes upon him? Job: 27. 9.

4 Gods not communicating of his Spirit to him. when Simon Magus would have
given Peter money, for the power of Conferring the Holy Ghost, he told him;
Thou have neither part, nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in
the sight of God Acts 8. 21. For as A Hypocrite serves God, only with outward
actions: so God will serve him, only with outward blessings. Thy heart is not
right] (...). David (Ps: 78. 37. speaking of the Hypocrisy of the Israelites)
says, Their heart was not RIGHT with him: the Hebrew is (...) that is
fastened, or standing upright, without leaning on any side; as a thing that is
deeply fastened in the ground: or, as a man that halts not on either leg:
(for such is the expression, 1 King 18. 21.) or as the Sun at noone, Prove: 8.
18, where that which we render perfect day, is in the Hebrew, Nechon haiiom,
upright day, i.e. not inclining, or at an equal distance from the morning, and
evening. neither of all which expressions will suit with a Hypocrite. The truly
godly are called Josherim leb upright in heart, Ps: 7. 10. where they are, they
are every whit of them; whereas the Hypocrite stands in one place, and leanes
toward another, seldom asking the way to Sion with his face thitherward, Jer:
50. 5.

5 God's not accepting of any of their services. This people draws nigh unto
me with their mouth and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far
from me: But in vain do they worship me etc. Mat. 15. 8, 9, they are words
cited by our Savior out of the Prophet Esaias c. 29. 13. A little of this leaven
will sour a whole lump of good duties, if a man did perform never so many,
and if they were made of never so fine flower, in the account of men. In the
Evangelist there is mention made of a leaven in Doctrine: such as the Leaven of
Herod Who set up a relgion of Heathanisme and Judaisme.
Mark 8. 15; and the Leaven of the Sadduces Who denied the Resurrection.
Mat: 16. 6, and there was likewise such a Leaven of the Pharisees Who hel^
Traditions.
, verse. 12; each of which, our Savior bade his Disciples to beware of. But
there is mention also made, of a Leaven in practice, or the Leaven of the
Pharisees which is hypocrisy, and of this leaven he bids them beware in the
first place, Luke 12. 1. He began to say to his Disciples, (...), In the first
place beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy: for so we
should translate according to Beza, placing the point at Disciples. Be sure
therefore thoroughly to purge 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.
out this leaven of hypocrisy (or those sins, which through hypocrisy thou
do conceal:) for, if there be never so little left in any corner of thy
heart, if it be with allowance and approbation; it is enough to mar a whole
seven days feast, of a long and specious series, of godly performances. Be as
careful to purge it out of thy heart, as the Jews were to purge their leaven
out of their houses before they kept the feast of unleavened bread: for they
went about it two or three days before the feast began, and searched every
little hole with a candle, and when they had done all, fearing there might be
any yet left, they pronounced a solemn curse against All Leaven in general.
Where hypocrisy is not, never so little, will be counted much: and where it
is, never so much will be nothing regarded. Nay, I may boldly threaten the
Hypocrites

6 With God's abhorring both those performances, See Duties.
and their persons too. our Savior told the Pharisees, Ye are they which Or
behave your selves like just men, and cause your selves to be counted so^
justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts: for that which
is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 18. 15.

7 Frustrating of their Hope. The Hypocrites hope shall perish. Whose hope
shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be as a spiders web, Job 8. 13, 14. the
reason is, because neither they, nor their hopes were ever rooted in a sincere
love Ephesians. 3. 17. or built upon Christ by an unfeigned faith, Coloss: 1. 23. 1 Timothy 1. 5. for such a hope, is like a rush without mire: now (as Job said in
the forementioned chapter v. 11.) Can the flag grow without water? See c, 27. 8.

8 Discovery of their wickedness, which by their Hypocrisy they have
concealed. For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, neither
hid that shall not be known, Luk: 12. 2. our Savior told his Disciples this,
after he had bid them Beware of Hypocrisy; though elsewhere this saying be
applied to another sense, as Mark: 4. 22; and in this same Evangelist c. 8. 17.
The two following punishments which I shall mention, are fruits of this viz.

9 Shortness of their Joy. The triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy
of the Hypocrite, but for a moment. Job 20. 5. The wicked and the Hypocrite,]
As in this, so in other chapters, Job no sooner names Wicked, but presently he
falls upon the Hypocrite, as if there were no wicked man like him, ch: 27. 7,
8. chapter 8. 13. the Hypocrite is with him; as the froward man, and the fool,
were with Solomon, viz. all one with a wicked man. The Septuagint almost
always translate the word, Haneph, which we translate Hypocrite, either by
(...), ungodly, as c. 8. 13. c. 27. 8. Isa. 33. 14. or by (...), transgressour,
as in this place it is (...). Mark, speaking of the Pharisees, who dissembled
with our Savior, saying, Master we know thou art true, etc. says, But he
knowing their hypocrisy, c: 12. 15. But Matthew says, Jesus perceiving their
wickedness, etc. c. 22. 18. An Hypocrite may be honest, but he cannot be
religious. The Chaldee Paraphrast upon Job, always expresses the word by (...)
(a Latin word in Chaldee letters, used also by other Chaldee writers) which
signifies (as it is pronounced) delator a promoter, or false accuser; one, that
Hypocrite like, takes upon him the person of a lover of justice, out of love to
bribes, to wrong an innocent person* and for this translation there is some
ground in the 15 chapter, verse. 34. because mention is made of bribery in the
same verse: and the Sept. seem to accord with him herin, translating (...) (the
word which we translate congregation) (...), witness. R: David In libro ubi
vocum sensa enarrat.
comes somewhat near him; but that he would have the word to be meant, rather
of a wrongful Judge, then a wrongful Accuser; for he paraphrases it, a
Respecter of Persons. (...), (says he) est improbus, (...), i. e. hypocrita:
that is, Haneph (the word which we render Hypocrite) is a wicked man, and
Respecter of Persons, that is, a Hypocrite for so, in Mat. c. 6. 2, the Syriak
Interpreter renders that, which we render Hypocrites, Accepters (or Respecters)
of Persons. Now all Hypocrites are respecters of persons, because they have an
eye only to men, in what they do, (viz. how they may please them, and get
repute of them:) but Accepters of Persons, I know not how to call them,
(unless you mean by Accepters, Takers;) because they do not so much accipere
personas, accept the persons of any men; as capere personas, take upon them the
persons, (or vizards) of good men, after the manner of Stage Plaiers For who
the word (...), now used for Hypocrites, was first used.
, and therefore I wonder the less at what is said, viz. The joy of a Hypocrite
is but for a moment Job 20. 5. It is like the pleasure that a Stage Plaier
takes, who bears the person of a King; for when the vizard is off, and
iniquity found to be hateful, Ps: 36. 2, all the vain joy, that either of
these can take, will be presently at an end. For a moment (...)
] Aquila, and Theodotion translate (...): as who would say, their joy makes a
great flame, but it is only a flash, and away; like the flame of a squib, or the
crackling of thorns Ecles: 7. 6. The Septuagint translate it, (...) to
destruction: for that commonly is the end of his joy, by reason of security,
and presumption.

10 Shame. And therefore David prayed, Let my heart be sound in thy Statutes,
that I be not ashamed Ps: 119. 80. Sound,] or entire: in Hebrew Tamim, in the
Chald. Par. unspotted, or rather (as we also render the word Ps: 119. 1.)
undefiled, or not contaminated: for this construction is directly opposite to
the signification of Haneph; which signifies not only Hypocrite, but defiled,
or contaminated, that is, defiled with a mixture of a contrary; corrupted. Now
as a man's heart may be sound, that is entire, and not wanting any of it is own,
parts; so it may be pure, that is sincere, (or without the mixture of a
contrary,) and yet have many faults or spots. for to be sound, that is, without
distemper; or pure, that is, not having any blemish; this we must not expect.
And I believe, it was no other soundness (or purity) which Paul meant, when he
prayed for the Thessalonians, that they might be preserved (...) blamlesse 1
Epist: 5. 23: or Luke, when he commended Zachariah, and Elizabeth, that they
walked in the commandments of God (...), blameless, Luk 1. 6. A weak body
may have all it is members; and bad dough may be notwithstanding pure dough,
that is, without leaven, The unleavened bread of sincerity, 1 Cor. 5. 8.
and mixture. A man may so give his heart to God, as not to purpose to keep
back any part from him; and a man may so love God, as not to purpose to mix
the Love of the world with it. And this I conceive Paul to mean by (...), (
sanctify you wholly,) and (...), your whole spirit, and soul and body be
preserved blameless etc. 1 These. 5. 23, but I shall have occasion, to speak
more to this, anon.

11 Opposition from those that are sincere. The innocent shall stir up
himself against the Hypocrite Job: 17. 8. The Hypocrite, (whether to God, or
man,) is hated of all sorts of men, good and bad.

12 Subjection to them. Thus, God tells the Church of Philadelphia. Behold I
will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews and are not,
but do lie; behold I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and
to know that I have loved thee Rev: 3. 9.

13. Desolation. Their heart is divided, they shall be made desolate, (for so
the word (...) also signifies) Hos: 10. 2. Their heart is divided ( halak
Libbam) For, though the Chald. Paraphrast expound it, is divided from the Law;
and the Septuagint translate, (...), he (that is God) has divided their
hearts; and others agreeing with them interpret it, of the division, (or
revolt,) from Shalmaneser King of Assyria, in the reign of King Hoshea,
mentioned 2 Kings 17: yet me thinks, I may all as well interpret it of the
division of the heart in it is self, and in respect to God, viz. through
Hypocrisy. For first, it is not so proper, to say of one heart, that it is
divided from another, (but rather that it is separated:) and therefore the
Septuagint, though the Hebrew word be in the singular number, used the plural,
(...), hearts. 2 In that chapter but now mentioned (2 Kings 17.) there is a
plain reproof of the peoples Hypocrisy, and dividing of their heart, viz.
between God and their Idols, in these words, And the children of Israel did
secretly those things that were not right v. 9. 3 This expression here of a
divided heart (to say nothing of the expression of the same Prophet c. 7. 8,
where he compares the same people, to a cake not turned, as if they were for
God but of one side) is agreeable to the expressions of the Scripture
elsewhere, concerning Hypocrites, viz: that they have a double heart, or, as
the Hebrew reads, a heart and a heart. so Psalm. 12. 2. with flattering lips and
a deceitful heart (or a heart and a heart) do they speak: where the word
which we translate flattering, viz. halakoth, signifies likewise divisions, and
comes from that word, which we here translate divided; insomuch that the
Syriack renders, the lips of divisions. where I conceive, that according to the
Hebrew Idiom (as you may see Jer. 51. 26. etc.) divisions is to be understood
passively reciprocal, as if it were lips divided: because I believe David does
not so much complain of his enemies their flattering Saul; as of their
flattering him, viz: telling him one thing, and telling Saul another; wherein
their tongue was divided, as well as their heart. So in the Epistle of James
chapter 4. 8. they are called (...), double souled, or double minded. For albeit in
the first chapter, verse 8. he seems to mean by (...) ( double minded) (...)
(as he calls him verse 6.) him that wavereth in faith, or doubts in prayer,
(whose heart is not, as David says Psalm: 112. 7, fixed (...), of which word
before.
, trusting in the Lord, but is partly on, and partly off, halting, as it were,
between trust and distrust:) yet I believe in this place, he is to be
understood of Hypocrisy; and the rather, because of some expressions which he
uses, as of drawing nigh to God; as if instead of drawing nigh to God with the
mouth, and removing their hearts far from him (which is the property of a
Hypocrite Isa: 29. 13.) he would have them draw nigh to him simply, and indeed.
And of clensing and purifying; as if he had respect espcially to the Leaven,
(or contamination) of Hypocrisy. 4 This interpretation of a divided heart,
(viz: that it is meant of Hypocrisy,) seems to be confirmed, by the
expressions applied in Scripture, to that which is opposite to it, viz.
Sincerity; when those that serve God sincerely, are said to seek him with their
WHOLE heart Ps: 119. 2. To follow the Lord WHOLLY In the Hebrew it is (...) he
filled after the Lord.
Josh: 14. 9. 14. a To serve him with a PERFECT In Hebrew shalem complete and
entire.
heart 1 Chr: 28. 9; and many more of the like nature.

14 Destruction, ( without mercy.) And they remembered that God was their Rock,
and the high God their Redeemer. Nevertheless they did flatter him with their
mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues: For their heart was not right
with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. But he being full of
compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not etc. Ps: 78. 35, to
38

15 Destruction without mercy, both they, and theirs. Job 14. 34.
Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither shall he have
mercy on their Fatherless, and Widows; for every one is an Hypocrite, and an
evil doer, and every mouth speaks folly, for all this, his anger is not
turned away; but his hand is stretched out still, Isa: 9. 17. Indeed this
Hypocrisy seems to have been the maine sin that led the Jews into Captivity:
For in the next chapter, when God speaks of sending the Assyrian against them,
he mentions no other sin, but this; and he has no sooner mentioned this,
but presently he calls them a people of his wrath. Mark the angry expressions,
that are in his threat: I will send him against an Hypocritical Nation, and
against the people of my wrath, will I give him a charge to take the spoil,
and to take the pray, and tread them down like the mire in the street. Isa:
10. 6. See the angry expressions likewise in Jeremiah's prayer c. 12. 13,
compared with verse 2. Why is not cutting off, as due to us, for having the
Leaven of Hypocrisy in serving God, as it was to the Jews, for having Leaven,
when they kept the Feast of nnleavened bread? Exodus: 12. 15. For whosoever
eats leavened bread, from the first day till the seventh day, that soul
shall be cut off from Israel.

16 Lastly Hell, though not expressed downright, yet in a worse manner; such
as whereby the certainty of falling into it, and the difficulty of avoiding it,
is more fully expressed, then if it were directly threatened, viz: thus, And
shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the Hypocrites, Mat.
24. 51. With the Hypocrites] as if, though others also come to hell, yet it
were chiefly intended for Hypocrites In chap. 21. 31, our Savior tells the
Priests and Elders, (whom he compares, for their Hypocrisy, and fair
pretenses, to the son in the Parable, that said, I go Sir, and went not, v.
30.) Verily I say unto you, that the Publicans, and Harlots go into the
Kingdom of God before you. Fig trees, that have nothing on them, but leaves
only (Mat: 21. 21.) are near unto cursing and burning: and to those that are
wells without water, the mist of darkness is reserved for ever, 2 Pet 2. 17.

I have held you long, in relating the punishments of a Hypocrite; and not
without cause. He must needs have more then one punishment, for he has
necessarily more then one sin, because otherwise he could not be an hypocrite,
whose proper sin is, to cloak and conceal sins. insomuch that indeed
Hypocrisy may seem not to be so properly called a sin, (any more then
wickedness may be called sin,) as, a wicked habit, of committing sins in
secret, and pretending, and practicing the contrary in public. I will conclude
with the saying of a Heathen, concerning Hypocrisy toward men; who (though he
would not use our greek name for it) says, he counted it, of all injustice
the most capital, or worthy of death, Totius autem injustitiae nulla
Capitalior est, Cic: lib. 1. de Officiis.
quam eorum, qui cum maxim fallunt, id agunt ut viri boni esse videantur.

Idleness.
Idle men, such as either do nothing, or are slothful in business, are
usually punished
1 With difficulty, vexation, and pain when they do any business: The way of
the slothful man is as an hedge of thorns, Prove. 15. 19. but the way of the
righteous is made plain. Slothful, and Righteous, perhaps are put here as
opposites, (though I confess the latter part of every verse in Solomon's
proverbes, beginning with But, is not necessarily to be counted opposite to the
former.) For a slothful man cannot be righteous, and a righteous man will not
be slothful. In the Greek tongue the word (...) so used often in Homer* and
as it is likely in that verse of Epimenides, cited by Paul, Tit. 1. 12* evil
beasts, etc. for beasts cannot be evil in the other^ sense: henc^ the word
(...) ( which seems to signify to be evil, is used by Paul^ for to be weary,
or faint, especially in doing of good (Gal. 6. 9 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3.) or, to be
aff^^ghted from doing good, through laziness, and fearfulness because of
other men's afflictions, Ephesians. 3 13. See the Note shortly after.
, which signifies evil, is used also for slothful, or fearful: and the word
which signifies industrious (...).
, for good. In the 12 chapter of this book, verse 27, the word Ignavis
precibus fortuna repugnat. Ovid.
, which in our translation, is rendered slothful, in the Septuagint, and the
Vulgar, is rendered deceitful: for he that will not get his living by working,
will do it by cheating; as we commonly see in Gamesters, and others.

2 Continual desiring, and not having their desire: which must needs be a
great punishment, because it is a great vexation. The soul of the sluggard
desires, and has nothing, Prove. 13. 4. Longing women can tell you best, what
a punishment this is; and I believe, it is as great a torture, as hunger or
thirst.

3 Grief, for not having their desire. The desire of the slothful kills
him: for his hand refuses to labor, Prove. 21. 25. Desire spends the spirits,
and feeds upon the empty heart, as bad as hunger does upon the empty stomach:
as the poet spoke of the Desire of praise, -- Exultantiaque haurit Corda pavor
pulsans, laudumque arrecta cupido.

4 Noe-pleasure, if they have it. The slothful In Genesis 25. 27 that which we
translate a cunning hunter, the Targum Baraphrases an Idle man.
man rosteth not that which he took in hunting In Genesis 25. 27 that which we
translate a cunning hunter, the Targum Baraphrases an Idle man.
, but the substance of a diligent man is precious, Prove. 12. 27.

5 Impair of their estate, as 1 Of their houses. By much slothfulness the
building decays, and through Idleness of their hands, the house droppeth
through. Eccl. 10. 18. 2 Of their lands. I went by the field of the slothful,
and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding. And lo it was all grown
over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof was broken down, Prove. 24. 30, 31.

6 Poverty. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep. So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want
as an armed man, Prove. 6. 10, 11. You have the very same words again, chap: 24.
33, 34. See chapter 23. 21. chapter 10. 4.

7 Not-being relieved in their poverty; (for every one will say, it is good
enough for them.) The sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold; therefore
shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing, Prove. 20. 4. In Harvest] or any
other time of the year, if Paul's rule were observed: for even when we were
with you, this we commanded you, that if any one would not work, neither
should he eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. Drusius says, this saying of Paul's was a
Common proverb among the Jews. And indeed, it is not likely, that God did
leave so many, and so excellent things, either for pleasure, or for every body
alike. It Is our punishment (and therefore not a matter of choice) to eat our
bread in the sweat of our faces Gen: 3. 19. We shall be accountable for every
thing we meddle with; and if we be found guilty of theft, woe unto us, when the
Judge comes. Paul in the chapter above mentioned, exhorts the idle
Thessalonians, that, with quietness they work, and eat their OWN bread
(...); as if without working, they could not eat their own bread, though it
were given them: at least not so much their own, as it would be if they
wrought for it; not (...), but only (...). For unless they had every one (...)
bread of their own earning; although men might give it them, God did not give
it them; and so long they were no better then thieves. A Monk, that labors
not, is like a thief. Socrates tripart: hist: lib. 8.


Now I could reckon up sundry evils, that are the consequents of Idleness:
and among them the chief is Discordia laboratum, cu^ assuetus expeditionibus
miles otio laboraret Tacit: in vit: Agr:
Discord, for fear whereof (they say) the Kings of Egypt set their people on
building of Pyramyds; and Tarquin, the Romans, on clensing of ditches and
sinkes;) but I desire as much as possibly I can, to keep me within the compass
of Scripture-experiences.

Idolatry
Perhaps, some will say, that I had done better, not to have mentioned this
sin at all, for these reasons; first, for the same reason, that Solon Cic.
pro Rosc.
and Romulus, when they made their Laws, made no mention of parricide, viz.
lest the prohibition of it, to perverse natures might prove a provocation to
commit it; as Tacitus ideoque magis spernitur quam si vetitum esset Tac: de
Mor: Germ:
says, the old Germans hated usury, more then they would have done, if it had
been forbidden. 2 Because the places of Scripture, which concern this sin, are
so many and obvious. But my answer as to the first reason, shall be this; 1
That in after times there was a Law also made against parricide 2 I do not see
Idolatry so much detested now, as parricide was even in those days; and I say,
not only among Papists, but among Protestants; who though they do not set up
Idols in their houses, yet set them up in their hearts, Ezekiel* 14. 4* ^.
(for there they will stand, even the greatest Idols, as well as in the
greatest room in the world.) Besides, I hope the prohibition of Idolatry,
comprehends more, then the worshipping of an Image; as the prohibition of
murder, does more, then the killing of a man; and almost every other
prohibition, more then that, which the letter expresses. Insomuch, that,
although we have no Idols of wood, and stone, as the heathen had: yet if we
have them of Silver or gold; or if we have any thing, upon which our hearts are
set, as theirs were upon their Idols; I know no reason, why we may not be
called Idolaters, as well as they. Idolatry, though it be indeed a very great
sin; yet in this respect, is very little, viz. because it is hard to be seen,
and will lie in a very little room: so that I fear we commit it ofte^^r then
we think of, even the best of us. At the least, the number of sins, that
border very close upon Idolatry, is exceeding great: and therefore I thought, I
might do well, If it were for nothing, but because of them, to produce the
punishments concerning Idolatry; that so fearing to commit this sin, you may
the more be afraid likewise, to commit them (being so near it,) for feareof
committing this, before you are a ware. As to the other reason, I shall give
this satisfaction; that my purpose is, to produce only the more noted places of
Scripture, and where it is more plainly expressed, that Idolatry, and not any
other sin, was the maine cause of such a punishment. Now the threats, and
punishments, which concern Idolatry, are expressed either in General terms,
or in particular: In General thus. Woe unto him that says unto the wood,
awake. etc. Hab: 2. 19. If thou serve their Gods, it will surely be a snare
unto the, Exodus: 23. 33.

The particular punishments are 1 Sorrows, Their sorrows shall be multiplied,
that hasten after another God, Ps: 16. 4.

2 Deprivation of temporal blessings. Take heed to your selves ( it is for
your own good, and you shall hurt no body but your selves, if you do not)
that your heart be not deceived, Rev: 18. 23. It is said of Babylon's Idolatry,
by thy Sorceries were all the Nations of the earth deceived.
and ye turn aside, and serve other Gods and worship them; And then the Lord's
wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven that there be no rain,
and that the land yield not her fruit etc. Deuteronomy. 11. 16, 17.

3 God's refusing to speak to them in his word; or to hear them speak to him,
in prayer. Son of man, these men have set up their Idols in their heart, and
put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their faces: should I be
enquired of at all, by them? Ezekiel: 14. 3. Should I be enquired of?] the
interrogation seems to imply, that they did enquire of God; as is to be seen
likewise in the following verse. Men may be Idolaters (I speak this to the
Papists) even when they pray to God, if they retain their Idols. In Hosea, c.
4. 15, The Jews are forbid to go up to Bethaven, though they swear, The
Chald: Paraph: they swear in vain; for the Lord lives.
the Lord lives. In Zephany c. 1. 5. there is mention made of some, that
swear by the Lord, and by Malcam (or, according to the Original, to the Lord,
and IN Malcham; as the Papists say, they direct their worship to God only, IN,
or THROUGH their Images:) But in the second, and third verses, there is almost
as heavy a threat pronounced against such, as against any Idolaters, in any
place; I will utterly consume all things from off the land etc. Take some
examples of this Idoll-godlynesse ( Popish linsey -- woolsey-worship; which
perhaps is worse then pure Idolatry; as adultery is worse then whoredom.) 1
Micah's Mother, who said, she had dedicated that silver to the Lord, (forsooth)
whereof (as she said) she intended to make a graven Image, and a molten Image
Jud: 17. 3. 2 The Israelites, (in the reign of Ahab;) who halted between the
worship of God, and the worship of Baal, 1 Kings 18. 21. 3 The Jews, (in the
reign of Manasseh;) who did sacrifice still in the high places, yet unto the
Lord their God only 2 Chr: 33. 17. 4 The people which were sent by Shalmaneser,
to inhabit the country of the ten Tribes; of whom it is said, They feared the
Lord, and served their own Gods 2 Kings 17. 33. But (you may see) such
worship, and such fear, was counted as none at all by God: for in the very
next verse, it follows, Unto this day they do after their former manners,
they FEAR NOT the Lord, though it were said before (even in relation of those
manners) that they feared him.

4 Excommunication, and Banishment. Thou shall make no Covenant with them, nor
with their Gods: They shall not dwell in thy land etc. Exodus 23. 32, 33. The
Septuagint translate, (...), thou shall not sit with them.

5 Spiritual Blindness. Exekiel, relating the Jews their manner of making an
Idol, and worshipping it after they had made it, thus speaks: He has shut
their eyes that they cannot see, and their hearts that they connot understand,
Isa: 44. 18. And well might he say so; for had they had any sense or
understanding left in them, it was impossible they could have been so mad Jer.
50* 38.
, as to worship a thing that they made with their own hands, see Romans 1. 21.

6 Delusion, Every one etc. Which sets up his Idols in his heart etc: and
comes to a Prophet to enquire of him, concerning me. If the Prophet be
decived, when he has spoken a thing; I the Lord have deceived that Prophet,
Ezekiel: 14. 9.

7 Giving up to sin. Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness etc.
Romans 1. 24, mention is made of Idolatry in the next verses, both before and
after.

8 Conquest by enemies: as is to be seen especially in Judges c. 2. 13, 14, 15.
Where it is said, that when the Israelites served Baal and Ashtaroth, they
could not stand before their enemies, but whither soever they went out, the
hand of the Lord was against the^for evil, as the Lord had said, and as the
Lord has sworn. He had said it, and sworn it. Thus were conquered The Jews,
in the reign of Rehoboam, by Shishak King of Egypt, 1 King 14. 23, compared
with 25. The Israelites, in the reign of Jehoahas, by Hazael King of Syria, 2
Kings 13, 3: and in the reign of Menahem, by Pull King of Assyria 2 Kings 15.
19. The Jews again, in the reign of Jehoiakim, by Nebucadnezar 2 King 23.
37, compared with chap: 24. 1. Let Rome take heed of Idolatry: That which they
themselves will confess to be Idolatry, continued amongst them, till Honorius
his time; and Austin De Civit. D.
says, it was the maine cause of the conquest of that City by the Barbarians.

9 Captivity, and Loss of liberty to worship the true God, if they would. Thus
were punished Once, The Ten Tribes ( in the reign of Hoshea) by Shalmaneser
King of Assyria, 2 King. 17. 16. 18. 20. The Jews, twice, viz. in the reign
of Jehoiachim, chapter 24. 9* 12. and in the reign of Zedekiah verse. 19. ( comp:
with chapter 25. 1.) and both times by Nebuchadnezar: which punishment was no more,
then what they were told of should be inflicted, if they followed Idols, before
ever they went into the land of Canaan. For thus spoke Moses unto them, in the
last year of their journey, when they were in the wilderness on this side
Jordan. When thou shall beget children, and childrens children, and shall have
remained long in the land, and shall corrupt your selves, and make a graven
image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the
Lord thy God, to provoke him to anger; I call heaven and earth to witness
against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the Land
whereunto you go over Jordan to possess it: ye shall not prolong your days
upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed: And the Lord shall scatter you among
the nations, and ye shall be left few in number among the heathen whither the
Lord shall lead you; And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands,
wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell. But if from
thence thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him: if thou seek
him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, Deuteronomy. 4. 25 to 29.

10 Shame, viz: for being guilty of such desperate folly and madness.
Confounded ( or ashamed) be ( or shall be) all they that serve graven images,
Ps. 97. 7. And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was
ashamed of Bethel, Jer. 48. 13.

11 Death temporal, by virtue of a Law. He that sacrifices unto any god (or
unto god; for so much only is expressed in the original) save unto the Lord
only, (if he worship God, yet if he worship an image too, it is nothing) he
shall be utterly destroyed, Exodus 22. 20. See Deuteronomy. 13. 13, 14, 15. This Law
was executed by Elijah, upon the Prophets of Baal 1 King. 18. 40. And when the
Kings neglected to execute it, upon their subjects, because they were addicted
to Idolatry themselves; it was executed upon themselves by God, by the hands of
their subjects and serants. For so died Kings of Israel 1 Zachariah, 2 King.
15. 10. 2 Pekahiah, v. 24, 25. 3 Pekah, v. 30. Kings of Judah, 1 Amon, 2 King.
21. 21, 23. 2 Amaziah, 2 Chronicles: 25, 27. whose idolatry was the worse, (and is
so taken notice of)* that he worshipped the Idols of those people whom he had
conquered, and those Idols which he had brought away by violence, and which he
found by his own experience, could not deliver their own people out of his
hand, verse. 15. See a most angry threat Ezekiel. 14. 8. denounced in very angry
expressions.

12 Death eternal. Be not deceived, neither fornicators nor Idolaters, etc.
shall inherit the Kingdom of God 1 Cor: 6. 9, 10. See Rev. 21. 8.

These are the Punishments, wherewith they are punished Themselves. But there
are punishments likewise, inflicted upon their Families after them; or (if you
will) upon Them, in their families, according to the threat in the second
Commandments. Read the extirpation of the family of Jeroboam, threatened by
Ahijah the Prophet 1 King. 14. 9, 10, 11; and fulfilled by Baasha his
successor, who left not to Jeroboam any that breathed; no not so much as a
dog, to piss against the wall: ch: 15. 29.

The Odiousness of this sin in the sight of God; and the dangerousnesse of
it to those that commit it, may be gathered out of the Scriptures several
other ways: viz:

1 By the Severity of the punishment inflicted upon those that enticed others
to it: who were to be stoned to death, Deuteronomy. 13, 10. neither shall thine eye
pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal him, But thou
shall surely kill him, etc: verse: 8, and 9. Surely] In the vulgar translation
it is, Statim interficies
presently. And they say, that whereas in the execution of punishment for
ordinary crimes, the malefactor had a day and a night, after sentence
pronounced, to think what to speak for himself: for this, and (so likewise,
for being a false Prophet, for stealing things out of the Temple, and for lying
with an Idolatrous woman, or if a Priest had meddled with holy things, being
unclean) the custom was to put the malefactor to death forthwith.

2 From the Curse, pronounced even against such as should either make an Idol
themselves: Cursed be the man that makes anygraven or molte^ image, an
abomination unto the Lord, the work of the hands of the craftsman, and puts
it in a secret place, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Or, but only keep it in their houses, when
it had been made by others: Neither shall thou bring an abomination into thy
house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it, etc. chap. 7. 26.

3 By the Passionate expressions ( if I may so speak) of God, in his threats
against it* such as those of wiping Jerusalem as one would wipe a dish, 2 King.
21. 13. Plucking them up by the roots, 2 Chronicles: 7. 02. and such like.

4 By the passionate actions, and expressions of godly men, in detestation of
it. Such was Moses his breaking the two Tables ( which God himself gave him;
and wherein were the ten Commandments, written with God's own finger) out of
extremity of anger, for the molten Calfe Exodus: 32. 19. And such was that prayer
of Isaiah against the Jews, That God would not forgive them, chapter 2. 8, 9.
Their land is also full of Idols etc. Therefore forgive them not.

5 And lastly, By the names, that are given, 1 To the sin it self, as
Adultery, Whoredom, Fornication, Jer: 1. 16. c. 3. 17. Not that these sins
are greater, but that the Jews accounted them greater: or to show, that God
was as angry with his people, for committing this sin; as a man will be with
his wife, ( whom he loves) for committing adultery. whence his anger is usually
called Jealousy; and he, a Jelous God; being as jealous of worship, as married
people are of love; and not giving his glory to another, Isa. 42. 8. 2 To the
Idols. Those names that are given to the Idols, some express their
odiousness; such as, 1 Semel Hakkinah, the Image of Jealousy. Ezekiel. 8. 3. 2
Gillulim, which signifies dung, Ezekiel 22. 3. So the God of the Ekronites,
otherwise called Beelzebu B, i. e. the God of flies, 2 Kings 1. 3, in the
Gospel is called Beelzebu L, i. e. The God of dung (or dirt) Mat. 10. 25. 3
Aven, which signifies iniquity, Isa. 66. 3. 4 Hhetzeb, which signifies, grief:
The Septuagint call it (...), 1 Kings 11. 33. 2 Kings 23. 13.
because God is grieved with them, Jer: 22. 28, or because they bring grief to
men also, at last; according to that in Ps: 16. 4. 5 Tizrim, which signifies
tortures: for the same reason; Isa. 4. 5: 16. 6 Tohhebah, which signifies
abomination; because God does, and men should, abominate, and loath them. The
R. Solom: in Buxtorf: Rabb: Dict:
Jews in the detestation of Christ, call him, Tahuth, i. e. an Idol. Other
names express the hurtfulnesse. of them, such as 1 Michshol, a stumbing
block, Ezekiel: 14. 3. 2 Mokesh, a Snare, Exodus: 23. 33. 3 Bosheth, Shame: either
because men should be willingly, or because they shall be by force (at last)
ashamed of them Hos: 9. 10. 4 Miphletzeth, Horror, or, a Bugbeare: because men
should be afraid, to come near them, 1 Kings 15. 3.

I will conclude, with an expression or two of such, as were neither Jews, nor
Christians, against Idolatry. 1 Against the Idolatry of the Egyptians,
worshipping Sanctas gentes quibushaec nascuntur in hortis Numina etc. Juvenal:
Sat: 15.
herbs, and Illic coeruleos, hic piscem fluminis, illic oppida tota canem
venerantur etc. ibid.
beasts. Cotta in Cicero, l. 3. de Not: D.
Ecquem tam amentem esse putas, qui illud quo vescatur deum credat esse; do
you think any one so mad, as to believe that which may be meat, can be a God? 2
Against the Idolatry of the Roman-Heathen, worshipping men, and women.
Xenophanes, Aristot^ Rhet: l. 2. c. 25. t. 8.
being asked of the people of Elea, whether they should Sacrifice to, and
mourn for Leucothea Otherwise called Ino and Matuta. She was Athamas his wife;
and for drowning her self in the Sea, (to escape killing by her husband) was
made a Goddess.
, (as others did:) made answer, (...), (which cannot be so well rendered in
English:) If they thought she De Mor: Germ:
were God, they should not mourn for her, and if they thought she were but a
woman, they should not sacrifice to her. 3 Against the Idolatry of the
Roman-Christians, painting, and worshipping God, in the likeness of man.
Tacitus a says of the old Germans, neque deos in ullam humani oris speciem
assimilare, ex magnitudine coelestium arbitrantur, that they thought it not
agreeable with the nature of Gods, to resemble them in any human countenance.
Plutarch, in the Life of Numa, says, that, (following Pythagoras, who said that
God was invisible etc, (...).
) he forbade the Romans, to represent God in any Image, whether of man or
beast: and that for one hundred and seventy years, they had not any such
Image (...).
amongst the^, but only Temples. As if it (...).
were not fitting (says he) to liken better things to worse, and as if it were
not possible to comprehend God, otherwise then by the understanding.

Ignorance.
Ignorance See Hardening.
(or Blindness) threatened, and Inflicted.
The Jews are the most notable examples of this punishment, that can be
produced: For Before the coming of Christ
You may see it threatened to them in Micah, a These two prophets prophesied
together.
even upon their Prophets themselves, thus, Therefore night shall be unto you,
that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall
not divine; and the Sun shall not go down over the Prophets; and the day
shall be dark over them, chapter 3. 6.

You may see it inflicted in Isaiah, a These two prophets prophesied together.
upon all sorts. For the Lord has powered out upon you the spirit of deep
sleep, and has closed your eyes: the Prophets and your Rulers, the Seers has
he covered; and the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book
that is sealed, etc. chapter 29. 10. See chapter 6. 10.

After the coming of Christ
You may see it threatened in Luke thus, Unto you it is given to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but unto others in parables, that seeing they
might not see, and hearing they might not understand, chapter 8. 10. See chapter 19.
42. In John thus, For Judgment I am come into this world, that they which see
not, might see, and that they which see, might be made blind, chapter 9. 39. For,
though Grotius would have these last words to be an Hebraisme, for, Be made to
appear blind; and I acknowledge the The Hebrew says made so, o^ did so, in^
d^vers senses, as 1 ^or said it is so, Le^ 13. 3. where we render it, pronounced
him unclean, in the Hebrew it is, make him unclean, So Job 9. 20. prov^ me
perverse, in the Hebrew it is, make me perverse; as w^ say in English, you
make me very foolish, etc. for you account m^ so. 2 For prophesying it shall
be so, Ezekiel. 43 3. When I can to destroy this city: and chapter 32. 18 Cast them
down. 3 F^ using the means to have it so, Jer. 51. 9. where we render it, W^
would have healed Babylon, in the Hebrew it is, we heal 4 For suffering it to
be so, Ezekiel. 39. 7. where we render it, I w^ not let them pollute, etc. in the
Hebrew it is, I will not pollute.
Hebraisme: yet I rather choose to follow Beza, whose words upon the place are
these, Illos in densissimas ignorantiae tenebras demergam. Grotius himself
(upon Matt: 15. 14.) produces a saying of the Jews (out of the Midrash
Tehillim. Psalm. 146.) that, when God should have his Tabernacle among them,
their teachers shall be blind, See chapter 19. 42. chapter 12. 4. Act. 28. 26. Romans
11. 8.

You may see it inflicted in Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 15. Even unto this day, when Moses
is read, the veil is upon their heart: and threatened to continue. Until the
fullness of the Gen^^es come in: by the same Apostle, Romans ^. 25.

Now this punishment is executed both ^on Jew and Gentile, 1 By not destroying
^e veil, that is spread over them; but lea^ng them in the dark, Esaias 25. 7. 2
By ^elivering the word in languages, which they cannot understand. Wherefore
tongues are ^or a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe
not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. Grotius ^^deed (upon the same principle, as before,)
^nterprets it, Tongues are for the converting ^f those who as yet believe not.
But I rather ^gree with Beza, who would have this being a sign, here to be
meant of a punishment; and those words of Esaias, chapter 28. 11. (cited in the verse
going before this) to be meant as a threat; and whereas it is said, And yet for
all that they will not hear me, that the meaning in the Prophet, is as if he
had said thus, Notwithstanding this grievous punishment, of living dispersed
captives among people whom they cannot understand; yet for all that, this
perverse people, will not be brought to hearken to my word. Indeed (besides
that, the word (...), rendered, them that believe not, is seldom applied to any
but those, that never believed at all.) I cannot be persuaded, but that
delivering the Gospel to a people in no other languages, then such as they
cannot understand, is a sign, that God will leave them to themselves: for by
this means it is hid; and it is hid, to none but to them that are lost, or (
those that (...).
shall perish^) In whom the God of this world (the God who is the maker, and is
the owner of this world, and therefore may do with any creature thereof, what
he will) has blinded See 2 These. 2* 1.
the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor 4. 3, 4.

I will conlude with Beza's wish, utinam vero istius horrendae maledictinis
dei, domestica exempla nobis non suppeditarent eae gentes, quae solae hodie
Christi nomine gloriantur, That there were no such examples of this punishment,
in this manner executed (as are) in the Popish Churches; where the people are
not suffered, to have the use of the Bible, in their mother tongue.

Ignorance threatened, and punished
It is threatened in general terms, thus: That the Soul be without knowledge,
it is not good, Prove: 19. 2, that is, it is very bad: as it is said c. 17. 26.
To punish the just is not good, that is, it is very bad: for such is the use of
the Scripture, and especially in the Proverbs viz: by joining a negative to a
verb, to signify, not barely, the not being of that which is expressed, but
the clean contrary. Solomon There are very many examples of it. In the
Psalms, where it is said; shall no man living be justified, in the Heb: it is
all men living shall not be justified, Ps: 143. 2. several oherinsta^ces might
be produced out of the Old Test. and you have the like phrase in the greek, in
the New Test: for where it is, said, with God nothing is impossible in the Gr:
it is, every thing shall not be impossible Luk 1. 37.
seems to me, as if he had spoken thus, (and what he said either concerning
knowledge, or ignorance, you may believe him for his wisdom,) How bad it is
for a Soul to be without knowledge, I cannot presently tell you: or how many,
and what evils will befall it; but this I am sure, it can never be good.

The evils, which an ignorant man is subject to, must needs be many, both of
Sin, and punishment: even as many of both sorts, as a drunken man; whom every
man knows to be subject to infinite many. I use this comparison, because the
Prophet Esaias, has used it before me: They are drunk, but not with wine, they
stagger, but not with strong drink: for the Lord has powered upon them the
spirit of deep sleep, and has closed their eyes, Isa: 29. 9. I say of Sin;
and therefore, those words of Solomon translated by us in that manner, as you
have read; are by the Septuagint, and the Chald: Par: rendered thus, Without
knowledge the soul is not good. and though (I believe they mean in opposition
only to the evil of Sin, yet according to the use of the Hebrew word ( Tob,)
it may be meant in opposition to both evils; as if we said (after our usual
phrase,) The soul without knowledge cannot do well, which will express both.

The Evils, and Punishments of ignorance, more particularly expressed in the
Scriptures, are, 1 Error in opinion; for hence proceeded the opinion of the
Sadduces, that there was no resurrection; as our Savior told them: Ye err not
knowing the Scriptures, and the power of God, Mat: 22. 29, see c. 12. 7. Osea,
4. 1. 2. The power of God] viz: either to raise the bodies again, or to
preserve the souls without them: even as the heathen, most of their errors,
both in judgment and practice, proceeded from their Ignorance of the nature of
God, (if I may so speak.) Hinc Sil. Ital l. 4.
primae sceleru^ causae mortalibus aegris naturam nesciredeum.

2 Rejection Spiritual (for not knowing God, not being known Ambros and Hierom
of him) 1 Cor: 14. 38: If that which we render, let him be ignorant, be to be
rendered, shall not be known; according to the vulgar, and Erasmus, and
according to the use of the expression of God's knowing, (or acknowledging us)
Luke 13. 27. and our being known of God, 1 Cor. 8 3. But (at lest) of
temporal rejection, you have a threat without question in Hosea chapter 4. 6.
Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall
be no priest to me: seeing thou have forgoten the Law of thy God, I also will
forget thy children. I might in the next place, threaten them with more
ignorance, and produce my warrant, those words of Paul (in the place above
quoted) as we have rendered them, If any man be ignorant, (for so I have seen
them applied) as if the Ignorant were in those words threatened, with the
continuance of their Ignorance: neither is it unusual with God, to punish
sin in this manner. But I forbear, because with Beza I rather conceive it to
be spoken, either by way of slighting; or else to exhort the ignorant person to
acknowledge his ignorance, and not to trouble the Church by speaking, or
teaching.

3 Being Strangers to the life of God; ( which they would count a very great
unhapinesse, did they know what a life that is.) Having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them, Ephesians: 4. 18.

4 Being given up to sin. And even as they did not like, to retain God in
their knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do those things
which were not convenient, Rom 1. 25.

5 Captivity, and misery. Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because
they have noe knowledge; * and their honorable men are famished, and their
multitude dried up with thirst etc. Isa 5. 13.

6 No mercy. It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them
(whom therefore for shame, they should not have been ignorant of) will not have
mercy on them, and he that formed them ( in whose favor alone his life) will
show them no favor Isa: 27. 11.

7 Destruction. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, Hos: 4. 6.
Though he had mentioned many other sins before, v. 1. 2, and this along with
them; yet in regard this was the worst, or because it was the fountain of all
the rest, he says, they are destroyed for lack of knowledge. It was told the
King of Assyria, when he had sent Idolaters, to inhabit the Land of Israel,
instead of the Israelites: The nations which thou have removed and placed in
the Cities of Samaria, know not the manner of the God of the Land; therefore he
has sent Lions among them, and behold they slay them, because they know not
the manner of the God of the Land, 2 Kings 17. 26.

8 Damnation. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God etc.
2 These: 1. 7, 8. See several punishments of him that knows not God, related
by Bildad Job 18. 5, to the 21.

The danger of Ignorance may be gathered, from many other places of Scriptures.
Our Savior says, He that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes, Luk: 12. 48. and therefore he shall
becertainly beaten. As Paul obtained mercy, because he did it ignorantly. 1 Timothy: 1. 13: So he had not escaped the punishment, but because he obtained
mercy. If our Savior pray for his persecutors, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do, Luk 23. 34: then surely, woe be to them who persecute
him, though they know not what they do; unless God pardon them. And it is not
improbable, that in those words, For they know not what they do, he meant not
so much to extenuate their sin; as, in a pitying manner, to aggravate their
sad, and desperate condition, in sinning so as they did through ignorance; as
if he had said, They do, they know not what. It was said under the Law, If a
Soul sin etc. though he wist it not, yet he is guilty and shall bear his
iniquity, (as well as others) Lev. 5. 17: and without an offering, it could not
be forgiven him, v. 18. See what God said to Abimelech Gen: 20. 6.

It may be as well, because they expected to be chid for their ignorance, as for
any other reason, that the Disciples of Christ were so afraid, to ask him the
meaning of that, which they understood not, when he told them of his passion
and resurrection, Mark 9. 32. Luk 9. 45.

Job, speaking of the misery of mortal men, concludes with this as the
complement, They die, (...) and that with out wisdom, (or in Ignorance) c. 4.
21; even like the beasts, Ecclesiast: 3. 19.

Ignorant men, the best sort of them, are compared to blind men, and to them
that walk in the night, or in darkness; and therefore, they cannot but be in
danger of stumbling, and falling. But there is a worse sort, viz. those that
love darkness rather then light, Joh. 3. 9; and their condition is worse. and
there is a worse then this again; those who should be lights of the world, and
leaders of the blind; and the condition of these men is worst of all: for other
blind men, will but fall into the ditch themselves; but these will fall, and
pull others upon them, Mat: 15. 14. (I speak of Ignorant Pastors, and
Teachers.) For if thou give him not warnning, nor speak to warn the
wicked from his wicked way, to save his life, the same wicked man shall die in
his iniquity, but his blood will I require way at thine hand, Ezekiel: 3. 18.

Impatience, and Murmuring.
In the Old Testament, you shall find it Threatened.
1 With The grant of what is desired, in anger; which is a very sad punishment.
Thus the Israelites were punished, for murmuring for want of flesh. Therefore
the Lord will give you flesh, and ye shall eat. Ye shall not eat one day, nor
two days, nor five days, neither ten days, neither twenty days: But even a
whole month, till it come out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome Having
eaten too much: and yet in Wis. c. 16. 3. It Is said they loathed those quails,
for the ugly sight of other beasts sent among them.
unto you: because that he have despised the Lord, which is among you, and have
wept before him, saying, why came we forth out of Egypt Number: 11, 18. 19, 20.
Because ye have despised the Lord which is among you, etc.] as if he had said,
because ye have so undervalued me, and my being among you; choosing even to go
back again into Egypt, so you may eat flesh; rather then go along with me
into Canaan, without it. Impatience under the want of temporal blessings, God
takes as a d^spising, or thinking slight of him; as if he were not a sufficient
portion without them. So, distrusting of Gods providence (at such a time,) is a
polluting of his name, making it common and vile, as if he were no more to be
trusted then a creature; and therefore those that believe him, are said to
sanctify him in the eyes of others. Number: 20, 12. The Chald: par: at those words
above cited, says, because the word of the Lord was loathsome to you; or,
because you were weary of it: to intimate the near resemblance of their
punishment to their sin: as if because they had loathed, (or were weary of
the word of God) (or rather the Manna which he sent the^, v. 6.) they should be
brought to loath, even that which they so earnestly desired, as it is said,
(and as the Chaldee also renders, as if he thought it to be thus meant) till it
be loathsome to you.

2. Death. and that first by fire Unless the expressions be metaphorical and
because it was said. before, hi^ anger wa^ kindled.
from God: as in the Israelites, for complaining, (as it is thought) of their
toylesome traveling. And when the people complained, it displeased the Lord,
and the Lord heard it, and his anger was kindled, and the fire of the Lord
burnt among them, and consumed in the uttermost parts of the Camp, Number: 11, 1.
Secondly, by a fearful judgment. See Gluttony.
not specified; for the murmuring formerly spoken of. And while the flesh was
yet in their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled
against the people, and the Lord smote the people with a very great plague
Perhap by an Angel, or as the Apost^calls him. (1. Cor. 1^ 10. the destroyer
for by plague, is not me nt sickness onl^
verse. 33. I know some * interpret this plague, to be the fire spoken of verse.
1. and the murmuring to have been the same, and the rather because of what is
said, Ps: 78. 20. 21. But why then is it said The children of Israel wept
again, v. 4. And why should the same place be called Taberah in the beginning
verse. 3.
of the chapter; and Kibroth Hattaavah, before you come to the verse. 34.
end. Mark, how earnest, and hasty God was to punish this sin. He had
promised they should eat flesh for a month, v. 20. and therefore to be as good
as his word, would not do it sooner; but let them have a full month of days,
as it is in the Hebrew, v. 20.) but as soon as ever the month was out, *
verse. 20.
he did it presently; * Distrusting God is called tempting of him, Wisd. 1. 2.
so that though they took the meat into their mouths, they had no time to
chew it: While the flesh was yet in their teeth, the fire of the Lord was
kindled, etc. Thirdly, by fiery serpents, for tempting In Wisdom, it is said,
they were thus punished by beasts, for worshipping beasts, c. 16. 1. viz. after
the manner of the Egyptians. ( Crocodilon adorat pars haec Juv. Sat. 15.
God (as the Apostle's expression is, 1 Cor. 10 9.) to send other bread, and
not being contented with, but loathing the Manna which he provided for them.
And the people spoke against God, and against Moses, Wherefore have ye brought
us up out of the land of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for there is no
bread, neither is there any water, and our soul loatheth this light bread. And
the Lord sent fiery serpents, and they bit the people, and much people dyed,
Number. 21. 5, 6. Lastly, by Several ways, for murmuring at the journey into
Canaan, upon the report of the cowardly spies, (who were themselves stricken
with sudden death R Solomen says, their tongues (wherewith they spoke the evil
report) swoll, and that they dyed with poison.
, Number. 14. 37.) For because of this sin, their entrance into Canaan was
prorogued for 40 years; and during that time, they wandered up and down in the
wilderness so long, till all that were numbered at the time of the murmuring,
and were above 20. years old, were dead according to the threat, v. 29. 30,
All that were numbered of you according to your whole number, from 20 years old
and upward, which have murmured against me: Doubtless ye shall not come into
the land, concerning which I swear to make you dwell therein.

In the New Testament you shall find it threatened.
1 With Not being owned by Christ. Whosoever does not bear his cross, and
come after me, cannot be my disciple, Luke 14. 27.

2 Not having a crown or reward, for not striving Lawfully. And if a man
strive for masteries, he is not crowned, except he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2.
5. The Apostle had before exhorted Timothy to patience, v. 3. Strive lawfully]
(...), unless he fight a good fight. 1 Timothy 6. 12. unless he strive justum
and legitimum certamen, doing every thing as he should. You may pati (suffer,)
and yet you may not be patiens (patient) in persecution. You must be sure that
you suffer justly, as well as suffer unjustly: as you must suffer well, and
take it patiently; or else your suffering for doing well, will not be
acceptable to God, 1 Pet. 2. 20. In James we have impatience threatened with
(...), condemnation, though it be but Impatience of what we suffer from men;
and though it be never so wrongfully. What is there then, for impatience under
what we suffer from God, who always punishes us less then we deserve? Grudge
not one against another, lest ye be condemned, Jam. 5. 9. Not only if ye wrong
first, but if you return wrong for wrong, you may be condemned in the opinion
of all good men, who would else justify you, and commend you. The law gives an
action against him that strikes again, as well as against him that struck
first. And here in this place even for grudging, we have a Judge ready to
punish, Behold the Judge stands at the door. The word in the Original for
grudge not, is (...); and that it is meant of impatience, may be gathered by
the verses immediately before and after. Be ye also patient, stablish your
hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh, verse. 8. Take, my brethren,
the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of
suffering affliction, and of patience, verse. 10.

Impenitence See Hardness of heart.
is threatened, in general terms.
1 With Certain punishment: for God will whet his sword; so that it shall be
sure to cut. If he turn not he, will whet his sword, he has bent his bow, and
made it ready Ps: 7. 12.

2 With Severe punishment ( where there has been extraordinary means See
Means.
used to reclaim.) Then began he to upbraid the Cities wherein most of his
mighty works weere done, because they repented not. Woe unto thee Chorazin,
woe unto thee Bethsaida Mat: 11. 20, 21.

The Punishments more particularly mentioned are.
1 Shortning of life. For whereas God had promised the old world, to spare them
a hundred and twenty years, Gen 6. 3: yet when he saw, they would not repent,
he cut their time shorter by twenty years. For Noah was but 600 years old,
when the flood of waters was upon the earth, 7. 6; and yet he was 500, Hierom
Chrysostom etc.
at the time when God made the promise c. 5. 32. Thus some of the * Fathers.

2 Removal of the light of the Gospel. Remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen, and repent and do the first works: or else I will come unto thee
quickly I will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent Rev:
2, 5: it is spoken to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus.

3 Destruction temporal (at the least.) And I will fan them with a fan in
the gates of of the Land, I will bereave them of children: I will destroy my
people, since Methinks, it is better rendered so, then after the vulgar, and yet
they return not, from their ways: for though we should render, I have
destroyed: yet that might be understood, of purpose and intention to destroy;
according to the use of the Scripture, and as it is likely to be meant in this
place. the Sept: render (...).
they return not from their ways, Jer: 15. 7. So in the Gospel: Suppose ye
that these Galileans, were sinners above all the Galileans, because they
suffered such things. I tell you nay, but except yerepent, ye shall all
likewise perish, Luk 13. 3, you have this threat repeated v. 5 in the samewords.

4 Destruction eternal, (as is easily gathered.) not willing that any should
perish but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet: 3. 9. The rich man in
hell, supposed it for a certainty, that his brethren would come to his place of
torment, unless they did repent, Luk, 16, 28, compared with verse 30.

5 Greater condemnation since Christ's time, then before: for thus our Savior
thratened those Cities above mentioned, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and
Sidon, at the day of judgment then for you, Mat: 11. 25.

The greatness of Gods displeasure at not repenting, and the sad condition of
those, that do not repent, may be farther gathered out of the Scriptures.

First by God's extending mercy, upon the sight of repentance, though it were
only in outward show: as he did to Pharaoh, in ceasing the thunder Exodus: 9. 27,
33; and in removing the locusts c. 10. 16, and 19. To Ahab, in not bringing the
evil, which he had threatened, in his days, 1 Kings 21. 27. To Cain, (if those
words (...) be to be rendered, mine iniquity is greater then can be pardoned,
Gen: 4. According to the Sept: (...). and the Vulgar, major est iniquitas mea
qua^ ut veniam merear, where the Papist cannot say the word mereri signifies to
deserve, but only, to obtain; yea the Lovaine Divines translate it qu' elle ne
puisse estre pardonnee, that it cannot be pardoned.
13.) in giving him a mark (or, letter) of protection Ge: 4. 15.

2 By the Joy, which the Saints have at the repentance of sinners: as a man
would, when his friend has escaped death; or as if either condition must needs
have been exceeding miserable, if they had not repented Luk: 15. 7.

3 By those speeches of Paul, of being Humbled for, and Bewailing the
Corinthians, (not those that had sinned already, but) those that had sinned
already, and had not Repented 2 Cor: 12, 21: as if the condition of those, that
do not Repent, were most deplorable; and the condition of those that sin,
were chiefly made deplorable, by not Repenting.

4 By the greatness of the reward, which such shall have, who cause others to
repent; as having saved their Souls from death, * which otherwise they could
not have escaped. They that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever
and ever, Dan: 12. 3.

To conclude, we may gather from our selves, that God must needs be much
displeased, at Not repenting, seeing we are so excedingly displeased with it
our selves, if a man be not sorry, forwhat he has done against us, if he have
but trodden on our foot, yea against his will. there is nothing vexes us more;
especially if he is ready to do it again.

Impudence threatened
They shall not prophecy to them, that they shall not take shame, Mic: 2, 6,

Impudence punished
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall among them
that fall: at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down says the
Lord, Jer: 6. 15. It is spoken of the Jews; and you have the same threat, in
the very same words, to the same people c. 8. 12. See how God sets forth their
impudence, in Ezekiel c. 16, 23, to the 37 verse: where he threatens to punish
it, with very grievous punishments, nay in the very beginning of his complaint,
(as if his anger were so hot, that he could not keep it in) before he came to
the sins which he intended to speak of; and when the sense was yet imperfect
he cries out twice, Woe, Woe: And it came to pass after all thy wickedness
(Woe, Woe unto thee, says the Lord) v. 23.

The show of the countenance does witness against them, and they declare their
sin as Sodom; Buxtorf. Rab. Lex. in voce (...) where he says, that R. Simeon
Benchilpheta upon the word (...) cried mightily unto God, Jon. 3. 8. ( as if it
had been said, cried impudently) thus co^ments, An impudent man will prevail
with a bad man. How much more with God, who is the goodness it self of the
world.
they hide it not: woe unto their soul, for they have rewarded evil unto
themselves, Isa: 3. 9. The show of the countenance] which cannot be meant of
bewraying by the countenance; for that would argue shame; which I believe,
Sodom was never guilty of: but rather of putting a good face upon sin, or
committing it openly and without blushing. which he that does, the Rabbines
say, he (...)
reveals his face against the law.

Doubtless Impudent sinners will not be forgotten: for how can we think, but
God must be exceedingly provoked with impudence in his creatures; seeing
Fathers and Masters are so much provoked with it in their children and
servants: who if they laugh, when they have done a fault, and are told of it:
or if they commit a fault before their face; nothing is more intolerable.

Impudence is prosperous in nothing, but in prayer, according to the saying of
the Talmudist,* (calling importunity, Impudence.)

3. He that Hardens his face (Jer: 5. 3.) is worse then he that hardens his
heart: for he that does this, does the other two; but not on the contrary. The
Talmudists say, that (...) hardness of heart, may be taken in a good sense;
but (...) hardness of face, is always taken in a bad sense.

Impudence must needs provoke to anger very much, for it has more contempt in
it, then any thing; and if there were never so little esteem in a man, of the
party against whom it is committed; it would never be. The Philosopher says,
(...), Aristot. Rhet. l. 2. c. 2,
that it is only before those, whom we much contemn, we are not ashamed. An
impudent sinner vexes God, as bad as the stone did Sisyphus; which turned back
upon him, as fast as he rolled him up. Homer gives that stone the Epithete
(...), Impudent. See Arist. Rhet. l. 3. c. 2.

Incorrigiblenes See Punishments, and Not being Humbled.
under punishments threatened and punished.
1. With Not removing the punishments. For all this his anger is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still: For the people turns not unto him
that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of hoasts, Isa: 9. 12, 13.
Unto him that smites them.] In the Hebrew it is as much as, close, or (...) as
it is in the places hereafter quoted, Amos 4. 6, 8, 9, 10. (...) not (...)
quite home to him, that smites them. Perhaps to intimate that they did turn,
but not quite home, and withal their heart: and you may see their hypocrisy
complained of, within a few words after, v. 17. and in the next Chap. verse. 6.

2. Increasing the punishwents: for thus Moses told the Israelites, God would
deal with them, in case they were incorrigible, after he had punished them for
disobedience, Lev. 26. 18. And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto
me; then I will punish you seven times more for your sins. So verse. 23. 24.
If ye will not be reformed by these things, but will walk contrary unto me.
Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times
for your sins. And again, v: 27. 28, you have the like threat.

3. Leaving to Incorrigiblenesse; or Punishing without intention to correct, (
which is the heaviest punishment.) In thy filthiness is lewdness: because I
have purged thee, and thou wast not purged; thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. Ezekiel: 24,
13. In thy filthiness is lewdness.] Thy sin is not infirmity, and barely
uncleanness: for surely then, so much purging by affliction, would have made
thee clean: but there is joined with it ( as the word (...)
in the original seems to signify) studied and premeditated wickedness, a
resolved frowardness to walk contrary to me, let me do what I will.

4. Total destruction to whole nations, as to the Jews, in the place above
quoted: For the people turns not unto him that smites them, etc. Therefore
the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush in one day,
Isa: 9. 13. 14.

That God is very much provcked by Incorrigiblenesse under judgments, may be
gathered yet further: First out of the Scriptures, where there is a mark of
contempt, and hatred, set upon Ahaz King of Judah, for this sin. And in the
time of his distress did he trespass yet more against the Lord: This The
Rabbis say the pronoun is thus used likewise. concerning Esau. Genesis 36. 4. 3.
is that King Ahaz. 2. Chr. 28. 22. This is that King Ahaz] as it is said, Number:
26. 9. This is that Dathan and Abiram. Secondly, from reason and from our
selves, because by this sin, God is frustrated of his end and purpose, in
sending the punishments: and we see, how much it vexes us, to miss our ends
and aims, in humane affairs; especially, if it be by such a ones interposing,
who can be never the better for it. Continuing in sin, notwithstanding
punishments, is as flat walking contrary to God, as can be. For, in that a man
knows Gods end; and that this end is solely his good, and not God's: it can
argue nothing but perverseness, and frowardness in him, not to turn from his
sin: as if he did it merely to be contrary, and because God should not have
his will. This seems to be Aristotle's (...) ( one of the kinds of contempt,
which are usually the cause of anger which he defines, (...) hindering of
another, not to do one's self good, but only to cross him Rhet. l. 2. c. 2.
6.
A Physician will be very angry, when be has given his patient physic, if he
shall endeavor either by using things forbidden, or by neglect of that which
he should use to make it work, to hinder it from working. For it argues
extreme frowardness; and it is a thousand to one, but the Physician, if he be
not very patient himself; will resolve to meddle with him no more.

If this be the condition of them, who are not better, after they have been
punished; what is provided for these, who are worse? Doubtless their
punishments shall be more and many. For thus was Israel threatened (when he
said, in the pride and stoutnesse of his heart. The bricks are fallen down,
but we will build with hewn stones, and the Sycamores are cut down, but we
will change them into Cedars.) Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries
of Rezin against him, and join his enemies together, Isa. 9. 9, 10, 11.

Incest.
Incest punished.
1. With Loss of Birthright. For thus Jacob (as he was dying) cursed Reuben,
for lying with (his Concubine only) Bildad. Unstable as water, The Greek
translations are various. (...) Sept. (...) Aq.
thou shall not excel, because thou wentest up to thy fathers bed; then
defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch. Genesis 49. 4. Unstable as * water] or
(according to Onkelos, and the Vulgar) thou art powered out as water. i. e. thou
have quite lost thy self by doing this thing, thou have cast thy self away
without recovery, and art become like water spilt upon the ground, which cannot
be taken up again. Thou shall not excel.] etc. Else thou should; but now
thou shall have no more then thy brethren, Reuben's tribe, was likewise one of
the lest tribes.
any way, either in Princehood, or Priesthood, or having a double portion, (for
these three things belonged to the eldest Son) which was accordingly
fulfilled: for the first went to Judah; the second to Levi, and the last to
Joseph. This last part of the first borne's privilege, is (...); or more
especially called the Birthright; and therefore it is said in the 1. Chr. 5. 1.
(speaking of Reuben) his Birthright was given to the sons of Joseph. So the
Chaldee paraphrast (at those words in this Chapter v. 3. the excellency of
dignity, and the excellency of power) says, thou should have had three
parts, the Birthright, Priesthood, and Kingdom. And perhaps, after this fact
of Reuben's, the birthright reached no farther then this part (for thus far
it did, Deuteronomy. 21 17) Because thou wentest up to thy fathers bed, then defiledst
thou it. I went up to my couch] in which words is plainly seen, how exceedingly
Jacob was grieved at this fact, (even though it were done forty years before)
1. By mentioning it often, and using several expressions. 2. By changing the
person; as if he had fallen back upon his bed; or turned aside, and spoken it
to some other body He went up to my couch. I have elsewhere observed this
change of the person, in the threats of the Prophets.
Therefore in the verse next before, that which we translate the beginning of
my strength, is in the vulgar, and some Greek Aquila (...) Symmach. (...).
translations, the beginning of my grief.

2 Under the old Testament, Cutting off, and Bearing iniquity, and dying
childlesse. Lev, 20. 17. 20. All which expressions some interpret by Death, and
not suffering the parties to live after the fact committed, till their children
were borne. And although Austin, and Cajetan, and others (I hope not out of a
slight opinion of the sin) interpret as if it were meant, that their issue
should not be counted Children, but bastards; and others, that they should be
childlesse, and have no issue (as it is v. 21.) and that this was their
punishment (as being a thing which the Jews much bewailed, Genesis 15. 2.) And
though I believe, that Cutting off, does no more of necessity imply death,
then taken away from among you does, in 1. Cor. 5. 2. (being many times meant
of the least excommunication, which was a cutting off indeed, but like the
cutting off of a branch; which is not presently dead, but may be grafted in
again:) yet in this place, (viz. v. 17.) I choose to agree with the first
Interpreters, at least in the interpretation of the first expressions; and the
rather because cutting off, is not attended with the usual expression viz:
from among their people: but with such an expression, (as to my remembrance) it
is no where else viz. They shall be cut off in the sight of the people.
in the sight of their people; which cannot be so properly spoken of
excommunication, or any other punishment, as of death.

3 Under the New Testament, Excommunication: according to the practice of Paul,
upon him, that committed Incest, with his Fathers Wife, 1 Cor: 5. 15.

4 Being murdered. As in Amnon the Son of David; who lay with his Sister Tamar
2 Samuel: 13. 14, and was murdered by his Brother Absalom verse 29. Unnatural
lust, was punished with unnatural cruelty.

5 Monstrous Births: For the Twins, which Tamar had by her Father in law Judah;
at the delivery, one of them put forth his hand, and drew it back again: so
that the other was first borne.

Injurious dealing
Injurious See Injustice, deceitful dealing and oppression.
dealing is threatened
In general, with punishment; though he, that does the wrong be never so
great; and he that suffers be never so mean: nay in what relation soever he be
toward them (for it is spoken especially of Masters in relation to their
Servants) But he that does wrong, shall (...) methinks the phrase is much like
the Hebrew (...) i. e. bear his in iniquity.
receive for the wrong which he has done, and there is no respect of persons,
Col: 3. 25.

Punishment, I say, and that certain and speedy, even while it is acting; by
one means or other, one way or other: as by remorse of conscience Maxima est
enim factae injuriae poena fecisse, The greatest punishment of an injury is to
have done it. Sen: l. 3. de Ira c. 26.
, and hurtfullnesse of the creatures, wherein the injuries are done; etc. Whosoever
breaks a hedge, a Serpent shall bite him; Whosoever removes stones, (or
landmarkes, whereby to cousen the^ of their lands, For they, who do so, were
cursed upon mount Ebal. Deuteronomy: 27. 17, yet the Chal: Par: interprets it of
worshipping Images made of stone or wood.
) shall be endangered thereby, Eccles: 10. 8, 9. Whosoever shall (...), go
beyond or defraud his Brother (1 Thessalonians: 4. 6.) whether by adultery, and
coveting his wife; (for so the words are limited by some:) or by cheating, and
coveting any other thing that is his; especially in trading, (as some expound
those words, (...), The Thessalonians were great Merchants.
in any matter:) though the Law of man do not take hold of him, (as many times
it does not) yet the Apostle says, The LORD is the avenger of all such; as we
have also forewarned you, and testified, 1 Thessalonians: 4. 6. If God had not
certainly determined the punishment of injurious dealing, we should not be so
strictly forbidden to resist evil, as we are, Mat: 5. 39. For sin will never
leave crying, till it be heard; and justice must be executed.

The punishments more particularly mentioned, may be these.

1 (If it be much used) Having many enemies. God said of Ishmael, His hand will
be against every man, and every man's against him, Gen: 16, 12: which we may
see sufficiently fulfilled in his posterity, the Turks, and Arabians.

2 Men's being Hurt by that themselves, whereby they intend the hurt of
others. He made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch, which he
made. His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing
shall come down upon his own pate Ps: 7. 15. come downe] for from God this
punishment comes, more notoriously then others; and whatsoever goes up to him,
is sure to come down again in reward; whether good or bad, see Eccles: 10, 8.

3 Desolation of whole Countries. For the rich men thereof are full of
violence, and the Inhabitants thereof have sopken Lies, and their tongue is
deceitful in their mouth: Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee
( for some times God makes men well, by smiting the^) Isa: 19 22.
in making thee desolate because of thy sins Mic. 6, 12, 13. it is spoken to
the Jews.

4 Destruction of the whole world, ( which otherwise perhaps had not come
before God, so soon as it did:) The earth is filled with violence through
them, and behold I will destroy them with the earth, Gen: 6. 13. with violence]
In the fourth verse, where we render Giants, Symmachus translated (...) i. e.
violent men. The Poet Ovid speaking of the age next before the flood (which he
calls the iron age, for the heard-heartednesse, and cruelty which then
reigned,) complains most of violence; fugere pudor, verumque fidesque In
quorum subiere locum fraudesque dolique Insidiaeque and vis, and amor
sceleratus habendi; and a little after, vivitur ex rapto non hospes ab hospite
tutus, l. 1. Met. Fab. 4.

They that do wrong, must needs be very unhappy, because they that suffer
wrong, are so happy, Mat: 5. 11, 12. The Rabbines have a saying, Be not of
those that do, but of those that suffer wrong. and the Apostle wondered, why
the Corinthians would not choose, to be of the number of these latter, rather
then the former: (...): why are you not rather wronged? why are you not rather
defrauded? 1 Cor: 6. 7.

Injustice
Injustice Se Bribery and Opression
(especially distributive, that which is practiced by Judges) threatened and
punished
1 With, The hatred of men. He that says unto the wicked thou art righteous;
him shall the people curse, Nations shall abhor him, Prove: 24. 24.

2 The Hatred of God: Both Injustice distributive. He that justifies the
wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the
Lord, Prove: 17. 15. And Injustice communicative. ( i. e. in dealing (...)
,) For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously are abomination
to the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy: 25, 16, mention was made before of having diverse
measures, and weights v. 13, 14.

3 Woe: Both in Making laws that are unjust, Woe unto them that decree
unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousnesse which they have prescribed,
Isa. 10, 1: And not executing, those that are just. Woe unto them etc. Which
justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him, cap: 5. 22, 23.

4 Fears and Terrors, proceeding from a guilty conscience, and the execution
of God's judgments, ( which none but the upright, are able to behold or endure,
with comfort, or without fear.) Thus says the Lord, behold I will make thee a
terror to thy self, and to all thy friends etc. Jeremiah thus spoke to
Pashur, who had smitten him, and put him in the stocks, c. 20. 4, and 2.

5 Translation Because of unrighteous dealings, injuries, and riches gotten by
deceit, the Kingdom is translated from one people to another, Eccl: 10. 8
of power thus abused, to others. (that is the least) For Ananias, having
commanded Paul to be smitten contrary to Law; (according to Paul's threat to
him, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall, Acts 23. 3.) either died shortly
after, or was removed from his place: for there was another put in his room.
The Injustice of Samuel's two Sons, (who were Judges of Israel,) occasioned the
Israelites to desire a King, 1 Samuel: 8. 3, 5; and accordingly they had him chap.
10. 1.

6 Shortning of life. For that Pashur formerly spoken of, (whereby we may
gather, that in those days, men lived longer then threescore and ten years;
for otherwise, this had been no punishment, and the time of the captivity was
so many years) was thus threatened, Thou Pashur, and, all that dwell in thy
house, shall go into captivity; and thou shall come into Babylon, and there
thou shall die, and shall be buried there, thou and all thy friends to whom
thou have prophesied Lies. Jer: 20. 6.

7 Being given up by God, to Continuance in it. He that is unjust let him be
unjust still Rev: 22. 11. So Deiodate expounds the place, comparing it with
Ezekiel: 3. 27, and 20, 39. Dan: 12. 10. Am: 4. 4.

8 Destruction. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them, because they
refuse to do judgment, Prove: 21. 7. destroy them] the originalis (...); which
some desire from (...) to draw to ground: according to the Latin translation,
Rapinae impiorum detrahent eos: as if it were said, The weight of their money,
as bad as stolen by jnjustice, and bribery, shall draw them out of their seat,
and sink them to the ground.

9 Damnation; so certainly, that Paul wonders, if a Christian be ignorant of
it. Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor: 6. 9.

The greatness of this sin, and the dangerousnesse of it, may be yet further
gathered out of the Scriptures.

1 From the frequent Complaints made of it; more frequent, then almost any
other sin; and in those Books, where punishments are most threatened, viz: the
Books of the Prophets.

2 By the names (...). Aquila (...), forraging or plundring: eating up of
people, as they would eat bread: see Opression
that are given it, as of robbery * Prove: 21. 7. Mighty Sins Am: 5. 12.
(...) To do any thing vehemently or, with boldness, in Latinwe call it,
fortiter agere to do it strongly.
so in the same verse, (...); which perhaps denotes not so much, many, as
large, and (as our English word very well expresses it,) Manifold
transgressions. (as Samuel called the sin of the Israelites in asking a King
(...) A manifold wickedness.) Now the Sin, mentioned immediately before, and
after, is Injustice. Suitable with the first of these expressions, is that of
the Fist of wickedness, (spoken concerning the same sin) Isa: 58. 14. and
with the latter, that of wickedness simply, v. 6, spoken also concerning the
same sin) as if it were so large wickedness, as to comprehend all
wickedness in it: or as if it were so great wickedness, that you need not
call it by any other name, to make men know what you mean. But this might more
properly have been put in the chapter of Oppression.

Insensiblenesse under punishments threatened
In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them drunken, that
they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the Lord.
It is spoken of the Babylonians, Jer. 51. 39.

Instruments of punishing punished,
Instruments (or men employed by God in punishing his children) punished
themselves.
The Assyrians are the most notable example, that can be produced, All that
found them ( meaning the Israelites) have devoured them: and their adversaries
said, we offend not, because they have sinned against the Lord, etc. Jer. 50.
7. but it follows verse. 9. I will raise, and cause to come up against Babylon,
an assembly of great Nations from the North country, etc. Though the godly are
justly punished by God, that they cannot be so by men, ( nor the wicked neither
without authority.) Though Christ were delivered by the determinate Counsel of
God: yet were those hand^ wicked, wherewith he was taken, and crucified, Acts
2. 23.

The reason, why God punishes the Instruments, which he thus employs, is partly
this; Because, though they are weapons of his indignation, (as he calls the
Medes, by whom he punished the Babylonians, Isa: 13, 5,) to execute his wrath;
yet they do it not in obedience to him, or respect to his ends; any more then
a sword, (as David called the wicked gods sword, Ps: 17. 13,) or an axe, or a
saw, or a rod, (as God calls the King of Babylon, Isa: 10, 15;) or any other
Senseless Instrument. Nay they do it only, with respect to their own ends;
and out of malice, or covetousness, or ambition, or some such thing. The
Assyrian, though God sent him; and sent him against a people of his wrath; and
gave him charge to take the spoil Isa: 10, 6: yet because his aim was not so
much to punish the Israelites by destroying, as to destroy by punishing; nor so
much to destroy the Israelites only, and then to sit down; as to make himself
the Monarch of all the world; (because he means not so, neither does his
heart think so, but it is in his heart to destry and cut off nations not a few
verse. 7.) in the 12. v. he is thus threatened: Wherefore it shall come to pass,
when the Lord has performed his whole work upon mount Sion, and on Jerusalem,
I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the
glory of his high looks. When God's own wrath against his people is out, he
will make the former wrath of the wicked to praise him; and not only restrain
that which remains of their wrath: but (according to the Chaldee Par. upon
that place Ps. 76. 10.) employ the remainder of his own in their destruction.

Such Instruments are no way likely to escape punishment. 1. Because in doing
their work, they do always sin

1 Either in the manner, ( as I have showed you how) and therefore it is said
of Babylon -- All ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows; For she
has SINNED against the Lord; Jer. 50. 14.

2 Or, in the matter; That which they do, being a wrong to those that are
punished: and therefore in the place but now quoted, verse. 15. Babylons
punishment is called vengeance; For it is the vengeance of the Lord: take
vengeance upon her; as she has done, do unto her.

3 Or, in the measure. In doing more, then God would have done: I am very sore
displeased with the heathen, that are at ease: for I was but a little
displeased, and they helped forward the affliction, Zach. 1, 15. See Esa. 47. 6.

2, Because, after they have done their work, most commonly they provoke God to
punish them, by pride; and make themselves unfit to avoid punispments, by
security, out of conceit, that their success was to be attributed to their own
strength, or the justness of their cause, or the like; and not to the sins
of those whom they have hurted. And the Heathen shall know that the house of
Israel went into captivity for their iniquities, because they trespassed
against me. Ezekiel. 39. 23. For their iniquities] as if he had added, not because
your were better, and they their cause was juster. and to intimate, that they
being guilty of that, which the Israelites were, viz: iniquities; must take
their turns also, and be punished in the same manner.

Intemperance. See Gluttony.

This will seem to have had a great stroke, (at least) in occasioning the
destruction of the world; if we take the interpretation given by diverse, to
those words of God in Genesis, Chapter 6. 3. thus translated by us, My spirit shall
not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh. Which I know no reason,
but we may very well do: especially if instead of following Arias, Who read
the Hebrew Jadon (from Dun) shall strive
and Symmachus; and translating My spirit shall not always strive, etc. we
follow either Pagnin Who read Jiddon from Nadan^ shall be sheathd
; or the Septuagint Who translate, as if they had read Jalon (from Lun) shall
lodge, or remain.
Chald: Par: Who translate, as if they had read Jalon (from Lun) shall lodge,
or remain.
, and the Vulgar Who translate, as if they had read Jalon (from Lun) shall
lodge, or remain.
, and translate thus, My spirit shall no longer remain in man, because they
are flesh. For so it will very well bear this paraphrase, viz: because I see
they are altogether for their bodies, to pleasure their flesh by gluttony, and
las^iviousnesse, and care not for their souls; I am resolved to resume again
that breath, which I put into them and not to suffer my spirit any longer to
lodge in such filthy carcasses. Our Savior himself may seem to have seconded
this interpretation, when he spoke of this punishment, and the security of the
people in sinning, before it was inflicted, in this manner, For as in the days
that were before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving
in marriage, etc. Mat. 24. 38. not as if eating, and drinking were a sin; but
either intemperance in eating and drinking, or doing that, and nothing else.
So* speaking of the destruction of Sodom, and the security of the people in
sinning before the inflicting of it, he says in the first place, they did eat
they drank etc. Luke 17. 28. And in the like security, he told the Jews, that
many should be surprised by the day of judgment, (either General, that which
shall be to all; or particular, that which has been to them; take it how you
will,) Even thus shall it be in the day, when the son of man is revealed,
Luke 17. 30. See chap. 12. 45. Mat. 24. 49. And therefore Paul, speaking to the
Thessalonians, to prepare for the day of the Lord, bids them in especial
manner to be sober and temperate, Epist. 1. 5. 6.

The intemperate man, both his danger and his hurt, must needs be great,
especially from the Devil, ^ ( for men usually spare him, out of pity, or
scorn:) and therefore the Apostle says, Be sober, be vigilant, because your
adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may
devour: 1. Pet. 5. 8.

1 Because, even while he is well, he is not careful to prevent it; only sober
men will be careful, to gird up the Gird up the loins of your mind and be
Sober.
Loins of their mind, 1. Pet. 1. 13. or put on the brestplate of faith, and
love, Let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the brestplate of faith
and love, ver. 8. 1 But the end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore
Sober, and watch unto prayer.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. or watch unto prayer, * 1. Pet. 4. 7. Sober (in the Epistles)
may be meant also of being Sober-minded (as we render it in Tit. 2. 6.) or
Grave, Humble, quiet, serious, circumspect, as it is in Romans 12. 3. 1. Tim. 3.
11. Tit. 2. 2. 4. But yet in these places the word in the original is
different, viz. (...), and not (...): and in those which I have quoted, (...):
which in the place first quoted v. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. seems clearly to be
meant of Temperance properly so called; because in the following verse there is
mention made of sleeping, and being drunken, as of things opposed to watch, and
be sober: For they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that are drunk, are
drunk in the night.

2. Because, when he has ^urfeited, he is not able to avoid it, or receive it.
Receive it he cannot, for want of strength; of which he has as little in mind,
as he has in Body. and avoid it he cannot, because he is seldom so much as
awake to foresee it. Only the sober man can be watchful. and therefore the
Apostle in the place above quoted, viz: These. 5* 6. knowing that a man cannot
be watchful, unless he be sober; as soon as he had named the former,
presently added the latter; Let us watch and be sober. Peter, in the place
above quoted, puts them as near together, though not in the same order. He
must needs be taken napping, that cannot keep himself waking.

But the greatest of these causes, (as being the cause of the latter) I take to
be the former, viz: Security. All sins, wherein men are secure, must needs be
dangerous: and therefore there is no sin so dangerous, as Intemperance, because
there is none, wherein men are so secure. You have had three notable examples
hereof. But of all the three, the first is the most notable: in regard that the
people of the old world; if they had not that time told them, (which God had
limited for their continuance) viz: of a hundred and twenty years: yet had
they all that time given them ( after notice of the flood) wherein the Arc was
in preparing: which could be no small time, as Peter seems to intimate; When
once the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Arc was
a preparing, 1. Pet. 3. 20. Besides the time, wherein the creatures were a
gathering, which were to be put into the Arc. If the time allotted them had
been never so short; unless they had been worse then beasts, they must needs
have bethought themselves a little, and not have still continued in that manner,
as our Savior says they did, eating and devouring, till the very Day, that
Noah went into the Arc (for then they believed certainly he was not in jest.)
Nay he says, They knew not, till the flood came, and took them all away. Beza
observes how the word (...).
in that place used for eating, is by the Gra^marians said to be properly used
of beasts, adding Vt etiam videatur magnae esse hujus verbi emphasis; quo
significatur, homines brutorum instar fore ventri deditos.

There is one thing more, that aggravates the security of those gluttons before
the flood; viz: that although for those hundred and twenty years (as it is
probable) they had had Noah (...) (as Peter calls him, 2. Pet. 2. 5.) a
preacher of righteousness, or a publisher of that righteous judgment of God,
intended by him in the destruction of the world: (so that by knew not, must be
meant, as Beza translates, acknowledged not, or did not consider The Hebrew
word for know is likewise thus used: it has set him on fire round about, yet
he knew not. Isa, 42. 25.
) yet notwithstanding all this, they repented not, but remained (...) (as the
Apostl's* word is) i. e. disobedient, or not persuaded to believe what Noah
told them. If you observe it, you shall find that the Intemperate man (his
pleasure is so bewitching, and seemingly harmless It is usually said of
drunkards, He is no bodies foe but his own.
) is the hardest to be persuaded; and the worst to be made, either to believe a
threat, or fear a punishment, or to leave his sin See the wickedness of this
sin, set forth by Aristotle Eth. l. 7. c* 6* where he compares lust and anger
together.
, of any in the world. You may see more of this sin in the Chapters of
Gluttony, Whoredom, Drunkenness, Adultery.

Judging others threatened.
1. With Judgment. Judge not; and ye shall not be judged, Luke 6. 37. For, if
that which is less likely, be true: that which is more likely, is not likely
to be false. Now it is more likely, that he who judges, shall be judged, then
that he who judges not shall not be judged; because there are other faults,
for which he may be judged. And so is i^ more likely, then that if we judge our
selves we shall not be judged: which notwithstanding is the saying of the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 11. 31. Besides, in Matthew it is said c. 7. 1. judge not that
ye be not judged. Now if not judgeing, be the way to avoid judgment; judging
must needs be a way to incur it.

Judgment, I say, not only of Men; for every body will be sure to judge him,
and spy and catch at every little fault in him; and will be glad to see him
miscarry: but of God too, and such as will be damnatory, even.

2 Condemnation, against which he cannot complain; for he has condemned
himself, in condemning others for sin, being a sinner himself, (even in
thus condemning;) which he thinks not of (even as David did, when he condemned
the rich man in the parable of Nathan, 2 Samuel: 12. 5.) so that he has nothing
to say: and therefore says the Apostle, Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever
thou art, (...), and (...), Romans 1. 2.
that JUDGE, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self: for
thou that judge do the same thing, Romans 2. 1. In judging others, he does
as it were, show God the way, of Judging him; and in a manner, challenge him to
do the like. Condemnation, I say; yea, and

3 Greater condemnation, perhaps, then else he should have had. Be ye not many
masters, knowing that ye shall receive the greater condemnation, etc. Jam. 3.
1. viz. as for other sins, and for this to boot. No sooner had the Scribes
and Pharisees taxed the Disciples of Christ, for transgressing the tradition of
the Elders (in eating with unwashen hands:) but presently, Christ reproves
them, for transgressing the commandments of God, in keeping the tradition of
the Elders, Mat. 15. 2, 3. So the same men, had no sooner condemned the
Disciples, for breaking the Sabbath, in plucking ears of corn, to satisfy
their hunger: but presently Christ condemns them, both for unmercifulness in
not pitying the hungry, and denying a little corn: and for injustice to boot,
in condemning the guiltless, chapter 12. 7; and finding fault where there was
none, (a thing usual with them that are given to judging and censuring.)

Judgment day.
Take heed, how you put it f^rre Amos, 6. 3.
away, and so be Secure in sinning: for thus says our Savior, But if that
evil Servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming; and shall
begin to smite his fellow Servants, and to eat and to drink with the Drunken.
The Lord of that Servant shall come in a day, when he looks not for him; and
in an hour, that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder etc. Mat. 24.
48, 49, 50, 51. It Is the only way, to make you neglect, to get oil in your
lamps; the Danger whereof, you may see in the Parable of the Foolish Virgins c.
25. 3, 12. It will be in vain, to plead, non putaram, I was not AWARE;
Foolishness will be no excuse. you slighted your Master, and the Bridegroom,
while he was your Advocate; and now there will be no more pleading, no more
place for an Advocate. I remember a saying of Cicero (speaking of Minos, and
Rhadamanthus, whom the Poets make to be universal Judges in the life to come)
apud quos nec te L. Crassus defendet, nec M. Antonius, etc. before whom, thou
shall not have either Crassus or Antony (two famous Orators of Rome) to plead
for thee, l. Tusc: Q:

Kings, and Governors, threatened and punished
1 For Destroying their people, with Woe. Woe be unto the Pastors, that destroy,
and scatter the sheep of my pasture, says the Lord, Jer: 23. 1. The people are
God's sheep, and not theirs. Rulers are but Shepherds (for that is the usual
name they have, (...)
both in Hebrew and Greek;) and therefore have no right to them. nay they are
Shepherds, and therefore are bound to feed them; and therefore woe, must needs
be to them, if they destroy them.

2 For Oppression; with Removal from their places, and Requiring the Flock at
their hands. Thus says the Lord God, behold I am against the Shepherds; and I
will require my Flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the
flock; neither shall the Shepheards^ feed themselves any more* for I will
deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them, Ezekiel:
34, 10, see Zach: 11, 3, compared with v. 5, to the 8. see likewise the title,
Oppression.

3 For Injustice; with God's unappeasable Anger. The Princes of Judah were like
them that remove the bound: therefore I will power my wrath The Sep: (...).
upon them like water, Hos: 5. 10. seeing they have removed the bounds of their
Injustice; I will also remove the bounds of my wrath.

4 For Bribery; with Shame from men, and judgment from God. Her Rulers with
shame do* love, (or do love that, which is a disgrace to them) Give ye, Hos:
4, 18, and it follows. c. 5. 1. Hear this O Priests, and hearken ye house of
Israel, and give ye ear ye house of the King; for judgment is toward you,
because you have been a Snare in Mizpah, and a Net spread upon Tabor. Her
Rulers] In the Hebrew, her Shields; to intimate, what they should have been. It
is a sign that God is very angry, especially in his threatenings, when he
calls men by such names, as express that duty, which they have not performed:
as you may observe, the Kings are, for the most part, threatened under the name
of Pastors; such as they should be. A Snare in Mizpeh] As others translate,
viz: not Mizpeh, as a proper name, but (as the Septuagint) (...), or (as
Jerome) Speculationi, that is, the Watch; making it an appellative* or as the
Paraphrast, your Teachers: this place may be better applied to (that which many
Kings and Governors are guilty of) the hindering of the Ministers, who are
God's Watchmen, in the work of the Gospel. See more in Bribery.

5 For Feeding themselves, and not the flock; with Woe. Son of man prophecy
against the Sheepheards of Israel; prophecy and say unto the^, thus says the
Lord God, say unto the Sheepheards; Woe be to the Sheepheards of Israel: Should
not the Shepherd, feed the flock Ezekiel: 34. 2.

6 For Deserting their flocks, with the Loss or Destruction both of their
power and wisdom; Woe be to the Idol Shepherd that leaves the flock: the
sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye; his arm shall be clean
dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened, Zach: 11, 17. Our
English Paraphrast, agreeing with Hierom, in the exposition of this and the
former verse, (who applied it to Antichrist) thus speaks, Woe be to that False
Pastor, which only carries the name, and semblance of an Evangelicall
Shepherd; who leaves the flock, to be wasted and spoiled. the just revenge
of God, shall be both upon the power, and policy of that man of sin; his power
shall be abated, and utterly weakened by the breath of the mouth of God, and
his craft and policy shall at the last end in disappointment and confusion. But
Grotius (a most sagacious Oedipus, and one that had a Lyncean sight himself;
only his endeavor was to make the Prophets look as little way as possibly he
could, though I know not whether he deserve so much blame here) makes it to be
spoken of Manasses, who left Jerusalem, and went and set up a Temple at
Garizim: saying, that his arm was then dried up, when the Soldiers of his
father in law Sanballat (by whose assistance he did his work) were all carried
away captive by Alexander the Great into Egypt: and that by his right eye is
meant, the Knowledge of Divine things See Man* 6. 22.
; which in short time was very much darkened, and made almost quite blind.

7 For, Not judging the Fatherles and the Widow etc. with Removal from their
places etc: In abundance of anger. They judge not the Fatherless, Or, for the
Fatherless, according to the Septuagine (...).
neither does the cause of the Widow come unto them, Isa: 1. 23, which was no
sooner mentioned, but the threat could be no lonber kept in: for it presently
follows, Therefore, says the Lord, the Lord of Hoasts, the Mighty one of
Israel, Ah I will ease me of mine enemies (the enemies of God's people are his
enemies, and those that oppress them, oppress him; I will ease me.) And I
will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away
all thy tin, And I will restore thy Judges, as at the first etc. verse 24,
25, 26.

Nay 8 For Ignorance, (when instead of being Sheepheards, they are SHEEP
themselves, brutish, and sottish, especially in things concerning the worship
of God, As the Kings of Israel were, when they were so sottish and as brutish,
as to worship Stocks v. 8
) Not prosperity, and loss of their Subjects. For the Pastors are become
brutish, and have not sought the Lord, therefore they shall not prosper; and
all their flocks shall be scattered. Jer: 10. 21.

Law righteousness
Such as trust to it, are thus threatened: Christ is become of none effect to
you. Whosoever of you are juistified Grotius, upon this place thus speaks, qui
^a justitia contenti estis, qua^ lex producere potest, quae justitia est
carnalis, and praemia ha bet terrena. I do not conclude from this; but I
fear, he was of the number of those, of whom Beza upon this place complains,
qui Somniabant, sese suae justiciae suorumque meritor^m plenos ad deum
accedere, Christo quasi siquid ipsis deesset supplente, etc: see Rivet,
Apologet. Sect. 34: and his Grot: Disc: Dialysis, Sect: 3. and as he speaks
here, of Meriting temporal rewards, by our own righteousness: so had he an
opinion of, redeeming temporal punishments, by our own satisfaction: se
Dialys. Sect. 7. He made both the righteousness, and satisfaction of our
Savior, but helps.
by the law, ye are fallen from Grace, Gal: 5. 4.

Are justified] It is spoken, (...) as Beza says; or it is a Hebraisme, viz:
for SAY, you are justified: for justified indeed, the Jews, (or any other)
could not be; otherwise it had been no threat (as the Apostle delivers it ver.
3.) to be a Debtour to do the whole Law; and yet they both thought they could,
and boasted, that they were able: which opinion, and boasting, of theirs, was
as false, and vain, as the present opinion of the Rabbines, that whosoever
professes Judaisme, let him live how he will, shall have a portion in the
world to come.

Leaving of men by God See Leaving us to sin, in Sin.
threatened.
I will tear, and go away, Hos: 5. 14. and v. 14. I will go and return to
my place, till they acknowledge their offense, etc. Then, is a punishment of
the Sense of affliction, truly deplorable; when it is aggravated with the
Loss of God's presence. God himself, who best knows both our happiness, and
our misery, has said, Woe also unto them, when I depart from them, Chapter 9. 12.

Libertinisme.
The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve
the unjust unto the day of judgment, to be punished. But chiefly the^ that
walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanesse, and despise government.
Presumptuous are they, self-willed, etc. 2. Pet. 2. 9, 10. It follows likewise,
v. 12. But these as natural bruit beasts made to be taken and destroyed,
speak evil of the things that they understand not, and shall utterly perish
in their own corruption.

Love.
The want of it is punished with Non-acceptance of, and Not being the better
by, any thing we do, though it be never so specious. Though I speak with the
tongues of men, and of Angels, and have not Charity; I am become as sounding
brass, or a tinkling cymball. 1. Cor. 13. 1. or I am nothing, ver. 2. or, It
profits me nothing, verse. 3.

Lovers of Life, more then Christ, threatened,
With the Loss of it. Whosoever will save his life, shall loose it, says
Matthew, c. 6. 25. Whosoever shall seek to save his life, says Luke. chapter 17.
33. (though he have not what he seeks for.) nay further yet (according to the
title) he that LOVES his life, shall loose it, says John (though he never
sought to save it) Chapter 12. 2. If thou do, but in thine heart (where I might
have left out the but, because that which is least with men, is most, and
almost all with God,) prefer this life before thy Savior; with what sense
can thou presume to have him thy Savior; or with what face can thou expect
to have that life which thou have by overmuch affection to this, slighted and
rejected?

Lovers of the world.
They are thus spoken to by James, Ye^ adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not
that the friendship of this world is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will
be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God, c. 4. 4. God's anger against
such men (as against adulterers) is Jealousy; and he will not spare Prove: ^* 34.
in the day of vengeance. If a wife should have many husbands, and yet commit
adultery; who can excuse her? God is to us as good as many husbands. In Isaiah,
Chapter 54. 5. where it is said, thy maker is thine husband, in the original it is
husbands (...); to show what an excellent husband he is.

Lukewarmnesse.
The Angel of Laodicea was thus threatened, Because thou art lukewarm, and
neither hot nor cold, I will spew thee out of my mouth, Rev. 3. 16. God does
loath a halting religion Kings 18, 21.
, as much as a stomach does lukewarm water.

Lying See False witness.
threatened, and punished.
1. With not prevailing (at the least) as in false witness and slander, when
men speak one thing, and know the contrary. A false witness (or, a witness of
lies) shall perish, but the man that hears, speaks constantly, (or speaks
to prevail Aquila, Symmach* and Theodotion render Le Netzah (...): by which
though they mean in aeternum, for ever (as they do Ps 49. 7. etc) yet they may
as well mean, ad victoriam: to prevail (or as we say) to the last. that which
holds longest, prevails.
, and conquer in his cause.) Prove. 21. 28.

2 Discovery in a little time. The Lip of truth shall be established for ever:
but a lying tongue is but for a moment, Prove. 12. 19.

3 Being put to silence, (at the lest:) Let the lying lips be put to silence,
Ps: 31. 18. Perhaps it is meant, by putting them inter silentes, or causing
them to be silent in the grave by death: as in the verse next before.

3 Gods Hatred: as in flattery, when men speak one thing, and do the contrary.
Lying lips are abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly, are his
delight. Prove; 12. 22.

4 The Hatred of Men, refusing to admit such as are guilty of it, either into
their service or society. He that works deceit, shall not dwell in my house;
he that tells LIES, shall not tarry in my sight, Ps: 101. 7.

5 A Curse, and perpetual bondage. The Gibeonites, for saying, they came from
a far country, when they did not, (Josh 9. 9.) were thus punished by Joshua.
Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall none of you be freed from being
bondmen and hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the house of my God. Josh.
9. 23.

6 Leprosy, both in the Liar himself, and in his posterity after him: as in
Gehazi (Elisha's Servant,) who partly for covetousness, in running after
Naaman the King of Syria, for money for his Masters curing his leprosy, (when
his Master had refused it) whereby he disgraced his Master* but, (as some
think) especially for telling him, He went no whither; was thus threatened by
the Prophet his Master, The leprosy therefore of Naaman, shall cleave unto
thee, and unto thy seed for ever 2 Kings 5, 27, compared with v: 22, 23, 25.

7 Many sad and bitter punishments: as in the Prophets, among the Jews: who
for committing adultery, and walking in lies, (which God calls (...) a horrible
thing;) are thus threatened, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them
drink the water of gall, Jer: 23, 15, compared with the 14. Whether there were
in this speech, an allusion to that bitter water, which the woman drank, that
was suspected of adultery, Number: 5. 18. (there being mention made before of
committing adultery) I know not; but it may seem probable, because as it was
said of such a woman, that if she were guilty, she should be a curse among the
people: so those Prophets, (especially Zedekiah, and Ahab) became a curse among
the Jews. Whereby I mean not, that they were cursed by them, (neither is this
the meaning of that expression, so often Chap. 24. 9. c. 15. 18. c. 26. 6.
used in the Prophets:) but that their condition was so bad, that the people,
when they cursed any body, used to express it, by wishing that he were, as
such men were; as you may see it explained, Jerem. 29. 22. The Lord make the
like Zedekiah, and like Ahab, etc. It Is almost the same, as to become a
Proverb, an expression usual also in Scripture, Ezekiel. 14, 8, etc. Even as
Irus, or Troy, became a proverb; being proverbially applied, to signify a
poor man, or a miserable place. Now though this allusion be admitted, because
of what is before spoken of Adultery, v. 14. ( They commit adultery, and walk
in lies, etc:) so that the punishment shall look aside to that sin; yet
methinkes, the punishment threatened, seems to look back more directly upon
the sin of lying, by way of retaliation: as if God had resolved, that seeing
those Prophets, especially abused their mouths, and their tongues to lying:
those same parts of theirs, should be chiefly punished, viz. in eating, and
drinking the bitterest things that could be gotten, wormwood, and water of
gall. In the ninth chapter verse 15* you have the same manner of threat to all
the Jews; and there the maine sin complained of is Lying: as you may see v.
5. The Septuagint in that place translate for, wormwood, (...) Chrysostom: 2 Cor.
6. Paraphrasp it (...)* i. e. unavoida^ ^e evils, we render, necessities. The
Chaldee word (...) is like it in sense, and sound. See Chal^ par.
, necessities, (a word used likewise in the singular number in the same sense,
both in the Apocrypha, and in the new Testament, as Tob 3. 6. Bar. 7. 37. Luke
21. 23.) And here they translate (...), sorrows, or griefs: In both places,
they use the word, (...), and (...)) which signifies, to feed by little and a
little at a time, as one would children: Whereby the punishment is very much
aggravated. To swallow down a bitter thing at once* is not so much: but, to
take it by degrees; and to be long in taking it, is a great torture. To
conclude even by our English expression of feeding with wormwood, etc. can
hardly be less signified, then a long continuance of many bitter evils, or a
longcaptivity. Where, for, he that speaks Lies; in the Hebrew it is^h that
blows Lies, as if he meant to Kindle a fi^e: he Se^. rende^ it (...) he that
will kindle, or burn wickedness, as if his tongue did not only set other things
on fire, but were a fire it self: as James says it is, c. 3, 6. perhaps it ^s
rather a Metaphore from venomous creatures, (the poyso^ of Aspes, being under
such men's lips, To. 3. 13.) of who^ Virgil says, inspirant venenu^, that they
hiss, or blow forth their poison.
See the expressions of Devouring by bitter destruction Deuteronomy: 32. 24. God's
w^i^^ng bitter things against Job* c. 13, 26, and the vision of the Star called
Wormwood, Rev. 8. 11.

8 Destruction. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing, Ps. 5. 6. and that
unavoydable. A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks Lies
shall not escape, Prove: 19. 5, see v. * 9. Ananias, and Sapphira, saying they
had but so much, for the possession which they sold, whereas they had more,
(wherein they did not only lie to, but by lying endeavored to deceive, the holy
Ghost: for so much (...), in the accusative case, will import) were both
threatened by Peter, with sudden death; and accordingly fell down, as soon as
he had done speaking, Acts 5. 3, 5, 9, 10. Shemaiah, and Hananiah, for making
the People to trust in a Lie, Jer: 28. and c. 29. Ahab and Zedekiah, for
prophesying a Lie, c. 29, v. 21, were punished with death. (See the chapter of
False-teachers.) And here I cannot but say somewhat of one grand Liar more; (for
so much the name imports, which the Jews have given him; viz. Bar Cosiba, i. e.
the Son of a Lie.) He fained himself to be that Star, spoken of by Balaam
Number: 24. 17. And therefore at first, the Jews, (as long as they took him for
the true Messiah) called him Bar Cochba, i. e. the Son of the Star. The
number of those that believed this lie, was very great; Buxtorf says there was
one Rabbi Al^^ibha who had 24000 D^^ciples that adhered to him.
insomuch that after a while, having slaughtered many thousands of the heathen,
especially of the Romans in Africa and elsewhere; he caused himself to be
crowned King in Bitter, a City in Arabia. But his kingdom was short; for after
a few months, Adrianus, being sent thither by Trajan the Emperor, won the
city by violence, and slew both the Impostour, and forty hundred thousand men
of the Jews. This happened about two and fifty years, after the the
destruction of Jerusalem See Bux torf. Syn. Jud* c. 36
.

9 Exclusion out of the holy Jerusalem. There shall in no wise enter into it
any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a
lie, Rev. 21. 27. Without are dogs, etc. and whosoever loves and makes a
lie, Chapter 22. 15.

The greatness; and the hurtfulnesse of this sin may be yet further gathered
out of the Scriptures.

First from the words of David, Psalm. 120. 3. For if we translate in the
vocative case, What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee,
thou false tongue? he seems to speak, as if the sin were so great, that he
could not tell what punishment he could name bad enough for it. If, what will
be given, etc. and what will be done, etc. as if he could not express, but
admired the greatness of the punishment, which he thought would be inflicted
for it. If in the nominative case (which better accords with other translations
(...), and another* (...), etc.
and with the Hebrew it self) thus, What shall a false tongue give thee, or
what shall it add unto thee, (that is, profit thee or bring unto thee as a
fruit or reward the Hebre^ I^s^ph ( (...) add) is often so use* as Prove. 3. 2.
etc,
) he seems to mean (according to the usual force of such expressions in the
Hebrew) a positive affirmation of the clean contrary, viz: that it would be
both unprofitable, and exceeding hurtful.

Secondly, By Gods aggravating the wickedness of such as commit other sins,
by complaining of this. They have taken of the accursed thing, and have also
stolen and dissembled also (speaking of Achan) Josh 7. 11. Dissembled^ or lied
So the original (...) Stolen and dissembled also^ Mark the gradation. And
therefore chapter 22. 20* where we render, commit a trespass in the accursed
thing; Sehekar Scikra.
he Chaldee paraphrast says, lied a lie. So likewise in Ezekiel Chap. 17. 20.
(where complaint is made of Pharoah's breaking his promise to help the Jews)
that which we render, for his trespass which he has trespassed against me;
the paraphrase renders for his lie which he has lied: * Ma^hhal Mahhal.
and the word in the Hebrew is the same in both these places.

3 By God's aggravating so much as he does, the punishment of other sins,
when this is joined with them. If a man had taken, or detained ought of his
neighbors; he was to restore it again. but if he had ly^d, (and denied it
with an oath) he was to add a fifth part more to it, Lev 6. 5 And they say,
that, whereas at the offering of other offerings, only a general confession of
sins sufficed; at the offering of the oblation for this sin, a particular
confession of the sin, and a particular acknowledgement of deserving death
(which the creature offered, suffered for the^) was required. If you say the
punishment was not aggravated for lying; but for lying with an oath, or
swearing falsely: I have only this to answer, that I believe the contrary,
because in Number: 5. 6. you have the same punishment without mentioning any oath:
for it is said, only, If a man or woman shall commit any sin: which the Chaldes
Paraphrase renders, shall lie a lie, as in the places before quoted* which I
do not allege to prove, that speaking falsely is as bad as swearing falsely;
but only to show how much a sin is aggravavated by denying it, though it be
not with an oath: in regard of the hurt and deceit thereby wrought; which may
be all as much. And therefore Cicero In Orat. pro Q. Roscio Comoedo. Qu^ semel
^ veritate deflexit, hic non majore religione ad perjuriu^ qua^ ad mendaciu^
perduci consue^vit. prop^terea quae poe^a a diis immortalibu perjur^, haec
eaden mendaci constituta est. no^ enim ex pactione verboru^ quibus jus jurandum
comprehenditur sed ex perfidia and malitia per qua^ infidiae tenduntur alicui,
dii im^mortales hominibus ir^sci and succensere consuerunt*
(a heathen) could say, that the Gods were as angry for lying, as for perjurie;
and had provided the same punishments. I could wish we were as careful against
lying, as the Jews would seem to be: who have a saying in their Talmud, that
none must say to a child, I will give thee such a thing, if ^e mean not to give
it him; for fear of teaching him to LIE. But I may say of them also
notwithstanding this, that they are not so careful against Lying, as they
should be; if they forbid it only to a Jew, and allow it to a heathen; as they
say they do: just as the Papists do, to any, whom they please to call
Heretics. They may seem to have encouragement, from those words in Ecclus 7.
12. devise not a lie against thy brother, etc. But I am confident, (to use the
expression there (...).
used) wh^soever thus So the Hebrew word (...) is used Pr. 3. 29. In Ps. 129.
3. we translate it Plowed. (The Plowers plowed upon my back) as if it were
meant of aration rather then exa^ation. Aq and Thood. translate (...), and I
know not but it may very well be interpreted of this manner ^f plowing by
backbiting, and slanderous lying upon a man. For so we say in English, and so
the Greek in that apocryph^ll place but now quoted properly sounds; (...),
upon thy brother, or against ^im behind his back.
ploweth, upon what ground soever it be, his harvest will be nothing but his
own cutting down to be burnt in everlasting fire.

Marriage with Idolaters etc.
Was punished with the Drowning of the world, (if the most common conjecture be
true) For in Genesis c. 6. 2. immediately before mention made of God's
resolution to do it, it is said, That the sons of God saw the daughters of
men that they were fair, and they took them wives of all which they chose i.
e. according as their lust led them, without any regard had to religion, or
goodness. By the sons of God, says Chrysostom and others, is meant the
sons or Seth, so called either from their godliness, and goodness of
nature; or from their good^inesse, and greatness of stature; according to the
use of the Hebrews, adding the word, God, when they mean to express the
greatness of any thing. But they conceit, that the posterity of Cain, through
their intemperance, and for their wickedness, had both their growth hindered,
and their strength impaired; so that their children which they begat, were for
the most part daughters; and that therefore it is said the daughters of men:
and of men or Adam, (for that is the word in the original) because they were
altogether earthly, and carnal in their affections. Since that, it has been
threatened or punished, In the persons themselves.

1 With being seduced from the true worship of God: For it was said to the
Israelites, concerning the seven nations, Neither shall thou make marriages
with them etc. For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may
serve other Gods, Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4. Examples hereof you may see in Solomon, 1
Kings 11* 3. 4, 5* in Ahab Ch 21. 25* and in Joram 2 Kings 8. 18. of which
three the Scripture speaks expressly, that they were seduced by their wives.

2 Oppression, and Loss of their estates. They have dealt trecherously against
the Lord: for they have begotten strange Chaldee Par. children of the dau^hters
of the nations, See Chapter 7. 8.
children: Now shall a month devour them with their portions, Hos 5. 7. There
can be no less herein threatened, then what I mentioned; whether you interpret
(with the Paraphrast) I will bring people every month that shall devour the
fruit of the ground: or (with others) would have it to be meant of a morthly
tax, put The Septuag. The rust shall eat up the^ and their portion.
upon the Israelites by Menahem King of Israel, to recruite his treasure, 2
Kings 15. 20. (for Hosea prophesied in his time and long after And before too:
for he prophesied (as Rivet conjectures) seaventy and nine years.
) which came to a thousand talents of silver. I might add hereunto.

3. Destruction, being an ordinary consequent, if not a punishment. It is said
in the place above quoted, For they will turn away thy sons from following me,
that they may serve other Gods; so will the anger of the Lord be kindled
against you, and destroy thee suddenly. Suddenly] or in have, lest they should
beget children, and teach them Idolatry too.

In their children, it is threatened and punished with Wickedness, and Misery,
to the trouble and grief of the parents. As you may see in Absalom, and Tamar
(David's children which he had by Maacha daughter to the King of Geshur an
Idolater (1 Chr. 3. 2.) Tamar was forced by Amnon, 2. Sam. 13. 14. Absalom
caused Amnon to be murdered, verse. 29 rebelled against his father, chapter 15. and
in that rebellion miserably died, chap. 18. In the Prophet Malachi, in whose
time viz: after, and about the building of the second temple this sin very much
reigned As you may see in the book of Ezra, (c. 9.) whom Hierome and Calvin
conceived to be the same with Malachi; and that Malachi was but a title of
service, or honor; signifying (...) Angel, or my Messenger.
among the Jews) you have this threat, Judah has profaned the holiness of
the Lord, which he loved, and has married the daughter of a strange god The
Lord will cut off the man that does this: the master and the scholar, out of
the tabernacles of Jacob, chapter 2. 11, 12. where instead of the master and the
scholar, he Paraphrast translates, the son and the nephew: which suits better
with that which goes before it, being in the Hebrew, cut off To the man. (...)
The daughter of a strange god] that is, a woman that worships a strange god:
for, what a man counts his God, that he loves and honors, as a father: and so
he may be called the son or daughter of it. Se Je: 2. 27. and Is. 43. 6. Ex. 4.
22.

The odiousness, and hurtfulnesse of marrying with Idolaters may be further
gathered out of the Scriptures, thus,

1 By the passionate actions, and expressions of godly men against it. Of Ezra,
chap. 9. 3. And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment, and my mantle, and
plucked of the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down astonished And of
Nehemiah, chap 13 25. I contended with them, and cursed them, and smote
certain of them. Nay verse. 29. you have him praying against some, Remember
them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood, etc.

2 By what Ezra speaks of God's fierce anger by reason of it; Until the
fierce wrath of our God for this matter be turned from us, chapter 10 14. which he
thought could not be, till they had every one turned away their strange wives,
and made their peace with an offering, verse. 19. In the end of his prayer chapter
9. his words are, We cannot stand before thee because of this.

3 By what Paul speaks (as it is thought) chiefly concerning it, 2 Cor. 6.
verse. 14. to the end. Where First, he calls it (...), to be unequally yoaked: as
if (say some) he alluded to plowing with an ox and an ass together; a clean
beast, and an unclean; which was forbidden in the Law, Deuteronomy. 22. 10. Now from
this similitude (or expression) only, may be gathered how hurtful it is: viz.
because of the many inconveniences, of trouble, and strife, and discontent,
which must necessarily follow. For in that word but now mentioned, if there be
not, there may be signified, not only a being yoaked with a beast, as I may
say, of another kind, (which may be so sorted as they may draw together without
trouble;) but after another way: as if one's face stood East, and the other's
West; whereby the pain, and difficulty, in drawing each one his way, must
needs be the more. For when one draws forward, the other must either draw
backward, with a great deal of pain: or yield to be drawn the same way, with
a great deal of danger, if the way be naught. Now, how much a man must needs
be hindered from good duties, that is yoked in this manner, by marrying a wicked
person, especially an Idolater; every one may guess, (and it has been partly
shown in this chapter.) And so likewise, what strife, and contention, he is
like to meet with: an example whereof you may see in Zipporah, and Moses, about
the Circumcision of their child, Exodus 4. 26. See the consequents of Sampson's
marriage with a Philistin, Jud. 15. Secondly, from those words, verse. 16. of
this chapter, For ye are the temple of the living God, as God has said, I
will dwell in them etc. may be gathered, what danger there is of God's
departure from us. For he will not dwell in a Temple, that is polluted: and it
is a thousand to one, but it be polluted this way. You may remember, in that
place of Malachi formerly quoted, it was said, that Judah profaned the
holiness of the Lord, which he loved, etc. and it is not unlikely to be meant
of the holiness (often mentioned in the Old Testament) of being a consecrated,
or peculiar people to God; by reason whereof the Jews are forbid to profane,
or defile, or make themselves common, (viz: with the Nations) either by
entertaining communion with them (especially by marriage) or imitating them in
their practices, (especially those of Idolatry) See Neither shall thou make
marriages with them, etc. v 3. For thou art an HOLY PEOPLE TO THE LORD THY GOD,
verse. 6.
Deuteronomy: 7 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. ch 14 2. and Ezekiel. 20. 18. and Dan. 1. 8. Lastly, by
those words verse. 17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, may
be gathered, what danger there is, even of God's Rejecting of us, if we thus
defile our selves; in regard that being separated, seems to be required as a
condition of his receiving of us.

Means of Grace continued in Anger See also Hardening and Ignorance
.
1 Though men have rejected them. Since the day that your fathers came forth
out of the land of Egypt, unto this day, I have even sent unto you all my
servants the Prophets daily, rising up early, and sending them, yet they
hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck; they
did worse then their fathers. Therefore thou shall speak all these words unto
them, but they will not hearken unto thee: thou shall also call unto them, but
they will not answer thee. Jerem. 7. 25, 26, 27.

2 Though they have mocked at them. The Jews, though they slighted the
importunity of the Prophets, in speaking to them so often, and laying Line upon
line, and precept upon precept, here a little, and there a little, Isa. 28. 10;
insomuch that at length they took up these words for a Proverb And therefore
the Paraphrast translates, ver. 11. because with a scoffing tongue they mocked
at the Prophets, etc. but the Apostle otherwise, 1 Cor. 14. 21.
, to sport with: (even as they did, The burden of the Lord. Jer. 23. 38.) yet
notwithstanding this importunity, it was continued to them, to the ensnaring of
them, and for an occasion of falling. But the word of the Lord was unto them,
precept upon precept, Line upon line Epiphan. advers. haer. l. 1. Tom. 2. (
where he speaks of the abominable abuse of the Hebrew words Kau lacau by the
Nicolaitans, related by Hierome) translates the first words singularly,
affliction upon affliction: but the others with Hierome, hope upon hope: expect
a little, expect a little. In which sense the words are most likely to be
^eered; because the Prophets were still warning; but (through God's mercy)
nothing came to pass. And the Chaldee Paraphrast, as well as can be, expounds
this translation thus, They shall hope for redemption at such time, when I will
bring upon them tribulation.
; line upon line: here a little and there a little: that they might go and
fall backward, and be broken, and snared and taken Eirher b^ the Babylonian, or
by the Roman army, Says Hierome.
verse. 13.

3 Though it be certain, they will not hearken to them. You shall say unto him
( says God to Moses, when he sent him to Pharaoh) Let us go we beseech thee,
three days journey, etc. Exodus 3. 18. and yet he adds v. 19. I am sure that
the King of Egypt will not let you go, etc. See Ezekiel. 3. 11. But that they
will kill the messenger. Behold I send unto you Prophets and wise men, and
Scribes, and some of them, ye shall kill and crucify, etc. That upon you may
come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth Mat. 23, 34, Luk: 11. 49. 50.

4 Though it be certain they cannot be the better for them. Unto them that are
without, all these things are done in parables, that seeing they may see, and
not perceive, etc. Mark. 4. 11, 12.

5 Though God himself harden their hearts against them. And the Lord said unto
Moses: when thou go to return into Egypt, see that thou do all those
wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand: but I will harden his
heart, that he shall not let the people go, Exodus: 4. 21. See Chapter 7, 4. Chapter 9.
12. See Isa: 6. 9, 10. Continuing the means of grace, to such as profit not by
them, heaps up wrath and coals, and aggravates condemnation more then any
thing: and therefore their case is exceeding miserable, to whom they are thus
continued.

Means of grace, if extraordinary, such as profit not by them are threatened.
1 In general, with Woe. For thus our Savior threatened Chorazin, and
Bethsaida, for not repenting, notwithstanding he had done most of his mighty
works in them, Mat. 11. 20. 21.

2 Removal of those means. For thus our Savior threatened the Priests, and
Elders of the Jews; after he had told them a parable of husbandmen, who
returned their master no fruit of his Vineyard, notwithstanding he had sent so
many servants, nay and his own Son, and heir to receive them. The kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation, bringing forth the fruits
thereof, Mat. 21. 43. Now the justice of this punishment, they themselves had
before in the parable, unwittingly acknowledged: eve^ as David did the justice
of his, in the parable of Nathan, 2. Sam: 12. 5. For being asked what they
thought, the Master would do to those husbandmen, when he came himself; they
made answer with indignation, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and
will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the
fruits in their season, verse 40. 41.

3 Condemnation by others; who profited by less, and shall rise up in
judgment against them as witnesses; to testify, that less means then they
have had, are sufficient means for co^version. For thus our Savior told the
Scribes and Pharisees, they should be condemned by the Ninevites, and the Queen
of the South: viz: because they repented not at his preaching; and refused to
hear him: whereas the Ninevites repented at the preaching of Jonas, for so
little while; and the Queen of the South came so far, even from the utmost
parts of the earth, and only to hear the wisdom of Solomon: who were both
far inferior to him, Mat. 12 41. 42.

4 Greater condemnation then others. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall
be much required, etc. Luk: 12. 48. They shall have many stripes, verse. 47.

This is the condition of all men, to who^ the Gospel is preached: because
they have no excuse at all, to plead. If I had not come and spoken to them,
they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin, Joh. 15.
22. at least no cloak, that is great enough to cover it.

Men-pleasers threatened.
1 With Being disowned by Christ. For if I yet pleased men, I should not be the
servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10.

2 God's hatred. Ye are they which justify your selves before men, but God
knows your hearts, for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is
Abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. Christ thus spoke to the
Pharisees, who were altogether Men-pleasers in every thing that they did, it
was their maine fault, and it was all they cared for. Paul was one of them: and
therefore in the place before quoted, he says, if I YET please.

Mercies, Not being bettered by them.
See Unthankfulness, Security, and Prosperity.

Ministers, their Duty.
Ministers, if naught, have cause to fear these ensuing punishments.
Such as are Scandalous, and Corrupters of the word.
Contempt. For thus were the Priests among the Jews threatened. But ye are
departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at the law: ye have
corrupted the covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts. Therefore have I also
made you contemptible and base before all the people according as ye have not
kept my ways but have been partial in the law. Mal. 2. 8. 9. In Samuel it is
said, even of the servant of the Priests of Belial, Wherefore the sin of the
young man was very great before the Lord, viz: because it was scandalous: for
by this means men abhorred the offering of the Lord. 1. Sam. 2. 17. See Ezekiel.
22. 26.

Such as Teach false doctrine, whereby they cause the wicked to presume, and
the godly to despair, (a practice very much to be lamented amongst us)
Being by some severe punishment or other made to leave their function. Wi^ ye
pollute me among my people for handfulls of barley, and for pieces of bread,
to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that
should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your lies, Ezekiel. 13. 19.
so, ver. 22. you have the same complaint. but it follows verse. 23. Therefore
ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divinations: for I will deliver my
people out of your hand, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

For handfuls of barley, and for pieces of bread.] Hierom says, this is most
properly applied to Teachers of heretical doctrines: who (as we have frequent
experience in these days) do not take whole places of Scripture, but broken
pieces here and there, for the confirmation of their errors. His words are
these. Non propter chorum and hemichoru^ hordei, ut in Hosea legimus c. 5. sed
propter pugillum hordei quo bruta vescuntur animantia: and fragmentum panis,
non panem integrum, nec solida testimonia scripturarum, sed quae haeretica
pravitate fracta and decurtata atque imminuta sunt, and sanctos quosque
decipiant and ad mortem trahant, and peccatores vanis promissionibus vivificare
contendant. See the chapter of False-teachers.

Such as are covetous daubers, and Men-pleasers.
1 Ignorance, and Shame. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make
my people to err, that bite with their teeeh, and cry peace, and he that
puts not into their mouths, they even prepare war against hjm. therefore
night shall be unto you, that ye shall not divine, and the Sun shall go down
over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. then shall the Seers
be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea they shall all cover their lips,
for there is no answer of God, Mic. 3. 5, 6, 7. That bite with their teeth and
cry peace] Chald. Par. He that offers them a feast of flesh; to him they
prophecy peace. I am ashamed to remember, how much it has been the practice of
many, to preach for entertainment, and preferment. They even prepare warre] the
Hebrew word will import, sanctify So the Septua^. (...).
war: and though I know it be usual in this sense, yet it puts me in mind
of the Popish pretended holiness, in denouncing wars, and excommunications
against such as do not stop their mouths, by feeding them with gifts. They
shall all cover their lips.] The Sept. translate, they shall all of them curse,
for so I choose to translate their translation, rather then as others do, all
shall curse them; because of the Hebrew (...) which (if the Septug did not mean
so) seems to be more genuinely rendered, (...), then (...).
word for, all, with an affixe after it, signifying all of them reciprocally:
and because of that which follows viz: instead of, because there is no answer,
because there is none to hear them. Which puts me in mind of what we have
known of later days especially, both by false teachers amongst themselves, and
by Papists from abroad; who having endeavored to seduce the people with their
false doctrines, when they see it is in vain, how do they bite their lips for
vexation? If you translate it the other way, there is experience enough of that
too, and, I doubt not, there will be more: when those who have been seduced
with false doctrines, shall fret themselves, and curse their seducers, and Look
upward Isa. 8. 19, 21.
.

2 Destruction. For thus God spoke to Jeremiah, when he sent him to prophecy to
the Jews, Be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them,
Ier. 1, 17. (...). as if he had said, Be not confounded with fear, at their
faces, lest I confound thee with destruction, before their faces: so that both
thou, and they shall see what a folly it is, to fear men, rather the^ God; and
how unable they are to protect those that please them, when God who is
displeased, is resolved to punish them. The word for dismayed and confound, in
the Hebrew is the same; and so likewise the word for their faces, and before
the^. which I thought good to intimate, because I have observed in diverse
places (in the prophecies especially) the like manner of expressing a threat,
viz: by the same word, that was mentioned in the sin. perhaps the more to make
the persons reflect upon, and keep in memory their sin, to repent of it, and be
humbled for it; or to acknowledge God's justice. So Jer. 28. verse. 17. It is
said to Hananiah (...) the Lord has not SENT thee; and verse. 18, he is
threatened thus, (...) behold I will SEND thee. (or, I will cast thee,) from
off the face of the earth. So ch 23. 26. for abusing and mocking at those words
of the Prophets (which they used when they delivered their messages) The Burden
of the Lord; the people are threatened, that Every man's word shall be his
burden See Such as Mock them.
. so verse. 39, it is said, (if we read according to the Sept. and the Vulgar,
(...)) I will BEAR you quite Our translation is, I will utterly forget you,
fetching the word from (...)
away, (meaning by captivity:) as if he alluded to the word (...) Burden. I
confess the Vulgar translation in this verse pleases me well, viz: In
carrying I will carry you (Portabo vos portans, etc. agreeing with the
Septuagint their (...), answering to their word (...), which they use for
burden:) but not so well in the 33 verse, where they translate for, what
burden? I will forsake you: vos estis onus projiciam, quippe vos, ye are the
burden, I will fling you off: because I know not how to bring the Hebrew to it,
unless instead of (...) we read (as it is likely the author of that
translation did) (...): which are the same letters differently p^aced. The
words both of the Latin and Greek translation may be thus paraphrased: If the
people ask, what is the burden of the Lord? tell them, You are my greatest
burden: and so you have been a long time; but now I will fling you off, says
the Lord. or thus, I have let you lie still for a long time, but now I have
taken you up, (as a man will take up a potters vessel) and I will dash you to
pieces. for so the Septuagint seem to have conceived of the meaning of this
place; translating, for, I will forsake you, (...), i. e. allidam vos, I will
dash you in pieces, which is not unsuitable (especially if it were (...) From
(...).
, which I think properly signifies breaking one thing with another, whereas
(...) From (...).
is breaking one thing upon another) with what is said verse. 29. of God's word
(which he sends by his Prophets) viz. that it is like a hammer, which breaks
the Rock in pieces. This their translation suites very well with their word
(...), (the word which they use for burden) coming from (...) to take. which
expression is usually applied to Prophecies, especially such as were bad; for
the Prophets were bid to This word w^h I TAKE UP ((...)) against you, Am. 5. 1.
TAKE UP a lamentation, Ezekiel. 28. 12. So it is said of any unpleasing speech,
which a man casts at another; he takes it up; TAKE UP a proverb against, Isa.
14. 4. and, take up a parable against, Mic 2. 4.
take up such or such a message, to such or such a people. i. e. either as a
burden to lay upon them; or as a stone, to fling at them. But it is likely,
that they did read the Hebrew, not (...), as we read, (which signifies, I will
forsake: but (...), which signifies, as they translate, I will dash. You may
see the like in several other places, as Hos. 4. 6. etc.

Those words of Micah above quoted, (and the diviners confounded: they shall
all cover their lips, chapter 3. 7.) some expound them not of confusion by shame
(viz. to see the prophecy of the captivity fulfilled, which they had
contradicted:) but of this confusion (as we usually call it) by destruction;
making it a proverbiall speech, taken from the custom of covering the faces of
such men as were condemned to die, in use (as I think) both with Jews and
Gentiles. See Esth. 7. 9. Ezekiel. 12. 6.

Nehemiah prayed, that God would think upon those Prophets who were hired by
Tobiah and Sanballat to discourage him from his work, chap. 6. 14. And Jude
pronounces, Woe, to them that ran greedily after the error of Balaam for
reward, ver. 11. And therefore certainly such men have cause to fear severe
punishment.

Such as are Idle, and neglect their duty,
1 Woe. Necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is unto me if I preach not the
Gospel: 1 Cor. 9. 16.

2 God's requiring men's souls at their hands. For thus God told Ezekiel, (whom
he made the peoples watchman.) When I say unto the wicked thou shall surely
die; and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his
wicked way, to save his life: the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity,
but his blood will I require at thine hand, Eze. 3. 18. The same wicked man
shall die, etc.] Though it were not so; but such a wicked man might be suffered
to live; yet such a watchman deserved to die, because his fault is alike though
the other's success be better. If a Sentinel suffer the enemy to come on, and
give no warning: though the enemy do not prevail, the Sentinel shall lose
his life. His blood will I require, etc.] that is, the spilling of his blood;
or, the loss of his life. Idle Ministers are soul murderers. He that forbids
not to sin when he may, is as bad as he that bids. So, much more, he that
saves not a soul when he may, and when he must too, is as bad as he that
destroys it. His blood] And therefore Paul (where he seems to me to rejoice,
like a man that has narrowly escaped danger of death) when he was going from
Miletus, sent for the Elders of Ephesus, and told them, he was pure from the
blood of all men, because he had not shunned to declare unto them all the
counsel of God, Act. 20. 26, 27. (as if otherwise he could not have been so;)
and therefore strictly charged them to imitate him; and to approve themselves
pastors indeed, in feeding the flock: to be guilty of whose blood was no
ordinary murder: in regard that God (for so it is said; wherein the deity of
Christ His own name is not mentioued, for four verses before.
is as clearly proved as by any place that I know) had purchased them with his
own blood, verse. 28. It would anger a man; if he had been but at a little
cost, or pain, to save a thing, but of a little value; by another negligence
to have it lost. Read also Act. 18. 6. where you may see the like exulting
expression of the same Apostle to the Jews at Corinth; when he left preaching
to them, and began to preach to the Gentiles.

The Prophet Amos, was so convinced of the danger of being negligent in an
Embassy from God, that he wondered how any one could dare, not to tell the
people, what the Lord had told him. The Lion has roared, who will not fear?
The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? Am. 3. 8. The shepherds dog,
that shall see the foxes, and the wolves, and the Lion himself come roaring
close home to the flock, and never bark; can deserve no less then hanging.
much more if he fall upon the sheep himself, (as those covetous pastors, in
the former chapter.) See the comparison of Greedy dogs, Isa. 56. 11.

Ministers, for shame, should not be Idle, were it but for their name's sake;
for they are called (...), workmen or laborers, Mat. 9. 38. But especially for
the company, and help which they have, being laborers with God, 1. Cor. 3. 9.
But yet I must confess however, that, as heretofore it was the common fault to
be Idle: (not only of such, who had undertaken; but of such who intended to
undertake, the work of the Ministry; insomuch that we had cause to pray, not
only that God would utterly cast out the Idlers, but violently (...) So the
word signifies. which we render, send forth. Mat. 9. 38. Yet perhaps by this
word is no more meant, then by (...), which the Sept. many times render by it:
as, 2 Chro. 29. 16, etc.
cast forth the laborers into the harvest:) so now it is the common fault to
be over- busy.

Such as are Ignorant.
1 The loss of their sheep, of whom they are to give an account. which is a
sad evil, though it may not seem so; as it is worse, to loose what is another
man's, then what is mine own. All the Beasts of the field come to devour, yea
all the beasts in the forest they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs,
they ca^nnot bark, etc. Isa, 56. 9. 10. It is able to break a man's heart, to
think how many poor ignorant silly souls by reason of the blindness or
carelessenesse of their teachers are (...) (as the Apostles word is) like so
many sheep made a prey of, and taken captive alive by the Devil at his will 2 Timothy 2. 26.
.

Secondly, Removal from their places. Because thou have rejected knowledge; I
will also reject theee, that thou shall be no Priest to me, Hos. 4. 6. This is
thought to be spoken to those, who were unlawfully made Priests by Jeroboam,
being of the lowest of the people, and not of the sons of Levi, 1 Kings 12,
31. And therefore let men look to it, who do not only reject a calling (and so
truly (...), Heb. 5. 4.
take upon them the Ministers office) without which they should not undertake
it: but do also reject knowledge, without which they cannot discharge it.

3 God's forgetting their children: as it follows in the same verse. Seeing
thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I also will forget thy children. I know
not what the main fault is; but (that which the Papists attribute to the
unlawfulness of their marrying) it has been generally observ^d, that
Ministers are very unhappy in their children; either for wickedness, or poverty;
either they forget God only, or else God forgets them too. The sins of the
Priests (under the Law) were looked upon as far greater, then the sins of
ordinary men: and therefore their offering was to be no ordinary offering; and
the ceremonies used about it, no ordinary ceremonies: the offering was to be a
Bullock, and the blood thereof to be sprinkled seven times before the Lord,
etc. Lev: 4. 3. 6. So no doubt Ministers sins are greater then others, and
and shall be more severely punished.

Such as ordain them.
Have cause to fear their punishments. Especially if they do it rashly. Lay
hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins, 1. Tim. 5.
22. Neither be partaker of other men's sins.] He seems to bid him take heed of
this with abundance of caution, as if he meant more to affright him with
danger, then dissuade him from sin. To be partaker of other men's sins is a
thing as dangerous, as it is often committed, and seldom taken notice of.
Better sin thy self, then thus be partaker of other men's sin.

Ministers, their Due.
They that persecute them (for there is a prophecy there shall be such, Behold
I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves, Mat. 10. 16.) are punished
and threatened.
In the OLD TESTAMENT, 1 With making that member useless, which they used to
hurt them. Jeroboam's hand which he did but put forth, to lay hold of the
Prophet of Judah (for prophesying against his altar at Bethel viz. that it
should be rent; and the Priests offered upon it by Josiah: which was
accordingly fulfilled, 2. Kings 23. 14.
) was suddenly dried up, so that he could not draw it in again to him, 1
Kings 13. 3,

2 Being Beholding to them for their prayers: as in the same example. Entreat
now, (quoth Jeroboam to the Prophet) that my hand may be restored me again,
verse. 6. It is as great a punishment this: as it is vexation, viz. for a man to
have need of his enemy, whom he hates.

3 Blindness. The army, which Benhadad King of Syria sent to apprehend Elisha,
(for informing the King of Israel of his plots) was upon his prayer smitten
with blindness, and led by him even into Samaria, the chief city of their
enemies, where he made them believe they should find him, 2 King. 6. 19.
Blindnesse] the Septuagint translate (...), not-seeing: as if they had not lost
their sight, but their seeing: that is, their power to see for the present.
Wherein, me thinks, the hand of God does more notoriously appear, then in
making them quite blind. The miracle would be greater; for every one would
wonder more at it: and the punishment would be greater; for it would vex them
more: and punishments are aggravated by vexation, as much as by any thing. It
is a sadder punishment to take away the use of a thing; then to take away the
thing: and it is seldom inslicted, but in anger. It is a way of punishing, as
peculiar to God, and as severe, as any; to make men not to perceive, when they
see; and, not to understand, when they hear, Isa. 6. 9.

The word in the original (...)
is in the plural number, viz. Blindnesses: and Aben Ezra (a Jewish writer
upon the Bible) says, it is meant of two sorts of blindness, viz. of the
eyes, and the heart. And indeed, unless they had been blind both ways, (as it
is likely) they would not have been led in that manner, by a man, whom they did
not know, in their enemies country. The word is used likewise in Gen: 19. 11,
concerning the Sodomites. who, had they not been smitten with blindness in
another way, as well as in their eyes; would have been able to keep Lot's door,
when once they had found it, (as once they had.) But this is but conjecture.
This place of Genesis also, may not unfitly be brought into the chapter of the
Punishments of those who persecute God's Ministers; although the story be
concerning Angels. For if Ministers are not Angels, (so as we usually take the
word;) yet are they (...), or (...) (the words in Hebrew, and in Greek used to
signify Angels) i. e. Messengers; (to say nothing how we render it Angels in
the Revel.) and Angels themselves are (...) Heb. 1. 14.
(...), (not only (...), spirits, that are Ministers; but ministering spirits:
as if that were the end for, and the employment in which chiefly they are) sent
forth, (...) to minister FOR the^ which shall be heirs of salvation: as
Ministers are, to minister To them

4 Being persecuted themselves. The Prophet Micaiah threatened Zedekiah when he
had stricken him, that he should be made run from chamber to chamber to hide
himself, 1 Kings 22. 25. viz. being pursued by the Syrians. This is a very
great punishment, viz. to fly when a man's enemy pursues him. David's flying
three months before his enemies, while they pursued him, was ranked with seven
years famine, by God himself, 2 Samuel 24. 13. I make no doubt, but he, who is
pursued, is always in more torture of mind, (to say nothing, how he is
sometimes in more of the body too) then he who is taken. He fears more
things, for he fears every thing. And he fears his Enemy more, being more
afraid of not having quarter, then the other is of not being suffered to live.
The other has past a great part of what is to come with him. It is less pain
(I make no doubt) to be sure of hanging, then to be in suspense, whether he
shall or no: unless there be ground of hopes.

5 Death. 1 By sword and famine. For thus the men of Anathoth were threatened,
for co^spiring to kill the Prophet Jeremy; Behold I will punish them; the young
men sball die by the sword, their sonns and their daughters shall die by
famine, Jer: 11. 22. 2 By Fire. For so were two Captains with their Companies
of fifty (being sent one after the other, by Ahaziah King of Judah, to
apprehend Elisha, for prophesying his death) destroyed by fire from heaven, 2
Kings 1. 10, 11. In the Revelation it is said, of the two Prophets, And if any
man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and devoureth their
enemies, and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed, ch:
11. 5. And if any man will hurt them, etc. And if any man will hurt them] twice
the same words. Why, what? Is it such a matter to hurt them? It seems, it is;
for else it had not been repeated. and it is repeated, because it seems, the
holy Ghost, if any man did wonder and therefore ask the cause, why men should
be so severely punished for so small a matter; thought it sufficient
satisfaction only to repeat the offense. If any man will hurt them] If he do
his endeavor to hurt them, it is sufficient: though he have no success.

In the NEW TESTAMENT, the punishments mentioned are both Spiritual and
Corporal. Such as

1 Removal of the Gospel. For so our Savior threatened the Priests and
Elders, after he had told them the parable of the husbandmen, who killed their
Master's servants, whom he had sent to receive the fruits of his vineyard. The
kingdom of heaven shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof. Mat. 21. 43,

2 Requiring at their hands, the blood of the Ministers and Prophets that have
been persecuted heretofore, because they approve of what was done to them, (
for approving of a thing done, or to be done, is as bad as doing it:) which way
God is unquestionably just, in visiting the sins of the fathers upon the
children Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets and
Apostles, and some of them they shall slay, and persecute. That the blood of
all the Prophets which was shed from the foundation of the world may be
required of this generation, Luke 11. 49, 50.

3 Desolation of their houses: Thirdly, unless by house, you interpret the
house of God, viz: the Temple: which if you do, it will amount to a worse
threat, viz: the loss of God's public worship. for though in that sense, it
were no punishment to others, yet were it a very great one to unbelieving
Jews, who would so account it. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which were sent unto thee, (in love to do thee
good.) how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Behold your house is
left unto you desolate, Mat. 23. 37, 38. Desolation of their houses, etc. not
so much. or want of a dweller, as of a protector: for it is not said, your
house is left BY you, but To you, viz: by Christ; who because they refused to
come to him, resolved to be gone from them. at least, this is the first
desertion, whereupon the other followed not long after. Desolation of a house
is greatest, even when it is full; if God be away. After this interpretation,
the Dative case (...), to you, is either by way of aggravation, to intimate
their sad condition, when their house should be left to them alone, without God
to protect them: or by way of indignation, only to express the threat of
desertion, the more angrily As when we say, tuas res tibi habito. And as it is
said Luk 10. 11. (...), we wipe off To you, not AGAINST you) the dust, etc:
not in scorn but by way of renouncing.
; especially, if we understand it of the Temple; that, which they stood so much
upon. as if it had been said, Seeing you stand so much upon your Temple; your
Temple shall be even left unto you: and see, what will become of it, and, you,
when I am gone. In Jeremy you have some of the same na^ion thus speaking, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these,
chapter 7. 4. which seems to me, as if they had said, What do these Prophets
mean to threaten us with captivity, and desolation? Behold, have not we the
Temple of the Lord? and is not the Lord among us Mic: 3. 11.
? none evil can come upon us. We will never believe any such thing ca^ be,
that God should forsake his own Temple, and his own People. just as if we
should say, (as doubtless many do think, though they do not say it) Are not
we of the Church of England? have not we Gods ordinances amongst us? are we not
called by his name? are we not Christians? Doubtless, we are secure enough;
let these Calvinisticall Preachers, that preach nothing but damnation, say what
they will. but mark what follows in that chapter of Jeremy. in the 13 and 14
verses, you have both a complaint and a threat from God, very like to this of
our Savior: which I think not much to transcribe. And now because ye have
done all these works, says the Lord, and I spoke unto you, rising up early,
and speaking, but ye heard not, and I called you, but ye answered not:
therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye
trust, and to the place which I gave to you, and to your fathers, as I have
done to Shiloh. So you must interpret: unless you make the Dative case,
((...), to you) to be (...), superfluously used, as the manner is, for it to be
both in Hebrew, and in other languages: for the^ it is no more, the^ if it had
been said, your house is, (or, shall be) left desolate; or, your house is left
to be made desolate; or, so, as it shall become desolate.

4 Destruction of themselves. For hereunto those husbandmen in the parable
(formerly spoken of) were condemned, according to Luke ch: 20. 16. by our
Savior; but according to Matthew chapter 21. 41. by themselves, that is, the
Priests and Elders. So likewise in the parable of those, that murdered the
Kings servants, whom he lovingly sent to invite them, to his sons wedding, it
is said, The King sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and
burnt up their cities, Mat. 22. 7. See c. 23. 35. The Apostle Paul says of the
Jews (after he had spoken of their killing the Lord Jesus, and the Prophets,
and persecuting his Apostles) that wrath was come upon them to the utmost, 1 Thessalonians: 2. 15, 16. In which place however (I speak it with reverence) I think
the Greek were better translated, wrath is come TO AN END upon them. To an
end] I mean not of it is self, but of it is appointed time; at the end whereof,
it shall be kept in no longer, but break forth into About twenty years, after
these words were written, their city was de stroied by Titus: at such ^imeas
they were gathered thither to keep the Passover.
punishment. So that if you will make (...), to be as much as (...), (as some
do,) it must not be meant in perpetuum, for ever; which is the commonly
received signification of that Hebrew in which sense the Septuagint,
doubtless, rendered it (...), in Psalm. 9. 18.) but (...), unto victory, or
execution; according as that greek is rendered in Matt. 12. 20, He shall send
forth judgment into victory, that is, to execution.

This sense of the words (...); First it suits very well with those Hebrew
expressions (...) Dan. 11. 36. and (...) Ezekiel. 7. 8. rendered, till the
indignation be accomplished; I will accomplish mine anger. Which I conceive
(the last at least) to be spoken in that sense, as it is said, Jer. 25. 34, The
days of your dispersions are accomplished, (in the Hebrew, (...), filled:) as
if it had been said, The days, at the end whereof your dispersions shall
begin, are fully come. In the like manner, as it is said in the Greek, (...).
Act. 2. 1. When the day of Pentecost was accomplished; or, fulfilled: that is,
(as we render it) Fully come. So on the contrary, God is said to defer his
anger, when he continues indeed his anger, but deferres the execution of it,
Isay 48 9.

2 It suits very well, with what is spoken before in the same verse, of filling
up their sins: as if God had intended, when those should be filled up, that
then the time of their punishment should be fulfilled also; that being God's
appointed time. The Septuagint, who usually translate the Hebrew (...), (...),
translating it so in Jeremy 50. 39. and Isa. 13. 20. (where it is said of
Babylon, It shall never be inhabited) are there interpreted, not as we, (and
the Latin also, in the last place) translate: but as the Latin translates in
the first of those places, viz. usque in finem, until the end: i. e. till the
end of Gods appointed time, the decree whereof he will never revoke.

3 It suits very well with the word (...), which will signify, Come upon (as it
is here translated) that is, Come suddenly (for so we use that expression in
English) without the preposition (...) upon: and cannot be so properly said of
a thing in the extremity, or increase thereof; as in the Beginning. But enough
of this. I shall conclude this chapter of those that persecute Ministers, with
what I have to say of the certainty of their punishment: and that shall be.

1 Two expressions of Paul. One, to Ananias the High Priest, when he commanded
to smite him, viz: God shall smite thee thou whited wall, Act. 23. 3. God
shall] or God will certainly ere it be long; for he is about it already.
(...). Whether God did in proper speech smite him indeed viz: by Death: or
whether he did it another way, only by removing him from his place, is not
certain; but thus much we have read, it was not long after, that there was
Ishmael Phabi.
another put in his room. The other expression, is that concerning Alexander
the Coppersmith (who he says, did him much evil) viz: The Lord reward him
according to his works. 2. Tim. 4. 14. The Lord reward.] (...), some read: but
it is in a manuscript, (...), shall (or will) reward (as it is (...), for
(...), in 2. Tim. 2. 7.) and so the Syriack Interpreter and Augustine
translate. And I must confess, sometimes I think, that even so, as we read
viz: (...), it may be also rendered in a future signification (at lest in the
mind of the speaker, according to our english phrase) thus, The Lord MAY
reward him according to his works, if he do; and it is a hundred to one, (or
great chance) but he do. So in that place of Timothy but now quoted (where we
thus read the Greek, (...)) that we may render thus: Consider (or, mind) well
what I tell thee: for I make no question then, but God will give thee
understanding in all things.

2 A Prophecy of Jeremy, concerning his persecuters. But the Lord is with me as
a mighty terrible one, therefore my persecuters shall stumble, and they shall
not prevail; they shall be greatly ashamed, for they shall not prosper; their
everlasting confusion shall nevor be forgotten, Jer: 20. 11. I might instance
in a world of examples, especially of Kings, and great persons: but I am loath
to go beyond my bounds. And therefore I will only mention two or three, whose
Persecution is spoken of in the Scripture. 1 Jezabel (the wife of Ahab) who had
slain diverse Prophets, and would have also slain Elijah, 1 Kings 19. 14, was
thrown out at window by her servants, and trodden under foot by her enemies,
and eaten up by the dogs. 2 King 9. 36. according to Elijahs prophecy, 1 King
21. 13. 2. Herod Antipas who beheaded John the Baptist, Mat. 14. 10, was
banished into France, and there murdered, as he was a hunting Joseph. l. 18, c.
3.
. You may mark the end also, of Herod Agrippa, who imprisoned Peter, and
James: although his death be by Luke attributed to another cause, Act 12. 33.
The Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory; and he was
eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost. 3 Nero, who caused Paul to be put to
death, (he call's him the Lion 2 Timothy 4. 17) had been drawn through the city
and whipped to death, (according to the sentence of the Senate;) but that he
cut his own throat before. Lastly Domitian, (called also Nero by the people,)
who banished John the Evangelist into the Island Patmos Rev. 1. 9
; was conspired against and murdered by his own wife, (and some of his
friends:) and after his death both his name and all his Acts were eras'd and
abolished by the decree of the Senate. But what do I talk of persecuting by
offering violence, when as,

Such as Mock at them, are punished,
1 With Wrath unappeaseable. But they mocked the messengers of God, and
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord
arose against his people, till there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles 36. 17. Against his
people, etc.] whom he was loath to be so angry with, b^t being thus provoked,
he could not forbear.

2 Severe punishment, both on them, and theirs. The Jews, because the Prophets
had told them so many prophecies of God's judgments for their sins, and of
nothing else: and because they saw none of those prophecies yet fulfilled: at
length began to mock at them, when they met them; and to ask them in derision,
(because with those words, usually they began their prophecy, especially of
Gods Otherwise (...) translated by the Sept: Symm: and Theod. (...), may
signify any charge, or message, which they had received of God to carry to the
people.
judgments) What is the burden of the Lord; and their false Prophets and
Priests would do the like. But they are thus threatened by Jeremy, And as for
the Prophet and the Priests, and the people that shall say, the burden of the
Lord, I will even punish that man, and his house, Jer. 23. 34. So v. 36. Every
man's word shall be his burden] viz. either because God would burden them with
heavy judgments, for thus speaking: or because it should lie as a burden upon
their consciences hereafter, when those prophecies should be fulfilled, to have
thus derided them.

3 Reproach; for their reproach Jer. 6. 10. The word of the Lord is unto them a
reproach.
; And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon them, and a perpetual shame,
which shall not be forgotten, Jer. 23. 40. We all know the proof of this. The
very name of a Jew is (to use the Scripture language) a reproach and a byword,
and a curse, to this day See Jet. 44. 12.
. though I believe, these words are rather meant of their unhappiness, then of
their wickedness.

4 Violent death by wild beasts. As Elisha was going up to Bethel, There came
forth little children out of the city, and mocked him, and said unto him, Go
up thou bald head, Go up thou bald head. And he turned back, and looked on
them, and cursed them in the Sea the Chap: of Blasphemy
name of the Lord, and there came forth two she bears out of the wood, and
tare forty and two children of them, 2 Kings 2. 23, 24. Children] what must the
elder sort expect then? Some make this Allegory: ( which I mention, because
what is said, is not impertinent to the subject in hand) Christ a Crucifying,
was Elisha: the Jews mocking him, and saying, If thou be that Christ the Son
of God come down from the Cross, were the children: and Titus and Vespasian, (
who shortly after destroyed both them and their City) the two bears, ( though
in the masculin^ gender) because they were so fierce Of most boasts the she is
the fiercest: especially, when she bath young.
, that they had better have met with a bear robbed * of her whelps, then them.

Such as Despise them or slight them
Shall be punished as despisers of Christ himself. He that hears you,
hears me: and he that despises you despises me, Luke 10. 16. Just as Moses
told the Israelites Exodus 17. 2. Why chide you with me? wherefore do ye tempt
In Zach. 7. 13. For as he cried, the Chalde says, the Prophets prophesied
the Lord. And chapter 16. 7. he hears your murmurings against the Lord. For what
are we, that you murmr against us? Let them put it off, how they will, viz:
that they despise not God, but the men; their distinction will not serve. For
he that truly respects me, will respect any one that comes from me, for my
sake. Further

Such as Believe them not, have been punished and threatened
1 With violent death. That Lord, that would not believe Elisha (who, when
Samaria was besieged by the Syrians, even in the extremity of the famine,
prophesied, that the next day, a measure of fine flower should be sold for a
shekle, etc. was by him threatened, that he should see it indeed with his own
eyes, to his conviction; but he should but see it, to his grief; for he should
not eat of it. which fell out accordingly: for the next day, he was trodden to
death by the hungry greedy people, as they pressed out at the gate, to take the
spoil of their enemies camp, to satisfy their hunger, 2 Kings 7. 2. 17.

2 Being worse dealt with at the day of Judgment, then Sodom and Gomorrah:
and how bad is that like to be! Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your
words, when ye depart out of that house, or city, shake off the dust of your
feet. Verily, I say unto you it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah
in the day of judgment then for that city, Mat. 10, 14, 15. Further,

Such as will not suffer them to reap their carnal things. * 1. Cor. 9. 11.

One may conjecture, their Condition is not safe, by the strictness of the
charge given to the Israelites, concerning the Levites, Take heed to thy self,
(for thou will hurt thy self most,) that thou forsake not the Levite as long
as thou live upon the earth Deu. 12. 19 as long as thou live upon the
earth.] Come what will; poverty, or any condition: yet be sure to remember him:
and that as long a^ thou art upon the earth; though thou art led captive out of
thine own country. See the charge repeated Deuteronomy. 14. 27. after which it is
added verse. 29. That the Lord may bless themin all the work of thine hand
which thou do. Which seems to be spoken, as if otherwise, he would not in
this manner bless them. Nay further yet

Such as do not stand by them, in persecution
Have cause to to fear; as may be gathered by what Paul says of those, who
deserted him. At my first answer, no man stood with me, but all men forsook me,
I pray God, that it may not be laid to their charge, 2 Timothy 4. 16 See the chapter
of Not-helping the godly, at the end.

Ministry Such as Intrude upon the work thereof.
I know not how they can be secure from punishments; seeing under the Old
Testament, those who intruded upon the office of the Priest, were to be put to
death, by a law of God's own making, when he first consecrated Aaron and his
family thereunto. I have given your Priests office unto you as a sacrifice of
gift: and the stranger That is, he that is not of the seed of Aaron, chapter 16. 40.
that comes nigh shall be put to death, Number. 18 7 The Israelites had more
cause to grudge, that the Priesthood should be appropriated to a family only;
then we have, that the ministry should be confined to learning, and gifts, and
other necessary qualifications; and yet the stranger, (even to the family) that
comes nigh, shall be put to death. This law, when men could not execute it,
God did; and that in a fearful full manner. For as Dathan and Abiram, and all
that followed them, with all they had, were devoured by the earth, Number. 16.
verse. 32: So Korah, and his brethren, who sought the Priesthood (for meddling
with that fire which they had nothing to do with) were devoured by fire Yet
the Jews say, they were consumed, only in their inner parts; as they do say
of others, that suffered in this manner* and therefore (as in imitation of God)
when the Law prescribes, to have any one ^urnt to death, they power hot lead
into his mouth, and so kill him.
, verse. 35. Korah and his brethren were Levites of the same tribe with Aaron;
and yet this would not excuse them. What must men expect then, who are of
another tribe, if they encroach? If they plead necessity, viz: because there
is a defect of Ministers, or because the work of the Ministry is neglected, or
not performed in that manner, as it should be: yet will this reason hardly
suffice. For though there were no Priests present: and though the Arc sho^ke;
and though it were not carried as it ought to be, viz: upon men's shoulders:
yet it is said of Vzzah (the son of Abinadab, (who with his brother drove the
cart, wherein the Ark was carried) that when he laid hold on the Ark. The anger
of the Lord was kindled against Vzzah, and God smote him there for his error,
and there he died by the Ark of the Lord* 2 Samuel: 6. 7. For his errour] or,
because of his error; for so the Hebrew ((...)) me thinks, seems to signify
clear enough; and not only, upon. And that this error was his laying hold of
the Arc, me thinks the Holy Ghost seems to intimate; having mentioned that
action of his, immediately before his punishment; which also had not been
otherwise a passage so much worth a relating, (to say nothing that the Hebrew
may as well be translated this error, as his error: having an article before
it; which may be demonstrative (...) notitiae.
, as well as not.) And yet because it is said only, error; and not, his
error. or because the Vulgar translation (out of too much superstition,
keeping closer to the words (...)
of the Septuagint, then the sense) renders only super temeritate, and not,
propter temeritatem, upon, and not for his rashness; (and yet perhaps
intending it, for, because; As in Amos 1 and 2. Super tribus sceleribus.
) you will not think, what a company of different conjectures there are, of
other causes of this punishment: as if God had been unjust in thus punishing
him, but only for this small fault (as they suppose) of touching the Arc.
when as you may read in Numbers chapter 4, 15. that the Kohathites themselves,
whose place was so were the Arc as to bear it; were notwithstanding forbidden
to touch the Arc, upon pain of Death. Besides, as to the Septuagint, their
translation; it is well enough known, that the preposition (...) therein used,
is often put with a Dative case, to signify, because* and of all it is
significations besides (of which it has diverse) there can be hardly any other
given in this place with any propriety, neither do I remember when it is used
for, super, in the sense as super is used with an ablative case. If you will
needs translate UPON his rashness, I shall give consent, so you take it, as it
is said, Luke 5. 5. (...), UPON this word will I put down the net. But enough.
If it might have been safe, for any one, to meddle with the office of the
Priest: it is likely it might be for the King, (whose office, and the office of
Priesthood, were many times joined together among some people.) But yet it was
not. For Vzziah King of Judah, for but offering to burn incense upon the
Altar, (for he did not do it, because the Priests withstood him) was suddenly
struck with Leprosy in his forhead, and continued a Leper to his dying day, 2
Chr. 26. 19. Josephus says, there was also an Earthquake at that time, (as
there was at that time, when Korah committed the like sin:) and that the
Temple being therewith rent at the top, the Sun shone in directly upon the
Kings head: whereupon the Leprosy presently arose. Hierom Cyrill, Origin, and
Chrysostom (upon Isaiah chapter 6. 1.) say, there was another greater punishment
inflicted by God for this sin, verse. 12. not suffering them to have any more
prophecies after that time as long as Vzziah lived. There is in my mind yet
one place of Scripture more, whence a man may well conjecture, how likely such
men are to be punished; and that is Exodus 30. 38. where it is said, that
whosoever should but make the like ointment, as Moses made to be used about the
Tabernacle, should be cut off from his people: which I produce, only to show,
how curious God was of any thing that belonged to his sanctuary, to preserve
the propriety of it: and how careful, not to have it made common, and vile.

If God do not punish them for their sin; yet I doubt he will ha^dly bless
them in their practice, for only Aarons rod did blossom, Number: 17. 8.

Bad Ministers, threatened for a punishment.
To some there seems to be a threat of bad Prophets ( or Ministers) in Micah.
chap. 2. 11. If any man walking in the spirit and falsehood, do lie, saying, I
will prophecy unto them of wine, and of strong drink; he shall even be the
Prophet of this people. The paraphrast upon this place thus speaks, Because
they have wandered after false Prophets who prophesied to them with a lying
spirit, and accustomed them to wine and strong drink; it shall be, that the
people of this generation, as they are wandered after false Prophets ( in a
place where they had such as were true) shall be banished into a land of lies (
where they shall have no true Prophets, if they would)

I will raise up a shepherd in the land, which shall not visit those that be
cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor heal that that is broken, nor
feed that that stands still, but he shall eat the flesh of the fat and tear
their claws in pieces Zach. 11. 16. Hierom expounds this of Antichrist:
Grotius, of Manasses, who marrying with Sanballats Neh. 13. 28.
daughter, made himself high priest (against his brother,) and built another
Temple upon mount Garizim: whither he made the Jews go ^ong journeyes, so
that they tare their claws, and wore out their feet with going. Deiodate
applies this place to Governors. See Kings and Governors.

Mirth (i. e. worldly Mirth) punished
1 With Non satisfaction. I said in my heart go to now, I will prove thee with
Mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure: and behold this is also vanity. Eccles 2, 1.

2 Sorrow AFTER it. Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and weep,
Luke 6. 25. Hell has enlarged her self etc. and he that rejoices shall
descend into it. Isa. 5. 14. I believe, worldly men may say almost of all their
sorrow, (being the attendant either of sinful Acts, or of vain enjoyments,
wherewith they made themselves merry) Gaudia Principium nostri sunt, Phoce,
doloris, that, joys were the beginning of it As it is said, that worldly sorrow
works death; and it proves true many times, of the death of the body: so I
have read of Joy too, that being too violent, it has caused death. Pliny
says, Sophocles the Tragedian died Accept^ tragicae victoriae nuntio l. 7 not.
hist. c. 29.
so and Plutarch Policrate for having betrayed a castle to he countrymen Plut
de mul. virtut.
speaks of a woman that died so. Nay*

3 Sorrow IN it. Even IN laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that
mirth is heaviness, Prove. 14. 13. especially when men are merry in sinful
things; and in a way, which only seems right unto them, (verse. 12.) Quid,
quod gaudia eorum trepida sunt? * Sen. De vit. brev. c* 17.
For why? Their joys are fearful (and full of fear.) As the Poet Ovid: Met:
l. 1^, fab. 9. de Myrtha.
said of her, that went to commit incest with her brother, Non toto pectore
sentit Loetitiam virgo, praesagaque pectora moerent: So their own hearts tell
them, that they have no cause to be merry, now; and that they shall have cause,
to be sad, hereafter. I may hereunto add, (that which is commonly observed of
this mirth) that it is many times attended with sad and unhappy accidents. And
the rather, because of two examples, which I remember related in the S^ripture*
one is of Amnon ( David's son) who in the midst of his mirth, at the
Sheepshearing-feast (to which his brother Absalom had invited him;) when his
heart was merry with wine, was by his brother Absalom's servants, at their
master*s command, most treacherously murdered, 2 Samuel 13. 28. The other is
Job's children, who (in the midst of their jollity,) as they were eating and
drinking wine in their eldest brothers house, were all miserably killed by the
fall of the house, Job 1. 18, 19.

Mockers of the Godly, punished and threatened
1 With Being conquered by them. Thus the Ephraimites were conquered by the
Gileadites, because (as the text says) they said (in derision) Ye Gileadites
are fugitives to Ephraim, among the Ephraemites, and among the Manassites, Jud.
12. 4. this jeere cost them the lives of two and forty thousand men, verse. 6.
And the Ammonites by David. for Hanun their King, having abused his
Ambassadors (whom he sent in a friendly way, to comfort him after the death of
his father,) by cutting their beards half way off* and their garments up to
their buttocks; and so turning them along, 2 Samuel 10. 4. when Abishai was sent
to fight with them, they fled before him, verse. 14. and were afterward, (upon
the taking of their royal city Rabbah chap. 12, 29) for cutting other men's
beards, and clothes, made to suffer the cutting of their own bodies with
sawes, and harrowes and axes of iron; and to pass thorough Vulg. traduxit in
typo laterum: by which is meant, cutting them and chopping them, either in the
place where they made brick, or after the manner that they chopped that stuff,
of which they made it.
the brick kilne, v. 31. By Mocking their enemies, (then which nothing is more
provoking,) men do but whet their courage with anger: and so make them fight
more desperately; not regarding their lives, so they may be revenged. You have
an example hereof in the Jebusites. For (as the more For some expound those
blind and lame, the Images of their ^tutelary gods: and some otherwise.
received interpretation of that place will have it in contempt of David's
weakness, (when he besieged them at Jerusalem) they placed blind men, and
lame men in the fort, to defend i; and in a mockery told him, Except thou take
away the blind and the lame, thou shall not come in hither, 2 Samuel 5. 6. But
David herewith was so enraged It is said, v. 8. The lame and the blind, that
are HATED OF DAVID'S SOVLE. Scorn angers the very Soul of a man, Our SOVLE is
exceedingly filled with the scorn of those that are at ease, Ps. 123. 4. The
word for, are at ease, is (...) The Septuagint render it (...) here; but in
Amos, chapter 6. 1. (...). So that, for woe unto them that ARE AT EASE, according
to their translation, it should be, woe be unto them that SCORN.
, and his soldiers made so desperate; that they presently fell on, and took
the fort the same day, verse. 7. 8. Another example you have in the Philistines,
who having gotten Sampson into the temple of Dagon, to make sport of him; were
killed thousands of them by the fall of the house, when Sampson had pulled away
the pillars, Judge. 16. 25. 30.

2. Barrenness of womb. Thus was Michal (David's wise) punished for jeering at
her husband, when she saw him dancing before the Ark, with a linen Ephod about
him: as if he had done a thing unbeseeming the state of a King, (as indee^ most
godly, and virtuous actions, seem either absurd, or ridiculous, or
disgraceful, to ungodly men) Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no
child unto the day of her death, 2 Samuel 6. 23. The daughter of Saul] as if she
were no longer worthy, to be called the wife of King David: and accordingly
some say Pineda l. 7 de reb. Salom. c. 4.
, that David never after that time used her as his wife. Had no child] For
those five sons spoken of chapter 21. 8. which ou^ Hebrew says she brought forth;
she only brought up, and adopted them for her own. And therefore our English
renders, brought up. And the Chaldee Paraphrase (me thinks very well) thus
says upon that place, the five sons (viz: of Merob) which Michal the
daughter of Saul brought up.

3 God's Hearing the prayer of the godly against them. I am as one mocked of
his neighbor, who called upon God and he answered him, Job. 12, 4.

4. God's not pardoning them: at least, as to this worlds punishment, (if not
also that which is to come) For when Sanballat and Tobiah jeered the Jews, (
as they were building the new wall at Jerusalem:) Sanballat thus, What do
these feeble Jews? Will they fortify themselves? Will they sacrifice? Will
they make an end in a day? W^ll they revive the stones out of the heaps of
rubbish which are burnt Neh. 4. 2. Tobiah thus Tobiah jeered in that manner as
Rhemus did his brother Romulus (when he built the wall at Rome) by leaping over
it, whose ieer cost him his life.
, Even that which they build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their
stone wall, verse 3: Nehemiah prayed to this purpose against them. If his prayer
were not prophetical ( as most such men's prayers in Scripture are) yet it was
the fervent prayer of a righteous man* and that we know, avails much Jam. 5.
16
; especially at such a time, as he is mocked: for then (as (...) said in the
former punishment) he calls on God, and he answers him. Nehemi^ words were
these. Hear, O our God, for^ are despised; and turn their reproach upon the
own head, and give them for a prey in the (...) of captivity, and cover not
their iniquity, (...) let not their sin be blotted out from before (...) for
they have provoked Vulgar Translat: irriserunt aedificantes* they MOCKED the
builders.
thee to anger bef^^ the builders, Neh. 4. 4.

The men of the world, who so often commit this sin, and make use of it to
man themselves and others merry, think b^ slightly of it; because it steals
no goods, (...) makes no scarre in the flesh, and does a (...) no visible hurt.
But doubtless, it is not slightly accounted of by God; and he w^ severely
punish it. In the Epistle to the Hebrews ch: 11. mockings are put in the
Catalogue of the Saints persecutions; and joyn^ with scourgings, verse. 36. and
justly aggrav^ted by our translation (for it is not in the original) with the
epithete, Cruel. Other had trial of cruel mockings, and scourges. In the
Epistle to the Galatians, it is said that Ishmael persecuted Isaac; and
therefore w^ cast out. ch: 4. 29. and yet in Genesis, we rea^ of nothing but
mocking, chap. 21. 9. I wi^ conclude with one punishment more, an^ that no
small one (which, though I have (...) ^ut of the Apocrypha, yet I believe for
truth) and that is the vexation and sorrow, which ^ey shall have hereafter,
when they shall ^e those whom they despised, in honor with God. And they
repenting, and groaning for ^^nguish of spirit shall say within themselves,
This was he whom we had sometime in derision, and a proverb of reproach. We
fools accoun^ed his life madness, and his end to be without honor, etc.
Wisd* 5. 3, 4, 5, 6.

Mockers at those that denounce God's Judgments, threatened
With the aggravating of those judgments. Now therefore be ye not mockers,
lest your bands be made strong Validiora fiant, says Vatablus.
, Isa 28. 22.

Mockers at those that suffer them
With, Being mocked in the same manner. Moab also shall wallow in his vomit,
and he shall also be in derision. For was not Israel a derision unto thee?
Jer. 48. 26, 27. And not only the Moabites; but the rest of the Heathen, for
mocking at the Jews in their calamity, Ezekiel. 36. 3. were thus threatened,
Because ye have borne the shame of the Heathen, therefore thus says the Lord
God, I have lifted up mine hand, surely the Heathen that are about you, they
shall bear their shame, verse. 6. 7. Bear their SHAME] better so, then
ignominy, which will signify both actively and passively; whereas shame will
not. F^ though these words may seem to signifi^ (according to the use of the
word, bea^^ in other places, as when it is said, bear the iniquity, etc. and
likewise the use of the Hebrew word for, shame, in the verse next before) that
the heathen should certainly r^ it, for reproaching God's people ( luerent
co^tumeliam suam:) yet I rather think, tha^ which is mainly intimated in this
place, to be retaliation in God's punishing of them that is, giving them like
for like, or the sam^ that they gave others. For in the first sense, they might
bear their ignominy, that is, that wherewith they reproached others, by
another way, as well as by suffering ignomin^ again: for he that is punished
for a sin, may be said to bear it, though his punishment have no resemblance
with his sin. An^ this I say the rather, because the word for Shame (...) not
(...)
, or Reproach, with the pronoun^ affixed, is seldom or never used actively (as
it is passively, chapter 15. 54. Psalm. 44. 15, and Ps. 69. 20, etc.) and
especially, because there is a separate pronoune also put on purpose, for (...)
they; as if it were thus spoken* THEY who have reproached others, eve^ THEY,
for all their confidence and prid^ shall be reproached THEMSELVES, and shall
bear THEIR shame also, as the Israelites have borne THEIRS. To say nothing how
affixed possessive pronounes are many times superfluously added in such
expressions, according to the manner of other languages. We say in English, he
shall have, or ( he shall bear) HIS punishment: and that with a kind of
Elegancie; as in Galat. 5. 6. where it is in the Greek only, he shall bear
(...)
judgment, we translate, he shall bear his Judgment.

Murderers shall be certainly punished
For, thus God threatens him, that should kill Cain, (though he had murdered
his brother, and was therefore cursed by God.) Whosoever slays Cain,
vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. Genesis 4. 15. If you translate (with
Symmachus) Omnis qui occiderit Cain, Septimus ulsciscetur; and interpret (with
Hierom Ep. 125. ad Damasum.
) Whosoever shall kill Cain, the seventh (i. e. a man of the seventh
generation) shall execute vengeance for his murder: it will make more for our
purpose, for he says, it was the opinion of the ancient, that Cain, for an
example, was suffered to live till the seventh generation, and then slain by
Lamech But I suppose, taking vengeance (...) seven times (or sevenfold) is only
an expression, to set forth abundance of severity in revenging: as to forgive a
man till he has sinned against him seventy times seven, is only to express
endlesnesse of mercy in forgiving: viz. without any curious respect to a
certain number of times The barbarous people of Malta (and such they were
indeed, not for inhumanity, but ignorance) when they saw a viper leap out of
the fire upon Paul's hand, as if they thought no sin could have drawn such a
punishment upon him sooner then murder, presently said, No^ doubt this man is a
murderer, whom though he has escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffers not to
live, Act. 28. 4. Suffers not] or, has not suffered so the Original (...).
; and so Beza renders. as if they made it sure, he would presently die for it:
and as it is said, they did, verse. 6.

They are punished in their Persons,
First with a Curse, executed, as it were by the Earth it self in revenge, for
defiling Number. ^5. 33.
it with blood. thus Cain was punished. And now thou art cursed from the earth,
which has opened her mouth to receive thy brothers blood from thy hand. When
thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength A
fugitive and a Vagabond shall thou be in the earth, Genesis 4. 11. 12. Just. lib.
13. c. 5.
Alexander, when he returned from the Indians, sent letters through Greece to
give liberty to all banished men, to return to their homes, excepting only
such as had been so punished for murder.

2 God's hatred, The Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man. Ps. 5. 6
the bloudy] Chald. pa: the shedder of innocent blood: according to the Heb:
(...) the man of bloods: For when the word in Hebrew for blood, is in the
plural number, it is usually meant of unlawful putting to death. And the
reason may be, (if my judgment fail not) because the blood of any one man
cannot be unlawfully shed, Number. 35. 33:
but the blood of another also must and will be shed for it, sooner or later:
so that every murderer is a shedder of bloods. Whereas, if a Magistrate cause a
man to be put to death according to law, only one man's blood (and scarce that,
I mean in the Scripture language,) for the most part is shed, and we hear no
more of it.

3 God's not hearing their prayers. And when ye spread forth your hands (your
bloody hands) I will hide mine eyes: yea though ye make many prayers, I will
not hear, your hands are full of blood, Isa 1. 15. Of bloud*] for though, I
confess, by this word are usually expressed other sins, besides Murder: yet
I believe it is chiefly meant of wrongful condemning men to death, which I
make no question, is a breach of that Commandment, Thou shall do no Murder.
And that the greatness of those sins is set forth by this expression (as the
fittest for aggravation) it makes much the more for the aggravating of this
sin.

God's not pardoning their sin. For though there had been three Kings in
Judah, since Manasseh's time: yet it is said in the second book of Kings chapter
24. v. 4. (speaking of the misery that befell the Jews for Manasseh's sins.)
And also for the innocent blood, that he shed ( for he filled Jerusalem with
innocent blood) which the Lord would not pardon.

5 Shortness of life. ( If they escape a violent death.) Bloody and deceitful
men shall not live out half their days, Ps: 55. 23.

6 Violent death.

Before the Law, threatened or prescribed. Who so sheddeth man's blood Or, His
blood shall be shed, ( that is certainly shed, one way or other: sooner, or
later.) So says the Vulgar, making Haadam to be the Nominative case, and
Baadam to look backward, translating, Quisquis effuderit sanguinem humanum,
fundetur sanguis illius.
, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God made he man, Genesis 9.
6. So that he destroys not merely a man: as he that breaks in pieces the
statue of a Prince, does not only break the wood, or the stone. It was either
the death of Esau, or little better, which Rebeccah feared, when she bid Jacob
fly from him, adding this reason, Why should I be deprived of you both in one
day? Genesis 27. 45.

Under the Law, prescribed. He that kills any man shall surely be put to
death, Lev. 24 17 repeated, v. 21. A Law that admitted of no composition, or
satisfaction. The land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but
by the blood of him that shed it Number. 35. 33.


Under the Gospel, threatened: For our Savior told one of his company, (who
had cut off the care of a servant of the High-priest's, that came to apprehend
him,) Put up thy sword again into his place; for all that take the sword,
shall perish with the sword, Mat. 26. 52. you have almost the same words in
Rev. 13. 10.

They that take the sword] though persecuted, yea, though Christ and his
Gospel, be persecuted, they may not take such (...) they that take; that is,
usurp, says Beza. In Parricidio n^lla satis justa causa ad sceleris
patrocinia praetexi potest, Justin. l. 16. c. 1.
arms to themselves, no more then a man could take a the Priesthood to
himself; that is, unless they are called of God. Even in Tertullian's time,
when the Christians had far less reason (there were so many of them) to fear
perishing with the sword if they took it, then they had when Christ spoke
those words, yet he says, they durst not do it. Cui bello (says he) non
idonei, non prompti fuissemus etiam impares copiis, qui tam libenter
trucidamur; si non apud istam disciplinam magis occidi liceret, quam ^^cidere?

Examples of violent death executed upon murderers, either by the Magistrate,
or by God, by the hands of themselves or others, the Scripture affords many. I
will produce some of the more noted. As 1 Zeba and Zalmunna, Kings of Midian.
Being taken by Gideon in fight, they were by him afterward put to death in cold
blood, for murdering his brethren, Jud: 8. 19. 21. 2 Abimelech, with the help
of the Shechemites had murdered seventy of his own brethren, Jud. 9. 5. But
(according to Jothams parable. v. 7) when the Shechemites rebelled, a fire came
first out of this bramble and devoured them, verse. 45. and after that fire came
out of them, and devoured the bramble, verse. 53. For as Abimelech was besieging
the tower at Thebez; a woman threw down a piece of a millstone He that kill his
brethren upon a stone, was alm^st killed himself under a stone.
upon his head, and brake his scull whereupon, lest it should be said, he was
slain by a woman, he caused his armor bearer to run him through, and so died,
ibid. 3. Agag king of the Amalekites. For having made women childlesse, Samuel
hewed him in pieces, after he had taken him, in cold blood, 1 Samuel: 15. 33, and
Saul lost his kingdom for sparing him, verse. 33. 4. Rechab and Banah, two of
king Ishbosheths captains. They murdered their master in his bed, and carried
his head to king David, 2 Samuel 4. 7. But so far was he from commending them
for what they did: that, although he, whom they had murdered, was his
competitour in the kingdom, yet he caused them presently to be put to death;
and cut off their hands, and their feet; and hung them up for a terror, 2 Samuel
4. 12. 5 Zimri, captain to Elah king of Israel. He murdered his master, and
made himself king* but being afterward besieged in Tirzah by Omri, (who^ the
people erected in his place,) he set his house on fire over him, and so died, 1
Kings 16. 10, 18. This example, Jezabel used, to fright Jehu with all 2 Kings
9. 31. 6 Ahab king of Israel. He caused Naboth, upon false witness of
blasphemy, to be stoned to death, that he might get his possessions, 1 Kings
21. 2, 3. But he he was afterward, in a fight with the King of Syria, wounded
in his chariot; and died of the wound c. 22. 37. Now his blood run^ning out in
the chariot; when the chariot came home, it came to pass according to that
which Elijah the Prophet threatened him, chapter 21. 19. viz: In the place where
dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood event hine. 7
Shallum king of Israel. He ^urdered Zachariah king of Israel, and was murdered
by Menahem; who came in his place. 2 kings 15. 10 14. 8 Pekah. He made
himself king of Israel, by the murder of Pekahiah; and was afterward murdered
by Hoshea, who came in his place, 2, Kin. 15. 25. 30* 9 The servants of Amon
King of Judah. They murdered him in his house; and were all of them afterward
put to death by the people: who made Josiah king in his steed, 2 Kings 21. 24,
10 Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah. Having made her self Queen of Judah by the
murder of all the seed royal except Joash (whom Jehosheba hid. 2 Kings 11. 2)
she was afterward slain at the command of Jehoiada, v. 16. 11 Joash King of
Judah. He caused Zachariah the son of Jeho^ada to be stoned to death, and was
afterward murdered by his own servants. 2 Chr. 24. 24. 12 Those servants but
now mentioned, they were put to death by Joash his son Amaziah, who reigned
after him, chapter 5. 3.

7 The last punishment of murderers, which they s^ffer in their persons, is
Hell. for he, whom John saw sitting upon the throne, has said it himself,
that murderers shall have their part in the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev: 21. 8.

They are punished in their Countries.
1 With Famine. There was three years famine in Israel, for Saul's murdering
the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21. 1.

2 Conquest and destruction by enemies. Such as befell the Jews, upon the
rebellion of Jehoiakim. Surely, at the command of the Lord, came this upon
Judah; to remove them out of his sight: for the sins of Manasseh, according
to all that he did; and also for the innocent blood which he shed, for he
filled Jerusalem with innocent blood which the Lord would not pardon, 2 Kings
24. 3, 4.

They are punished in their Posterity.
By Death, or some other great calamity: as you may see 1 In Joab, according to
David's threat to him. For, when Joab had trecherously murdered Abner (who came
over to him) by taking him aside to speak with him, thus he spoke, I, and my
kingdom are guiltles before the Lord for ever from the blood of Abner the
son of Ner, let it rest on the head of Joab, and on all his fathers house,
and let there not fail from the house of Joab, one that has an issue, or that
is a leper, or that leans on a staff; or that falls on the sword, or that
lacks bread, 2 Samuel 3. 28, 29. See also Solomon's threat concerning him, 1
Kings 2. 33. after which, it is said also, that he himself was slain by
Benaiah, at the command of Solomon, even when he hung upon the altar. 1 Kings
2. 28. to 34. For God will not be a refuge for murderers: neither were the
cities of refuge appointed for them, Deuteronomy. 19. 11: 2 In David, (for the murder
of Vriah,) according to Nathans threat, Now therefore the sword shall never
depart from thine house: because thou shast despised me, and have taken the
wife of Vriah the Hittite to be thy wife, 2 Samuel: 12. 10. 3 In Saul (for
murdering the Gibeonites) For when the Gibeonites were asked by David, what
satisfaction they desired: they demanded seven of Saul's sons; and hung them
all up with his consent, 2 Samuel: 21 9 4 In Ahab, for murdering Naboth. For Joram
his son King of Israel, was by Jehu* (who was already anointed king in his
stead) shot to death with an arrow, as he sat in in his chariot, 2 Kings 9.
24. See what he says, when he had killed him, v. 25 26 It was not long after,
ere Jehu put to death all the rest of his family; causing the heads of
seventie of his sons, to be brought to him at one time, to Jezreel in
baskets, c 10. 7. Thus you see how loud, and how long, blood cries: and how
deeply it staineth; so that nothing but blood will fetch it out again*
especially if it be in a place, where the true religion is professed: for then
the punishment will be, as to one, that has defiled God's dwelling: which must
needs anger him exceedingly, Number: 35, 33, 34. So ye shall not pollute the
land, wherein ye are: for blood it defiles the land; and the land cannot be
cleansed of the blood, that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed
it. DEFILE not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit wherein I DWELL: for
I the Lord DWELL among the children of Israel.

The Odiousness of this sin, and how certain it is to be punished, may be
further gathered out of the Scriptures thus,

1 By the strictness of God's requiring the blood shed (as if it were a thing
more his own, then other things) even at the hand of a beast, that has
neither hand, nor reason, Genesis 9. 5. For if a beast killed a man, yea, though
it were an Ox (the most useful beast of any,) it was to be stoned to death:
and none of his flesh was to be eaten, Exodus 21. 28.

2 By the strictness of God's inquiring after it. I do not read of his making
inquisition, for any thing but this: and for this he allows times of purpose,
as if it were a business, which he constantly does, and which he will not by
any means omit. When he makes inquisition for bloods, be remembers them.
Ps. 9. 12. No wonder then, there are such strange discoveries of murder, so
deeply concealed, so long ago committed. Sithence he, who is the searcher even
of hearts, makes inquest for it: and shall not he search Ps. 44. 21,
it out? See Isai 26. 21. I might produce many examples of such discoveries, if
it were not beyond my bounds.

3 By the strictness of the Enquiry, which he prescribed to the Elders of the
Israelites, when they found a man slain, and it was not known, who killed
him. As likewise by the form of prayer given them, wherein they wereto desire
God, not to lay even such a man's blood to their charge, Deuteronomy. 21. 1.

4 By David's charge to Solomon concerning Joab, for murdering Abner and Amasa
Whom he murdered most treacherously embracing ^he^ so closly that their blood
came out upon his girdle, and his shoes, v. 5.
: Let not his hoary head go down to the grave in peace, 1 Kings 2. 5.

5 By the punishment, which the Shechemites suffered, for helping. Abimelech in
the murder of his brethren: viz: the slaughter of themselves; and the utter
ruin of their city, by the hand of Abimelech himself. Then God sent an evil
spirit between Abimelech, and the men of Shechem, and the men of Shechem dealt
treacherously with Abimelech. That the cruelty done to the threescore and ten
sons of Jerubaal might come, and their blood come upon Abimelech their Brother
which slew them, and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in Killing of his
brethren, Judge. 9. 23, 24.

6 Lastly, by what is said of the importunate cries of such, as have been
murdered: which are sure to be heard; Rev: 6. 10. How long, O Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge, and avenge our blood, on them that dwell on the
earth?

What ever thou do, let the life of a man be precious in thy sight. If thou
have the invitation of an opportunity to Save it: as thou hate blood, do it.
For there are but two ways, To Save life, or to Kill Mark: 3. 4. If thou have
the provocation of an injury to destroy it; as thou love life, do it not.
For if thou have not hated blood, even blood shall pursue thee, Ezekiel: 35. 6.
Take heed of a bloody hard heart. How many Murderers, are there, that never
lifted up their hand to hurt a man?

Oaths
Such as do not keep them, or take them fasly, threatened
With Certain punishment. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltles, that takes his name in vain,
Exodus 20; 7. Name.] What an account does the meanest of us make of his name? and
how tender are we of it, and how do we listen, when we hear another mention
it? Thy God] thou would be wary, of using the name of thy King; or thy
Master; or thy Father; in their hearing: and why not of thy God who hears at
all times, and places; and is then most quick of hearing, when his name is
used. In vaine] or, for a Lie. For that the word (...)
in Hebrew for, vain, will signify, and is so used, and that when the meaning
is only of assertion, and not of promise. For whereas in this chapter verse. 16,
the word for false witness, is (...); in Deuteronomy: c. 20. it is (...). I know,
they usually say, that these words are cheifely meant of promissory oaths,
because of our Saviors words, Mat. 5. 33. speaking only of the forbidding of
(...), that is, forswearing: And (as if this word were properly meant of doing
or not doing after an oath to the contrary, whereby a man does, as I may say,
unsweare I take forswear, to be aword like, for fit, which is properly mean of
undoing, or, making void a thing in force before there are diverse words like
it, as forbid, forwarne, forget.
himself, or make his swearing null and void; and not of doing or speaking
first, and then adding an oath (...), upon it or for it;) adding, But shall
perform unto the the Lord thine oaths. But as for the words of our Savior; I
conceive, he relates the commandment, as the Scribes and Pharisees related it,
and according to their gloss: and not that he knew no such words as those,
which I first produced: or that he thought, the meaning of them extended no
further, then is expressed in these. And as for these words which I have
quoted; in the original, one might think, they sound clean contrary viz:
rather for an assertory falsity, then a promissory, both because of the word
translated, in vain, signifying more properly, FOR, or, TO vain, (as it is in
Leviticus 19. 12. He shall not swear by my name, (...) for a Lie,) as if it
were said, thou shall not use the name of the Lord thy God to (or for) the
confirmation of a falsehood, and because of the word Taking. For in promissory
perjury men may, and usually do, take God's name not in vain: i. e. they have
a resolution when they take it, to keep their oaths, though they break them
afterward. hold him guiltlesse] or, let him go unpunished, for so much the
Hebrew (...)
will signify; and so it is used, and translated. Jer. 30. 11, and c. 46. 28.
And, me thinks, both in this, and other threats against this sin, there
seems to be insinuated, that God may, and many times does let such men alone
for a while: ( Tibull. There is a proverb, Sero Jupiter diphtheram inspexit.
Aquil: and Theod. in Zach. 5. 2. where we read of a roll against false
swearers, translate it (...).
Et St quis primo perjuria celat, sera tamen tacitis poena venit pedibus:) but
that notwithstanding he does not hold them guiltless, but will certainly
punish them one time or other. Nay I may add, I will not hold him guiltless,
that is, I will most severely punish him. for that is a common Hebraisme in the
Scriptures, by a (...), or, extenuation in the negative, to intend the positive
in the highest degree.

Oaths (and Covenants) Such as do not Keep them, Threatened
With Certain and unavoidable punishment. And thus I speak, because in most
of the threats against this sin, there is an expression of the certainty, and
of Gods resolution also, not to change his mind. As first, in that concerning
Zedekiah, for breaking his Oath of subjection, even to the King of Babylon:
Shall he break the covenant, and be delivered? ( It cannot be.) Ezekiel. 17. 15.
the Septuagint translate without an Interrogation) (...)) i. e. IF he shall
escape (or be delivered) after the manner of swearing used in Scripture: as if
God had sworn, that he should not. and so indeed he did afterward: and you
have his oath twice related, viz. v. 16. and verse. 19. and in verse. 16. with
notable aggravations, both of his sin, and his punishment: As I live, says the
Lord God, surely in the place where the King dwells that made him king, whose
oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him, in the midst of
Babylon he shall die. The Chal. P. in those verses; for, breaking the Covenant,
translates, changing the Covenant: and so Zedekiah did, in revolting from the
Assyrian, to the Egyptian. Now a man has the greater cause to fear God's
punishment, when he does not only not do what he promised; but do, and
promise to do the contrary. 2 In that threat, to the people of Tire, for
breaking the Oath of friendship, which Hiram their King had made with Solomon
Kings 5. 12.
, in selling the Jews Those whom they took in fight, Theodor those that fled
to them for shelter from the Assyriinvaders, Vatabl: Those that come to them
for wares, Arias.
for bondslaves to the Edomites: who were their inveterate enemies, and would
use them cruelly. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Tyrus, and
for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they delivered
up the whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not the brotherly Covenant, Amos
1. 9. This punishment was the destruction of that city by Nebuchadnezar, which
accordingly came to pass, after a siege of 30 years, so that, (as I said in
the former chapter) their punishment for breaking Covenant, was long a coming,
* Ezekiel. 29. 18.
yet came at last.

3 Severe punishment, and many judgments. They have spoken words, swearing
falsely in making a Covenant: thus, ( or therefore) judgment springs up as
hemlocke in the furrows of the field, Hos. 10. 4. The Chaldee Paraphrase
runs thus; They swear falsely, and they make a Covenant in vain. Now will I
bring against them the heads of noisome serpents, as a judgment for their
lies, upon the borders of their Country And they that thus take this place,
interpret those words, Springs up as hemlocke, etc. of the great number of
God's judgments, which should come as thick as hemlock in a furrowed or tilled
field. which me thinks seems better then to interpret judgment, of judgment
among men i. e. justice: making it not a threat, but a complaint, viz: that
judgment was so corrupted, that it became as hateful to the people, when they
had occasion to use it, as hemlock is to the palate.

3 The like hurt, as they intended, or must necessarily do to others by their
perjury. Thus Zedekiah is threatened in the place above cited, As I live, surely
(what expressions here are to make it certain) mine oath that he has
despised, and my covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon
his own head, Ezekiel: 17. 19. But especially those that promise a man help in his
misery, if they break their oaths, must look to be punished, because they do
most hurt, and men depend upon them. they are like a rotten weak staff; which
when a man leanes upon it, breaks; and runs into his body. The Egyptians, for
dealing thus with the Israelites, are thus threatened. When they took hold of
thee, thou did break, and rent all their shoulder: and when they leaned upon
thee, thou brakest and made all their loins to be at a stand; therefore thus
says the Lord God: Behold I will bring a sword upon thee, and cut off man and
beast out of thee, Ezekiel: 29. 7, 8. Certainly God is as angry, and therefore men
are likely to be as severely punished, for this sin, as for any Even among
men (creatures exceeding contemptible in comparison) nothing will provoke to
anger, more then contempt, and slighting: especially if men are slighted, as if
they wanted that which they have, viz: power or authority, or knowledge, or the
like. Now he that breaks an oath, despises Tam facile and pronum est superos
contemnere testes, si mortalis idem nemo sciat, Juven. Sat. 13. speaking of
swearing falsely,
God; as if he had not power, or knowledge, or justice enough, to execute that
vengeance, which he himself submitted himself unto, in case of breach, and
therefore in that chapter of Ezekiel before quote^, God complains twice of
DESPISING the oath, and verse: 20. where we translate trespassed against me,
Hierom renders, despised me. Now as men in such a case, will do something, to
show that which they have, which else they would not: So God cannot forbear in
such a case, to execute punishment, if it were for nothing, but merely that
men may know (who else would be apt to question it) that he, whom they have
taken as a knower of all things, and a revenger of sin, and a revenger of
perjury, is such a one indeed. And therefore in Ezekiel: c. 29. in the verse. next
before the words which I quoted, thus he speaks, and all the inhabitants of
Egypt shall KNOW, that I am the Lord, verse. 6. viz: When I shall revenge upon
them their breach of promise, in this manner as I intend. Neither can the
perjured person complain; let it be what punishment it will, or be it never so
great. For in swearing by the name of God, either he gave himself up to him,
to do to him what he would; or he desired him to do his worst (in case he
swear not in truth) if not in words, at least in meaning: as the Jews Thus to
swear with an imprecation is properly called (...) to curse (...). as Peter
did, Mat. 26, 74
did in their swearing, when they said, only, IF I do, or IF I dot not such or
such or such a thing, etc. leaving a blanck for the punishment; as if they
would acknowledge any punishment to be little, and just enough, for such a sin,
as perjurie. Those ceremonies, which the Jews used at the making of covenants
and leagues, viz: cutting a beast in two, and passing between the parts of it,
implied (if there were none expressed) an imprecation, (or a contented
acknowledgement of justice, if it were so) that, whosoever brake that covenant,
his body might be cut in two, in the like manner, and be for meat for the
fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth. For so much seems to be
intimated in Gods threatening Zedekiah in these expressions, Jer: 34. 20. for
breaking his oath to the king of Babylon; which he had so deliberately taken,
and so solemnly confirmed with those forenamed ceremonies, as you may see verse.
18, 19. And here give me leave to impart one conceit, which just now came into
my mind upon this occasion. In Genesis c. 15. 11. It is recorded of Abraham,
(at the time that God confirmed his covenant with him in a formal manner, with
these ceremonies) that when the fowls came down upon the carcasses, he drove
them away. Now I say that this seems to be a passage, which in a story of so
solemn a business, would not have been related, but with some special
meaning, and which I conjecture to be this, viz. to show either Abraham's
faithfulness, that he resolved to keep God's covenant; or his faith, that he
doubted not, but God would keep his promise, (and so it should never come to
that pass, as the coming of the fowls would seem to bode, which was a great
temptation to him to unbelief). As if he had said withal by way of
abomination, Absit, away, I fear not, or, God forbid it should come to this
pass, that either a Covenant O^ God's should be in vain, and a sacrifice of
his covenant devoured by the fowls; or that a covenant WITH God should be
broken; or that ever I should come to this pass, as to be exposed to the
fowls for meat, for breaking covenant. No, for my part, I am RESOLVED: and for
God's part, I am CONFIDENT, that he is also; that this covenant shall be firm
and sure. The old Romans, at the performance of such rites, used to express
their imprecation: for their ceremony was to throw a stone at a hog, (so say
some Godwin Antiq. Ro^. p. 253.
: but I rather think, to knock him in the head with a flint Silice. Live. 1.
, and so kill Because it is said, -- Caesa jungebant foedera porca. Virgil.
him) with this or such like form of words Sic Live. ibid.
a Jove feriatur is, qui sanctum hoc fregerit foedus, ut ego hunc porcum ferio.
So let Jupiter smite him that breaks this league, as Ismite this hog.

Oaths, Such as take them falsely, threatened
With Destruction of their persons, and ruin of their houses. Every one that
swears shall be cut off, as on that side, according to it (speaking of the
flying roll with two curses, one on one side against thieves, and another on
the other side against false swearers) I will bring it forth says the Lord of
hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of
him that swears falsely by my name. And it shall remain in the midst of his
house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof,
Zac. 5. 3, 4. Every one that swears, etc. (...),] The Septuagint translate
(...), Every perjured man shall be punished (or revenged) by this hook ( or
sickle (...) such as that spoken of Revel. 14. 14.
: for so they translate, where we render, a roll verse. 2.) unto death. It is
likely, they did read for (...), or (...) As for the word (...), which we
translate, cut off, (which suits well with (...) in the septuagint,) perhaps
they did read (...). The Chald. And so in Jer. 30. 11. where we render (...) I
will not leave thee altogether unpunished, he translates, perdendo non perdam:
I will not altogether destroy thee. Vatabl. Succidendo succidam. R. David ( in
lib: Radicum) mundus eris, i. e. vacuus omni bono, clean destroyed, ( as we
say.)
Paraphrast seems to have read (...), translating, shall be stricken. But The
Syriack, and the Zurich translation.
others render it, is absolved: as if the roll were a letter (or proclamation)
of pardon* which is clearly proved to be false, by what is afterward said, viz.
That it shall remain in the midst of the house, and shall consume it with the
timber thereof, and the stone In the Oracle in Herodotus (...). See Prove. 3. 33.
thereof. It shall remain in the midst of the house] The house, which he has
built Zeph. 2. 11.
with, or wherein he keeps, that which he gets by stealing, and defrauding, and
forswearing. For, as it said in Job That fire shall consume the Tabernacles of
bribery, chapter 15. 34. So this curse shall consume such houses.

Old Men, their Duty
The sinner being a hundred years old shall be accursed Is. 65. 20. For though
the expositions of the former part of the verse be various: yet these words are
generally expounded in this sense.

Their Due.
Such as do not honor them, may justly fear God's anger: because it is said,
Thou shall rise up before the hoarie head, and honor the face of the old man;
and fear thy God: I am the Lord, Lev: 19. 32. As if the charge were thus,
Honor the face of the old man, as thou fear God, who will punish thee if
thou do not. How tenderly God takes it to have them wronged by any; you may
gather by his complaint thereof, against the king of Babylon, Thou did show
them no mercy: upon the Ancient have thou very heavily laid the yoke. Is: 47.
6. And what a crime he accounts it, to have them despised by the younger sort;
by his threat thereof to the Jews (as a punishment) Isa: 3. 5. The child shall
behave himself proudly against the Ancient. Such sins as are threatened for
punishments, are usually great sins. that was a great wrong to old men;
otherwise it had not been threatened for a punishment. And if it were a great
wrong, it was a great sin; and if it were a great sin, it must expect a great
punishment. Give me leave to produce what a heathen Juvenal. Satyr. 13.
speaks, in commendation of the practice under the golden age. When, although
men had no other law besides that of nature; yet, he says, they counted it a
capital crime, if a young man did not rise up (as the phrase is here used
likewise in the Hebrew) to an Old man, though a poorman.

Credebant hoc grande nefas and morte piandum,
Si Juvenis vetulo non assurrexerit, and si
Barbato cuicunque puer, licet ipse videret
Plura domi farra, and majores glandis acervos.
Tam venerabile erat praecedere quatuor annis.
But the present age is of another metal, Wherein the disrespect commonly
showed not only to old men, but to old parents, (and such especially; for then
do we slight them most, when we should most respect them,) makes this report
concerning those times almost incredible, so that I may use the words of the
Historian Live. 26.
(speaking of an army, how the younger bands gave place to the elder) Vix ut
verisimile sit, parentum quoque hoc saeculo vilis levisque apud liberos
autoritas. Of the respect given and commanded to be given to old men in
Scriptures, See Job. 29. 8. Chr: 32. 4, 6, 7. Rom: 16. 3. 1 Timothy: 5. 1, 2.

Opportunities of Grace, such as neglect them, threatened.
1 With Hardening. Exhort one another while it is called to day Psalm. 95.
, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3. 13.
See Ps. 32. 6. Isa. 55 6. 2 Cor: 6, 2,

2 Removal of the means afforded them. Yet a little while the light is with
you, walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you, Joh: 12. 35.

3 Not being suffered to have any more, though they desire it. Our Savior told
his Disciples, The day will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the days
of the son of man and shall not see it. Luk: 17. 22. See c. 13, 24.

4 Being suffered to dye in their sins. I go my ways, and ye shall seek
me, and shall dye in your sins: whither I go ye cannot come, Joh: 8. 21.
Because it is not your desire, to seek me, when I may be found: it shall be
your punishment, to seek me, when I may not.

Now seeing it is thus, I will exhort you in the words of Jeremy to the Jews,
Give glory to the Lord your God (by repenting and believing) before he cause
darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while
ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross
darkness, Jer: 13. 16. And if you will not hear it. I am sure I shall have
cause to mourn, as he had, (saying it with confidence, as if the punishment
were already inflicted,) Because the Lord's flock is carried away captive,
verse. 17. because through your inward darkness in the midst of so much light,
you are led captive by Satan into outer darkness, whence there is no returning
to all eternity.

Oppression.
Oppressors of the Poor, threatened.
1 (In general) with Punishment, great and sure enough. For God goes solemnly
about it: as if he made it his business to keep an assize of purpose for them.
The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancient of his people, and the
Princes thereof, for ye have eaten up the vineyard, the spoil of the poor is
in your houses, Isa: 3. 14. The spoil of the poore] etc. which is like the
gold of Toloze: for none can prosper, that have it. Nay, he is so earnest at
it, that he rises off his seat to execute it. For the oppression of the poor,
for the sighing of the needy now will I arise says the Lord, I will set him in
safety, from him that puffs at him, Psalm. 12. 5.

2 Poverty, and loss of their estates, which they have gotten by oppression.
Solomon has a Proverb for it. He that oppresses the poor to increase his
riches, and he that gives to the rich shall surely come to a want (...).
Septuag.
, Prove. 22. 16. He that oppresses, ( in the (...). In the like manner do they
translate Ps. 72. 4.
Septuagint, the Paraphrase, and the Vulgar) he that falsely accuses only.
Amos has a prophecy for it, Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the
poor, and ye take from him burdens of wheat ye have built houses of hewn
stone, but ye shall not dwell in them, ye have planted pleasant vineyards,
but ye shall not drink of them, chapter 5. 11. This is a great punishment, and
matter of much vexation: much more, then if the houses, or vineyards, had been
bought, or given. It is a punishment often mentioned in the Scripture. viz. not
dwelling in an house that a man has built: and not eating or gathering of the
grapes of the vineyard which a manhath planted, See Deuteronomy. 28. 30. and chapter 20. 6.

3 Destruction. 1 Of their persons. He shall judge the poor of the people, he
shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor,
Ps. 72. 4. Break in pieces (...)] where he expresses that which he often uses:
(and the Scripture intimates as much in allusion, by using the same words; as I
have often said) his retaliating, or doing to them as they have done to others,
for it is said of these oppressors, Is. 3, 15, (...) Perhaps the word (...)
used for a poor man, signifies one made poor by such oppression, or a poor
man so oppressed,
they beat (or break) in pieces my people, and grind the faces of the poor. 2
Of their country. for the Prophet Amos cha. 8. after complaint made of some
that swallowed up the needy, v. 4. and that bought the poor for silver and the
needy for a pair of shoes, v. 6. thus threatens Judea, The Lord has sworn
by the excellency of Judah. Surely I will never forget any of their works.
Shall not the land tremble for this and every one mourn that dwells therein,
etc. verse. 7. 8. Shall not etc.] as if he had said, If the land have cause to
tremble at any time, it has now under the weight of such heavy Oppressors.
Or, I cannot choose but make it tremble now, unless I will be God no longer.

Oppressors of the Fatherless, Widows, Strangers, and Servants.
Are threatened with speedy punishment: and perhaps the more speedy, because
their oppressors put it so far away: for these were the words of the Jews,
Where is the God of judgment? Mal: 2. 17. But in the following Chapter, you
have this threat, And I will come near to you in judgment, and I will be a
swift witness against the Sorcerers, etc. and against these that oppress the
hireling in his wages, the widow and the fatherless: and that turn aside the
stranger from his right, and fear not me, says the Lord of hoasts, verse. 5.
And fear not me, says the Lord of hoasts] or, fear not me, who am the Lord
of hosts; and therefore able: nay, who am a father Nemo tam pater, Nemo tam
pius, Tertul. de poenit. c, 8.
of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, Ps. 68. 5. a preserver of the
stranger, Ps. 146. 9. and a judge of all that are oppressed, See Deuteronomy 10, 18,
Ps. 103: 6. and therefore willing, to punish them.

Oppressors of Widows, Fatherless, and Strangers, threatened and punished.
1 With a curse. Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger,
fatherless, and widow, Deuteronomy. 27. 19.

2 God's not hearing their prayer in affliction. In Zachary chapter 7. after
complaint made of hardheartednesse, in oppressing, and of hardness of heart,
in continuing to oppress, notwithstanding God has spoken so much against it,
verse. 9, 10, 11, 12. it is added ver. 13. Therefore it is come to pass, that
as he cried, and they would not hear: so they cried, and I would not hear,
says the Lord of hoasts.

Oppressors of the Fatherless, and widows threatened
With Death. Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child: If thou
afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear
their cry, and my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and
your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless, Exodus 22. 22, 23, 24.

Oppressors of the Fatherless.
Their punishment is certain. Remove not the old Landmarke (...) the bounds of
little children, Hieron. translates.
, and enter not into the fields of the fatherless. For their Redeemer is
mighty: he shall plead their cause with thee, Prove. 23. 10, 11.

-- Of Widows.
Their judgment is severe, (especially if they think to hide it with piety.)
Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye devour widows houses,
and for a pretense make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater
damnation. Mat 23. 14. Greater damnation, (...)] It would be (...) otherwise,
that is, very great: but if they seek to cloak it with piety, creeping into
their houses, like those false teachers, 2 Timothy 3. 6. it shall be (...) (as I
may say) more very great, or by much the greater. Woe to that nation, where it
can be said, that the people Lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge
by every altar: and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their
God. Am. 2. 8.

-- Of Strangers.
After the CURSED be ye, above mentioned Deu. 27. 19. pronounced in this world,
they must expect a DEPART ye cursed to be pronounced in the world to come. For
thus our Savior has told us, it shall be said to him, that entertaines not
the stranger, Mat. 25. 41. 43: much more to such as oppress him.

-- Of Servants (see Hire.)
Their punishment will be not only speedy in coming, (as I told you before out
of Malachy:) but intolerable when it comes, and yet not to be avoided If I did
despise the cause of my man servant, or of my maid servant, when they contended
with me: what then shall I do, when God rises up? and when he visits, what
shall I answer him? Job. 31. 13. If I did despise] (...), the Septuagint. If I
did but think slight of it ( in contempt of their condition, because they were
but my servants) to do them right, and give them their due: ( either when they
contended with me or before me So perhaps the Hebrew (...) properly signifies:
the Septuagint. (...), may very well be expounded so,
;) much more, if I dee them wrong: what then shall I do, when God rises up,
etc. What then shall I do?] In the Hebrew (...) And (or But) what shall I do?
As if Job had tacitly (as he does expressly in the rest of the chapter except
ver. 34. where he does as he does here) made an imprecation of some punishment,
or acknowledged the justice of God, in punishing him so as he did; and then
added this, after this manner, If I did despise, etc. I could not but say, I
were justly punished now: And, more then so; what shall I do, when God comes
to judgment? When God rises up.] God is not said in the Scriptures to arise,
for any occasion, so much as for oppression, and violence: as in the place
before, Ps. 12. 5. and several other places of the Psalms: and in Isa: 33.
10. 15. etc. As if he could not otherwise deal with oppressors: who are
usually the great ones of the land, and men of power. Whereas those that are
oppressed, are commonly the meanest, and those that can do nothing for
themselves; and have none to speak, or do for them.

Oppressors of Any, threatened, and punished.
1 In general with woe, and unavoidable punishment. Woe to them that devise
iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when the morning is light, they
practice it, because it is in the power of their hands. And they covet fields,
and take them by violence; and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a
man, a man and his house, ( which he has to cover his head) even a man, ( such
as themselves are) and his heritage ( which came lawfully to him from his
father, and which cannot but be a great grief to him, to be defrauded of,)
Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold against this family I devise (...), the
same word that is used verse. 1. according to the usual manner in God's threats
(as I have often said) to express a retaliation, or punishing with like for
like; much used, and prescribed in the Law, Exodus 21.
an evil ( for their devising the evil of iniquity, I will devise the evil
of punishment) from which ye shall not remove your necks, neither shall ye go
haughtily, for this is an evil time, Mic: 2. 1, 2, 3. See Zeph. 3. 1. Jer. 30.
20.

2 If Kings, with the Revolt of their subjects. Rehoboam being King of Israel,
Jeroboam and the people came to him to desire him, to make their heavy yoke
lighter 1 Kings 12. 4. but he hearkening rather to the counsel of young hot
spirited fellows (who thought to gain by his oppression, and to have the more
liberty to exercise it themselves) made them answer, that, whereas his father
CHASTENED them with WHIPS, his resolution was to WHIP them with SCORPIONS,
verse. 14. and therefore was served accordingly; for all Israel hereupon
revolted from him, and made Jeroboam King, verse. 16.

3 God's not Hearing their prayer. For the Prophet Micah, after he had
complained of the ravenous butcherly cruelty, of the princes of Israel in their
Oppression, c. 3. 2, 3. presently added. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but
he will not hear them: he will even hide his face from them at that time, as
they have behaved themselves ill in their doings, verse. 4. Behaved themselves
ill in their doings] I observe, that in most places, where complaint is made of
Oppression, there is mention of Evil: evil time, and evil doings: and still
in the same word (...). either to show what an Evil, and sinful thing God
accounts it: or what an evil, and hurtful thing it is in a State. See the
place before, Jer 31. 12. Mic. 3. 4. Is. 33. 15. Am. 5. 13. Mi. 2. 3. Ezekiel. 18.
18.

4 Destruction. The roaring of the Lion, and the voice of the fierce Lion, and
the teeth of the young Lion are broken. The old Lion perished for lack of prey,
and the stout Lyon's whelps are scattered abroad, Job: 4. 10, 11. comp: with
verse. 8, 9. See Isa. 49. 26.

Creatures, that never cry, will cry, when they are seized upon for a prey; and
never so loud as then. The cry of the Oppressed, is a very lowdlong-lasting
cry. God hears it, says Job, chap. 34. 28: and forgets it not, Says
David, Ps. 9. 12. and therefore they are sure to be avenged.

The Odiousness of this sin in the sight of God, and the danger of it, may
be further gathered out of the Scriptures, thus:

1 By the Odious names given to it. Such as Grinding the faces of men, *
Wearing them, till they look thin with poverty.
Isa. 3. 15. eating them, Psalm. 14. 4. Devouring them, Hab. 3. 14. Plucking off
their skin, and their flesh from their bones: Nay, breaking their bones, and
chopping them in pieces, as for the pot, Mic. 3. 2, 3. Blood, ( which is the
life; and they that take away a man's livelihood, in effect, take away his
life) almost every where in the Prophets, Isay 3. 15. Ezekiel. 22. etc.

2 By the odious names, that are given those that practice it: as of Lions, and
Wolves. Zeph. 3. 3. Ezekiel. 22. 27. Psalm. 10. 9, 10.

3 By the greatness of God's anger, even for not helping those that are
oppressed, and that speedily. for thus it was said to Zedekiah King of Judah,
Execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled, out of the
hands of the oppressor. lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can
quench it, Jer. 21. 12.

4 Lastly, by the greatness of the reward, promised to those who do not only
abstain from it: (for that they may out of policy only:) but hate it. (For
though it be not enough for such a reward; yet it is the maine thing
mentioned.) -- He that despises the gain of Oppression. that shakes his
hands from holding of bribes, etc. He shall dwell on high, etc. Isa. 33. 15.
What ever they think, Princes can never be so safe, nor so secure, when they
have the fear; as when they have the love, of their subjects. I have been the
longer upon this subject, because I see it is a sin so much practiced in most
countries, even (which I am ashamed to speak) of Christiandome.

Parents, their Duty.
Such as Correct not their children, rewarded
1 With Shame and sorrow. The rod and reproof, give wisdom: but a child left
to himself, brings his mother to shame, Prove. 29. 15.

2 Continuation of punishments inflicted for their childrens sin, which might
else have been taken off. In that day I will perform against Eli all things,
which I have spoken concerning his house. When I begin, I will also make an
end. For I have told him, that I will judge his house for ever, for the
iniquity which he knows: because his sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not. And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that
the iniquity of Eli's house, shall not bt purged with Sacrifice, nor offering,
for ever, 1 Samuel 3. 12, 13, 14. He restrained them not,] in the Hebrew (...),
He did not bend his brow upon them. He reproved them indeed, because he would
give content to the people; (and herhaps God punished him partly for his
hypocrisy herein;) but in such a manner as any other body might do, and as if
he were loath to cross them. Mark his words, ch: 2. 23. Why do ye such
things, etc. and, Nay, my sons, for it is no good report that I hear, etc.
v. 24. There is too much of this counterfeit reproof, and correction in use,
both among Parents, and Magistrates. And he restrained them not. And therefore
I have sworn, etc.] I had but told him before; but now I have sworn. The
iniquity of his house shall not be purged] or thus, The punishment of his house
which I have threatened, (viz. chapter 2. 21.) shall not be taken off. For I am not
of their mind, who gather from this place, that Eli was damned. Yet let me tell
you thus much; that though it may be charity in you to think the best of
others; yet I count it wisdom in you, to fear the worst of your selves.

Parents, their Due.
Such as Curse them, threatened
1 with Death. Every one that curses See of this word a little after.
his Father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death. he has cursed his
father, or his mother, (of whom he had his life) his blood shall be upon him,
Lev. 10. 9. He shall be put to death, he has cursed his father etc.]
Certainly, God accounts this a heinous sin: for he seems to have thought,
that he gave sufficient reason for the greatness of the punishment of it,
only by repeating it. Children might forbear to curse their parents, even out
of malice: for, no doubt, God will prosper them the better, and bless them the
more. The Jews, when they speak of a child's cursing his parents, by an
(...), express it by Barach, a word which signifies, Bless.

2 Blackness of Darkness, (as some compare the following expression with that
in Peter, 2 Epist. 2. 17. and Jud. 13.) Who so curses his father or his
mother, his lamp, shall be put out in obscure darkness, Prove. 20. 20. When the
godly die, it is no more, then if a man's candle should be put out, when the
day breaks.

I used the word cursing, in the Title, because it is so in our translation:
but yet I believe a smaller matter, then we usually understand by cursing,
will deserve punishment; yea, though it be meant only of evil speaking. for
so in Leviticus (...), is translated by the Sept. (...), he that shall speak
evil To, or OF. So in Mark 9. 39. we translate, (...) SPEAK EVIL OF me. The
word is the same which we translate, curses, chapter 7. 10. where this statute in
Leviticus is cited in these words, viz. (...). Evil speaking, I said: * I
conceive (...) is not so opposite to Barach, as it is to (...) which primarily
signifies, heavy, as (...) does light.
but I meant not only (...), such as that, 1 Pet. 2. 1, i. e. obtrectation and
slander; but (...), such as that, Ephesians. 4. 31. i. e. vilifying, or disgracing by
reports; though true. So that (...) (the word used in this statute, and
translated, curses,) shall be that thing in words, which (...) (rendered,
despises, in Deuteronomy. 27. 16.) may be in any other way, viz: in mind, or
behavior.

Such as make Mocks of them, or give them ill words,
1 With a curse upon their posterity, viz. of serving their brethren. For Noah,
(though he deserved sufficiently, to be mocked for his folly) because his son
Cham, finding him naked, went and made sport of it; or perhaps only complained
to his brethren, of what his father had done; (whereas children should cover
their parents failings, in this sense) thus says of his son Canaan, (as some
think, because he first saw it, and told his father, who told it to his
brethren) Cursed be Canaan, a servant Parents had power of selling their
children for servants, Ex. 21. 7 at least they practiced it for the payment of
debts, or the like causes, Neh. 5.
of servants shall he be to his brethren, Genes. 9. 25. with 22. Cursed be:]
or, cursed is. So the Hebrew rather: as if he did not pray, but prophecy. And
his prophecy was fullfilled: for the Canaanites, being the posterity of Cham,
which came of Canaan (who alone is mentioned of Cham's sons: and the ejection
of whose posterity by the Israelites, Moses his maine design was to relate, so
that there is some ground to think, that Canaan the grandchild, had a hand in
the sin, as I have said, before) those that were used best (I mean the
Gibeonites) were used as servants; the rest as servants of servants, and worse
too, by the Israelites: who were of the posterity of Seth, and their brethren,
or kindred, (for so the word is used in Scripture) by whom they were utterly
destroyed. Whether Noah prayed, or prophesied; this is certain: The prayers of
Parents, both for, and against their children, are very powerful; and many
times come to pass, like prophecies. Augustine Lib. 22. de civ. Dei c. 8.
speaks of ten children, that being cursed by their mother, went about quaking
and trembling from one place to another, like vagabonds. In that manner, as
some conceive, Cain did: because the Septuagint in Gen: 4. 12. for fugitive and
vagabond, translate, groaning, and trembling. And there might be many other
instances given. Insomuch, that, as Ambrose Lib. de Bened. Patriarc. c. 1.
says, Children should honor their parents, if it were for nothing but for
fear: honoretpius patrem propter gratiam, ingratus propter timorem.

2 With a most fearful Judgment, what ever it be. The eye that mocketh at
his father, and despises to obey his mother, the Ravens of the valley shall
pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it, Prove: 30. 17. The eye] the same
thing (I believe) that is meant by Lamp in c. 20, and so it is expounded alike,
viz: of the Soul. And accordingly it is thought, that by the Ravens of the
valley, and the young Eagles, are meant the black Devils of the lowest Hell,
and the Spirits subject to that Prince of the air; who shall make a prey of
such a man's Soul, as soon as it is got out of the Cage. If these words be
meant only of blindness (as the Sept. seem to have taken the other, chapter 20
Translating (...) not, blackness, but the apple of the eye, (...).
) yet is the Punishment sad and fearful. The EYE that mocketh] though he say
nothing; but do it so closely, that his father shall not know it. And
despises to obey] or despises the wrinkles (for so one Rab. Solom.
says, the Hebrew word * also signifies; (...). It is translated by us
gathering, Genesis 49. 10. wrinkles are made by the gathering up of the skin.
and the Septuagint render it Old age) that is, the marks of her old age,
hastened with pains and care in bearing and bringing him up. so that herein he
is both unreasonable, in despising, that which himself occasioned, and
unnatural also, and worse then the beasts: for some The Storke called in greek
(...), whence (...) to be grateful. I will not say that our word comes from
(...).
of them will pay their (...), a great deal better, then many Christians; in
feeding their old ones. So that (understand you by Ravens and Eagles, what you
will) such a wretch as will mock his parents, may well fear, that the birds
and beasts will rise up against him, to punish him in this world: and their
natural affection come against him in judgment co condemn him, in the world
to come.

Such, as Set light by them, threatened.
With a Curse. Cursed be he that sets light by his father or mother, Deuteronomy.
27. 16. Seteth light.] Does not honor, says the Paraph. and the vulgar
translation This sin is ranked with very heinous sins, in that Catalogue,
Ezekiel. 22. 7. after which follows a fearful threat. v. 13, 14, 15.

Such as are Disobedient to them, and Incorrigible.
With Stoning to death. If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which
will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that
when they have chastned him will not harken unto them: Then shall his father
and his mother lay hold on him and bring him out unto the Elders of his city,
and unto the gate of his place. And they shall say unto the Elders of this
city. This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice,
he is a glutton, and a drunkard, Being rebellious is the maine crime, and being
a glutton and a drunkard, are brought in as evidences, though crimes too) And
all the men of his City shall stone him with stones that he die: So shall thou
put ^ill away from among you, (...) it is the word in most plaes, where we have
this exprssion, Put away evil from among you (Used most commonly when mention
is made of some desperate crime) as Deuteronomy. 13. 5. c. 17. 7. etc. it signifies
burn. and it has respect either to the incorrigiblenesse of the person:
because we use to burn such things as we cannot otherwise deal with. or else
to the infectiousnesse of his sin: because we use to burn quite up, (or
dead) such things as will certainly spread further, if they are not so used.
and all Israel shall hear and fear, Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19. 20, 21. Certainly,
rebellious children are grievous sinners in God's account, and he will
accordingly punish them; because he aggravates the disobedience of the
Israelites to his own self by it, Isa. 1. 2. I have nourished and brought up
children, and they have rebelled against me. And accordingly threatens them
with grievous threats, c: 30. 1. etc. Woe to the rebellious children.

Such as do not Honor them.
Have cause to fear Shortness of life. Because it is said, Honor thy father
and thy mother that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God
gives thee, Ex: 20. 12. I say, shortness of life, simply, because it is
usually so expounded, otherwise I should say, short enjoyment of their
inheritances, which is no reason they should enjoy, who will not honor those
from whom they have them. Indeed I rather think that in these words is
promised (that which is promised also in other places to other things upon the
keeping of the command), not so much living long as living long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee. In that good good Land, (for so the
Septuagint translate, a Deuteronomy. 1. 25, 35. etc.
and so it is otherwise called) out of which, on the contrary, they are every
where threatened to be cast (...).
out, and carried away by captivity if they kept not the co^mandments. As for
living long only, a promise of that, is annexed only to Letting the damme go,
when they robbed a bird's nest, chapter 22. 7. And Dying in a polluted land, though
they lived never so long, was a punishment, Amos 7. 17.

I placed Not-Honouring, after not-Obeying, because I take it to be less: as I
take Honoring to be more then Obeying (So far am I from taking it for no
more then it is commonly made to be, viz: honoring with Cap and Knee forsooth;
which they think to be enough without doing any thing, when they are bid) viz:
yielding them help, and support, And to perish from off the good land, Deuteronomy:
11. 17*
and indeavoring to reward them with acts of piety. Reward them, I say; for so
the word in the Hebrew for honor, will signify; as well as to honor;
according Such as Aeneas gave to his decrepit father Anchises, who^ he carried
upon his back (at the destruction of Troy) and is therefore called Pius Aeneas
by the Poet, in honor and commendation, especially of this act of his
Aristotle says, the young storke will do the like to the old.
Beza upon 1 Timothy: 5. 17. honoris enim appellatione jam dixi, pium omne
officium, ac subsidium Hebraeorum more significari. See Jer. 30. 19. etc.
to the use of the Greek word (...) and (...), Tim. 5. 3. and v. 17. Act 28.
10. The Jews Buxtorf. in Florileg.
have a saying, What honor is to be given to parents? To give them meat, and
drink, and to cloth them and cover them.

Peace breaking, see Discord.

Persecution.
Threats of it, and for it.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy: 3.
12. All, from the Devil: and most, from men; even for so living. All that will
but live honestly, suffer by so living; but not for. But they that will live
godly, who are resolved they will live godly, notwithstanding all rubs and
hindrances and dangers; they shall suffer for so living.

Nay, there is also a threat of persecution, even out of zeal for God ( such
as is too usual; the more is the pity.) Yea the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God service. Joh. 16. 2. But there is also
a threat against the^. Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my
names sake, said, The Lord be glorified So Pagnine. Kimchy, and Moseh expound,
is grievous. ( or his words are grievous) because the Hebrew word does not
signify glorifying, in the conjugation Kal. but, as R. Abraham says, he
forgets that place in Job 14. 21.
: but he shall appear to your joy; and they shall be ashamed, Isa: 66. 5.
which cannot be well interpreted, but of these latter days since Christ's time.

Pity.
Not pitying others See Rejoicing.
in their misery. threatened
With Suffering the like. Woe to them, etc. That drink wine in bowls, and
anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but they are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph. Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that
go captive, etc. Amos 6. 6. 7. They are not grieved] (...), Septuagint. Nihil
patiebantur, lat: i.e. they suffered nothing ( or they were not moved.)
whereas, if one member suffer; all the members should suffer with it, 1 Cor:
12. 26. God is so much for tender heartedness in this kind, that he would
have us, not to have the heart to look upon them. For he tells Edom, Thou
should not have looked on the day of thy brother, in the day that he became
a stranger, Obad. 12.

Pledges of things necessary, Such as keep them
Have cause to fear, what may come of the prayers of him that pawned them. For
thus it is spoken, If thou at all take thy neighbour^s raiment to pledge, thou
shall deliver it to him by that the Sun goes down. For that it is his
covering only; it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? And it
shall come to pass when he cries unto me, that I will he are: for I am
gracious, Exodus 22. 26, 27. God would have us be very tender of taking pledges,
of any kind; as you may see Deuteronomy: 24. 10, 11. but especially of such things as
are necessary for the sustenance of life, such as a millstone, verse. 6.
expressedly forbidden.

Politicians See Wisdom.
punished
1 With Infatuation of their minds: so that their counsels are to their hurt.
The Princes of Zoan are become fools: the Princes of Noph are deceived: they
have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the tribes thereof. The
Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof, and they have caused
Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit,
Isa: 19. 13, 14 see v. 11, 12. Those that counsel^d Pharaoh, to help the Jews
against the Assyrians; did it to his and their own ruin: for the Assyrians
thereupon invaded Egypt.

2 Frustration of their counsels: so that their desires are not accomplished.
He disappointeth the devices of the crafty Septuag. (...).
: so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise, Job 5, 12. Let them be
never so (...) perplexedly knit and twisted, they shall all be unravelled. See
Ps: 33, 10. Isa: 19. 3, and 4. Jer. and the example of the builders of Babel,
Gen: 11. 6, 7, 8. Upon the certainty of this punishment, Gamaliel advised the
Council of the Jews, to let the Apostles alone. For (says he) If this
counsel, or this work be of men, it will come to naught, Act. 5. 38.

But especially they are thus punished, if their counsels are not only
ungodly, but against the godly. For in the frustrating of such counsels, God
has appeared very notably several ways, As 1. By discovering them himself in
a dream. (or some such way) As he did to Joseph, Herod's design of killing all
the children in Bethleem; whereby he preserved the life of our Savior, Mat: 2.
16. And to Nehemiah, Sanballat's design, of killing the builders of the wall
of Jerusalem, as they were at work, Neh: 4. 11. with the 15. 2 By causing those
whom they entrust, to discover them. As he caused Jonathan, Saul's own son;
and Michal, his own daughter; to discover Saul's design of killing David, 1 Samuel: 19. 2, 11. 3 By Contriving strange ways of getting the godly out of their
power. As he did for David, and Paul: who, when their enemies had beset the
house to apprehend them, were let down at a window, and so escaped, 1 Samuel: 19,
12. 2 Cor: 11. 33. And for Baruch and Jeremiah concerning whom, when Jehoiakim
had sent men to put them to death, it is said, The Lord hid them, Jer: 36. 26.
which some conceive he did by striking the men with blindness: as he did for
Elias, 2 Kings 6. 18. or by making him invisible; so as they conceive our
Savior did for himself, Joh: 8. 59. 4 By causing their counsels to be
slighted as he did that notable council of Ahitophel to Absalom, to choose out
12000 men and go suddenly in the night after David, and take him unprovided:
which in any man's judgment was the wisest way that possibly could be taken.
And therefore it could never have been, that Absalom should rather hearken to
Hushai, one that came from his enemies; and to such counsel as his was, to take
such a tedious course of gathering all Israel from Dan to Beersheba, 2 Samuel: 17.
11: but that the Lord had appointed to defeat the good counsel of Ahitophel:
to the intent that the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom: as it is said 2 Samuel
17, 14. 5 By raising up enemies against them. As he did for Ahaz King of
Judah, against Rezin king of Syriah and Pekah king of Israel; who had a design
to conquer his kingdom, and set up another king. Isa 7 6. But according to the
the prophecy verse: 7. their council was frustrated; for Tiglath Pileser, king
of Assyria, came against Rezin, and slew him, 2 Kings 16. 9. and not long
after, Shalmaneser King of Assyria, subdued Samaria, cap. 17.

3 Destruction of themselves, by their own hands. For so Ahitophel, because
his council was not followed, and because he knew David had intelligence of
what he had done; went presently and hung himself, 2 Samuel 17. 23. Or at least,
by their own councels. I say, by, or with; and not only in: and it will stand
very well with the frequent use both of the Hebrew (...)
and Greek (...)
, so to translate (although the more ordinary signification be in) in these
following places, viz. Job 5. 13. and 1 Cor. 3. 19. He takes the wise with
their own craftiness. Which it is easy for God to do, being wiser then
they: as it is easy, for one that knows the foxes cunning in taking such a
secret way; to take The word for takes, (...) Beza says, properly signifies,
taking with a snare or trap.
him sooner so, then if he went more openly. All wicked men (as I have often
showed) are as thorns and briars; and their own wickedness, as fire, Isaa. 9.
18. They are like a garment, and their wickedness like a moth, Job 13. 28. in
regard destruction comes to them from themselves. But yet in a more special
manner, does God delight, to make the devices and co^ncels of (...), He^od.
those, that proudly presume, and confidently use, their wisdom and strength
against him and his; to prove destructive to themselves: scattering them, even
by the imagination of their own hearts, Luke 1. 51. Me thinks I hear him
speaking to such; as he did once to the Assyrians, Ye shall conceive chafe
Sicut turdus sibi malum parit.
; ye shall bring forth stuble: your own breath as fire shall devour you, Isa.
33. 11.

Prayer not heard,
For these causes (among many other,) viz.
1 Not-hearing God. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even
his prayer shall be abomination, Prove. 28. 9. See chapter 1. 24. and verse. 28.

2 Not-hearing the Poor. Who so stops his ears at the cry of the poor; he
also shall cry himself, and shall not be heard, Prove. 21. 13.

3 Apostasy from the true worship of God, to Idolatry. They are turned back to
the iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to hear my words, and they
went after other Gods to serve them, etc. Therefore thus says the Lord God,
Behold I will bring evil upon them which they shall not be able to escape, and
though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them, Jer. 11. 10, 11.
See Ezekiel. 20. 31. and chapter 8. 17. 18.

4 Contempt of the worship of God, and worshipping him neglige^tly. Ye offer
polluted bread upon mine altar: and ye say, wherein have we polluted thee? In
that ye say, the table of the Lord is contemptible. And if ye offer the blind
for sacrifice, is it not evil? etc. I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord
of hoasts; neither will I accept an offering at your hand, Mal. 1. 7, 8, 10.

5 Blood guiltiness, and injustice in judgment. When ye spread forth your
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea, when ye make many prayers, I will
not hear; your hands are full of blood, Isay 1. 15. See c. 59. 2.

6 Oppression. Who eat the flesh of my people, etc. Then shall they cry unto
the Lord, but he will not hear, Mic: 3. 3, 4.

7 Hypocrisy. Will he hear his cry, when trouble comes upon him? Job 27. 9.

8 Sinning with delight, and without remorse. They have loved to wander, they
have not refrained their feet, therefore the Lord does not accept them, etc.
Jer: 14. 10. It follows v: 11. Then the Lord said unto me, pray not for this
people, and verse. 12. When they fast, I will not hear their cry etc. God
hears not sinners ( that sin in such a manner,) Joh: 9, 31.

9 Resolving to continue in sin, when we pray. If I regard iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me, Ps. 66. 18.

10 Intending to make ill use of what we pray for. Ye ask, and receive not,
because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts, Jam: 4. 3.

11 Having sinfully occasioned those evils, from which we pray to be
delivered. And ye shall cry out in that day, because of your King, which you
shall have chosen you, and the Lord will not hear you in that day. They are
the words of Samuel to the Israelites, when they desired a King, 1 Samuel: 8. 18.
You may see an experience of Gods refusing to hear prayer for this reason,
likewise in those Israelites, who fighting with the Amorites against the
command of God, and being overthrown (in the words of Moses,) returned and
wept before the Lord but the Lord would not hearken unto them, Deuteronomy: 1. 45.

12 Doubting in prayer. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering: for he
that wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind and tossed. For
let not that man think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. Jam: 1.
6, 7.

Praying amiss, punished.
1 With Not-obtaining the request. Ye ask and have not; because ye ask
amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts, James: 4. 3. which is a
notable argument of the greatness of Gods love, and that which we have
experience of, oftener then we take notice. It is more love to deny us a
Scorpion, when we ask for a Scorpion; then not to give us a Scorpion, when we
ask for a fish. as it is a greater sign of love to do good, when there is
greater excuse for doing hurt; then where there is less.

2 Obtaining with Anger. God tells Israel, I gave thee a King in mine anger;
The Sep. (...), and they had him in my wrath. as if this punishment were
repeated, that we might take the more notice of it.
and took him away in my wrath, Hos: 13. 11.

3 Obtaining with a vengeance, (as we say.) He gave them their request; but
sent leanness into their soul, Psalm. 106. 15. the Septuagint translate for,
leanness, fullness, (or saciety, (...)). Whether they by fulness, meant
fullness to loathing (spoken of Number: 11. 20.) and so made it a cause of
leanness. And so whether we, by leannes, be to be understood of an atrophy,
usually occasioned by too full feeding. Again, whether they read the Hebrew
(...) instead of (...): or whether they read (...) (the same word that is in
Numbers:) and whether this place, and that in Numbers (in ch: 11. 20) be to be
understood of a different punishment, at a different time; I cannot determine.
But only thus much I can determine from these words, viz: that the Israelites
lusting sinfully after flesh, when they should have been contented with what
God had else provided for them, had their desire in that indeed, but were met
with another way. And perhaps all that the Prophet meant by calling it leannes,
was only to allude to their fullness with flesh, which they so eagerly
desired, and obtained: and to show, that for a little good, they had a great
deal of bad, (of what kind soever the punishment were.)

Not-Praying punished.
With Temptation. For thus Jesus Christ told his Disciples, when he found them
asleep, Arise, (or according to Mark, Watch) and pray, lest you enter into
tentation, Luke 22. 46. Lest] So we translate the Greek words, (...). Which
yet may be rendered, THAT ye may not enter. As if because Christ's enemies,
then were so eager in persecution; he would have his Disciples to pray to God
for his (according as he had taught them to pray before, Mat. 6. 9.) that they
might not be tented to forsake him through fear. This is certain (for I have
had experience of it, to my great grief.) not only if a man do not forbear to
pray now and then; but if he forbear to pray often; he will presently lie open
to the assault of all manner of tentations. Besides he will be in danger of
utter falling away from goodness, and not without abundance of difficulty, b^
brought to renew his wonted course of praying again. And here I had once
concluded this Chapter: but since, I though good to add two or three words in
favor of the aforesaid interpretation, to the end that I may make you more
seriously (then usually we do) to think of these two things: one as great an
evil, as we can be delivered from, viz. Temptation: and the other, as
necessary a duty, as we can practice, viz: prayer against it. (which I never
heard practiced since the disuse Brought in instead of the misuse.
of the Lord's Prayer.) 1 In the 40. v. of this chapter it is said, (...) (...);
which cannot be otherwise translated then it is: (viz. without a point after,
Pray) Pray that ye enter not into temptation. 2 In the 31. v. our Savior
says, that Satan had desired (yea and obtained So the Greek will signify,
(...), we may render it, has begged you.
) liberty to tempt them. 3 In the 32 v. he says, that he had prayed for
Peter, that (in that temptation) his faith might not fail. 4 He had told them
all, the day before, what danger they should be in that night, of being
offended at him, through temptation: and he had absolutely told Peter, (being
confident to the contrary) that he should deny him. 5 He himself had prayed
for the same in effect, viz. That the cup might pass from him, v. 39. And I
must confess, I do not think, that by the preposition in (...), is meant (as
some say) their being delivered Coming in to it head and ears, without having
(...) a way to escape. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
up to temptation; but only their coming into that temptation, in which our
Savior already was, viz. of being put to it, either to depart from God, or to
part with life. 6. There was not any thing which they had so much need to pray
against, at such a time as that was, viz. when the shepherd himself should be
smitten; then that the sheep might not scattered from him, and forsake him. 7.
It was that which the shepherd had long before prescribed to them, especially
to pray for, viz. (...), that God would not LEAD (or BRING) them into
temptation, Matthew. 6. 13. an expression to which this Beza compares them.
answers, that ye may not enter into temptation, (...). And whereas it is there
presently added, And deliver us from evil (...): not, (...)
: so in this chapter, it is said, that Satan (that evil (...), so he is
called, Matt. 13. 19. Ephesians. 6. 16. etc.
one) had begged them, to winnow them. and therefore now, if ever, they had
cause, to pray to be delivered from him. 8 The words added immediately after
these, Mat: 26. 41. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak, seem
to make much for it. For I do not think (as some do) that they are spoken in
a favorable manner to excuse their drowzinesse: because the contrary appears
by the verse next before, where there is a reason mentioned, why they were not
to be excused, viz: because Christ had as yet watched but one hour; which was
urged by our Savior very sharply, (...). What? (or, is it possible?) could ye
not watch with me one hour? But rather in a friendly monitory manner, to
mind them of their weakness, (especially because he saw how confident they
were of their strength) to hold out in temptation. as if he had spoken the
whole thus; Do ye sleep, as if you were secure against, and as if you would
expose your selves to temptation? you had more need watch; and pray that you
may not be tempted: and all little enough. I deny not, but (according to your
profession) (...), (...) To. 7. 18.
, to will may be present with you, and you may be resolved in the spirit to
hold it out with me, even to die with me. But, know this, your flesh is weak.
So that, unless my father do extraordinarily strengthen you, when it comes
to, you will not tell how to find (...).
in your heart to perform, what you would and therefore by all means, pray that
ye may not be brought to temptation. So that, If, to be free from Temptation,
it be needful, not only to pray, but to pray against it: you have no cause to
wonder, if They who do not pray, do meet with it.

Preaching of the Word, threatened to be removed.
Behold the days come, that I will send a famine in the land; not a famine of
bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the word of the Lord. And they
shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North, even to the East: they shall
run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it, Am: 8. 11,
12. A famine of bread] or, A hunger for bread. So the original, (...), for the
threat is not, only of a want, or scarcity: but of an hunger, and earnest
desire, proceeding from that want, (as is plain by the 12 verse and by the
word for, of hearing, which signifies literally, To hear, (...).) which
aggravates the punishment very much. for they shall have pain and grief,
whiles they hunger; and in the end, shall be starved to death, for want of what
they would have. And yet, as we render it, ( famine:) it makes the threat
sufficiently dreadful; because it implies a necessity of this food, for the
life of the Soul. For we do not call it a famine, although other things be
never so scarce and dear; unless there be a scarcity of corn, (or bread)
which we cannot be without.

Such as Hinder it, have cause to fear.
1 Removal of good preachers, and havin^ bad in their stead, ( which is a
worse punishment, then if they had none.) Prophecy y^ not, say they to them
that prophecy. They she not prophecy to them, that they shall not ta^^ shame,
Mic: 2. 6. And it follows verse. 11. If man walking in the spirit and falsehood
do ly^ saying, I will prophecy unto thee of wine, (...) of strong drink* he
shall even be the prophet (...) this people. If you translate this verse wit^
the vulgar, Utinam non essem vir habens spiritum, and mendacium potius
loquerer. stillabo tibi in vinum and in ebrietatem, and erit super quem
stillabit populus iste.
thus: I could wish, I were not man that had the spirit; and that which I speak
were not true* but yet I will prophecy to you, (...) I have made you drunk as
it were with win^ ( even a full cup of judgments, which I shall denounce unto
you) it will amount to thus much viz: that when men endeavor to hinder the
faithful Ministers of God's word, from preaching the truth: God will punish
them with fearful judgments; and make even those very Ministers, in spite of
all their opposition his instruments to denounce them Prophecy] In the
original it is, drop, in both verses. And it is not unlike, the people did
indeed use this very word, in a jeere, ( because it was a word which the
Prophets much used as you may see Ezekiel: 20. 46. ch: 21, 2.) Even as they did
the words, Line upon Line, Isa: 28, 10. and, The burden ^f the Lord, Jer: 23,
34. And so likewise that Amaziah thus used it, Amos 7. 16. Drop not thy word,
etc.

2 Death and ruin of their families. That Amaziah but now mentioned, (who was
a Priest of Bethel, in Jeroboam's time,) is thus threatened by Amos, Thou
say, Prophecy not, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac They
presumed much upon their descent from Isaac and Jacob, as you may see Mic. 2.
7. as they did in Christ's time upon their desce^t from Abraham, Joh. 8. 49.
. Therefore thus says the Lord, thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, and
thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be
divided by line, and thou shall die in a polluted land, etc. chapter 7. 16, 17.

Preparation before meddling with God's Ordinances,
Such as neglect it, may justly fear severe punishment.
For thus it was said under the Old Testament, (and doubtless, there is as
much need of preparation for Gospel services, as there was for those of the
Law,) Let the Priests also, which come near to the Lord, sanctify themselves;
lest the Lord break footh upon them, Exodus: 19, 22. The Septuagint say (...),
lest the Lord depart away from them (as being a holy God, and therefore not
enduring any unholy thing to come near him) which I take to be a worse
punishment then the former.

Especially after the commission of some foul sin; whereby we are defiled.
For then we had need to wash our selves first, with tears of humiliation, and
repentance. The man that shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself,
that soul shall be cut off Sept. (...), shall be destroyed So we render that
word, Act. 3. 23.
from among the congregation, etc, Number: 19. 20. See the practice of Job, chapter 1.
5.

The Priests, before they went into the Tabernacle, were to wash their hands
and their feet upon pain of death, Exodus: 30. 20. What a charge did God give of
preparing the people to hear him, when he intended to speak upon mount Sinai,
even two days before. Exodus: 19. 10, 11. See Gen: 35. 2, concerning the
practice of Jacob. And Job: 11. 13, I wish, we were as strict in preparing for
all manner of duty; as the Jews The Heathen themselves before some of their
more solemn Sacrifices, would (...) and (...), i.e. in casto esse, prepare
themselves by continence, and abstinence, from such or such things.
were, and yet are, in external preparations for the keeping of the Sabbath*
or, that we were as punctual to wash our hearts, before we go to sit down at
the Lords table: as they were to wash their feet, and the Pharisees their
hands, before they would sit down at their own tables.

Presumptuous Sins, See Sins.

Presumption of Perseverance punished.
Both with Sin and Sorrow. Peter told our Savior, Though all men shall be
offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended. M^tth: 26. 33. but our
Savior presently threatened him, Verily I say unto thee, that this night,
before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice, verse: 34. Shalt] not wilt, so
that if it be a prophecy, it is a threatening one, Mark, how these words of
our Savior answer to Peter's in every expression of his praefidence: as were
of purpose to make him see his exceeding great weakness. Whereas he was so
confident of the continuance of his fidelity, that all should be offended in
Christ rather then he: he tells him (and none but him) most peremptorily to the
contrary, VERILY, I SAY unto thee, etc. Whereas he was confident, that he
should not be so much as offended For though this expression be usually taken
of not owning Christ, yet it may be taken of less.
in Christ, (which notwithstanding Christ had said, should be the lot of all of
them, verse. 31.) He tells him, that he should not only be offended in him, but
even quite deny him. Whereas he was confident, that he should never deny
Christ; not once so much; and not once for ever (not only that night) he tells
him clean contrary, This night, and BEFORE the Cok crow, thou shall deny me
THRICE. Now you may see this threat fulfilled, verse. 70. 72. 74. and in the
next verse after Peter's sin, you may read his sorrow. For there it is said,
that upon the crowing of the Cock, being put in mind of Christ's words, he went
out, and WEPT BITTERLY.

Professors See Hypocrites. and Religion in show only.
in Hypocrisy, punished.
1 With Deceiving of themselves, and Nonacceptance of their religion. Trust ye
not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord are these. Jer: 7. 4. Lying words] Because they called it
the Temple of the Lord, when it was not; for the Lord would no longer dwell in
it, nor own it. So it seems to be interpreted, if we translate with the Latin
v. 7, Then I will our translat. Then will I cause you to dwell in this place.
dwell with you in this place. But I rather take lying words, for, words that
would deceive them, vain and unprofitable words: as it is interpreted, and as
the Latin it self also translates ver. 8. thus, ye trust in lying words
which will not profit For in this sense the word (...)
you. You will deceive your selves exceedingly, if you think you are a jot the
better, for going to the house of God, hearing the word of God, living with the
people of God, and having the name of God upon you; if your lives be not
answerable.

2 Being given over to death in Sin. especially, if they pretend to more then
others, and take the name of figtrees upon them, (which is the greatest fruit
bearing tree of any.) our Savior, When he saw a figtree in the way, he came
to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no
fruit grow on thee hence forward for ever: and presently the figtree withered
away, Mat: 21, 19.

3 Being given over to death in Hell. Many will say to me in that day, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out
Devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then I will profess
unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity, Matt: 7.
22, 23. Work iniquity] What? do all these great things, and yet work iniquity?
Yea, prophecy, cast out Devils, preach well, pray well, even to admiration;
and yet work iniquity. There is too often experience even of such hypocrisy.
Such as are not professors, will rise up in judgment against such men, and
condemn them. Shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfill the
law, judge thee who by ( or in) the letter, and circumcision do transgress
the Law? Rom: 2. 27.

Prosperity See Unthankfulness.
:
Such as abuse it to Sin, through wantonness, confidence, and security,
Threatened
1 With Not-being pardoned. How shall I pardon thee for this? Thy children have
forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods. when I had fed them to the
full, they then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in
harlots houses, Jer. 5. 7. Froward children will be most froward, when their
parents are most loving. But nothing will anger a parent more. When I fed them
to the full] As full-feeding on meat, disposes the body to corporal adultery:
so does being full fed with prosperity, dispose the soul to spiritual
adultery. But withal it is as certain, that as diseases are the fruits of the
former; so punishments are the reward of the latter.

2 Removal of those things which they abused, and wherein they put their
confidence. As they were increased, so they sinned against me. or, (according
to the Chald. Alluding it may be to what is said chapter 10. 1. As I take it, (...)
signifies to increase any other way, as well as in number, see 1 King. 4. 30.
Ezekiel. 19. 2. But perhaps (...) here, is rather meant of increasing in number:
because it is presently after, threatened for a punishment, They shall commit
whoredom, and shall not increase, verse. 10. as if it had been said, because
they abuse their increase in number, they shall increase so no more, ^^ough
they shall commit whoredom never so much to effect it. ^^eed, ( says the
vulgar translation) as if it were a threat of frustrating their confidence in
the Egyptians: for that is usually meant by feeding with the wind.
par.) As I multiplied their fruits; so they multiplied to sin. Therefore
will I change their glory into shame, Hos. 4. 7. So in Jeremy, The complaint
is, I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity; and thou saidest, I will not hear, c.
22. 2. ( even in Adversity we do not hear, but in prosperity we are apt to
say, we will not hear) The threat presently follows, verse. 22. The wind shall
eatea up all thy pastors, thy lovers shall go into captivity, etc. So
likewise verse, 23. it is said, O inhabitant of Lebanon, that make thy nest in
the cedars ( thinking thy self, as secure as the eagle in his nest. Jer. 49.
16.) But it is presently added in the same verse, How gracious shall thou be,
now when pangs come upon thee? Or, if you will, How shall thou be gracious: and
obtain favor and mercy, when adversity comes; having been thus lifted up
with prosperity. See the like complaint Hos. 10. 1. where Israel is compared
to a vine that brings forth fruit only for it self: ( perhaps only leaves
Leaves are (...) (the word here used) i. e. soetus.
, for it is own covert:) and not for the use of the owner.

3 Most severe punishments without mercy. According to their pasture, so were
they filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me.
Therefore will I be unto them as a Lion, as a Leopard by the way, will will I
observe them, I will meet them as a bear robbed of her whelps, and will rent
the cawle of their heart, and there will I devour them like a lion: the wild
beast shall tear them. ( It is spoken of the Israelites) Hos. 13. 6, 7, 8. As
a Lion.] Seeing they have been like idle beasts to me; only growing fatt
with my blessings, as beasts do with pasture, till they kick Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
against their master* I will be like a cruel beast to them, even like a Lion,
and punish them without mercy. as a ravenous beast will I observe them, and
choose out the fattest of them for my prey. I will destroy the fat and the
strong, Ezekiel. 34. 16. Full and high fed horses, and such as have layen long
idle, break and grow unruly: but they are sure to be hampered for it. And
there will I devour them.] There, that is (says one Arias.
) in the heart: as if the threat were thus, As the Lion (when he kills a beast)
falls upon the HEART chiefly, and the blood and the fat that is about it: and
leaves the rest of the body to be devoured by other beasts. So I will first
punish the Israelites in their hearts, with sorrows, and fears: and afterward
deliver them to the Assyrians, to punish them in their bodies, with oppression
and violence.

In the places hitherto cited, you have had God's punishments for abused
prosperity, upon the Israelites his own people: (for Judgment usually
begins at the house of God) Now I shall show you, how he threatened, and
punished the heathen. as 1 The Moabites. who, for trusting Woe to them that are
at ease, Amos 6. 1.
in their treasures Jer: 48, 7, and their Idols v. 13 for their Security in
being at ease*, and obstinacy in their wickedness, in Keeping their Sent, like
wine settled upon the lees, because they had no Changes, and because no enemy
molested them verse. 11; in the 12 verse. are thus threatened, I will send unto
him wanderers that shall cause him to wander, and shall empty his vessels, and
break their bottels. 2 Chaldea. who for being overjoy^d with success upon her
enemies, and growing fatt with the spoil of Gods people. Jer, 50, 11; is
threatened to be dealt with her self, as she had dealt with others Chaldea
shall be a spoil, all that spoil her shall be satisfied verse. 10. 3 Sodom;
the maine occasion if not the cause of whose fearful punishments, was her
idle security, and her proud confidence for her fulness of bread Ezekiel. 16, 49,
50. Idleness, as well as full feeding, will breed dsieases in men's bodies, and
draw down judgment upon their persons. Security, and confidence; if they be
not the causes, why men suffer punishments; are the occasions, why they do not
escape them. for, like hypnotick potions they bring men asleep, with the doors
open upon them: so that misery, and all sorts of misery, may come upon them,
and take them napping in one day: as it is said of Babylon. Whose threat,
because it is so pat to my purpose, I will produce. How much she has
glorified her self and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her.
for she says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
sorrow. therefore shall her plagues come in one day: death and mourning, and
famine: for she shall be utterly burnt with fire, Rev: 18. 7, 8. Worldly men,
as they abuse prosperity, so they are abused by it, and deceived, viz: by
becoming so proud, as to think they can never be removed. But see how Edom is
threatened for his pride thus occasioned, Jer: 49. 16. Thy terriblenesse has
deceived thee, and the pride of thine heart, etc. Be more afraid in, and of
prosperity, then adversity. They who are too much taken with it, will be
quickly taken by it, and ensnared. For it is no better to worldly men, then a
baited snare.

Proud I choose this title, rather then Pride: because, though all these
punishments mentioned were inflicted upon proud me^, yet some of them it is not
expressed, that they were inflicted for pride.
men,
Have cause to fear.
1 God's slighting and neglecting of them, (for, however some translate; yet
the place is most easily thus interpreted: and the context seems to require
it) Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect to the lowly: but the proud he
knows a far off, Psalm. 138. 6. He knows them well enough; and that they
shall know one day: but he does not acknowledge, nor respect them. Think it
not strange. The higher men are, the further from heaven See more in sect. 4.

2 God's anger and resolution to punish them. for it is said even of Hezekiah;
and though he were only too glad, or (as we say) proud of a mercy, the
recovery of his health. His heart was lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon
him, and upon Judah, and Jerusalem, 2 Chr 32. 25. This wrath was executed,
after his death: and it had been executed before, had he not humbled himself
for having exalted himself: Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his
heart, etc. So the wrath of the Lord came not upon them in the days of
Hezekiah, verse. 26.

3 God's hatred. Both when it is expressed in behavior. These six things does
the Lord hate, yea seven are an abomination Hebr. abominatio^ of his soul.
to him. A proud look, etc. Prove: 6. 17. And when it is only in the heart, (as
there are too many proud hearts, with dejected looks.) Every one that is proud
in heart, is an abomination to the Lord, c: 16. 5. And no wonder: for God
knows, whereof he is made; and that he is but dust, Ps: 103, 14. How do our
stomachs rise, when we see a man proud, whom we know to come of a very mean
descent?

4 God's setting himself against them. (...) etc. He resists the proud, and
gives grace to the humble. I believe this was an ordinary saying, in the times
of the Apostles; like a proverb. Both Peter and James have it, in their
Epistles, 1 Pet. 5. 5. James 4. 6. It was one of Solomon's proverbs, long
before, Surely he scorneth the scorners, but gives grace to the lowly, Prove.
3. 34. It is a fearful thing when God resolves to punish a man after that
manner This he often does, not forgiving trespasses against him, to those, who
will not forgive trespasses against them, Matthew. 6. 15. and executing judgment
without mercy, on him that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2. 13. etc.
, as he sins against him: when he will walk contrary to them, that walk
contrary to him; and show himself froward with the froward: or, (as it is
here) when he scorneth, the scorners. If one scorner, or one froward man, meet
with another; woe to him that is weakest. The more proud, the more resistance;
the more resistance the more pain, and enraging of the adversary for the
present; and the greater punishment to come. God takes a kind of delight, to
deal with such men: as a valiant soldier does, to deal with a stubborn
enemy, whom he hopes to conquer. If all the Kings of the earth should set
themselves against him; it would be but so much laughing matter to him. Psalm.
2. 2, 4. Me thinks, I see God, like a challenged enemy, after long
provocation, as it were, entering into the lists against Babylon; when I read
those words of his, Behold I am against thee, O thou most proud, Jer. 50. 31.
AGAINST thee] or, To thee (so the (...)
Hebrew) as if he should say. Have at thee: or, Come on, Babylon; now I am for
thee. now I see thee proud, now thou art a fit object to exercise my full
strength upon. God does not punish any so deliberately, (as I may say) or with
such resolution; as he does a proud man. The Lord of hosts has purposed it
(...) I know not whether the word does signify only excellency: but here the
Sept. translate it (...), and the vulgar Superbiam.
(or, upon consultation determined) to stain the pride (...)
of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth Is:
23. 9. And no wonder: if it be according to that saying of the Jews, In
whomsoever is haughtiness Buxtorf. ex Sota fo. 5. coll. 1
of spirit, God says of him: I and he, cannot dwell together in one world. So
that the next thing he must expect is

5 Certain punishment, in spite of all his strength, and endeavors to the
contrary. (for to thus much the words will amount; expound them how you will)
Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord: though hand
join in hand, he shall not be unpunished, Prove: 16. 5.

The punishments, which the Scripture mentions are

1 Abasement. It was a common saying among the Jews, Whosoever exalts
himself shall be abased, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted Aesop
being asked, What God did in heaven? made answer (...), he makes high things
low, and low things high.
. Our Savior (belike) used it often. Luke speaks of twice, as c. 14 11. c. 8.
14. Abasement I say: both by, and with God: whether it be pride toward him, or
toward men. For one of those times, our Savior used it upon occasion of the
Pharisee's justifying himself, c. 18. the other, upon occasion of a man's
taking the uppermost seat at a feast, without entreaty, c. 14. Evils (of
punishment do not spring out of the ground. They come all from above: and
therefore no wonder that the highest things bear the brunt, and the lowest
escape. The day of the Lord of hoasts, shall be upon every one that is proud
and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up: and he shall be brought low.
And upon all the Cedras of Libanon that are high and lifted up, and upon all
the Oaks of Bashan, and upon all the high mountains Feriunt summos fulmina
montes. Sen.
, and upon all the hills that are lifted up etc. Isa: 2. 12. to 18. See c. 5,
15. c. 13. 11. c. 14. 13. Job 40. 12. Infinite many more texts for such like
threatening expressions, might be brought against pride. But I am oath to offer
you to many, lest you resolve to take none at all. There be likewise many
examples of men, and people that have been abased for their pride. whereof I
will only namea few, in whose relation pride is chiefly mentioned and they are
1 the Sodomites, Ez: 16. 49. 2 Nebucadnezar, Dan: 5. 20, 21 3 Belshazzar (his
son) ibid. verse. 23. 4 The Tyrians, Ezekiel: 28. 6. 5 The Assyrians, Ezekiel: 31. 10.
6 The Moabites, Isa: 16. 6. So likewise examples of evils occasioned by pride,
doubtless, I might produce many: but that it is not agreeable with my purpose,
to speak of consequents; except such as are necessary, or immediate. However I
will name one, viz: Amaziah King of Judah. who being lifted up for his victory
over the Edomites; when he had no occasion given him, would needs challenge
Joash King of Israel to fight with him; and was overthrown, and taken
prisoner: and both the Court, and Temple plundered, 2 Chronicles: 25. 19, 22. And I
refer you to three or four more the like instances, in the Chapter of
Despising.

2 Shame (an attendant of the former punishment) When pride comes then
comes shame, Pro: 11. 2. and indeed shame cannot come without pride: for a
humble man, befall him what will, has no cause of shame if he have of grief.
Shame I say: not only (as we usually take the word) being ashamed; but, (as
the original is) (...) the shame of reproach Contumelia, Hierome: (...) the
Sept: who usually call pride it self by that name.
. When a proud man falls; many will reproach him, and no body will pity him See
Ps. 119 78. As likewi^e the punishment of proud women, Isa: 3, 17. and the
parable of the guest, who was made with shame to take the lowest room, Luk:
14. 9.

3 Diseases upon their bodies (which they have too proudly clothed, or carried)
Because the daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth
necks, and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling
with their feet. Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the
head of the daughters of Sion, etc. Isa: 3. 16, 17. with the following verses.
Joash King of Israel, was punished with very loathsome diseases: so that no
body could endure to come near him, 2 Chr. 24, 25. And he is thought to have
been thus punished, chiefly for his pride viz. in suffering men to adore him
and worship him, as a God. For this Hierom In his Hebrew qu^stio^s.
and others conceive to be meant by those words, v. 17: of the aforesaid
chapter, After the death of Jehoiada (because, say they, it could not be
suffered, while Jehoiada was living) came the Princes of Judah, and made
obeisance to the King. now says one Cassian. institut. l. 16 c. 21. ut carnis
ignominiosa contagio patefaceret immunditiem cordis ejus occultam, quam
superbiae malo contraxerat: ac manifesta pollutione corporis probaretur
impurus, qui elatione spiritus, factum se non sentiebat immundum.
, by this filthiness, and uncleannes of his body, through diseases; God did mind
him of the uncleanness of his soul, through pride. The Septuagint in Prove:
16. 5 where we render abomination, translate, unclean.

4 Ruin and destruction. Upon their persons: He that exalts his gate,
seeks destruction (and that is easy enough to be found) Prove: 17. 19 As
surely as he that exalts his gate (as we call it) in going, and takes no
notice of his way, is sure to fall. See Mal: 4. 1. Upon their Families. The
Lord will destroy the house of the proud, c: 15. 25. Pride will have a fall, is
so true a saying: that if we once see a man proud, we may conclude, whereto he
will. For he is fallen Illa prorsus ruina, quae fit in occulto, praecedit
ruiuam, quae fit in manifesto: dum illa ruina non esse putatur, August. de civ.
Dei. l. 14. c. 13.
with God already: dead in Law, there wants only execution. It Is God's way,
when he will destroy a man to the purpose: to let him get up high: and then
his fall will be the greater. Thus much is implied (viz: that pride is
commonly both a sign, or a means of a man's ruin) in these words, Pride goes
before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall, Prove: 16. 18. See c:
18. 12. Jeremiah knew this very well: and that was it that made him mourn so
bitterly for the pride of the Israelites: But if ye will not hear it, my
soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, Jer: 13. 17. Why? because he
was certain now, that their captivity was determined: as certain, as if it
were already fulfilled. for so he speaks in the same verse, Because the Lords
flock Is carried away. See his mourning (for he was a man of a very pitiful
spirit; witness his Lamentations: otherwise he would never have mourned for
proud men, above any) for Moab's destruction for the like cause, c. 48, 28. 31.
It was said above, If ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep for your
pride. Now give me leave upon these words, to take occasion to tell you, that
(as I take it) both here and in several other places of the Prophets, when
complaint is made of the pride of the Israelites, it is chiefly meant of
stiffenesse and stoutnesse of spirit, in not believing In two places of the
Psalms viz. Ps. 31. 23. and Ps. 101 6. you have faithful, and proud, opposed
one to the other, though (as I have elsewhere said) in the old Testament, by
faithful, is meant trusty; or, one that may be believed: rather then one that
will believe.
and fearing God's threats and judgments. And so in the Proverbs and
elsewhere, I believe it is many times meant of stoutnesse of spirit in refusing
to hear instruction: as ch: 13. 10. etc. I say, pride (in the Scripture) is
many times meant of pride toward God; as well as toward men.

5 Being condemned to hell (if (...) be rightly rendered) Not a Novice (...),
The Vulgar translate (...), judicium. Beza is indifferent, for criminationem,
or, condemnationem. and Erasmus renders (...) calumniatoris, as he does Ephesians. 4.
27.
lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the devil.
1 Timothy: 3. 6. Yea though you should in this place, translate otherwise then we
have translated: yet nevertheless will proud men have cause to fear this
punishment, because it was the Devils punishment, and inflicted upon him for
this sin: as most Divines say; and as it may seem to be proved by those
words of Jude vere 6. (...), (...). And the Angels which kept not their first
estate but left their own habitation, etc. For though the word (...) ( kept)
may seem to imply rather regard, then contentedness, in keeping: (a^ in
keeping the Commandments, or the like: for so it is oftenest used) and so
consequently that (...) may not be translated otherwise then with Beza,
Originem; or with us, first estate, cautiously and dubiously. yet it being
said, (...) ( their OWN first estate) and not only (...) (as it is afterward
(...) Which is not an expression of their punishment but of their sin, as the
former part of the verse is, as appears by the conjunction (...).
(...), their OWN habitation.) though this be not so much, yet it may be of
some moment, to make us incline to the translation of the Vulgar, who translate
it principatu^, principality: so that we may render it, first STATE; as well as
first ESTATE: making (...) to be understood of honor. Now hereby the ambition
of the Angels, in desiring to be equal with God, having an honorable
condition of their own already, is not only expressed, but aggravated. What
ever the Divel's sin was: First, he could not deserve such a punishment as he
had, for any sin, better then for such pride and ambition: if being as high
as heaven already, he desired to be higher yet. 2 No other punishment could
have been so suitable either to the sin of pride; or to that rule of Gods
providence of abasing the proud, etc. If being as high as heaven; he was abased
as low as hell. Thus you see, what a numerous train of Pursuyvants attend the
proud man: enough to frighten him in for all his stomach, if he would but
vouchsafe to look behind Sequitur superbos ultor a te^ go deus. Sen.
him. And therefore well might David say, that God PLENTIFULLY rewards the
proud doer, Ps. 31. 23. and I may justly cry with Isaiah, Woe to the crown of
pride c. 28. 1.

But were there never a one of these places of Scripture, to threaten a proud
man withal: yet has he just cause of fearing many evils and punishments,
even from the very nature and quality of his sin: that which the Scripture
also takes notice of, as

1 Because it makes him contentious: (and he that is so, can never live a quiet
life.) Only by pride comes contention, Prove: 13. 10.

2 Because it makes him hated. Him that has a high look, and a proud heart, I
will not suffer, Ps. 101. 5. I did not EAT with him The Septuag. and so the
Rom Psalm.
, some translate. Others, I could not BE with him.

3 Because it makes him think, he is secure, * Hierom.
and so deceives him; as it did Edom. The pride of thine heart has deceived
thee, thou that dwell in the clefts of the rocks Obad: 3.

4 Because it makes them impudent in sinning, so that they declare Isa 3. 9.
their iniquities; and cause God to punish many times, when else he would not.
The pride of Israel does testify to (or in) his face, Hos. 5. 5. Hebr. The
pride (...)
of Israel does answer Respondebit. Hieron. as it is said, Prove. 27. 19. Face
answers face.
in his face. now whether by answer, be here intended, Ephraim, and Israel
their likeness one to another in pride: (as it may seem to be, because in the
verses before, they are complained of together, and here in this verse it is
immediately added, Therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity:)
or, whether it be meant of a defending of sin in not hiding it, but
acknowledging it, and replying in the defense of it, when they were reproved:
as it is said in Esaiah (c. 3. 9.) The (...)
acknowledgement of their face does answer in them (or against them: or as we
translate, The show of the Countenance does witness against the^.) Either way
it will be impudence enough. for they should have been ashemed of one another;
and layne their hands upon their mouths. No sinner can be so easily condemned
for sin, as a proud man: because he needs no witness. He will confess it,
(shall I say?) or rather, boast of it of himself. A man^s pride will bring him
low, Prove. 29. 23. you need have nothing else to do it. Proud men reward evil
to themselves, none like them. And therefore woe unto them, Isa. 3. 9. See of
this Pride toward God, in the Chapter of Impudence.

Punishments * See Incorrigiblenes.
.
Such as are not bettered by them, have cause to fear:
1 If the punishments are other men's; the same, or rather worse. especially, if
they knew they were inflicted for the same sins, that they commit. For when
Judah committed the same sins of spiritual adultery, for which God had put
away Israel into captivity before: having an intention thus to punish them, he
made his complaint in these words, But she returned not: and her treacherous
sister Judah saw it. And I saw, when for all the causes whereby backsliding
Israel committed adultery, I had put her away and given her a bill of divorce,
yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot
also, Jer: 3. 8. And it follows v. 11. The backsliding Israel has justified
her self more then treacherous Judah. I saw] Me thinks, I see God, when he
has punished any one, like a schoolmaster when he has whipped a boy, looking
upon the rest, to see how they stand in awe: and observing more then, than at
other times, how they amend their carriage. See this complaint of Judah's not
taking example by his judgments upon Israel, under the names of Aholah and
Aholibah ( Aholah for Israel, and Aholibah for Judah) Ezekiel. 23.

2 If their own; The addition of more. But the hypocrites in heart heap up
wrath, they cry not when he binds them Job. 36. 13.

3 If both their own, and other men's; The Extremity of punishment, or, the
execution of that punishment, which those lesser punishments were used as
means to make them escape. especially, if they were peculiar, and
distinguishing. And for proof of this, there is a notable place in Amos:
which, because it is so pathetick, I will not think much to transcribe to your
hands. And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and
want of bread in all your places: YET have ye not returned unto me says the
Lord. And I also have withholden the rain from you, when there was yet three
months to the harvest, and I caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it
not to rain upon another city: one piece was rained upon, and the piece
whereupon it rained not withered. So two or three cities wandered unto one city
to drink water: but they were not satisfied: YET have ye not returned unto
me says the Lord. I have smitten you with blasting and mildew; when your
gardens and your vineyards, and your figtrees, and your olive trees increased,
the palmerworm devoured the^: YET have ye not returned unto me, says the
Lord. I have sent among you the pestilence, after the manner of Egypt, your
young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses, and I
have made the stink of your camps to come up unto your nostrills, YET have ye
not returned unto me says the Lord. I have overthrown some of you, as God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the
burning, YET have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord, Amos, 4, 6. to 12.

YET have ye not returned] you have this complaint no less the^ five times.
to show, how tenderly God took it, and how inexcusable they were, that they
were not recalled, though he had called to them so often, and so loud, and that
by so many and great punishments. But what does he threaten them with, after
this long complaint? doubtless that which is severe enough. but it is not
expressed. only he says, Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, viz:
which, though some refer to that which was threatened before ver. 2. viz:
taking them away with hooks, etc. yet others more probably; because that
punishment seems to be less then other punishments were mentioned; and
because it (...) not likely they would be frighted with less, who were not
frighted with greater; make it to be an aposiopesis, or figurative expression
of the greatness of the punishment by not Like Virgil, Quos Ego -- Aen. 1.
expressing it. As if he had said, I know what I will do; or, I will do as I
purposed.

How guilty have we of this Nation been of this sin, especially of late
years! Who though so many of God's judgments have been abroad in the earth;
yet have not learned righteousness. I am confident more guilty, then we dare
be again: would we but consider, that God is little sesse angry, for not taking
notice of his judgments, then he would be, if he should speak to us with his
own voice from heaven, and we should stop our ears: which I am confident none
of us would dare to do. All punishments Esa. 26. 9.
are documents, (to teach us:) and so they are intended, both by God and man
(...).
. In the book of Ezekiel, c. 16. v. 56. where we translate, Thy sister Sodom
was not mentioned Nemo prudens punit quia peccatum est, sed ne peccetur. Sen.
l. 1. de Ira. c. 16.
etc. The Chald: paraphrast, says, was not for instruction. the word, in the
Heb. are (...) was not in thy mouth for hearing (or, a report.) They had quite
forgot the destruction of Sodom: there was no more speech of it. (God's people
should love to be talking, and hearing of his judgments.) So in Jeremy 46.
28. where we translate, I will correct thee in measure: He renders, I will
bring punishment upon theee to teach thee. It is so much God's intention, and
expectation, that we should learn by other men's punishments: that when he
threatened to punish Jerusalem, he said he would make it an instruction (...)
Hieron. exemplum.
, Ezekiel. 5. 15 It is likely, that many times God would not punish men in the
open sight of others Job. 34. 26.
; were it not that he would have others to fear Ps. 64. 9. Isa. 25. 3.
, and be taught, not to do after their wickedness Ezekiel. 23. 48.
(...) d.
Why should not amendment, and punishment, go together? We use one word,
Correct, to express both. And in Hebrew *, and Greek, (...).
the some word signifies both, to punish, and to teach.

Rashness punished,
With Miscarriage. Without counsel, purposes are disappointed: but in the
multitude of counselors they are established, Prove: 15. 22. Counsell] or
secret (...)
(...) We say, that is noe counsel.
, which in English we usually call Counsel The same word (...), is used for
rashly, and in vain.
. Taking counsel, is as necessary, that our purposes may be effected: as
keeping counsel is necessary, that they may not be hindered Q. Curtius (
speaking of temerity in Soldiers) quae ubi primum impetum effudit, velut
quaedam animalia amisso aculeo torpet. Lib. 40.
. In the story of the Maccabees, it is said that certain Priests desirous to
show their valor, were slain in battle for that they went about to fight
unadvisedly, 1 Mac. 5. 6, 7.

Reconciliation.
The Neglect of it.
Agree with thine adversary quickly while thou art in the way: lest at any time
the adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the
officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily, I say unto thee, thou shall by
no means come out thence, till thou have paid the utmost farthing, Mat: 5. 25,
26.

Regeneration,
The Want of it.
Our Savior told Nicodemus ( a Ruler among the Jews,) Verily, verily I say
unto thee, except a man be borne of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven, Joh: 3. 5.

Rejoicing at See Notpitying.
other men's miseries.

Whether the men are godly, or wicked, threatened
1 With certain Punishment. Who so mocketh the poor, reproacheth his maker:
and he that is glad at calamities, shall not be unpunished Prove: 17. 5. Shall
not be unpunished.] Perhaps it may be meant, shall be punished severely. For it
is an usual Hebraisme in the Scripture, to speak by a (...) or (...), of
things that are very bad, whether punishments or sins: meaning the more, by
expressing the less. At Calamities] simply, without expressing a person. as if
calamities themselves, upon no person, and in no case, might be the direct
object of our joy.

2 If they are our enemies, God's turning away his wrath from them (and perhaps
to us) Rejoice not when thine enemy falls: and let not thine heart be glad,
when he stumbleth: lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away
his wrath from him, Prove. 24. 17, 18. Job puts it among those sins, which if
he were guilty of, he wished, or would be contented, that any misery might fall
upon him. If I rejoiced at the destruction (or misery) of him that hated me, or
lift up my self, when evil found him, Job 31. 29. as if he had added, I would
have been contented, God should have done to me what he would. Lift up my
selfe] The Sept. (...), if my heart, (only) did say, it is good enough for him,
(a speech too often used.) At the destruction] in the Hebrew. (...) IN the
destruction. as if he would not rejoice, so much as at such a time when his
enemy was destroyed. Which is more then Solomon's at, or for At calamities,
Hebr. (...)
, in the place above quoted. (And indeed they are no ordinary acts of piety,
which Job commends himself for in that Chapter.) But not more then David
practiced, to the purpose, not only not rejoicing, but mourning at such times
WHEN they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth, Psalm: 35. 13.

But if the men are godly, it is threatened,
With God's exceeding great anger, and the like miseries as they suffered. For
now, it is true (...). At the miseries of wicked men, we may ( The Philosopher
Aristot: Rhet. l. 1. c. 11. f. 20.
says, we must) (...), be without sorrow: but at these we may not. There are
several instances for this. as, 1. the Ammonites. who rejoiced at the
captivity of the Jews. Because, thou have clapped thine hands, and stamped
with the feet, and rejoiced in heart, with all thy despite, against the Land of
Israel. Behold therefore, I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will
deliver thee for a spoil to the heathen, and I will cut thee off from the
people, and I will cause thee to perish out of the countries. I will destroy
thee: and thou shall know that I am the Lord Ezekiel, 25. 6, 7. 2 The Tyrians (
though they rejoiced, because it would be for their own good.) Because that
Tyrus has said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken that was the gates of the
people: she is turned unto me; I shall be replenished, now she is laid wast.
Therefore thus says the Lord I am against thee, O Tyrus c. 2 6. 2, 3. 3 The
people of Seir. As thou did rejoice at the inheritance of the house of
Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee. Thou shall be desolate
O mount Seir, and all Idumea, even all of it: and they shall know that I am the
Lord. c 35. 15. Such insulting words at the affliction of the godly, though
for shame of the world, men will not confess they intend it so: yet do indeed
strike at God. for I am sure, he would not complain without cause: and yet in
the chapter last quoted verse. 13, you find him thus complaining, Thus with
your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have multiplied your words against
me: I have heard them.

Relapsing into sin * Punished, See Apostacy.

With a worse condition. For the Unclean Spirit when he comes again to a house
which he has left, will bring seven more spirits along with him; and keep it
so strongly, that he will hardly be cast out. When the unclean spirit is gone
out of a man, he walks through dry places, seeking rest, (or, habitation) and
finds none. Then he says, I will return unto my house, from whence I came:
and when he is come he finds it empty, swept, and garnished, then goes he,
and takes with himself Seven This number is used to express a full number,
or measure, as, 1 Samuel 1^. 5. Isa. 4. 1.
(or as many as can be gotten) other Spirits, worse then himself, and they
enter in, and dwell therein, (before, he did but lodge there, but now he will
dwell) and the last state of that man is worse then the first, Mat: 12. 43, 44,
45. Our Savior says thus to the Jews. and his saying has been verified in
them: according to his prophecy in the same place, Even thus shall it be also
unto this wicked generation This Parable-like speech of his, you have delivered
by Peter, in plainer terms; as if he had it in his mind to interpret it, For
if after they have escaped the pollution of the world (pollution, and unclean
spirit, answer very well) through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are entangled again therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse
with them then the beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20. The clean spirit (if I may so call
the Holy Ghost) when it has left a man for a while: (as many times in a manner
it does) when it returns again, it comes with a great deal more efficacy.
for it finds a man humbled for the want of it, and empty. Soldiers, that have
kept a Castle and lost it; if they take it again, will go near to make it
impregnable. If you consider it, you will find it hold in Spiritual, Civil,
and Natural things: that Returns to former conditions or actions (for the
most part) improve them.

Threatened.
With a worse punishment, Our Savior said to the man, whom he had cured of an
infirmity of 38 years, Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee, Joh:
5. 14.

Religion, and religious actions used for a cloak Commonly such as are thus used
are longer, and larger, thou ordinary: fit to make cloakes of: For a pretense
make long prayers. Mat. 23. 14.

Threatened.
1 With Not-being accepted. Though they be of the best sort, even free will
offerings, nay the best of that sort, (I mean the fairest and best to look
to.) Thus was threatened Readiness sparing (forsooth) the best of the Oxen and
Sheep, to sacrifice to the Lord, 1 Samuel: 15. 21. (which was but a pretext to
cover his covetousness, and his disobedience) for Samuel told him, To obey is
better then sacrifice, verse 22. Thus the Israelites their fasting for strife,
Isa 58. 3, 4, 5. Is it such a fast, that I have chosen? v. 5. So in Jeremy,
(says God) What has my beloved to do in my house, seeing she has wrought
lewdness with many? ch: 11. 15. Our Savior speaking of those, who denied to
profit (or, help) their decayed parents, upon pretense that they had given
their goods to the Korban, for the use of the Church and the poor; applies the
complaint of the Prophet Isay, In vain do they worship me, Mark 7. 7. See
what an Epiphonema, John puts upon Judas his charity (forsooth) to the poor,
(when he would have had the ointment spent upon our Savior's feet, to have
been spent upon them) Joh. 12. 6. This he said, not that he cared for the
poor, but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put
therein.

2 God's not rewarding, or, satisfying them ( such as Trust, and Reliance) The
heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the
Prophets thereof divine for money, yet will they lean upon the Lord and say, is
not the Lord among us? None evil can come upon us. Therefore shall Zion, for
your sake be plowed as a field, Mic: 3. 11, 12.

3 God's abhorring of them. I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt
offerings, Isa 61. 8. Such robberies, the Scribes and Pharisees, to whom Christ
spoke those words before mentioned, were guilty of. who pretending they took
it for pious uses, as for offerings, and the like; by this means, rooked the
poor widows and orphans of their livelihood. God abhorres such pretended
religion, as much as he did the hire of an whore, or, the price of a dog,
brought into his house, though it were for a vow: which, he says, were an
abomination to him, Deuteronomy: 23. 18. It was the saying of an Heathen Cic. pro
Cluentio. Deorum mentes no^ contaminata superstitione neque ad scelus
perficiendum coesis hostiis posse placari.
, that the Gods could not be made propitious with offering sacrifices to commit
wickedness.

4 God's being against them. Behold, I am against the Prophets that use their
tongues and say, HE SAYS, Jer. 23. 31.

5 God's severe punishing them. For thus he complains, Whose possessours slay
them, and hold themselves not guilty, and they that sell them, say, Blessed be
the Lord, for I am rich, Zach. 11. 5.

Religion only in Show.
Threatened.
1 With Having no reward. Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to
be seen of them: otherwise ye have no reward of your father which is in
heaven, Mat. 6. 1. No reward of your father.] All the reward you have, is that
which you do it for (and how can you expect any other?) viz. The praise of men.

They disfigure their faces that they may appear unto men to fast, verily I
say unto you: they have their reward, Mat. 6. 16. They have their reward] they
are paid: and let them look for nothing in heaven hereafter. Hitherto may you
refer that in Timothy, ( if you expound it of fasting, with Beza,) Bodily
exercise profits nothing, 1 Ep. 4 8.

2 Woe. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees: for ye make clean the outside of
the cup, and the platter, but within they are full of extortion, and excess,
Mat. 23. 25.

Repenting late
Strive to enter in at the strait gate. For many, I say unto you, will seek (
which do not strive) to enter in, and shall not be able. When once the master
of the house is risen up, and has shut to the doors: and ye begin to stand
without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and he
shall answer, and say unto you, I know you not whence you are etc. Luke 13. 24,
25.

Reported well of by all
Woe Non minuspericulum est ex magna fama qua^ ex mala, Tac. in vit. Jul. Agri.
unto you, when all men shall speak well of you, Luke 6. 26.

Reproaching Threatened, * See Mocking.

1 With certain punishment: because God takes special notice of it. Thou have
heard their reproach O Lord, and all their imaginations against me, Lam: 3. 61.
Ps. 69. 19. Whosoever shall say to his brother Raka, shall be in Vain fellow.
such as those (...) Jud. 11. 3.
danger of the council, but whosoever shall say thou fool, shall be in danger
of hell fire, Mat. 5. 22.

2 With sad and heavy judgments, denounced in very angry expressions. I have
heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon; whereby
they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against their border.
Therefore, as I live, says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, surely Moab
shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of
nettles, and salt pits, and a perpetual desolation. The residue of my people
shall spoil the^, and the remnant of my people shall possess them, Zeph: 2.
8, 9. See Eze: 21. 28. concerning the same people.

3 Exclusion out of heaven. Nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the
kingdom of God, 1. Cor: 6. 10. Certainly a reviler is as much out of charity
in his heart, as a man can be. and God looks not so much to uncharitableness,
what it is either in our speech or our actions (for that is according to our
power) as what it is in our hearts.

There is an example or two of reproachers severely punished. 1 Nahash the
Ammonite, when he besieged Jabash Gilead; would not yield to the desire of the
inhabitants, to enter into covenant with them, although they proffered to serve
him; but with this condition, viz: that he might thrust out all their right
eyes Josephus says, he did thus to all the Israelites, that he could take. that
so being not well able to use their shield (which they held in their left hand)
unless they hindered their sight; they might be made unfit for war.
, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel, 1 Samuel: 11. 2. But the inhabitants
sent immediately to Saul: who came with his army upon the Ammonites in the
morning watch, and slew them until the heat of the day. And it came Aristotle
in his Politics l. 5. c. 10. among other occasions of the ruin of States,
brings this for one, and instances in the conspiracy of Decamnichus against
Archelaus for giving him to Euripides to be whipped, whom he had formerly jeered
for his stinking breath.
to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them were
not left together, verse. 11. 2 Nabal the Carmelite, when David sent his
servants to him for victuals for his men, gave them this reproachful answer.
Who is David, and who is the son of Jesse? There be many servants now adays,
that break away every man from his master As they usually do in a Civil war.
. 1 Samuel: 25. 10. Now which sin it was, that was punished: whether his not
giving David provision; or his giving this reproachful answer; I know not.
But it is said in the same Chapter, v 38. And it came to pass about ten days
after, that the Lord smote Nabal that he died. Had not his wife Abigail
pacified David with a present, he had been killed by him before, ver. 33. but
the punishment was more notorious this way, viz: by the hand of God.

Reproof,
Such as do not Give it
If Parents, they are sometimes punished by God (of which see in the Chapter of
Parents.) Sometimes by their children themselves. Thus was David punished by
his son Adonijah: of who^ is it said, that his father had not displeased him at
any time, in saying, why have thou done so? 1 Kings 1. 6. But he took a course
to work him trouble enough, to reward him for his gentleness: for he sought
to make himself King. ver. 5.

If they are God's Ministers; I know not what they may expect. Their case is
bad enough doubtless: as you may gather by the Prophet Isai's words (if the
Latin translation be right) Woe unto me, because We translate, for I am
undone, The Hebrew which we have is (...)
I have held my peace, ch: 6. 5. Those who follow this translation, some of
them interpret it, of the Prophet's not reproving King Vzziah so, boldly as he
should, for meddling with the Priests office, 2 Chr. 26. 16. Others, because he
did not see him putt out of the City, according to the Law for the Lepers, Lev.
13. 46. But this last we have the less cause to suspect, for what is said in
that chapter but now quoted, v. 21: viz. That he dwelt in a several house.

Such as do not Take it, punished,
1 With Error. He is in the way of life that keeps instruction: bnt he that
refuses reproof, erreth. Prove 10. 17.

2 Destruction. Correction is grievous unto him that forsakes the way; and he
that hates reproof shall die. Prove. 15. 10. The way, again; as it was
before. For there is no other way, to come to life. The horse that will not
follow the reins: and the traveller, that will not hearken to him, that tells
him when he is Out; especially where there are so many turnings: how is it
likely, they can be in the right? Shall die] and that shamefullly: (...), make
a shameful end, so the Sept translate. And this is often seen stubborn, and
self-willed men, how are they ashamed to show their faces, when they miscarry!
having nothing to say for, and nobody to speak against but, themselves.

They miscarry shamefully, and they miscarry suddenly (for they must of
necessity, if they will not take warning.) He that being often reproved
hardens his neck, (for he keeps going notwithstanding, and every step brings
him nearer to the pit) shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy,
Prove. 29. 1. Basil being asked, With what mind a man should take reproof?
answered, with the same that a man should take a medicine, being in a dangerous
disease.

Cyprian's Ep. 61. ad Pomp.
punishment for such men is Excommunication.

Revenging.
God threatens to punish it severely. 1 In the Edomites. Thus says the Lord
God, because that Edom has dealt against the house of Judah, by taking
vengeance; and has greatly offended, and (...).
revenged, ( or, has greatly offended in revenging) himself upon them.
Therefore thus says the Lord God, I will stretch out mine hand upon Edom, and
will cut off man and beast, etc. And I will lay vengeance upon Edom, etc. Ezekiel.
25. 12, 13, 14.

2 In the Philistines. Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have
taken vengeance with a despitefull heart, to destroy it, for the old hatred.
Therefore thus says the Lord behold I will stretch out my hand upon the
Philistines, etc. and I will execute great vengeance, etc. Dealt by vengeance]
as if their dealing with the Israelites as they did, had not been so bad, if it
had not bin in way of revenge. Great Vengeance] or, vengeances, ( so it is in
the original.) great, and vengeances too. Vengeance] viz: for vengeance; after
the usual way, in most of the threats in the Prophets, of punishing like with
like.

Riches.
Such as gain them wrongfully threatened,
1 With Not-being the better for them. (which is no small punishment,
considering what pains they are at in gathering them.) Treasures of
wickedness profit nothing, but righteousness delivers from Death, Prove. 10.
2. At least in the end, they will be so punished. An inheritance may be gotten
hastily, in the beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed, ch 20, 21.
See chapter 21. 6.

2 The diminishing of those riches thus gotten; ( as it is commonly seen, that
they moulder away they know not how) Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished,
but he that gathers by labor shall increase, Prove. 13. 11.

3 Poverty. He that hastes to be rich has an evil eye, and considers not
that poverty shall come upon him ch 28, 22. wealth hastily gotten, is like a
child borne before his time; which cannot be long-lived. And indeed, there are
few rare-ripes, but are soon rotten; whether in wealth, wisdom, or learning.
He that hasteth] There is little difference between him that hastes to be
rich, and him that gets riches wrongfully. For he that is hasty, and greedy;
if he cannot do it by right: (yea though he can; if that way be long about; as
usually it is) will do it by wrong. Poverty shall come upon him] one way or
other. Either he shall be taken from his riches by captivity, or such like
punishment; as the Jews were; As the partrich sits on eggs, and hatcheth
them not: so he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the
midst of his days: and in the end shall be a fool Jer: 17, 11. Or else his
riches See a notable place more, Job 20. 21, 22.
shall be taken from him, the same way that he got them. for so the Israelites
are threatened, Who store up violence and robbery in their palaces Therefore
thus says the Lord God, an adversary there shall be round about the Land, and
he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled,
Amos 3, 11. Store up violence and robbery.] The Scripture in diverse places
calls Job 15. 34 Hab. 2 9.
things that men have wrongfully gotten, by the names of the sins: and indeed
it is they, that will stick longest with them. See almost the like threat against
the Chaldeans, Hab. 2. 6, 7, 8. In the end shall be a fool.] or, shall appear
to be so; or be so accounted For the present, he is only counted wise, that
has worldly cunning to get wealth, and the honest simple-dealing man, is
counted a fool. (insomuch that honest, and simple, are come to be used for the
same with foolish.) But in the end it shall appear, who was indeed most wise,
and who took the wisest course.

4 In his poverty in temporal things poverty likewise in spiritual things;
the only thing that makes that poverty intolerable. The Lord will not suffer
the soul of the righteous to famish; but he casts away the substance of the
wicked Prove: 10, 3. (for though the Hebrew word for soul, be most commonly
meant otherwise, then in a spiritual sense: yet by the words * in the former
verse, it seems to be so meant here, and so Jerome expounds it.) Casts away]
He does but gently take away a godly man's substance, and put spiritual things
in the room, for a supply. But the wicked man's substance he casts away in
anger; and looks no more after him.

5 The disposal of his wealth ( first, or last) (...) the merciful, whom he
never imitated; and the poor whom he never relieved. He that by usury and
unjust gain, increases his substance, he shall gather it for him, that will
pity the poor, Prove. 28. 8.

These which I have named, are very usual ways of punishing Such men: I mean
in the riches themselves, which they have wrongfully gotten. And although,
perhaps, for the most part, punishments of this sort are slow of coming; (viz:
after the death of the parties:) Yet many times you may see them Speedily
executed; so that the parties themselves, shall plainly perceive a curse
attending their dishonest gain. Such is that by the hand of God, in not
prospering those things, in, and about which, their wrongs were practiced: such
as Job speaks of, If my Land cry against me, or that the furrows likewise
thereof co^plain. If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or have
caused the owners thereof to loose their life. Let thistles grow in stead of
wheat, and cockle instead of barley. They are his last words, chapter 31. 38 39. 40.

After all this you may say, that you often see the contrary; and that such men
come in no misfortune at all. And I grant, they may be punished either so
invisibly, as few: or with such manner of punishments; as none but discerning
Spirits, may take nocice of, as inflicted for such a sin. But that hereafter;
and even now, one way or other (corporally, or spiritually) they shall be
punished: I may undertake to assure you. Pagnin. in that place but now quoted,
Prove. 10 30 translates, for casts away the substance of the wicked; Shall
overthrow the wicked for their riches: meaning, which they have wrongfully
gotten.
for God cannot suffer it, As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full
of deceit: therefore they are become great and waxen rich; They are waxen fatt,
they shine, yea they overpasse the deeds of the wicked: they judge not the
cause of the fatherless; yet they prosper: and the right of the needy do they
not judge. Shall I not visit for these things says the Lord, Jer. 5. 27. 28.
29.

Such as trust in them, punished,
1 With a Fall: for they lean upon that which cannot support them, He that
trusts in riches, shall fall, but the righteous shall flourish as a branch,
Prove: 11, 28.

2 Death the sooner: when they have most wealth, and most Confidence: to show
the vanity of their confidence. I will say to my soul, ( quoth the rich man in
our Savior's parable Luke 12) soul, thou have much goods laid up for many
years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him; thou
fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee, then whose shall these
things, which thou have provided. Luke 12, 20. Death temporal is the least
that is here meant; and of this we have frequent experience.

3 Exclusion out of heaven. It is easier for a Camel, to go through the eye of
a needle; then for a rich man, to enter into the kingdom of heaven Mark. 10
25. It is meant of him that trusts in his riches; for our Savior himself
expounds it so verse. 24. Not only him that trusts in them, and therefore keeps
them (such a one, as seems to be meant in that place of the proverbs but now
cited:) but him that trusts in them, and therefore bestows them. and so even
the the righteous man (or, the charitable man: for so it is often meant) let
him be never so righteous; shall fall, as well as the other.

Doubtless, trusting in riches will be punished, and punished with much
rigor. For thus speaks Job, If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the
fine gold, Thou art my confidence chap: 31, 24. and afterward adds, This were
also an iniquity to be punished by the Judge v: 28: or (as the Hebrew is) an
iniquity of the judges. As if he had said, I should answer for such a sin, not
before a merciful God; but a just Judge. It is not a sin of the Priests,
Levit. 4.
like a sin of ignorance, for which the Priests may make mine atonement with an
offering. No, it is scelus gladii, Job. 19 29.
a sin which I must be certainly punished for, by the judge. And the reason
which he adds, is, For I should have denied the God that is above. I have
applied these words to the 24 verse. because I met with no answer to his IF,
betwitx this and that: and because the reason agrees as well with this Prove.
30. 9. give me neither poverty nor riches, lest I be full and DENY thee.
sin, mentioned in that verse; as with the other mentioned in the 27 If I
beheld the Sun when it shined, or the moon, walking in brightness: and my
heart has been secretly emiced, or my mouth has kissed my hand This also
were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, for I should have denied the God
that is above.
viz. the sin of Idolatry. Now as Job joins the sin of trusting in riches,
with Idolatry: so the Apostle gives Covetousness the very name of Idolatry
Coloss. 3, 5. which name it cannot have for any reason, so well, as because of
this sin, which covetous men are usually guilty of. See in the chapter of
covetousness.

Such as love them too much (though they came lawfully to them,)
They are always punished with Want of satisfaction. He that loves silver,
shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase,
Eccels, 5. 10. He that has it, and does not love it, though he cannot be
satisfied BY it, (as he cannot by any thing besides God,) yet he may be
satisfied with it, that is, have so much as to desire no more; or, have what
he has with rest and content; which he that loves it, never will. This
punishment of not-being satisfied, is a sore punishment; and it is very usual
with God to punish wicked men with it; as I have hinted elsewhere, See also
Ezekiel. 7. 19.

They have cause to fear other punishments by the hand of God. For Job in the
place last quoted, immediately after those words, If I made gold my hope (as
indeed love of riches, and confidence in them, more or less, usually go
together; though we do not perceive it) added also, If I rejoiced because my
wealth was great, and because mine hand had gotten much, verse. 25. See for this
also in Covetousness.

Rich and wicked
The Scripture speaks against them thus,
1 That they cannot prosper. The sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat,
but it withers the grass, and the flower thereof falls, and the grace of
the fashion of it perishes. so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways.
Jam: 1. 11. They spring as grass, Psalm: 92. 7. But it is but as grass. for
like grass they wither, Psalm: 102. 11: and in little time, like the grass upon
the top of a house, Psalm: 129. 6. They are fading every way. What they have, is
fading: and they do nothing, that will last, and stand by them, when what they
have, fails Luke 16. 9.
. All their treasure is on earth. They have none in Matt. 19. 20.
Heaven; neither do they care to lay up any Matt. 6. 20.
there, and therefore they must not think to be able to live there: especially
having no friends there neither, to entertain them. Luke 16. 9. They have
nothing whereon to build any hope: for they do not lay up a good foundation
for the time to come; 1 Timothy: 6. 18, 19. This life's joy, and pleasure, and
content, is all that wicked rich men look after. And yet they miss of those
too. For even this life is never the better for riches (or, for having more
then others) in regard that a man's life consists not in the abundance of
things which he (...).
possesses, (or, a man's living upon his estate, is not according to his
having more then another) Luk: 12. 15. which was a reason our Savior used, to
dissuade his Disciples from greediness of having (...) of which see in
Covetousness.
more wealth, one then another. Nay it is usually the worse, as will appear in
the ensuing punishments.

2 That they shall be; nay, that they are very miserable, in regard of sundry
evils and punishments; some of which arise merely from their wealth: so that
the preacher had very good cause to say, There is a sore evil which I have
seen under the sun, riches kept for the owners thereof, to their hurt. Eccles,
5. 13. Kept FOR them] as who would ay, kept by God, as a scourge to punish
them: not, kept BY. for wicked men are not masters, but slaves of their wealth
which they do not so much use, as they are abused by it.

Now those evils or punishments are,

1 Want of sleep, either through intemperate use, or immoderate love of what
they have. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much:
but the abundance of the rich, will not suffer him to sleep, Eccles 5. 12.

2 Trouble. In the house of the righteous is much treasure, ( and that is all;
without any sorrow added with it, Prove: 10. 22.) but in the revenues of the
wicked is trouble. Prove. 15. 6.

3 Being deceived by their riches, many ways; as by security Their riches are
given them with this curse, viz. to make the^ secure, and confident (...) Job
24. 23
, pride, etc. but especially that which our Savior speaks of. He that
received the word among thorns, ( a very good name for riches) is he that
hears the word, and the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches
choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful, Matt. 13. no fear of the godly
rich man his being much deceived, for he will be sure to be far enough from
the thorns, when he receives the word. His riches shall not be in his heart,
where the word is to come: so that he will not receive it among thorns.

4 A diminishing, and decay of their Riches, they know not how. Ye looked for
much: and lo, it came to Little: and when ye brought it home I did blow upon
it. Why? says the Lord of host^ because of my house: that is wast, and ye run
every man unto his own house Hag: 1, 9. They that seek the worst things first,
are usually punished with not finding the best, when they seek them. Whereas,
if we first seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, we may
not only have that, which we seek for; but those other things also added unto
us over and above, before ever we seek them. Usually those things prosper
most, that are least cared for. And it is commonly seen in persons too, that
they have most health, and wealth, when they are least sollicitous for it.

5 Taking away of their false riches, for abusing them to sin. So the Jews
were punished for abusing their riches to the service of Baal: to whom they
sacrificed, and made his Images of their gold and silver. For she did not know
that I (and not Baal) gave her corn, and wine, and oil; and multiplied her
silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal. Therefore will I return, and
take away my corn (for it is not Baal's; and they have forfeited their right)
in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and I will In the Latin
translation it is, deliver: as if it were a bondage to the creatures; to be
subject by force, to be used to other purposes, then for which they were
intended, according to that Romans 8. 2.
recover my wool and my flax given to cover her nakedness Hos: 2, 8, 9. See
Ezekiel: As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty; but they made
the images of their abominations and of their detestable things therein:
therefore have Iset it far from them v. 20.
7, 19, 20, 21. for there, (according to the latin translation, thereof, for,
therein) speech is made of the like abuse of their Jewels and ornaments for the
making of images, (as they made the golden calfe, Exodus: 32, 2.)

6 Denial of the true Riches (grace and the Gospel.) For they are not fit to
be entrusted with greater and better things, who were not faithful in less
and worse. If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon,
who will commit to your trust the true riches? Luke 16. 12. So that it is as
Mary said, He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has
sent empty away, Luk 1. 51.

7 At his death, The taking away of his soul by the devils, (...) for, though
the word be impersonally used after the Hebrew manner: yet I think it is
seldom spoken, but of a third person. (...). Theoph.
and not by God: (because it is God that thus speaks.) or the taking it away
by God in an angry manner with a resolution to execute justice: which will come
to all as bad Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee. then
whose shall those things be, which thou have provided? So is he that lays up
treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God, Luke 12, 20, 21. For though
this may be also meant of temporal death: (as I have made use of it before:)
yet is it cheifely meant of eternal death. For otherwise, here were little more
threatened, to him that is not Rich toward God; then what is common to him
that is.

8 After Death (for an answer to that question, Whose shall these things be?)
The disposal of his estate to the godly ( whom he hated; and therefore is it a
great punishment.) A good man leaves his inheritance to his childrens
children. But the wealth of the Especially that of the sinner in getting. De
male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres, whose wealth, his childrens children,
seldom enjoy.
sinner is laid up for the just, Prove. 13. 22. See Job 27. 16, 17.

9 Not having an other estate to recompense it. Woe unto you that are rich, for
ye have received your consolation, Luk: 6. 24. They have their portion in this
life, and they accept of it, without caring for more: and no more they are like
to have, Ps: 17. 14.

10 Eternal destruction ( as if they were not fed but for the slaughter.) When
the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do
flourish: it is, that they shall be destroyfor ever, Ps: 92. 7. Either the
wasting of the creatures abused through luxury: or the rust of the money not
used at all through covetousness, will rise up in judgment against them. Go
to now, ye Rich-men: weep and howl for your miseries, that shall come upon
you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moath eaten. Your gold and
silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the
last day: Jam: 5. 1, 2, 3. A Rich wicked man is like one, that is made a
Steward of a great estate, and is an unthrift. He can give no good account: and
yet has a great account to give. And therefore his condition must needs be
exceeding miserable.

Sabbath-breaking.
The punishments for it, which we may find in the Scriptures, are

1 No-profit by that work, in doing where of it was broken. They that sought
for Manna upon the Sabbath day, could find none. Exodus 16. 27.

2 Death. Every one that defiles it, shall surely be put to death. For
whosoever does any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from amongst his
people. Exodus: 31. 14. So again v. 15. Whosoever does any work in the sabbath
day, he shall surely be put to death. This punishment was executed when the
Israelites were in the wilderness, upon him that gathered sticks upon this
day, Number: 15. 36. and that by special order from God: of whom they inquired,
what they should do with him, not out of ignorance of the law (which had been
declared unto them:) but of the fact: which because it seemed so small a matter,
they knew not whether it were a breach of the Law, or no.

3 Misery upon whole Countries or Nations. What evil thing is this, that ye
do and profane the sabbath day? Did not your Fathers thus? And did not God
bring all this evil upon us. and upon this City? Yet ye bring more wrath upon
Israel by profaning the sabbath. Neh: 13. 18 They are the words of Nehemiah to
the Jews: who brake the sabbath by treading wine-presses, housing of fruit,
selling victuals, and going with carriages. You have a very dreadful threat in
Jeremy, there where only the last of these is mentioned: But if ye will not
hearken unto me, to hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even
entering in at the gates of Jerusalem: then will I kindle a fire in the gates
thereof; and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be
quenched, Jer: 17. 27. Even entering in] Though the things were carried into the
ci^y, for which there might be more use and necessity pleaded. Yea, and
though they were carried by strangers (whom they ought to have hindered.)
Ezekiel in ch: 20. relating to the Jews, the story of their fathers carriage
in the wilderness, ( how they walked not in God's statutes, but despised his
judgments; for which they had severer judgments threatened them, then those,
which were inflicted: which were some of them very dreadful ones) mentions no
sin but this: as you may see verse: 13, 16, 21. Only verse. 24 Idolatry Some
understand by Sa^baths, Feasts only, But (I believe) in that sense, it is not
used to be said my, but your Sabbaths.
is mentioned along with it. Nay in the Priests, only negligence in seeing it
strictly kept, and conniving at the breach of it, or, hiding their eyes from
the sabbaths, (as the expression is) Ezekiel: 22. 26. is reckoned for one of the
causes of that severe punishment mentioned ver. 31. Therefore have I powered out
mine indignation upon them, I have con^umed them with the fire of my wrath. In
the 23 Chap. of that prophecy, where several punishments are threatened, and
their causes declared: Sabbath breaking is made an aggravation after adultery,
murder and idolatry. for complaint being made of them, ver. 37. it is added
ver: 38. MOREOVER this they have done unto me, they have defiled my sanctuary
in the same day, and have profaned my sabbaths.

Sacrilege.
It is threatened with a Curse. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But
ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed
with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation, Mal. 3. 8, 9.

It has been punished.
1 With Shortness of life. As in the family of Eli; whose sons Hophni and
Phinehas used to take away the flesh, which the people brought for offerings,
to roast it for themselves. But what said Eli of this sin? 1 Samuel: 2. 25. If
one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him; But if a man sin
against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? notwithstanding, they hearkened not
unto the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay the^. See the
punishment denounced from v. 31, to the end of the Chapter.

2 The death of the party. Achan, (who at the taking of Jericho, stole some of
the gold and silver, which was before consecrated for the Lords treasury, Josh.
6. 19.) was by God's special sentence condemned to be burnt, ch: 7. 15. and
accordingly the people stoned him first, and burnt him afterward, verse. 25.

3 The conquest of the people, to which he belonged. Josh. 7. 5. Hitherto may
you reduce the example of Belshazzar King of Babylon. who upon a time (in his
jollity) commanded to be brought forth to drink in, the golden and silver
vessels, which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple at
Jerusalem. But it is said, that before one hour passed, the hand came forth,
and wrote in the wall, those words that told him, his kingdom was divided and
given to the Medes and Persians, Dan: 5. 2, 5, 28. If I would follow others, I
might give you for examples, Asa, and Jehoash Kings of Judah, Shishak King of
Egypt, and Ananias and Sapphira. But because I take the sin of the two last, to
be no proper sacrilege; and that it was not so much the detaining of the money,
that was punished. And because I meet with no particular relation of Shishak^s
punishment, as inflicted for this sin* And lastly, because of the two first,
it is not only not mentioned, that they were punished for this sin; but said,
that they were punished for other causes; Asa, for relying on the King of
Syria, 2 Cor. 16 7: and Jehoash, for the blood of the sons of Jehoida the
Priest, 2 Chronicles. 24, 25: I think it is not best to make this use of them. I
might also present to you for your use, examples out of the Maccabees. As I
Alcimus a Commander under Demetrius. who as he began to pull down the wall of
the inner Court, and the works of the Prophets ( Haggai and Zachary, by whose
persuasions the walls were built) was stricken dumb, and died suddenly, 1 Mac.
9. 54. 2 Heliodorus. who when he came to the treasury of the temple to take it
away, saw a strange apparition, and was stricken to the ground, 2. Mac. 3. 25.
and 27. 3 Menelaus, one who had committed much sacrilege first and last.
Against him it is said, the King of Kings moved the mind of Antiochus; who
caused him to be put to death, after the manner as sacrilegio^s persons were
See the manner described 2 Macc. 13. 5, 6, 7.
wont to be at Berea. 2 Mac. 13. 4. But, because the faith of these relations
is suspected, I do but name them. Whether these and other examples that might
be brought, be truly related, or not; of this you may be confident, that, he
who takes a thing sacrilegiously, is most taken himself. For, It is a snare to
the man who devoureth that which is holy, Prove. 20. 25

Being Scandalized.
1 At the ways of God. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things?
prudent, and he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the
just shall walk in them. But the transgressors shall fall therein, Hos. 14. 9.

2 At the word of God. Peter says that our Savior becomes a stone of
stumbling to them, which stumble at the word, 1 Pet. 2. 8.

3 At God himself. He shall be for a sanctuary: but for a stone of stumbling,
and for a rock of offense, to both the houses of Israel, Isa 8 14. See the
Chapter of Christ.

Scandalizing dangerous.
For 1 It makes God punish a sin, which otherwise he had not punished. David
said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said unto David.
The Lord has also put away thy sin, thou shall not dye Howbeit, because by
this deed, thou have given occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme the
child also that is borne to thee, shall surely die, 2 Samuel 12, 13, 14.

2 It makes him to resolve immutably, to punish: when perhaps otherwise he
would repent. especially if it be in his ministers. For thus he speaks of the
Priests of Bethel, in Jeroboam's time. Because they ministered unto them before
their Idols, and caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity: therefore
have I lift up my hand against them, says the Lord God, and they shall bear
their iniquity, Ezekiel: 44, 12. In Malachy, mention is made, how God punished
such ministers in his time, viz. with the contempt of the people. Ye have
caused many to stumhle at the law, ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi,
says the Lord of Hosts. Therefore I also have made you contemptible (as you
have made my ordinances contemptible) and base before all the people; according
as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the law. Malach. 2. 8,
9. How justly the Ministers of England by their scandalous life and doctrine,
have suffered, and do still suffer this punishment, I wish it were not so
easy to demonstrate.

The wicked, who scandalize maliciously, endeavoring to make the godly to fall
into sin, that they may laugh at them, or have somewhat to accuse them of, as
Hypocrisy, or the like: (such as there are too many:) they shall be sure to
fall themselves into a pit of destruction, when the others perhaps shall
escape. Who so causes the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shall
fall himself into his own pit, Prove. 28. 10.

The Godly, who do it by falling into sin themselves, are as a troubled
fountain and a corrupt spring, Prove. 25. 26. And therefore are they like to be
purged by some chastisement: for else (like a corrupt spring) they will do
abundance of hurt.

Scorners,
Especially such as Scorn Instruction, punished,
1 With Ignorance. A Scorner seeks wisdom and finds it not: but knowledge
is easy to him, that understands, Prove. 14. 6. Here the Scorner, and he that
understands seem to be opposed. And so ch: 19. 29. Scorners, and fools,
seem to be put for the same.

2 Being hated of men. The thought of foolishness is sin: and the scorner is
an abomination to men, Prove: 24. 9.

3 Being scorned and slighted by God ( which is a fearful thing.) Surely he
scorneth the scorners, but gives grace unto the lowly, Prove: 3. 34.

4 Many heavy judgmentes. Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for
the back of fools Prove: 19. 29. Solomon's fool, is only the Scorner: and he
that is a Scorner, can be no other.

5 Destruction. As sure, as the Jews were punished with it, who scorned, and
jeered at the Prophets. For the terrible one is brought to naught, the scorner
is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity shall be cut off, Isa 29. 20. They
think they do a great matter, and that they have a sufficient revenge upon a
man, to scorn his reproof: but alas, they hurt none but themselves. If thou
be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self; but if thou scornest, thou alone
shall bear it, Prove. 9. 12.

Scriptures,
Not-knowing them punished,
With Error. Our Savior told the Saduces, who denied the resurrection, Ye
err not knowing the Scriptures. Matt. 22. 29.

Wresting them attended,
With Destruction. Peter speaking of Paul's Epistles, says, In which are some
things hard to be understood: which they also which are unlearned, and
unstable, wrest to their own destruction, 2. Epist. 3. 16.

Scrupling at Gnats, and swallowing Camels.
Woe unto you Pharisees, for ye tithe mint, and rue, and all manner of herbs,
and pass over judgment, and the love of God; these ought ye to have done, and
not to have left the other undone. Luke 11. 42.

Security See Despising.
as to enemies punished (or threatened
With Being conquered by them. Whereof take these instances. 1 The Midianites
under the command of Zeba and Zalmuna. They were overcome by Gideon: who (in
the Scriptures words) smote the host; for the host was secure Jud. 8. 11. 2
The people of Laish: of whose security special mention is made thrice in one
Chapter. viz. Jud. 18, 7, 10. 27. They were put to the sword by the Children of
Dan; and their City burnt, verse. 27. 3 The people of Kedar, and Hazor (
Arabians) threatened to be destroyed by the Caldeans Jer: 49, 28 to 34. The
Complaint is of them, that they dwelled with out care verse. 51, 4 The Careless
Ethiopians Ezekiel 30 9. 5 The Ninivites, who dwelt carelessly, Zeph. 2. 15, 6
Belshazzar. The same night, as he was feasting and carousing, he was slain:
and the City of Babylon taken, Dan. 5. 1. 30. 7 Those that dwell carelessly in
the Isles (among whom we of England may well be numbered) Ezekiel. 39. 6.

Security as to evil
Such as cause it in others
Are threatend with the same punishments, which they promise them freedom
from; as those false Prophets were, who would make the Jews believe, they
should not be conquered by the Assyrians, Thus says the Lord concerning the
prophets, that prophecy in my name, and I sent them not, yet they say, sword
and famine shall not be in this land; by sword and famine shall these Prophets
be consumed, Jer; 14. 15.

Such as are guilty of it themselves See prosperity.
, are In like manner threatened
1 With those punishments, which they promise themselves freedom from. So
were, 1 The Israelites. who saying, we have made a Covenant with death, and
with Hell are we at agreement: when the overflowing scourge shall pass throw,
it shall not come unto us, etc. Isa. 28. 15, are thus threatened v. 11.
Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet etc. By
which I conjecture may be meant, that he would be so strict, in punishing them:
that, whereas they presumed, that, when the scourge should pass through the
Land, it should not so much as come near them; his Judgments should hit them
so right, as if they had been directed by line and plummet: so that they should
not miss them. And it follows also v. 18. Your Covenant with Death shall be
disanulled, and your agreement with Hell shall not stand. when the overflowing
scourge shall pass through, then shall ye be trodden down by it. 2 The
Edomites. who were secure through pride of their strength; and thought that the
Chaldeans could never conquer them, because they dwelt upon high hills, and in
a mountainous country. Whose habitation is high, who says in his heart, who
shall bring me down to the ground? though thou exalt thy self as an Eagle, and
though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down says
the Lord, Obad, 3. and 4. 3 The Chaldeans themselves; after that God had made
use of them, as he intended, for the punishing of others. Hear now this, Thou
that are given to pleasures, that dwell carelessly, that seyest in thine
heart, I am, and none else beside me; I shall sit as a widow, neither shall I
know the l^sse of children. But these two things shall come to thee in a moment
in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood, they shall come upon thee in
their (...)
perfection, etc Isa. 47. 8, 9. In a moment, and, in their perfection.] Evils
Evils sudden, and great too, who can deal with? The suddenesse of the
Chaldeans punishment is expressed again verse 11. And indeed here is the
misery of every one that is secure viz: that all his evils come suddenly to
him, that is, when he is not aware; and many of them, he himself also comes
suddenly to them, that is, sooner then other men.

2. Conquest, and Captivity. And it shall come to pass at that time, I will
search Jerusawith candles, and punish the men that are settled in their lees;
that say in their heart, the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil.
Therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their house a desolation, etc.
Zeph: 1. 12, 13. I will search Jerusalem with candles] I believe, the meaning
is the like with the meaning of that in Isaiah, of laying judgment to the line;
and spoken after the same manner. viz: in answer to the peoples opinion, that
there was no divine providence, to take notice of men's actions; and that things
should continue as they were without alteration. But, says God, they shall
know the contrary for I will not only punish them, but I will do it very
exactly; so that not only, not all, but none, shall escape Josephus Lib. 7.
Bell. c. 17. 26.
says, that the Roman Soldiers under Titus, when he took Jerusalem,
searched the very sinks, and graves, and dens, for men: and put to death those
that they found. That say in their heart] you have had the expression twice
before in this chapter of Security. And indeed it is proper to all Secure men,
so to say: See Ps. 13. 1. Zeph. 2. 15.
and the best of us are guilty of it oftener, then we take notice of. In their
heart.] That is enough with God, to provoke him: and we dare not say otherwise
then in our hearts, for fear of provoking men.

3 Death by the sword. All the sinners of my people shall dye by the sword,
which say, the evil shall not overtake, nor prevent us, Amos 9. 10.

4 Sudden and unavoidable destruction. For when they shall say, peace and
safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape 1 Thessalonians: 5. 3.

5 All the curses written in the book of the Covenant. And it come to pass,
when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart,
saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to
add drunkenesse to thirst. The Lord will not spare him: but then the anger of
the Lord, and his Jealousy, shall smoke against that man, and all the curses
that are written in this book, shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out
his name from under heaven Deuteronomy: 29. 19, 20.

No wonder then that the Prophet Amos should say, Woe to them that are at ease
in Sion, Amos 6. 1.

Seducers and seduced. See False teachers

Self conceited men, punished,
1 By their own sin, deceiving them. For if a man think himself to be
something, when he is nothing: he deciveth himself, Gal: 6. 3.

2 By God, detaining from them, that which they think they have. Whosoever has
not, from him shall be taken, even that which he seems to have, Luk: 8. 18.

Selfe-destruction Threatened to Sinners.
In general, as for the prime and remote cause, any sins whatsoever are men's
own snares, and stumbling blocks: so that you may say to a man of any of them,
as Moses does of serving Idols, It will surely be a snare Not a snare of
enticement, but of hurt and ruin: in that sense as the word snare is most
commonly used, as Prove. 11. 3* etc. And so likewise the word stumblingblock or
scandal, though in the New Testament it be used Metaphorically, of falling
into sin: yet in the Old Testament, it is used most commonly more literally, of
falling by sin into misery, and punishment, as Ezekiel 3. 20. Isa. 8. 14, etc.
unto thee, Ex: 23. 33. Sinners will run themselves fast enough in, and hang
themselves sure enough with the Cords of their own sins, of their own accord,
although (or rather indeed If) God let them alone. His own iniquities shall
take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins,
Prove: 5. 22. Wickedness is the fire; and they are the briars, and thorns,
Isa. 9. 18. Punishment by God, is but their own way brought back again upon
their own head. The Scripture uses this expression for it, 1 Kings 8. 32. as
likewise that of eating the fruit of their own ways: Pr. 1. 31. David prayed,
that the way of his enemies might be dark and slippery, Psalm: 35. 6. Jeremy
threatened, that the way of the false Prophets should be so, chap: 23. 12. and I
make no doubt, but I may say, that the way of every sinner is so. Which if it
be, there needs none to throw him down: for he will fall soon himself; and
fall most dangerously: as a man must needs do in such ways. Many are the
places of Scripture which speak to this purpose: especially in the Psalms and
the Proverbs. You may see at your leisure, Psalm. 64. 8. 140. 9. 141. 10 *.
Prove. 11. 5, 6, 19. ch: 13. 6, 14. 14. 21. 7. 29. 6.

I say that every sinner will punish himself with his own courses: when once
God leaves him (or gives him leave) to take those courses, and so to punish
himself. Now the main cause of God's leaving him in this manner, is his
leaving God first: and refusing to hearken to the counsel of his word. So that
still the sinners destruction is from himself, and he is his own greatest
enemy. They would none of my Council: they despised all my reproof. Therefore
shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own
devises, Prove: 1 30, 31. If he will not take God's Counsel, he must needs
take his own; and his own is never good. Such as will not follow advice,
though it be but man's advice, we see but few of them prosper. See more to
this purpose in the Chapter of God's Leaving men to sin, in the Title Sin.

Now by any sin, as I told you before, men do hurt themselves remotely, and in
the end, by just desert: But there are some sins, by which they are more
immediately their own executioners. And of such sins, and the manner of being
punished by them, mention is made in several places of this book. And
therefore I will instance only in two or three, that are more noted, and these
are 1 An unruly tongue. A fools mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the
snare of his soul, Prove: 18. 7. 2 Anger and Envy. For wrath kills the
foolish man: and Envy slays the silly one, Job, 5. 2. 3 Frowardness. The
integrity of the upright shall guide them: hut the perverseness of
transgressors shall destroy them. Prove: 11. 3. 4 Confidence, and wantonness,
in prosperity. The turning away of the simple shall s^ay them, and the
prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Prove: 1. 32. Of these you may see more
in their several Chapters.

This way of punishing men by themselves, is a way that God uses very much
whether it be by giving them up to such sins, as are most hurtful to the
parties, that commit them: Or by causing them to be wh^pt by those scourges,
which they made themselves and intended for the backs of others. Insomuch that,
if you see men punished this way you have very good cause to think, that God
has a special hand in it; and that he is very angry As David says. The Lord
is known by the judgment which he executes: the wicked is snared in the work
of his own hands, Ps. 9. 16.

Selfe-Feare. See Fear, and Enemies of Gods people.

Selling deceitfully, See deceitful dealing. Sin.
I mean to give you two or three of the more remarkable texts of Scripture,
which speak of Sin in general, as Sin. Now we find in the Scriptures,

First, that by Sin there comes no good, no not in this world, every thing
considered. What fruit had ye then (then) in As on the contrary, IN keeping
the commandments there is great reward. Ps. 19 11.
those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Rom: 6 21, and therefore sins are
called the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians.

Secondly, that for Sin there will be certain punishment. It was so before
Christ, as appears, 1 By what is threatened. God told Cain, If thou do not
well, sin lies at the door, Gen: 4. 7. And Moses told the Reubenites, and
Cadites (when he would have them go over Jordan with the rest of the
I^raelites, to help them into their possessions; having their own already on
this side the river) But if ye will not do so: behold ye have sinned against
the Lord; and be sure, your sin will find you out See in the Chapter of
blasphemy against the holy Ghost at the end.
, Number: 32. 23. 2 By what we read of to have been inflicted. Which as men knew,
before it was inflicted, that it would be: (as appears by Samuels speech to
the people 1 Samuel: 12. 25. and Solomon's prayer, 1 Kings 8. 33. 35) so they
acknowledged, after it was inflicted, that it was merely the fruit of sin. As
(among other places) you may see in 2 Chronicles: 30. 7. where it is said, that the
Messengers sent about by Hezekiah, with proclamation for keeping of a
passover, in their exhortation used these words. Be ye not like to your
fathers, and like your brethren, which trespassed against the Lord God of your
fathers: who therefore gave them up to desolation, as ye see. In the book of
Judges, there is seldom mention made of a victory had over the Israelites, but
with this preface: The children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord,
etc, and such or such an enemy came against them etc. See ch: 3. 12. ch: 4 3 6.
1. 10. 6. 13. 1. The same (...) Zach. 14. 19. etc. So for the verb, In Job ch
5. 24 the word which we render Sin, The Sep. render (...) be unhappy.
word in the Scripture is used for sin and for punishment, and the same word in
a different form, for to sin, and to expiate sin. for sin will be either
expiated or punished; that is c^rtaine.

It is so since Christ: as both the threats of the Gospel, and (in part)
experience, testify. For,

In this world, sinners are punished in the worst manner, that they can be; hat
is, with Spiritual punishments, which are far the worst, and such as make
way for more. In speaking of these, I might be very large, if I would descend
to Particulars. But because that is a work of a volume, and not a chapter; I
will only mention three more general evils, that render the condition of a
sinner, in this life, both miserable, and exceeding dangerous. 1 Darkness 1 John 2. 11. etc. so that he knows not whither he goes: and therefore must
needs fall. 2 Slavery, to which he is sold, (and has sold himself) and
wherein he continues. To 7. 14. See Joh. 8. 34. Acts 8. 23. 3 Death. Co^ 2. 13.
Perhaps he knows it not. But his condition is never the better for that; for of
those evi^s that are evils indeed, ignorance is always an aggravation.

In the world to come, they shall be punished with most bitter punishments.
Tribulation (...).
and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, Romans 2. 9. And that for
ever. These shall go away into everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25. 46. This is
all the wages which the servants of sin have, Romans 6. 23. and this they are
sure to have: unless by Christ Joh. 8. 36.
they are made free Romans 6. 18.
from sin, and become the servants of righteousness: so that what ever their
beginning be, yet their end Verse. 22.
may be everlasting life.

Sinning deliberately, and with delight.
Woe unto them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds; when the
morning is light, they practice it, because it is in the power of their hands,
Mic. 2. 1. See Isa. 5. 18. You that sin thus, take heed, lest God take up a
resolution against you, that he will not forget you; as he did against the
Jews, Thus says the Lord unto this people, thus have they loved to wander,
they have not refrained their feet; therefore the Lord does not accept them, he
will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins, Jer: 14. 10.

Sinning with a high hand
By Sinning with a high hand, I mean Sinning (as the word is in our
translation) presumptuously, ^iz: when men do not only resolve, but profess
to Sin, out of pride, and in Contempt* of authority. This manner of Sinning
is very frequent. so that you shall see many commit Sins, merely because they
would not seem to be controlled; and to anger, and vex those under whose
command they are. But what is the danger of such Sinning? doubtless, great
enough. For even doing ought presumptuously, God threatens with cutting off,
(one way, or other:) But the Soul that does ought presumptuously, whether he
be borne in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord, and that
Soul shall be cut off from among his people, Number: 15. 30 See Dent: 29. 19. But
if they Sin thus against the sentence of the Priests and Judges also, he
prescribes to have the parties put to death. And the man that will do
presumtously, and will not hearken to the Priests etc. even that man shall die,
and thou shall put away the evil from Israel, Deuteronomy: 17. 12. The Israelites
going presumptuously up to the hill toward Canaan, when Moses had expressly
forbidden them, were overcome by the Amorites, Deuteronomy: 1 43, 44. The word for
presumptuously, in the original is (...) you were PROUD. And so chap: 17,
where we translate, the man that will do presumtuously, the Hebrew is (...)
that will do in PRIDE. and the Sept. translate both this, and (...) in that
place of Numbers above quoted (which we translate, presumtuously,) after the
same manner, viz: (...), with a hand of PRIDE. And indeed, PRIDE has the
greatest hand in such Sins* whereby they either despise the word of the Lord,
(as it is said in the place before quoted, Number: 15. 31.) or scorn to do after
the command of another

Sinning against Knowledge It occasions
1 The aggravation of God's anger. And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because
his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto him
twice, 1 Kings 11. 9. Which had appeared unto him twice,] viz: in adreame by
night chap* 3. 5, and chap. 9. 2. And (that which still makes for the
aggravation of Solomon^s Sin) The first of those times, God bestowed upon him
a wise and understanding heart, so that there was none like him, before him;
neither after him, should any arise like him, chap. 3. 12.

2 Inexcusablenesse. So that they are without excuse^ because that when they
knew God, they glorified him not as God, etc. Rom: 1. 20, 21. Without excuse]
so we render (...): though in the 2. chap. v. 1, we render (...), inexcusable.
And very well. for such Sinners, as they cannot be excused by others; so they
have nothing to say for themselves. Glorified him not etc.] Even omission
against knowledge is dangerous.

3 Not being pardoned. Especially, if it be also with a high hand, professedly,
so that they stick not to say, we see, (not only we hear) and yet will not
believe, or obey. Our Savior told the Pharisees, If ye were blind ye should
have no sin, (you were in such a condition, as that, if you sinned, perhaps
through God^s mercy, you might have had noe sin, but it might have been taken
away:) but now ye say, we see* therefore your sin remains, John 9. 41. Now
certainly it remains, and will remain still at your door, and will not be
taken away. Seeing Jesus^ Christ lived amonst them; and did such miracles
before their eyes; if yet they would deny him to be the Christ; I do not see
how they could be excused such wilful lying. for Jesus his being the Christ
is so plain a truth, that I may say, Who is a Liar, if he be not, that denies
that Jesus is the Christ? John 2. 22. ^ (...).
For such a translation the Greek will bear, as well as BUT he: especially if
we render, A Liar, and not, The Liar.

4 Temporal Destruction by enemies: As it did in the Jews, (perhaps the
Scribes and Pharisees, such as I mentioned but now.) I will get me unto the
great men, and will speak unto them; for they have known the way of the Lord,
and the Judgment of their God. But these have altogether broken the yoke and
burst the bonds; wherefore a Lion out of the forest shall slay them etc. Jer:
5. 5. 6. See v. 4.

5 Damnation. Especially, if it be against the knowledge of the truth, that is,
the true religion, by Apostasy; and the men are also adversaries to the truth.
For if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains noe more sacrifice for sin, but a certain looking for
of Judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries, Heb:
10. 26, 27.

6 Greater damnation then others. That Servant who knew his Lord's will, and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many stripes, Luk 12. 47. Those six men which Ezekiel saw in his vision, who
had a commission from God to go through Jerusalem, and to kill both old and
young, had this order from him viz: to begin at the Sanctuary Ezekiel. 9. 6. Where
it is also said, that they began at the ancient men which were before the
house. See James 4. 17.

Enticing, (or causing) others to sin.
Doubtless it shall be severely punished. Woe unto him that gives his
neighbor drink: that puts thy bottle to him (the Prophet changes the person
for anger) and make him drunken also, that thou may look on his nakedness
Hab. 2 15 That puts thy bottle to him] or. offerest the cup to him, to tempt
him. How often is this sin committed by us! I mean our importunit with our
friends to eat, and drink which we take no notice of as a sin: but practice
it our selves, and expect it from others, as an act of civility and complement.

Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye compass sea and land
to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, you make him twofold more, the
child of hell, then your selves, Matt. 23. 15. The Lord, in the prophecy of
Amos, being about to threaten the Israelites, with most severe punishments, and
beginning to reckon up the mercies which he showed them, seems to have had an
intent, after that, of complaining of more sins then one, (as may be gathered
by the expression afterward used, of a cart load of sheaves.) But yet as soon
as ever he had mentioned this ( ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink, and
commanded the Prophets saying, prophecy not:) as if the weight of it had forced
him to speak; he goes no further, but presently breaks out, Behold I am
pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves. Therefore the
flight shall perish from the swift etc. Am 2. 12, 13, 14.

Such as are guilty of this Sin, their condition is woeful, and their persons
are cursed. They are exceedingly detested by God; as those are by men, who
endeavor to set others against them. Cursed be he that makes the blind to
wander out of the way, Deuteronomy 27. 18. They shall be called the least (methinkes
there is much detestation and anger in this expression) in the Kingdom of
Heaven; though it be but in the breach of the least Commandment, Mat. 5. 19.

Leaving of men in Sin Threatened
1 For, Not-seeking to God in difficulties. And therefore Elisha said to
Jehoram King of Israel, What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the Prophets
of thy father, and to the Prophets of thy mother, 2 Kings 3. 13. But especially

2 For leaving God to serve Idols. For for this are they left to serve idols
longer, 10 Judges 13. 14. Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other Gods:
wherefore I will deliver you no more. Go, and cry unto the Gods which ye have
chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation. And so Hosea 8.
11, Because Ephraim has made many altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to
sin. See Amos 4. 4. Jer: 16, 13. 2 After serving one or some Idols, to serving
of others, As the Israelites for making and worshipping the golden calfe, were
left to worship the host of heaven, Act. 7. 42. God turned and gave them up to
worship the host of heaven. Nay, 3 They are left and given up to other sins,
Rom: 1. 24. Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness. The Apostle head
mentioned the committing of Idolatry v. ^ 3. and so he does again in verse 25.
and brings in this as by a parenthesis. As if he were in have, to show how this
leaving them to those sins, was the certain effect of their Idolatry: and as
if that cause, and this effect, were inseparable. See such another Parenthesis
Ezekiel. 16. 23. Amaziah King of Judah, for bringing home, and worshipping the
Gods of the Edomites after he had conquered them, was left to pride,
uncharitableness, and obstinacy: so that he would not be diswaded by Joash
King of Israel, from the challenge which he made to fight with him. But Amaziah
would not hear it, for it came of God that he might deliver them into the hand
of their enemies, because they sought after the Gods of Edom. etc. 2 Chr. 25.
20. So it is said of Zedekiah King of Judah, for Idolatry especially, (among
other sins) Through the anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem, and
Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled
against the King of Babylon, 2 Kings 24. 20.

3 For despising his word. Because they had not executed my judgments, but had
despised my statutes, and had polluted my Sabbath and their eyes were after
their idols. Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good; and
judgments, whereby they should not live, Ezekiel. 20. 24, 25. Hierom and
Maldonate expound it in my sense. And so does the Chaldee Because they
tra^sgressed against my word, and would not obey my Prophets, I cast them off,
and delivered the^ up to their foolish lust and they went away and made decrees
not right, and laws by which they should not live.
Paraphrast. But they expound Statutes of the Idolatrous laws and rites of the
Assyrians, among whom the Jews lived captive: He, of wicked decrees which they
made themselves. Whereby they should not live.] God's statutes only are such,
Which if a man do, he shall even live by Or in, if it be not better
translated, by.
them, verse. 11. 13. 21.

4 For Stubbornness in obeying his word, and refusing to hear. Thou shall say
unto them, thus says the Lord God, he that hears, let him hear, and he that
forbeareth, let him forbear. For they are a rebellious house, Ezekiel: 3. 27. He
that forbeareth let him forbear The Sept. (...)
] Aquila translates, He that leaves shall be left: And so says Hierom, who
parallels these words with those in Luke, ch: 8. 18 and from him that has not,
shall be taken away even that which he seems to have.

But my people would not hearken to my voice and Israel I would none of me. so
I gave them up to their own hearts lust, and they walked in their own
counsels, Ps. 81. 11. 1. See Mat: 23. 32. Rev: 22. 11.

Slanderers; or, False Accusers,
Doubtless, shall suffer many punishment. For David has many prayer-like
Prophecies, and Prophetical prayers in the Psalms against them usually
describing them under the name of Flatterers, and liars, and deceitful
persons. Among the rest, there is one dreadful one against Doeg the Edomite in
the 52 Psalm. Where (without speaking any thing of his killing the Priests at
the command of Saul, 1 Samuel: 22. 18. but only of his wicked tongue) after
complaint made of his lying, v. 3. as well as his deceitfullnesse. verse. 4.
(whereby it appears he did more then tel^ Saul of Abimelech's entertaining
David, which is all that is mentioned in Samuel, ^ Sam. 22. 10. and was true
enough, as you may see ch: 21. 2. 9.) in the 5 verse thus he speaks, God shall
likewise destroy thee for ever, etc. But give me leave to show, after my wonted
manner, the several punishments which I meet with in these and other
Scriptures, according to their different quality. Now they are

1 Shame (that is the least) by not having their wills upon those whom they
slander. Those who slandered the Prophet Jeremy to Zedekiah, in saying, that
he sought See also chapter 18. 18.
not the welfare of the people, but the hurt, Jer: 38. 4, (because he
disheartened them by his prophecies, from standing out against the Assyrians)
see what he says of them, chapter 20. v. 10. I heard the defaming of many, Report,
say they, and we will report (or accuse him to the King: as the Scribes sent
forth their Spies to observe our Savior, that they might accuse him to the
Governor, Luk: 20. 20.) All my familiars watched for my halting (a complaint
which David often makes) saying, peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall
prevail against him, etc. But he adds immediately, v. 11. But the Lord is with
me as a mighty terrible one: therefore my persecutours shall stumble, and they
shall not prevail: they shall be greatly ashamed. For they shall not prosper:
their everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten.

2 The evil, which they intended by slandering to bring upon others. So Haman,
who slandered the Jews to the King of Babylon, that they kept not his laws,
Esth: 3. 8, intending to have them all massacred, verse 9; was put to death
himself, and hanged upon the gallows which he made for Mordecai, Esth. 7. 10.
If men do not execute this punishment, (as it is not often that they do;
because the hearer usually is pleased with such news, and the other is
ignorant of it:) yet God will. For having shot their arrows secretly, when men
knew it not: so that they hurted them suddenly, before they thought of it,
Psalm. 64. 4. God also shall shoot at them with his arrows; and suddenly shall
they be wounded, v. 7.

3 Being excluded the houses of men, even of those to whom they bring their
slanders (this is the least.) For thus David speaks, where he is telling what
he would do, when he came to be King, Who so privily slandereth his neigbour,
him will I cut off, Psalm. 101, 5. It could not be meant, of such as were
Slanderers in Readiness time; for such he would never admit at all.

4 Being excluded the house of God, (as we may well conjecture.) for David,
Psalm. 15. having asked verse. 1. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle?
afterward makes answer to himself, that such and such, and among the rest, he
that backbiteth not with his tongue, verse. 3.

5 A Curse. Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly, Deuteronomy: 27. 24.
Smiteth] there is little difference between him, who hurts a man first, with
his tongue; and him who afterward upon his false accusation, hurts him with
his sword. smite they do both; only secretly, and publicly, is all the odds;
and what is that with God? David calls the tongue of Slanderers, a sword, Ps.
64. 3. See the hurtfullnesse of a slanderous tongue, notably described by the
Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 28. 14. to the end.

6 Utter destruction of them and their families. Amaziah a Priest of Bethel,
accusing the Prophet Amos to Jeroboam the King of Israel, of conspiring against
him, Amos 7. v. 10, in the 17 verse, is thus threatened, Thy wife shall be a
harlot in the city, and thy Sons and thy Daughters shall fall by the sword,
and thy land shall be divided by line, and thou shall dye in a polluted land.
And thus is that of Doeg's being rooted out of the land etc, in the place above
quoted Ps. 52. 5, interpreted; because, say the Hebrews, the children are the
root, when the tree is cut down, (or a man is dead,) from whence spring new
branches, that is, Nephews. Ezekiel chap 22. being about to threaten Jerusalem
with captivity, first makes complaint of some notorious sins: and among the
rest this was one, In thee are men that carry tales Or men of Slanders.
to shed blood v. 9. To shed bloud] There are but few such men, but are
bloudy-minded. If they do not speak to that end, that another man's blood may
be shed; yet they would be glad, if that were the end; and it is not seldom
that it proves so.

Thus you have seen, what evils a slanderous tongue may occasion to the
slanderers themselves. And good reason, they should have some hurt, among so
much as it does. The Hebrews call a slanderous tongue (...) an Evil tongue.
The Chaldee Paraphrase almost every where, expresses the sin by the name
(...) a Treble tongue. And so in that chapter of Ecclesiasticus, which before I
referred you to, verse. 15, it is called (...) a Third tongue. And the reason
they give, is, because it does hurt to three persons viz: the hearer, the
accused, and the speaker himself. It may be so likewise called from speaking
three manner of ways. For 1 The Slanderer flatters the party whom he will
slander, to make him the more ready to trust him. 2 He slanders that party, to
whom he means to sla^der him; that so he may speak his mind the more freely
against him. 3 He tells again, what he has heard the party speak. David
Psalm. 143. 3. complains of his slanderous enemies, that Adders poison was
under their lips. If they have Adders poison, they may as well have Adders
tongues, The Epithete, that Poets have for the tongue of a Serpent, is,
trisulca, Linguis micat ore trisulcis. Virg.
three-furrowed. and perhaps it was with this instrument especially, that
David's backbiting enemies, plowed their furrows upon his back Psalm. 129. 3.
But let all Slanderers know, that for this treble hurt, of part whereof they
are not allwaies certain; they shall certainly meet with double punishment;
double destruction; such as Jeremy prays for, against those that slandered
him, chapter 17. 18. Paul made it so certain, that those who slandered Saying, that
his intent was to encourage mento sin, by teaching, that because sin had so
much abounded, God's grace was the more glorified.
him, should come to punishment; that he neither prays that they might, nor
threatens that they should; but only speaks in approbation of their
punishment; (which he thought to be irrevocably determined against them:) that
it was good enough for them. And not rather as we b^ slanderously reported, and
as some affirm, that we say, Let us do evil that good may come thereof,
whose damnation is just. Romans 3. 8.

Sorrow of the world.
Godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of: but the
sorrow of the world works death, 2 Cor. 7. 10. If you take this to be spoken
of a te^porall death; It is that whereof we see experience very often, viz: in
such as make themselves away, by hanging, drowning, and such like ways: out of
grief for some worldly crosses. I believe, you have heard of few, that have
been sorry after a godly sort, that came to such ends.

Tale bearers. see Slanderers.

Talkativenesse is punished, or attended
With Poverty ( being usually accompanied with idleness Talkative people may
be (...) busy bodies, like those women 1. Tim. 5. 13. (for to that sex this
vice is most common) but seldom (...), laborious, according to the proverb
always busy, and never well employed.
) In all labor there is profit, but the talk of the lips tends only to
poverty, Prove: 14. 22.

2 Destruction (as by discovery, provocation, and an hundred otherwise) He
that keeps his mouth, keeps his life but he that opens wide his lips,
shall have destruction, Prove: 13. 3 Keeping the door of a man's mouth shut is
as requisite for his safety, as the keeping the door of his house shut: Mic.
7. 5.
and as careful is it to be observed, if a man would live free, not only from
hurt, but from fear. The Septuagint The Chal de likewise for destruction,
Fear.
translate the last part of this verse he that is rash in his lips, shall make
(...).
himself afraid. And doubtless, such as talk much, are seldom free; either
from fear, lest what they have not well spoken, may do them hurt; or from
doubt, whether they have spoken so or no. We Plutarch. Nulli tacuisse nocet
nocet esse locutum.
repent often that we speak too much, but seldom that we hold our peace.

Temple of God.
If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of
God is holy, which Temple ye are. 1 Cor: 3. 17.

Tempting of God punished.
1 In the Israelites, when they had their will one way, with being crossed
another, (as usually it falls out, when we are too eager in our pursuits.) But
lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the desert: and he
gave them their requests, but sent leanness into their soul, Psalm. 106. 14,
15. See Murmuring.

2 In the same people, with the loss of Canaan. Wherefore I swear unto them in
my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest. Psalm: 95. 11. They committed
this sin very many times: but this punishment was chiefly inflicted, for
their refusing for to go forward toward Canaan, when they were come very
near it, Numb 14. 23. If men will not go to Heaven when they may, they shall
seek to enter in Luke 13. 24.
, and shall not be able.

3 Destruction ( in the same people also.) Neither let us tempt Christ, as some
of them also tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents, 1 Cor. 10. 9.

4 Sudden death, in Ananias and Saphira. for Peter told Saphira, How is it that
ye have agreed together to tempt the spirit? etc. Act. 5. 9.

Thieves.
Their punishment by the Law was Restitution; which was in some cases Exodus 22.
4, 7. 9.
twofold, in some 2 Samuel: 12. 6.
four, and (as it is interpreted by the vulgar, Prove. 6. 31.) in some seven:
and if he were found breaking up of an house, any man might kill him, Exodus: 22.
2.

But besides this they are threatened,

1 With a secret curse upon their estates which they have gotten by Thievery,
Or any wrongful dealing. I suppose by thief, is meant any injurious gainer.
wasting and eating them out like a Canker. I will bring it forth, says the
Lord of hoasts, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the
house of him that swears falsely by my name* and it shall remain in the
midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof, and the
stones thereof, Zach. 5. 3. He speaks of the flying roll which he saw;
wherein it seems were two curses, one of one side against Thieves, and anther
on the other, against false-swearers. And it is conceived to be meant chiefly
of the Jews in Babylon: who for poverty would steal, and then forswear it.

2 Exclusion out of heaven. Nor Thieves nor covetous etc. shall inherit the
kingdom of God 1 Cor. 6. 10.

Thoughts of wickedness
Doubtless, they shall be punished. for otherwise, Peter had never said to
Simon Magus (when he offered to give him money, for the power of conferring the
Holly-gost) Repent ^therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps
the thought of thine heart may be for given thee, Acts 8. 22. If perhaps
(...).] According to Beza, the Greek word expresses a doubting. As if he had
said, I fear God will hardly pardon thee; yet try however. But for this, use
your judgment.

Unless Jerusalem did wash her he art from wickedness, she could not be
saved. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be
saved, how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer: 4. 14. Vain
thoughts] Hierom translates, noxiae, hurtful; and Symmachus, (...), thoughts
of wickedness. The thoughts of the wicked are abomination to the Lord, (...)
Prove. 15, 26, much more, the thoughts of wickedness.

Treacherous dealing punished.
Woe to thee that spoilest, and wast not spoiled, and dealest The Latin
renders it Spernis as if it were (...) but we render it (...)
treacherously and they dealt not treacherously with thee. when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to
deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee Isa. 33. 1.

Threatend (or, prophesied)
Our Savior told his disciples, Ye shall be betrayed, both by Parents, and
Brethren, and Kinsfolks, and Friends; and some of you shall they cause to be
put to death, Luk 21. 16.

Trusting in the arm of Flesh, punished
1 With not prospering against enemies, so well, as otherwise they might.
Hanani the Seer told Asa K. of Judah, (because, when Baasha King of Israel came
against him, he betook himself for help to Benhadad King of Syria, and made a
league with him,) Because thou have relied on the King of Syria, and not relied
on the Lord thy God, therefore is the host of the King of Syria escaped out of
thy hands, 2 Chr. 16. 7. It Is true, he overcame the K. of Israel. But, it
seems, he might have overcome the king of Syria too, (who was as great an enemy
to Judah, as he was to Israel;) had it not been for this sin.

2 Being overcome. Sometimes by treachery of those in whom they trust: as the
Jews were overcome by the Assyrians, being promised help, and encouraged to
stand it out by the Egyptians. For upon them they leaned as upon a staff; but
it proved a hollow-hearted reed, and brake under them, Ezekiel. 29. 6. Isa 36. 5.
And some times without treachery; as the same people were by the same people,
when they fled into Egypt; where they, and the Egyptians both, were overthrown
by Nebuchadnezzar, The Egyptians are men and not God, and their horses are
flesh, and not Spirit etc. When the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he
that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down; and they all
shall fail together, Isa. 31. 3. Perhaps, Benhadad King of Syria might have
prospered against Ahab (being a wicked king,) had he not put so much confidence
in the strength of his Army. For the Scripture relates his boasting
expressions, 1 Kings 20. 10. But you may read of his overthrow v. 20. See Hos.
10. 13, 14, 15.

3 Shame for their folly. Woe to the rebellious house etc. Isa. 30. 1. (where
the Latin translates, desertores, forsakers, because they forsook God, and
betook themselves to men.) And it follows verse. 3. The strength of Pharaoh
shall be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt, your confusion. The
trust] Not their being overthrown by the enemy. For it had been no shame, to
be overcome by so potent an enemy, as the Assyrian. But that they should
occasion their own overthrow, by trusting in vain men, when they might have
trusted in the Lord of Hoasts; how could they choose but be exceedingly ashamed,
and confounded, for their folly and madness? One of the sins for which God
threatens to give Jerusalem blood in fury and jealousy, Ezekiel. 16. 38, was
trusting in her own beauty, verse. 15. An Idol especially, is (...) a thing of
naught (or that which is not a thing. (...) The same word signifies Idol, and,
nothing.
) And the Prophet Amos complains of rejoicing in it, chap. 6. 13. But any
creature to trust in, is as good as nothing, mere vanity; and cannot satisfy
his expectation. Men find it so by daily experience, and yet it is all one. But
what says Job, Let not him that is deceived, trust in vanity, for vanity shall
be his recompense chap. 15. 31.

4 A Curse. Cursed be the man ( being Geber The best name the Hebrew has for
man; As Adam is the worst.
) that trusts in man, (Adam a: whom he knows to be an earthen vessel) and
makes flesh his arm. For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall
not see when good comes: but shall inhabit the parched places in the
wilderness, in a salt land and not inhabited Jer. 17. 5, 6.

Trust in God.
The want of it (especially if it be distrust, and doubting of his
faithfulness) punished
1 With Want of assurance, and establishment. When Ahaz K. of Judah, being
invaded by Rezin K. of Syria, and Pekah K. of Israel distrusting God's
providence, intended to betake himself for help to the Assyrians; the Prophet
Isaiah told him, If ye will not believe, ye shall not be established, Isa. 7.
9. Hebrew. (...) The words used for believe, and for established, are the same;
only in a different form. And indeed, belief (or, trust in God) is the only
thing, that can establish both our hearts, and our conditions. According to the
Hebrew, we might render thus, If ye will not be assured So as not to doubt.
, ye shall not be assured So as not to fail.
. The word (...) which signifies faith, (both ours in belief; and God's in
faithfulness (I think) the most natural signification.
) is used as if it did signify also riches. And therefore some derive the word
Mammon, Riches, from Amun, trust. If it signify riches, it may well be used
also for trust; because men usually trust in riches: and if it signify trust,
it may be used also for riches; because God (who only is to be trusted in) is
riches enough to them that trust in him, and rich unto all that call upon him.
In the 37. Psalm. verse. * The same word likewise signifies to nourish and to
believe,
3. where we translate, Trust in the Lord, and do good, and dwell in the land,
and verily thou shall be fed, the Sept. translate (...), thou shall be fed with
the riches of it. The Hebrew for these words is (...). which Vatablus renders,
Aquila renders, (...).
nourish thy self with faith (that which Habakkuk says, the just shall live
by. Chapter 2. 4.)

2 God's fiery indignation, and severe punishment. Yea they spoke against God,
they said, can God furnish a table in the wilderness, etc. Therefore the Lord
heard this, and was wroth, so a fire was kindled against Jacob, etc. Psalm. 78,
19, 20, 21. and afterward in the same Ps. verse. 32, 33. For all this they
sinned still, and believed not, for his wondrous works. Therefore their days
did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble. It is strange: all the
while the Israelites were in the Wilderness, though they were so often
punished for distrust in God's providence, yet upon every occasion they
distrusted it. He was never so often tempted, and provoked through distrust of
it: and yet there were never so many clear testimonies given of it.

Unbelief, as to promises, punished,
1 With not enjoying those promises, when they are fulfilled. Thus the Noble
man at Samaria was punished. Who because he would not believe Elisha's
Prophecy, of a plenty to be the next day in that town: although there were
then a strait siege, and the want of provision was so great, that women did
eat their children, so that one would think, he had good cause to doubt of
the truth of it: yet notwithstanding had this punishment threatened him by the
Prophet, Thou shall see it with thine eyes, but shall not eat thereof, 2 Kings
7. 2. which came to pass accordingly. See Ministers not believed. In like
manner were the Israelites punished, viz: with dying before they came to the
promised land. And to whom swear he, that they should not enter into his rest,
but to them that believed not? So we see, they could not enter in, because of
unbelief, Heb. 3. 18, 19. See Jude verse 5.

2 With Dumbness. Thus Zachary was punished, for not believing the promise
sent him by the Angel, that his wife Elizabeth should have a Son: although (as
one might think) he had good reason to doubt of it, because he and she too were
both old, Luk: 1. 20. Dumbness, I said. and I may add Deafness too; if the
opinion of Theophylact and others be true: who would have the Angel's words
(...), to be translated, not, thou shall be dumb: but thou shall be deaf, and
not able to speak They have some reasons for it, as 1 Because else, here were a
speaking of the same thing twice.

2 Because it is said verse: 62. that they made signs to him, when they desired
to know, how he would have his son called: which they needed not to have
done, if he had not been deaf. And as for the Greek word (...); it is not
unlikely, it may be used as the Hebrew word (...) is, as well for deaf *, as
dumb. For so another Greek word (...) is used, in one and the same Evangelist,
Mat. 11. (...).
5. and ch: 12. (...).
22 (and therefore from the words (...), verse. 22. Can be nothing brought As
Grotius would have it.
for this purpose.)

Unbelief as to the Gospel punished
1 With Removal of the means of belief. It is said of Nazareth, that our
Savior did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief Mat: 13.
58.

2 Rejection. Because of unbelief they were broken off, Romans 11. 02. Because
of unbelief,] or through unbelief. Unbelief breaks a man off from the tree
presently: and perhaps, in the original it is so meant, And because of the
words following, (...).
viz. though it be a meritorious cause, under the notion of an efficient.

3 Damnation. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: but he that
believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16. 16. Shall be damned, (...)] or, his
condemnation shall be fulfilled. For, (...), he is condemned, already John 3.
He that beleiveth not is condemned already.
18. God is so angry for this sin, that he resolves presently to damn men
for it. And his resolution will certainly be executed; for the wrath of God
abides on him, verse. 36. See the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. and chap. 1. 9. Rev. 21. 8.
Wherefore see that ye refuse not him that speaks. for if they escaped not,
who refused him that spoke on earth; much more shall not we escape, if we turn
away from him that speaks from heaven, Heb. 12. 25.

Vncharitablnesse toward those who are in want; the punishments for it either
inflicted, or threatened, are
1 Excommunication. An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the
Congregation of the Lord; even to their tenth generation, shall they not enter
into the Congregation of the Lord forever. Because they met you not with bread
and with water, in the way when ye came forth out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 23. 3, 4. See
Not-helping the godly.

2 Poverty. There is that scatters, and yet increases, and there is that
withholdeth more then is meet, but it tends to poverty, Prove. 11. 24.
Withholdeth more then is meet.] Some translate Aq. and Sym. (...) the same that
(...) 2 Cor 9. 6. Heb. (...)
Spares, i. e. gives not as much as he should. Which if it be so; and that
such a one shall come to poverty: much more he that gives nothing at all. They
say it is usual in the Jewish Writers, to compare giving alms (a thing which
they talk very much of) to salt. And not without reason. For, as meat will
putrify, if it be not salte^ and fruit will rott, if it be not turned; an^ many
things will be the worse, if they be no^ used: So wealth is many times lost by
keeping, but never by bestowing. We have an example of this punishment related
by Gregory Nyssen, in one whose children came to poverty, though he did not.
For hiding his money in holes, and walls, without acquaining any body where he
put it; he happened to dye sudenly, and so it was all lost. I believe, if it
were observed, it might be as common to see the uncharitable man forsaken, and
his seed begging their bread: as it is rare to see it in the righteous The word
righteous, seems to be often taken in this sense
and liberal, Ps. 37. 25.

3 God's not hearing their prayers, in su^ or any other condition. Who so
stops hi^ ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry an^ shall not be
heard, Prove. 21. 13. At the CRY^ the poore] not the Call, viz: when he beggeth
whenever he CRIES only, out o^ the sense of his misery; though it be not t^
thee, that he cries. Nay, whereas it is renderred, AT the Cry: it may be
rendere^ FROM the Cry: for the word is (...) that he who never heard their cry,
if it we^ of his own occasioning, that he did n^ hear it, viz: by going, or
looking anoth^ way, or keeping at home, (tricks too oft^ used by uncharitable
men:) shall be certain ^^nished. He also shall CRY,] or, rather, (...) shall
CALL ((...)) i. e. He shall call upon God. so the Chaldee Paraphrase. which
(...) worse then crying only. for his condition shall be such, that none but
God shall be able to help him; (so that he shall be necessitated to call upon
him:) and yet God shall refuse to help him. Shall not be heard] or, shall not
be answered; (...) which is a grea^er token of anger. for it argues, that God
has shut up his bowels toward him, when (...) hears him, and does not pity
him.

4 Many curses; not from Which we have frequent experience of.
men only, but from God. He that gives to the poor shall ^ot lack: but he
that hides his eyes ( for fear of being moved to pity) shall have many a
^urse, Prove. 28. 27.

Thus it is with uncharitable men even in his life. And if they do any of them
escape punishments without; they are worse punish^d within, with continual
fears, both of God, and man. As Eliphaz told Job, (though (...) had not
perhaps stripped the naked of their doathing: but had only not given water to
the weary to drink, or witholden bread from ^he hungry) Therefore snares are
round about ^ee, and sudden fear troubles thee, Job 22. ^, 10. But his
punishment in the next life, ^specially, if he be so to Christ's members, is ^o
less then

5 Damnation. Then shall he say also to them on the left hand, Depart from me
ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his Angels, Mat.
25. 41. And it follows in the next verse, for I was, (or my members were) a
hungered, and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, verse.
42. So in the parable, the rich man, who relieved not Lazarus, is said to be in
hell, Luk 16. 23. And in another parable, the Servant, who pityed not his
fellow servants, that owed him money, is coudemned to perpetual imprisonment,
Matt. 18. 33, 34. And as no heaven is provided, for such as have no charity:
so, but a little heaven for such as have but a little charity. He that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he that sows bountifully shall reap
bountifully, 2 Cor: 9. 6.

God himself says, that one of the reasons why he destroyed Sodom, was,
because she did not strengthen the hand of the poor and needy, Ezekiel. 16. 49,
50.

Job even in his impatience said, he would be contented, in case he had seen
any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without covering etc. that his
arm should fall from his shoulder blade In this expression he alludes,
perhaps, to what Eliphaz accused him of, that he had broken the arms of
fatherless, chap. 22. 19. For which he would count this a just retaliation
, and his arm be broken from the bone, Job 31* 19, to 23. Which puts me in
mind of a saying among the Jews, The door that is not opened Buxtorf. in
Floril.
to the poor, shall be opened to the Physicians.

Vnfruitfullnesse. God punishes men for it
1 With leaving them to the wide world. What could I have done more to my
vinyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore when I looked that it should
bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? and now go to, I will tell
you what I will do to my vinyard, I will take away the hedge thereof, and it
shall be eaten up, and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden
down Isa. 5. 4, 5.

2 Taking away the means of making them fruitful. It shall not be pruned nor
dug: but there shall come up briars and thorns, I will also command the
clouds that they rain no rain upon it, ib. v. 6.

3 Taking away the power and means of being fruitful (gifts and talents.)
Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him that has ten talents,
Mat. 25. 28. So that for unfruitfullnesse the sin, they have unfruitfullnesse
the punishment; When he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found
nothing thereon, but leaves only: and said unto it, let no fruit grow on thee
hence forward for ever. and presently the figtree withered away Mat. 21 19.

4 Cutting down, as trees that have left bearing. It was John the Baptist's
doctrine, every tree which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and
cast into the fire, Mat. 3. 10. And it was our Saviors too, in in the same
words, chap. 7. 19. Luk 13. 7. He that had hid his talent in the ground, had
his doom to be cast into outer darkness, Mat. 25. 30.

Unthankful sinning.
(I mean sinning against more then ordinary mercy. For otherwise, all sinning*
has Unthankfulness in it) It has been threatened,
1 With God's anger; although the party were one that God loved exceeding well.
Hezekiah rendered not again, according to the benefit done unto him: for his
heart was lifted up* therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and
Jerusalem, 2 Chr: 32. 25.

2 God's not pardoning them ( or forbearing to punish them.) How shall I pardon
thee for this? Thy children have for^aken me, and sworn by them that are no
Gods. When I had fed them to the full, they then committed adultery, and
assembled themselves by troops in the harlots houses, Jer: 5. 7.

3 God's punishing them severely. You only have I known of all the families of
the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities Am. 3. 2. How
tenderly does God take it, to have hatred thus returned him for his good will!
even as a father does, to be hated by his children, whom he has not only
begotten, but bred up with a great deal of love, and pains, and care. One may
plainly see it in the manner of his expressions. Of the rock that begat thee
thou art unmindfull, and have forgotten God that formed thee. And when the Lord
saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons, and of his
daughters, Deu: 32. 18, 19. Because of the provoking of his sons and his
daughters.] If they had been strangers; their Provoking had not been so odious,
nor their Sins so provoking, Deu: 32. 18, 19.

Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the Lord has spoken. I have
nourished, and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. The Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but Israel does not know, my
people does not consider, Isa: 1. 2, 3. Hear O Heavens] As if creatures only
natural, would be sensible of such an unnatural thing viz: for children to
forget him that nourished and fed them. In that place of Deuteron. last quoted;
where we translate formed, the Sept. translate, (...), that nourished thee. So
in Hos. 11. 3. in the Latin translation, the words are, I, as Ephraim's Our
translation. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking the^ by their arms.
nursing father bare them in my arms. And indeed, these expressions, viz: of
nourishing and a nursing father, do aggravate ingratitude, much more then
making, or begetting, or being a father. For many fathers do hate their
children; and many cause them to be made away, as soon as they are borne.
Being a father is not so much a matter of love. At least, there is no love in
so being (but only from:) unless it be by adoption, so, as God is a father in
Jesus Christ. For they, to whom he is so, may well say, Behold, what manner of
love the father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of
God? 1 John: 3. 1. He did not love us as fathers love their natural children:
which is usually by force of nature, so that they cannot help it. But he
bestowed his love upon us freely. To have been indeed the sons of God, had not
been matter of love: but being not the sons of God (but the children if wrath)
yet to be called the sons of God, here was love.

It may be seen likewise (viz: how tenderly God takes sinning against his love)
in another comparison, which God often uses, viz: of a wife forsaking her
husband. Among other places, I refer you especially to Ezekiel. 16. 32. For in
that Chapt. the Prophet seems to have made it his business, to set forth the
greatness of the peoples ingratitude: recounting first Gods mercies, from
verse. 4. to 14. and after that their sins notwithstanding those mercies. See
the complaint concerning Ephraim, Hos* 7. 13. 15. and the threat pronounced
against them verse. 16, See also Chapter 11. 3.

4 Denial of mercy under punishment, ( which is a very sad thing.) When the
Israelites cried to the Lord for help, being invaded by the Ammonites; his
answer was this, Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the
Amorites, from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines? The Zidonians
also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites did oppress you, and ye cried unto
me, and I delivered you out of their hand. Yet ye have forsaken me and
served other Gods, wherefore I will deliver you no more, Judge: 10, 11, 12, 13.

It has been punished and threatened.

1 With many sorts of judgments. Such as the Jews at several times met with
before their captivity. The Levites in their confession (at the time of the
fast, after the peoples return to Jerusalem) relating the manner of God's
dealing with their ancestors by mercies and punishments; and their behavior
toward him; still made the cause of their punishments, to be their sins
after the receipt of mercies; as you may see in Nehemiah, c. 9. Not once, nor
twice, nor twenty times, in the Old Testament, when there is either an
exhortation to the Jews to remember, or a reproof for forgetting the Lord
their God: their deliverance out of the land of Egypt, is presently mentioned,
in these words, Which brought them forth out of the land of Egypt. See 2 King
17. 6, 7. Deuteronomy. 13. 5, 10. etc. The mention of this mercy alone, God knew to
be sufficient, to keep any one from wondering at any punishment, that should
befall them, in case they sinned against him. And therefore, in several
places, where he shows how severely he would punish them, if they rebelled
against him; he tells them withal, how that, when strangers should see how
they were dealt with, and should ask the cause; it should be answered, that it
was for forgetting the Lord their God, who brought them forth out of the land
of Egypt. As you may see 2 Chronicles: 7. 21, 22. Deuteronomy: 29. 24, 25. 1 Kings 9. 8.
etc.

2 Captivity, and by that means the enjoying of their labors by others,
(which is a bitter punishment.) Because thou have forgotten the God of thy
salvation, and have not been mindful of the rock of thy strength: therefore
shall thou plant pleasant plants, and shall set it with strange slips. In the
day shall thou make the plant to grow, and in the morning shall thou make thy
seed to flourish. But the harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief, and
desperate sorrow, Isa. 17. 10, 11. As you have given those things which you had
of me to Idols: (whereof see Ezekiel. 16. 16, 17, 18, 19.) so shall your land give
those things which it had of you, to your enemies. It is a sad thing, when God
makes a man very happy: or setts him upon hopes, and endeavors to be very
happy: and in the mean time, resolves to make him miserable.

3 The total, and unavoidable destruction of a Nation. For thus said Ezra in
his prayer, And after all this that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and
for our great trespasses; seeing thou our God have punished us less then our
iniquities deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this; should we
again break thy commandment, and join in affinity with the people of these
abominations? Would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us,
so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping? Ezr: 9. 13, 14. The Prophet
Amos chap. 2, complaining first of the wickedness of the Jews; afterward, to
aggravate it, begins to mention some of God's mercies toward them, Yet I
destroyed the Amorite before them etc. verse. 9. but having mentioned two or
three, not able to hold any longer, he breaks forth into these words; Therefore
the flight shall perish from the swift etc. verse. 14. None of them shall
escape, and nothing shall stand them in steed.

Nay the Scripture speaks of punishing Unthankful sinners, not only in their
persons, but in their posterity also. For so was Jeroboam punished. Forasmuch
as I exalted thee. etc. says God to him by the Prophet Ahijah 1 Kings 14. 7,
and thou have not been as my servant David, verse. 8. Therefore I will bring
evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off him that pisseth against the
wall, verse. 10. In the 16 chapter verse. 2, and 3, you shall find him speaking
after the same manner, to Baasha King of Israel, by the mouth of Jehu.

How many strict charges may you meet with in the Scriptures, against this
sin of ingratitude toward God! especially in the book of Deuteronomy: where
to show what danger there is in it, they usually begin with a Cavete, Take heed
or beware, viz: Lest thou forget the Lord, etc. See Deuteronomy: 6. 10, 11, 12. chap
8, 10, 11, and read at your leisure these texts of scriptures Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Isa.
51. 13. Ps. 78. 42. 1 Kings 14. 7. Jer: 2. 5, 6. chap. 5. 24. Hos. 2. 8, 9. chapter
7, 15. See likewise Samuels reproof of Saul, 1 Samuel: 15. 17.

Voluptuousness punished
With poverty. He that loves pleasure shall be a poor man: and he that loves
wine and oil, shall not be rich. Prove. 21. 17.

War
Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kindome, etc. Mat. 24,
7.

VVatchfull
Such who are not so. 1 They are the more exposed to temptation, and the sooner
made a prey to the Devil. Be sober, be vigilant: because your adversary the
Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.
8.

2 Thy are most in danger of being surprised, and most dangerously surprised,
by Judgment. It was threatened the Church of Sardis, If therefore thou shall
not watch; I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shall not know what hour
I will come upon thee Rev. 3. 3, and perhaps here is an Aposiopesis of some
heavy judgment (to be understood, though it be not expressed.)

Weariness in well doing
It hazards the reward. Let us not be weary of well doing, for in due season we
shall reap if we faint not, Gal: 6. 9.

Whoremongers threatened
1 With certain judgment. Whoremongers and Adulterers (because many times men
cannot or do not) God will judge Heb. 13, 4.

2 Exclusion out of Heaven. They are the first in the Apostles black roll;
Neither fornicators, nor Idolaters etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. See Rev. 22. 15.

punished
With Death. For when the Israelites committed whoredom with the Moabites, God
(by a disease, or fire, or some other extraordinary plague) slew no less then
four and twenty thousand of them, Number. 25. 1, 9.

The usual evils See Adultery.
wherewith they punish themselves, are
1 Loss of honor, long life, wealth and health: and gain of nothing, but
repentance and grief. Remove thy way far from her ( speaking of the strange
woman) and come not nigh the door of her house; lest thou give thine honor
unto others, and thy years unto the cruel: lest strangers be filled with thy
wealth, and thy labors be in the house of a stranger, and thou mourn at the
last, when thy flesh and thy body And so the Apostle might very well say, He
that commits fornication, sineth against his own body, 1 Cor. 6. 18.
are consumed Prove: 5. 8, ^o the 12.

2 Death. For she has cast down many wounded: many strong men have been slain
by her* Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of Death,
Prove. 7. 26, 27. Her house is the way, and chap. 2. 18. Her house enclineth
unto death, and none that go unto her return again, etc. v. 19: as if the
wiseman intended to intimate, (which is often seen) that such as once enter
into the practice of that sin, usually continue in it, till it work their
destruction. The danger of falling in this way, must needs be great; and the
fall very desperate; because those that go in it, are usually made blind with
passion: so that like blind metalsome horses they will run, when they know not
where they go. He goes after her straight way as an ox goes to the
slaughter^ or a (...), Sept. as a dog to the collar.
fool to the correction of the stocks, Prove. 7. 22.

Wicked men.
When I read the Bible, for the collection of these particular threats and
punishments: sometimes I thought it not useless, to collect those places also,
which concern wickedness in general: and accordingly, such as are more
notable, I did set them down as I met with them. But yet again sometimes (I
must confess) I thought it needless; because they were so many, and so easy
to be found. Hence, it is possible, that I may have overslipt some. but being
confident they are very few, I here give you a catalogue of those which I
took. which I have put in figures only: both because they might perhaps seem
too many to be written out in a greater volume; and especially, because I
feared the book would be of two great a bulk for the volume.

More notable places of threats, and punishments for wicked men.
Genesis 38. 7. Exodus: 23. 7. 1 Samuel: 2. 9. 2 Samuel: 23. 6, 7. 1 Kings 8. 32. 2 Kings
17. 20: Job. 4 8, 9. cap: 5. 3. 6. and 16. c. 8. 20, 22. c. 10. 14, 15. c. 11.
20. c. 15. 20. to the end. c. 11. 15. to the end. c. 20. 5. to the end. c. 21.
17. to 20. c. 22, 16. and v. 30. c. 24. 20, 24. c. 27. 13. etc. c. 31. 3. c.
34. 22. 26, 27. c. 36, 6. c. 38. 13. 15. c. 40. 12. Psalm. 1. 4. 5, 6. Ps. 5. 5.
Ps. 9. 19. Ps. 11. 5, 6. Ps. 20. 8, 10, 12. ps. 32. 10. Ps. 34. 16. 21. ps. 36.
12. Ps. 37. 2. 9, 10, 13, 15, 20, 22, 28, 36. 38. Ps. 50. 17. to 21. Ps. 5. 2.
to 5. Ps. 64. 1. to 7, 8. Ps. 68, 21. 23. Ps. 73. 18, to 21. and 27. Ps. 75, 8.
10. ps. 92. 7. 9. ps. 94. 23. ps. 101. 4. 8. ps. 104. 35. psalm. 109. 78. ps.
112, 3. 10. ps. 129, 4. ps. 141. 10. ps. 146. 9. ps. 147. 6. Prove: 6. 15. c.
10. 7. 9., 24, 25. 27. 28. 29, 30. c. 11. 7. 21. c. 12. 7. 21. c. 13. 5, 9. 21.
c. 14. 11. 19. 32. c. 16. 4. c. 21. 18. c. 22, 8. c. 29. 16. Eccles: 2. 26. c:
8, 12: Isa: 1. 28. c. 3. 8. 11 c. 5. 18. c. 9. 18. c. 13. 9. 11. c. 57. 20, 21.
c. 59. 2. c. 64, 6. Jer: 7. 20. c. 9, 10, 11, 15. 16. Par. 22. c: 13, 24, 25.
c: 14, 16. c: 15, 1. to 8. c: 16, 4. c: 18. 16. c: 20, 5. 10, 12. c: 22. 24.
25, c: 23. 40. c: 24, 9. 15: c: 44, 27: c: 48, 38, 39. c: 49, 17, c: 50, 25:
Lament: 2, 4: c: 3, 1: 3, 5, 8, 10. 12, 15, 43, 44. Ezekiel: 4, 17. c: 5, 11, 13,
15, c: 7, 3, 4, 8, 27, c: 12, 19, c. 14, 8, c: 22, 31, c: 24, 13, Hos: 1, 9, 6,
c: 5, 10, 12, 14, 15, c: 13, 3, Nah: 3, 5, 6, Zeph: 6, 17, 18, Mal: 1, 4, c: 3,
5, c: 4, 4, Mat: 13, 41, 42. 50, Joh: 5, 29, c: 17, 9, Rom: 1, 18, 1 Cor: 6, 9,
10, 11: Gal: 5, 19, to 22, Ephesians: 5, 5, 6: Col. 3, 5, 6, 1 Pet: 4, 18.

Will worship.
And Nadab, and Abihu took each of them his censer, and put fire therein, and
put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord, which he
commanded not. And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and
they died before the the Lord, Lev: 10, 1. 2.

Wisdom.
Such as neglect it.
1 They are certainly punished, one way or other. A rod is for the back of him
that is void of understanding, Prove. 10. 13. This rod usually grows in their
own mouth. In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride, chap: 14. 3 For by
their own rash, and foolish speeches, and actions, they work themselves
abundance of misery, chap: 10. 14.

2 For the most part, they are (spiritually) starved to death. The lips of the
righteous feed many: but fools dye for want of wisdom. (which is the food of
the soul) Prove: 10. 21, By death, I mean that which is everlasting. For the
man that wandereth out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the
congregation of the dead, Prove: 21: 16. Shall remaine] He shall not obtain the
resurrection from the dead, as it is said, Luk: 20, 35, that is, a resurrection
to happiness* which is only worthy the name of resurrection, and is called a
resurrection to life *: life in misery being not worthy the name of life.

Wisdom i e. carnal wisdom, punished
1 With Infatuation, and Ignorance in spiritual things. For it is written, I
will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is
the disputer of this world? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world? 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20. See Isa 29. 14. Rom: 1. 22.

2 Denial of grace. For ye see your calling brethren: how that not many wise
men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, 1. Cor: 1, 26.
See Mat: 11. 25.

3 Confusion and Shame, (when they see children and fools get to Heaven before
them; and that they, with all their wisdom cannot understand the things of
God, so well as others who have less knowledge.) God has chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound, or shame the wise, and God has chosen the
weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty, 1 Cor: 1. 27.

I may add heereunto, how men, many times ruin themselves, either by the
practice, or by the over eager pursuit of human wisdom, and learning. Be not
righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over wise: why should thou
destroy thy self, Ecles. 7. 16. We see, what ends many Politicians, and hard
Students make. Either they take such courses as are destructive: or growing
mad, they destroy themselves. Destroy thy selfe] Lat. Tran. ne obstupescas,
lest thou be astonished (shall I say?) or stupefied. For so, many times, those
who have attained to most humane knowledge, are: more then those who have
attained but to a little: so that though they have more understanding, they
have less sense. The wisdom that is from above, has none of these evils
attending it. You never knew a man the worse with studying that.

Witnessing falsely
It shall be certainly punished, one way or other: For Solomon has said it
twice in one chapter, A false witness shall not be unpunished, Prove. 19. 5,
and 9. The manner of punishing it among the Jews, is thus prescribed, Deuteronomy 19,
from the 16 verse. to the end. If a false witness rise up against any man, to
testify against him that which is wrong. then both the men, between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before the Priests, and the Judges
which shall be in those days. And the Judges shall make diligent inquisition:
and behold, if the witness be a false witness, and does testify falsely
against his brother: Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done
unto his brother; so shall thou put away evil from among you And those that
remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more such evil
among you. And thy eye shall not pity, but life shall go for life, eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

The hand of God appears notably against False witness, in this, that many
times their speech bewraieth them. So (says Upon Psalm. ^ 36.
Augustine) theirs did, who, when our Savior was risen out of the grave, said,
His disciples came by night and stole him away, while we slept, Matt. 28. 13.
For (says he) if they were asleep, how came they to know so much. And in like
manner the speech of those, whom the same men viz: the chief Priests suborned
to witness against him, to put him to death. For (that which is strange to
observe, considering what cunning men they had to teach them their tale,)
though there were many of them, and though they brought diverse accusations; yet
were they not able to make any two testimonies agree together, Mark. 14. 56, 59.

Word of God
Such as obey it not
1 They have no title to God's Covenant, nor to any thing contained in the
word. But unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my
statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou
hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee? Ps. 50. 16, 17.

2 They are sure to be punished, ( especially if it be the word of the Gospel.)
See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not, who refused
him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him, that speaks from Heaven, Heb: 12. 25.

3 Their punishments have been great, and without remedy. Because they rebelled
against the word of God, and contemned the Freindlike counsel, for their own
good only.
Counsel of the most high, Therefore he brought down their heart with
labour^, they fell down, and there was none to help, Psalm. 107. 11, 12. See
Jer: 26. 4, 5. 6.

Let such hear the word never so much; nay declare it, and preach it never
so much; yet, if they build upon this only, and presume thereupon, that the
promises contained in the word are theirs, and that Christ is their Savior;
they are in no better condition, then he that without a foundation built his
house upon the sand, for that is our Saviruo's comparison, Mat. 7. 26. Every
one that hears these sayings of mine and does them not, shall be likened unto
a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand.

Those that believe it not
1 They will not be profited by it, nor be partakers of what it promises. *
Or, and so were they. (...), our translation, as well as unto them.
For unto us was the Gospel preached, as it was unto them, but the word
preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it,
Heb. 4. 2.

2 They will without question be condemned. For the word which they have
slighted, shall judge them, He that rejects me, and receives not my words,
has one that judges him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge
him in the last day, John 12. 48: and all the Ministers, whom they have heard,
and their writings which they have read, shall accuse them, Do not think,
that I will accuse you to the Father (there is no need of that, though I have
cause enough*) There is one that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust,
chap. 5. 45, 46.

Mark how angrily God threatens the Jews, for not believing the Prophet Jeremy,
They have belied the Lord, and said, it is not he: neither shall evil come
upon us, neither shall we see sword nor famine: and the Prophets shall become
wind, and the word is not in them: thus shall it be done unto them. Wherefore
thus says the Lord God of hoasts, because ye speak this word: behold, I will
make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour
them, Jer: 5. 12. 13, 14.

Such as will not hear it
1 God is exceeding angry with them. They refused to hearken, and pulled away
the shoulder and stopped their ears, that they should not hear. yea they made
their heart as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words,
which the Lord of hoasts had sent by the former Prophets. Therefore came a great
wrath from the Lord of hoasts, Zach: 7. 12, 13. So in Jeremy. To whom shall I
speak, and give warning that they may hear? Their ear is uncircumcised, and
they cannot harken: behold, the word of the Lord is unto them a reproach: they
have no delight in it. Therefore I am full of the fury of the Lord, I am weary
with holding in, etc. Ch: 6. 10, 11: See also verse. 19. and ch: 7. 13, 14, 15.

2 They shall be certainly punished. God told Moses, concerning the Prophet,
whom he would raise up in his room, And it shall come to pass, that whosoever
will not hearken unto my words, which he shall speak in my name, I will Sep.
(...), Vulg. ego ultor existam, I will be revenged upon him.
require it of him, Deuteronomy. 18, 19.

The punishments which the Scripture mentions, are
1 God's not hearing their prayers in their misery: as in that place of Zachary
last quoted: Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would
not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord of hoasts, v.
13. Nay, instead of hearing them, abhorring of them. He that turns away his
ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination, Prove: 28, 9.

2 Giving up to their lusts. But my people would not hearken to my voice; and
Israel would none of me. So I gave them up to their own hearts lust; and they
walked in their own counsels, Ps. 81. 11, 12:

3 Greater condemnation then those have, who never had the word to hear.
Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words: When ye depart out of
the house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, then
for that city, Mat: 10, 14, 15. Our Savior thus spoke to the twelve Apostles,
when he first sent them; and he said the like to the seventy disciples, Luke
10, 11, 12.

Such as despise it.
Their end shall be destruction. Who so despises the word shall be destroyed:
but he that fears the commandment shall be rewarded, Prove: 13. 13.

Words idly spoken
Our Savior told the Jews, I say unto you, that every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give an account thereof, Matt. 12. 36. Idle word.]
(...), not that which we usually mean by idle talk, viz: wicked and profane
only: but useless, and needless, and of which there comes, or is intended, no
good

Works neglected
No Salvation. What does it profit, my brethren, if a man He might well say,
say, for they do but say, they have true faith, who have no works.
say, he has faith, and have no works? Can faith save him? Jam. 2. 14.

Offer the sacrifice of righteousness ( says David) and put thy trust in the
Lord, Psalm. 4. 5, or else thy trust is vain.

That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but
keep his commandments, says the same Prophet, Psalm. 87. 7, otherwise they
might be one day ashamed of their Psalm. 119. 116.
hope: faith without the observation of the Commandments, being but a dead
James 2. 17.
faith, and not a lively 1 Pet. 1. 3.
ashamed.

The Jews were told, that unless they did thoroughly amend their ways, and
their doings etc. they did but trust in lying words, (which would deceive
them,) to say, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, though they said it never so often, Jer: 7. 4, 5.

Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in Heaven, Matt. 7. 21.

Works of God not regarded.
Because they regard not the works of God, nor the operation of his hands, he
shall destroy them, and not build them up, Psalm. 28. 5. See Psalm. 78. 32, 33.

World Those that love it, punished
1 With a short enjoyment of what they love, ( which is no punishment, to them
that do not love it) And they that use this world, as not abusing it; for the
fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 31.

2 Vexation of mind. I have seen all the work that are done under the Sun, and
behold all is vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1. 14.

3 Not being able to be Christ's disciple. Whosoever he be of you, that
forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my disciple, Luk 14. 33. That
forsakes not] and verse. 26. That hates not his father etc. Much less then
can they that love, and cleave to the world, be Christ's disciples. Paul says,
he counted all things but dung, (...): not, so he could; but, that he might,
win Christ: as if else he could not. See Phil. 3. 8.

4 Surprizall by the day of Judgment. Take heed to your selves, lest at any
time, your hearts be overcharged with surfeting, and drunkenesse and cares of
this life, and so that day come upon you unawares, Luke 21. 34.

Worship of God neglected,
Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little, and when ye brought it home, I
did blow upon it. Why, says the Lord of hoasts? Because of mine house that is
wast, and ye run every man to his own house. Hag. 1. 9.

APPENDIX.
READER, I entreat thee to lend me the reading of a few lines more, which
partly by the Printers fault, and partly by mine own (having done my work in
loose papers) were left out in the book.

P. 31. Before Destruction, Read, 6 Shame. O Lord the hope of all Israel; all
that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they that depart from me, shall be
written in the earth, because they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of
living water. Jer. 17, 13.

Page 32. read, The Jews when they heard any one blaspheme God's name: either
out of indignation against the party, for the affront (as Joshua and Caleb did
at the murmuring of the people, Number. 14. 6 And Paul and Barnabas, when the
people would have sacrificed to them. Act. 14. 14.
:) or else out of grief for God's dishonor (as it was their custom to do in
times of mourning:) used to rent their clothes. And this they would do,
whosoever he were, that had blasphemed: but especially, if he were one of their
own nation, and had professed himself to be in covenant with him, whose name
he blasphemed, (oh! I could tear my hair to see Professors of godliness,
dishonourers of God Every dishonor and disgrace which we bring to God and his
truth, is petty blasphemy.
.) For this reason, (and because he spoke in the Hebrew tongue) the Jews
conjecture Rabsbacheh, at whose blasphemy the people in Jerusalem did rent
their clothes, 2 Kings 18. 37. to have been formerly of their religion Yea they
thought the practice of this custom so warrantable, upon such an occasion;
that even the Priests, who were expressly forbidden to use either this or any
other custom used in times of mourning, yea though their own daughters should
be burnt to death, for whoredom, Lev. 21. 9. 10: yet notwithstanding (as it
seems) upon the hearing of blasphemy, thought they might lawfully, and perhaps
were ambitious to use it (as they were to do many other things, whereby they
might seem to be over righteous As their Hasidim were.
.)

P. 75. before. Those who have no union etc. this chapter

Threats and Examples of his being a Scandal,

He shall be for a Sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling, The Apostle applies
this place to Christ. Rom: 9, 23
and a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel; for a gin and a snare to
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Isa. 8. 14.

Behold this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel,
etc. Luk 2. 34. See Pet. 2. 8. Romans 9. 33.

This stumbling at Christ, was to the Jews 1 A punishment of their
disobedience. And therefore Jonathan the Paraphrast, in the place of the
Prophet before quoted, before he mentions the threat, prefixes these words, If
ye shall not obey. 2 A fruit of their blindness, and ignorance. for
certainly, had they seen never so little; they could not possibly have
stumbled in so great a stone, as he was. No; instead of going on till they
dashed the selves against him; if they had perceived him to be a rock of refuge,
as indeed he was; they would have got up upon him, and have made him their
Sanctuary. Had they known what a precious 1 Pet. 2, 4.
corner stone he was, even chosen of God, and laid in Sion of purpose, (as the
fittest in whom the building of either sides, viz: of themselves, and Gentiles,
might be fitly knitted together, Ephesians: 2. 21, for a living and a Holy Temple for
God to dwell in by the Spirit, instead of their temple made with hands, which
must perish:) doubtless, they would never have rejected him, and have let him
lie in the way, for themselves to fall in. Or, if they envied so much good to
the Gentiles, as to make him a corner stone: yet they would have made him their
foundation stone, and have built upon it themselves.

And as they stumbled at him, both Jews and Gentiles, because of the meannesse
of his quality, and because of the danger of believing in him: so because they
liked not his do ctrine, as for other reasons, so especially for these. 1.
Because of the Spirituality of the expressions, and language thereof, seeming
strange, and uncouth to them. Pilate said, what is truth? John 13. 38. He
wondered what Christ meant by truth. Festus took Paul for a mad man, Acts 26.
24. Nicodemus could not conceive, how a man could be born again, unless he
could enter into his mother's womb, and so be borne, Joh. 3. 4. So when he
told them, that unless they did eat his flesh, and drink his blood, they had
no life in them; they said, how can this man give us his flesh to eat? Joh. 6.
52. Nay, many that were his disciples before, took such offense at this hard
saying, (as they called it) verse. 60, that they went back and walked no more
with him. And thus the Pharisees were offended, when he told them, that Not
that which goes into the mouth, defiles a man, but that which goes out of
the mouth, Matt. 15. 12. They could not believe, that that which went out of a
man, or that which proceeded from a man's own self, should defile himself.
Many other such like things there were in his doctrine, which (as Paul says, 1
Cor. 1. 24.) they could not know, because they are spiritualy discerned. 2 They
stumbled at it, because of the plainness and simplicity of it. And thus
especially the Grecians, who were Scholars and Philosophers, and all for the
words of man's wisdom. To the Jews a stumbling block, to the Greeks
foolishness, 1 Cor: 1. 23. viz: because they could see no wit, nor reason, nor
Philosophy it it. The Apostle in expressing the stumbling of the Greeks,
expresses what they stumbled at: but of the Jews, he only says, that Christ
was a stumbling block. as if they had had no cause at all of stu^bling at him
worthy the naming: but only because they would stumble at him, and because they
were thereunto appointed, 1 Pet. 2. 8. No cause, Isay; or that which was worse
then none, even a cause why they should not stu^ble at him, viz: the Liberty
preached by his Apostles. Liberty from such a number of ordinances, to which
they were subject. Coloss. 2. 20. Liberty from such weak beggarly elements, to
which they were in bondage, Gal: 4. 9. Liberty from the grievous yoke of
circumcision, which neither their fathers, nor they were able to bear, Acts
15. 10. Which one would have thought should have prevailed to entice them to
it, and not have deterred them from it. And yet so it was: insomuch that even
Liberty from circumcision (as if it were the main thing they stumbled at) is by
Paul called the Scandal of the Cross. Nay, it was that, for which he suffered
most persecution of the Jews, and Judaizing Christians: If I yet preach
circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? then is the offense of the
Cross ceased, Gal: 5. 11.

P. 90. After Genesis 34, 23. In allusion to this covetousness of theirs, the
Jews called him that turned Pharisee for love of gain, Pharisaeum
Shechemitam, a Shechemite Pharisee. Page 123. In the margin against (...), See
this word, perhaps, better expounded in the end of Intemperance.

P, 126. After Mat, 11. 13. So Mark, after he had related this speech of our
Savior's, immediately adds, Because they said, He has an unclean spirit. c.
3. 30.

P. 133. Before, Some have, etc. But (I must confess) this Hebrew word is more
usually rendered a Basilisk: which makes me take the more notice of the word
used for color in the verse before, viz: (...), which signifies Eye. Because
they say Plin. l. 8. c. 21. speaking of a creature called Catob^epas, having a
very heavy head, which always hangs downward (as it were of purpose to prevent
the hurt which else it might do) says, omnibus qui oculos ejus videre
expirantibus: and the^ presently adds Eadem est Basilisci viz. And this is all
that I have read to this purpose.
, a Basilisk has such a venomous eye, that he will poison a man at a distance;
but with this condition, if you do not see him before he sees you. Be sure
therefore to see the wine first, before it see thee I mean, to see it with thy
mind, before thou see it with thine eye, and consider well the danger of it,
if thou take too much; for so it will do thee no hurt. In that place above
cited (viz. Prove. 23. 29.) where it is said, Who has sorrow? In our Hebrew it
is (...), But the vulgar translation renders it cujus patri to whose father is
sorrow? And indeed there is too many a parent, who has had many sorrows by
means of this sin in their sons.

p. 166. Among the Jews, whereas the law was for the Theruma (or heave
offering of the floor,) that it should be the sixth part of the whole: If a man
gave the fourth part, they called it Theruma Hhajin jopha, the offering of a
fair eye; if the fifth part, Benonith, of a middle eye, but if he gave but the
sixth part, just as much as was required, and no more; They called it Theruma
Hhajin Rahha, the offering of an evil eye.

P. 176. After slight of hand, See Ephesians. 4. 14.

P. 395. After Ezekiel: 3. 18. See Heb, 13. 17.

p. 614. Over against adoption, in the margin, Is not he thy father that has
bought thee? Deuteronomy. 32. 6.

FINIS
ERRATA.
Page 20. read with. p. 45. read Use. p. 56. No break at, Sin, but at, I have
been, p. 59. Scycophants. b 10. for one; are. p. 116. Christ's obedience as pure
obedience. p. 108. reconciliation, p. 120. blot out, against the p. 232. Jer.
8, 17. d. 171. increase. p. 238. (...) v. p. 273. punished p. 315. blot out,
read. p. 329. before the figure 7 read Gen: p. 339. He went. p. 405. blot out,
Thirdly, p. 576. for, In Sin, To sin. p. 568. Ephesians. 5. 11. p. 574. 1 John 2.
22.


