The Second Book. CONCERNING The Three Principles OF The Divine Essence Of the
Eternal, Dark, Light, and Temporary World.

SHOWING What the Soul, the Image and the Spirit of the Soul are; as also
what Angels, Heaven, and Paradise are.

How Adam was before the Fall, in the Fall, and after the Fall.

AND What the Wrath of God, Sin, Death, the Devils and Hell are; How all
things have been, now are, and how they shall be at the Last.

Written in the German Language by Jacob Behmen; Alias Teutonicus Philosophus.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. for H. Blunden at the Castle in Cornhill. 1648.

To the READER.
SInce the Publishing of this Authors forty Questions in English; the Minds
of several Persons, have had diverse Thoughts, concerning his Writings, and yet
have been of Searching apprehensions: I would they were well acquainted with
his Writings, and then they would not only be able to find out the Truth in
their own thoughts, but also in the written words of him and others, as in the
Articles and confessions of Faith, or any other Writings: and it may be, those
thoughts they have, though they be true, if rightly understood, yet if they may
perhaps be misapprehended, they may hinder themselves of inestimable Eternal
Benefit.

Some have complained of the Hardness to understand his writings, and
therefore I have endeavored the Englishing of this Book of the Three
Principles, which the Author says is the A. B. C. to all his writings; and if
they read it carefully, they will find it, though hard at first, easy at
last, and then all his other Books easy and full of Deep Understanding. A Man
cannot conceive the wonderful knowledge, before he has read this Book
thoroughly and diligently, which he will find to be contained in it, when he is
weighing and deliberating upon the Matter as he reads, and that without hard
Study; for it will rise in the Mind of it self, with a ravishing sweetness
and content: and he will find that the Threefold Life is tenfold deeper than
this, and the forty Questions to be tenfold deeper than that, and that to be as
deep as a Spirit is in it self, as the Author says; then which there can be
no greater Depth, for God himself is a Spirit.

And accordingly there appear some Glimpses of the most Deep Mystical
Oriental Learning here and there, which is not discovered in any Books, and
therefore some of the Learned Men of Europe think it may be past their Reach,
but they will find that Ground in him, which will make such things easy to be
understood; for the time of disclosing those Grounds so plainly, was not till
now, that the Mysteries which have been hid since the wotld began should be
revealed. Those that had the Spiritual Understanding of the Natural Mysteries
were called Wisemen, and they that understood the Divine Mysteries, were called
Saints.
Holy Men, and they were Prophets, Preachers, Apostles, Evangelists, and
Believers. The Wise Men of All Nations, did write darkly of their Mysteries,
not to be understood but by such as were Lovers of those things: and so the
very Scriptures themselves, which contain all things in them, cannot be
understood, but by such as love to follow, practice, and endeavor to do those
things which they find in them, ought to be done; and those that led their
Lives in such a way, came to understand those Mysteries from which they were
written: and in several Nations their wisdom has had several Names, which
has caused our Age to take all the Names of the several parts of wisdom, and
sort them into Arts: among which the Magia and Cabala, are accounted the most
Mystical; the Magia consisting in the knowing how things have come to be; and
the Cabala, in knowing how the words and forms of Things express the Reality
of the Inward Mystery: But he that knows the Mystery, knows both these,
and all the Branches of the Tree of Wisdom, in all Real Arts and Sciences,
and the true Signification of every Idea in every Thought, and Thing, and
Sound, and Letter in every Language: and therefore this Author having the true
knowledge, could well expound the Letters of the Names of God, and other words
and Syllables, the signification of which he says is well understood in the
Language of Nature; and as one jot or tittle of the word of God shall not pass
away, till all be fulfilled, so there is no tittle of any As in the
Revelations; I am A and O, the beginning and the end.
Letter, that is proceeded from that Eternal Essential Word, as all things
are; but has its weighty signification, in the deep understanding, in that
Word from whence it came, even in the voices of All Men, and sounds of All
other Creatures: also the Letters and Syllables of a word, of some Language,
do express something of the Mystery more exquisitely, than of another, and
therefore I conceive the Author uses sometime to expound words borrowed from
the Hebrew and Greek, and some Latin words, and other words of Art, as well as
German words, and not always words of his own Native Language only, according
to their signification in the Language of Nature: for that Language does show
in every ones Mother Tongue the Greatest Mysteries that have ever been in the
Nature of any thing in the Letters of that word by which it is expressed;
therefore let every one esteem those expositions of his according to their high
worth; for the knowledge of that Language is only taught by the Spirit of the
Letter.

Some think it is unnecessary to know such Mysteries; indeed every ones Nature
is not fitted with a Capacity for the highest Depths, therefore they need not
search so far, nor trouble themselves, to look for the understanding of that
they desire not to know; but that they may see how necessary his writings are,
let them read the Authors own Preface to this Book, and there they shall
find the necessity of (...).
knowing themselves, for else they can never know God, and then they cannot
know the way to God, though they read it never so plainly set down in the
Scriptures; and besides, the way to God, is in his writings, more easy to be
understood by those of our Age, than in the Scripture, because that has been
so vayled by Doubtful Interpretations, Expositions, Inferences and
Conclusions; and therefore it must needs be highly necessary, that such a
foundation be laid, as may assure us of the true meaning of the Scriptures,
which teach that which is so Absolutely necessary to salvation: Moreover, his
Grounds will teach us the way to Get such understanding, that we shall know
and feel, as well as they to whom the Apostle John wrote, that we shall not
need any Man to teach us any thing, for we shall know and get that Unction,
which teaches all things, and leads into all Truth: though it is thought
(People cannot have that now,) by such as know not what is in Man, for want of
Examining what is in themselves: yet they may well perceive, that the Ground of
what has ever been, lies in Man; for whatsoever any Man has been or can be,
must needs be in that Man that attaineth to it, as the Ground of the Most
Excellent Flower is in the Root from whence it grows; and then sure the
Ground of all that was in Adam, or any since, or shall be, is in any one of us,
for whatsoever Ground lay in God, the same lies in Christ, and in him it lies
in us, because he is in us all. There is nothing but may be understood, if we
do but consider how every thing that ever was or shall be known truly, is
feelingly understood, by and in him that knows it as he ought: and he that
thus knows God within him, cannot but know the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Angels, Men, and all other Creatures, even the Devils, and may well be able to
speak the Word of God infallibly, as the Holy Men that Penned the Scriptures,
and others also: and he that can understand these things in himself, may well
know, who speaks by the Spirit of God, and who speaks his own Phansies and
Delutions; as our Savior said, He that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven, shall know of my words whether they be of God: but if that will of his
Father in Heaven, had not been in them from the beginning of their life, in
their Conception, in their Mothers womb, how could they to whom he said this,
have done that will, whereby they might know whence his words proceeded: and
according to this Rule may any discern the words and writings of All:
therefore such things as these, are necessary to be known.

There are some who have desired his writings might be Epitomized, for ease of
those that have not leisure to read so large Treatises, truly the spare time
they spend in any other outward thing, may be spent with more benefit a
thousandfold in this; and where he has written at large it would not be
understood if it were contracted more in brief, and all his Books as large as
they are, are but a small spark of the Great Mystery, and where he has
written more in brief, it is so obscure to some, that they think it impossible
to be understood, which he wrote both so briefly and obscurely as I conceive,
that none but such as would be diligent in the practice of that which he has
written plainly and at large should be able to understand it.

It is intended that the Book of the Threefold Life (which with the Three
Principles and forty Questions are a Complete contence of All the Mysteries)
should be published in English with the soonest convenience; and in the mean
time, for a Taste of the Spirit of Prophecy which the Author had, there is a
little Treatise of some Prophecies concerning these latter times collected out
of his writings by a Lover of the Teutonick Philosophy, and Entitled Mercurius
Teutonicus.

In turning the German into English I retain in some places the propriety of
the German Language, because the Author should be rendered as near as might be
in his own Expression, that those Excellent Notions which he lays down, might
not be slipped over as men do common current English, but that the strangeness
of the words may make them a little stay, and consider what the meaning may be,
having some difference from the vulgar English phrase: also where it is somewhat
hard at first sight to know what some of the words mean, I have set the
Synonima's in the Margin, and sometime the English rendering between two such
Semiquadrates. [].

In the Preface to the Lovers of Wisdom set before the 40 Questions in
English, there are some of the many benefits mentioned, that would arise from
the studying this Authors writings, which may be there Read: among the Rest
there is a hint about reforming the Laws by Degrees in every Nation; and there
is no doubt, but if those in whose hands it is to make Laws, did but consider,
that the Spirit of God is, and may be stirred up in them, they would stir him
up, and make a Reformation according to that Spirit of Love, the Holy Ghost:
and then they would be Gods true Vicegerents, they would be Fathers of their
Country, and deal with every Obstinate rebellious Member in the Kingdom, as a
Father would do with a disobedient child, first tell him lovingly and show
him his faults, if that will not do, he will inquire the Reason, and study some
course to remedy the cause that hinders his amendment; but if he should go
beyond the bounds of reason and be beside himself, he would take care of his
safety, livelihood, and cure. God takes such care for us all, though we be
most obstinate enemies against him; and we should do so for all our Brethren
the sons of Adam; though they be our Enemies, we should Examine their wants
in all things, and supply them, that necessity may not compel them to be our
enemies still, and offend God, that they may but live; If they will not be
quiet when they have their wants supplied, and their wrongs redressed, but will
turn Murderers, and so deserve to live no longer: in mercy let them be
provided for as other more friendly children of the Commonwealth, and removed
to live by themselves, in some remote uninhabited Country, where they may have
no occasion to do hurt among those, whom they would not suffer to live
quietly; but let them not there want that which may give them honest
subsistence, as others who are willing to transplant themselves; and for those
that desire to live quietly and peaceably at home, let all their Earthly things
be so ordered that they may easily understand what right and wrong is, by
having most brief, plain and easy Laws to be Governed by, and have their
wants considered and supplied; then all Hearts will bless the Hands of such
Reformers, and Love will cover All the Ends of the Earth, and the God of Love
will give us his blessing of Peace all the world over, and then the King of
Glory will dwell with Men, and All the Kingdoms of the Earth will be his. Who
would not desire such a Thing, with me

The unworthiest of the Children of Men; J. S.

The Authors Preface to this BOOK.
1. MAN can undertake nothing from the beginning of his youth, nor in the whole
course of his Time in this world, that is more profitable and necessary for
him, than to learn to know himself; What he is, out of what, from whence, and
for what, he is Created, and what his Duty, employment or business is.
Office is; In such a serious Consideration he will presently find, that he
and all the Creatures that are, come all from God: he will also find, among
all the Creatures, that he is the most Noble Creature of them all; from whence
he will very well perceive how Gods intent is toward him: in that he has made
him Lord over all the Creatures of this world, and has endued him with Or,
sense.
Mind, Reason, and Understanding, above all the rest of the Creatures,
especially with Speech or Language, so that he can distinguish every thing that
sounds, stirs, moves, or grows, and judge of every things virtue,
effect, and Original: and that all is put under his hand, so that he can bend
them, use and manage them according to his will, as pleases him.

2. Moreover, God has given him higher and greater knowledge than this, in
that he can penetrate into the Heart of every thing, and discern what Essence,
virtue and property it has, both in the Creatures, in Earth, Stones, Trees,
Herbs, in all moveable and immovable things; also in the Stars and
Elements, so that he knows what substance and virtue they have, and that in
their virtue, all natural sensibility, Growing.
vegetation, Propagation or increase.
multiplication, and life, does consist.

3. Above all this, God has given him the understanding and perception to know
God his Creator; What and whence Man is, how he is, and where he is, and out
of what he proceeded, or was created; and how he is the Image, Or, Being.
substance, Inheritance or possession.
propriety, and child of the Eternal uncreated and infinite God: and how he
is created out of the substance of God, in which God has his own substance and
propriety, in whom he lives and governs with his Spirit, by which God
manageth his own work, and loves him dearly as his own Heart and substance:
for whose sake he created this world, with all the Creatures that are therein,
which for the most part, without the Reason and Government of Man, could not
live in such a Or, Qualification or manner of Life.
Condition [as they doe].

4. Tbe Divine Wisdom it self stands in such a high Consideration, and has
neither number nor end; and therein is the Love of God toward Man known, in
that Man knows what his Creator is: and what he would have him do and leave
undone; and it is the most profitable thing for Man in this world, that he can
search for, and seek after; for herein he learneth to know himself, what
matter and substance he is of; also from whence his understanding [cogitation,
perceptibility] and sensibility is stirred, and how he is created out of the
Essence or Being.
Substance of God, and as a Mother brings forth a Child out of her own
substance, and nourishes it therewith, and leaves all her Goods to it for its
own, and makes it the possessour of them: so does God also with Man, his
Child, he has created him, and preserved him, and made him heir to all his
Eternal Goods. In and by this Consideration the Divine knowledge buddeth and
grows in Man, and the Love toward God, as of a Child to its Parents, so
that Man loves God his Father, for that he knows that he is his Father, in
whom he lives, is, and has his being, who nourishes him, preserves him, and
provideth for him; for thus says Christ our Brother, (who is begotten of the
Father, to be a Savior, and sent into this world.) This is the Eternal Life,
that they know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ.

5. Now seeing we our selves know, that we are created out of Gods own
substance, and made his Image, substance and peculiar Inheritance; it is
therefore equal that we should live in obedience to him, and follow him,
seeing he leads us as a Father does his Children. And we have also his
Promise, that if we follow him, we shall obtain the light of the Eternal
Life: without such a Consideration as this, we are altogether blind, and have
no knowledge of God; but we run on, as dumb Beasts, and we look upon our
selves and upon Gods Creation as Heifers look upon a Which being strange, they
start back at it, and are afraid to go into their own Lodging.
new Door made to their Stalls, and set our selves against God and his will,
and so live in opposition, and enmity, to the perdition of body and soul, and
of Gods Noble Creatures: we fall into this terrible and abominable Darkness,
because we will not learn to know our selves, what we are, of what Or,
matter.
substance, what we shall be, whether we are Eternal, or whether we are
wholly transitory, as the body is: or whether also we must give an account of
our Substance.
matters and doings, seeing we are made Lords of all Creatures, and of the
whole Creation, and have all this in our power to manage.

6. Even as we see, know, and find undeniably, that God will require an
account of all our Doings, how we have kept house with his Or, Creation.
works, and that when we fall from him and his Commandments, he will punish
us terribly, of which we have fearful Examples, from the beginning of the
world, and among the Jews, Heathens, and Christians, especially the Example of
the Flood, and in Sodom and Gomorrha; also in Pharaoh, and the Children of
Israel in the Wilderness, and ever since till this very Time: Therefore it is
indeed most necessary that we learn wisdom, and learn to know our selves,
how great vice and wickedness we carry about us, how horrible Wolves are
amongst us, which strive against God and his will.

7. For there is none that can excuse himself, and plead ignorance, because
the will of God is put into, and written in our Minds, so that we very well
know what we should do: and all the Creatures bear witness against us:
Moreover, we have Gods Law and Commandments, so that there is no excuse, but
only our drowsy lazy negligence and carelessness, and so we are found to be
sloathfull unprofitable servants in the Lords Vineyard.

8. Lastly, it is in the highest measure most needful for us to learn to know
our selves, because the Devil dwells with us in this world, who is both Gods
Enemy and ours, and daily misleadeth us, and entrappeth us, as he has done
from the beginning, that we might fall away from our God, and Father, that so
he might enlarge his Kingdom, and bereave us of our Eternal Salvation: as it
is written; He goes about as a roaring Lion, and seeks whom he may devour.

9. Seeing therefore we are in such horrible danger in this world, that we
are environed with enemies on every side, and have a very unsafe Pilgrimage or
Journey to walk, and above all, we carry our worst Enemy within us, which we
our selves hide, and desire not to learn to know it, though Viz. our evil and
corrupt nature and will which is inclined to all evil.
it be the most horrible Guest of all, which casts us headlong into the Anger
of God; yea it self is the very Anger of God, which throws us into the
Eternal Fire of Wrath, into the Eternal unquenchable torment: therefore it is
most needful for us to learn to know this Enemy, what he is, who he is, and
whence he is, how he comes into us, and what in us is his proper own; also
what right the Devil has to us, and what access of entrance into us, how he
is allied with our own Enemy that dwells in us, how they favor and help one
another, how both of them are Gods Enemies, and continually lay wait for us to
murder us, and bring us to perdition.

10. Further, we must consider the great Reasons why it is very necessary to
learn to know our selves, because we see and know that we must die and
perish for our own Enemies sake, which is Gods Enemy and ours, which dwells
in us, and is the very half of Man: and if he grow so strong in us, that he
get the upperhand, and be The chief ruling part.
predominant, then he throws us into the Abyss to all Devils, to dwell
there with them Eternally, in an Eternal unquenchable pain and torment, into
an Eternal Darkness, into a loathsome house, and into an Eternal forgetting
of all Good, yea into Gods contending will, where our God and all the Creatures
are our Enemies for ever.

11. We have yet greater Reasons, to learn to know our selves, because we
are in Good and Evil, and have the promise of Eternal Life, that (if we
overcome our own Enemy and the Devil) we shall be the children of God, and
live in his Kingdom, with and in him, among his holy Angels, in Eternal joy,
Clarity.
brightness, Glory, and welfare, in meekness, and favor with him, without
any touch of Evil, and without any knowledge of it, in God Eternally. Besides,
we have the Promise, that if we overcome and bury our Enemy in the Earth, we
shall rise again at the Last Day in a new Body, which shall be without evil
and pain, and live with God in perfect joy, loveliness, and bliss.

12. Also we know and apprehend, that we have in us a Reasonable Soul, Or,
which God has a love to.
which is in Gods Love, and is Immortal: and that if it be not vanquished by
its adversary, but fights as a spiritual Champion against its Enemy, God
will assist it with his holy Spirit, and will enlighten and make it powerful,
and able to overcome all its Enemies, he will fight for it, and at the
Overcoming of the evil, will Glorify it as a faithful Champion, and Crown
it with the Or, fairest.
brightest Crown of Heaven.

13. Now seeing Man knows that he is such a twofold Man, in the Or,
Potentiality of being good or evil.
Capacity of Good and Evil, and that they are both his own, and that he
himself is that Only Man which is both good and evil, and that he shall have
the reward of either of them, and to which of them he inclines in this life,
to that his soul goes when he dies: and that he shall arise at the Last Day
in power, in his Labor [and Works] which he exercised here, and live therein
Eternally, and also be Glorified therein: and that shall be his Eternal food
and Source or sustenance.
subsistence: therefore it is very necessary for him to learn to know
himself, how it is with him, and whence the impulsion to Good and to Evil
comes, and what indeed the Good and Evil merely are in himself, and whence
they are stirred, and what properly is the Original of all the Good, and of
all the Evil, from whence, and by what [means] Evil is come to be in the
Devils, and in Men, and in all Creatures: seeing the Devil was a holy Angel,
and Man also Created Good, and that also such Or, Evil disposition.
untowardnesse is found to be in all Creatures, biting, tearing, worrying, and
hurting one another, and such Enmity, strife, and hatred in all Creatures: and
that every Corpus or body or natural substance.
thing is so at odds with it self, as we see it to be not only in the
Living Creatures, but also in the Stars, Elements, Earth, Stones, Mettalls,
in Wood, Leaves, and Grass, there is a Poison and Malignity in all things: and
it is found that it must be so, or else there would be no life nor mobility,
nor would there be any color or virtue, neither thickness nor thinness, nor
any perceptibility or sensibility, but all would be as Nothing.

14. In this high Consideration it is found that all is through and from Viz.
through and from Gods wrath and love.
God Himself, and that it is his own substance which is himself, and he has
created it out of himself: and that the Evil belongs to the Imaging,
fashioning, framing.
forming and mobility, and the Good to the Love, and the austere severe or
contrary will, belongs to the joy; so far as the Creature is in the Light of
God, so far the wrathful and contrary will makes the rising Eternal Joy, but
if the Light of God be extinguished, it makes the rising painful Torment and
the Hellish Fire.

15. That it may be understood how all this is, I will describe the Three
Divine Principles, that therein all may be declared, What God is, what Nature
is, what the Creatures are, what the Love and Meekness of God is, what Gods
desiring or will is, what the wrath of God, and the Devil is, and in In brief
or in sum.
conclusion, what joy and sorrow is: and how all took a beginning, and endures
Eternally, with the true difference between the Eternal and transitory
Creatures: Especially of Man, and of his soul, what it is, and how it is an
Eternal Creature: and what Heaven is, wherein God and the H^ly Angels and holy
Men dwell; and what Hell is, wherein the Devils dwell, and how all things
originally were created, and had their being. In sum, what the Being of all
Beeings or substance of all substances: not the pure Deity, as Aristotle has
supposed; but the Eternal Nature Gods love and wrath.
Essence of all Essences is.

16. Seeing the Love of God has favored me with this knowledge, I will set
it down in Writing for a Memorial or remembrance to my self, because we live
in this world in so great danger between Heaven and Hell, and must continually
wrestle with the All evil affections or practices of the Devil in the Anger
of Go^.
Devil, if perhaps through weakness I might fall into the Anger of God, and
thereby the Light of my knowledge might be withdrawn from me, that it may
serve me to recall it to memory, and raise it up again; for God wills that
all Men should be helped, and will not the Death of a sinner, but that he
return, come to him, and live in him Eternally: for whose sake, he has
suffered his own Heart, that is, his Son to become Man, that we might cleave
to him, and rise again in him, and [departing] from our sins and Enmity, or
contrary will, be newborn in him.

17. Therefore there is nothing more profitable to Man in this world, while he
dwells in this miserable corrupted house of flesh, than to learn to know
himself: now when he knows himself aright, he knows also his Creator, and
all the Creatures too: also he knows how God entendeth toward him, and this
knowledge is the most acceptable and pleasant to me, that ever I found.

18. But if it should happen, that these Writings should come to be read, and
perhaps the Sodomitish world, and the fatted swine thereof may light upon them,
and root in my Garden of Pleasure, who cannot know or understand any thing,
but to scorn, scandalize, reproach, and Or, dispute; always arguing without
looking after the Salvation of their souls.
Cavil in a proud haughty way, and so do know neither themselves, nor God,
much less his children: I entend not my writing for them, but I shut and lock
up my Book with a strong Boult or Bar, from such Idiots and wild Heifers of
the Devil, who lie over head and ears in the Devils murdering Den, and
know not themselves, they do the same which their Or, Schoolmaster.
Teacher the Devil does, and remain children of the severe Anger of God: But
I will here write plainly and clearly enough for the children of God; the
world and the Devil may roar and rage till they come into the Abyss; for
their Houre-Glasse is set up, when every one shall reap what he has sown:
and the Hellish Fire will sting many sufficiently for his proud spiteful and
despising haughtiness, which he had no belief of while he was here in this
life.

19. Besides, I cannot well neglect to set this down in writing, because God
will require an account of every ones Gifts, how they have employed them: for
he will demand the Talent which he has bestowed, with the increase or use, and
give it to him that has gained much; but seeing I can do no more in it, I
commit it to his will, and so go on to write according to my knowledge.

20. As to the Children of God, they shall perceive and comprehend this my
writing what it is, for it has a very convincing Testimony, it may be proved
by all the Creatures, yea in all things, especially in Man, who is an Image and
Similitude of God: but it continues hidden and obscure to the Children of
Malignity or Iniquity, and there is a fast A Seal that can be opened by no
Academick, or University, or Scholastic learning: but by earnest repentance,
fasting, watching, praying, knocking, and seeking in the sufferings of Jesus
Christ by the Holy Ghost.
Seal before it; and though the Devil dis-relish the smell and savor, and
raise a storm from the East to the North: yet there will then in the wrathful
or Crabbed sour Tree, grow a Lilly with a root as broad as the Tree spreads
with its branches, and bring its sent and smell even into Paradise.

21. There is a Wonderful Time coming: but because it begins in the Or,
Great darkness, or blindness.
Night, there are many that shall not see it, by reason of their sleep and
great drunkenness: yet the Sun will shine to the Children o^ Sophia or
Divine Wisdom.
Children at Midnight. Thus I commit the Reader to the Or, Sweet.
Meek Love of God. Amen.

The First Chapter.
Of the First Principle, of the Divine Being or substance.
Essence.
BEing we are now to speak of God, what he is, and where he is, we must say,
that God himself is the Essence of all Essences; for all is Generated or
borne, Created and proceeded from him, and all things take their first
beginning out of God: as the Scripture witnesses, saying; Through him, and in
him are all things. Also, the Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens are not able to
contain him: also, Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my footstool: and in
Our Father is mentioned, thine is the Kingdom and the Power; understand All
Power.

2. But that there is yet this difference [to be observed,] that Evil, neither
is, nor is called God; this is understood in the first Principle, where it is
the Earnest fountain of the Wrathfulnesse, according to which, God calls
himself an Angry, Wrathful, and Zealous God: for the Original of Life and of
all Mobilitie, consists in the wrathfulnesse: yet if the [tartnesse] be
kindled with the Light of God, it is then no more tartness, but the severe
wrathfulnesse is changed into Great Joy.

3. Now when God was to Create the world and all things therein, he had no
other Or materials, Materia.
Matter to make it of, but his own Essence or substance.
Being, out of himself. But now, God is a Spirit that is incomprehensible,
which has neither beginning nor end, and his Greatness and Depth is All: yet
a Spirit does nothing but ascend, flow, move, and continually generate it
self: and in it self has chiefly a threefold manner of form in its
Generating or Birth, viz. Bitterness, harshnesse, and Or scorching.
heat, and these three manner of forms are neither of them the first, second,
nor third; for all these three are but one, and each of them Begets,
bears, or brings forth.
Generateth the second and third. For between Astringency, or at tracting.
Harshnesse and Bitterness Fire is Generated: and the wrath of the Fire is the
bitterness or sting it self, and the harshnesse is the stock or father of
both these, and yet is generated of them both; for a Spirit is like a will,
sense, [or thought] which rises up, and in its rising beholds, Infecteth,
impregnateth, or mixeth seed in it self.
perfecteth, and generateth it self.

4. Now this cannot be expressed or described, nor brought to the understanding
by the Tongue of Man: for God has no beginning: but I will set it down so as
if he had a beginning, that it might be understood what is in the first
Principle, whereby the difference between the first and second Principle may be
understood, and what God or Spirit is. Indeed there is no difference in God,
only when it is enquired from whence evil and good proceed; it is to be
known, what is the first and original fountain of Anger, and also of Love,
since they both proceed from one and the same original, out of one mother, and
are one thing: thus we must speak after a creaturely manner, as if it took a
beginning, that it might be brought to be understood.

5. For it cannot be said that Fire, bitterness, or harshnesse is in God, much
less that air, water, or earth are in him; only it is plain that all things
have proceeded out of that [Originall]: neither can it be said, that Death,
Hellfire, or sorrowfulness is in God, but it is known that these things have
come out of that [Originall]. For God has made no Devil out of himself, but
Angels to live in Joy, to their comfort and rejoicing: yet it is seen that
Devils came to be, and that they became Gods enemines; therefore the source or
fountain of the Cause must be sought, viz. What is the Prima Materia, or first
Matter of Evil, and that in the Originalnesse of God as well as in the
Creatures; for it is all but one only thing in the Originalnesse: All is out
of God, made out of his Being or substance.
Essence, according to the Trinity, as he is one in Essence and Threefold in
Persons.

6. Behold, there are especially three things in the Originalnesse, out of
which all things are, both spirit and life, motion and comprehensibilitie; viz.
Wherein the kindling consists.
Sulphur, The Spirit of a substance.
Mercurius, and Salt, body, or substantiality.
Sal; but you will say that these are in Nature, and not in God: which indeed
is so; but Nature has its ground in God, according to the first Principle of
the Father, for God calls himself also an Angry Zealous God: which is not so
to be understood, that God is angry in himself; but in the Spirit of the
[Creation or] Creature which kindles it self; and then God burns in the
first Principle therein, and the Spirit of the [Creation or] Creature suffers
pain and not God.

7. Now to speak in a Creaturely way, Sulphur, Mercurius, and Sal, are
understood to be thus. SUL is the Soul or the Spirit that is risen up, or in a
similitude, [it is] God: PHUR is the Prima Materia, or first Matter, out of
which the Spirit is generated, but especially the Astringency or attraction.
Harshnesse: Mercurius has a fourfold form in it viz. Harshnesse,
bitterness, fire, and water: Sal is the child that is generated from these
four, and is harsh, eager, and a cause of the comprehensibility.

8. Observe or consider.
Understand aright now what I declare to you: Harshnesse, bitterness, and
fire, are in the Originalnesse, in the first Principle: the water-source is
generated therein: and God is not called God according to the first Principle,
but according to that he is called, wrathfulnesse, angrinesse, the earnest
[severe or tart] source, from which Evil, and also the woeful, tormenting,
trembling, and burning, has its Original.

9 This is as was mentioned before; the harshnesse is the Prima Materia, or
first matter, which is strong, and very eagerly and earnestly attractive, that
is Sal: the bitterness is Generated.
in the strong attracting: for the spirit sharpeneth it self in the strong
attracting, so that it becomes wholly aching, [anxious or vexed.] For example,
in man, when he is enraged, how his spirit attracteth it self, which makes
him bitter [or sour,] and trembling; and if it be not suddenly withstood and
quenched, we see that the fire of anger kindles in him so, that he burns in
malice, and then presently a An essential, real, imagination, or purpose.
substance or whole essence, comes to be in the spirit and mind, to be
revenged.

10 Which is a similitude of that which is in the original of the generating
of Nature: yet it must be set down more intelligibly [and plainly.] Mark what
Mercurius is, it is harshnesse, bitterness, fire, and brimstone-water, the
most horrible Being substance, or thing.
Essence; yet you must understand hereby no Materia, matter, or comprehensible
thing; but all no other then spirit, and the source of the original nature.
Harshnesse is the first essence, which attracteth it self; but it being a hard
cold virtue or power, the spirit is altogether prickly [stinging] and sharp.
Now the sting and sharpness cannot endure attracting, but moves and resists
[or opposes,] and is a contrary will, an enemy to the harshnesse, and from
that Or, rigling.
stirring comes the first mobility, which is the third form. Thus the
harshnesse continually attracteth harder and harder, and so it becomes hard
and tart [strong or fierce,] so that the virtue or power is as hard as the
hardest stone, which the bittternesse, [that is, the harshnesses own sting, or
prickle] cannot endure: and then there is great anguish in it, like the
horrible brimstone-spirit; and the sting of the bitterness: which rubbeth it
self so hard, that in the anguish there comes to be a twinkling flash, which
flies up terribly, and breaks the Or, astringent attraction.
harshnesse: but it finding no rest, and being so continually generated from
beneath, it is as a turning wheel, which turns anxiously and terribly with
the twinkling flash Or, senselesly and madly.
furiously, and so the flash is changed into a pricking [stinging] fire: which
yet is no burning fire, but like the fire in a stone.

11 But being there is no rest there, and that the turning wheel runs as
fast as a swift thought, for the prickle drives it so fast; the prickle
kindles it self so much, that the flash (which is generated between the
astringency and bitterness) becomes horribly fiery, and flies up like a
horrible fire, from whence the whole Materia or matter is terrified, and
falls back, as dead, or overcome, and does not attract so Or, eagerly.
strongly to it self any more, but each yields it self to go out one from
another, and so it becomes thin; for the fire-flash is now predominant, and
the Materia, or matter which was so very harsh [astringent or attracting] in
the originalnesse, is now feeble, and as it were dead, and the fire-flash
henceforth gets strength therein, for it is its mother: and the bitterness
goes forth up in the flash together with the harshnesse, and kindles the
flash, for it is the father of the flash, or fire, and the turning wheel
henceforth stands in the fire-flash, and the harshnesse remains overcome
and feeble, which is now the water-spirit; and the Materia, or matter of the
harshnesse, henceforth is like the brimstone-spirit, very thin, raw, aching,
vanquished, and the sting in it is trembling: and it dries and sharpneth it
self in the flash; and being so very dry in the flash, it becomes continually
more horrible and fiery, whereby the harshnesse or astringency is still more
overcome, and the water-spirit continually greater: and so it continually
refreshes it self in the water-spirit, and continually brings more matter to
the fire-flash, whereby it is the more kindled; for (in a similitude) that is
the Or, wood.
fuel of the flash or fire-spirit.

12. Or, consider seriously, observe, or mark.
Understand aright the manner of the existence of this Mercurius. The word MER,
is first the strong, tart, harsh attraction; for in that word (or syllable
Mer,) expressed by the tongue, you * understand that it jarreth [proceeding]
from the harshnesse, and you * understand also, that the bitter sting or
prickle is in it: for the word MER, is harsh and trembling, and every word [or
syllable] is formed or framed from its power or virtue, [and expresseth]
whatsoever the power or virtue does or suffers. You [may] * understand that
the word [or syllable] CU, is [or signifieth] the rubbing or unquietness of
the sting or prickle, which makes that the harshnesse is not at peace, but Or,
boyleth.
heaveth and rises up; for that syllable [thrusteth it self or] presses
forth with the virtue [or breath] from the heart, out of the mouth: it is done
thus also in the virtue or power of the Prima Materia, [or first matter] in the
spirit, but the syllable CU having so strong a pressure ftom the heart, and yet
is so presently snatched up by the syllable RI, and the whole understanding
[sense or meaning] is changed into it, this signifies and is the bitter
prickly wheel in the Or, geniture.
generating, which vexes and whirleth it self as swiftly as a thought: the
syllable US, is [or signifieth] the swift fire-flash, that the Materia, or
matter, kindles in the fierce whirling between the harshnesse and the
bitterness in the swift wheel: where you may very plainly understand [or
observe] in the word, how the harshnesse is terrified, and how the power or
virtue, in the word sinketh down, or falls back again upon the heart, and
becomes very feeble and thin: yet the sting or prickle with the whirling
wheel, continues in the flash, and goes forth through the teeth out of the
mouth; where rhen the spirit sisseth, like fire a kindling, and returning back
again, strengthens it self in the word.

13. These four forms are in the originalnesse of nature, and from thence the
mobility does exist, as also the life in the seed, and in all the creatures
has its original from thence: and there is no comprehensibility in the
originalnesse, but such a virtue or power and spirit: for it is a poisonous or
venomous, hostile or enimicitious Being, essence, or substance.
thing: and it must be so, or else there would be no mobility, but all [would
be as] nothing, and the source of wrath or anger is the first Originalnesse, or
originality.
original of Nature.

14 Yet here I do not altogether [mean or] understand the Mercurius [Mercury or
Quicksilver] which is in the third Principle Or, or,
of this created world, which the Apothecaries use, (although that has the
same virtue or power, and is of the same essence) but I speak [of that] in the
first Principle, viz. of the originalnesse of the essence of all essences, of
God, and of the eternal beginninglesse nature, from whence the nature of this
world is generated. Although in the originalnesse of both of them there is no
separation; but only the outward and third Principle, the sydereall and
elementary Kingdom, [Region or Dominion] is generated out of the first
Principle by the Word and Spirit of God out of the eternal Father, out of the
holy Heaven.

CHAP. II.
Of the first and second Principle, what God and the Divine Nature is: wherein
is set down a further description of the Sulphur and Mercurius.
1. BEcause there belongs a divine light to the knowledge and apprehension of
this; and that without the divine light there is no comprehensibility at all of
the Divine Essence: therefore I will a little represent the high hidden secret
in a creaturely manner, that thereby the reader may come into the depth: for
the Divine Essence cannot be wholly expressed by the tongue; the spiraculum
vitae, (that is, the spirit of the soul which looks into the light) only
comprehends it. For every creature sees and understands no further nor
deeper then its mother is, out of which it is come originally.

2. The soul which has its original out of Gods first Principle, and was
breathed from God into Man, Or, in.
into the third Principle, (that is, into the Sydereall and Elementary
Generating. of the stars.
birth) that sees further into the first Principle of God, out of, in and from
the essence and property of which it is proceeded. And this is not mavelous:
for it does but behold it self only in the rising of its birth; and thus it
sees the whole depth of the Father in the first Principle.

3. This the Devils also see and know; for they also are out of the first
Principle of God, which is the source of Gods original nature: they wish also
that they might not see nor feel it: but it is their own fault, that the second
Principle is shut up to them, which is called, and is, God, one in essence, and
threefold in personal distinction, as shall be mentioned hereafter.

4. But the soul of Man, which is enlightened with the holy Spirit of God,
(which in the second Principle proceeds from the Father and the Son in the
holy Heaven, that is, in the true divine Nature, Viz. the holy Ghost.
which is called God;) this soul sees even into the light of God into the same
second principle of the holy divine Or, working.
Birth, into the heavenly essence: but the Astrall, or starry spirit.
Sydereall Spirit wherewith the soul is clothed, and also the Elementary
[Spirit] which Or, has.
rules the source, or springing and impulsion of the blood; they see no
further then into their mother, whence they are, and wherein they live.

5. Therefore if I should speak and write that which is pure heavenly, and
altogether of the clear Deity; I should be as dumb to the reader, which has
not the knowledge and the gift [to understand it.] Yet I will so write in a
Divine and also in a creaturely way, that I might stir up any one to desire
and long after the consideration of the high things: and if any shall perceive
that they cannot do it, that at least they might seek and knock in their
desire, and pray to God for his holy Spirit, that the door of the second
Principle might be opened to them; for Christ bids us to pray, seek, and
knock, and then it shall be opened unto us. For he says, All that you shall
ask the Father in my name, he will give it you: Ask and you shall teceive;
seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

6. Seeing then that my knowledge has been received by seeking and knocking; I
therefore write it down for a memorial that I might occasion a desire in any
to seek after them, and thereby my talent might be improved, and not be hidden
in the earth. But I have not written this for those that are wise aforehand,
that know all things, and yet know and comprehend nothing, for they are That
is, wise in their own conceit, and in their blindness think they see well
enough.
full satisfied already, and rich; but I have written it for the simple, as I
am, that I may be refreshed with those that are like my self.

Further, of the Sulphur, Mercurius, and Sal.
7. The word [or syllable] SUL, signifies and is the soul of a thing; for in
the word it is the oil or light that is generated out of the syllable PHUR;
and it is the beauty or the Well-doing, or flourishing, or beneficialnesse.
welfare of a thing, that which is lovely and dearest in it: in a creature it
is the light by which the creature sees [or perceives:] and therein Reason
and the Senses consist, and it is the spirit which is generated out of the
PHUR. The word or syllable PHUR, is the prima materia [or first matter,] and
contains in it self in the third Principle, the Or, great world.
Macrocosme, from which the Elementary Dominion, or Region, or Essence is
generated: But in the first Principle it is the essence of the most inward
birth, out of which God generateth or begets his Son from eternity, and
thereout the holy Ghost proceeds, understand out of the SUL and out of the
PHUR. And in Man also it is the light which is generated out of the Sydereall
spirit, in the Or, second ground of the little world.
second center of the Microcosme: but in the Spiraculum and spirit of the soul
in the the most inward center, it is the light of God, which that soul only
has, which is in the love of God, for it is only kindled and blown up from
the holy Ghost.

8. Observe now the depth of the Divine Or, of the eternal divine working.
birth: there is no Sulphur in God, but it is generated from him, and there is
such a virtue or power in him: For the syllable PHUR, is [or signifieth] the
most inward virtue or power of the original source or spring of the anger of
the fierce tartness, or of the mobility, as is mentioned in the first chapter,
and that syllable PHUR has a fourfold form, [property or power] in it, as
first, harshnesse [or astringency] and then bitterness, fire and water: the
harshnesse is attractive, and is rough, cold and sharp, and makes all hard,
hungry, and full of anguish: and that attracting is a bitter sting or prickle,
very terrible, and the first swelling, or boiling up existeth in the anguish;
yet because it cannot rise higher from its seat, but is thus continually
generated from beneath, therefore it falls into a turning, or wheeling, as
swift as a thought, in great anguish, and therein it falls to be a twinkling
flash, as if a steel and flint, or stone, were strongly struck together, and
rubbed one against another.

9. For the harshnesse is as hard as a stone [or flint] and the bitterness
rusheth and rages, like a As the wheel in a firelock strikes fire by turning
round.
breaking wheel, which breaks the harshnesse, and stirs up the fire, so
that all falls to be a terrible Rumbling, or thunderclap.
crack of fire, and flies up; and the harshnesse or astringency breaks in
pieces, whereby the dark tartness is terrified, and sinketh back, and becomes
as it were feeble or weak, or as if it were killed and dead, and runs out,
becomes thin, and yields it self to be overcome: But when the strong flash
of fire Or, reflecteth
shines back aagain upon or into the tartness, and is mingled therein, and
finds the harshnesse so thin and overcome, then it is much more terrified;
for it is as if water were thrown upon the fire, which makes a crack: yet when
the crack or terror is thus made in the overcome harshnesse, thereby it gets
another source [condition ot property,] and a Or, skreek.
crack, or noise of great joy, proceeds out of the wrathful fierceness, and
rises up in the fierce strength, as a kindled light: for the crack in the
twinkling of an eye becomes white, clear, and light; for thus the kindling of
the light, comes in that very moment, as soon as the light (that is the new
crack of the fire) is infected or Or, filled.
impregnated with the harshnesse, the tartness, or astringency kindles, and
skreeketh, or is affrighted by the great light that comes into it in the
twinkling of an eye, as if it did awake from death, and becomes soft or Or,
lovely.
meek, lively and joyful, it presently loses its dark, rough, harsh, and cold
virtue, and leapeth or springs up for joy, and rejoices in the light: and
its sting or prickle, which is the bitterness, that triumphs in the turning
wheel for great joy.

10. Here observe, the shreek or crack of the fire is kindled in the anguish in
the brimstone-spirit, and then the skreek flies up triumphantly; and the aching
or anxious harshnesse, or brimstone-spirit, is made thin and sweet by the
light: for as the light or the flash becomes clearer or brighter from the
crack of the fire in the vanquished harsh-tartnesse, and loses its wrathful
fierce Dominion, or jurisdiction
property, so the tartness loses its authority by the infection or mixture of
the light, and is made thin or transparent and sweet by the white light: For in
the original the harshnesse, or astringency was altogether dark, and aching
with anguish, by reason of its hardness and attracting; but now it is wholly
light, and thereupon it loses its own quality, or property, and out of the
wrathful harshnesse there comes to be an Or, springing substance.
essence, that is sharp, and the light makes the sharpness altogether sweet.

The The Divine everlasting gates or doors, by which we have entrance to the
Deity.
Gates of God.
11. Behold now, when the bitterness, or the bitter sting [or prickle,] (which
in the original was so very bitter, raging and tearing, when it took its
original in the harshnesse) attaineth this clear light, and tastes now the
sweetness in the harshnesse, which is its mother, and then it is so joyful,
and cannot rise or swell so any more, but it trembles and rejoices in its
mother that bare it, and triumphs like a joyful wheel in the birth. And in
this triumph the birth attaineth the fifth form, and then the fifth source
springs up, viz. the Or, loving favor.
friendly love, and so when the bitter spirit tastes the sweet water, it
rejoices in its mother [the sour tart harshnesse] and so refreshes and
strengthens it self therein, and makes its mother stirring With, or for.
in great joy; where then there springs up in the Sweet-water-spirit, a very
sweet pleasant source or fountain: for the Fire-spirit (which is the root of
the light which was a strong [fierce rumbling skreek, crack, or] terror in the
beginning) that now rises up very lovely, pleasantly and joyfully.

12. And here is nothing but the kiss of love, and wooing, and here the
Bridegroom embraces his beloved Bride: and is no otherwise then when the
pleasing life is born or generated in the sour tart, or harsh death; and the
birth of life is thus in a creature: for from this Or, riggling
stirring, moving, or wheeling of the bitterness in the essence of the harsh
astringent tartness of the Water-spirit, the birth attaineth the sixth
Property, virtue, or power.
form, viz. the sound or noise of the motion. And this sixth form, is rightly
called Mercurius; for it takes its form, virtue, and beginning, in the aching
or anxious harshnesse, by the raging of the bitterness; for in the rising it
takes the virtue of its mother (that is, the The substance that springs or
buddeth out of the tartness
essence of the sweet harshnesse) along with it, and brings it into the
fire-flash, from whence the light kindles: And here the trial [or experience]
begins, one virtue beholding the other, in the fire-flash, one [vertue]
feels the other by the rising up, by the stirring they one hear another, in
the essence they one taste another; and by the pleasant, lovely [source, spring,
or] fountain, they one smell another, from whence the sweetness of the light
springs up out of the essence of the sweet and harsh spirit, which from
henceforth is the water-spirit: and out of these six forms now in the birth, or
generating, comes a sixfold self-subsisting essence, which is inseparable;
where they one continually generate another, and the one is not without the
other, nor can be, and without this birth or substance, there could be nothing:
for the six forms have each of them now the essences of all their sixfold
virtue in it, and it is as it were one only thing, and no more: only each
form has its own condition.

13 For observe it, although now in the harshnesse there be bitterness, fire,
sound, water, and that out of the springing vein of the water there flows
love (or oil from whence the light arises and shines: yet the Or, astringent
attraction.
harshnesse retains its first property, and the bitterness its property, the
fire its property, the sound or the stirring its property, and the overcoming
the first harsh or tart anguish, (viz. the returning down back again,) or the
water-spirit, its property, and the springing fountain, the pleasant love,
which is kindled by the light, in the tart or sour bitterness, (which now is
the sweet [source or] springing vein of water,) its property: and yet this is
no separable essence, parted asunder, but all one whole essence or substance in
one another: and each form or birth takes its own form, virtue, working and
springing up from all the forms; and the whole birth now retains chiefly but
these four forms in its generating or bringing forth: viz. the rising up, the
falling down, and then through the turning [of the wheel in the four, harsh]
tart essence, the putting forth on this side, and on that side; on both sides
like a Cross; or, as I may so say, the going forth from the point, [or center]
toward the East, the West, the North and the South: For from the stirring,
moving, and ascending of the bitterness in the fire-flash, there existeth a
cross birth. For the fire goes forth upward, the water downward, and the
essences of the harshnesse sidewayes.

CHAP. III.
Of the endless and numberless manifold engendring, [ Begetting, hatching,
bearing, bringing forth, or propagation.
generating] or birth of the eternal Nature.
The Gates of the great Depth.
1. REader, understand [and consider] my writings aright, we have no power or
ability to speak of the birth of God [or the birth of the Deity] for it never
had any beginning from all eternity: but we have power to speak of God our
Farher, what he is, and how he is, and how the eternal Nativity, birth, or
generation, or working.
geniture is.

2 And though it is not very good for us to know the austere, earnest [strong,
fierce, severe] and original birth, into the knowledge, feeling and
comprehensibility of which our first parents has brought us, through the
Mixture; poisoning, venoming, or temptation.
infection [instigation] and deceit of the Devil; yet we have very great need
of this knowledge, that thereby we may learn to know the Devil, who dwells
in the most strong [severe or cruell] birth of all: and [that we may learn to
know] our own enemy Self, which our first parents Or, roused up.
awakened and purchased for us, which we carry within us, and which we our
selves now are.

3. And although I write now, as if there were a beginning in the eternal
Birth, yet it is not so: but the eternal Nature thus begets [or generateth]
it self without beginning; my writings must be understood in a creaturely
manner, as the birth of man is, who is a similitude of God: although it be just
so in the eternal Being [essence or substance] yet that is both without
beginning and without end: and my writing is only to this end, that Man might
learn to know what he is, what he was in the beginning, how he was a very
glorious eternal holy man, that should never have known the Gate of the strong
[or austere] birth in the eternity, if he had not suffered himself to lust
after it through the Or, temptation.
infection of the Devil, and had not eaten of that Viz. the fruit of the
austere matrix, or genetrix.
fruit which was forbidden him; whereby he became such a naked and vain man in
a bestiall form, and lost the heavenly garment of the divine power, and lives
now in the kingdom of the Devil in the Or, poisonous virtue.
infected Salnitre, and feeds upon the infected food. Therefore it is
necessary for us to learn to know our selves what we are, and how we might be
redeemed from the anguishing austere birth, and be regenerated or born anew,
and live in the new Man, (which is like the first Man before the fall,) in
Christ our Who brings us forth out of the Wrath into the Love of God.
Regenerator.

4. For though I should speak or write never so much of the Fall, and also of
the Regeneration in Christ; and did not come to the root and ground, what the
fall was, and by what it was we come to perish, and what that property is which
God abhors, and how that was effected, contrary to the command and will of
God: What should I understand of the thing? just nothing! and then how should I
shun or avoid that which I have no knowledge of: or how should I endeavor to
come to the New birth, and give my self up into it, if I knew not how,
wherein, nor wherewith to do it.

5. It is very true, the world is full of Books, and Sermons of the Fall, and
of the New birth. But in most part of the Books of the Theology.
Divines, there is nothing but the History that such a thing has been done,
and that we should be regenerated in Christ, but what do I understand from
hence? nothing: but only the History, that such a thing has been done, and
done again, and ought to be done.

6. Our Theology.
Divines set themselves hand and foot with might and main, with their utmost
endeavor, by persecution and reproach, against this [and say] that men must
not [dare to] search into the deep Grounds, what God is, men must not search
nor curiously pry into the Deity: but if I should speak plainly what this trick
of theirs is? it is the dung and filth wherewith they cover and hide the
Devil, and cloak the injected malice and wickedness of the Devil in Man, so
that neither the Devil, nor the anger of God, nor the Or, Evil will,
Evil Beast in Man, But remain hidden and undiscovered.
can be discerned.

7. And this is the very reason, because the Devil smells the matter, and
therefore he hinders it, that his kingdom might not be revealed, but that he
might continue to be the Great Prince [of the world still]: for otherwise, if
his kingdom were known, men might fly from him; where is it more needful
for him to oppose, than on that part where his Enemy may break in? He therefore
covers the hearts, minds, thoughts, and senses of the Divines, he leads
them into covetousness, pride, and wantonness, so that they stand amazed with
fear and horror at the Light of God, and therefore they shut it up, for they
are naked, nay they grutch the light to those that see it; this is rightly
called the service and worship of the Devil.

8. But the time is coming, when the Aurora or Dayspring will break forth, and
then the Beast that evil child [or child of perdition] shall stand forth
naked and in great shame, for the judgment of the Whore of the Great Beast
goes on: therefore awake and fly away ye children of God, that you bring not
the Mark of the Great Evil Beast upon your forehead with you, before the
clear Light; or else you will have great shame and confusion of face
therewith: It is now high time to awake from sleep, for the Bridegroom makes
himself ready to fetch home his bride, and he comes with a clear shining
Light; they that shall have oil in their Lamp, their Lamps shall be kindled,
and they shall be Guests: but those that shall have no oil, their Lamps shall
continue dark, and they shall sleep still, and retain the marks of the Beast
till the Sun rise, and then they shall be horribly affrighted, and stand in
eternal shame: for the judgment shall be executed; the children of God shall
observe it, but those that sleep shall sleep till day.

Further of the Birth.
9. The Birth of the Eternal Nature, is like the [thoughts or] senses in Man,
as when a [thought or] sense is generated by somewhat, and afterward
propagateth it self into infinite many [thoughts] or as a root of a Tree
generateth a stock and many buds and branches, as also many roots, buds, and
branches from one root, and all of them from that one first root. Therefore
observe what is mentioned before: whereas nature consists of six forms [or
properties]: so every form generateth again a form out of it self of the
same quality and condition of it self, and this form now has the quality and
condition of all the forms in it self.

10. But Or, understand, and consider it aright.
observe it well: the first of the six forms generateth but one Or, Budding
property.
source like it self, after the similitude of its own fountaine-Spirit, and
not like the first Mother the harshnesse, but as one twig or branch in a Tree,
puts forth another sprout out of it self. For in every fountaine-Spirit,
there is but one center wherein the fire-source or fountain arises, and the
light arises out of the flash of the fire, and the first six-fold form is in
the Or, Springing property.
source or fountain.

11. But mark the depth, in a similitude which I set down thus; the
harsh-spring in the Original, is the Mother out of which the other five
Springs are generated, viz. Bitterness, fire, love, sound, and water. Now
these are members of this Birth [of their Mother] and without them there would
be nothing but an anguishing dark vale [or vacuum] where there could be no
mobility, nor any light or life: But now the life is borne in her by the
kindling of the light, and then she rejoices in her own property, and
labors in her own tart, sour quality to generate again, and in her own
quality there rises a life again, and a center opens it self again, and
the life comes to be generated again out of her in a six-fold form, yet not
in any such anguish as at the beginning, but in great joy.

12. For the Spring of the great anguish, which was in the beginning before the
light, in the [tart] harshnesse, from which the bitter sting or prickle is
generated; that is now in the sweet fountain of the love in the light, changed
from the water-spirit, and from bitterness or pricklinesse is now become the
fountain or spring of the joy in the light. Thus now henceforth the fire-flash
is the father of the light, and the light shines in him, and is now the only
cause of the moving Birth, and of the birth of the love; that which in the
beginning was the Or, Lake of Torment.
aching source, is now SUL, or the oil of the lovely pleasant fountain, which
presses through all the fountains, so that from hence the light is kindled.

13. And the sound or noise, in the turning wheel, is now the declarer, or
pronouncer in all the fountains, that the beloved child is borne; for it
comes with its sound before all Doors, and in all Essences; so that in its
awakening, all the virtues or powers are stirring, and see, feel, have smell,
and taste one another in the light, for the whole Birth nourishes it self in
its first mother, viz. the Or, Sour, tart springing substantiality.
harsh essence; being now become so thin [or pure] meek, sweet, and full of
joy, and so the whole birth stands in very great joy, love, meekness, and
humility, and is nothing else than a mere pleasing taste, a delighting sight,
a sweet smell, a ravishing sound to the hearing, a soft touch, beyond that
which any tongue can utter or express, how should there not be joy and love,
where, in the very midst of death the Eternal Life is generated, and where
there is no fear of any end, nor can be?

14. Thus in the harshnesse there is a new birth again: understand, where the
tart [soure astringency] is predominant in the Birth, and where the fire is not
kindled according to the bitter sting or prickle, or from the beginning of the
anguish: But the rising [or exulting] Joy, is now the Center and kindling of
the light, and the tartness [or astringency] has now Or, for.
in its own quality the SUL, Oil, and Light of the Father: Therefore now the
Birth out of the Twig or Branch of the first tree is qualified altogether
according to the Or, tart, sour fountain.
harsh fountain: and the fire therein is a tart [or soure] fire, and the
bitterness, a tart bitterness: and the sound a tart sound: and the love a
tart love, but all in mere perfection, and in a totally glorious love and joy.

15. And thus also the first bitter sting or prickle, or the first bitterness
(after the Light is kindled, and that the first Birth stands in perfection)
generateth again out of its own quality an Twig or branch.
essence, wherein there is a Center, where also a new fountain or source
springs up in a new fire or life, having the condition and property of all
the qualities, and yet the bitterness in this new sprout is chiefest among all
the qualities: so that there is a bitter bitterness, a bitter tartness, a
bitter water-spirit, a bitter sound, a bitter fire, a bitter love, yet all
perfectly in the Or, exulting great Joy.
rising up of Great Joy.

16. And the fire generateth now also a fire, according to the property of
every quality, in the tart spirit it is tart; in the bitter, bitter; in the
love, it is a very hearty yearning, kindling of the love, a total, fervent, or
burning kindling, and causes very vehement desires; in the sound, it is a very
shrill tanging Or, life.
fire, wherein all things are very clearly and properly distinguished, and
where the sound in all qualities tells or expresses, as it were with the
lips, or tongue, whatsoever is in all the fountain spirits, what joy, virtue,
or power, essence, substance, or property, [they have] and in the water it is a
very drying fire.

17. The propagation of the Love is most especially to be observed, for it is
the loveliest, pleasantest, and sweetest fountain of all, when the love
generateth again a whole birth, with all the fountains of the original essences
out of it self, so that the love in all the Or, wellspring.
springing veins in that new birth be predominant and chief, so that a center
arises therein, then the first essence, viz. the Tartness, is wholly desirous
or longing, wholly sweet, wholly light, and gives it self forth to be food to
all the qualities, with a hearty affection toward them all, as a loving mother
has toward her children; and here the Bitterness may be rightly called Joy;
for it is the rising or moving [thereof:] what joy there is here, there is no
other similitude of it, than when a man is suddenly and unexpectedly delivered
out of the pain and torment of hell, and put into the light of the Divine Joy.

18. So also the sound, where the Love is predominant, it brings most joyful
tidings, or news into all the forms of the Birth, as also the fire in the
love, that kindles the love rightly in all the Fountain-spirits, as is
mentioned above; and the Love kindles Love in its essence. When the Love is
predominant in Love, it is the sweetest, meekest, humblest, lovingest fountain
of all that springs in all the fountains: and it confirms and fixes the
heavenly birth, so that it is a holy divine Essence or Substance.

19. You must also mark the form of the Water-spirit, when that generateth its
like, so that it is predominant in its regeneration or second birth, and that a
center be awakened in it, (which it self in its own essence does not awaken,
but the other fountain-spirits do it therein) it [the Water-spirit] is still
and quiet as a meek mother, and suffers the other to sow their seed into it,
and to awaken the center in it, so that the fire rises up, from whence the
life Or, begins to stir.
is moved. In this [form] the fire is not a hot burning [scorching] fire, but
cool, mild, soft and sweet: and the bitterness is no bitterness, but cool,
mild, budding, and flowing forth, from whence the forming [or figuring and
beauteous shape] in the heavenly glory proceeds, and is a most beautiful
substance; for the sound also in this birth, flows forth most pleasantly and
harmoniously, all as it were palpably or feelingly; or in a similitude, as a
word that comes to be an essence, or a comprehensible substance. For in this
regeneration that is brought to pass in the water-spirit, (that is, in the
true mother of the regeneration of all the fountain-spirits) all is as it were
comprehensible or substantial: although no comprehensibility must be
understood here, but spirit.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Or, right.
true eternal Nature, that is, of the numberless, and endless Begetting, or
propagation.
generating of the Birth of the eternal Essence, which is the Essence of all
Essences; out of which were generated, born, and at length created, this World,
with the Stars and Elements, and all whatsoever moves, stirs, or lives
therein.
The open Gate of the great Depth.
1. HEre I must encounter with the proud and seeming wise conceited, who does
but grope in the dark, and knows or understands nothing of the Spirit of
God, and must comfort both him and also the desirous longing Reader who loves
God, and must show them a little door to the Heavenly Essence; and show them
in what manner they should understand these writings, before I come to the
chapter it self.

2. I know very well, and my spirit and mind shows me as much, that many
will be offended at the simplicity and meannesse of the Author, for offering
to write of such high things; and many will think, (with themselves) he has no
authority to do it, and that he does very sinfully in it, and runs clean
contrary to God and his will, in presuming, being but a man, to go about to
speak and say what God is.

3. For it is lamentable, that since the fall of Adam, we should be so
continually cheated and befooled by the Devil, to think that we are not the
children of God, nor of his Substance, or offsprings.
essence. He continually puts the monstrous shape or form into our thoughts,
as he did into our mother Eve, which she gazed too much upon, and by her
representing it in her imagination, she became a child of this world, wholly
naked and vain, and void of understanding: And so he does to us also
continually still; he would bring us into another Image, as he did Eve, that we
might be ashamed to appear in the presence of the Light and power of God, as
Adam and Eve were, when they hid themselves behind the trees, (that is,
behind the monstrous shape or form,) when the Lord appeared in the center of
the birth of their lives, and said, Where art thou Adam? And he said, I am
naked, and am afraid; which was nothing else, but that his belief [or faith]
and knowledge of the holy God, was put out: for he beheld the monstrous shape
which he had made to himself by his imagination and lust, by the Devils
[instigation] representation, and false persuading, to eat of the third
Principle wherein Destruction or perdition
corruption was.

4. And now when he saw and knew by that which God had told him, that he should
die and perish, if he did eat of the knowledge of good and evil: it made him
continually imagine that he was now no more the child of God, and that he was
not created out of Gods own essence or substance, out of the first Principle:
he conceived that he was now but a mere child of this world, when he beheld
his corruptibility, and also the monstrous image which he Or, carried about him.
was in; and that the Paradisicall Wit, reason, or skill.
understanding, delight and joy was departed from him, so that his spirit and
perfection was driven out of Paradise, (that is, out of the second Principle of
God, where the Light or the Heart of God is generated from eternity to
eternity, and where the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son)
and that he now lived no more merely by the word of God, but did eat and drink,
viz,, the Preservation, or propagation.
birth of his life henceforward consisted in the third Principle, that is, in
the [Region, Kingdom, or dominion of the Stars and Elements, and he must now
eat of the virtue and fruit thereof, and live thereby: and thereupon he then
supposed, that he was past recovery, and that the noble image of God was
destroyed. And beside, the Devil also continually represented his
corruptibility and mortality to him, and himself could see nothing else, being
he was gone out of paradise, that is, out of the incorruptible holy
Preservation, or protection.
geniture [or operation] of God; wherein he was Gods holy image and child, in
which God created him to continue therein for ever. And if the merciful love
of God had not appeared to him again in the center of the birth of his life,
and comforted him; he would have thought that he were wholly departed, or quite
separated from the eternal Divine birth, and that he were no more in God, nor
God any more in him, and that he were no more of Gods essence.

5 But the favorable love, (that is, the Unigenitus.
only begotten Son of God, or that I may set it down so that it may be
understood, the lovely fountain where the light of God is Begotten, or born, or
brought forth.
generated,) sprung up, and grew again in Adam in the center of the birth of
his life in the fifth form of his birth; whereby Adam perceived that he was not
broken off from the Divine root, but that he was still the child of God, and
repented him of his first evil lust: and thereupon the Lord showed him the
treader upon the Serpent, who should destroy his monstrous birth; and so he
should from the monstrous birth be regenerated anew, in the shape, form, power
and virtue of the treader upon the Serpent, and be brought with power again
into Paradise, into the holy birth, and eat of the Verbum Domini.
Word of the Lord again, and live eternally, in spite of all the Or, power.
gates of the wrathfulnesse, wherein the Devil lives: concerning which there
shall be further mention made in its due place.

6. But mark and consider this well, dear Reader, and let not your simplicity
deceive you, the Author is not greater than others, he knows no more,
neither has he any greater authority than other children of God. Do but look
upon your self, why have you earthly thoughts of your self? why will you be
mocked by the Devil, and be fooled by the world, [so as to be led to think]
that you are but a kind of Figure like God, and not generated or begotten of
God?

7. Your monstrous form or shape indeed is not God, nor of his essence, or
substance, but the hidden man, Which the soul is.
which is the soul, Or, out of Gods own essence or substance, in a child is
the fathers own substance.
is the proper essence of God, forasmuch as the love in the light of God, is
sprung up in your own center, out of which the holy Ghost proceeds, wherein
the second Principle of God consists: How then should you not have power and
authority to speak of God, who is your Father, of whose essence you are?
Behold, is not the world Gods, and the light of God being in you, it must needs
be also yours, as it is written, The Father has given all things to the Son,
and the Son has given all to you. The Father is the eternal power, or
virtue, and the Son is the heart and light continuing eternally in the
Father, and you continue in the Father and the Son. And now being the holy
Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, and that the eternal power or
virtue of the Father is in you, and that the eternal light of the Son
shines in you, why will you be fooled? Know you not what Paul said? That our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we expel our Savior Jesus Christ, who
will bring us out of this monstrous Image, or Birth (in the corruption of the
third principle of this world, in the Or, paradisicall sustenance.
Paradisicall birth to eat the word of the Lord.

8. Why will you be fooled by Antichrist: by his laws [precepts] and pratings?
Where will you seek God? In the deep above the stars? You will not be able to
find him there. Seek him in your heart Or, in the ground or foundation of the
beginning and sustaining of man's life.
in the center of the birth of your life, and there you shall find him, as our
father Adam and mother Eve did.

9. For it is written, You must be born anew through the water and the Spirit,
or else you shall not see the kingdom of God. This birth must be done within
you: the heart, or the Son of God must arise in the birth of your life; and
then the Savior Christ is your faithful Shepherd, and you are in him, and he
in you, and all that He and his Father has, is yours, and none shall pluck you
out of his hands; and as the Son (viz. the heart of the Father) is one [with
the Father,] so also thy new man is one in the Father and the Son, one virtue
or power, one light, one life, one eternal Paradise, one eternal heavenly Or,
enduring substance.
birth, one Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and thou his child.

10. Does not the Son see plainly what the Father does in his house? and now
if the Son learn to do the same thereby, what displeasure will the Father
have toward his Son for it? Nay, will not the Father be well pleased that
his Son is so apt [and forward to learn?] Then why should the heavenly Father
be so displeased with his children in this world, which depend upon him, and
enquire after him? which would fain learn to know him, fain labor in his
works, and do his will? Does not the Regenerator bid us come to him, and
whosoever comes to him, he will not reject? Why should any Or, withstand the
spirit of the manifestation of the hidden things of God.
resist the spirit of Prophecy, which is Gods? Look upon Christ's Apostles, did
any other teach them than God, who was in them, and they in him?

11, O dear children of God in Christ, fly away from Antichrist, who has set
up himself over all the coasts of the earth, and who seteth a painted image
before you, as the Serpent did before our mother Eve, and Or, represents to
you.
painteth your own image of God [as if it were] far off from God: But
consider what is written, The word is near thee, yea in thy heart and lips. And
God himself is the word which is in thy heart and lips.

12. But Antichrist has never sought any thing else but his own pleasure in
the third principle, and to fulfill it in the house of flesh: and therefore he
has detained people with laws of his own inventing, which are neither
grounded in Nature, nor in the Paradise of God, neither are they to be found in
the center of the birth of life.

13. Dear children, consider, how mightily and powerfully, with wonders,
miracles, and works, the Spirit of God went forth in word and deed in the times
of the Apostles, and after, till Antichrist, and the spirit of self-pride, with
his invented laws and Astrall wisdom brake forth, and set himself up by that
worldly and fleshly arm [or by the authority of the worldly Magistrate] merely
for his own pleasure and honor sake, where the most precious words of Christ
(who gave no laws to man, but the law of Nature and the law of Love, which is
his own heart) must be a cloak for him, viz. for Antichrist, who is a Prince in
the third Principle: what he ordains must be as the voice to Moses out of the
Bush: and so the man of Pride makes as if himself had Divine, or Apostolical
Authority, or Jus Divinum.
Divine power upon Earth, and knows not in his blindness the Holy Ghost will
not be Or, blinded and mocked by them.
tied [or bound up to their Cannons and Humane Inventions].

14. But if any would attain salvation, he must be borne again, through the
Water in the In the ground where the grain of Mustard Seed is sown and
springs up.
Center of the Birth of Life, which springs up in the Center in the light of
God: for which end God the Father has by his Son commanded Baptism, that so
we might have a Law, and a remarkable sign of Remembrance, signifying how a
Or, Infant.
child void of understanding receives an Outward sign, and the Inward Man
the power and the New Birth in the center of the Birth of Life; and that there
arises the confirmation, which the light of God brought into Adam, when the
light of God the Father, in the center of the fifth form of the birth of the
Life of Adam brake forth or sprung up. Thus it is both in the Baptism of an
Infant or child, and also in the repenting Convert that in Christ returns
again to the Father.

15. The last Supper of Christ with his Disciples, is just such another
Covenant as the [Paedobaptisme or] Baptism of Infants. That which is done to
the Infant in Baptism, that is done also to the poor sinner which awakeneth
from the sleep of Antichrist, and comes to the Father, in, and through
Christ; as shall be handled in its place.

16. I have therefore been desirous to warn you, and tell you beforehand, that
you must not look upon flesh and blood in these high things, nor upon the
worldly wisdom of the Universities, or high Schools: but that you should
consider, that this wisdom is planted and sown by God himself in the first,
and last, and in all Men: and you need only to return with the Prodigal lost
Son to the Father, and then he will cloth you with a new Garment, and put a
seale-ring upon the hand of your mind: and in this Garment only you have
power to speak of the Or, Divine Birth.
Birth of God.

17. But if you have not gotten this Garment on, and will prattle and talk
much of God, then you are a thief and a murderer, and you enter not into the
Sheepfold of Christ by the Door, but you climb over into the Sheepfold with
Antichrist and the Robbers, and you will do nothing but murder and steal,
seek your own reputation, esteem, and pleasure, and are far from the
kingdom of God: your Universitie-Learning, and Arts, will avail you nothing:
it is your poison that you are promoted by the favor of Man to sit in great
Authority and Place, for you fit upon the stool of Pestilence: you are but a
mere servant or minister of the Antichrist; but if you be newborn, and
taught by the Holy Ghost, then your place or office is very pleasing and
acceptable to God, and your sheep will hear your voice, and you shall feed
them and bring them to the chief Shepherd: God will require this at your
hands, therefore take heed what you teach and speak of God without the
knowledge of his Spirit, that you be not found to be a liar.

Now here follows the Chapter.
18. The Eternal Or, begetting.
Generating is a not-beginning Birth, and it has neither number nor end, and
its depth is bottomless, and the band of life Indissoluble.
uncorruptible: The Astrall, starry, or aerie spirit of man.
Sydereall and Elementary Spirit cannot discern it, much less comprehend it:
it only feels it, and sees a glimpse of it in the mind: which [minde] is
the chariot of the soul, upon which it rides in the first Principle in its
own seat in the Fathers Eternal Generating [or Begetting]: for its own
substance is altogether Weak, feeble, empty, and dry.
crude, without a body, and yet it has the form of the body in its own
spiritual form, understand according to the Image: which soul, if it be
regenerated in the light of God, it sees in the light of God the Father (which
light is his Glance, Luster, or Son,) in the Eternal Birth, wherein it
lives and remains eternally.

19. Understand and consider it aright O Man: God the Father made Man: the
beginning of whose body is out of the [one] Element, or Root of the four
Elements from whence they proceed, which [one Element] is the fifth Essence, [or
Quintessence] hidden under the four Elements, from whence the dark Chaos
[mist, cloud, or dust] had its being, before the times of the Earth: whose
original is the spring of Water, and out of which this world with the Stars
and Elements, as also the Heaven of the third Principle, was created.

20. But the soul was breathed into man, merely out of the original Birth of
the Father by the moving Spirit (understand, the Holy Ghost which goes forth
from the Father out of the light of the Father). Which original Birth, is
before the Light of Life, which is in the four Or, Aching properties.
Anguishes, out of which the light of God is kindled, wherein is the original
of the Name of God: and therefore the soul is Gods own Essence or substance.

21. And if it elevate it self back into the Anguish of the four forms of
the Original, and will horribly Or, Work in continual generating: as the
breath goes in and out continually for the preserving of life.
breath forth out of pride in the Original of the Fire, knowing it self
[shall] so [become] powerful; it so becomes a Devil: For the Devils also
with their Legions, had this Original, and they out of pride would live in the
Or, Strong.
fierce wrath of the fire, and so they perished, and remained Devils.

22. Yet if the soul elevate its Or exercise its thoughts and purposes in
resignation.
Imagination forward into the light, in meekness and comeliness or humility,
and does not (as Lucifer did) use the strong power of its fire, in its
qualification [or breathing] then it will be fed by the Verbum Domini.
Word of the Lord, and gets virtue, power, life, and strength, in the Verbum
Domini.
Word of the Lord, which is the heart of God; and its own Original strong
[fierce wrathfull] source of the Birth of the Eternal life, becomes
Paradisicall, exceeding pleasant, friendly, humble, and sweet, wherein the
Laughing for joy.
rejoicing and the fountain of the Eternal Or, Halelujahs.
Songs of Praise springs up: and in this Imagination it is an Angel and a
child of God, and it beholds the Eternal Generating of the Note what is
possible to be spoken of, and what not.
indissoluble Band; and thereof it has ability to speak (for it is its own
Essence or substance) but [it is] not [able to speak] of the infinite
generating, for that has neither beginning nor end.

23. But if it undertaketh to speak of the unmeasurable space [or infinite
Geniture] then it becomes full of lies, and is troubled and confounded: for it
belyeth the unmeasurable Deity; as Antichrist does, which will have the Deity
to be only above the starry Heaven, that thereby himself may remain to be
God upon Earth, riding upon the great Beast, which yet must shortly go into
the original lake of Brimstone, into the Or, Dominion of the anger of God.
Kingdom of King Lucifer; for the time is come that the Beast shall be
revealed and spewed out; concerning which we may be well enough understood
here by the Children of Hope; but there is a wall and seal before the servants
or ministers of The whore of the Beast.
Antichrist, till the wrath be executed upon her whoredom, and that she have
received her full wages, and that the Or, Ornament of her kingdom.
Crown of their Dominion which they have worn, be their shame, and till the
eyes of the blind be opened: and then she will sit as a scorned whore which
every one will adjudge to Damnation.

The very sublime Gate of the Holy Trinity, for the Children of God.
24. If you lift up your thoughts and minds, and ride upon the Chariot of the
soul, as is beforementioned, and look upon your self, and all creatures,
and consider how the Birth of life in you takes its Original, and the light
of your life, whereby you can behold the shining of the Sun; and also look
with your Imagination, without the light of the Sun, into a huge vast space,
to which the eyes of your body cannot reach: and then consider what the cause
might be that you are more Rational than the other Creatures, seeing you can
search what is in every thing: and consider farther, from whence the Elements,
Fire and Air take their Original, and how the Fire comes to be in the Water,
and generateth it self in the Water: and how the light of your body generateth
it self in the Water.

25. And then if you be borne of God, you attain to what God and the Eternal
Birth is: for you see, feel, and find, that all these must yet have a higher
root, from whence they proceed, which is not visible but hidden: especially if
you look upon the starry Heaven which endures thus unchangably, therefore you
ought to consider from whence it is proceeded, and how it subsisteth thus, and
is not corrupted, nor rises up above, nor falls down beneath, though indeed
there is neither above nor beneath there. Now if you consider what preserves
all thus, and whence it is: then you find the Eternal Birth that has no
beginning, and you find the Original of the Eternal Principle, viz. the
eternal indissoluble Band: and then secondly, you see the separation; in that
the material world, with the Stars and Elements, are out of the first
Principle, which contains the outward and third Principle in it: for you
find in the Elementary Kingdom or Dominion, a cause in every thing, wherefore
it is, generateth and moves as it does: but you find not the first cause,
from whence it is so: there are therefore Viz. The first and the third
Principle.
Two several Principles; for you find in the visible things a corruptibility,
and perceive that they must have a beginning, because they have an end.

26. And thirdly, you find in all things a glorious power and virtue, which is
the life, growing and springing of every thing, and you find that therein
lies its beauty and pleasant welfare, from whence it stirs. Now look upon
an herb or plant, and consider it, what is its life which makes it grow? and
you shall find in the Original, harshnesse, bitterness, fire, and water, and
if you should separate these four things one from another, and put them
together again, yet you shall neither see nor find any growing, but if it were
severed from its own mother that generated it at the beginning, then it
remains dead; much less can you bring the pleasant smell, nor colors into
it.

27. Thus you see that there is an Eternal Root, which affords this; and if
you could bring the colors and vegetation or growing into it, yet you could
not bring the smell and virtue into it: and thus you will find in the
Original of the smell and of the taste, there must be another Principle, which
the stock it self is not, for that Principle has its original from the light
of Nature.

28. Now look upon the humane life a little further, you neither see, find,
nor apprehend any more by your sight, than flesh and blood, wherein you are
like other Beasts: secondly, you find the Elements of air and fire which Or,
Mingle themselves.
work in you, and that is but an animal or beastiall life, for every beast
has the same in it, from whence proceeds the lust to fill them, and to
propagate themselves, as all plants, herbs, and grass, and yet you find no
true understanding to be in all these living creatures; for although the
Stars or Constellations do operate in Animal or Beastiall man.
Man, and afford him the senses, yet they are only such senses as belong to
nourishment and propagation, like other Beasts.

29. For the Stars themselves are senseless, and have no knowledge or
perception, yet their soft operation in the water makes a seething, flowing
forth, or boiling up one of another, and in the tincture of the blood, they
cause a rising, seeing, feeling, hearing, and tasting. Therefore consider from
whence the tincture proceeds, wherein the noble life springs up? That thus
becomes sweet from harshnesse, bitterness, and fire, and you shall certainly
find no other cause of it than the light: but whence comes the light, that it
can shine Or, upon a dark place.
in a dark body? If you say it comes from the light of the Sun, then what
shines in the night, and enlighteneth your Inward senses or thoughts
senses and understanding so? that though your eyes be shut, you perceive and
know what you do? Here you will say, the noble mind does lead you, and it is
true. But whence has the mind its original? You will say, the Or, Thoughts,
or inward senses.
senses make the mind stirring; and that is also true. But whence come they
both? What is their birth or off spring? Why is it not so with the Beasts?

30. My dear Reader, if you be able, Or, answer this question.
break open all, and look into the pith, yet you shall not find it, though
you should seek in the Deep, in the Stars, in the Elements, in all living
Creatures, in Stones, Plants, Trees, and in Metalls; also in Heaven and Earth,
you shall not find it. Now you will say, Where then shall I find it? Dear
Reader, I cannot so much as lend you the Key that will lead you to it. But I
will direct you where you shall find it; it lies in the third Chapter of the
Evangelist St John; in these words; You must be borne anew by water and by the
Holy Ghost. This Spirit is the Key, when you attain it, receive it, and go
before the first Principle, out of which this world and all Creatures are
created, and open the first root, from which such visible and sensible things
did spring.

31. But you will say, this is only God, and he is a spirit, and has created
all things out of nothing. It Is very true, he is a Spirit, and in our sight he
is as nothing: and if we had not some knowledge of him by the Creation, we
should know nothing of him at all; and if he himself had not been from all
Eternity, there could nothing have ever been.

32. But what do you think there was before the times of the world, out of
which the Earth and Stones proceeded, as also the Stars and Elements? That
out of which these proceeded was the Root: But what is the Root of these
things? Look, what do you find in these things? Nothing else but fire,
bitterness, and harshnesse, [or astringent sournesse] and these three are but
one thing, and hence all things are generated. Now this was but a Spirit before
the times of the world; and yet you cannot find God in these three forms: the
pure Deity is a light which is incomprehensible, and unperceivable, also
allmighty and all-powerfull, where is it then that men may find God?

33. Here open your noble mind, see and search further; seeing God is only
Good, from whence comes the Evil? And seeing also that he alone is the life,
and the light, and the holy power, as it is undeniably true, from whence comes
the anger of God? From whence comes the Devil, and his [evill] will; also
Hellfire, from whence has that its Original? Seeing there was nothing before
the time of this world, but only God, who was and is a Spirit, and continues
so in Eternity: From whence then is the first Materia, or matter of Evil? For
reason gives this judgment, that there must needs have been in the Spirit of
God, a will to generate the source or fountain of Anger.

34. But now the Scripture says, The Devil was a holy Angel: and further, it
says: Thou art not a God that wills evil: and in Ezekiel: As sure as I
live, I will not the death of a sinner: this is testified by Gods earnest
severe punishing of the Devils, and all sinners, that he is not pleased with
death.

35. What then moved the Devil to be angry, and evil? What is the first
matter [of it] in him, seeing he was created out of the Original Eternal
Spirit? Or from whence is the Original of Hell, wherein the Devils shall
remain for ever, when this world, with the Stars, and Elements, Earth, and
Stones, shall perish in the end.

36. Beloved Reader, Open the eyes of your mind here; and know, that no other
[anguish] source will spring up in him [and torment him] than his own Or,
working property.
quality: for that is his Hell out of which he is created and made: and the
light of God is his eternal shame, and therefore he is Gods enemy, because he
is no more in the light of God.

37. Now you can here produce nothing more, that God should ever use any matter
out of which to create the Devil, for then the Devil might justify himself,
that he made him evil, or of evil matter: for God created him out of nothing,
but merely out of his own Essence or Substance, as well as the other Angels:
As it is written; Through him, and in him, are all things: and his only is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory; and all in him, as the holy Scriptute
witnesses: and if it were not thus, no sin would be Or, accounted sin.
imputed to the Devil, nor men, if they were not eternal, and both in God,
and out of God himself.

38. For to a Beast, (which is created out of matter) no sin may be imputed;
for its Spirit reaches not the first Principle; but it has its original in
the third Principle in the Elementary and syde-reall kingdom, in the
corruptibility, and it reaches not the Deity, as the Devil and the soul of man
does.

39 And if you cannot believe this, take the holy Scripture before you, which
tells you, that when man was fallen into sin, God sent him his own heart,
life or light, out of himself into the flesh, and opened the gate of the birth
of his life, wherein he was united with God, and being broken off in the light
[part] (yet continued in the original of the first Principle) he has kindled
that light, and so united himself to man again.

40. If the soul of man were not [sprung] out of God the Father out of his
first Principle, but out of another matter, he could not have bestowed that
highest earnest or pledge of his own heart and light upon him, as himself
witnesses, saying, I am the light of the world, and the life of Man: but he
could very well have redeemed or helped him some other way.

41. But what do you think that he brought to man into the flesh when he came?
Nothing else but what Adam and our mother Eve had lost in Paradise: the same
did the treader upon the Serpent bring again to the monstrous birth, and
delivered man out of that Elementary and Sydereall house of flesh, and set him
again in Paradise: of which I will write at large hereafter.

42 If therefore you will speak or think of God, you must consider that he is
all: and you must look further into the three Principles, wherein you will
find what God is, you will find what the Wrath, the Devil, Hell and Sin
are; also, what the Angels, Man and Beasts are, and how the separation or
variation followed, from whence all things have thus proceeded, you will find
the creation of the world.

43. Only (Reader) I admonish you sincerely, if you be not in the way of the
prodigal, or lost son, returning to his father again, that you leave my
book, and read it not, it will do you harm: for the Satan.
great Prince will not forbear to deceive you; because he stands naked in
this book before the children of God, and is exceedingly ashamed, as a man that
is put to open shame before all people for his misdeeds: therefore be warned.
And if you love and savor the tender delicate flesh still, do not read my
book: but if you will not take warning, and a mischief befall you, I will be
guiltless, blame no body but your self: for I write down what I know at
present, for a memorial to my self; yet God knows well what he will do
[with it] which in some measure is hid from me.

44. Seeing now that we can find nothing in all Nature, of which we may say,
This is God, or here is God, from whence we might conclude, that God might be
some strange thing; and seeing himself witnesses, that his is the kingdom and
the power from eternity to eternity; and that he calls himself Father (and
the Son is begotten out of the loins of his Father,) therefore we must seek
for him in the original, In principio.
in the Principle out of which the world was generated and created in the
beginning: and we can say no otherwise but that the first Principle is God the
Father himself.

45. Yet there is found in the original the most horrible and [fierce or]
strong birth, viz. the Harshnesse, Bitterness, and Fire; of which we cannot
say, that it is God: and yet it is the most inward first Wel-spring or fountain.
source of all, that is in God the Father; according to which, he calls
himself, an Angry, Zealous, [or Jealous] God: and this source (as you find
before in the first three chapters concerning the original of the eternal
Birth) is the first Principle, and that is God the Father in his originality,
out of which this world has its beginning.

46. But the Angels and the Devils, as also the soul of man, are merely and
purely, As before, verse 37.
out of the same Spirit. The Devils and the Angels, in the time of Their being
made corporeal, continued in the spiritual substance.
their bodifying, continued therein: and the soul of man, in the time of the
creating of the body, [is] breathed in from the Spirit of God, in the Or, one
Element.
root of the third Principle, and now continues therein, in eternity,
unseparably and unmoveably in the eternal original Substance or Essence of
GOD, and as little as the pure eternal Birth, and the indissoluble band of the
Father ends or vanishes; so little also will such a spirit have an end.

47. Yet in this Principle there is nothing else but the most horrible
begetting, the greatest anguish and hostile quickening, like a Brimstone-spirit,
and is ever the gate of Hell, and the Abyss wherein Prince Lucifer (at the
extinguishing of his light) continued; and wherein (viz. in the same abyss of
Hell) the soul continues, which is separated from the second Principle, and
whose light ([which shineth] from the heart of God) is extinguished, and for
which cause also, at the end of this time, there will be a separation or
parting asunder of the Saints of light from the damned, whose Or, working
fountain of their condition as a boiling springing torment.
source will be without the light of God.

48. Now we have here showed you the first Principle, out of which all things
take their beginning: and must speak so of it, as if there were a place, or a
separable essence, where there is such a kind of source; to the end that the
first Principle might be understood, so that the eternity, as also the anger of
God, sin, eternal death, the darkness, (which is so called in respect of
the extinguishment of the light) also hellfire, and the Devil might be known
and understood [what they are.]

49. So I will now write of the second Principle, of the clear pure Deity, of
the That is, the power, glory, or luster of the Father.
heart of God. In the first Principle (as I have mentioned above) is The
attracting, astringent, sour, tart, smartnesse.
Harshnesse, Bitterness, and Fire; and yet they are not three things, but one
only thing, and they one generate another: Harshnesse is the first Father,
which is strong, [fierce or tart] very sharp and attracting to it self; and
that attracting is the [sting] or prickle, or bitterness, which the harshnesse
cannot endure, and it will not be captivated in death, but rises and flies up
like a strong fierce substance, and yet cannot remove from off its place: And
then there is a horrrible anguish, which finds no rest: and the birth is like
a turning wheel, twitching so very hard, and breaking or bruising as it were
furiously, which the harshnesse cannot endure, but attracteth continually more
and more, harder and harder; as when steel and a flint are struck one against
another, from which the twinkling flash of fire proceeds: and when the
harshnesse perceives The flash of fire.
it, The harshnesse.
it starteth and sinketh back, as it were dead and overcome: and so when the
flash of fire comes into its mother, the harshnesse, and finds her thus soft
and overcome, then it is much more terrified [than the harshnesse] and becomes
in the twinkling of an eye white and clear: And now when the harsh tartness
attaineth the white clear light in it self, it is so very much terrified, that
it [falleth or] sinketh back as if it were dead and overcome, and expandeth it
self, and becomes very thin and [pliable or] vanquished: For its own source
was dark and hard, and now is become As when the the rays of the sun which
turns the hard cold ice into thin fluid water.
light and soft; therefore now it is first rightly become as it were dead, and
now is the water-spirit.

50. Thus the birth gets an essence that has sharpness from the
harshnesse, and sweetness, thinness, and expansion from the light: and now
when the flash of fire comes into its mother, and finds her so sweet, thin
and light, Or, can work no more.
then it loses its own propriety in the qualification, and flies aloft no
more, but continues in its mother, and loses its fiery right [or propriety]
and trembles and rejoices in its mother.

51. And in this joy, in the water-spring, [or source] the pleasant Or, stream.
source of the Unsearchable, unfathomable, or inconceiveable.
bottomless love rises up, and all that rises up there, is the second
Principle: for the whole begetting or generating, falls into a glorious love;
for the harshnesse now loves the light dearly, because it is so refreshing,
chearly and beautiful: for from this pleasant refreshing it becomes thus
sweet, Gentle, or friendly.
courteous and humble [or lowly] and the bitterness now loves the harshnesse,
because it is no more dark, nor so strongly [eagerly or fiercely] attractive to
it self, but is sweet, mild, pure, and light.

52. And here begins the taste, whereby one continually [trieth, tastes
and] proves the other, and with great desire mingle one within another, so
that there is nothing but a mere courteous embracing; thus the bitterness now
rejoices in its mother, and strengthens it self therein, and for great joy
rises up through all the essences, and declares to the second Principle, that
the loving child is Begotten.
born; to which then all the essences give heed and rejoice at that dear
child: from whence the hearing arises, which is the sixth form where the
wheel of the birth stands in triumph. And in this great joy the birth cannot
contain it self [within its bounds,] but expandeth it self, flowing forth very
joyfully, and every essence [or substance] generateth now again a center in the
second Principle.

53. And there begins the unfathomable [or unsearchable] multiplication; for
the flowing and springing spirit, that proceeds from the first and second
Principle, confirms, fixes and establishes all; and in the whole birth it
is as a growing or multiplying in one will: and the birth attaineth here the
seventh form, viz. the multiplication Or, in.
into an essence of love: and in this form consists Paradise, or the Kingdom
of God, or the numberless divine birth, out of one only essence, Or, in all
things.
into all essence.

54 Although here the tongue of man cannot utter, declare, express nor fathom
this great depth, where there is neither number nor end; yet we have power to
speak thereof as children talk of their father: but to dive into the whole
depth, that troubles us, and disturbeth our souls: for God himself knows
neither beginning nor end in himself.

55. And now being to speak of the holy Trinity, we must, first say, that there
is one God, and he is called the Father and creator of all things, who is
Almighty, and All in All, whose are all things, and in whom and from whom all
things proceed, and in whom they remain eternally. And then we say, that he is
three in persons, and has from eternity generated his Son out of himself,
who is his Heart, Light, and Love: and yet they are not two, but one eternal
essence. And further we say, as the holy Scripture tells us, that there is a
holy Ghost, which proceeds from the Father and the Son, and that there is
but one essence in the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, which is rightly spoken.

56. For behold, the Father is the original essence of all essences: and if
now the second Principle did not break forth and spring up in the birth of the
Son, then the Father would be a dark Vacuum, or valley of darkness.
valley. And thus you see, that the Son (who is the Heart, the Love, the
brightness and the mild Or, Satiating.
rejoicing of the Father) [in whom he is well pleased] opens another
Principle in his birth, and makes the angry and wrathful Father (as I may
say, as to the originality of the first Principle) reconciled, pleased, loving,
and as I may say, merciful: and he is another [manner of] person than the
Father: for in his Or, ground.
center there is nothing else but mere joy, love, and pleasure: And yet you may
see that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, for when the
heart or light of God is generated in the Father; then there springs up (in
the kindling of the light in the fifth form) out of the Or, Welspring of water,
which is the ground of Humility.
Water-source in the light, a very pleasant sweet smelling and sweet tasted
Spirit: and this is that Spirit which in the Original was the bitter sting or
prickle in the harshnesse [or tartnesse]; and that makes now in this
Water-source, many thousand Centra.
Centres without number or end; and all this in the fountain of the Water.

57. Now you may well perceive that the birth of the Sun takes its Original
in the fire; and attaineth his personality and name in the kindling of the
soft, white, and clear light, which is himself, and himself makes the
pleasant smell, taste, and satisfaction [or reconciliation and well-pleasing]
in the Father: and is rightly the Fathers heart, and another person: for he
opens and produces the second Principle in the Father; and his own Essence
is the power or virtue and the light: and therefore his is rightly called the
power or virtue of the Father.

58. But the Holy Ghost is not Acknowledged or manifest, as the air is not
known or breathed forth in the original of the fire before the light be
kindled.
known in the Original of the Father before the light [breake forth]; but
when the soft fountain springs up in the light, then he goes forth as a
strong allmighty Spirit in great joy, from the pleasant source of water, and
[from] the hight, and he is the power and virtue of the source of water, and of
the light; and he makes now the forming [shaping figuring] and Images [or
species,] and he is the center in all Essences; in which [Centre] the light of
life, in the hight of the Sun, or heart of the Father takes its original.
And the Holy Ghost is a several Person, because he proceeds (as a living
power and virtue) from the Father and the Son, and confirms the Begetting,
generating, or working.
Birth of the Trinity.

59. Now we pray thus: Our Father [which art] in Heaven, hallowed, (or
sanctified) be thy Name; and in the first of Genesis it is written; God created
the Heaven out of the midst of the Water: by which is [meant or] understood the
Heaven of the third Principle: and yet indeed he has created it out of his own
Heaven wherein he dwells. Thus you may easily find, that the Birth of the
Holy Deity stands in the source of Water, and the powerful Spirit is
moreover the former, framer, and fashioner [or moulder] therein.

60. Thus now the Heaven in this forming or framing, and the framing and
generating out of it in infinitum, or endlesly, is the Paradise of God: as the
highly worthy Moses writes: The Spirit of God moved upon the Water, in the
framing [forming or fashioning] of the world. This is and continues so in its
Eternity, that the Spirit of God (in the birth of the Son of God) moves upon
the Water; for he is the virtue, or power, and out flowing in the Father, out
of the kindled Light water.
light, [a] water, out of the water and light of God.

61. Thus God is one only undivided Essence, and yet threefold in personal
distinction, one God, one will, one heart, one desire, one pleasure, one
beauty, one almightinesse, one fulness of all things, neither beginning nor
ending, for if I should go about to seek for the beginning or ending of a
[small dot point punctum] or of a perfect Circle, I should miss and be
confounded.

62. And although I have written here, as if it took a beginning (writing as
it were of the beginning [and first springing] of the second Principle, and the
Or, continual operation.
birth of the divine Essence) yet you must not understand it as having any
beginning: for the eternal birth is thus, [without beginning or end,] and that
in the Originalnesse: but I write to the end that man might learn to know
himself, what he is, and what God, Heaven, Angels, Devils, and Hell are, as
also what the wrath of God and Hellfire is. For I am permitted to write as far
as of the Originalnesse.

63. Therefore O child of Man, consider what thou art in this time, esteem
not so slightly or poorly of thy self, but consider that you remain in
Paradise, and put not out the divine light in you; or else you must hereafter
remain in the Original of the source of anger or wrath in the valley of
darkness; and your noble Image out of God, will be turned into a Serpent and
Dragon.

64. For you must know, that as soon as the divine light went out in the
Devils, they lost their beauteous form and Image, and became like Serpents,
Dragons, Worms, and evil Beasts; as may be seen by Adams Serpent; and thus
it is also with the damned souls. For this we know in the Original of the
first Principle very well. If you ask how so; read this following.

A description of a Devil, how he is in his own proper form, and also how he
was in the Angelical form.
65. Behold O child of Man. All the Angels were created in the first
Principle; and by the Or, moving working.
flowing Spirit were formed, and bodified in a true Angelical and spiritual
manner, and enlightened from the light of God, that they might increase the
Paradisicall joy, and abide [therein] eternally: but being they were to
abide-eternally, they must be figured [or formed] out of the indissoluble Band;
out of the first Principle, which is an indissoluble Band: and they ought to
look upon the heart of God, and feed upon the Word of God, and this food would
be their holy preservation, and would make theit Image clear and light; as the
heart of God in the beginning of the second Principle, enlighteneth the Father,
(that is the first Principle;) and there the Divine Power, Paradise, and
kingdom of Heaven, springs up.

66. Thus it is with those Angels that continued in the kingdom of heaven in
the true Paradise, they stand in the first Principle in the indissoluble Band,
and their food is the divine Power, and their Imagination (or Imagining) [in
their thoughts and minde] is the will of the holy Trinity in the Deity: the
confirmation [or establishing] of their life, will, and doings, is the power of
the Holy Ghost, whatsoever that does in the generating of Paradise, the Angels
rejoice at, and they sing the Or, Hallelujahs.
joyful songs of Paradise, concerning the pleasant saving fruit, and eternal
birth: all they do is an increasing of the heavenly Joy, and a delight and
pleasure to the heart of God, a holy sport in Paradise, a [satisfying of the
desire or] will of the eternal Father: to this end their God created them,
that he might be manifested, and rejoice in his Creatures, and the Creatures in
him, so that there might be an eternal sport of love, in the center of the
multiplying (or eternal Nature) in the indissoluble eternal Band.

67. This [sport of love] was spoiled by Lucifer himself, (who is so called,
because of the extinguishment of his light, and of being cast out of his
Throne) who was a Prince and King over many Legions, but is become a Devil,
and has lost his beautiful, [faire, bright,] and glorious Image. For he as
well as other Angels, was created out of the Eternal Nature, out of the
eternal indissoluble Band, and [hath also] stood in Paradise, also felt and
seen the Or, working.
Birth of the holy Deity, the birth of the second Principle, of the heart of
God, and the confirmation of the Holy Ghost: his food should have been of the
Word of the Lord, and therein he should have continued an Angel.

68. But he saw that he was a Prince, standing in the first Principle, and so
despised the birth of the heart of God, and the soft and very lovely Working or
influence.
qualification thereof, and meant to be a very potent and terrible Lord in the
first Principle, and would qualify [or work] in the strength of the Fire: he
despised the meekness of the heart of God: he would not set his imagination
therein [or his thoughts upon it] and therefore he could not be fed from the
Word of the Lord, and so his light went out; whereupon presently he became a
loathsomenesse in Paradise, and was spewed out of his princely Throne, with all
his Legions that stuck to him [or depended on him].

69. And now when the heart of God departed from him, the second Principle was
shut up to him, and so he lost God, the kingdom of heaven, and all
Paradisicall knowledge, pleasure, and joy; he also presently lost the Image of
God, and the confirmation of the holy Ghost; because he despised the second
Principle, wherein he was an Angel and Image of God: thus all things departed
from him, and he remained in the Or, Valley of Darkness.
dark valley: and could no more raise his imagination up into God, but he
continued in the four Anguishes of the Originalnesse.

70. And when he raised up his Imagination, then he kindled to himself the
source or root of the fire, and then when the root of the fire did seek for
the water ( viz. the true Mother of the eternal Nature) it found the stern
[or tart astringent] harshnesse, and the mother in the aching death: and the
bitter sting [or prickle] formed the birth to be a fierce raging Serpent, very
terrible in it self, rising up in the indissoluble Band, an eternal Enmity, a
will striving against it self, an eternal despair of all-good: [the bitter
sting also formed] the mind to be [as] a breaking striking wheel, having its
will continually aspiring to the strength of the fire, and to destroy the heart
of God, and yet could never at all be able to reach it.

71. For he is always shut up in the first Principle (as in the eternal
Death) and yet he raises himself up continually, thinking to reach the heart
of God, and to domineere over it: for his bitter sting in the birth, climeth up
thus eternally in the Or, Root.
source of the fire, and affords him a proud will to have all [at his
pleasure] but he attaineth nothing, his food is the Fountain of poison.
source of water, viz. the Brimstone-spirit, which is the most aching mother;
from which the indissoluble band is fed and nourished: his refreshing is the
eternal Viz. the cold fire.
fire, an eternal freesing in the harsh mother: an eternal hunger in the
bitterness, an eternal thirst in the source of the fire: his climeing up is
his fall, the more he climeth up in his will, the greater is his fall: like one
that standing upon a high clift, would cast himself down into a bottomless
pit, he looks still further, and he falls in further and further, and yet
can find no ground.

72. Thus he is an eternal enemy to the heart of God, and all the holy Angels:
and he cannot frame any other will in himself. His Angels and Devils are of
very many several sorts, all according to the Eternal Birth: For at the time
of his Creation he stood (in the kingdom of Heaven) in the point, Locus, or
place (where the holy Ghost in the birth of the heart of God, in Paradise, did
open infinite and innumerable Centres) in the eternal Birth; in this seat or
place, he was Or, Created.
bodified, and has his beginning in the opening of the In the opening of the
ground, as a building from the Earth.
Centres in the Eternal Nature.

73. Therefore (as is mentioned before in the third Chapter) when the Birth of
life sprung up, every Essence had again a Center in it self, according to its
own property or quality, and figureth a life according to its Essences, viz.
Harshnesse, bitterness, fire, and sound: and all further according to the
ability of the eternal birth, which is Or, established.
confirmed in the kingdom of Heaven.

74. Seeing then that they stood in Heaven in the time of their Creation,
therefore their quality was also manifold; and all should have been and
continued Angels, if the great fountain Lucifer (from whence they proceeded)
had not destroyed them: and so now also every one in his fall continues in his
own Essences, only the second Principle is extinguished in them: and so it is
also with the soul of man, when the light of God goes out in it: but so long
as that shines therein, it is in Paradise, and eats of the word of the Lord,
whereof shall be clearly spoken in its due place.

CHAP. V.
Of the third Principle, or creation of the material world, with the Stars
and Elements; wherein the first and second Principle is more clearly understood.
1. BEcause I may happen not to be understood clearly enough by the desirous
Reader; and shall be as one that is altogether dumb to the unenlightned, (for
the eternal and indissoluble band, wherein the Essence of all Essences
stands, is not easily nor in haste to be understood;) therefore it is
necessary that the desirous Reader do the more earnestly consider himself what
he is, and from whence his Reason and Inward senses, or thoughts.
Senses do proceed, wherein he finds the similitude of God, especially if he
consider and meditate what his Soul is, which is an eternal uncorruptible
Spirit.

2. But if the Reader be Or, be in true resignation.
born of God, there is no nearer way for him to come to the knowledge of the
third Principle; then by considering the new Birth, how the soul is new born by
the love of God, in the light; and how it is translated out of the prison or
dungeon of darkness into the light by a second birth. And now if you consider
that darkness wherein it must be without the new birth; and consider what the
Scripture says, and what every one finds by experience, that falls into
the wrath of God; and whereof there are terrible examples; that the soul must
endure irksome torment in it self, in the birth of the life of its own self, so
long as it is in the wrath of God: and then that if it be born again, exulting
great joy arises in it: and thus you find very clearly and plainly two
Principles, as also, God, Paradise, and the kingdom of Heaven.

3. For you find in the root of the original of the spirit of the soul, in
it self, in the substance of the eternal birth and uncorruptible eternal band
of the soul, the most exceeding horrible inimicitious irksome Or, torment, or
working property.
source, wherein the soul (without the light of God) is like all Devils,
wherein their eternal source consists, being an enmity in it self, a will
striving against God [and goodness,] it desires nothing that is pleasant or
good, it is a climbing up of pride in the strength of the fire, a bitter,
[fierce, odious malice, or] wrathfulnesse against Paradise, against God,
against the kingdom of heaven, also, against all creatures in the second and
third Principle, lifting up themselves alone, [against all this] as the
bitterness In wrath, or anger does.
in the fire does.

4. Now the Scripture witnesses throughout, and the newborn man finds it
so, that when the soul is new born in the light ^f God, then on the contrary it
finds, how very humble, meek, courteous, and cheerly it is, it readily
bears all manner of crosses and persecution, it turns the body from out of
the way of the wicked, it regards no reproach, disgrace, or scorn put upon it
from the Devil, or Man, it places its confidence, refuge, and love in the
heart of God; it is very cheerful, it is fed by the word of God, in which
there is a Paradisicall exulting and triumph, it cannot be [hurt, or so much
as] touched by the Devil: for it is in its own substance (wherein it stands in
the first Principle of the indissoluble band) enlightened with the light of God;
and the holy Ghost, who goes forth out of the eternal Generation, begetting,
or working.
birth of the Father in the heart, and in the light of the heart of God, he
goes forth in it, and establishes it the child of God.

5. Therefore all that it does (seeing it lives in the light of God) is done
in the love of God: the Devil cannot see that soul, for the second Principle
wherein it lives, and in which God and the kingdom of heaven stands, as also
the Angels, and Paradise, is shut up from him, and he cannot get to it.

6. In this consideration you may find what I understand by a Principle: For a
Principle is nothing else but a new birth, a new life; besides, there is no
more than one Principle wherein there is an eternal life, that is, the
eternal Deity: and that would not have been manifested, if God had created no
creatures in himself, (viz. Angels and Men) who understand the eternal and
indissoluble band, and Or, the manner.
how the birth of the eternal light is in God.

7. Thus now herein is understood, how the divine Essence in the divine
Principle, has wrought in the root of the first Principle, which is the
begettresse, matrix, or genetrix in the eternal birth in the Limbus,
signifies a seed, or concretion of matter.
Limbus, or in the original water-spirit: by which operation at last, the
earth and stones come forth. For in the second Principle, (viz. in the holy
birth) there is only spirit, light, and life; and the eternal wisdom has
wrought in the eternal Insensible, dumb, speechless.
inanimate, genetrix which is void of understanding (viz. in her own property)
before the original of the light; out of which came the Dust, dirt, or mud.
dark Chaos, which in the elevation of Lord Lucifer (when the light of God
departed from him, and the fierceness of the source of the fire was kindled)
became hard matter (viz. stones and earth,) whereupon followed the gathering
together of the earth, as also the spewing out of Lucifer from his Throne, and
the creating of the third Principle: and thereupon it followed, that he was
shut up in the third Principle as a prisoner, expecting henceforth the
[judgement or] sentence of God. Now whether it be not a shame, disgrace, and
irksomeness to him to be so imprisoned between Paradise and this world, and not
to be able to comprehend either of them, I propound it to be considered.

8. Thus now if we will speak of the third Principle, viz. of the beginning and
birth of this world; then we must consider the root of the genetrix, or
begettresse, seeing every Principle is another birth, but out of no other
essence; and so we may find, that in the first Principle in the indissoluble
band (which in it self is inanimate, and has no true life, but the Or, working
property.
source of the true life is born by the moving spirit of God, which from
eternity has its original in the first Principle, and goes forth from
eternity in the second Principle, as in the birth of the heart or Son of God)
the matrix of the genetrix is set open, which is originally the Astringency, or
tartness.
harshnesse; yet in the light it is the soft mother of the water-spirit. Thus
it is seen and found clearly and plainly before our eyes, that the Spirit of
God has wrought there in the matrix, so that out of the incomprehensible
Matrix, (which is but a Spirit) the comprehensible and visible water is
proceeded.

9 Secondly, you [may] thus see the separation clearly by the stars and fiery
Heaven, that the eternal separation [or distinction] is in the eternal
matrix: for you may see that the stars and the fiery heaven, and the watery,
the aerie, and earthly, are generated out of one mother, that they qualify
with, [or have influence upon] one another, and that the birth of their
substance is in one another, also that one is the case or vessel to hold the
other in, and yet they have not one and the same [property] qualification [or
condition.] Thus here in the separation you [may] know, that the eternal
matrix has a separation in it self, as is mentioned before in the third
chapter concerning the eternal birth of the four anguishes, where the fire is
generated between Harshnesse and Bitterness, and the light in the flash of
fire, and so every source retains its own due.

10. Understand it thus, as the Spirit moved this Matrix, so the matrix
wrought, and in the kindling from the Spirit of God in the fifth form of the
matrix, the fiery heaven of the Constellations did exist, which is a mere
Quinta essentia, or Quintessence, born in the fifth form of the matrix, in
which place the light has its original: out of which at last the Sun is
born [or brought forth,] wherewith the third Principle becomes opened and
manifested, which [Sun] now is the life in the third Principle, and the opener
of the life of every life in the matrix, in this place, or Locus; as the heart
of God in Paradise in the immateriall heaven and birth, opens the eternal
power of God, wherein the eternal life continually springs up, and wherein
the eternal wisdom continually shines. Thus also the light of the Sun
(which is sprung up in the inanimate matrix) by the [flowing, hovering, or]
moving spirit in the matrix, opens the third principle of this material
world, which is the third and beginning Principle; which as to this form
takes an end, and returns into its Or, devourer, the most pure elementary
air.
Either in the end of this Or, finishing of its time.
enumeration, as the Scripture witnesses.

11. And then all in this third Principle remains again in the first matrix;
only that which has been sown in this Principle, and that has its original
out of Paradise, out of heaven, and out of the second Principle (viz. Man) that
continues eternally in the matrix. And if he have in this [lifes] time
atrained the second Principle, so that he is born therein; it is well with him:
but if he have not, then he shall remain still eternally in the matrix, yet not
Or, Attain.
reach the light of God.

12. Now I know very well, that I shall not only in part be as it were dumb or
obscure to the desirous Reader, but also tedious, and he will be somewhat
troubled at me; in that I have written of the eternal mother (wherein the
divine essence stands;) and that I now write, that this matrix is Or, dumb.
inanimate and void of understanding, out of which also a Principle void of
understanding is generated; as is plain before our eyes, that in this world
there is no true understanding either in the Stars or in the Elements; and
also in all its creatures there is but an understanding to qualify [or to
operate] to nourish it self, and to increase, as the matrix in it self is.

13. Hereupon you are to know, that the matrix in the second Principle (which
yet has its original and eternal root in the first Principle) is but merely
an eternal, beginninglesse, soft [or meek] spirit, which has no such fiery
Or, light that cannot be endured, as is in the matrix of the first Principle.
intolerable light, but all there is pleasant and cheerful, and the eternal
original matrix is not known there; but the soft light of the heart of God,
makes all courteous and cheerful.

14 Therefore also the spirit which goes forth in the soft matrix, is the Holy
Ghost: and God dwells in himself, and he calls himself an Angry, Zealous
[or Jealous] God, only according to the most original matrix, which is not
manifested in Paradise: and in the beginning also it was forbidden to man, to
eat of the fruit [of] good and evil, from the most original matrix: neither
should man have known this most original matrix, if he had not imagined
[thought or longed] after it, and eaten of the fruit thereof, whereby the
Matrix presently took hold of him, captivated him, [acteth or] qualifieth in
him, nourishes and also drives him, as is plain before our eyes.

15. And thus you are to know, that the second Principle has it [in its
power,] and there only is wisdom and understanding; also therein now is the
omnipotence [almightinesse]: and this third Principle is the seconds proper
own, not separate, but one essence in it [and with it] all over, and yet there
is a birth between them, as may be seen, by the Rich Man and Lazarus, Luke 16.
the one being in Paradise, and the other in the most Original Matrix, or Hell.

16. And therefore God [created or] generated the third Principle, that he
might be Made known to Angels and men.
manifested by the material world: he having created the Angels and Spirits in
the second Principle in the Paradisicall world; they could thereby understand,
the eternal Generating, working, or begetting.
Birth in the third Principle, also the wisdom and omnipotence of God, wherein
they could behold themselves, and set their Imagination merely Or, Into.
upon the heart of God, in which Or, Condition.
form they could remain in Paradise, and continue to be Angels: which the
Devils have not done, but they meant to rise up in the Matrix, and domineere in
great power over Paradise, and all Angelical Principalities Thrones and
Dominions.
Regions, upon which they fell out of Paradise: and besides were driven out of
their place (or Locus) into Narrowness, or a Corner.
restraint, so that the Matrix of this world also holds them captive.

17. For the The universal place of this world as far as the creating word
Fiat spreads it self.
Locus or space of this world was their Angelical [Dominion or] Kingdom where
they were, in the place of this world.

18. But though we speak of the Paradisicall Essence, and also of the
principle of this world, of its power and wonderful birth, and what the Divine
and Eternal Wisdom is, yet it is impossible for us to utter and express it
[all]: for the Fountain or Wellspring.
Lake of the Deep can be comprehended in no Spirit (whether it be Angel or
Man): therefore the innumerable Eternal Or, Working.
Birth and Wisdom makes a wonderful eternal joy in Paradise. This
innumerable power and wisdom, may now also be known by us men, in the third
Principle; if we will take it into our consideration; if we look upon the
Starry Heaven, the Elements and living Creatures, also upon trees, herbs, and
grass, we may behold in the material world, the similitude of the
Paradisicall incomprehensible world: for this world is proceeded out of the
first root, wherein stand both the material, and also the Paradisicall
spiritual world, which is without beginning or transistorinesse.

19. And now if we meditate and consider of the Original of the four
Elements, we shall clearly find, see, and feel the Original in our selves,
if we be men and not beasts, full of malice and gainsayings against God and the
Mother, the Eternal Nature, or Root.
Matrix of this world: for the Original is as well known in man, as in the
Deep of this world: although it seems wonderful to the unenlightened Man,
that any should [be able] to speak of the original of the Air, Fire, Water,
and Earth, as also of the Starry Heaven: he supposes this impossible to be
known: thus he Glideth away in his thoughts imperceptibly.
swimmeth in his own Mother, and desires not to know it: neither was it good
for man to know it: but since the Fall of Adam has cast us headlong into it,
it is highly necessary for us to know it, that we may fly from the beastiall
Man, and learn to know the true Man.

20. And if you open the eyes of your mind, you will see that fire is in
water, as may be seen in a storm of Lightening, and yet it is no durable
fire, though it be true fire, which sets houses on fire, and burns them:
so also you may see that there goes forth from it a mighty forcible air, and
that they are in one another, and besides you see that water is generated in
the storm.

21. But you will not find this root here, you must look into the Or, womb.
The temporary Matrix is the temporary Nature, and the Eternal Matrix is the
Eternal Nature.
Matrix, and there it is wholly manifest, and you may know it in all things,
for the Matrix of this world stands in the eternal Matrix, from which,
Paradise and the kingdom of Heaven has its Original. Now as the Eternal
Matrix is a Birth that goes forth, where, in the Original there is
harshnesse, darkness, hardness, and anguish: so you may see, that when the
Spirit of God has Or, awakened.
kindled the inward Matrix, then it becomes stirring, working, and active.

22. For there is in the Original, first, Astringent attraction.
harshnesse, which attracteth, shuts up, makes darkness, and sharp cold:
but the tartness cannot endure the attracting: for the attracting in the cold,
makes in the bitterness a sting [or prickle] which rages and resists
against the hard death, but not being able to come away out of the tartness,
(being its Mother wherein it stands) therefore it rages very horribly, as if
it would break the harshnesse [in pieces]: it flies out upwards and
sidewayes, and yet finds no rest, till that the Birth of the harshnesse fall
into an aching horrible essence, like a Brimstone Spirit, very rough, hard,
stinging in it self [or kindling in it selfe] like a whirling wheel, and that
the bitterness fly up very swiftly, from whence proceeds a twinkling
flash; at which the dark harshnesse is terrified, and sinketh back as
vanquished. And so when the bitterness finds the mother overcome, and as it
were half dead, or soft, [or meek,] it is terrified more than the mother: But
the skreek or terror being past in the harsh mother, which is now half dead
or soft, [pliable or meeke] then the bitterness loses its terrible right [or
property] and becomes white, light, and clear: and thus is the kindling and
birth of the Fire, as is mentioned before.

23. Dear Reader, account not this ridiculous; that this birth (which also is
just so in the In the Mothers womb.
beginning of your life) may not trouble or confound you: and observe it
further.

24. When God in the first Matrix moved himself to create, and created the
Angels, he created them in Paradise, in the light holy Matrix, (which is this
and no other) but the Matrix with its fiery, dark, and harsh bitter property,
remained altogether hidden: for the light of God from eternity preserved it,
and kept it pleasant, clear, and bright: But when God moved himself to
create, then it became manifested: for the Angels were created out of the
indissoluble Band, out of the Matrix, and were bodified from the moving Spirit
of God.

25. Now when God had created great potent princely Angels, and that in the
place of the fourth form in the Matrix, where the source of Fire has its
original; they stood not, neither did they cast their Or, Their minds into
resignation.
imaginations forward into the fifth form, wherein the sprouting forth of
Paradise consists; but they cast their Imaginations back into themselves, and
formed [or created] a will [or purpose] in the Matrix, to domineere in the fire
over the light of God and Paradise. For the fiery Matrix ( viz. the abyss of
Hell) moved it self in the creation so hard, that Lucifer (that great Prince)
has formed his will out of it, and is continued therein, supposing that so he
should be a Great and terrible Lord in his whole place [of Dominion.]

26. Thus the Devil moved the Matrix, and the fiery form moved the Devil;
for The fiery form would have a Creature of its own.
that also would be creaturely, as [well as] all the other forms in the
Matrix, which yet was opposite to the fifth form in the Matrix, where in the
meek and clear light, the pleasant source of love springs up, wherein the
second principle stands eternally.

27. When this storm was in the Creation (in the first Principle) the Matrix
became very big [or much impregnated] and kindled: and every form in the
Matrix wrought [stirred or acted]. But because the anger and the wrath had
there elevated it self, and that this place could not thus subsist in
Paradise, therefore God moved this place yet more in the Matrix, which was yet
the more kindled, where then is to be the Devils Bath, [repository or dwelling
place], and the fourth form stood in the flash of the fire, which reflected
back into the mother, and Felt or perceived.
found the Spirit of God in the forming [or creation], where in a moment [that
fourth forme] lost its wrathful [smart, fierce property, authority, or] right,
and became in great joy, white, clear, and Or, Bright.
light; and in th^s place [or thing consists or] stands the Fiat, by which
God created Heaven and Earth: for before the fiat, the third Principle was not
manifested, but there was merely Paradise in the place of this world.

28. But God seeing that the great Prince Lucifer would domineere in the
Matrix, in the strength of the fire in his place, therefore he shut up the fifth
form in the Matrix of Paradise from him, for it is shut up both in its inward
corporeal form, and outwardly also.

With or rarefied.
29. For when the Matrix became thin again, dead and vanquished, from the risen
light, then the material [Matrix] turned to water, as we may perceive; and in
this kindling before the light of the Sun (when the Matrix was still in the
harsh fierceness) the Matrix attracted, that which was wrought, together into
a water-spirit, out of which came the rocky clifts, stones, and the dark earth,
which before the time of the Creation was but a Dust, cloud, dirt, or puddle.
Chaos: and in that time sprung forth the third Principle, the fiery Heaven, in
the fifth form in the Matrix; by the fiat, which the Father spoke through his
heart or Son, by and in the going forth of his Spirit: who there, The Spirit
moved upon the Water.
upon the Matrix in the fifth form, framed the fiery Heaven, as the highly
worthy Moses has clearly written of it: for the Matrix, is the water-spirit in
the original, in the first form: and now when it became material in the
place of this world, then the Spirit moved upon the Water in the heavenly
Matrix, which is immateriall, (from whence the material water is generated)
and so formed the Creatures.

30. Thus in this springing up [or going forth] the material Matrix was
extinguished, and the wrathfulnesse [tartnesse or fiercenesse] is come in the
stead thereof; And the Devil remained in the original of the Matrix (which
cannot be altered in Eternity) between Paradise and this world, in the dark
Matrix; and with the creation of the Earth, he was thrust down from his high
Throne [or seat,] where now the fiery starry Heaven is.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Separation in the Creation, in the third Principle.
1. IF ye consider of the Distinction specificall, difference, or form, or
variation, whereby every thing has its own peculiar Essence.
Separation and the springing forth in the third Principle of this world, how
the starry Heaven should spring up: and how every Star has a peculiar form
and property in it self, in every of which a several Center is observed, so
that every one of them is fixed [or steady] and master [or guider] of it self,
and that every one of them rules in the Matrix of this world, and Or,
qualifieth.
works and generateth in the Matrix after their kind. And then afterward if
we consider the Sun, which is their King, heart, and life: without whose
light and virtue, The stars.
they could neither act nor effect any thing, but remain in the hard dark
death; and this world would be nothing (but a fierce rough hardness.) And
further, if we consider the elements of fire and water, [and observe] how they
continually generate one in another, and then how the constellations do rule
in them, as in their own propriety: and also consider what the mother is, from
whence all these things must proceed, then we shall come to see the separation,
and the eternal mother, the Or, bringer forth.
genetrix of all things.

2. Nay, we have it clearly and plainly to be seen in our selves, and in all
things, if we would not be so mad, blind, and self-conceited, and would not be
so drawn and led by a Outward Reason.
Schoolboy; but did stick close to the Schoolmaster himself, who is the
master of all masters; for we see indeed that all things spring out of the
eternal mother: and as she is in her own birth, so she has generated this
world, and so is every creature also generated. And as that [mother] is in her
springing forth in multiplication, where every fountain [or source] has
another center in it from the genetrix, and a separation [or distinction] but
undivided and not asunder: so also this world is generated out of the eternal
mother, which now is such another genetrix, and yet is not separated [or
sundred] from the eternal Or, Nature.
mother, but is come to be in a material manner, and it has through the Sun
attained another light and life, which [light and life] is not the wise master
himself, but the wise master (who is God) he keeps that light and life, so
that it stands and continues in the eternal matrix, and yet it is not the
eternal wisdom it self.

3. Now because this birth [of the Sun] has a beginning through the will of
God, and enters again into its Or, repository.
Either, therefore it has not the virtue or power of the wisdom; but it
continually Or, builds.
works according to its kind, it vivifieth and kills: what it does it
does, [not regarding whether it be] evil, crooked, lame, or good, beautiful
or potent, it causes to live and to dye, it affords power and strength, and
destroys the same again; and all this without any premeditated wisdom:
whereby it may be perceived, that it is not the divine providence and wisdom
it self, as the heathens did suppose, and did foolishly rely upon the virtue
thereof.

4. But if we would see the ground thereof, we must only look upon the first
mother in her birth, and so we shall see and find it all: For as the first
mother (considering her in the original without the light) is sour, [or
harsh] dark, hard, and cold, and yet there is the Or, spirit of the water.
water-spirit in the bringing forth* Thus you may find (when the material
world sprung up) that God then on the first day created the heaven and the
earth.

5. Now the heaven comes out of the sour matrix, which in the Paradisicall
[heaven] is the water-spirit: and out of that Paradisicall [water-spirit, or
matrix] the material [heaven or matrix] is created; as Moses writes, that the
heaven was created out of the midst of the waters: and it is very right. And
also in that very hour the earth and the stones, and all metals (the matrix of
this world being yet dark) were generated out of the matrix.

6. For when the matrix was stirred, and that Lord Lucifer would domineere in
the fire, then the dark matrix attracted all that was wrought in the Out-birth.
birth, together; from whence earth, stones, metals, brimstone and salt did
proceed: hereby the kingdom of Prince Lucifer was shut up, and he remained in
the inward center captivated in the outward.

7. But the virtue which was in the matrix, was that which could effect such
things in the matrix: for a stone is nothing else but a water, The original
Text Mercurius.
mercury, salt, and brimstone, wherein an oil is hidden. Now the birth of the
matrix has such a form in its eternal Essence, and Or, continual generation
and subsistence.
birth of its life. For first, there is the harshnesse [or sournesse]
fierceness [or eager strongnesse] and hardness, from whence the cold
proceeds. Now the sournesse [or harshnesse] attracteth and sharpneth the
cold; and in its attracting it makes the bitter sting [or prickle] which
pricketh and rages, and cannot endure the hard attracting, but vexes like a
furious madness, it rises up and rages, and becomes like a brimstone-spirit.

8. And in this form in the wrath [or fierce strongnesse] in the watery sour
mother, the sour bitter earth, brimstone and salt, is generated, before the
kindling of the Sun in the matrix that is void of understanding. But the
separation that is in it, is caused from the births standing in great anguish,
and from its desiring the separation in the birth: for the bitterness agrees
not with the harshnesse [or sournesse,] and yet they are as mother and son,
and as members one In.
of another: and it must be so, or else nothing could be; for it is the
eternal band, and the original of life.

9. Moreover, when the bitterness rages, rises up, and Aketh.
vexes in the [soure] harsh mother, then it falls into a glimmering flash
most terribly: in this form the Mercurius, or venom, or poison, is generated.
For when the matrix perceives this flash of fire in its dark sour form, then
it is terrified, and becomes dead in her hard sour property. And in this
place death, poison, Falling away or decaying and destruction.
withering and corruption are generated in the matrix, and also the noble life
in the Mercurius, and in the springing up of the third Principle.

10. And further, when the horror [or crack or skreek] of the fire is come into
its harsh mother, and has thus overcome its mother, then it self is much more
terrified, for there it loses its fierce or strong property, because the
mother [hath] attained another Or, root.
source; and out of the horror of the fire a Glance, or luster.
brightness is come to be; in which in the inanimate matrix, the Materia, [or
matter] in the midst of the horror [or crack] is come to be a soft and bright
Or, concrete.
mixed matter, viz. from the crack of the light [is prococeeded] Gold, Silver,
Copper, Tin Lead,, etc. according as every place in the matrix stood in the
wrestling center.

11. For the birth in the whole space of this world (as far as Lucifers
kingdom did reach) was thus; Note.
and therefore there is much different kind of earth, metals, and other things
in one place than in another. And it is plain before our eyes, that all metals
are mixed, which proceeds from the Or, out-birth.
bringing forth in infinitum; which we well understand and see, but cannot
utter, nor dare we speak it, for it troubles us, and it reaches into the
Deity, which is without beginning, and eternal: therefore the creature must
let it alone upon pain of the loss both of its reason and sense.

12. But to declare this further; when the matrix stood thus in the birrh,
where the matter of the earth was generated, then the matrix with the kindling,
became water: you must understand it aright, not wholly in substance, but it
has generated the earth, stones, and metals, and yet the matrix continues
still, so also the water still continues in the killing and overcoming;
whereby the material world took beginning, where the globe of the earth was
drawn together in this moving, and stands in the middle of the Circle from
above and from beenath as a point [or punctum.]

13. And there in the center in the Paradisicall matrix, Note.
and in the Paradisicall heaven, the Spirit of God stood in his own eternal
seat, neither did it depart from thence; and moved upon the material water
with the Fiat, and there formed the heaven, which was created out of the midst
of the watery matrix, and he separated the root of the darkness from the light
in the matrix; in which darkness the Devils remained, and they have not
comprehended the matter in the matrix, nor the new light, which sprung up in
the matrix, and so with this creation and separation, the length of one day was
finished, and out of beginning and end, and morning and evening was the first
day, as Moses writes.

14. But that we may so speak of the heaven, that the r^^der might come to
understand what that [heaven] is which God then created; [consider] what Moses
writes of it: God made a Firmament between the waters, and separated the water
beneath the Firmament from the waters above the Firmament, and the Firmament he
called Heaven, which is very right: but hitherto it has been very ill
understood.

15. Now observe, the Heaven is the whole Deep, so far as the Ethera, or
Skies have Expanded, or spread.
, given up themselves to the birth of this world, and that heaven is the
matrix, out of which earth, stones, and the material water is generated. And
there God separated the material water from the matrix: and here it is very
plainly discerned, that the material water is as it were deaded, or has death
in it: for it could not abide in the Viz the Air.
moving mother, but was created [to be] upon the globe of the earth, and God
called it Sea: [Meer:] in which [word] is understood in the language of Nature,
as it were a springing [or growing] in death, or a life in The corruptibility.
corruption: That is, the reader will not understand it.
although herein I shall be as one that is dumb to the Reader, yet I Or,
understand.
know it very well, and I am very well satisfied therewith: but because the
bestiall man is not worthy to know it, therefore I will not here cast the
Pearl before the Swine: but for the children of God, which will be benefited
by it; the Spirit of God will certainly teach and instruct them in it.

16. Now when the heaven became clear [or pure] and cleansed from the earth
and the dark mist [or dust] in the concretion [or driving together,] then in
the matrix of the heaven there was the three Elements, Fire, Air, and Water,
which are three in one another, in one mother; and that mother is here called
the Heaven, therefore henceforward in my writing, I shall use the word Heaven
in stead of the word Matrix.

17. For the Heaven is the Matrix, and is called Heaven, because of the
separation; because the fifth essence of Heaven is severed, and set in the
higher Heaven, where the Matrix is more firery, as it is properly, understood
in the language of Nature, and is plain before our eyes. But here the quality,
birth and property of the heaven ought to be described, because the four
Elements sprung out of it, as out of their mother; and beeause the virtue of
every life consists therein, therefore the original of the four Elements
must be described, wherein it will first truly be understood what the Heaven is.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Heaven and its eternal Birth and Essence, and how the four Elements
are generated: wherein the eternal band may be the more and the better
understood, by meditating and considering the material world.
The Great Depth.
1. EVery Spirit sees no further then into its mother, out of which it has
its original, and wherein it stands: for it is impossible for any Spirit in
its own natural power, to look into another principle, and behold it, except
it be regenerated therein: But the Natural man, who in his fall was captivated
by the matrix of this world, whose natural spirit Wavereth.
moves between two principles, viz. between the Divine and the Hellish, and he
stands in both the gates, into which principle he falls, there he comes to
be regenerated, whether it be as to the Kingdom of Heaven, or the Kingdom of
Hell: and yet he is not able in this [life] time to see either of them both.

2. He is in his own essence and substance a twofold man: For his soul (in its
own substance) is our of the first Principle, which from eternity has no
ground nor beginning; and in the time of the creation of man in Paradise, or
the kingdom of heaven, the soul was truly Bodily created, or corporized.
bodified by the Fiat in a spiritual manner; but with the first virtue [or
power] which is from eternity, in its own first virtue or power it has
remained inseparably in its first root, and was illustrated [or made shining
bright] by the second principle, viz. by the heart of God: and therewith
standing in Paradise, was there by the moving Spirit of God, breathed into the
matrix of the third Principle, into the starry and Elementary man; and now
therefore he may understand the ground of heaven, as also of the elements and
of hell, as far as the light of God shines in him; for if that light be in
him, he is born in all the three Principles: but yet he is only a spark risen
from thence, and not the great source, or fountain, which is God himself.

3. And therefore it is that Christ says: If you had faith as a grain of
Mustard Seed, you might say to the mountain, Cast thy self into the sea, and
it shall be done. And Note the power by which the holy men raised the dead.
in this power men have raised the dead, and healed the sick, by the word, and
the virtue and power of the Spirit, or else they could not have been able to
have done such things, if they had not stood in the power of all the three
Principles.

4 For the created Spirit of man, which is out of the matrix of this world,
that rules (by the virtue of the second principle in the virtue of the light)
over and in the virtue of the spirit of the stars and elements very mightily,
as in that which is its proper own. But in the fall of Adam we lost this great
power, when we left Paradise, and went into the third Principle, into the
matrix of this world, which presently held us captive in restraint: But yet we
have the knowledge [of that power] by a glance [or glimmering] and we see as
through a dim or dark glass, the eternal Or, operative propagation.
birth.

5 And although we move thus weakly or impotently in all the three births, and
that the gate of Paradise is so often darkened to us, and that the Devil does
so often draw us into the hellish gate, and that also the elements do cover the
Or, the dominion or influences of the stars.
sydereall gate, and wholly cloud them, so that we oftentimes move in the whole
matrix, as if we were deaf, dumb, or half dead, yet if the Paradisicall light
shines to us, we may very well see into the mother of all the three
principles: for nothing can hinder us, the threefold spirit of man sees every
form and quality in its mother.

6 Therefore though we speak of the creation of the world, as if we had been by
at present, and had seen it, none ought to marvel at it, nor hold it for
impossible. For the Spirit that is in us, which one man inherits from the
other, that was breathed out of the eternity into Adam, that same spirit has
seen it all, and in the light of God it sees it still: and there is nothing
that is far off, or unsearchable: for the eternal birth, which stands
hidden in the center of man, that does nothing [that is] new, it knows,
works and does even the same that ever it did from eternity: it labors for
the light and for the darkness: and wotketh in great anguish: but when the
light shines therein, then there is mere joy and knowledge in its working.

7 So that when the heaven, and the birth of the elements are spoken of, it is
not a thing afar of, or that is distant from us, that is spoken of; but we
speak of things that are done in our body and soul: and there is nothing
nearer us than this birth: for we live and move therein, as in the house of our
mother, and when we speak of heaven, we speak of our native country, which the
enlightened soul can well see, though indeed such things be hidden from the
body.

8 For as the soul of man moves and swimmeth between the virtue of the
Stars and Elements, so the created heaven also moves between Paradise and
the kingdom of Hell, and it swimmeth in the eternal matrix: its limit
reaches as far as the Ethera [skies or receptacle] has yielded it self up
to the creation, so far as the kingdom of Lucifer did reach, where yet no
end is to be found: for the virtue or power of God is without end; but our
sense reaches only to the fiery heaven of the Stars, which are a Or,
outbirth, issue, or offspring.
propagation in the fifth form of the eternal Mother (or a Quinta essentia)
wherein the separation in the time of the third Principle (or in the beginning
of this world) the virtue or power of the matrix was Gr, divided into parts, or
varyed.
separated, where now the separation is thus movind: and then every essence in
the propagation in the manifold centres of the Stars, have a Attracting.
longing desire one after the other, and a continual will to infect
[impregnate or mix influences:] and the one essence, or virtue, is the Food.
meat and drink, as also, the chest [case or] receptacle of the other.

9 For as in the Paradisicall principle the holy Ghost in the Trinity of the
Deity, continually goes forth, and flows very softly, immoveably, and
imperceptably, as to the Creature, and yet forms and fashioneth all in the
Paradisical matrix, so also does the third Principle. After that the Matrix
became visible and material, every virtue in the matrix has had a great
attractive longing toward one another, a continual springing, blossoming, and
fading again like a bud, or some boiling seething matter, wherein the
sournesse, coldness, and [eager fierce] strongnesse attract without ceassng;
and this attracting, prickle [or sting] stirs always without ceasing, and
striveth [or resisteth] so, that the sour matrix, (because of the inward,
hellish, or most original matrix) stands continually in anguish, with a
great desire of the light, which it espyeth in the root of the fire, and is
continually affrighted at it, and becomes mild, soft, and material: whereby
the Elementary water is continually generated.

10 In this manner you must understand the four elements, which yet are not
four divided things, or essences, but one only essence: and yet there are
four differences, or distinctions, in this birth; and each element lies in
the other as in a chest, and it is its receptacle, also it is a member therein.
Understand and consider the ground aright, which follows. The Or, astringency
is the root of the mother.
sournesse is the matrix, and a cause of all things, which in its own substance
is very dark, cold, and as nothing: but the eternal Deity being there, and
speculating or beholding it self in the sournesse; therefore the dark
sournesse is desirous after the Divine virtue, and attracteth; although there
is no life or understanding in the sournesse, yet it is the gtound of the first
essence, and the original whence somewhat comes to be: Here we can search no
further into the ground of the Deity, for it troubles [disturbeth or
confoundeth] us.

11 Now the sournesse (in its lust or great longing [or panting] after the
light) attracteth continually, and in its own substance it is nothing else but
a vehement hunger very dry, and as [a vacuum or] nothing at all, a desiring
will, as the darkness after the light: and its hunger, or attracting, makes
the bitterness; the woe [or lamentation that it cannot be satiated or
mollified, from whence the anguish arises, so that the will, or prickle [or
sting] is rubbed [or As steel and a flint strike fire
struck] in it self, from the lust of the desiring, and it will not yield it
self to the dark nothing, or dead will; but sets its desire and anguish,
and also its [eager or] strong will so very hard toward the hidden light of
God, that thereby the will becomes a twinkling flash, like a sparkling or As
when ye throw water into the fire.
crackling fire, whereby the sournesse, that is so very aching, is continually
filled, and as it were deadned, whereby the sour spirit comes to be soft,
sweet, and material, even water.

12 But the bitterness being so very much affrighted at the flash of fire in
the sournesse, it catches its mother (the sournesse) which is become material
from the crack, and flies out, and is clouded or Impregnated.
swelled from the material sournesse, as if it also were material, and
moves, and strenghtheneth it self continually in the mother: and that is the
element called Air in this world, which has its original in the watery
mother; and the water has its original from the air, and the fire has its
original from the longing anguish; and the earth and stones took their
beginning in the strong attraction at the fall of Lucifer, when the sournesse
was so fierce, strong, rising and attractive, which attraction is stopped again
by the light in the third principle.

13 Thus it may very plainly be understood, that the light of God is a cause of
all things, and you may hereby understand all the three Principles: For if the
power, virtue, and light of God were not, then there would be also no
attractive longing in the dark eternity, and also the sour desire (which is
the mother of the Eternity) would be nothing at all; and it may be understood,
that the Divine virtue shines in every thing, and yet it is not the thing it
self, but the Spirit of God in the second principle; and yet the thing is his
Ray [glance or lustre] which thus proceeds from the longing, or attracting
will. But now the Heart of God is in the Father [in] the first will, and the
Father is the first desiring or longing after the Soon, and the Son is the
virtue and Luster, or brightness.
light of the Father, from whence the eternal nature becomes always longing;
and so from the heart of God, in the eternal dark matrix [it] generateth the
third principle. For Or, thereby.
so God is manifest, but otherwise the Deity would remain hidden eternally.

14 Now therefore we say (as the Scripture informs us) that God dwells in
heaven: and it is the truth. Now mark, Moses writes, that God created the
heaven out of the midst of the waters, and the Scripture says, God dwells in
heaven; therefore we may now observe, that the water has its original from
the longing of the eternal Nature after the eternal light of God; but the
eternal Nature is made manifest by the longing after the light of God, as is
mentioned before: and the light of God is present every where, and yet
remains hidden to Nature: for Nature receives only the virtue of the light,
and the virtue is the Heaven wherein the light of God dwells and is hidden,
and so shines in the darkness: The water is the Materia, or matter that is
generated from the heaven, and therein stands the third, which again
generateth a life and comprehensible essence, or substance, out of it self,
viz. the elements and other creatures.

15 Therefore, O noble Man, let not Antichrist and the Devil be fool you, who
tell you that the Deity is afar off from you, and direct you to a heaven that
is situated far above you; whereas there is nothing nearer to you than the
heaven is: you only stand before the door of heaven, and you are gone forth
with Adam out of the Paradisicall heaven into the third Principle: yet you
stand in the gate, do but as the eternal mother does, which by great desiring
and Or, seeking.
longing after the Kingdom of God, attaineth the Kingdom of heaven, wherein
God dwells, wherein Paradise springs up; do you but so, set all your
desire Into.
upon the heart of God, and so you will pass in by force, as the eternal
mother does: and then it shall be with thee as Christ said: The kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force: so you shall make
to your self friends in heaven with your unrighteous Mammon, and so you come
to be the true similitude and Image of God and his proper own: for, all the
three principles with the Eternity are in you, and the holy Paradise is again
generated in you, wherein God dwells: then where will you seek for God? seek
him in your soul only, that is proceeded out of the eternal Nature, wherein
the Or, divine working.
Divine Birth stands.

16 O that I had but the pen of man, and were able therewith to write down the
Spirit of knowledge: I can but stammer of the great mysteries like a child
that is beginning to speak; so very little can the earthly tongue express what
the Spirit comprehends and understands; yet I will venture to try whether I
may procure some to go about to seek the pearl, whereby also I might Or, work.
labor in the works of God in my Paradisicall garden of Roses: for the longing
of the eternal Mother of Nature.
matrix drives me on to write and exercise my self in this my knowledge.

17 Now if we will lift up our minds, and seek after the heaven wherein God
dwells; we cannot say that God dwells only above the stars, and has
enclosed himself with the firmament which is made out of the waters, into
which none can enter except it be opened (like a window) for him; with which
thoughts men are altogether befooled [and wilderd:] neither can we say (as some
suppose) that God the Father and the Son are only with the Angels in the
uppermost enclosed heaven, and rule only here in this world by the holy Ghost,
who proceeds from the Father and the Son. All these thoughts are void of
the very knowledge of God: for then God should be divided and circumscriptive,
like the Sun that moves aloft above us, and sends its light and virtue to
us, whereby the whole deep becomes light and active all over.

18 Reason is much befooled with these thoughts; and the kingdom of Antichrist
is begotten in Which possess the minds of straying Christians.
these thoughts, and Antichrist has by these opinions set himself in the
place of God, and means to be God upon earth, and ascribes Divine authority.
Jus divinum.
Divine power to himself, and stops the mouth of the Spirit of God, and
will not hear him speak: and so strong delusions come upon them that they
believe the Spirit of lies, which in hypocrisy speaks strong delusions, and
seduceth the children of Hope, as St Paul witnesses.

19. The trve Heaven, wherein God dwells, is all over, in all places [or
corners] even in the midst [or Centre] of the Earth: He comprehends the
Hell where the Devils dwell, and there is nothing without God. For wheresoever
he was before the Creation of the world, there he is still, v^z. in himself;
and is himself the Essence of all Essences: All is generated from him, and is
originally from him: and he is therefore called God, because he alone is the
Good, the Heart, or [that which is] Best: understand, he is the light and
virtue [or power] from whence Nature has its Original.

20. If you will Think, or applauding any thing of God.
meditate on God, take before you the eternal Darkness, which is without God;
for God dwells in himself, and the Darkness cannot in its own power
comprehend him: which Darkness has a great [desire of] longing after the
Light, caused by the Lights Speculate as in a glass.
beholding it self in the Darkness, and shining in it: and in this longing or
desiring, you find the Or, active property.
source, and the source takes hold of the power or virtue of the Light, and
the longing makes the virtue material, and the material virtue is the
enclosure to God or the Heaven; for in the virtue, stands the Paradise,
wherein the Spirit which proceeds from the Father and the Son, works. All
this is incomprehensible to the Creature or natural man.
Creation: but not impossible to be found in the mind; for Paradise stands
open in the mind of a holy soul.

21. Thus you [may] see how God created all things out of nothing, but only
out of himself: and yet the That which is procreated, viz. the four Elements.
Out-birth is not from his Essence [or substance], but it has its original
from the Darkness. The Or, springing properties.
source of the Darkness is the first Principle, and the virtue [or power] of
the Light is the second Principle, and the Out-birth [generated] out of the
Darkness by the virtue of the Light, is the third Principle; and that is not
called God: God is only the Light, and the virtue of the Light, and that which
goes forth out of the Light is the Holy Ghost.

22. You have a similitude [of this] in your self: your soul which is in you,
gives reason to you, whereby you think [consider and perceive]: that
represents God the Father: The light which shines in your soul, whereby you
know the virtue [or power in you] and lead [and direct or order] your self
with, that represents God the Son, or the Heart, the eternal power and
virtue: and the mind in which the virtue of the light is, and that which
proceeds from the light wherewith you govern your body, that represents
the Holy Ghost.

23. The Or, blindness of understanding.
darkness that is in you, which longs after the light; that is the first
Principle: the virtue or power of the light which is in you, whereby you can
see in your mind without [bodily] eyes, that is the second Principle: and the
longing [power or] virtue, that proceeds from the mind, and attracteth and
fills [or impregnateth] it self, from whence the material body grows,
that is the third Principle. And you [may] understand very exactly, how there
is an enclosure [stop or knot] between each Principle; and how God is the
beginning and the first virtue [or power] in all things: and you understand,
that in this gross [sluggish or dull] body, you are not in Or, in the Divine
joy, wherein God and the Angels dwell.
Paradise: for that [outward body] is but a misty [excrementitious dusky opake
procreation or] Out-birth in the third Principle, wherein the soul lies
captive, as in a dark dungeon: of which you shall find a very large
description, when we come to write about the Fall of Adam.

24. Now mark, when God would manifest himself by the material world, and the
Matrix stood in the anguishing birth, wherein the Creator moved the first
Principle to the creating of Angels; then the Matrix stood undivided in the
inward Or, substance.
Essence: for there was then no comprehensibility, but spirit only, and the
virtue of the spirit: The Spirit was God, and the virtue was Heaven, and the
spirit wrought in the virtue, so that thereby the virtue became attracting and
longing: for the Spirit beheld it self in the virtue: and therein the Spirit
created the virtue from whence the Angels came to be: and thus the virtue
became the dwelling of the Angels, and the Paradise wherein the Spirit wrought:
and the Spirit longed after the light, and the light shone in the virtue: so
there is a Paradisicall joy, and pleasant sport therein: and thus God is
manifested.

25. Now thus the eternal light, and the virtue of the light, or the heavenly
Paradise moves in the eternal Darkness; and the Darkness cannot comprehend
the light; for they are two several Principles; and the darkness longs
after the light, because that the Spirit beholds it self therein, and
because the divine virtue is manifested in it: but though it has not
comprehended the Divine virtue and light, yet it has continually with great
lust lifted up it self toward it, till it have kindled the root of the fire
in it self, from the beams of the light of God: and there arose the third
Principle: and it has its original out of the first Principle out of the dark
Matrix, by the Beholding, imagining, or reflection.
speculating of the virtue [or power] of God: But when the kindled virtue in
this springing up [of the third Principle] in the darkness became fiery; then
God put the Fiat therein, and by the moving Spirit, which goes forth in the
virtue of the light, created the fiery source in a bodily manner, and severed
it from the Matrix: and the Spirit called the fiery created properties,
stars, for their quality.

26. Thus it is plain to our sight, how the starry heaven (or as I may better
render it to the enlightened Reader) the Quintessence (or the fifth form in the
Birth) is severed from the watery Matrix; or else there would have been no
ceasing from the generating of stones and earth, if the fiery Property or
kind.
nature had not been severed: but because the eternal Essence ( viz. God)
would manifest himself in the dark Matrix; and [hath desired] to make the
nothing something; therefore he has severed the kindled virtue, and made the
Matrix clear or pure.

27. And thus now the Matrix stands incomprehensibly, and longs after the
fiery nature [or condition] and the fiery nature longs after the Matrix: For
the Spirit of God (which is a Spirit of meekness,) Speculateth, or imagines.
beholds it self in the watery Matrix; and the Matrix receives virtue from
thence: thus there is a constant will to generate and work: and the whole
nature stands in a great longing and anguish; willing continually to generate
the Divine virtue; God and Paradise being hidden therein: but it generateth
after its kind, according to its ability.

28. Now when God had severed the Matrix with [or from] its fiery form, and
would manifest himself with this world; then he put the Fiat into the Matrix,
and spoke out of himself: [saying,] Let there be Herbs, Grass, Trees, and
Beasts, every one according to their kind: This speaking, was the heart, or
the virtue [or power] of the Eternal Father: But the Spirit which had the
Fiat, went from the Eternal Father (in the virtue of the heart of God) forth
with the will (and the will was the Fiat) and Created.
made the Out-Birth in the third Principle, material, visible, and
comprehensible, each according to its Essence: as the virtue was, so was also
its body. For there the fiery Matrix, or the Constellation, gave its virtue to
the Fiat; and the watery Matrix with the Elements received the virtue, and so
were impregnated, and each Element generated its own creatures out of it self:
as also each form in the fiery and watery Nature out of themselves: and yet it
became no seperable Essence, but only every creature was separated according
to its kind, according to the Eternal virtue, which arose in the longing by
the lust, and became the third Principle, which was not before Time [began].

29. Thus the starry Heaven rules in all creatures, as in its proper own: it
is the [husband or] Man, and the Matrix, or the watery form is its [wise or]
Woman, which it continually impregnateth, and the Matrix is the genetrix, which
brings forth the child which the Heaven Makes, or forms.
begets: and that is the created Heaven in the third Principle, from whence
the Elements are proceeded; viz. the watery Matrix, out of which the visible
water generated it self, and still always does generate it self in the
anguish.

30. Therefore Moses writes; That, God created the Heaven out of the midst of
the Waters; [This you must] understand [to be] out of the eternal watery
Matrix, which is but a Spirit, wherein the Paradise is, and the holy Heaven,
viz. the Divine virtue, which the dark Matrix lusted after in its hunger, out
of which the visible Matrix of the four Elements is proceeded, out of which,
the Essence of all Essences that now are, were created by the Fiat through the
eternal Spirit of God.

31. For every form in the Matrix has its visible creatures, and such as are
invisible to humane eyes: which creatures in part as to us are as it were but
mere Shapes and forms of appearance.
figured Spirits: as the fire has spirits and creatures that are invisible to
our material eyes, and we cannot see them: there are also in the Air
invisible spirits, which we see not; for the Air being immateriall, so are
also the spirits thereof: The water has material creatures, which are not
visible to us: and because they are not out of the fire nor air, they are of
another Property.
quality, and are hidden [as] to the fiery and airey [spirits] except they will
manifest themselves.

32. As Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, lie in one case [or chest] and they four
are but one thing, and yet of four distinct differences, and none of them can
comprehend, nor retain the other: and somewhat of one of the four, being Or,
predominant.
fix, in every creature: that creature cannot bind it self as to that: but is
manifested therein, and according to that spirit is comprehensible and
perceptible, and yet is incomprehensible to the spirits of the other Elements.

33. For all things are come to be something out of nothing: and every creature
has the Center, or the circle of the birth of life in it self: and as the
Elements lie hidden in one another in one only mother: and none of them
comprehends the other; though they are members one of another: so the created
Creatures are hidden and invisible to one another: for every Creature looks
but into its mother that is fix [or predominant] in it: The material creature
sees a material substance, but an immateriall substance, (as the spirits in
the fire and in the air) it sees not; as the body sees not the soul, which
yet dwells in it; or as the third Principle does not comprehend, nor
apprehend the second Principle wherein God is; though indeed it self is in
God, yet there is a Or, Principle.
birth between: As it is with the spirit of the soul of man, and the
elementary spirit in man, the one being the case [chest] or receptacle of the
other; As you shall find, about the Creation of Man.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Creation of the Creatures, and of the springing up of every Vegetable,
or fruit.
growing thing: as also of the Stars and Elements, and of the Original of
the Or, essence.
Substance of this world.
1. IN the beginning of the last foregoing Chapter, it is mentioned, that it
is not strange for a man to write, speak, and teach of the Creation of the
world, though he was not present when it was doing, if he have but the
knowledge in the Spirit: For there he sees in the Mother, as in a glass, the
genetrix of every thing; for one thing always lies in another, and the more
is sought, the more is found, and there is no need to cast the mind beyond
this world; for all is to be found in this world, yea in every thing that
lives and moves. Whatsoever any looks upon, and searches into, he shall
find the Spitit with the Fiat therein; and the divine virtue [or power
discovers or] Appears.
beholds it self in all things, as it is written, The word is near thee,
even in thy heart and lips. For when the light of God dawneth, or breaks
forth in the center of the spirit of the soul; then the spirit of the soul
sees very well the Or, Creating.
creation of this world, as in a clear glass, and nothing is afar off.

2 Therefore now I direct the Reader to the creatures, that he may search into
them, and so he shall find all things, and that more wonderfully than any man
can write or speak; if we be born of God. We must not Or, fundamentally
conceive.
think with our understanding and skill, of Gods making or creating, as of a
man that makes somewhat, as a Potter makes a vessel of a lump of clay, or a
Stone-cutter, or Carver makes an Image after his pleasure; and if i^ does not
please him, then he breaks it again: No, the works of God in the creation of
the world, were altogether fix and steadfast, good and perfect, as Moses
writes: And GOD saw all that he had made, and behold, it was very good.

3 For he took not one lump after another, or many lumps together, and made
beasts of them, that is not likely; and it is much more a bestiall than a
humane thought But as is mentioned before, after that the Devil was fallen with
his legions, (who had his throne In loco.
in the place of this world, standing bodily after the manner of a Spirit, in
the first Principle, and With luster or brightness.
thoroughly enlightened all over with the second Principle, truly dwelling in
Paradise, and in the divine virtue [or power,] and yet with pride fell from the
light of God, and catched at his own mother the root of the fire, thinking to
domineere over the meekness of the heart of God) then his dwelling continued
to be the first Principle in the fiery dark Matrix; and God created the
Out-birth out of the matrix, for a Principle: and in the eternal matrix, in
the longing will opened the center or birth of life; and there (after the
manner of the Deity, as the eternal Deity from eternity has always
generated) arose [and sprung up] the third Principle, in which the Deity
stands as it were hidden; yet forming, imagining, or imprinting it self
powerfully in all things: which is incomprehensible and unprofitable for the
Devil.

4 Yet the third Principle is a similitude of the Paradisicall world, which is
spiritual, and stands hidden therein. And thus God manifested himself, and
seeing the spiritual world of the Angels in the place of this world continued
not, therefore he gave another Principle to this place, wherein a light
springs up still, and where there is a pleasant refreshment: for the purpose
of God must stand, and the first creatures must continue in darkness rather
[than that the purpose of God should fail.]

5 So the matter of this world, as also the Stars and Elements must not be
looked upon, as if God were not therein: his eternal wisdom and virtue [or
power] has formed it self with the Fiat in all things, and he himself is the
Master-workman; and all things went forth in the Fiat, every thing in its own
essence, virtue and property. For as every star in the Firmament has a
property different from the other; thus is it with the mother also, out of
which the fifth Substance, or form.
essence of the stars went forth. For when the fiery form of the stars was
separated from her, she was not presently severed from the first eternal
Birthright; but she kept her first eternal virtue. Only the rising power of
the fire is severed from her; so that she is become a pleasant refreshment, and
a kind mother to her children.

6 Now when God on the first day had gathered together the lump of the earth in
the great deep of this world, then the deep became purified, yet [the deep
between the firmament and the earth though it was cleansed from dregs, was]
dark, and had no light in the matrix; but the fifth essence, that is, the fifth
form in the matrix, shined as a fire, wherein the Spirit of God with the Fiat,
moved upon the watery matrix: and the earth was naked, bare, and void, neither
had it so much as one spile of grass.

7 Now, says Moses, And GOD said, Let there be light, and there was light.
This light now was the fifth form in the matrix: For the fifth essence was not
yet created in the matrix, nor separated till the fourth day, when God created
the Sun and Stars out of it, and separated the light from the darkness;
where then the light got the virtue of the glance, or splendour into it self
for its own, and the root of the fire in the center remained hidden in the
darkness.

8 On the second day God created the Firmament of the heaven, viz. the strong
enclosure [fence or stop] to the darkness of the original matrix, that it
might no more kindle it self, and generate earth and stones. And therefore he
made the enclosure or firmament out of the midst of the waters, which stays
the might [force or power] of the fire, and became the visible heaven, whence
the creatures are proceeded, whereout now the Elements, Fire, Air, and Water
proceed.

9 The third day God, by the Fiat, divided the waters upon the earth, and
created them for several places, that there might be a dwelling upon the earth,
and so the earth became dry. Now when this was done, then God did seek the
creature, and the eternal Father said, (that is, he wrought through the Son,
who is his heart and glance) [or lustre] in the Fiat in the earth: and there
budded the life through death, and grass, herbs, and all manner of trees and
plants sprung up, every one according to the eternal Fountain.
source, as it had been before. Thus every essence became visible, and God
manifested his manifold virtue with the manifold herbs, plants and trees, so
that every one that does but look upon them, may see the eternal power,
virtue, and wisdom of God therein; if he be born of God he may know in every
spile of grass, his Creator in whom he lives. Thus in this time sprung up all
that grew [or was] in the earth.

This was found written in the manuscript copy apart by it self, so that it
is not known whether it be the Authors or no.
If men would not be blind, they might here see the mystery of the Man Christ's
remaining in death till the third day, and his bringing of life out of the
earth.

10 And the Matrix of the Earth stood still till the third day, as it were in
death, in respect of the great storm: But in the Fiat the life sprung up
through the death; and the eternal virtue [or power] and wisdom of God (which
has formed it self together in the Fiat) discovered it self on the blossoming
earth, where the similitude of the Paradisicall world may be clearly seen.

11 For although many thousand several herbs stand one by another in one and
the same Meadow, and one of them fairer and more vertuall than another, yet one
of them does not grudge at the form of another, but there is a pleasant
refreshment in one The earth.
Mother: so also there is a distinct variety in Paradise, where every Creature
has its greatest joy in the virtue and beauty of another; and the eternal
virtue and wisdom of God, is without number and end; as you found before in
the third Chapter concerning the opening of the Centres of the eternal life.
You shall find no book wherein the Divine wisdom may be more searched into,
and found, than when you walk in a flowery fresh springing Meadow, there you
shall see, smell, and taste, the wonderful power and virtue of God, though
this be but a similitude, and the divine virtue in the third Principle is
become material; and God has manifested himself in a similitude. But [this
similitude] is a loving Schoolmaster to him that seeks, he shall there find
many of them.

12 On the fourth day God took the place of this world rightly at the heart:
for therein he created the Or, the wise-mens masters, or teachers.
wise master out of his eternal wisdom in the third Principle, viz. the Sun
and Stars; herein men may first rightly see the Deity, and the eternal
wisdom of God, as in a clear glass, though indeed the essence or substance
that is visible to the eyes, is not God himself, but it is the Goddess in the
third Principle, which in the end goes into her Either again, and takes her
end.

13 Though men must not cast the Pearl in the way that the beasts may tread it
under foot, much less must men throw it among the grains [or husks] to be
devoured by the swine: (for that would not be beneficial to the wanton world,
because that seeks nothing thereby but to misuse it self therewith; for the
Devil whom the world serves, does teach it, that when it learneth the ground
of the Heaven, and of the Stars, to will presently to be a God, as Lucifer
did:) yet I will write somewhat of the beginning and virtue or power of the
Stars (because man and all creatures live in the virtue, working, and
essences of them, and that every creature receives its property from them) for
the sake of him that seeks, who would willingly fly from the bestiall man,
and would fain live in the true man, who is the image and similitude of God:
For to such it is very highly necessary to be known. Also for the Lillyes sake
which grows in the tree of the sour wrath toward the Midnight.
North in the Matrix.

14 Moses writes, God said, Let there be lights in the Firmament of Heaven,
which may separate and distinguish day and night, and be for signs, for times
and seasons, for days and years. And to be for lights in the Firmament of
heaven, to shine upon the earth, and it was so. And God made two great lights,
the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night:
Also, he made the Stars. And God set them in the Firmament of heaven, that
they might shine upon the earth, and rule the day and the night, and separate
the light from the darkness.

15 And though Moses has written very rightly, that they should govern the day
and the night, and should separate the light from the darkness, and make times
and seasons, years and days, yet is it not plain enough to be understood by
the desirous Reader. For there is found a very high thing in the virtue and
power of the stars; [which is] that every life, growth, color and virtue,
thickness and thinness, smalnesse and greatness, good and evil, is moved
and stirred by their power. For this cause the wise Heathens did rely upon
them, and honored them as Gods: therefore I will write somewhat of their
original, as far as is permitted to me at this time, for their sakes that
seek and desire the Pearl. But I have written nothing for the swine, and other
bestiall men, who trample the Pearl into the dirt, and scorn and contemn the
spirit of knowledge; such as they, may, with the first world, expect a deluge,
or flood, of fire: and seeing they will bear no Angelical image, therefore
they must bear the images of Lions, Dragons, and other evil beasts, and worms
[or creeping things:] and if they will not admit of good counsel that God may
help them, then they must look to find by experience whether the Scriptures of
Prophecy do lie to them, or no.

16 The Evangelist St John writes of the originality of the essence and
creatures of this world, so very highly and exactly, as may be read in no other
place of Scripture in the Bible: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and that Word was God: This was in the beginning with God, all
things were made by it, and without it was nothing made that was made. In it
was the life, and the life was the light of men, and the light shone in the
darkness, and the darkness has not comcomprehended the light.

17. Mark what John says: In the beginning of the Creation, and before the
times of the world, was the Word, and the Word was God, and in the Word was the
light, and it shone in the Darkness, and the Darkness could not comprehend
the light. Wherein may be clearly understood, that the Eternal Light is God;
and that it has its eternal Original in the eternal virtue or power; and
that it is the eternal Word, which shone in the Darkness. Seeing then that
Word created all things in all places, therefore it also was in all places, for
without it was nothing made.

18. Now that Word had no matter out of which it made any thing, but it created
all things out of the Darkness, and brought them to light, that it might shine
forth, appear, and present it self. For in it was the life, and it gave the
life to the creature, and the creature is out of its virtue, and the virtue
became material, and the light shines therein, and the material virtue
cannot comprehend it, for that is in Darkness: but seeing the material virtue
cannot comprehend the light, which from eternity shines in the darkness;
therefore God has given that [materiall vertue] another light, which
proceeds out of the virtue, ( viz. the Sun) which shines in the creature,
that so the creature is manifested in the light.

19. For as the Deity is the virtue [or power] and light of Paradise in the
second Principle: so the Sun is the virtue [or power] and light of this
material world in the third Principle: and as the Deity shines in the
darkness in the first Principle, so the Sun shines in the darkness in the
third Principle. And as the Deity is the eternal virtue and the spirit of the
eternal life; so the Sun is the Spirit and the virtue in the Or, Transitory
life.
corruptible life.

20. So now a Spirit is nothing else but a springing will, and in the will
there is the anguish to the birth, and in the anguish the fire generateth it
self, and in the fire the light, and from the light the will becomes
friendly, pleasant, mild, and sweet, and in the sweet will the kingdom and
the glory generateth it self. Thus the light keeps the might [or power]; and
if that be put out, then the virtue [or power] and glory cease, and the
kingdom also.

21. God, who is the eternal light, he is the eternal will, he shines in the
Darkness, and the Darkness has comprehended the will: and in that will
(which has comprehended the Darkness) the anguish rises up, and in the sour
[harsh] anguish the fire, and in the fire the light, and out of the light
[cometh] the virtue [or power] and out of the virtue the kingdom. So now out
of the fire [came] the Constellations, and moreover the Sun, and out of the
virtue came the Heaven; and the kingdom is Gods. All this was in the first
will in the Creation, one with another: wherein God severed the fiery will,
from the mild will of the light, and called the fiery [will] Stars, and the
mild [will] Heaven, in respect of the virtue of each of them.

22. The Sun is the Petty God.
Goddess in the third Principle; in the created world (understand, in the
material virtue) it went forth out of the darkness in the anguish of the
will, in the way and manner of the eternal Birth. For when God set the Fiat in
the Darkness, then the darkness received the will of God, and was impregnated
To.
for the Birth. The will, causes the [soure] harshnesse, the harshnesse
causes the attracting, and the stirring of the attracting to mobility causes
the bitterness, which is the woe: and the woe causes the anguish: and the
anguish causes the moving, breaking, and rising up. Now the sour harshnesse
cannot endure the jirking, and therefore attracteth the harder to it self: and
the bitterness or the attracting will not endure to be stayed, but breaks
and stingeth so very hard in the attracting, that it stirs up the heat,
wherein the flash springs up, and the dark [sourenesse or] harshnesse is
affrighted by the flash, and in the skreeke the fire kindles and in the fire
the light. Now there would be no light if the skreek in the harshnesse had not
been, but there would have remained nothing but fire; yet the skreek in the
harshnesse of the fire kills the hard harshnesse, so that it sinketh down as
it were to the ground, and becomes as it were dead and soft; and when the
flash perceives it self in the harshnesse, then it is affrighted much more,
because it finds the mother so very mild, and half dead in weakness: and
so in this skreek its fiery property becomes white, soft, and mild, and it is
the kindling of the light, wherein the fire is changed into a white clarity
[glance, luster, or brightness.]

23 In such a manner as this the Sun rose up in the Fiat, and out of the Sun
(in its first kindling) [arose] the other Planets, viz. upwards, out of the
raging bitterness Mars [arose] which the splendour of the Sun stayed [or
upheld] when it discovered Mars.
it: and out of the virtue of the Sun, which raised it self higher [arose]
Jupiter imprisoned in the center of the Fiat; and out of the chamber of anguish
[arose] Saturnus: and downwards Venus [arose] from the soft mildness, when the
harshnesse was overcome, and that it was soft, sweet, and sinking down like
water. And when the light kindled, then out of the sour harsh wrath came Love
and Humility to be, running downwards: and out of the overcome virtue in the
sour harshnesse [arose Mercurius) wherein stands the knowledge of what was
in the Original before the light: But when the light made the virtue in the
place of the Sun material; as it were in an earthly manner [arose] the Moon.

24 This the world comprehends not, but scorneth it, therefore I will here no
further cast the Pearl before the swine: for there belongs another light to
this knowledge; therefore I will pass that by, and go on.

25. Out of the anguish of Darkness (when God spoke the [word] Fiat therein)
came forth all things: The anguish has its Original in the Fiat, and the Fiat
[hath its Originall] in the will, and the will is eternal without Original:
for it is (in God) the Matrix of the Genetrix.

26. God is invisible, and the will is also invisible, and the Matrix also is
invisible, and yet they are in substance, and are from eternity, and continue
in eternity: and the Word is the virtue of the will; and the virtue [or power]
makes the Fiat, and the Fiat makes the kingdom, and it is all alike eternal
in one only substance: The will has generated the Word from eternity; and the
Word the virtue, and the virtue the spirit, and in the spirit is the light, and
in the light is the power, understanding, and knowledge; otherwise it were
altogether nothing.

27. That light has wrought in the knowledge, and in the understanding, and
generated a similitude of its substance: and the substance which wrought was
the Fiat, and the Fiat formed the similitude which was generated out of the
will, and made it visible: and the similitude was generated out of the
darkness, out of the eternal nothing; and yet somewhat was there, viz. the
originalnesse of the anguish, out of which the eternal will Or, takes its
eternal original.
generateth it self from eternity.

28. Now the similitude also has received such a will out of the Fiat, as the
eternal will is; and it has generated the virtue [or power,] and the virtue
is the Heaven; and the light which is become shining in the virtue, is the Sun:
and that works in the virtue; so that there is understanding and knowledge;
or else all in this world would be an immovable substance, and all would lie
still, and so neither herb nor grass would grow.

29. Therefore in the Fiat is arisen out of the anguish, the similitude of the
knowledge and understanding; and that is the Constellation; and it is the fifth
form of the Birth in the Fiat, and the Fiat has severed the forms in the
birth, so that every essence is several; as hard, soft, thick, thin, hot,
cold, bitter, tart, sour, sweet, and so forth as we see: and the spirit
continued in the matrix of Heaven, which goes out from thence, ( viz. the
air) and the Spirit receives the understanding from the Constellation; for it
is a member of the other in one only Mother.

30. Now the Matrix ( viz. the created Heaven) in the Fiat, together with the
stars, is the similitude of all that was from eternity: though not visible:
and the Fiat is in the similitude: and the Paradise wherein the Angels dwell,
is hidden in the Matrix: and God is shining in the Paradise, and yet
incomprehensible; as the glanse [or lustre] of the Sun cannot be comprehended.

31. And God is immense [immeasurable], and the similitude is also
immeasurable: he is in the similitude and the similitude comprehends him not:
the similitude is his work, and he is the Master workman thereof; the
Constellation is his instrument, and the The created Heaven.
Matrix with the Elements, are the Materia, [matter or materialls] out of which
the The Fiat.
Master cutteth and fashioneth his work.

32. Now the Master always works on and on, without consideration, what he
lights upon that he makes: for the consideration is in the work. And
therefore it is that the whole nature stands in anguish and longing, to be
freed from the vanity; as also the Scripture witnesses. Because it tastes the
Paradise in it self, and in the Paradise the perfection, and therefore it
groaneth and lifts it self up toward the light of God and Paradise; and so
brings forth in its anguish always somewhat that is fairer, higher and new;
as may sufficiently be found and understood in the mind of man; and is very
visible to a small understanding: that in works always some special thing is
brought to light, and if you be not blind, you may see this in Men, Beasts,
yea even in herbs and grass.

33. Thus on the fourth day, by the Fiat, out of the virtue, prepared the
similitude of his substance [and fitted it] to be a Matrix, which should
generate all whatsoever was a similitude of his substance, out of the wisdom
which was in him from eternity: that so all forms might be brought forth and
become visible, which were from eternity in the Matrix; and the similitude of
the unsearchable manifold varieties and virtues, are the stars, which
altogether give [or send] their virtue into the matrix of the Heaven, and the
Heaven gives that same spirit to the Creatures. This is the course of all
Creatures after the same essence [or substance] and they are formed after the
same spirit, which is their virtue, spirit, and life.

34. When God had finished this on the fourth day; he saw it, and considered
it, and it was good, as Moses writes. Then God desired in his external will,
that this Kingdom or Principle [of this world] should also be creaturely, like
the perfect Paradisicall Kingdom; that there should be living creatures
therein: and the will set the virtue (that is, the Word) in the Fiat; and then
the Matrix generated all manner of [living] creatures on the Fifth Day, every
one after its kind. You must understand by the word, Kind, as many various
[formes] as the Matrix is [of]; as you may observe it in the Constellation.

35. Now I shall fall into the school of the Master in his Cornerd cap, or the
Crown of his degree.
Pontificallibus [hood and grace of his degree]: who will ask out of what the
Beasts, fowls, fishes, and worms were made; for he will have it, that all of
them were made out of the earth, and will prove it out of Moses, and he
understands as much of Moses as of Paradise, which he will have to be
altogether corporeal. Therefore there is a gross deadness in the
understanding: and though I write plain enough; yet I shall be still dumb to
that deadned soul which is void of understanding: and yet I cannot help it:
for it is said; You must be borne anew, if you will see the The Divine Region
or Government.
kingdom of God: would you feign know [whereout the Beasts are made] then lay
aside your Cap or Hood of self-conceited wisdom.
bonnet of pride that is in your mind, and walk along into the Paradisicall
Garden of Roses, and there you shall find an herb, if you eat of it, your
eyes will be opened, so that you shall see and know, what Moses has written.

36 The And Marginall notes.
Glosses that are put upon Moses from Reason, will not show you Paradise, much
less the Creator. The Prophets and Apostles learned more in the Paradisicall
School in one hour, than the Doctors in their The Universities.
Schools in thirty years: Ones own wisdom avails nothing: God gives it to
him whom he loves for nothing. It cannot be bought for money nor favor, as
King Solomon will tell you.

37 If we will be still so very earthly minded, as to think that God made all
the beasts of a lump of earth; of what then is their Spirit made? Seeing that
earth is not very flesh, and the blood is not mere water: Besides, the earth
and the water is not life; and though the Or, breath.
air come in it, yet it still remains such an essence as springs only in
the Fiat, and the tincture which rises up in the fire, and from whence the
noble life is stirred, is hidden.

38 Moses writes, Let there come forth all manner of Animals, or living
creatures.
beasts every one according to its kind. Now then the question is, Out of what
should they come forth? Answer, Out of the Matrix. What is the Matrix out of
which they should come forth? It is the four Elements, which are together in
the earth. The Fiat brought forth the beasts [or living creatures] very Without
order.
indigestedly as they are in the essence: not from heaven; but out of the
Matrix of the earth: and the Matrix of the earth is one [and the same] thing
with the Matrix in the deep above the earth, and [hath] one [and the same] Rule
or governing.
dominion. The constellation rules in all [things,] and it is the Limbus, or
the Mars.
Masculine wherein the tincture consists, and in the Matrix of the earth, is
the Aquastrish [or watery] Spirit: they come forth only out of the Matrix of
the earth, that they might be of the essence of the earth, that so they might
eat of the fruits that grow out of the earth. For every Spirit lusts after
its mother from whence it came.

39 Now then if the Beasts [or Animals nature] were merely out of a lump of
earth, then they would eat earth; but seeing The bestiall nature.
it is proceeded out of the Matrix of the earth by the Fiat, therefore it
desires also such food as the matrix affords out of its own essence: and
that is not earth, but flesh: yet this flesh now is a Or, Concretion.
Mass whence the Corpus.
body comes, and the spirit of the constellation makes the Or, penetrating
the life and the blood.
tincture therein; which [Spirit] rules over all, as in one mother, and in
every life it makes the understanding: for the spirit of the constellation
rules in all things, in the earth, stones, metals, elements and creatures.

40 For in the beginning of the creation, at the time when the earth became
material, all was generated out of one only substance, and there was no more
done but a separation made of one Part.
from another: therefore in every separation there must needs be always a
vehement hunger of one Part.
after another: An example whereof you have in propagation; for the sake
whereof the separation was so made: For you see that there is a male and a
female; and that the one continually desires copulation with the other, that
they may Engender.
generate. This is a great hidden secret. Observe, when the Creator by the Fiat
separated the Matrix from the Aquaster [or watery Mother;] for the first form
is heavenly and incorruptible, as long as the kingdom of this world stands,
and the root of the first form touches, or reaches.
holds Paradise.

I will set it down more intelligibly [or plainly] for the simplest Readers
sake.
41 Observe, as has been often mentioned, that as in the Fiat in the aching
matrix, ( viz. the dark harshnesse [or sournesse]) the fire rose up in the
breaking wheel in the kindling; and that in the fiery, the light of the Sun
and of all the Stars [sprung up (which is [done] in the harsh matrix, which
from the light is become thin, lowly, and material water) and the pleasant
source of love [sprung up] so that one form vehemently loverh the other, in
respect of the kind, meek light, which was come into all forms. So now the
soft meekness was become a new child, which was not the dark originalnesse in
the anguishingnesse. But this child was the Paradise, yet being it stood not
in the Materia [or matter] therefore the matrix of the harshnesse could not
comprehend it; but The matrix.
it yielded it self forth very desirously, and longing with great earnestness
(according to the fire and bitterness) to comprehend the pleasant source of
love, and yet could not comprehend it, for The source of love.
it was Patadisicall; and thus it still stood in great longing and generated
water.

42 But now God separated the fire ( viz. the fifth essence or form) from the
water, and out of that made the stars: and the Paradise is hid in the matrix.
Therefore now the mother of the water desires with great earnestness the
mother of the fire, and seeks the child of love; and the mother of the fire
seeks it in the mother of the water, where it was generated, and there is
between them a continual vehement hunger one after another to copulate.

43 Now God said, Let all manner of beasts come forth, every one after its
kind: and so there came forth out of the essence of every ones kind, a male
and a female. And thus the Spirit of the Stars, or the Spirit in the form of
Fire, had now by its longing copulated with the watery [Spirit,] and two Sexes
sprung out of one essence; the one according to the Limbus in the form of
fire, and the other according to the Aquaster [or spirit of the water] in the
watery form: yet so [blended or] mixed, that they were alik as to the body; and
so the Male was qualified according to the Limbus, or form of fire, and the
female according to the Aqua^^er in the watery form.

44 And so now there is a vehement desire in the creatures. The Spirit of the
male seeks the loving child in the female, and the female in the male; for
the irrationality of the body in the unreasonable creatures, knows not what
it does; the body would not if it had reason, move so eagerly toward
propagation; neither does it know any thing of the impregnation [or
conception,] only its spirit does so burn in desire after the child of love,
that it seeks love, (which yet is Paradisicall) and it cannot comprehend it;
but it makes a Or, sowing of seed.
semination only, wherein there is again a center to the birth. And thus is
the original of both Sexes, and their propagation: yet it does not attain the
Paradisicall child of love; but it is a vehement hunger, and so the
propagation is acted with great earnestness.

45 But that I now write, that the stars do rule in all Beasts, and other
creatures; and that every creature received the Spirit of the stars in the
creation, and that all things still stand in the same Regiment; this the simple
will hardly believe; though the Doctor knows it well, and therefore we direct
them to Experience. Behold, a Male and Female beget young ones, and that often:
now they come forth out of one only body, and yet are not of one kind, [nor
of the same] color and virtue, nor [shape or] form of body. All this is caused
by the alteration of the stars, For when the seed is sown, the The fashioner,
or the Fiat.
Carver makes an Image according to his Or, desire.
pleasure; As of a Lion, a Lion, of a sheep, a sheep.
yet according to the first essence, he cannot alter that; but he gives the
spirit in the essence, to it according to his power [or ability or dominion] as
also manners, and senses, color and gesture, like himself to be as he is, and
as the Constellation is in its essence at that time (when the [creature]
draws breath) [first in its mothers body] whether [the essence] be in evil
or in good [inclined] to biting, worrying and striking; or to meekness [or
loving kindness and gentleness;] all as the Or, the Matrix.
heaven is at that time, so will also the spirit and the beast be.

CHAP. IX-
Of the Paradise, and then of the transitorinesse of all creatures: how all
take their beginning and end: and to what end they here appeared.
The Noble and most precious Gate [or exposition] concerning the reasonable
Soul.
1 NO Money, nor Goods, nor Art, nor Power, can bring you to the eternal rest
of the eternal soft meekness of Paradise; but only the noble Knowledge: into
that you may wrap up your soul: that is the Pearl which no Moath can eat, nor
Thief can steal away; therefore seek after it, and then you will find the
noble Treasure.

2 Our wit [skill and understanding] is so very hard Cold, frozen, or shut up.
knit up, that we have no more any knowledge of Paradise at all; and except we
be again born anew by water and the holy Ghost, the veil of Moses lies
continually before our eyes when we read his writings; and we suppose that was
Paradise whereof Moses said: GOD placed Adam.
him in the Garden of Eden which he had planted, that he might till it.

3 O beloved Man, that is not Paradise, neither does Moses say so: but that was
the Garden in Eden, where they were tempted; the exposition whereof you may
find, about the fall of Adam. The Paradise is the Divine joy; and that was in
their mind, when they were [standing] in the love of God: But when
disobedience entered, they were driven out, and saw that they were naked: for at
that instant the spirit of the world caught them, in which there was mere
anguish, necessity, turmoyle and misery, and in the end corruptibility and
death. Therefore it was of Needful.
necessity that the eternal World did become flesh, and bring them into the
Paradisicall rest again: whereof you shall find [the exposition] in its due
place, about the fall of Adam.

4 Paradise has another Principle: for it is the Divine and Angelical joy,
yet not without the Extra locum.
place of this world. Indeed it is without the virtue and source [or active
property] of it; neither can the spirit of this world comprehend it, much less
a creature: for it stands not in the anguishing Operation.
birth; and although it thus takes its original, yet it consists in exact
perfection, mere love, joy and mirth; wherein there is no fear, neither
misery nor death: no Devil can touch it, nor no beast can Or, attain it.
reach it.

5 But when we will speak of the source [or fountain] and joy of Paradise, and
of its highest substance; what it is: we have no similitude of it in this
world, we stand in need of Angelical tongues and knowledge to express it; and
though we had them, yet we could not express it with this tongue: it is well
understood in the mind, when the soul rides in the Chariot of the Bride, but
we cannot express it with the tongue; yet we will not cast away the That
little which we can express of it.
A. B. C. but tattle [or stammer] with the children, till another mouth be
given us to speak withal.

6 When God had created the Beasts, he brought them to Adam, that he should
give them their names, every one according to their essence and kind, as they
[the beasts] were qualified, [or according to the quality and condition they
were of.] Now Adam was in the Garden of Eden in Hebron, and also in Paradise at
once, yet no beast can come into Paradise: for it is the Divine Or, habitation,
or refreshment.
joy, wherein there is no unclean thing, also no death or corruptible [or
transitory] life: Therefore the garden of Eden is not Paradise.
much less is there the knowledge of Good and Evil; yet Moses writes of it,
that in the Garden of Eden there was the tree of temptation, which bare the
knowledge of Good and evil; which indeed was no other Tree, than like the
Trees we now eat of, in the Or, In the transitory body.
corruptibility: neither was it any other Garden, than such as we now have,
wherein earthly fruit (Good and Evil) grow; as is before our eyes.

7. But the Paradise is somewhat else; and yet no other place, but another
Principle, where God and the Angels dwell, and where there is perfection, where
there is mere love, joy, and knowledge; where no misery is: which [Paradise]
neither death nor the Devils do touch, neither do they know it: and yet it
has no wall of earth or stones about it, but there is a great Gulf [or
cliffe] between Paradise and this world, so that they who will pass from hence
thither, cannot; and they who would come from thence to us, cannot neither: and
the Hell and the kingdom of darkness is between them: and none can come
therein but by a new Birth: which Christ spoke of to Nicodemus. The souls of
the Saints [holy] and regenerate, must enter into it (by the death of
Darkness,) whom the Arch-Shepherd, with the Angels, brings thereinto upon
his Note, the Bride-Chariot is the true Resignation into the bosom of the
Father.
Bride-chariot: of which you shall find [an exposition] in its proper place in
order.

8. But seeing somewhat is lent me, from the grace of the power [or Divine
vertue] of God, that I might know the way to Paradise: and seeing it behooveth
every one, to work the works of God, in which he stands; of which God will
require an account from every one, what he has done in the labor of his days
work in this world; and will require the work (which he gave every one to do)
with increase; and will not have them empty; or else he will have that
unprofitable servant to be bound hand and foot, and cast into Darkness; where
he must be feign to work, yet in the anguish, and in the forgetting of the
Day-labour which was given him to do here [or of the Talent which he had
received here] wherein he was found an unprofitable servant.

9. Therefore I will not neglect my Day labor; but will labor as much as I
can on the way; and although I shall scarce be able to Much less to spell or
read.
tell the Letters, in this so high a way; yet it My labor.
shall be so high, that many will have enough to learn in it all their life
long: he that supposes that he knows it very well; he has not yet learnt
the first letter of Paradise; for no Doctors are to be found on this way in
this School; but only Children going to school.
scholars [or learners.]

10. Therefore let not my Master of Art (in his Or, Crowned Hat.
Hood and Tippet) think himself so cunning in this matter; nor power out his
meckings so presumptuously [against the children of God]: for so long as he is
a se^rner [or mocker] he knows nothing of this; he ought not to think, his
cap does become him so finely; nor ought he to boast of his humane calling; as
if he did sit in his calling by By holy Orders, Divine institution, or Divine
Right.
the Ordinance of God, whereas he is not set or confirmed therein from God, but
by the favor of man. He ought not so much to prohibit [and forbid] the way to
Paradise, which himself does not know; He must one day give a heavy account of
his Or, institution.
Ordination by the favor of man: because he boasts of a Divine calling, and
yet the Spirit of God is far from him, therefore he is a liar, and belyeth the
Deity.

11. Therefore let every one take care what he does: I say again; that
whosoever he be that intrudeth himself to be a Pastor [or Or, Minister.
Shepherd] without the Divine Calling, without the knowledge of God, he is a
thief and a murderer, he enters not through the door into Paradise, but he
creeps in with the dogs and the wolves, into the den of thieves, and he
does it but for his bellies sake, and his own honor [and esteeme] he is no
Pastor [or Shepheard] but he depends on the great Whore, upon Antichrist:
and yet he supposes that he is a Pastor [or Shepherd;] but he is not known
in Paradise.

12. Christ teaches us and warns us faithfully of the Times that were to
come, wherein they shall say; Lo here is Christ, or, Lo there he is: he is in
the wilderness: he is in the chamber: go not forth, believe it not: for as
the lightening breaks forth in the East, and shines to the West, so will the
coming of the Son of man be.

13. Therefore O child of Man, see whether it be not so; where the false
Pastors [or Shepherds] without the Divine calling, always wrangle, [strive,
contend, and dispute]; and every one of them says Or, come and resort to me.
Follow me, here is Christ, there is Christ, and they one judge [and condemne]
another; and give one another over to the Devil: they abandon unity, and
forsake the love wherein the Spirit of God is Acts or works.
generated: and cause bitterness, and lead astray the simple plain people, to
think that Christ is such a wrangling Shepherd [Pastour, Priest, or Minister]
and does so grapple with his The adverse party.
Opponents, in raising war and murder, as they do; and that the Spirit of
God must needs be in such doings [which are accounted zeal for God]; and that
this must be the way to Paradise.

14. Christ said; Love one another, thereby shall men know that ye are my
Disciples: if any smite thee on one cheek, turn to him the other cheek also;
if you be persecuted for my Names sake, then rejoice, for your reward is great
in the Kingdom of Heaven: But now there is nothing taught but mere ignominy
[reproach, and revilings]: they that are dead for many hundred years ago, and
are in the Judgment of God, and some also may be in Paradise: these must be
judged, and condemned, and cursed by the wrangling Shepherds [or contentious
Priests]: Does the Holy Ghost speak by them, as they cry out, and say he does;
whereas they are still full of gall and bitterness, and nothing but
covetousness and vengeance is kindled in them, and they are far from the way
of Paradise?

15. Therefore thou child of Man, take heed, let not your ears be tickled:
When you hear the false Shepherds [or Pastours] judge and condemn the
children of Christ: that is not the voice of Christ, but of Antichrist; the way
to Paradise has clean another entrance; your heart must with all your power
and strength be directed to God [or Goodnesse]: and as God desires that all
men should be saved, so his will is that we should help to bear one another
burden [and bear with one another] and friendly, soberly, and modestly meet
one another with entreaties in the Holy Ghost, and seek with earnestness the
[salvation] and welfare of our neighbor in humility, and wish heartily that he
might be freed from vanity, and enter with us into the Into the sweet smelling
pleasant peacefulnesse.
Garden of Roses.

16. The knowledge that is in the infinite God, is various and manifold, but
every one should rejoice in the gifts and knowledge of another, and consider,
that God will give such superabundant knowledge in the Paradisicall world, of
which we have here (in the variety and difference of Gifts) but a Type.
Therefore we must not wrangle nor contend, about Gifts and knowledge; for the
Spirit gives to every one according to his Essence in the wonderful God, to
express that [Gift he hath] after his own form [or manner]; for that [forme]
in the perfection of love in Paradise, will be a very inward hearty sport of
love; where every one shall speak from his knowledge, of the great wonders of
the The holy Paradisicall bringing forth.
holy Birth.

17. O, what Bitter envy.
sharp thorns the Devil has brought into the sport of love, that we practice
such proud contention in the noble knowledge, in so much that men bind up the
Holy Ghost with Laws! What are Laws in the Kingdom of Christ, who has made
us free, that we should walk in him in the Holy Ghost? To what purpose are
they invented, but for the pleasure of Antichrist, who thereby does strut in
might and pomp, and is God on Earth? O fly from him thou child of Man, the
time is come for us to awake from the sleep of Antichrist. Christ comes with
the fair Lilly out of Paradise in the valley of Jehosaphat: it is time for
them to trim their Lamps that will go to the Marriage [of the Lamb].

The Gate [or the Exposition].
18. Paradise consists in the power [and vertue] of God: it is not
corporeal, nor Palpable.
comprehensible; but its corporeity or comprehensibility is like the Angels,
which yet is a bright, clear, visible substance, as if it were material; but
it is figured merely from the virtue [or power] where all is transparent and
shining, where also the center of the Birth is in all things, and therefore the
birth is without measure or end.

19. I give you a similitude in the mind of man, from which the thoughts are
generated, which have neither number nor end (for every thought has a center
to generate again other thoughts) and thus is the Paradise from eternity to
eternity. But being the light of God is eternal, and shines without wavering
or hinderance; therefore also in the birth there is an unchangeable substance,
wherein all things spring up in mere perfection, in great love.

20. For the spirit of knowledge intimates this, that there are fruits and
things that grow in Paradise as well as in this world, in such a form or
figure, but not in such a source [or property] and palpability. For the matter
or body of it is power, and it grows in the heavenly Soil or earth.
Limbus, its root stands in the Matrix, wherein there is neither earth nor
stone; for it is in another Principle. The fire in that [Principle] is God the
Father, and the light is God the Son: and the Air is God the Holy Ghost: and
the virtue [or power] out of which all springs, is Heaven and Paradise.

21. As we see that here out of the earth there spring plants, herbs, and
fruits, which receive their virtue from the Sun, and from the Constellation:
so the Heaven or the heavenly Limbus is in stead of the earth: and the light of
God in stead of the Sun: and the eternal Father in stead of the virtue of
the Stars; the depth of this substance, is without beginning and end, its
breadth cannot be Fathomed.
reached, there is neither years nor time, no cold nor heat: no moving of the
Air: no Sun nor Stars: no water nor fire: no fight of evil spirits, no
knowledge nor apprehension of the affliction of this world: no stony rock nor
earth: and yet a figured substance of all the creatures of this world. For all
the creatures of this world have appeared to this end, that they might be an
eternal figured similitude: not that they continue in this spirit in their
substance, no not so: All the creatures return into their Receptacle.
Either, and the spirit corrupts [or fadeth] but the figure and the shadow
continue eternally.

22. As also all words (both the evil and the good) which were here spoken by
a humane tongue, they continue standing in the shadow and figured similitude,
and the Good reach Paradise in the Holy Ghost: and the false [evill] and wicked
ones reach the abyss of Hell: and therefore it is that Christ said; Man must
give an account of every idle [or unprofitable.] word; and when the harvest
comes, then all shall be separated: for the Scripture says also; That every
ones works shall follow them, and all shall be tried by the fire of Nature: and
all false [or evill] works, words, and deeds, shall remain in the fire of
Nature (which shall be the Hell); at which, when the Devils hear it, they
tremble and quake.

23. All shall remain in the shadow, and every thing in its own source [or
property]: therefore it will be an eternal shame to the wicked, that they
shall see in the eternity all their works and words, as a menstruous cloth,
which shall stick full of the wrath of God, and shall burn, according to their
essence, and according to their, here kindled, source [or property].

24. For this world is like a field, wherein good seed is sown, into which the
enemy casts weeds [or Tares] and goes his way; which grow together until
the time of the harvest, when all the [fruit] shall be gathered, and brought
into the Barn: of which Christ also faith, That the Tares [or weeds] shall be
tied up in bundles, and cast into the fire, and the wheat shall be brought
into the barn.

The Holy Gate.
25 REason (which is gone forth with Adam out of Paradise) asks, Where is
Paradise to be had [or found]? Is it far off, or near? Or, when the souls
go into Paradise, whither do they go? Is it in this world, or without the
place of this world above the stars? Where is it that God dwells with the
Angels? And where is that desirable Native Country where there is no death?
Being there is no Sun nor Stars in it, therefore it cannot be in this
world, or else it would have been found long ago.

26 Beloved Reason: One cannot lend the Key to another to [unlock] this
[withall]: and if any have a key, he cannot open it to another; As Antichrist
boasts that he has the keys of Heaven and Hell; It is true, he may have the
keys of both in this [life] time; but he cannot open with them for any body
else: every one must unlock it with his own key, or else he cannot enter
therein; for the Holy Ghost is the key; when he has that key, then he may go
both in and out.

27. There is nothing that is nearer you, than Heaven, Paradise, and Hell, unto
which of them you are inclined, and to which of them you tend [or walke], to
that in this [life] time you are most near: you are between both: and there is
a birth between each of them, you stand in this world between both the Gates,
and you have both the births in you; God beckneth to you in the one Gate, and
calls you; and the Devil beckneth you in the other Gate, and calls you;
with whom you go, with him you enter in. The Devil has in his hand, power,
honor, pleasure, and [worldly] joy, and the root of these is death and hell
fire On the contrary, God has in his hand, crosses, persecution, misery,
poverty, ignominy, and sorrow: and the root of these is a fire also, and in
the fire [there is] a light, and in the light the virtue, and in the virtue [or
power] the Paradise, and in the Paradise [are] the Angels, and among the
Angels, joy. The Or, dim fleshly eyes.
gross eyes cannot behold it, because they are from the third Principle, and
see only by the splendor of the Sun; but when the Holy Ghost comes into
the soul, then he regenerateth it anew in God, and then it becomes a
Paradisicall child, and gets the key of Paradise, and that soul sees into
the midst thereof.

28. But the gross body cannot see into it, because it belongs not to
[Paradise]: it belongs to the Earth, and must putrify, or rot; and rise in a
new virtue [or power] (which is like Paradise) in Christ; at the end of days:
and then it also may dwell in Paradise, and not before: it must lay off the
third Principle: [viz.] this skin [fleece or covering] which father Adam and
mother Eve are gotten into, in which they supposed they should be wise when
they should wear, all the three Principles manifested on them, if they had
rather worn two hidden in them, and had stayed in the In the Principle of
light.
one, it had been good for us, of which further about the Fall.

29. Thus now in the essence of all essences, there are three several distinct
properties, which yet are not parted asunder, with one source [or property] far
from the other: but they are in one another as one only essence, and yet the
one does not comprehend the other; as these three Elements, fire, air, water,
are all three in one another, and neither of them comprehends the other: and
as one Element generateth another, and yet is not of the essence nor source [or
property] thereof: so the three Principles are in one another, and one
generateth the other: and yet none of them all comprehends the other, and
none of them is the essence [or substance] of the other.

The Depth in the Center [or Ground].
30. As has been often mentioned: God is the essence of all essences: wherein
there are two essences in one, without end, and without Original; viz. the
Eternal Light, that is, God, or the Good: and then the Eternal Darkness,
that is, the The nature or the working property.
Source: and yet there would be no source in it if the Light were not. The
Light causes that the Darkness longs after [or is in anguish for] the
Light, and this anguish is the source of the wrath of God (or the hellish fire)
wherein the Devils dwell: From whence God also calls himself an angry
Zealous [or Jealous] God; these are the two Principles, the Original of which
we know nothing of, only we know the Or, working activity.
birth (therein), the indissoluble Band: which is as follows.

31. In the Originalnesse of Darkness, there is Soreness, tartness,
sharpness, astringency, or attractivenesse.
harshnesse and austerenesse, this harshnesse causes that it be light: for
harshnesse is a desirousnesse, an attracting; and that is the first ground of
the willing [or longing] after the light, and yet it is not possible to
comprehend it: and the attracting in the will, is the [sting or] prickle, which
the desirousnesse attracteth, and the first stirring [or moving]. Now the
prickle cannot endure the attracting in the will, but resists, flies up, and
yet cannot get away from thence: for it is generated in the attracting; but
because it cannot remove from thence, nor can endure the attracting, therefore
there is a great anguish, a desirousnesse [or longing] after the light, like a
furiousness, and like a breaking whirling wheel: and the anguish in the
bitterness rises up in the Fierceness.
wrath after the light, but cannot get it, being desirous in the anxiety to
lift up it self above the light, yet does not overcome, but is infected
[impregnated or mingled] with the light, and attaineth a twinkling flash: and
as soon as the harshnesse, or the hardness, ( viz. the Darkness) gets the
same into it, it is terrified and instantly goes away into its Or, receptacle.
Either: and yet the darkness continues in the Center. And in this horror
[terrour or skreeke] the hardness or harshnesse becomes mild, soft, [supple]
and thin; and the flash is made in the bitterness, which flies up thus in the
prickle: thus the prickle discovers it self in the Mother, which so
terrifieth the mother with the flash, that she yields her self to be
overcome: and when the prickle strengthens it self in the mother, and
finds her so mild, then that is much more terrified, and loses its
[fierce, strong] wrathful propriety, and in the twinkling of an eye becomes
white, clear, and bright, and flies up very joyfully, trembling with great
delight, [lust] and desire; and the mother of harshnesse, from the light comes
to be sweet, mild, thin, and material, even water. For she loses not the
essence of the harsh condition, and therefore the essence attracteth
continually to it out of the mildness, so that out of the nothing, somewhat
comes to be: viz. water.

32. Now as is mentioned before; when the joy rises up from the mother, as the
light comes into her (which yet she cannot Or, take hold of.
comprehend) then the joy, (in the ascending will) has a center in it again,
and generateth out of it self again a very soft and pleasant source [or
fountaine] an humble, amiable source, which is immateriall; for then there can
be generated nothing that is more pleasant and full of joy [and refreshment]:
therefore here is the end of Nature: and this is the warmth or the Barm, or as
I may say the Barmhertzigkeit [the mercifulnesse]: For here Nature neither
seeks nor desires further any Or, working.
Birth more, it is the perfection.

33. Now in this pleasant source, the moving Spirit (which in the Original, in
the kindling, was the bitter aching Spirit) springs forth very joyfully
without removing: and it is the Holy Ghost: and the sweet Wellspring.
source [or fountaine] which is generated in the center from the light, it is
the Word or heart of God: and in this joy is the Paradise; and the birth is the
Eternal Trinity: in this you must dwell, if you will be in Paradise; and the
same must be borne [or generated] in you, if you will be the child of God, and
your soul must be in it, or else you cannot enjoy nor see the kingdom of God.

34. Therefore the Sure, or strong, firm.
steadfast faith and confidence thus brings us into God again: For it gets
the divine Center To the
of Regeneration in the Holy Ghost, or else there is nothing that avails:
Other matters which men do here, are but Works.
essences, which follow him in the shadow wherein he shall stand: for as there
is the birth in the holy Deity, which in the Original stands in the willing
[desiring] and aching before the light [breake forth]: so also must thou O man
(that art gone forth out of Paradise) in anguish, longing, and in a defirous
will, go into the birth again, and so thou shall attain Paradise again, and
the light of God.

35. Behold thou reasonable soul; to thee I speak, and not to the body, thou
only apprehendest it: When the birth is thus continually generated, then every
form has a center to the Regeneration; for the whole divine essence [or
substance] stands in continual and in eternal Working.
generating (but unchangeably) like the mind of Man, the thoughts being
continually generated out of the mind, and the will and desirousnesse out of
the thoughts, out of the will and desirousnesse [is] the work [generated] which
is made a substance, in the will, and then the mouth and hands, go on to
perform what was substantial in the will.

36. Thus also is the Eternal Birth, wherein the virtue [or power] is
continually generated from eternity: and out of the virtue, the light; and the
light causes and makes the virtue: and the light shines in the Eternal
Darkness; and makes in the Eternal Mind the [defiring] attracting will: so
that the will in the darkness generateth the thoughts, the lust and the
desirousnesse, and the desirousnesse is the attracting of the virtue, and in
the attracting of the virtue is the mouth that expresses the Fiat, and the
Fiat makes the Materia [or matter] and the Spirit seperateth it, and forms
it according to the thoughts.

37. Thus is the Birth (and also the first Original) of all the Creatures: and
The creation of the creatures.
it stands yet in such a Or, working.
birth in the Essence; and after such a manner, it is, out of the eternal
thoughts ( viz. the wisdom of God) by the Fiat, brought out of the Matrix; But
being come forth out of the Darkness; out of the Or, out of the created
substance.
Out-birth, out of the Center (which yet was generated in the Time, in the
will) therefore it is not eternal, but corruptible [or transitorie] like a
thought: and though it be indeed material, yet every Or, working property.
source takes its own into it self again, and makes it to be nothing
again, as it was before the beginning.

38. But now, nothing corrupts [or is transitory] but only the spirit in the
will, and Or, the body that subsisteth through the Word.
its body in the Fiat; and the figure remains eternally in the shadow: and
this figure could not thus have been brought to light and to visibility, that
it might subsist eternally; if it had not been in the Or, substance.
Essence; but now it is also uncorruptible: for in the figure there is no Or,
substance.
Essence: The center in the Or, working property.
source is broken asunder, and gone into its Either [receptacle, or aire]: and
the figure does neither good nor evil, but it continues eternally to the
[manifestation of the] deeds of wonder, and the glory of God; and for the joy
of the Angels.

39. For the third Principle of the material world shall pass away, and go
into its Either, and then the shadow of all creatures remain, also of all
growing things [vegetables or fruits] and of all that ever came to light: as
also the shadow and figure of all words and works; and that incomprehensibly:
also without understanding or knowledge, like a nothing or shadow in respect of
the light.

40. This was the unsearchable purpose of God in his will: and therefore he
thus Brought them to light in a four Elementary essence or substance.
created all things: and after this time, there will be nothing, but only
light and darkness: where the source [or property] remains in each of them
(as it has been from eternity) where the one shall not comprehend the other,
as it has also not been done from eternity.

41. Yet whether God will create any thing more after this [worlds] time; that
my spirit does not know: for it apprehends no further than [what is] in its
center wherein it lives, in which the Paradise and the kingdom of Heaven
stands: as you may read [afterwards] about the Creation of Man.

42. And so now the Angels and blessed men [will] remain in the birth of the
light: and the The spirits that were turned out of the light into darkness.
spirits of alteration out of light into the source [or torment], together with
the spirits of the wicked men) [will remaine] in the eternal Darkness, where
no recalling is to be found: for their spirits cannot go into the
corruptibility [or transitorinesse] again; they are created out of the The
divine power and virtue.
Limbus of God, out of the harsh Matrix, out of which the light of God existeth
from Eternity; and not like the Beasts out of the Or, progeneration.
Out-birth, which went forth out of the Limbus of the conceived purpose of God,
which is finite [or takes an end] and has been [or appeared] here, only that
it might be an eternal shadow and figure.

43. The eternal will is incorruptible [or intransitory] and unchangeable, [or
unalterable]: for the heart of God is generated out of it, which is the end of
the nature and of the willing; If the Or, the spirits of the working Nature.
spirits of the source [or torment] had put their imagination, and their
desiring will Into resignation.
forward into the light of meekness, into the end of Nature, they should have
continued Angels; but seeing they out of pride would feign be above the
meekness, and above the end of Nature, and awakened the center; they found
nothing more, for from Eternity there had been nothing more [than the end of
Nature]; and therefore they awakened the Or, ground of the working properties.
Center of the source [or torment] in themselves; the same they now have: and
they were thrust out of the Light into the Darkness.

44. If you be borne of God, then you [may] thus understand, God, Paradise, the
kingdom of Heaven and Hell, and the entrance in, and end of the Creatures,
[and] the creation of this world: but if not: then the veil is as well before
your eyes, as it was upon Moses. Therefore says Christ; Seck, and you shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: No son asks his Futher for
an egg, that he should give him a scorpion: Also my Father will give the Holy
Ghost to them that ask it.

45. Therefore, if you do not understand this writing, then do not as Lucifer
did, in taking the spirit of pride presently, and fall a Mocking that which you
understand not.
mocking, and deriding, and ascribe it to the Devil: but seek the humble
lowly heart of God; and that will bring a small grain of Mustard Seed (from
the Or, fruit, or growth.
Tree of Paradise) into your soul; and if you abide in patience, then a great
Tree will grow out of that [seede] as you may well think, that the like has
come to pass with this Author. For he is to be esteemed as a very silly
person, in comparison of the great learned men: But Christ says; My power is
strong in the weak: Yea Father, it has so pleased thee, to hide these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes and sucklings; and
that the wisdom of this world is foolishness in thy fight. And although now
the children of the world are wiser in their generation than the children of
light; yet their wisdom is but a corruptible substance [essence or thing] and
this wisdom continues eternally.

46. Therefore seek for the noble Pearl: it is much more precious than this
[whole] world; it will never more depart from you: and where the Pearl is,
there will your heart be also: you need not here ask any further after
Paradise, joy, and the heavenly delightfulness; seek but the Pearl, and when
you find that, then you find Paradise, and the kingdom of Heaven, and you
will be so taught, as being without it, you cannot believe.

47. It may be, you will turmoyle your self [with hard labour] and seek for it
in Art, supposing to find This deep and high wisdom.
it there: O no: you need not: it lies not therein; the Doctor that is without
this way knows it not: But if he also have found this Pearl, then he is a
Or, a more public Person, or Publicus.
person greater for the Public benefit, than I; as St Paul was above the other
Apostles, yet in one [and the same] way of gentle meekness, as becomes the
children of God. Whatsoever is wanting here, that you long after, seek further
and you will find the ground, according to the desire [or longing] of your
soul.

CHAP. X.
Of the Creation of Man, and of his soul, also of Gods Spiraculum vitae.
breathing in.
The Pleasant Gate.
1. I Have perused many Masterpieces of writing, hoping to find the The high
and deep wisdom of God.
Pearl of the ground of Man: but I could find nothing of that which my soul
lusted after. I have also found very many contrary opinions: and partly I have
found some who forbid me to search [or seeke] but I cannot know with what
ground or understanding, except it be that the blind do grutch at the eyes of
them that see. With all this my soul is become very disquiet within me, and
has been as full of [pain and] anguish as a woman at her travail, and yet
nothing was found in it, till I followed the words of Christ; when he said: You
must be borne anew, if you will see the kingdom of God: Which at first stopped
up my heart, and I supposed that such a thing could not be done in this world,
but [that it should first be done] at my departure out of this world: and then
my soul first was in anguish to the birth, and would very willingly have
tasted the Pearl: and gave it self up in this way more vehemently to the
Birth, till at last it obtained a Jewel. According to which [received Jewel] I
will write, for a memorial to my self, and for a light to them that seek.
For Christ said; None lights a Candle and puts it under a Bushel, but
sets it upon a Table, that all that are in the house may see by the light
thereof: And to this end he gives the Pearl to them that seek, that they
should impart it to the poor, for their health, as he has very earnestly
commanded.

2. Indeed Moses writes: That God made Man of the dust of the Earth: and that
is the opinion of very many: and I should also not have known how that were to
be understood, and I should not have learned it out of Moses, nor out of the
Expositions or interpretations of it.
Glosses which are made upon it: and the veil would have continued still
before my eyes, yet in great trouble. But when I found the Pearl, then I
looked Moses in the face: and found that Moses had written very right, and that
I had not rightly understood it.

3. For after the Fall God said also to Adam and Eve; Earth thou art, and to
Earth thou shall return again: and if I had not confidered the The power, or
the eternal substantiality.
Limbus (out of which the Earth was) I should have been so blind still: that
[Limbus] showed me the Ground of what Adam was before and after the Fall.

4. For no such earth or flesh as we carry about us, can subsist in the light
of God: Therefore also Christ said; None goes to Heaven, but the Son of Man
who is come from Heaven, and who is in Heaven. Thus our flesh before the Fall,
was heavenly, out of the heavenly Limbus: but when disobedience came, in the
lust of this world, to generate it self in That is, to seed it self and live
through the word of God.
another Center, then it [the flesh] became earthly: for by the biting of the
earthly Apple in the Garden of Eden; the earthly Dominion [or kingdome] took
its beginning: and the mother of the great world instantly took the Man.
little world into its power [or vertue] and made it to be of a Beastiall Or,
property.
kind, both Shape.
in form and in substance.

5. And if the soul had not been Or, in the midst, or center of it.
within it, then Adam should have continued to be an unreasonable Beast: but
being the soul out of the Limbus had been breathed into Adam by the Holy
Ghost, therefore now the Barmhortsigkeit.
mercifulness ( viz. the heart of God) must do its best again, and bring
again the Center out of the heavenly Limbus, and himself become flesh, and by
the Fiat generate the New Man in the soul, which is hidden in the Old: for the
Old belongs only to the corruptibility, and goes into its Either, and the
New remains for ever. But how this came to pass, you have the following
fundamental information of it, wherein if you be regenerated from God, you may
see the old and new man into the very heart, because you have the Pearl: but
if not; then you shall scarce see here the old Adam, and you shall not so much
as look upon the New.

6. The veil of Moses must be done away, and you must look Moses in the face,
if you will behold the New Man: and without the Pearl, you shall not be able
to take away the veil, nor know [what] Adam [was] before his Fall: for Adam
himself after the Fall, did no more know the first Man: and therefore he was
ashamed of his monstrous form [or shape] and did hide himself behind the
Trees in the Garden: for he looked on himself and saw that he had a beastiall
form: and thereupon he gat instantly beastiall members for propagation, which
the Fiat in the third Principle created on him, through the Spirit of the Great
world.

7. Men must not think that Man before his fall, had beastiall members to
propagate with, but heavenly [members] nor no Or, Gutts.
entrails; for such a stinck and [filthy] source [or property] as man has in
his body, does not belong to the holy Trinity in Paradise, but to the Earth, it
must go again into its Either; but Man was created immortal, and also holy,
like the Angels; and being he was created out of the Limbus, therefore he was
pure. Now in what manner he is, and out of what he was made it follows
further.

8. Behold when God had created the third Principle, after the fall of the
Devils, when they fell from their Glory (for they had been Angels, standing in
the place of this world) yet nevethelesse he would that his will and purpose
should stand; and therefore he would give to the place of this world an
Angelical Or, Company.
Host again, which should continue to stand for ever. And now he having
created the Creatures, whose shadows after the changing of the world should
continue for ever; yet there was no creature found that could have any joy
therein [in the shadowes] neither was there any creature found that might
manage the Beasts in this world: therefore God said; Let us make Man an Image
like unto us; which may rule over all the Beasts, and creatures upon the Earth;
and God created Man to be his Image, after the Image of God created be him.

9. Now the Question is; What is Gods Image? Behold, and consider the Deity,
and then you will light upon it: for God is not a Beastiall Man; but Man should
be the Image and similitude of God, wherein God should dwell. Now God is a
Spirit, and all the Principles are in him: and he would make such an Image, as
should have all the three Principles in him, and that is rightly a similitude
of God; And he created him, etc. Whereby Moses may be rightly understood, that
God created him, and not made him of a lump of Earth.

10. But the Limbus out of which he created him, is the Matrix of the Earth:
and the Earth was generated out of it: yet the Materia [or matter] out of which
he created him was a Massa, a Quinta Essentia, out of the Stars and Elements;
which instantly became earthly, when Man awakened the earthly center, and did
instantly belong to the earth and corruptibility.

11. But yet this Massa was out of the heavenly Matrix, which is the root of
the Or, progeneration.
Out birth, or [the roote] of the Earth. The heavenly Center ought to remain
Steadfast, chief, Master, or predominant.
fixed; and the earthly ought not to be awakened: and in this virtue [and
power] he was Lord and ruler over the Stars and Elements: and all creatures
should have stood in awe of him, and he should have been uncorruptible, he had
the virtue and properties of all manner of Creatures in him: for his virtue was
out of the virtue [or power] of the understanding. Now then he ought to have
all the three Principles, if he were to be the similitude of God, [viz.] the
Working property.
source of the Darkness, and also of the Eight, and also the Working property.
source of this world: and yet he should not live and Or, qualify.
act in all three, but in one of them only, and that in the Paradificall
[property] in which his life [quickned] arose [or did exist].

12. Now that this is demonstratively and certainly thus, [appeareth] in that
it is written: And God breathed into him the Or, breath of life.
living breath, whereby Man became a living soul. All other Creatures which
were produced out of the corruptible Substantiality, or nature.
Limbus by the Fiat, in all those, the will in the Fiat had awakened the spirit
in their Center, and every creatures spirit, went forth out of the essence and
property of its own self; and mixed afterward with the spirit of the great
world, of the Stars and Elements, and that ought not to have been in Man, his
spirit ought not to have mixed it self [or been united] with the spirit of the
Stars and Elements: the two Principles ( viz. the Darkness and the Spirit of
the Air) ought to have stood still in such a substance [as should be the Image
of God]; and therefore he breathed into him the Or, Breath of life.
living breath: understand Gods breath, that is, the Paradificall Breath or
Spirit, [viz.] the Holy Ghost; that should be the Breath of the Soul, in the
Center of the Soul: and the Spirit which went forth out of the Limbus, or out
of the Quinta Essentia (which is of the Kind, or property, or nature.
condition of the Stars) that was to have power over the fifth Essence of this
world: for Man was in one only Essence [or substance] and there was also but
one only Man that God thus created: and he could have lived for ever: and
although God had brought the Stars again into their Either, and also had
withdrawn the matrix of the Elements, and the Elements also, back into the
nothing; yet Man would have continued still. Besides, he had the Paradificall
Center in him, and he could have generated again out of himself, out of his
will, and have awakened the Center; and so should have been able, in Paradise,
to generate an Angelical Or, company.
Host, without misery or anguish, also without tearing [rending or dividing in
himselfe]: and such a Man he ought to have been, if he must continue in
Paradise, and be eternal without decay: for Paradise is holy, and in that
respect man also ought to have been holy, for the virtue [and power] of God and
Paradise consists in holiness.

The deep Gate of the Soul.
13. THe soul of Man, which God has breathed into him, is out of the Eternal
Father: yet understand it aright: there is a difference [to be observed; you
must] understand [that it is] out of his unchangeable will, out of which he
generateth his Son and Heart from Eternity, out of the divine Center, from
whence the Fiat goes forth, which makes separation; and has in The soul.
it all the Essences of the Eternal Birth: [or all manner of things which are
in the Eternal Birth:] only the Birth of the Son of God, that very Center,
which the Son of God himself is; he has not; for that Center is the end of
Nature, and not creaturely: That is the highest center of the Fire burning love
and mercy of God, the perfection [or fulnesse]: out of this center no creature
comes, but it appears [or shineth] in the Creature, viz. in Angels, and in
the souls of holy Men: for the Holy Ghost, and the Omnipotence [or
Almightinesse] which frames the Eternal will in the Eternal Father, that
goes forth out of this [Centre].

14. Now therefore the soul stands in two Gates; and touches two
Principles, viz. the Eternal Darkness, and the Eternal light of the Son of
God, as God the Father himself does. Now as God the Father Keeps or
retains.
holds his unchangeable Eternal will, to generate his heart and Son, so
the Angels and souls keep their unchangeable will in the heart of God. Thus
it [the soule] is in Heaven and in Paradise, and enjoys the inutterable joy
of God the Father which he has in the Son, and it hears the inexpressible
words of the heart of God, and rejoices at the Eternal, and also at the
created Images, which are not in essence [or substance] but in figure.

15. There the soul eats of all the words of God; for the same are the food
of its life; and it sings the Paradificall Halelujahs.
songs of Praise, concerning the pleasant fruit in Paradise, which grows in
the divine virtue [or power] of the divine Limbus, which is the food of the The
heavenly and Eternal paradisicall body.
body, for the body eats of the Limbus, out of which it is, and the soul
eats of God and of his word, out of which it is.

16. Can this be no joy and rejoicing? and should not that be a pleasant thing,
with the many thousand sorts of Angels to eat heavenly bread, and to rejoice
in their communion and fellowship? What can be possibly named which can be more
pleasant? Where there is no fear, no anger, no death: where every voice and
speech is; Salvation, power, strength, and might, be to our God: and this voice
going forth into the Eternity. Thus with this sound the divine virtue of
Paradise goes forth: and it is a mere growing in the divine Center of the
fruits in Paradise. And there is the place where St Paul heard words
inutterable, that no man can express. Such a man was Adam before his Fall: and
that you may not doubt, that this is very sure and most truly thus, look upon
the Circumstances.

17. When God had created Adam thus, he was then in Paradise in the
joyfulnesse: and this clarified [or Illustrious or shining.
brightened] Man was wholly beautiful, and full of all manner of knowledge:
and there God brought all the Beasts to him, (as to the Great Lord in this
world) that he should look upon them, and give to every one their Name,
according to their Essence and virtue; as the Spirit of every one was figured
in them. And Adam knew all what every Creature was, and he gave every one their
Name according to the quality [or working property] of their Spirit. As God can
see into the heart of all things, so could Adam also do, in which his
perfection may very well be observed.

18. And Adam and all men should have gone wholly naked, as he then went: his
clothing was the clarity [or brightnesse] in the virtue [or power]: no heat nor
cold touched him: he saw day and night [cleerly] with open eyes; in him there
was no sleep, and in his mind there was no night: for the divine virtue [and
power] was in his eyes: and he was altogether perfect: he had the The seed.
Limbus, and also the The womb.
Matrix in himself: he was no [male] or Man, nor [female or] Woman; as we in
the Resurrection shall be [neither]: though indeed the knowledge of the marks
[of distinction will] remain in the figure, but the Limbus and the Matrix not
severed, as now [they are].

19. Now Man was to dwell upon the Earth as long as it was to stand, and manage
[rule and order] the beasts, and have his delight and recreation therein: but
he ought not to have eaten any earthly fruit, wherein the corruptibility [or
transitorinesse] did stick: it is true he should have eaten, but only with the
mouth, and not into the body: for he had no [entrailes, stomach, or] guts, nor
any such hard dark flesh, it was all perfect: for there grew Paradificall fruit
for him, which afterward Or, disappeared.
went away; Because that he
when he went out of Paradise: and then God cursed the Earth, and the heavenly
Limbus was withdrawn from him, together with that fruit, and he lost Paradise,
God, and the kingdom of heaven: for before sin, when Paradise was upon the
Earth, the Earth was not bad [or evil as now it is].

20. If Adam had continued in innocence, then he should in all fruits have
eaten Paradificall fruit, and his food should have been heavenly, and his drink
[should have been] out of the mother of the heavenly water of the source [or
fountaine] of the Eternal life. The Or, the material water.
Out-birth touched him not, the element of air he had no need of in this
manner [as now]: it is true, he drew breath from the air, but he took his breath
from the incorruptibility, for he did not Or, was united.
mingle with the spirit of this world, but his Spirit ruled powerfully over the
spirit of this world, over the Stars, and over the Sun and Moon, and over
the Elements.

21. This must be Adams condition: and thus he was a true and right Image and
similitude of God: he had no such hard bones in his flesh [as we now have] but
they were strength, and such [a kind of] virtue: also his blood was not out of
the tincture of the Or, watery Mother.
aquastrish Matrix, but it was out of the heavenly Matrix. In brief, it was
altogether heavenly, as we shall appear [and be] at the day of the
Resurrection. For the purpose of God stands, the first image must return and
come again and continue in Paradise: and seeing it could be done in no other
form, [way, or manner], nor [that which was lost] be restored again,
therefore God would rather spend his own heart; his eternal will is
unchangeable, that must stand.

22. And when God had created Man, then he planted a Garden in Eden toward the
East, and placed him therein: and caused to spring up and grow all manner of
fruit, delightful to behold, and all sorts of Trees good to eat of: and the
Tree of Life in the midst of the Garden, and the Tree of knowledge of Good and
Evil: and when God had placed Man in the Garden, he commanded him, and said;
You shall eat of every Tree in the Garden, but of the Tree of knowledge of
Good and Evil thou shall not eat; for in the day that thou eatest thereof
thou shall die the Death. Here the veil lies upon Moses; and they must be
sharp [or piercing] Eyes that can behold the face of Moses: God has not
without cause let Moses write this so very mystically [hiddenly and obscurely].

23. For what needed God to care so much for the biting of an Apple, as to
destroy so fair a creature for it? Does he not forgive many greater sins?
And he so exceedingly loved Man, that he spared not his only Son, but let
him become Man, and gave him unto Death: and could he not forgive a small
sin? seeing he was omniscient, [or knew all things] therefore why did he let
the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil grow?

24. Reason judges thus, that if God would not have had it so, Adam should not
have eaten of it, or else he should not have forbidden that Tree only, sure he
made it for a stumbling stock to him. Thus the Reason of one [sort] or party
judges. The Reason of the other party will mend the matter, which is indeed
somewhat the wiser, but not much: They say, God tempted Adam, [to try] whether
he would continue in his obedience or not: and when he became disobedient, then
God threw mighty anger and wrath upon him, and cursed him to Death; and that
his wrath could not be quenched, except he be reconciled in such a manner. This
Reason of this party, makes God to be a mere unmercifulness, like an evil
man of this world, who yet will be reconciled, when he has once revenged
himself sufficiently; and this Reason has no knowledge at all of God, nor of
Paradise.

25. O beloved soul! it is a very For which the Curse came.
heavy business, at which the very Heavens might well stand amazed: in this
Temptation there is a very great matter hidden in Moses, which the
unenlightened soul understands not; God did not regard a bit of an Apple or
Pear, to punish so fair a Creature for it: The punishment comes not from his
hand, but from the Or, Macrocosme.
Spiritus majoris mundi from the Spirit of the great World, from the third
Principle. God intended most mercifully toward Man, and therefore he spared
not his own heart, but let it become Man, that he might deliver Man again. You
ought not to have such thoughts. God is love, and the Good, in him is no angry
thought, and Man's punishment was not but from himself, as you shall [finde or]
read in its due place.

The secret Gate of the Temptation of Man.
26. Since many Questions fall to be in this place (for the mind of Man
seeks after its native Country again, out of which it is wandered, and
would return again home to the Eternal Rest) and since it is permitted to
me in my knowledge; I will therefore set down the deep Ground of the Fall,
wherein Men may look upon the eyes of Moses: If you be borne of God, then it
may well be apprehended by you, but the unenlightened mind cannot hit the
mark: for if the mind desires to see what is in a house, it must then be
within that house; for from hear say, without seeing it ones self, there is
always doubting whether a thing be as is related: But what the eye sees, and
the mind knows, that is believed perfectly, for [the eye and the minde]
apprehends it.

27. The mind searches, wherefore man must be tempted, whereas God had
created him perfect: and seeing God is omniscient, [and knows all things] the
mind therefore always lays the blame upon God: and so do the Devils also:
for the mind says, If the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil had not sprung
up, then Adam had not fallen.

28. O beloved Reason! If you understand no more than so, then shut up the eyes
[of your minde] quite, and search not; continue under patience in hope, and let
God alone [he will do well enough] or else you will fall into the greatest
unquietness, and the Devil will drive you into despair, who continually
[pretendeth or] gives it forth The Devil says it in the mind.
, that God did will evil, [and that] he wills not that all men should be
saved, and therefore he created the Tree of Anger.

29. Beloved Mind, put such thoughts away from thee, or else thou will make of
the kind and loving God, an unmercifull and hostile will, but leave off such
thoughts of God, and consider thy self what thou art: in thy self thou shall
find the Tree of the Temptation, and also the will to have it, which made it
spring up: yea the source [lust or quality] whence it sprung up, stands in
thee, and not in God: [this must be understood] that when we will speak of the
pure Deity (which manifests it self in the second Principle through the
heart of God) it is thus and not otherwise.

30. But when we consider [or meane] the original of the first Principle,
then we find the [nature, property, or] species of the Tree, and also the
will to the Tree: we find there the abyss of Hell and of anger [and wrath]:
and moreover we find the will of all the Devils: we find the envious will of
all the Creatures of this world, wherefore they all are the enemies one of
another, and do hate, bite, worry, kill and devour one another. My beloved
Reason, here I will show you the Tree of the Temptation, and you shall look
Moses in the face: keep but your mind Fixed, or upon it.
steadfast, that you may apprehend it.

31. I have often given you to understand in this book already what the Essence
of all Essences is: but because it is most of all highly necessary in this
place to know the Ground [thereof] therefore I will Or, explain.
set you it down all at large, and very fundamentally, so that you shall know
it in your self: yea you shall understand it in all Creatures, and in all
things that are, or that you look upon, or at any time may possibly think on,
all these shall be witness. I can bring heaven and earth, also the Sun,
Stars, and Elements for a witness, and that not in bare words and promises
only, but it shall be set before you [very convincingly and] very powerfully
in their virtue and essence: and you have no virtue [or power, or faculty] in
your body, that shall not [convince you and] witness against you; do but not
suffer the lying Spirit, the old Serpent to darken your mind, who is the
inventor of a thousand Or, sleights, shifts, fetches, arts.
tricks.

32. When he sees that he cannot catch [or overcome] Man by making him Or,
Despair.
doubtful of the mercy of God; then he makes him careless, so that he
accounts all as nothing: he makes his mind very drowsy, so that he
esteems very lightly of himself, as if all were not worth the looking after:
let things be as they will, he will not break his heart [or trouble his head]
with it. Let the Priest, Minister, or learned, who take upon them cura Animarum.
Pope look after it, they must answer for it. Thus the mind carelessly passes
it over, like a whirlwinde or stream of water; concerning which Christ said;
The Devil steals the Word out of their hearts, that they do not apprehend
it, nor believe it, that they might be saved; so that it takes no root.

33. Or else if the Pearl should grow, and the Lilly bud forth; The Devil.
he should be revealed, and then every one would fly from him, and he should
stand in great shame. This Trade he has driven ever since the beginning of the
world: and though he resist never so vehemently yet a Lilly shall grow in his
supposed Kingdom, whose smell reaches into the Paradise of God, in spite of
all his raging and tyranny; this the Spirit of God does witness.

34. Behold thou child of Man, if thou will easily draw near to this
knowledge, take but thy mind before thee, and consider it, and therein thou will find all. You know that out of it proceeds joy and sorrow, laughter and
weeping, hope and doubting, wrath and love, lust to a thing, and hate of the
thing: you find therein wrath and malice, also love, meekness, and well-doing.

35. Now the Question is, May not the mind stand in one only will, ( viz. in
mere love) like God himself? Here sticks the mark, the ground, and the
knowledge: behold, if the will were in one only Essence, then the mind would
also have but one quality that could give the will to be so, and it should be
an immovable thing, which should always lie still, and should do no more but
that one thing always: in it there would be no joy, no knowledge, also no art
or skill of any thing at all, and there would be no wisdom in it: also if the
quality were nor in infinitum, it would be altogether a Nothing, and there
would be no mind nor will to any thing at all.

36. Therefore it cannot be said, that the total God in all the three
Principles, is in one only will and essence: there is a distinction [or
difference to be observed]: though indeed the first and the third Principle be
not called God, neither are they God, and yet are his essence [or substance],
out of which from eternity the light and heart of God is always generated, and
it is one essence [or being] as body and soul in Man are.

37. Therefore now if the Eternal mind were not, out of which the Eternal
will goes forth, then there would be no God. But now therefore there is an
Eternal mind, which generateth the Eternal will, and the Eternal will
generateth the Eternal heart of God, and the heart generateth the light, and
the light the virtue, and the virtue the Spirit, and this is the Almighty God
which is one unchangeable will. For if the mind did no more generate the will,
then the will would also not generate the heart, and all would be a nothing.
But seeing now that the mind thus generateth the will, and the will the heart,
and the heart the light, and the light the virtue, and the virtue the Spirit,
therefore now the Spirit again generateth the mind: for it has the virtue,
and the virtue is the heart: and it is an indissoluble Band.

The Depth.
38. BEhold now, the mind is in the Darkness, and it conceives its will to
the light, to generate it: or else there would be no will, nor yet any Working.
Birth: this mind stands in anguish, and in a longing [or is in labour]; and
this longing is the will, and the will conceives the virtue: and the virtue
fulfilleth [satisfieth or impregnateth] the mind, thus the kingdom of God
consists in the virtue [or in power] which is God the Father, and the light
makes the virtue longing to [be] the will, that is God the Son, for in the
virtue the light is continually generated from Eternity, and in the light, out
of the virtue goes the Holy Ghost forth, which generateth again in the dark
mind the will of the Eternal Essence.

39. Now behold dear soul, that is the Deity, and that comprehends in it
the second or the middlemost Principle. Therefore God is only Good, the love,
the light, the virtue [or power]. Now consider, if the mind did not stand in
the darkness, there would no such eternal wisdom and skill be: for the
anguish in the will to generate, stands therein: and the anguish is the
quality: and the quality is the Plurality.
multiplicity [or variety] and makes the mind, and the mind again makes
the multiplicity [or plurality].

40. Now dear soul, see all over round about you, in your self and in all
things, what find you therein? you find nothing else but the anguish, and in
the anguish the quality, and in the quality the mind, and in the mind the
will to grow and generate, and in the will the virtue [or Faculty or ability.
power], and in the virtue the light, and in the light its forth-driving
Spirit: which makes again a will to generate a twig [bud or branch] out of
the Tree like it self; and this I call in my Book the Centrum [the Centre]
where the generated will becomes an Essence [or substance] and generateth now
again such [another] Essence: for thus is the Mother of the Genetrix.

41. Now the anguish has the first Principle under its power.
in possession; seeing it stands in the Darkness, it is another essence,
than the essence in the light is, where there is nothing else but mere love
and meekness, where no source [or torment] is discovered, and the quality
which is generated in the Center of the Light, is now no quality, but the
eternal skill and wisdom, of whatsoever was in the anguish before the Light
[brake forth]: this wisdom and skill, now always comes to help the
conceived will in the anguish, and makes in it self again the Center to the
Birth, that so the sprout may generate it self in the quality, viz. the
virtue, and out of the virtue the fire, and out of the fire the Spirit, and the
Spirit makes in the fire the virtue again, that thus there [may] be an
Indissoluble Band: and out of this mind, which stands in the darkness, God
generated the Angels, which are flames of fire, yet Or, thoroughly enlightened.
shining through and through with the divine light: for in this mind a Spirit
can and may be generated, and not else: for before it in the heart and light of
God, there can no Spirit be generated, for the heart of God is the end of
Nature, and it has no quality: therefore also nothing comes out of it more,
but it continues unchangeably in the Eternity, and it shines in the mind of
the quality of the darkness, and the darkness cannot comprehend it.

42. Now therefore in the anguishing mind of the darkness, is the
inexpressible [or unutterable] source [quall, or rising property] from whence
the name quality, existeth, as from many qualls [or sources, or Wells] into one
quall [or source] and out of these many sources [running] into one source,
springs forth the plurality of skill, so that there is a multiplicity, [or
variety of it]: and the Spirit of God out of the light, comes to help every
skill* [or science, or knowledge], and in every skill of the sources [or quals]
in the quality (by its kind Infusion.
infecting of the love) it makes again a center and in the center a source
[or quall, or spring] is generated again, as a twig out of a Tree, where
again there springs forth a mind in the anguish: and the Spirit of Love
with its infecting [or infusing] of kindness makes all, every thought in the
will, and [that] essentially.

43. For the will in the Center climeth aloft till it generateth the fire, and
in the fire is the substance and essentiality generated: for it is the spirit
thereof, and the end of the will in the dark mind, and there can be nothing
higher generated in the anguish than the fire, for it is the end of nature, and
it generateth again the anguish and the source, as may be perceived. Now
therefore the dark anguishing [aking or anxious] mind has not only one
substance, viz. one being [or essence] in it self, but many; or else no
quality could be generated, and yet it is truly but one [being, essence, or]
substance, and not many.

44. Thou dear soul, thus says the high Spirit to thee; yield up thy mind
here, and I will show it thee. Behold, what does comprehend thy will, or
wherein consists thy life? If thou say, in water and flesh: No, it
consists in the fire, in the warmth: if the warmth were not, then thy body
would be stiff [with cold], and the water would dry away; therefore the mind
and the life consists in the fire.

45. But what is the fire? First, there is the Darkness, the Hardness, the
eternal cold, and the Dryness, where there is nothing else but an eternal
hunger. Then how comes the fire to be? Dear soul; here [in the fires coming
to be] the Spirit of God ( viz. the eternal Light) comes to help the hunger;
for the hunger existeth also from the Light: because the divine virtue
beholds it self in the darkness, therefore the darkness is desirous [and
longing] after the Light: and the desirousnesse is the will.

46. Now the will or the desirousnesse in the dryness cannot Or, attain.
reach the Light: and therein consists the anguish in the will [longing]
after the Light; and the anguish is attractive, and in the attracting is the
woe, and the woe makes the anguish greater; so that the anguish in the
Soreness, or astringency.
harshnesse attracteth much more, and this attracting in the woe, is the bitter
[sting or] prickle, or the bitterness of the woe: and the anguish reaches after
the [sting or] prickle, with attracting, and yet cannot Or, catch it.
comprehend it, because it resists, and the more the anguish attracteth, the
more the [sting or] prickle raveth and rages.

27. Now therefore the anguish, bitterness, and woe in the [sting or] prickle,
are like a brimstone spirit, and all spirits in Nature are Brimstone: they
[torment or] cause the anguish in one another, till that the light of God
comes to help them; and then there comes to be a flash, and there is its end,
for it can clime no higher in nature, and this is the fire, which becomes
shining in the flash, in the soul, and also in the mind. For the soul
reaches the virtue of the light, which does put it into meekness; and in this
world it is the burning fire: in Hell it is immateriall, and there it is the
Eternal fire, which burns in the Or, property.
quality.

48. Now thou dear soul! here you see in a Glass, how very near God is to
us, and that he himself is the heart of all things, and gives to all virtue,
[power] and life. Here Lucifer was very Careless, inconsiderate.
heedlesse, and became so very proud: that when this Brimstone Spirit in the
will of the mind of God was created, then he would feign have fline out above
the end of nature, and would drive the fire out above the meekness, he would
feign have had all burn in the fire, he would have ruled [or domineered]: the
sparks of fire in the Brimstone Spirit, did elevate themselves too high: and
these Spirits pleased not the Creator, or the Spirit in the Fiat, and
[therefore] were not [established] Angels, although in the first mind (when
the Center was opened to the [creation of the] Spirits) he came to help them,
and [ Or, reflected on them.
beheld] them as well as the other Angels: but they indeed generated a fiery
will, when they should have opened their Center to the regeneration of their
minds, and so should have generated an Angelical will.

49. The first will, out of which they were created, that was Gods, and that
made them good, and the second will, which they (as obedient [children]) should
have generated out of their Center in meekness, that was evil: and therefore
the The Generator for the will which he generated.
Father for generating such a child, was thrust out from the virtue of God,
and so he spoiled the Angelical kingdom, and remained in the source of the
fire: and because the The will that was borne out of their mind.
evil child of their mind did turn away from the meekness, therefore they
Or, came to be
attained what they desired. For the mind is the God and the Creator of the
will, that is free from the Eternal Nature, and therefore what it generateth
to its self, that it has.

50. Now if you ask; Wherefore came not the Love of God to help them again?
No, friend, their mind had elevated it self, even to the end of Nature, and
it would feign have gone out above the Light of God: their mind was become a
kindled source of fire in the fierce wrath, the meekness of God cannot enter
into it, the Brimstone Spirit burns eternally: in this manner he is an enemy
to God, he cannot be helped: for the Center is burning in the flash: his will
is still, that he would feign go out above the meekness of God; neither can
he get [frame, or create] any other [will], for his source has revealed the
end of Nature in the fire, and he remains an unquenchable source of fire: the
heart of God in the meekness, and the Principle of God, is close shut up from
him, and that even to Eternity.

51. To Conclude, God will have no fiery Spirit in Paradise, they must remain
in the first Principle, in the Eternal Darkness, if they had continued as God
had created them (when the meekness shined [or appeared] to them) and had put
the Center of their minds into the meekness, then the light of God should for
ever have Or, thoroughly enlightened them.
shined through them, and they should have eaten of the Verbum Domini [the Word
of the Lord]: and they should with the root of their Original, have stood in
the first Principle, like God the Father himself, and with the will in the
mind [they should have stood] in the second Principle: thus they should have
had a Paradisicall source [quality or property] and an Angelical will: and
they should have been friendly in the Or, heavenly Earth.
Limbus of Heaven, and in the love of God.

CHAP. XI.
Of all Circumstances of the Temptation.
1. NOw the Highest Question is, What that is, which caused the mind of the
Devil, so to elevate it self, and that so great a number of them are fallen
in the high mindedness [or pride]? Behold, when God set the Fiat in the will,
and would create Angels, then the Spirit first separated all qualities, after
that manner, as now you see there are many kinds of Stars, and so the Fiat
created them [severall]: Then there were created the Princely [Angels] and the
Throne-Angels, according to every Quality, (as, hard, sour, bitter, cold,
fierce, soft, and so forth In the springing essential powers.
in the Essences, till to the end of Nature) out of the source of the fire, a
similitude whereof you have in the Stars, how different they are.

2. Now the Thrones and Princely Angels, are every one of them a great
fountain: as you may perceive the Sun is, in respect of the Stars, as also
in the blossoming Earth. The great fountain vein [or Well-spring] in the
source, was in the time of the Fiat in the dark mind, the Prince or
Throne-Angel; There out of each fountain came forth again a Center in many
thousand thousands; for the Spirit in the Fiat manifested it self in the
nature of the Darkness, after the manner of the Eternal Wisdom: Thus the
manifold various properties that were in the whole nature, went forth out of
one only Fountain, according to the ability of the eternal wisdom of God;
or as I may best render it to be understood by a similitude; as if one Princely
Angel had generated out of himself, at one time, many Angels: whereas yet the
Prince does not generate them, but the Essences: and the qualities go forth
with the Center in every Essence, from the Princely Angels, and the Spirit
created them By.
with the Fiat, and they continue standing essentially: Therefore every Or,
Company.
Host (which proceeded out of one [and the same] fountain) gat a will in the
same fountain which was their Prince (as you see, how the Stars give all
their will into the virtue [or power] of the Sun) of this, much must not be
said to my The learned in Reason.
Master in Arts, he holds it impossible to know such things, and yet in God
all things are possible, and to him a thousand years are as one day.

3. Now of these Princely Angels One is fallen (for he stood in the fourth
form of the Matrix of the Genetrix in the dark mind, in that place in the
mind where the flash of fire takes its original) with his whole host that
was proceeded from him: Thus the fiery kind [condition or property] moved him
to go above the end of Nature, ( viz. above the heart of God) that kind stood
so Or, fiercely.
hard kindled in him.

4. For as God said to the Matrix of the Earth, Let there come forth all kinds
of Beasts: and the Fiat created Beasts out of all the Essences: and first
divided the Matrix, and after that, the essences and qualities; and then he
created them out of the divided Matrix, male and female. But because the
creatures were material, therefore every kind [species or generation] must
thus propagate it self from every Essence: but with the Angels not so: but
[their propagation was] sudden and swift, as Gods thoughts are, so were they.

5. But this is the Ground: every quality or quall [or source, would be
creaturely, and the fiery [property] elevated it self too mightily, into which
Lucifer had brought Or, set his delight or pleasure in it.
his will; and so it went with Adam as to the Tempting Tree; as it is written:
And God suffered all sorts of Trees to spring up in the Garden of Eden: and in
the midst of the Garden, the Tree of Life, and of the knowledge of Good and
Evil.

6. Moses says: God suffered to spring up out of the Earth, all sorts of Trees
pleasant to look upon, and good for food. But here is the veil in Moses, and
yet in the Word it is bright, clear, and manifest, that the fruits were
pleasant to behold, and good to eat, wherein there was no death, wrath, or
Corruption.
corruptibility, but [it was] Paradisicall fruit, of which Adam could live in
clarity [or brightnesse] in the will of God, and in his love in perfection in
Eternity, only the Death stuck in the Tree of knowledge of good aod evil,
that only was able to bring man into another Image.

7. Now we must needs clearly [conceive or] think, that the Paradisicall
fruit which was Good, was not so very earthly, for (as Moses himself says;)
they were of two sorts; the one good to eat, and pleasant to behold, and the
other had the death and corruptibility in it: in the Paradisicall fruit, there
was no death nor corruptibility: for if there had been any death or
corruptibility therein, then Adam had eaten death in all the fruits: but seeing
there was no death therein, therefore the fruit could not be so altogether
earthly; though indeed it sprung out of the earth, yet the divine virtue of the
second Principle was imprinted therein, and yet they were truly in the third
Principle, grown [or sprung] out of the earth, which God cursed as to the
earthly food, that no Paradisicall fruit did grow any more out of the earth.

8. Besides, if Adam had eaten earthly fruit, he must then have eaten it into
his body, and have had gut [or entrailes]: and how could such a stinck [and
dung] (as we now carry in the body) have been in Paradise in the holiness of
God? Moreover, he should by eating earthly food, have eaten of the fruit of the
Stars and Elements, which would presently have infected [or qualified] in
him, as was done in the fall: also so his fear over all the beasts would have
ceased. For the essences of the Beasts would presently have been like the
humane essences in virtue [and power]; and Or, the stronger would have
domineered over the weaker.
one would have domineered more strongly over the other.

9. Therefore it was clean otherwise with Adam: he was a heavenly Paradisicall
Man, he should have eaten of the heavenly Paradisicall fruit, and in the virtue
[or power] of that [fruit] he should have ruled over all Beasts [or living
creatures] also over the Stars and Elements: no cold nor heat should have
touched him; or else God would not have created him so naked, but like all
Beasts with a rough [or hairy] skin [or hide].

10. But the Question is; Wherefore grew the earthly Tree of the knowledge of
good and evil? for if that had not been, Adam had not eaten of it; or
wherefore must Adam be Tempted? Hearken, Ask your mind about it, wherefore it
so suddenly generateth and conceives in it self a thought of anger, and then
of love? Do thou say [it cometh] from the hearing and seeing of a thing? Yes
that is true, this God also knew very well; and therefore he must be tempted.
For the Center of the mind is free, and it generateth the will, from hearing
and seeing, out of which the imagination and lust does arise.

11. Seeing Adam was created an image and whole similitude of God, and had all
three Principles in him like God himself, therefore also his mind and
imagination should merely have looked into the heart of God, and should have
set his lust and [desire or] will thereon: and as he was a Lord over all, and
that his mind was a threefold Spirit, in three Principles, in one only
Essence, so his Spirit also, and the will in the Spirit, should have stood open
[or free] in one only Essence, viz. in the Paradisicall heavenly [essence]:
and his mind and soul should have eaten of the heart of God, and his body
[should have eaten] of the heavenly Limbus.

12. But seeing the heavenly Or, virtue, or power.
Limbus was manifested through the earthly, and was in the fruit in one only
Essence; and Adam so too, therefore it behoved Adam (having received a living
soul our of the first Principle, and breathed in from the Holy Ghost, and
enlightened from the light of God standing in the second Principle) not to
reach after the earthly Matrix.

13. Therefore God here also gave him the Command, not to lust after the
earthly Matrix, nor after her fruit, which stood in the corruptibility, and
transitorinesse, but the Spirit of Man Not in the corruptibility.
not. He should eat of the fruit, but no otherwise than of the Paradisicall
kind and property; [and] not of the earthly Essences. For the Paradisicall
Essences had imprinted themselves in all fruits, therein they were very good to
eat of, after an Angelical manner, and also pleasant to behold or corporeal,
as Moses also says.

Now it may be asked, What then was properly the Tempting in Adam?

The Gate of Good and Evil.
14. We have a very powerful testimony hereof, and it is known in Nature,
and in all her children, in the Stars and Elements, in the Earth, Stones, and
Metalls; especially in the living creatures, as you see, how they are evil and
good, viz. lovely creatures, and also venomous evil beasts; as Toads, Adders,
and Serpents, [or Wormes]: so also there is poison and malice in every sort of
Or, living thing.
life of the third Principle: and the [fiercenesse] or strongnesse must be in
Nature, or else all were a Death and a Nothing.

The Depth in the Center.
15. As is mentioned before, the eternal mind stands thus Or, unknown.
in the Darkness, and vexes it self, and longs after the light, to
generate that, and the anguish is the source, and the source has in it many
forms, till that it reaches the fire in its substance, viz. [it hath] bitter,
sour, hard, cold, strong, darting forth, or flashing, in the root of it self
sticks the joy and pain alike; viz. when it comes to the root of the fite,
and can reach the light, then out of the wrath [or sternnesse] comes the great
joy: for the light puts the stern form into great meekness: on the
contrary, that form which comes only to the root of the fire, that
continues in the Or, grimnesse, fierceness.
wrath.

16. As we are to know, that when God would manifest the Eternal Mind in the
Darkness, in the third Principle Or, by.
with this world, then first all forms in the first Principle till fire, were
manifested, and that form now which comprehended the light, that became
Angelical and Paradisicall; but that which comprehended not the light, that
remained to be wrathful, murtherous, sour and evil, every one in its own
form and essence: for every form desired also to be manifested; for it was
the will of the Eternal Essence to manifest it, self. But now one form was
not able to manifest it self alone in the Eternal Birth, for the one is the
member of the other, and the one without the other would not be.

17. Therefore the Eternal Word, or heart of God, wrought thus in the dark and
spiritual Matrix (which in it self, in the Originalnesse without the light
would be [as it were] dumb [or senslesse]) and has generated a corporeal and
palpable [or comprehensible] similitude of its essence, in which all the forms
were brought forth out of the Eternal formation, and brought into Essence: for
out of the spiritual form, the corporeal [forme] is generated, and the
eternal Word has created it by the Fiat, to stand thus.

18. Now then, out of these forms, out of the Matrix of the earth, by the
Fiat, in the Word, went forth all the Creatures of this world: also Trees,
herbs, and grass, every one according to its kind: as also Worms, evil and
good, as every form in the Matrix of the Genetrix had their original; and
thus it was also with the fruits in the Paradise of this world in the Garden of
Eden: when the Word was spoken, let there come forth all sorts of Trees and
herbs; then out of all forms [or the Genetrix or womb] Trees and herbs came
forth and grew, which were altogether good and pleasant: for the word in the
Fiat, had Imaged or Imagined.
imprinted it self in all the forms.

19. But then the Darkness and Quall [source or paine] were in the midst in
the Center, wherein Death, the wrathfulnesse, decay, and the corruptibility did
stick: and if that had not been, this world would have stood for ever, and Adam
should not have been tempted: The darkness, and source, or pain.
they also like a Mors.
Death, (or a corrupting worm of the Quall [or source]) did work together, and
generated the Tree of Good and Evil in the midst of its seat [or place]
because Death stuck in the midst of the Center, by which this world shall be
kindled in the fire at the end of the days. And this Quall [or source] is even
the anger of God, which by the heart or light of God in the Eternal Father, is
continually put into the meekness: and therefore the Word or heart of God is
called the Eternal Mercifulness of the Father.

20. Seeing then all the forms of the Eternal Nature were to come forth, [it
is so come to passe] as you may see in Toads, Adders, Worms, and evil Beasts:
for that is the form which sticks in the midst in the birth of all
Creatures, viz. the poison [venome] or Brimstone Spirit; as we see that all
Creatures have poison and gall: and the life of the Creatures sticks in the
power [or might] of it [the poyson]: as you may find before in this book in
all the Chapters, how the Eternal Nature takes its Original, how it works,
and how [or after what manner] its Essence [being or substance] is.

21. Now thus the Tree of the strong [tartnesse or wrath] (which is in the
midst of Nature) grew also in the midst of the Garden of Eden; and was
(according to the ability of its own form, which it has from the eternal
quality, in the Originalnesse) the greatest and the mightiest [Tree]. And here
it may be seen very clearly, that God would have preserved and had Man to be
in Paradise, for he forbad him this Tree, and caused other fruit enough
[besides] to grow in the forms and Essences.

The Gate of the Tempting.
22. St Paul says; God foresaw [or elected] Man, before the ground [or
foundation] of the world was laid: Here we find the ground so very [plaine or]
fair, that we have a delight to write on, and to seek the Wisdom.
Pearl; for behold, in the eternal wisdom of God, before the Creation of the
world, the fall of the Devils, and also of Man, appeared in the Eternal
Matrix, and was seen; for the Eternal Word in the Eternal Light knew very
well, that if it came to manifest the fountain of the Eternal Birth, that
then every form should break forth: yet it was not the will of the love in
the word of the Light, that the forms of the tart [soure strong wrath] should
elevate themselves above the meekness; but it had such a mighty [or potent]
form, that it is so come to pass.

23. Therefore the Devil also (in regard of the might of the tart [strong
fierce wrath] was called a Prince of this world in the [angry strong]
fierceness, of which you shall find [more] about the Fall. And therefore God
created but one Man: for God would that Man should continue in Paradise, and
live eternally: and on the contrary, the sternnesse [or strong fierce wrath]
would tempt him [to trie] whether he would put his imagination and will wholly
into the heart of God, and into Paradise, wherein he was.

24. And because Adam was drawn forth out of the strong [sterne soure]
Essences, therefore he must be tempted [to try] whether his Essences (out of
which his imagination and lust proceeded) could stand in the heavenly quality,
or whether he would eat of the Verbum Domini, [the Word of the Lord] and [to
try] which essence, (whether the Paradisicall, or the strong [fierce wrathfull]
would overcome in Adam.

25. And this was the purpose of God, therefore to create but one Man, that the
same might be tempted, [and tried] how he would stand, and that upon his Fall
he might the better be helped: and the heart of God did before the foundation
of the world in his love fore-intend [or prepurpose] to come to help [him]; and
when no other remedy could do it, the heart of God himself would become Man,
and regenerate Man again.

26. For Man is not fallen of strong [fierce angry] pride, like the Devil; but
his earthly Essences have overcome his Paradisicall Essences, and brought them
into the earthly lust, and in that regard he has Grace again bestowed upon
him.

The highest, strongest, and the mightiest Gate of the Temptation in Adam.
27. Here I will faithfully admonish the Reader, deeply to consider Moses, for
Not only in this Chapter, but in all these Writ^ngs.
here under the veil of Moses, he may look upon the face of Moses: Also he
may see the second Adam in the Or, womb, or lap.
love of the Virgin: Also he may see him in his Temptation, and upon the
Cross; as also in Death; and lastly, in the virtue of the Resurrection at the
right hand of God: Also you may see Moses on Mount Sinai; and lastly, the
Clarification [or Transfiguration] of Christ, Moses and Elias on Mount Thabor:
Also you may see herein the whole Scripture of the Old and New Testament; Also
you find herein all the Prophets from the beginning of the world hitherto, and
all the might and power of all Tyrants, wherefore things have gone so, and must
still go [as they doe]; Lastly, you find the Golden Gate of the Omnipotence,
[or Allmightinesse], and of the great power in the love and humility: and
wherefore the children of God must still be tempted: and wherefore the noble
grain of Mustard seed must grow in storms, crosses, and misery, and wherefore
it cannot be otherwise: Also herein you find the Essence of all Essences.

28. And it is the Gate of the Lilly, concerning which the Spirit witnesses,
that it will Shortly.
hereafter grow in the wrathful Tree, and when it grows it will bring us
true knowledge, by its pleasant and fragrant smell, in the holy Trinity: by
which smell Antichrist will be stifled, Note, we must yet conceal the
Exposition of this verse.
and the Tree of the stern anger be broken down: and the Beast enraged, which
has its might and strength from the Tree, for a time till it be dry and fiery,
because it can get no more sap from the wrathful Tree that is broken down:
and then it will smell [or lift up it selfe] in the [fierce, tart] Or, Rage.
wrath against the Tree and the Lilly, till the Tree (of which the Beast did
eat and was strong) destroy the Beast, and his power remain in the fire of
the Originalnesse. And then all Doors [will] stand open in the great Tree of
Nature, and the Priest Aaron [will] give his Garment and fair Ornament to the
Lamb, that was slain and is [alive] again.

29. Reader, who love God; hereby it will be shown thee, that the great
mysteries Or, are imparted to us.
do meet us, concerning the hidden things that were in Adam before his fall,
and that yet there are much greater after his fall, when he was as it were
dead, and yet living: and here is shown the Or, continual working.
Birth of the Eternal Essence, and wherefore it still must have thus been,
that Adam must have been tempted, and wherefore it could not have been
otherwise: though Reason continually Speaks against it.
gaine-sayeth it, and alleges Gods Omnipotency, that it was in him to hinder,
or suffer the doing of it.

30. Beloved Reason, leave off your thoughts, for with these thoughts and
conceits, you know not God, nor the Eternity; then how will you with such
thoughts, know the similitude which God generated out of the Eternal Mind? it
has here been sundry times mentioned to you, that the mind (which yet is the
greatest Essence in Man) does not stand in a In a working property, but is free.
Quall [or source].

31. If we think of [or consider] the incliner, what that was which inclined
and drew Adam to that which was forbidden, that he should lust contrary to the
Command of God, whereas he was yet in great Perfection; then we shall find
the Eternal Mind, out of which Adam was also created: and that because he was
an Extract out of the Eternal mind, out of all Essences of all the three
Principles, therefore he must be tempted [to trie] whether he could stand in
Paradise: for the heart of God desired that he should continue in Paradise, but
now he could not continue in Paradise, except he did eat Paradisicall fruit;
therefore now his heart should have been wholly Given up to God.
inclined toward God: and so he should have lived in the divine Center, and
God had wrought in him.

32. Now what opposed him, or what drew him from Paradise to disobedience, so
that he passed into another Image [forme or condition]? Behold thou child of
Man, there was a threefold strife in Adam, without Adam, and in all whatsoever
Adam beheld? Thou will say, What was it? It was the three Principles; first,
the Kingdom of Hell, the power of the wrath; and secondly, the Kingdom of
this world, with the Stars and Elements; and thirdly, the Kingdom of
Paradise, that desired to have him.

33. Now these three Kingdoms were in Adam, and also Extra.
without him: and in the The essential virtues or powers that went forth from
the three Principles.
Essences there was a mighty strife, all drew as well in Adam, as without Adam,
and would feign have him: for he was a Great Lord [come] out of all the [powers
or] virtues of Nature: the heart of God desired to have him in Paradise, and
[would] dwell in him; for it said, it is my image and similitude. And the
Kingdom of wrath [and of the fierce Tartnesse] would also have him: for it
said, he is mine, and he is [proceeded] out of my fountain, out of the
eternal mind of the Darkness, I will be in him, and he shall live in my
might, for he is generated out of [that which is] mine, I will, through him,
show great and strong power. The Kingdom of this world said, he is mine; for
he bears my Image, and he lives in [that which is] mine, and I in him: he
must be obedient to me, I will tame him and compel him, I have all my members
in him, and he in me: I am greater than he, he must be my Or, Stewart.
householder, I will show my fair wonders and virtues in him, he must manifest
my wonders and virtues, he shall keep and manage my herds, I will cloth him
with my fair Glory; as now it is to be seen.

34. But when the Kingdom of the fierceness, of the wrath, of Death, and of
Hell saw, that it had lost; and could not keep Man, then it said, I am Mors.
Death, and a Worm, and my virtue [or power] is in him, and I will grind him
and break him to pieces, and his spirit must live in me: and although thou
world supposest that he is thine, because he bears thy Image, yet his Spirit
is mine, generated out of my kingdom; therefore take what is thine, from him,
I will keep that which is mine.

35. Now what did the virtue in Adam, in this strife? It flattered with all the
three [Kingdomes]. It said to the Heart of God, I will stay in Paradise, and
thou shall dwell in me: I will be thine, for thou art my Creator, and thou have
thus concreted [or extracted] me out of all the three Principles, and created
me: thy refreshment is pleasant, and thou art my Bridegroom, I have received
of thy fullness, and therefore I am impregnated [or with childe], and I will
bring forth a virgin, that my kingdom may be great: and that thou may have
mere joy in me: I will eat of thy fruit, and my spirit shall eat of thy
virtue [or power]: and thy Name in me shall be called IMMANUEL, God with us.

36. And when the Spirit of this world perceived that; then i^ said; Wherefore
will thou only eat of that which thou comprehendest not, and drink of that
which thou feel not: thou art not yet merely a Spirit, thou have from me
all the kinds of comprehensibility in thee: behold, the comprehensible fruit
is sweet and good, and the comprehensible drink is Powerful and full of virtue
or strength.
mighty and strong, eat and drink from me, and so thou shall come to have
all my virtue and beauty, thou may in me be mighty [and powerfull] over all
the Creatures, for the kingdom of this world shall be thy own, and thou shall
be Lo^d upon Earth.

37. And the virtue in Adam said: I am upon Earth, and dwell in this world, and
the world is mine, I will use it according to my lust, [will, and pleasure]:
then came the Command of God Enclosed, conceived, or comprehended.
(which was received in the Center of God, out of the Circle [or Circumference]
of the Eternal life,) and said: In the day that thou eatest of the earthly
fruit, thou shall die the Death: This Command was comprehended or enclosed (and
has its original in the Eternal Father) in the Center, where the Eternal
Father continually from Eternity generateth his heart or son.

38. Now when the Worm of darkness saw the command of God, it thought with it
self, here thou will Or, have nothing to do.
not prevail, thou art spirit without body, and contrariwise, Adam is
corporeal, thou have but a third part in him, and besides, the Command is in
the way, thou will even slip [or creepe] into the Essences, and flatter with
the Spirit of this world, and take a creaturely form upon thee, and send a
Legate [or Embassadour] out of my kingdom, clothed in the form of a Serpent,
and wilt persuade him to eat of the earthly fruit, and then the command
destroys his body, and the spirit remains [to be] mine. Here now the Legate
[or Embassadour] the Devil was very willing [and ready] at this, especially
because Adam in Paradise, was in his place, where he should have been; and
thought with himself, now thou have an opportunity to be revenged: thou will
mingle lies and truth so together, that Adam may not [observe or] understand it
[the treachery], and so thou will tempt him.

Of the Tree of knowledge [of] good and evil.
39. I have told you before, out of what Might.
power the Tree is grown; viz. that it grew out of the earth, and has wholly
had the nature of the earth in it, as at this day all earthly Trees are [so]
(and no otherwise, neither better nor worse) wherein corruptibility stands,
as the Earth is corruptible, and shall pass away in the end, when all shall
go into its Or, Receptacle.
Either, and nothing else shall remain of it besides the figure; Now this was
the Tree which stood in the midst of the Garden in Eden, whereby Adam must be
tempted in all Essences: for his Spirit should rule powerfully over all
Essences, as the holy Angels and God himself does.

40. Besides, he was created by the Word, or heart of God, that he should be
his image and similitude, very powerfully in all the three Principles, [and be]
as great as a Prince or Throne-Angel. But this Tree standing thus in the
Garden, and of all the Trees that only did bear earthly fruit; therefore Adam
looked so often upon it, because he knew that it was the Tree of knowledge of
Good and Evil, and the virtue of the Tree pressed him to it so very hard
(which virtue was also in him) that the one lust infected [poysoned or mingled
with] the other: and the Spirit of the great world pressed Adam so very hard,
that he became infected, and his virtue [or power] was overcome; here the
Paradisicall man was undone, and then said the heart of God, it is not good,
that man [should] be alone, we will make him a help, [or consort] to be with
him.

41. Here God saw his Fall, and that he could not stand, because Adams
imagination and lust was so eager after the Kingdom of this world, and after
the earthly fruit, and that Adam would not generate a perfect Paradisicall Man
out of himself, but an infected [poysoned Man] according to the lust, and
would fall into corruptibility. And the Text in Moses sounds further very
right, thus: And God let a deep sleep fall upon Man, and he slept, [or fell
asleepe].

CHAP. XII.
Of the Opening of the holy Scripture, that the Circumstances may be highly
considered.
The Golden Gate, which God affords to the last world, wherein the Lilly
shall flourish [and blossom.]
1. LOving Reader, I had need have an Angelical Tongue for this description,
and thou an Angelical Mind, and then we should well understand one another:
But seeing we have them not, therefore we will express the Great Deeds of
God, with the earthly Tongue, according to our [received] gift and knowledge,
and open the Scripture to the Reader, and give him occasion to consider
further, whereby the Pearl might be sought and found at last: therefore we
will work in our Day-labour, And lead them that come after us into it.
according to our duty, till the Or, Gate.
Pearl of the Lilly be found.

2. Reason asks: How long was Adam in Paradise before his Fall, and how long
did the Temptation last? I cannot tell thee that, out of Moses description of
the Creation, for it is for great cause concealed: yet I will show thee the
wonders of God, and Or, search into them.
expound them, according to the knowledge that is given me, whereby thou may
the better learn to Or, understand.
consider the Temptation and the Fall of Adam.

3. Beloved Reason, look into the Glass of the actions and deeds of God. When
God appeared to Moses in the Or, fire flaming.
burning Bush, he said, Pull off thy shoes; for here is a holy place: What was
that? Answer: God showed [Moses] thereby his earthly Birth: For he would give
him a Law, wherein Man should live, (if it were possible) and attain
salvation: But who was it that gave the Law, and commanded Man to live therein?
Answer. It was God the Father, out of his Center, and therefore it was done
with fire and thunder: for there is no fire and thunder in the heart of God,
but kind love.

4. Hereupon Reason will say, is not God the Father one [and the same] Essence
with the Son? Answer. Yes, [they are] one essence and will. By what means
then did he give the Law? Answer. By the Spirit of the great world: because
Adam after the Fall, and all men, lived In the Spirit of the great world.
therein, therefore it must be tried, whether man could live In the Law.
therein, in confidence toward God: therefore he established it with great
wonders [or miracles], and gave The Law.
it clarity] shining brightness or glory]: as may be seen in Moses, who had a
[glorious bright] shining face: and when he had chosen to himself this people,
he destroyed the children of unbelief: and brought His chosen.
them out with wonders, into the W^ldernesse: and there it was tried whether
men could live in perfect obedience under this clarity [Glory or brightnesse].

5. What was done there? Answer. Moses was called by God (out from [among] the
children of Israel) up into Mount Sinai, and stayed there forty days: and then
he would try the people whether it were possible for them to put their trust
[or confidence] in God: that they might be fed with Manna.
heavenly Bread: that so they might attain perfection. And there now stood the
mind Majoris mundi, of the Or, Macrocosme.
great world; and on the contrary, the eternal mind of God, in strife one
against another; God required obedience, and the mind of this world required
[or desired] the pleasure of this transitory life, as, eating, drinking,
playing, dancing: therefore they chose them moreover their Belly-God, a Golden
Calfe, that they might be free and live without Law.

6. Here you see again, how the three Principles strove one against another
about Man: The Law that was given to Adam in the Garden of Eden brake forth
again, and desired to have obedience; in like manner also, the Spirit of
strong [fiercenesse or] wrath brake forth again in the false fruit and
voluptuousness, and sought the corruptible life. And this strife now lasted
forty days, before they set up the Calfe, and fell [wholly like Adam] from
God, so long the strife of the three Principles continued.

7. But now when they were fallen away from God [as Adam was] then came Moses
with Josuah, and saw the apostacy [or falling away], and brake the Tables in
pieces, and led them in the Wilderness: where they must all die except Josua
and Caleb: for the clarity [or brightnesse] of the Father in the fire, in the
first Principle, could not bring them into the promised Land: and although they
did eat Manna, yet it did not help [in] the trial, only Josua and at length
JESUS must do it.

8. And when the time came, that the true Champion, [or Saviour] returned
again out of Paradise, and became the child of the Virgin, then the strife of
the three Principles Was renewed.
came again. For there he was again set before the tempting Tree, and he must
endure the hard brunt before the tempting Tree, and stand out the temptation of
the three Principles, which was not possible for the first Adam to do. And
there the strife continued forty days and forty nights, just so long as the
strife with Adam in Paradise continued, and not an hour longer; and then the
Champion [or Saviour] overcame; therefore open your eyes aright, and look upon
the Scripture aright: although it be brief and obscure [to reason] yet it is
very true.

9. You find not in Moses, that Adam was driven out of Paradise the first day:
the temptation of Israel, and of Christ, informs us quite otherwise: for the
temptation of Christ, is to a tittle (in all Circumstances) the same with the
temptation of Adam.

10. For Adam was tempted forty days in Paradise, in the Garden of Eden before
the tempting Tree; [and tried] whether he could stand, whether he could set his
inclination on the heart of God and only eat of the Verbum Domini [the Word
of the Lord], and then [if he had stood] God would have given him his body (the
heavenly Limbus) to eat, that he should eat it in his mouth, not into his
body: he should have brought forth the child of the Virgin out of himself:
for he was neither Man nor Woman [male nor female]: he had the Matrix, and also
the Man [or masculine nature] in him, and should have brought forth the Virgin
full of modesty and chastity out of the Matrix, without rending of his body.

11. And here is the strife in the Revelation of John, where a Woman brought
forth a son, which the Dragon and the Or, Serpent.
Worm would devour: and there stood the Virgin upon the earthly Moon, and
despises the earthinesse, and treads it under feet. And so should Adam also
have trodden the earthinesse underfoot, but it overcame him: therefore
afterward the child of the Virgin (when it had overcome the tempting Tree)
must also enter into the first death of the strong [fierce] wrath, in the
death, and overcome the first Principle.

12. For he stood forty days in the Temptation in the Wilderness, where there
was no bread nor drink, then came the Tempter, and would have brought him from
obedience: and said, He should out of the stones make Bread; which was nothing
else, but that he should leave the heavenly bread, (which man receives in
Faith and in a strong confidence in God) and put his imagination into the
Spirit of this world, and live therein.

13. But when the child of the virgin laid the heavenly bread before him, and
said; Man lives not only Or, by, or of.
from this world, Or, by, or of.
from the earthly eating and drinking, then came the second way [or kinde] of
Temptation forth, viz. the might [power, dominion, and authority] of this
world; the Prince of the wrath [or strong fiercenesse] would give him all the
power of the Stars and Elements, if he would put his imagination into him,
and pray to [or worship] him: that was the right scourge [or whip] wherewith
Adam was Or, driven on with.
scourged [viz.] with the might, riches, and beauty of this world, after which
at last Adam lusted, and was taken; But the child of the Virgin laid before
him, that the kingdom was not his [viz.] belonging to the Prince of the
[fierce, strong] wrath, but [it belonged] to the word and heart of God, he must
worship God, and serve him only.

14. The third Temptation was the same into which the Devil also was fallen
Or, out of
with high mindedness [or pride], when he [Christ] was tempted to have fline
from above from the pinnacle of the Temple, and should have elevated himself
above humility and meekness: for the meekness makes the angry Father, in the
Originalnesse, soft and joyful, so that the Deity [thus] becomes a soft and
pleasant Essence.

15. But Lord Lucifer would (in the Creation) have feign been above the
meekness of the heart of God, above the end of nature: therefore he would
feign also have persuaded the son of the virgin to fly without wings, above
the end of nature, in pride; of which shall be handled in its due place at
large. I have brought this in thus, but in brief, that my writing may be the
better understood, and how it stands with [or upon] the ground, [or foundation]
of the Scripture, and is not any new thing, neither shall there be any thing
new [in them]; but only the true knowledge, in the holy Ghost, of the Essence
of all Essences.

Of Adams sleep.
16. Adam had not eaten of the fruit before his sleep, till his wife was
created out of him; only his essences and inclination had eaten of it in the
spirit by the imagination, and not in the mouth: and thereupon the spirit of
the great world captivated him, and mightily Or, wrought upon him.
qualified in him [or infected him]: and then instantly the Sun and Stars
wrestled with him, and all the four Elements wrestled so mightily and
powerfully, that they overcame him; and [so] he sunk down into a sleep.

17. Now to an understanding Man, it is very easy to be found and known, that
there neither was, nor should be any sleep in Adam, when he was in the Image
of God. For Adam was such an Image as we shall be at the resurrection of the
Dead, where we shall have no need of the Elements, nor of the Sun, nor
Stars, also [of] no sleep, but our eyes shall be always open eternally,
beholding the glory of God, Or, which will be.
from whence will be our meat and drink; and the Center in the Or,
Propagation.
multiplicity, or springing up of the Birth, affords mere delight and joy;
for God will bring forth out of the earth into the kingdom of Heaven no other
[kinde of] Man, than [such a one] as the first [was] before the Fall: for he
was created out of the eternal will of God, that [will] is unchangeable, and
must stand; therefore consider these things deeply.

18. O thou dear soul, that swimmest in a dark Or, Bath.
lake, incline thy mind to the gate of Heaven, and behold what the fall of
Adam has been, which God did so greatly loathe, that [because of it] Adam
could not continue in Paradise: Behold and consider the sleep, and so you
shall find it all. Sleep is nothing else but Or, a being overcome.
an overcoming: for the Sun and the Stars are still in a mighty strife, and
the Element of water [viz.] the Matrix, is too weak for the fire and the
Stars, for that [Element] is the [ Or, over-commednesse.
being] overcome in the Center of Nature, as you find before in many places.

19. And the light of the Sun is as it were a God in the Nature of this
world, and by its virtue [and influence] it continually kindles the Stars
[or Constellations] whereby the Stars [or Constellations] (which are of a
very terrible and anguishing Essence) continually exult in triumph very
joyfully. For it [the Sunne] is an essence like the light of God, which
kindles and enlighteneth the dark mind of the Father, from whence, by the
light there arises the divine Joy in the Father.

20. And so it [the Sunne] makes a triumphing, or rising [to be] in the Root
or mother.
Matrix of the Water, always like a Or, boiling.
seething: for the Stars altogether cast their virtue [or influence] into the
Matrix of the water, as The stars being in the Matrix.
being therein; in like manner also now the Matrix of the water is continually
seething and rising, from whence comes the Vegetation.
growing in Trees, plants, grass, and Beasts: for the uppermost Regiment [or
Dominion] of the Sun and Stars, and also of the Elements, rules in all
creatures, and it is a blossom or bud from them, and without their power,
there would be in this world in the third Principle, no life, nor mobility in
any manner of thing; nothing excepted.

21. But the living Creatures, as, Men, Beasts, and fowls, have the tincture
in them, for in the beginning they were an Extraction [taken] from the quality
of the Stars and Elements by the Fiat: and in the tincture [there] stands
the continual kindling fire, which continually draws the virtue or Oleum
[the Oyle] out of the Water; from whence comes the blood, in which the
noble-life Or, is.
stands.

22. Now the Sun and the Stars [or Constellations] continually kindle the
Tincture, for it is fiery: and the Tincture kindles the body, with the Matrix
of the water, so that they are always boiling [rising] and seething. The
Stars [or Constellations] and the Sun are the fire of the Tincture, and the
Tincture is the fire of the body, and so all are seething: and therefore when
the Su^^e is underneath, so that its beams [or shining] is no more [upon a
thing;] then the Tincture is weaker, for it has no kindling from the virtue of
the Sun: and although the virtue of the Stars and the quality are kindled
from the Sun, yet all is too little, and so it becomes feeble [or as it were
dead]: and when the Tincture is feeble, then the virtue in the blood (which is
the Tincture) is wholly weak and finketh into a sweet rest, as it were dead or
overcome.

23. But now in the Tincture only is the understanding, which governs the
mind, and makes the [thoughts or] senses; therefore all is as it were dead,
and the Constellation now only rules in the root of the first Principle,
where the Deity like a glance [lustre] or virtue, works in all things: There
the starry Spirit in the glance of the Glass of the divine virtue in the
Element of fire, looks into the Matrix of the water, and sets his jaws
open after the Tincture, but that is void of power: and therefore he takes
the virtue of the Tincture, ( viz. the mind) and mingleth [or qualifieth] with
it, and then the mind seals the Elements, and works therein, Dreams and
Representations.
visions, all according to the virtue of the Stars; for it The mind
consists.
stands in the working and quality of the Stars: and these are the Dreams
and visions of the night in the sleep.

The gate of the highest depth of the life of the Tincture.
24. Though the Doctor, it may be, knows what the Tincture is, yet the simple
and unlearned does not, who many times (if they had the Art) have better gifts
and understanding than the Doctor, therefore I write for those that seek;
though indeed I hold that neither the Doctor, nor the Alchimist, has the
ground of the Tincture: unless he be borne again in the Spirit, such a one
sees through all, whether he be learned or unlearned; with God the Peasant is
as acceptable as the Doctor.

25. The Tincture is a thing that seperateth, and brings the pure and clear,
from the impure: and that brings the life of all sorts of Spirits, or all
sorts of Essences, into its highest [pitch] degree [or exaltation]. Yea it is
the cause of the shining, or of the luster: it is a cause that all creatures
see and live: but its form is not one and the same [in every thing]; it is not
in a Beast, as in Man: so also it is different in stones and herbs: although
it is truly in all things, yet in some things strong, and in some weak.

26. But if we search what it is in essence and property, and how it is
generated, then we find a very worthy [precious] noble Being, essence, or
thing.
substance in its birth, for it is come forth from the virtue, and the
fountain of the Deity, which has imprinted The Image of it self.
it self in all things: and therefore it is so secret and hidden, and is
imparted to the knowledge of none of the ungodly, to find it, or to know it:
and although it be there, yet a vain, false, [or evill] mind is not worthy of
it, and therefore it remains hidden to him: And God rules all in all
incomprehensibly and imperceptibly to the Creature: the creature passes away
it knows not how: and the shadow and the figure of the Tincture continues
eternally: for it is generated out of the eternal will: but the Spirit is
given to it by the Fiat, according to the kind of every creature: also in the
beginning of the Creation it was implanted and incorporated in jewels, stones,
and metalls, according to the kind of every one.

27. It was from Eternity in God, and therefore it is eternally in God: But
when God would create a similitude of his Essence, and that it should be
generated out of the darkness, then it stood in the flash of fire that went
forth, in the place, where the fifth form of the birth of love, generateth it
self in the similitude: for it was generated out of the fountain of the will,
out of the heart of God, and therefore its shadow continues in the will of God
eternally: and for the sake thereof also the shadow of all creatures, and of
every [essence] substance [or thing] which was ever generated in the
similitude, remains eternally: for it is the similitude of God, which is
generated out of the eternal will: yet its Spirit continues not eternally in
the third Principle of this world, that cease or passes away with the
ceasing of the springing or the ceasing of the life.

28. For all whatsoever lives in the third Principle, corrupts, [or passes
away] and goes into its Either and end, till [it come] to the figure of the
Tincture; and that continues standing eternally as a shadow or will; without
spirit or mobility: But in the second Principle the Tincture continues
eternally standing in the spirit and in the substance [or essence], all very
powerfully, viz. in Angels and Men, as also in the beginning [or first
springing] of every substance: for their Center to the Birth, is eternally fixed
[or stedfast].

Of its [the Tinctures] Essences and property. The deep Gate of Life.
29. Its Essence is the flash in the Circle [or Circumference] of the springing
of the Life, which in the water makes the glance and shining: and its root is
the fire, and the stock is the [soure] harshnesse. Now the flash separateth the
bitterness and harshnesse from the water, so that the water becomes, soft,
[fluid] and clear, wherein then the Or, faculty of seeing.
sight of all creatures does consist, so that the Spirit in the flash in the
Matrix of the water does see: and the flash stands therein like a glance [or
lustre] and Fulfilleth or satisfies.
fills the Spirit of the Essences: from which the Essence draws vehemently
to it self: for it is the [soure] harshnesse: and the flash continually
separateth the darkness from the light, and the impure from the pure: and
there now stands the divine virtue [or power]: and the divine glance
continually imagines [or imprinteth] it self in the pure, from which the
[soure] strong [property] is separated out from Nature: and the divine Glance
makes the pure sweet: for it mingleth it self [or infecteth] there.

30. But the sweetness is like Oil or fire, wherein the flash continually
kindles it self so that it shines: But the Oil being sweet, and mingled
with the Matrix of the water, therefore the shining light is steady [constant
and fixt] and Pleasant.
sweet: But being it cannot in the nature of the water continue to be an oil
only (because of the infection of the water) therefore it becomes thick; and
the [nature or] kind of the fire colors it red: and this is the Blood and
the Tincture in a Creature, wherein the noble life stands.

Of the Death and of the Dying. The Gate of affliction and of misery.
31. Thus the noble life in the Tincture stands in great danger, and has
hourly to expect the [corruption, or destruction, breaking or] dissolution:
for as soon as the blood (wherein the Spirit lives) flows out [or passes
away] the Essence [breaketh or] dissolveth, and the Tincture flies away like a
glance or shadow: and then the source [or springing up] of the fire is out, and
the body becomes stiff.

32. But alas! the life has many greater and more powerful enemies;
especially the four Elements and the Constellations [or starres]; as soon as
[any] one Element becomes too strong, the Tincture flies from it, and then
the life has its end: If it be overwhelmed with water, it grows cold, and
the fire goes out; then the flash flies away like a glance or shadow: if it
be overwhelmed with earth, viz. with impure matter, then the flash grows
dark, and flies away: if it be overwhelmed with air, that it be stopped, then
the Tincture is stifled, and the springing Essences, and the flash breaks
into a glance, and goes into its Either. But if it be overwhelmed with fire or
heat, the flash is enflamed, and burns up the Tincture; from whence the
blood becomes dark, and swearthy, or black, and the flash goes out in the
meekness.

33. O how many Enemies has the life among the Constellations [or Starres]
which qualify [or mingle their influence] with the Tincture and Elements: when
the Planets and the Stars have their conjunctions, and where they cast their
poisonous rags into the Tincture, there arises in the life of the meek
Tincture, stinging, tearing, and torturing. For the sweet [or pleasant]
Tincture (being a sweet and pleasing refreshment) cannot endure any impure
thing. And therefore when such poisonous rags are darted into it, then it
resists and continually cleanses it self; but as soon as it is
overwhelmed, that it be darkened, then the flash goes out, the life breaks,
and the body falls away, and becomes a Cadaver Carcass [or dead corps]; for
the spirit is the life.

34. This I have here shown very briefly and summarily, and not according to
all the Circumstances, that it might thereby be somewhat understood [by the
way, what] the life [is]: in its due place all shall be expounded at large, for
herein is very much contained, and there might be great Volumes written of it;
but I have set down only this, that the overcoming and the sleep might be
apprehended.

The Gate [or Exposition] of the heavenly Tincture, how it was in Adam before
the Fall, and how it shall be in us after this Life.
35. Great and mighty are these Secrets, and he that seeks and finds them,
has surpassing joy therein; for they are the true heavenly bread for the
soul. If we consider and receive the knowledge of the heavenly Tincture, then
there rises up the knowledge of the divine kingdom of joy, so that we wish
to be loosed from the vanity, and to live in this Birth: which yet cannot be,
but we must finish our dayes-work.

36. Reason says: Alas! If Adam had not lusted he had not fallen asleep: If I
had been as he, I would have stood firm, and have continued in Paradise. Yes
beloved Reason, you have hit the matter well, in thinking so well of thy self!
I will show thee thy strength, and the Gate: and do but thou consider how
firm thou should stand, if thou did stand as Adam did before the Tempting
Tree.

37. Behold, I give you a true similitude: Suppose that thou were a young man,
or young maid [or virgin] (as Adam was both of them in one [onely] person:) how
do thou think thou should stand? Suppose thus, set a young man of good
complexion, beautiful, and virtuous: and also a fair chaste modest virgin [or
young maid] curiously featured, and put them together: and let them not only
come to speak together, and converse lovingly one with another, but so that
they may also embrace one another: and command them not to fall in love t
gether, not so much as in the least thought, also not to have any inclination
to it; much less any infection in the will: and let these two be thus together
forty days and forty nights, and converse with one another in mere joy: and
command them further, that they keep their will and mind steadfast, and never
Or, purpose in thought.
conceive one thought, to desire one another, and not to infect [themselves]
with any essence or property at all; but that their will and inclination be
most steadfast and firm to the command: and that the young man shall will [and
purpose] never to copulate with this, nor no other maid [or virgin]; and in
like manner, the maid [or virgin] be enjoined to the same. Now thou Reason,
full of misery, defects, and infirmities, how do you think you should
possibly stand here: would you not promise fair with Adam? but you would not
be able to perform it.

38. Thus my beloved Reason, I have set a Gloss before you, and thus it was
with Adam. God had created his work wisely and good, and extracted the one out
of the other. The first ground was himself, out of which he created the world,
and out of the world [he created] Man, to whom he gave his Spirit, and
intimated to him, that without wavering, or any other desire, he should live in
him most perfectly.

39. But now man had also the spirit of this world, for he was [come] out of
this world, and lived in the world: And Adam (understand the Spirit which was
breathed into him from God) was the chaste virgin; and the Spirit which he had
inherited out of Nature, from the world, was the young man. These were now both
together, and rested in one arm.

40. Now the chaste virgin ought to be bent into the heart of God, and to have
no imagination, to lust after the beauty of the comely young man: but yet the
young man was kindled with love toward the virgin, and he desired to copulate
with her; for he said, thou art my dearest Spouse [or bride] my Paradise, and
garland of Roses, let me into thy Paradise: I will be impregnated in thee, that
I may get thy essence, and enjoy thy pleasant love: how willingly would I taste
of the friendly sweetness of thy virtue [or power]? If I might but receive thy
glorious light, how full of joy should I be?

41. And the chaste virgin said: Thou art indeed my bridegroom and my
Companion; but thou have not my Ornament: my Pearl is more Costly.
precious than thou, my virtue [o^ power] is incorruptible [or unfadable] and
my mind is over constant [or stedfast]: thou have an unconstant mind, and thy
virtue is corruptible [or brittle]: dwell in my As in the outward Court of the
Temple.
Court, and I will entertain thee friendly, and do thee much good, I will
adore thee with my Ornaments, and I will put my Garment on thee: but I will not
give thee my Pearl, for thou art dark, and that is shining and bright.

42. Then said the Spirit of Nature ( viz. the young man) my fair Pearl and
chastity, I pray thee let me enjoy thy comfort, if thou will not copulate with
me, that I may impregnate in thee; yet do but enclose thy Pearl in my heart,
that I may have it for my own: art thou not my Golden Crown, how feign would
I taste of thy fruit.

43. Then the Or, Modest.
chaste Spirit out of God in Adam (viz. the virgin) said: My dear Love, and my
Companion; I plainly see thy lust, thou would feign copulate with me; but I
am a virgin, and thou a man; thou would defile my Pearl, and destroy my
Crown: and besides, thou would mingle thy soreness with my sweetness, and
darken my bright light; therefore I will not [doe so]: I will lend thee my
Pearl, and adorn thee with my Garment, but I will not give it Into thy own
disposing.
to be thy own.

44. And the companion ( viz. the spirit of the world in Adam) said, I will not
leave thee, and if thou will not let me copulate with thee, then I will take my
innermost and strangest Or, Might.
force, and use thee according to my will, according to the innermost Or, Might.
power. I will cloth thee with the power of the Sun, Stars, and Elements;
wherein none will know thee, [and so] thou must be mine eternally: And although
(as thou say) I am unconstant, and that my virtue is not like to thine, and
my light not like thine, yet I will keep thee well enough in my Treasure, and
thou must be At my disposing.
my own.

45. Then said the Virgin; Why will thou use Or, force.
violence? Am I not thy Ornament, and thy Crown? I am bright, and thou art
dark; behold, if thou coverest me, then thou have no glance [or lustre]; and
[then] thou art a dark [dusky or black] Worm; and [then] how can I dwell with
thee? Let me alone; I [will] not give my self to be thy own: I will give thee
my Ornament, and thou shall live in my joy, thou shall eat of my fruit, and
taste my sweetness; but thou can not Or, mingle.
qualify with me: for the divine virtue is my Essence, therein is my fair [or
Orient] Pearl, and my bright [shining] light generated: my fountain is
eternal: If thou darkenest my light, and defilest my Garment, then thou will
have no beauty [or lustre], and can not subsist, but thy Worm [will corrupt
or) destroy thee, and so I shall loose my companion, which I had chosen for my
Bridegroom, with whom I meant to have rejoiced: and then my Pearl and beauty
would have no Recreation or delight.
company: seeing I have given my self to be thy companion for my joys sake?
if thou will not enjoy my beauty? yet pray continue in my ornament and
Excellency, and dwell with me in joy, I will adorn thee eternally.

46. And the young man said: thy Ornament is mine already, I [will] use thee
according to my will: in that thou say I shall be broken (corrupted or
destroyed) yet my Worm is eternal, I will rule with that; and yet I will
dwell in thee, and cloth thee with my Garments.

47. And here the Virgin turned her to the heart of God, and said, My heart and
my beloved, thou art my virtue, from thee I am clear and bright, from thy
root I am generated from eternity; deliver me from the Worm of darkness
which infecteth [poysoneth] and tempts my Bridegroom, and let me not be
darkened in the Obscurity, I am thy Ornament; And am come that thou should
have joy in me; wherefore then shall I stand with my Bridegroom in the dark?
And the divine Answer said: The seed of the Woman shall break the head of the
Serpent, or Worm; and thou shall, etc.

48. Behold dear Soul, herein lies the heavenly Tincture, which we must set
down in a similitude, and we cannot at all express it with words: indeed if
we had the Angelical Tongues.
tongue of Angels, we could then rightly express what the mind apprehends:
but the Pearl is clothed [covered or vayled] with a dark [cloake or]
Garment: The virgin calls steadfastly to the The Son of God.
heart of God, that he would deliver her companion from the dark Worm: but
the divine Answer Stands.
still is: The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head; that is, the
darkness of the Serpent shall be separated from thy Bridegroom: the dark
Garment wherewith the Serpent cloatheth thy Bridegroom and darkneth thy Pearl
and beauteous Crown, shall be broken [corrupted or destroyed] and turn to
Earth; and thou shall rejoice with thy Bridegroom in me; this was my eternal
Or, purpose.
will, it must stand.

49. Now then when we consider the high mysteries, the Spirit opens to us the
understanding, that this [afore-mentioned] is the true Ground concerning Adam:
For his Original Spirit ( viz. the soul) that was the Worm, which was
generated out of the eternal will of God the Father, and in the time of the
Creation, was by the Fiat (after the manner of a Spirit) created out of that
place where the Father from eternity generateth his heart, between the fourth
and the fifth form in the center of God, where the light of God from eternity
discovers it self, and takes its beginning, and therefore the light of God
came thus to help him, as a fair virgin, and took the soul to be her
Bridegroom, and would adorn the soul with her fair heavenly Crown, with the
noble virtue of the Pearl, and beautify it with her Garment.

50. Then the fourth form in the Center of the soul brake forth there where
the spirit of the soul was created [viz.] between the fourth and the fifth
form in the Center, Next to
near the heart of God: and so the fourth form was in the glance in the
darkness; out of which the world was created, which in its form parts it
self in its Center into five parts, in its rising till [it attaine] to the
light of the Sun. For the Stars also in their Center are generated betwixt
the fourth and the fifth form, and the Sun is the Or, fountain.
spring of the fifth form in the Center; as in the eternal Center, the heart
and light of God [is,] which has no ground; but this [Centre,] of the Stars
and Elements, has its ground in the fourth form in the dark mind, in the
rising up of the awakened [or kindled] flash of the fire.

51. Thus the soul is generated between both the Centres, between the Center
of God (understand [between the Centre] of the heart or light of God, where it
is generated out of an eternal Place) and also between the [propagated or]
out-sprung Center of this world: and it [the soule] has its beginning from
both, and qualifieth with both; and therefore thus it has all three
Principles, and can live in all three;

52. But it was the law and will of the virgin, that as God rules over all
things, and Mouldeth or Imageth.
imprinteth himself every where, and gives virtue and life to all, and yet
the thing comprehends him not, although he be certainly there; so also should
the soul Or, have continued in true Resignation.
stand still, and the form of the virgin should govern in the soul, and
crown it with the divine light, the soul should be the comely young man which
was created, and the virtue [or power] of God [should be] the fair virgin: and
the light of God [should be] the fair [orient] Pearl and Crown, wherewith
the virgin would adorn the young man.

53. But the young man desired to have the virgin to be his own, which could
not be, because she was a degree higher in the birth than he: for the virgin
was from Eternity, and the Bridegroom was given to her, that she should have
joy and delight with him in God.

54. But now when the young man could not obtain this of the virgin, then he
reached back after the Worm in his own Center. For the form of this world
pressed very powerfully upon him, which also was in the soul, and [this forme]
would feign have had the virgin to be its own, that he might make her his Or,
Woman.
wife (as was done in the Fall: yet the wife was not from the Pearl, but out
of the spirit of this world:) for it ( viz. the nature of this world)
continually groaneth [or longeth] after the virgin; that it might be delivered
from vanity: and it means to qualify [or mingle] with the virgin; but that
cannot be, for the virgin is of a higher Or, descent.
Birth.

55. And yet when this world shall break in pieces, and be delivered from the
vanity of the Worm, it shall not obtain the virgin; but This world.
it must continue without spirit and Or, soul.
Worm, under its own shadow, in a fair and sweet rest, without any wrestling
[strugling] or desiring: for thereby it comes into its highest degree and
beauty: and cease [or resteth] eternally from its labor. For the Worm which
here tormenteth it, goes into its own Principle, and no more touches the
shadow nor the figure of this world to eternity, and then the virgin governs
with her Bridegroom.

56. My beloved Reader, I will set it you down more plainly: for every one
has not the Or, the light of the wisdom.
Pearl, to apprehend the virgin: and yet every one would feign know, how the
fall of Adam was. Behold, as I mentioned even now; the soul has all the three
Principles in it; viz. the most inward, [which is] the Worm or Brimstone
spirit, and the source according to which it is a Spirit: and then [it hath]
the divine virtue, which makes the Worm meek, bright and joyful, according
to which the Worm or Spirit, is an Angel, like God the Father himself
(understand, in such a manner and birth:) and then also it has the Principle
of this world; wholly undivided in one another, and yet none [of the three
Principles] comprehends the other, for they are three Principles, or three
Births.

57. Behold, the Worm is the eternal, and in it self peculiarly [a
Principle], the other two [Principles] are given to it, each by a Birth: the
one to the right, the other to the left. Now it is possible for it to loose
both the forms and Births that are given to it: for if it reach back into the
strong [or tart power or] might of the Fire, and become false to the virgin,
then she departs from it, and [shee] continues as a figure in the Center,
and then the door of the Or, Wisdom of God.
virgin is shut.

58. Now if thou will [turne] to the virgin again; then thou must be borne
anew through the Water in the Center and [through] the Holy Ghost; and then
thou shall receive her again with greater honor and joy: of which Christ
said: There will be more joy in heaven for one sinner that repents, than for
ninety and nine righteous, who need no repentance; so very gloriously is the
poor sinner received again of the virgin, that The converted soul.
it must no more be a shadow, but a living and understanding Creature, and [an]
Angel of God. This joy none can express, only a regenerate soul knows it:
which the body understands not: but it trembles, and knows not what is
done to it.

59. These two forms, or Principles, the Worm loses at the departing of the
body: although indeed it continues in the figure, which yet is but of a
Serpent, and it is a Or, gnawing.
torment to it, that it was an Angel, and is now a horrible fierce poisonous
Worm and Spirit; of which the Scripture says: That the Worm of the wicked
dies not, and their plague [torment or source] continues eternally. If the
Worm had had no Angelical and humane form, then its source [torment or
plague] would not have been so great: but that causes it to have an eternal
anxious desire, and yet it can attain nothing: it knows the shadow of the
Glory [it had] and can never more live therein.

60. This therefore in brief is the Ground of what can be spoken of the Fall
of Adam, in the highest Depth. Adam has lost the Divine wisdom.
virgin by his lust, and has received the Or, Wife.
Woman in his lust, which is a Subject to corruption and mingled with it.
Cagastrish person, and the virgin waits still continually for him, [to see]
whether he will step again into the new Birth, and then she will receive him
again with great Glory: therefore thou child of man, consider thy self; I
write here what I certainly know, and he that has seen it, witnesses it; or
else I also should not have known it.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Creating of the Woman out of Adam.
The fleshly, miserable, and dark Gate.
1. I Can scarce write for grief, but seeing it cannot be otherwise, therefore
we will for a while wear the Garment of the Woman, but yet live in the
virgin: and although we receive [or suffer] much affliction in the [Garment of
the] Woman, yet the virgin will recompense it well enough: and thus we must be
Schleppen, begirt, surrounded.
bound with the With fragility, or with the earthly Tabernacle.
Woman till we send her to the Grave; and then she shall be a shadow and a
figure: and the virgin shall be our Bride and precious Crown: she will give
us her The divine brightness.
Pearl and Crown, and cloth us with her ornaments; for which we will give
the venture for the Lillies sake. And though we shall raise a great storm, and
though Antichrist tear away the Woman from us, yet the virgin must continue
with us, because we are married to her, let every one take its own, and then I
shall have that which is mine.

2. Now when Adam was thus in the Garden of Eden, and the three Principles
having produced such a strife in him; his Tincture was quite wearied, and the
virgin departed. For the Lust-Spirit in Adam had overcome, and therefore he sunk
down into a sleep. The same hour his heavenly body became flesh and blood, and
his strong virtue [or power] became bones: and then the virgin went into her
Either and shadow, yet into the heavenly Either, into the Principle of the virtue
[or power,] and there waits upon all the children of Adam, [expecting]
whether any will receive her for their Bride again, by the Regeneration.
New Birth.

But what now was God to do? He had created Adam out of his eternal will: and
because it could not now be, that Adam should generate out of himself the
virgin in a Paradificall manner, therefore God put the Fiat of the great world
into the midst. For Adam was now fallen Or, into the bosom of the Fiat.
home again to the Fiat as a half broken Person. Now therefore seeing he was
half killed by his own lust and imagination, that he might live, God must help
him again: and if he be now to generate a Kingdom, then there must be a
Woman, as all other Beasts [have a Female] for propagation: The Angelical
kingdom in Adam was gone: therefore now there must be Or, a propagated
generation.
a kingdom of this world.

4. Then what was it that God now did with Adam? Moses says, When Adam slept,
he took one of his ribs, and [made or] built a Woman of it, (viz. of the rib
which he took from Man) and closed up the place with flesh. Now Moses has
written very right: but who is it that can understand him here: If I did not
know the first Adam in his virgin like form in Paradise; then I had been at a
stand, and should have known no other than that Adam had been made flesh and
blood of a lump of Earth, and his wife Eve, of his rib and hard bones; which
before the time [of my knowledge] has often seemed very strange and wonderful
to my thoughts, when I have read the Expositions, and Marginall notes.
Glosses upon Moses, that so [high or] deep learned men should write so of it:
Damascenus.
some of them will dare to tell of a Pit in the [Orient or] East Country, out
of which Adam should be taken and made as a Potter makes a vessel or Pot.

5. If I had not considered the Scripture, which plainly says, Whatsoever is
borne of flesh is flesh; Also, Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom
of Heaven: Also, None goes into Heaven but the son of Man, (viz. the pure
virgin) which came from Heaven, and which is in Heaven: which was very helpful
to me [to think] that the child of the virgin was the Angel, which has
restored again all that which was lost in Adam, for God brought again in the
Woman (in her virgin-like body) the virgin child, which Adam should generate.
And now if I had not considered the Text in Moses, (where God says, It is not
good that man should be alone, we will make a help for him) I should yet have
stuck in the Or, in the earthly thoughts.
will of the Woman.

6. But that Text says; God looked upon all that he had made, and behold, it
was all very good; Now if it were good in the Creation, then it must needs have
become evil when God said [afterward] it is not good for Man to be alone. If
God would have had them like all beasts to have a beastiall propagation, he
would at one and the same instant [at first] have made a Man and a Woman. But
that God did abominate [the beastiall propagation] it appeared plainly in the
first child of the Woman, Cain the murderer of his brother, also the fruit
[or the curse] of the earth shows it plainly enough. But what shall I spend
the time for, with these testimonies? the proof of it will clearly follow? And
it is to be proved, not only in the Scripture (which yet makes a cover [over
it]) but in all things, if we would take time to do it, and spend our labor
about vain and unprofitable things.

7. Now thus says Reason: What are then the words of Moses concerning the
Woman? to which I say; Moses has written right, but I (living thus In the
divided transitorinesse.
in the Woman) understand it not right. Moses indeed had a brightened [or
glorified face or] countenance, but he must hang a veil before it, so that
none could see his face. But when the son of the virgin ( The Eternal
wisdom of the Father.
viz. the virgin [wisdome]) came, he looked him in the face, and did the veil
away.

8. Then Reason asks: What was the rib [taken] out of Adam to be [made] a
Woman? The Gate of the Depth. Behold, the virgin shows us this, that when
Adam was overcome, and the virgin passed into her Either, then the Tincture
(wherein the fair virgin had dwelt) became earthy, weary, feeble, and weak:
for the powerful root of the Tincture, from whence it had its potency without
any sleep or rest ( viz. the heavenly Matrix, which Or, is the foundation of.
contains Paradise and the Kingdom of Heaven) withdrew in Adam, and went
into its Air or receptacle.
Either.

9. Keader understand [and consider] it aright: the Deity ( viz. the fair
virgin) is not Broken.
destroyed and come to nothing: that cannot be; only she is remaining in the
divine Principle: and the Spirit, or the soul of Adam is with its own proper
Worm remaining in the third Principle of this world: But the virgin ( viz. the
divine virtue [or power] stands in Heaven, and in Paradise, and beholds her
self in the earthly quality of the soul, viz. in the In the heavenly and not
in the earthly part thereof.
Sun, and not in the Moon (understand in the highest point of the Spirit of
this world, where the Tincture is noblest and most clear, from whence the
mind of man does exist).

10. And she would feign return again into her place to her Bridegroom, if
the earthly flesh, with the earthly mind and senses [or thoughts did not
hinder or] were not in the way, for the virgin does not go into them, she
will not be bound [to or] in the earthly Center: she finisheth the whole time
(while the Woman lives in her stead) of her speculation with longing and much
calling, admonishing and hearty seeking: but [to] the regenerate she appears
in a high triumphing manner, in the Center of the mind; [shee] also often
diveth into the Tincture of the blood of the heart, whereby the body, with the
mind and senses, come to tremble and triumph so highly, as if it were in
Paradise, it also presently gets a Paradisicall will.

11. And there the noble Grain of Mustard Seed is sown, of which Christ
says; That it is at first small, and afterward grows to be like a great
Tree, so far [or so long] as the mind persevereth in the will, but the noble
virgin stays not continually: for her Birth is [of a] higher [descent]: and
therefore she dwells not in earthly vessels; but she sometimes visits her
Bridegroom at a time when he is desirous of her: although she always with
observancy preventeth and calls him, before he [calleth] her, which is only
understood in the Lilly, this the Spirit speaks in a high and worthy
seriousness, therefore observe it ye children of God, the Angel of the great
Council comes in the valley of Jehosaphat with a Golden Charter, which he
sells for Oil without Money, whosoever comes shall have it.

12. Now when the Tincture was become thus earthy and feeble, by the overcoming
of the Spirit of the great world, then it could not generate [in a] heavenly
[manner], and was also possessed with inability: and then the Counsel of God
stood there, and said: Seeing he is become earthly, and is not able [to
propagate] we will make a help for him: and the Fiat stood in the Center, and
severed the Matrix from the Limbus: and the Fiat took a rib in the midst of
Adam out of his right side, and created a Woman out of it.

13. But you must clearly understand [or conceive]: that when the Fiat to the
creating [of the woman] was in Adam, in his sleep, his body had not then such
hard grissles and bones: O no: that came to pass first when Mother ^ve did
bite the Apple, and also gave to Adam: only the infection and the earthly
death, with the fainting and mortal sickness stuck in them: the bones and
ribs were yet strength and virtue, from which the ribs should come to be.

14. But you must highly and worthily understand [and consider] how it was
taken out [of his side]: not as a spirit, but wholly in substance: thus it may
be said, that Adam did get a rent; and the Woman, bears Adams spirit flesh
and bones: yet there is some difference in the Spirit: for the Woman bears
the Matrix, and Adam the Limbus or Man: and they two are one flesh, undivided
in nature, for now they two together must generate one man again, which one
alone could do before.

A Pleasant Gate.
15. We being here in describing the corruptibility of Adam, the Spirit
frames in our thoughts a heavenly mystery, concerning Adams rib, which the
Fiat took from him, and made a Woman of it; which [Rib] Adam afterward must
want: for the Text in Moses rightly says, God closed up the place with flesh.

16. But now the The malice or fierce rage.
wrath of the Serpent has so brought it to pass, that Adam is fallen in the
lust, and yet the purpose of God must stand: for Mankind.
Adam must rise again at the day of the Resurrection wholly and unbroken in
the first Image, as he was created. So likewise the Serpent and the Devil has
brought it about, that so terrible a Rent is made in him: wherefore the Spirit
shows us, that as little as the Worm or Spirit of the soul, could be
helped, except that the virgin came and did go into Death in the Worm in the
abyss of the Spirit of the soul (which in its own abyss reaches the Gate of
Hell and the fierce anger of God) and regenerate Adam.
him anew, and make him a new Creature in the first Image; which is done in the
son of the virgin, in Christ.

17. So little also could Adams Rib, and his hollow-side, where it stood, be
helped [healed] or brought to perfection, except that the second Adam (Christ)
suffer himself in the virgin to be wounded [pierced or cut) in the same place,
that his precious blood might come to help the first Adam, and repair his
broken side again; this of high and precious worth we speak according to our
knowledge: which when we shall write of the suffering and death of Christ the
Son of the virgin, we will so clear it that thou O thirsty soul shall
find a living fountain, which shall be little beneficial to the Devil.

Further concerning the Woman.
18. Reason asks: Is Eve merely created out of the Rib [taken] out of Adam?
then she should be far inferior to Adam? No beloved Reason, it is not so: the
Fiat (being a sharp attracting) took from Adam of all essences and properties
of every virtue; but it took from him no more members in substance: for the
Image should be a man, after a masculine kind in the Limbus, yet not at all
with this deformity. Understand it rightly in the ground, he should be and (he
was also) a man, and he had a virgin-like heart, wholly chaste in the Matrix.

19. Therefore Eve was for certain created out of all Adams Essences, and so
Adam thereupon had a great Rent, and so likewise the Woman might come to her
perfection to [be] the Image of God; and this again shows a great mystery,
wherehy the virgin very preciously witnesses again, that the son of the
virgin has not only suffered his side to be pierced through, and shed his
blood out of the hole of his side, but he has also suffered his hands and
feet to be struck through, and a Crown of thorns to be pressed upon his
head, so that the blood gushed out from thence; and in his body he endured to
be whipped, so that his blood run down all over. So very lowly has the Son
of the virgin debased-himselfe, to To heal.
help the sick and broken Adam and his weak and imperfect Eve, to repair them
and bring them again into the first Glory.

20. Therefore you must know for certain, that Eve was created out of all Adams
Essences: but there were no more ribs nor members broken from Adam: which
appears by the feebleness and weakness of the Woman, and also by the
Command of God, who said: Thy will shall be in subjection under thy Man [or
husband], and he shall be thy Lord [or Ruler]: because the Man is whole and
perfect, except a Rib, therefore the Woman is a help for him, and must help him
to do his work in humility and subjection: and the Man must know that she is
very weak, being out of his Essences: he must help her in her weakness, and
love her as his own Essences: in like manner the Woman must put her Essences
and will into [the Essences and will] of the Man, and be friendly toward her
Man [or husband]: that the Man may take delight in his own Essences in the
Woman: and that they two might be but one only will. For they are one flesh,
one bone, one heart, and generate children in one [onely] will, which are
neither the Man's nor the Woman's alone, but of both together, as if they were
from one only body. And therefore the severe commandment of God is set before
the children, that they should with earnestness and subjection honor their
father and mother, upon pain of temporary and eternal punishment: Note. The
Author lived not so lang to perform his purpose upon the Book of Exodus.
of which I will write concerning the Tables of Moses.

Concerning the Propagating of the soul. The Noble Gate.
21. The mind has from the beginning of the world had so very much to do
about this gate, and has continually so searched therein, that I cannot reckon
the wearisome heap of writers [about it]: but in the time of the Lilly this
Gate shall flourish as a Bay Tree [or Laurel tree]: for its branches will get
sap from the virgin, and therefore will be greener than Klee. Trifolium.
Grass, and whiter than the [whitest] Roses, and the virgin will bear the
pleasant smell thereof upon her Pearly-Garland, and it will reach into the
Paradise of God.

22. Seeing then the mystery presents it self to us, therefore we will open
the blossom of the Sprout: yet we would not have our Labor given to the
Wolves, Dogs, or Swine, which root in our Garden of delight, like [wilde]
Boares, but to those that seek, that the sick Adam may be comforted.

23. Now if we will search after the Tincture, what it is in its highest
degree: we shall find the Spiritum.
Spirit: for we cannot say, that the fire is the Tincture, nor the air
neither; For the fire is wholly contrary to the Tincture: and the air does
stifle it: it is a very pleasant Or, habitation.
refreshment: its root out of which it is generated, is indeed the fire: but
if I may rightly mention the seat where it sits, I cannot say otherwise but
that it is between the three Principles ( viz. [between] the Kingdom of God,
the Kingdom of Hell, and the Kingdom of this world) in the midst, and [it]
has none [of the three] for its own, and yet it is generated from all three:
and it has as it were a several Principle, which yet is no Principle, but a
bright pleasant habitation: neither is it self the Spirit, but the Spirit
dwells in it, and it so renews the Spirit, that The Spirit.
it becomes clear and visible: its true name is wonderful, and none can name
[that Name] but he to whom it is given, he names it only in himself, and not
without [or outwardly], it has no place of its rest in the substance, and yet
rests continually in it self, and gives virtue and beauty to all things, as
the Or, Sunshine.
Glance of the Sun gives light, virtue, and beauty to all things in this
world, and it is not the thing it self, though indeed it works in the thing,
and makes the thing grow and blossom; and yet it is found really [to be] in
all things, and it is the life and heart of all things, but it is not the
Spirit which is generated out of the Essences.

24. The Tincture is the pleasant sweetness and softness in a fragrant herb
and flower, and the Spirit thereof is bitter and harsh, and if the Tincture
were not, the herb would get neither blossom nor smell: it gives to all
Essences virtue to grow. It is also in metalls and stones: it makes that the
Silver and Gold do grow, and without it [the Tincture] there is nothing in
this world could grow: among all the children in Nature, it [onely] is a
virgin, and has never generated any thing out of it self; neither can it
generate, and yet it makes that all things impregnate: it is the most hidden
thing and also the most manifest, it is a Amica Dei. Friendesse, or shee-friend
of God.
friend of God, and a play-fellow of virtue: it suffers it self to he
detained by nothing: and yet it is in all things; but if any thing be done to
it against the right of Nature, then it flies [away] and that very easily: it
stands not fast, and yet it continues immovable: it continues in no kind
of decayi^^ of any thing; all the while that it stands in the root of Natu^^
not altered nor destroyed, so long it continues: it lays no burden upon any
thing, but it eases the burden in all things: it makes that all things
rejoice, and yet it generateth no Laughter, or outcry.
shouting noise; but the voice comes out of the Essences and becomes loud in
the Spirit.

25. The way to it is very near, whosoever finds that [way] dares not to
reveal it, neither can he, for there is no language that can express it: and
although any seek long after The Tincture.
it, if the Tincture will not, he cannot find it; nevertheless, it meets
them that seek after it aright, in its own way [or manner] as its nature is,
with a virgin-like mind, not being [prone] to covetousness and [wantonnesse
or] voluptuousness; it suffers it self to be imprinted [represented or
imagined] in a thing (where it was not before) by Or, Belief.
Faith, if it be right in a virgin-like manner it is powerful, and yet does
nothing: when it goes out of a thing, it comes not into it again, but it
stays in its Air, or receptacle.
Either, it never breaks [or corrupteth] more, and yet does grow.

26. Now you will say, this must be God! No it is not God, but it is Gods
Shee-friend.
friend. Christ said; My Father works, and I work also; but it works not:
it is in a thing imperceptably, and yet it may well be overpowred and used;
especially in Metalls, there it can (if it self be pure) make pure Gold of
Iron, and of Copper: it can make a little grow to be a great deal, and yet it
puts forth nothing. Its way is as subtle as the thoughts of a Man, and the
thoughts do even arise from thence.

27. And therefore when a man sleeps, so that the Tincture rests, then
there are no thoughts in the spirit: but the Constellation rumbleth in the
Elements, and beats into the brains, what shall (through their operation)
come to pass, which yet is often broken again by another Aspect of the
Planets.
Conjunction, so that it comes not to effect: besides, it can show nothing
exactly, except it come by a Conjunction of Planets and fixed Stars, and that
only goes forward, but it represents all [in an] earthly [manner] according
to the spirit of this world, so that where the Or, starry Spirit.
Sydereall Spirit should speak of Men, it often speaks of Beasts, and
continually represents the contrary; as the earthly spirit fancieth from the
starry spirit, so he dreameth.

28. Seeing now we have spoken of the Tincture, as of the house of the soul,
so we will speak also of the soul, what it is, and how it can be propagated,
wherein we can the better bring the Tincture to Or, to be understood.
light. The soul is not so subtle as the Tincture; but it is powerful and
has great might [or ability]: It can by the Tincture (if it ride upon the
virgins That is, upon true resignation.
Bride-Chariot in the Tincture) turn mountains upside down; as Christ said;
which is done in the pure Faith, in the place where the Tincture is Master,
which does it, and the soul gives the thrust, whereas yet no power can be
discerned. Even as the Earth Schwebet.
moves upon the heavenly Tincture, whereas there is not more than one only
Tincture in the Heaven, and in this world, yet [it is] of many sorts, according
to the Essence of every thing: in the beasts it is not as in men, also not in
fishes as in beasts; also in stones and gemmes otherwise; also otherwise in
Angels and in the spirit of this world.

29. But in God, Angels, and in virgin-like souls (understand pure souls) it
is alike; where yet it is only On Gods side.
for God. The Devil has also a Tincture, but a false one (and it stands not
in the fire) wherewith he can gripe that man in the heart, that lets him in,
as a [slie soothing] flattering false Thief, that insinuates himself,
desiring to steal, concerning whom Christ warns us, that we should watch.

30. And now if we will speak of the soul, and of its substance and
Essences, we must say that it is the Or, Crudest, mos, indigest, or raw.
roughest [thing] in man; for it is the originality of the other substances [or
things]: it is fiery, harsh, bitter, and strong, and it resembles a great
[and] mighty Power, its Essences are like Brimstone: its gate or seat out of
the Eternal Originality is between the fourth and the fifth form in the
Eternal Birth, and in the Or, indissoluble Band.
not beginning Band, of the strong might of God the Father, where the eternal
light of his heart (which makes the second Principle) generateth it self, and
if The soul.
it wholly loose the bestowed virgin of the divine virtue [or power] (out of
which the light of God generateth it self, which is given to the soul to be
its Pearl, as is mentioned above), then it becomes and is a Devil, like all
other [Devils] in Essences, form, and in Active property.
quality also.

31. But if it put its will Into true resignation.
forward into meekness ( viz. into the obedience of God, then it is in the
source [or of the quality and property] of the heart of God, and receives
divine virtue, and then all its rough Essences become Angelical and joyful;
and then its rough Essences are very serviceable to it, and are better and more
profitable to it, than that it were altogether sweet in the Originality; in
which [being sweet] there would be no strength, nor such mighty power as in the
harsh, bitter, and fiery [Essences].

32. For the fire in the Essence comes to be a Pleasant or delightful.
soft meek light, and is nothing else but a zealous [or eagar] kindling of the
Tincture, and the harsh essence causes that the divine virtue can draw it to
it self, and taste it, for in the [soure or] harsh essence the taste does
consist, in nature: in like manner the bitter essence serves to [make] the
moving rising joy, fragrancy and growing; and out of these forms the Tincture
goes forth, and it is the house of the soul; as the Holy Ghost [goeth forth]
from the Father and the Son, so also the Tincture goes forth from the light
of the fiery soul, and then also from its virtuous [or powerfull] Essences,
and so it Is like.
resembles the Holy Ghost, but yet the Holy Ghost of God is a degree higher:
for he goes forth from the Center of the light wholly in the fifth form, from
the heart of God, at the end of Nature.

33. Therefore there is a difference between the Tincture in Man, and the Holy
Ghost; and the bestowed virgin of the divine virtue [or power], dwells in the
Tincture of the soul [that is] if it be true and faithful: but if [the soul
be] not [faithfull] then The virgin.
she departs into her Center, which is not wholly shut up: for there is but
half a Birth between, except the soul pass into the Stock of a tree Which is
grifted upon.
stock of harshnesse and malice [evill or wickednesse] and then there is a
whole birth between. For the harshnesse stands in the fourth form of the
Darkness, and the bitterness in the fire, between the fourth and fifth form,
as is mentioned before.

34. Now [Reason's] question is; How has Eve received the soul from Adam?
Behold, when Gods Sour astringent or attractive.
harsh Fiat took the Rib Or, In.
out of Adam, then it attracted out of all Essences also to it, and the Fiat
Imaged [formed, imagined, or impressed] it self together therein, [that it
might] continually and eternally stay therein. But now the Tincture in Adam was
not yet extinguished, but the soul of Adam sat yet wholly with might and
virtue [or power] in the Tincture: only the virgin was departed: and therefore
now the Fiat Received.
took the Tincture, and the [soure] harsh Essences mingled [or qualified] with
the [soure] harsh Fiat; for it, ( [viz.] the Fiat) and the [sourenesse or]
harshnesse in the Essences, are one kind of Essence.

35. Thus the Fiat inclined it felfe now to the heart of God, and the Essences
received the divine virtue [or power]: and there sprung up the blossom in the
fire; and out of the blossom, [sprung] again the own [proper] Tincture, and
thus Eve was a living soul: and the Tincture filled it self in the growth
(even as it is a cause of all growing) so that Suddenly.
instantly there was a whole body in the Tincture. For that was possible, they
were not yet fallen into sin, neither were there yet any hard grisfles and
bones.

36. You must understand [or conceive] it aright: Eve gat not Adams soul, nor
Adams body: but one only Rib: but she was extracted from the Essences, and
gat her soul in her Essences [that were] given her, in the Tincture, and the
body grew for [or to] her in her own sprung up Tincture; yet in virtue [or
power]; but the Fiat had already formed [or made] her a Woman: indeed she was
not deformed, but altogether lovely: for she was of a heavenly kind, in
Paradise, yet the Of distinction of sex.
Marks were already also set upon her by the Fiat of the Macrocosme.
Great world: and it could not otherwise be, she must be a Woman for Adam:
indeed they were in Paradise: and if they had not eaten of the Tree, and if
they had returned again to God, then they should have continued in Paradise:
but the propagation must now needs have been after a womanly manner; and should
not have stood [Eternally]: for Satan had brought it too far, although he had
not yet suffered himself to be seen, only he strewed sugar abroad in the
spirit of this world, till at length the lovely beast, did lay it self forth
upon the Tree as a flatterer and liar.

The Gate of our Propagation in the Flesh.
37. As I have mentioned above: the noble Tincture is now henceforth generated
thus in a manly [or masculine] and womanly [or feminine] kind [or sex] out of
the soul; The Tincture is so subtle and mighty, powerful, that it [can go
or] goes into the heart of another, into his Tincture; which the devilish
bewitching whores well know, yet they understand not the noble Art, but they
use the [false] Tincture of the Devils, and Or, poison.
infect many in [their] marrow and bones, by their Exorcismes, Conjuration,
Adjuration.
Incantation, for which they shall receive their wages, with Lucifer, who would
feign have raised his Tincture to be above God.

38. But know that the Tincture is in the menkinde somewhat diverse from that in
the womenkinde; for the Tincture in the menkinde goes out of the Limbus, or
Man, and the Tincture in the womenkinde, goes out of the Matrix. For the
virtue of the soul frames [imprinteth, fashioneth or Imageth] it self not
only in the Tincture, but in the whole body: for the body grows in the
Tincture.

39. But thus the Tincture is the longing, the great desire after the virgin,
which belongs to the Tincture: for it is subtle without understanding, but
it is the divine inclination, and continually seeks the virgin, [which is]
its play-fellow: the Manly.
masculine seeks her in the Womanly.
feminine, and the feminine in the masculine; especially in the delicate
complexion, where the Tincture is most noble, clear, and vigorous: from whence
comes the great desire of the masculine and feminine sex, so that they always
desire to copulate, and the great burning love, so that the Tinctures mingle
together and [try, prove, or] taste one another with their pleasant taste;
whereas one [sex] continually supposes that the other has the virgin.

40. And the Spirit of the great world now supposes that he has gotten the
virgin; he graspeth with his clutches, and will mingle his infection with the
virgin, and he supposes that he has the prize, it shall not now run away from
him, he supposes now he will find the Pearl well enough. But it is with him
as with a Thief, driven out of a fair Garden of Delight, where he had eaten
pleasant fruit, who comes, and goes round about the enclosed Garden, and
would feign eat some more of the good fruit, and yet cannot get in, but must
reach in with his hand, and yet cannot come at the fruit for all that; for the
Gardener comes, and takes away the fruit: and thus he must go away empty,
and his lust is changed into discontent. Thus also it is with him [ viz. with
the spirit of this world]: he sows thus in his fiery [or burning] lust the
Grain, or Corn.
seed into the Matrix, and the Tincture receives it with great joy, and
supposes that to be the virgin: but the [soure] harsh Fiat comes thereupon,
and attracteth the same to it, while the Tincture is so well pleased.

41. Now then the feminine Tincture comes in to aid, and striveth for the
child, and supposes that it has the virgin: and the two Tinctures wrestle
both of them for the virgin [and yet neither of them both has her) and which
of the two overcomes, according to that the fruit gets the Mark of
distinction of sex]. But because that the feminine [Tincture] is weak,
therefore it takes the blood also to it in the Matrix, whereby it supposes it
shall retain the virgin.

The secret Gate of Women.
42. Hence I must show the ground to them that seek: for the Doctor cannot show
it him with his Anatomy, and though he should kill a thousand men, yet he
shall not find that [ground], they only know that [ground] that have Or,
attained it.
been upon it.

43. Therefore I will write from the virgin, which knows well what is in the
Woman: she is as subtle as the Tincture: but she has a life, and the
Tincture has none: the Tincture is nothing else but an exulting joyful mighty
will, and a house [or habitation] of the soul, and a pleasant Paradise of the
soul, which is the souls propriety [or own portion] so long as the soul with
its Imagination Sticks to God and goodness.
depends on God.

44. But when it becomes false, so that its Essences flatter with the Spirit
of the great world, and desire the Or, Its fill.
fullness of the world ( viz. 1. [In] the [soure] harshnesse, [desire] much
wealth [or riches], to eat and drink much, and to fill themselves
continually: 2. In the bitterness [desire] great power, authority, and might,
to rise high, to rule powerfully, and extol themselves above all, and put
themselves forth to be seen like a proud Bride: and 3. in the In the active
stirring of the wrath.
source of the fire, [to desire] a fierce cruel power, and by kindling of the
fire [of anger] supposing in the luster thereof to be brave, and so are much
delighted in themselves) then comes the flatterer and liar, and Imageth or
represents himself.
forms or figureth himself also in the Spirit of the great world, as [he
did] in the Garden of Eden, and leads the soul: 1. in covetousness, to
eating and drinking [too much], and says continually, thou shall [want and]
not have enough, get more for thy self how thou can, by hook or by crook,
that thou may always have enough [to serve thy turne]. And 2. in the bitter
form he says; thou art rich, and have much, aspire and lift up thy self,
thou art greater than other people, the inferior is not like thee [or so good
a man as thou]. And 3. in the might or power of the fire, he says: Kindle [or
stir up] thy mind, make it implacable and stout, yield to none, terrify the
simple, and so thou shall be dreadful, and make thy authority continue, and
then thou may do what thou listest, and all whatsoever thou desire, will
be at thy service: and is not this a fine brave Glory? Art thou not indeed a
Lord on Earth.

45. And as soon as this is That the soul listeneth and yields to the
Devil.
brought to pass, then the Tincture becomes wholly false: for as the Spirit
in a thing is, so is also the Tincture; for the Tincture goes forth from the
Spirit, and is the habitation thereof. Therefore O Man! whatsoever you sow
here, that you shall reap, for your soul in the Tincture, remains
eternally: and all your fruits stand in the Tincture, manifested in the clear
light, and follow after you, this the virgin says in sincerity [for a
warning], with great longing after the Lilly.

46. And now if we consider of the Tincture, [and search] how various it is,
and [that it is] many times so wholly false; then we may [be able]
fundamentally to demonstrate the falsehood of the many various Spirits, [and]
how they are generated. Therefore we will make a short entrance, concerning
the propagation of the soul, which we will enlarge [when we speake] about
the Fall of Adam, and the birth of Cain. For the seed (as is above mentioned)
is sown in the lust of the Tinctures, where the [soure or] harsh Fiat
receives it, and supposes that it has received the virgin: there both the
Tinctures (the masculine and the feminine) then strive together about it, and
there the Spirit of the great world ( viz. the spirit of the Stars and
Elements figureth [Imageth or imprinteth] it self also in it, and he fills
the Tinctures with his Elements, which the Tinctures in the Fiat receive with
great joy, and suppose they have the virgin.

47. But being the Fiat is the mightiest among them all, (for it is as it were
a spirit, and although it be no spirit, yet it is the sharp Essence) therefore
it attracteth the seed to it, and desires the Limbus of God in Paradise, out
of which Adams body was created by the Fiat; and Will.
would create an Adam out of a heavenly Limbus: and then the Spirit of the
great world insinuates himself and supposes [and saith] the child is mine, I
will rule in the virgin; and he always fills it with the Elements, from
whence the Tincture becomes full and very thick [grosse, swelled, or
impregnated]: and there then the Tincture gets a loathing against the
fullness: for the Tincture it self is clear, and the Fiat with the Elements
is thick [grosse and] swelled; from whence Women (when they Or, are impregnated
or with child.
grow big [with childe]) know well enough, that many of them loath some meats
and drinks, and long still after some strange thing [to eate] for the Tincture
comes to have a loathing of all that the spirit of this world with his
Elements fills in, and wills to have somewhat else; for this virgin does
not relish them, but becomes [discontented and] sorry, and forsakes them, and
goes into her Or, Own Principle.
Either, and comes not again.

48. And then the Spirit of the Sun, Stars, and Elements of this world
supposes with it self [saying] now thou art in the right, the child is
thine, the foundation is laid, thou will bring it up, the virgin must be thine,
thou will live therein, and have thy joy, [delight, and habitation] in her, her
ornament must be thine; and thus [he] attracteth always to himself in his
great lust, by the Fiat which in Eternity goes not away; and [he] supposes
that he has, the virgin.

Saturnus: this is done in the first Month.

49. And there tne blood of the Mother (wherein the Tincture of the Mother is)
is drawn into the seed: and when the [soure] harsh Fiat has tried [and
perceiveth] that to be sweeter than its own Essence, then it frames [Imageth
or representeth] it self with great earnestness [or longing] therein, and
becomes sharp in the Tincture, and will create Adam, and so severeth the
Materia [or matter]; and then the Spirit of the Stars and Elements, is in the
midst, and rules mightily in the Fiat.

Jupiter: this is done in the second Month.

50. And then the Materia [or matter] is severed according to the wheel of the
Stars, as they ( viz. the Planets) stand in order at this time, and which of
them [all] is predominant, that (by the Fiat) figureth the matter most, and the
child gets a form, after the kind of that [Planet].

Mars: All this which follows is done in the third Month.

51. Thus the matter (by the Fiat) is severed into Members: and now when the
Fiat thus attracteth the blood of the Mother into the matter, then The blood.
it is stifled [or choked; and then the Tincture of the blood becomes false,
and full of unguish: for the [soure] harsh Essence ( viz. the Fiat) is
terrified, and all the joy (which the sour [harsh] Fiat gat in the Tincture of
the blood) withdraws; and the Fiat begins to tremble in the terror, in
the sour [harsh] Essence: and the terror goes away like a flash, and would
feign depart and fly away out of the Essence, and yet is withheld by the Fiat,
which [terrour] is now turned hard and made tough by the Essence: which now
closes the child about (this is the skin of the child): and the Tincture
flies suddenly, flashing upwards in the terror, and would be gone; yet it
cannot neither (for it stands in the Out-birth [or procreation] of the
Essences) but Stretches forth.
rises up suddenly in the terror, and takes the virtue [or power] of all the
Essences with it. And there the Spirit of the Stars and Elements Represents.
figureth it self also therein, and fills it self also therein, in the
flight, and supposes that it has the virgin, and will go along with it: and
the Fiat gripeth it all, and holds it [fast], and supposes that the Verbum
Domini [the Word of the Lord] is there in the Hurlyburly, or flying up.
uproare, that shall create the Adam, and it strengthens it self in the
strong might of the terror, and creates again the uppermost [part] of the
body ( viz. the Head:) and from the hard terror (which is continually
departing and yet cannot) comes the skull, which encloseth the uppermost
Center: and from the departing out of the Essences of the Tincture with the
terror into the uppermost Center, come the veins and the neck to be, going
thus from the body into the head, into the uppermost Center.

52. So also all the veins in the whole body come from the terror of the
Choking, or stopping.
stifling, where the terror goes forth from all the Essences; and would be
gone; and the Fiat withholdeth it with his great strong might. And therefore
one vein has always a diverse Essence from the other, caused by the first
departing, where then the Essences of the Stars and Elements do also mingle
[or figure themselves] therein, and the Fiat holds it all, and creates it,
and it supposes that the Verbum Domini [the Word of the Lord] with the strong
mighty power of God is there, where the Fiat must create Heaven and Earth.

The Gate of the great necessity and misery.
O Man, consider thy self, how hardly thou art beset here,
and how thou gettest the misery in thy Mothers body:
Observe it O ye Jurists.
Lawyers, from what Spirit you Can go to Law.
[come to]
Judge.
know [what is] right, consider this well for it is deep.
53. The Spirit of the virgin shows us the mystery again, and the great
secrecy; for the stifling [or stopping] of the blood in the Matrix (especially
in the fruit) is the first dying of the Essences, where they are severed from
the Heaven, so that the virgin cannot be generated there, which should [have
been] generated in Adam, from the heavenly virtue [or power] without Woman,
also without rending of his body: and here the Kingdom [or Dominion] of the
Stars and Elements begin in Man, where they take hold of Man and mingle [or
qualifie] with him, make and fit him, also nourish and nourture him, of which
you may read more about Cain.

Further in the Incarnation.
54. And so when the Fiat thus holds the terror in it self, so that the
Elements fill it, then that filling becomes hard bones; and there the Fiat
figureth the whole Man with his bodily form, all according to the first
wrestling of the two Tinctures, when they wrestle [or strive] together in the
sport of love, when the seed is sown; and that Tincture which there gets
the upperhand (whether the masculine or the feminine) according to that sex the
Man is figured: and the figuring [or shaping] is done very suddenly in the
storm of the anguishing terror, where the blood is stifled [or stopt]: and
there the Elementary Man gets up, and the heavenly [man] goes down: for in
the terror, the bitter pricking.
sting is generated, which rages and raveth in the hard terrified [sourenesse
or] harshnesse in the great anxiety of the stifled [or stopped] blood.

55. Women have sufficient experience of this, in the third Month (when this
is done in the fruit) [and feele] how the raging and pricking comes into their
teeth, loins, back, and the like: this comes upon them from the stifled
[choaked or stopped] Tincture in the fruit, and from their stifled [or stopped]
blood in the Matrix because the evil Tincture qualifieth [or mingleth] with
the good [Tincture] of their bodies. Therefore in the same manner as the
Tincture in the Matrix suffers pain, after the same manner also the good
[Tincture] suffers in the members [limmes or parts] of the Mother, as in the
hard bones, teeth, and ribs, as such people know very well.

56. So now when the bitter sting [or prickle], (which is generated in the
anxious terror in the stifling [or stopping] and in the entering in of death,)
does thus rage and rave, and show forth it self in the terror, and flies
upwards, then it is catched and withheld by the [soure] harshnesse, so that it
cannot get up aloft: for the [soure] harshnesse draws it continually the more
eagarly and vehemently, because of The raging of the prickle.
its raging, and cannot endure it, from whence the pricking often becomes more
terrible, and this is after no other manner, than as when a man is dying, and
soul and body part asunder, for in the stifling [or stopping] of the blood by
the [soure] harshnesse, the bitrer death is also there: and therefore The
bitter sting or prickle.
it is like a furious whi^ling wheel, or swift horrible thought, which
worrieth and vexes it self: and here is a Brimstone Spirit, a venomous
[poysonous] horrible aching substance in the death; for it is the Worm to the
springing up of the life.

57. And now when the Spirit of the Stars and Elements, has mingled [or
figured] it self together in the Incarnation, then the virtue [or power] of
the Stars and Elements is together wheeled in this raging, where then (in
this anguish) the Spirit of the Stars attracteth the virtue of the Sun to
it, and Or, discovers.
manifests it self in the virtue of the Son, from whence there arises a
twinkling flash in this raging, from whence the hard [soure] harsh anxiety is
terrified, and sinketh down: and there the terrible Tincture goes into its
Or, Receptacle.
Either; for the Essence of the [soure] harshnesse in the Fiat is so mightily
terrified at the flash, that it becomes [faint] impotent [or feeble], and
sinketh back, Opens it self outward.
expandeth it self and grows thin.

58. And the terror [skreeke], or flash of fire, is done in the bitter
prickle; and when it reflecteth it self back in the dark [soure or] harsh
anxiety in the Mother, and finds her so very soft [gentle] and overcome, then
it is much more terrified than the Mother: But this terror happening thus in
the soft Mother, she becomes white and clear in the twinkling of an eye,
and the flash remains in the anguish, in the root of the fire, and now
therefore it is a skreeke [or terrour] of great joy, and it is as when water is
thrown into the fire, where the [soure] harsh Source or property.
quality is then quenched, and the [sourenesse or] harshnesse is then so
mightily overjoyed with the light, and the light with the Mother the
[sourenesse or] harshnesse wherein it is generated, that there is no similitude
to [compare] it [with,] for it is the birth and the beginning of the life.

Sol: All this which follows is done in the entrance of the fourth Month.

59. And as soon as the light of life appears in the [soure] harshnesse and
soft Mother, so that the [sourenesse or] harshnesse comes to taste the light
of life, [and findeth] that it is so meek, pleasant, [lovely] and full of joy;
then it exulteth with great delight [desire and longing] after the light, to
Infect.
mix it self therewith, and apprehend it, so that its lust [or longing
delight] and virtue goes forth from it after the light; which lust [or longing
delight] is the virtue of the light; and this out-going Delight.
lust in the love, is the noble Tincture, which is there new generated to be
the childs own: and the Spirit which is generated out of the anguish in the
flash of the fire, is the true [and reall] soul which is generated in Man.

60. Now here it is especially to be observed, where The soul.
it dwells, and whence Heart, Lungs, and Liver come especially the Bladder
and Or, entrails.
Gutts, and the Brain in the Head; also the understanding and senses; these I
will here set down one after another: It cannot [well or] sufficiently be
expressed by a humane tongue, especially the order which is Done or performed.
observed in the twinkling of an eye in Nature; it would require a great
Volume to describe it in: and as the world accounts us too Simple, or silly,
and void of understanding, and unable.
weak to [be able to] describe it; so we account our selves much weaker [and
more unable]: and it is with us as Isaiah says: I am found of them that sought
me not, and known of them that were ignorant of me, and of such as inquired
not after me.

61. I say, High knowledge.
this has not been sought, but we sought the heart of God, that we might
hide us therein from the Storm.
tempest of the Devil, but when we came there, then the loving virgin out of
Paradise met us, and offered us her love, she would be kind [and friendly] to
us, and be betrothed to us for a Companion, and show us the way to Paradise,
where we shall be safe from the stormy tempest, and she carried a branch in
her hand, and said, We will plant this, and a Lilly shall grow, and I will come
to thee again; from whence we gat this longing, to write of the amiable
virgin, which did show us the way into Paradise: where we must go through the
kingdom of this world, and also through the kingdom of Hell; and no hurt done
us, and according to that [direction of her's] we write.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Birth and Propagation of Man.
The very secret Gate.
1. IF we consider now the springing up of the life, and in what place of the
body it is where the life is generated, then we shall rightly find the whole
ground of Man, and there is nothing so secret in Man That may not be found.
but that it may be found. For we must needs say, that the Heart is the place,
wherein the noble life is generated, and the life again generateth the heart.

2. As it is mentioned above, so the life in the anguish with the kindling of
the light, takes its beginning from the glance of the Sunshine, from the
Spirit of the Stars and Elements in the great anguish, where death and life
wrestle one with the other. ^or when man departed from Paradise into another
Birth ( viz. into the Spirit of this world, into the quality of the Sun,
Stars, and Elements) then the Paradificall [vision or] seeing, ceased [or was
extinguished] where man sees from the divine virtue, without [need of] the Son
and Stars; where the Or, there the life in the Holy Ghost buddeth forth in
the place of the four Elements.
springing up of the life is in the holy Ghost, and the light of God is the
glance of the Spirit, from whence Man.
he sees; which went out: for the spirit of the soul went into the Principle
of this world.

3. You must not so understand it, as if it were extinguished in it self: No;
but the soul of Adam went out, from the Principle of God, into the Principle
of this world and therein now the Spirit of every soul is thus generated
again by humane propagation, as is mentioned before; and it cannot be
otherwise: and therefore if we would be fit for the kingdom of Heaven, we
must be regenerated anew in the Spirit of God, or else none can inherit the
kingdom of God, as Christ taught us faithfully; of which I will write
hereafter, that it may be a fountain for the thirsty, and a light to the noble
way, in the blossom of the Lilly.

4. And we must here know, that our life (which we get in our Mothers body
[or womb] stands merely and only in the power of the Sun, Stars, and
Elements; so that they not only figure [or fashion] a child in the Mothers
body, and give it life, but also bring it into this world, and nourish it the
whole time of its life, and bring it up, also cause fortune and misfortune to
it, and at last, death and corruption, and if our Essences (out of which our
life is generated) were not higher, in their first degree out of Adam, [than
the Beasts] then we should be wholly like the Beasts.

5. But our Active essential virtues, or faculties,
Essences are generated much higher in the beginning of the life in Adam, than
the beasts, which have their Essences but merely from the spirit of this world,
and it must also, with the spirit of this world in a corruptible substance, go
into its eternal Either: whereas on the contrary, the essences of Man are
proceeded out of the unchangable eternal mind of God, which cannot in
eternity corrupt.

6. For we have a certain ground of this, in that, our mind can find and
conceive all whatsoever is in the spirit of this world, which no beast can do:
for no creature can Think or imagine.
conceive [further or] higher than [what is] in its own Principle, out of which
its own Essences are proceeded in the beginning: but we (that are Men) can
certainly Meditate, consider, or think of.
conceive [of that which is] in the Principle of God, and also [of that which
is] in the anguishing kingdom of Hell (where the Worm of our soul in the
beginning in Adam originally is) and this no other creature can do.

7. But they think [consider or imagine] only how to fill themselves and
multiply, that their life may subsist: and we also receive Than the beasts do.
no more from the Spirit of the Stars and Elements: and Because our Essences
have a higher beginning than the beasts.
therefore also our children are naked and bare, with great inability and
without understanding, and now if the Spirit of this world had full [perfect
and absolute] power over the Essences of the child, then he would easily put
his rough garment upon it also ( viz. a rough hide) but he must let that alone:
and he must leave the Essences in the first and second Principle, to Man's own
choosing, to bind and yield himself to which [Principle] he will; which man
has (undeniably) in his full power, which I will expound in its own place
according to its worth, and deeply demonstrate it, in spite of all the Gates of
the Devil, and this world, which strive much against it.

8. Our life in the Mothers body has its beginning wholly, as is above
mentioned: and stands there now in the quality of the Sun and Stars, where
then, with the kindling of the light, a Center springs up again, where
instantly the noble Tincture thus generateth it self (out of the light, out of
the joyful Essences of the [soure] harsh, bitter, and fiery kind [or
qua^^^^,]) and sets the Spirit of the soul in a great pleasant habitation:
and the three Beeings or substances.
Essences ( viz. harshnesse, bitterness, and fire) are in the kindling of the
life so very fast bound one to another, that they cannot (in eternity) be
separated one from another, and the Tincture is their eternal house, wherein
they dwell, which [house] they themselves generate from the beginning unto
eternity, which again gives them life, joy, and lust [or delight].

The strong Gate of the Indissoluble Band of the soul.
9. Behold, the three Essences, ( viz. [sourenesse or] harshnesse, bitterness,
and fire) are the Worm or Spirit [that dies not] Or, soureness.
Harshnesse is one Essence, and it is in the Fiat of God, out of Gods eternal
will: and the attracting of the [soure] harshnesse is the sting [or prickle] of
the bitterness, which the [soure] harshnesse cannot endure, but attracteth
continually the more forcibly to it, from whence the prickle continually
grows greater, which yet the [soure] harshnesse holds Captive.
prisoner; and this together is the great anxiety, which was there in the dark
mind of God the Father, when the darkness was anxious [or longed] after the
light; from whence in the anxiety (from the glance of the light) it attained
the twinkling flash: out of which the Angels were created, which afterward
were enlightened from the light of God ( By their longing after, or imprinting
the heart of God in their thoughts.
by their Imagination into the heart of God); and the other (like Lucifer) for
their haughtiness [or prides] sake, remained in the flash of fire and anxiety.

10. This Birth [or active property), with the Indissoluble Band, is generated
in every soul: and there is no soul before the kindling of the light in the
child in the mothers body: for with the kindling, the eternal Band is knit
[or tied] so that it stands eternally, and this Worm, of the three Essences,
does not die, nor sever it self: for it is not possible, [because] they are
all three generated out of one [onely] fountain, and have three qualities, and
yet are but one being [or substance], (as the holy Trinity is but in one only
Essence [or substance]) and yet they have three Originalities in one Mother,
and they are one [onely] being [or substance] in one another. Thus also (and
not a whit less) is the soul of man, but only one degree in the first going
forth: for it is generated out of the Fathers eternal will (and not out of the
heart of God) yet the heart of God is the nearest to it of all.

11. And now it may very exactly be understood by the Essences and property of
the soul, that in this house of flesh (where it is as it were generated) it is
not at home: and its horrible fall may be also understood [thereby]: for it
has no light in it self of its own, it must borrow its light from the Sun:
which indeed springs up along with it in its Birth, but that is corruptible,
and the Worm of the soul is not so: and is seen that when a man dies The
light of the Sun, or a Man's faculty beholding of that light cease.
it goes out. And if then the divine light be not again generated in the
Center, then the soul remains in the eternal Darkness, in the eternal
anguishing [source or] quality of the Birth, where nothing is to be found in
the kindled fire, but a horrible flash of fire, in which [source property or]
quality also the Devils dwell: for it is the first Principle.

12. And the soul here in this world uses the light of the third Principle,
after which the soul of Adam lusted, and thereupon was captivated by the
Spirit of the great world. But if the soul be regenerated in the Holy Ghost,
so that its Center to the regeneration spring forth In true resignation.
, then it sees with two lights, and lives in two Principles: and the most
inward [Principle] ( viz. the first) is shut up fast, and hangs but to it, in
which the soul is tempted and afflicted by the Devil; and on the contrary the
The virtue or power of God.
virgin (which belongs to [and is in] the Tincture of the Regeneration; and
in the departure of the body from the soul, shall dwell [in the same
Tincture]), is in continual strife and combat with the Devil, and trampleth
upon his head in the virtue [and power] of the [soules] Prince and Savior, or
Conqueror.
Champion, ( viz. the son of the virgin) when a new body (out of the virtue
[or power] of the soul) shall Or, be generated.
spring forth in the Tincture of the soul.

13. And that (when the soul is Or, separated.
departed from the body) it might no more be possibly tempted by the Devil and
Spirit of this world, there is a quiet rest for the soul included in its
Center in its own Tincture, which stands in Paradise, betwixt the kingdom of
this world and the kingdom of Hell, to continue until God shall put this
world into its Or, receptacle.
Either, when the number of men, and figures (according to the depth of the
eternal mind of God) shall be finished.

14. And now when we consider how the temporary and transitory life is
generated; we find that the soul is a cause of all the Organs or Instruments.
members [or faculties] of [or to] the life of Man, and without it there would
not be one Organs or Instruments.
member [to, or] of the life of man generated. For when we search [into] the
beginning and kindling of life, we find strongly with clear evidences all
manner of [faculties or] members; so that when the clear light of the soul
kindles, then the Fiat stands in very great joy, and in the twinkling of an
eye does in the Matrix, sever the pure from the impure, of which the Tincture
of the soul in the light, is the Or, Work-master.
worker, which there renews it, but the Fiat creates it.

15. And now when the [soure] harsh Matrix is [made] so very humble, thin, and
sweet, by the light, the [sterne or] strong horror (which was so very
poisonous before the light [kindled]) flies upward; for it is terrified at the
meekness of the Matrix; and it is a terror of great joy, yet it retains its
strong [or sterne] right [or property], and cannot be changed, neither can it
get far from thence (for it is withheld by the Fiat) but it raises it self
suddenly aloft, and the terror makes it a filme from the [soure or] harsh
Fiat which holds the terror fast, and that is now the Gall Above upon, about
or near the heart.
of the heart.

16. But when the Matrix (from which the terror was gone forth) was thus
loosed from the terror of the anxiety, and became so very sweet, like sweet
water; then the spirit of the great world figured [or imprinted it selfe]
instantly, in the Matrix, and fills the four Elements also within it; and
thinks with it self, now I have the sweet virgin: and the Fiat creates That
which was brought in.
it, and severeth the Elements, which also are in strife; and each of them
would have the virgin, and are in a wrestling, till they one overcome another,
and that the fire (being the mightiest and the most strong) stay above and the
water sink down: and the earth, being a hard gross thing must stay below; But
the fire will have a Kingdom or Dominion.
Region of its own.

17. For it says, I am the Spirit and the life, I will dwell in the virgin:
and the [soure] harsh Fiat attracteth all to it, and makes it a Mesch [ Massa
Or, substance
concretion] and moreover [it makes it] flesh: and the fire keeps the
uppermost Region ( viz. the heart:) for the four Elements sever themselves by
their strife, and every one of them makes it self a several Or, Dominion.
Region: and the Fiat makes all to be flesh; only the Air would have no
flesh; for it said, I dwell in no house, and the Fiat said, I have created
thee, thou art mine; and closed it in with an enclosure, that is the bladder.

18. Now the other Regions set themselves in order; first the stern flash,
that is the Gall: and beneath the flash, the fire, whose Region ^^ the heart;
and beneath the fire, the water, whose Region is the Liver: and beneath the
water, the earth, whose Region is [in] the Lungs.

19. And so every Element qualifieth [or acteth] in its own source [or manner
of operation], and one could do nothing without the other, neither could one
have any mobility without the other: for one generateth the other, and they go
all four out of one Original, and it is in its Birth, but one only [thing
or] substance, as I have mentioned before at large about the Creation,
concerning the Or, generating.
birth of the four Elements.

20. The [soure strong or] bitter Gall ( viz. the terrible poisonous flash of
fire) kindles the warmth in the heart, or the fire, and is it self the cause,
from whence all else take their Original.

21. Here we find again, in our consideration, the lamentable, and horrible
fall, in the Incarnation, because when the light of life rises up, and when
the Fiat in the Tincture of the spirit of the soul renews the Matrix, then
the Fiat thrusts the death of the stifling [choaking, checking, or stopping]
and perishing, in the sternnesse ( viz. the impurity of the stifled [or
checked] blood) from it self, out of its Essences, and casts it away: and
will not endure it in the Corpus.
body, but as a Excrement.
superfluity, the Fiat it self, drives it out, and of its tough [glutinous]
soreness, makes an enclosure round about it, viz. a filme, or gut, that it
may touch neither the flash nor the spirit, and leaves the nethermost port
open for it, and Condemns.
banisheth it eternally, because that impurity does not belong to this
Kingdom: as it happened also to the earth: when the At the Creation.
Fiat thrust it out of the Matrix in the midst in the Center, upon a heap
[as a lump], being it was unfit for heaven, so also In the Incarnation.
here.

22. And we find greater mysteries yet in Testimony.
evidence of the horrible fall: for after that the four Elements had thus set
themselves every one in a several Region: then they made themselves Lords over
the spirit of the soul, which was generated out of the Essences, and they have
taken it into their power, and qualify with it. The fire, viz. the mightiest
of them, has taken it into its Or, Dominion.
Region [or jurisdiction] in the Heart: and there it must The Spirit must there
be kept in obedience.
keep, and the blossom and light thereof goes out of the heart, and moves
upon the heart, as the kindled light of a Candle: where the Candle resembles
the fleshly heart, with the Essences out of which the light shines. And the
fire has set it self over the Essences, and continually reaches after the
light, and it supposes that it has the virgin, viz. the Divine virtue [or
power].

23. And there the holy Tincture is generated out of the Essences, which
regards not the fire, but sets the Essences ( viz. the soul) in its
pleasant Refreshment, or habitation.
joy. Then come the other three Elements out of their Regions, and fill
themselves also by force therein, each of them would taste of the virgin,
receive her and qualify [or mingle] with her: viz. the water, that fills it
self by force also therein, and it tastes the sweet Tincture of the soul:
and the fire says, I would willingly keep the water, for I can quench my
thirst therewith, and refresh my self therein. And the Air says; I am indeed
the spirit, I will blow up thy heat and fire, that the water do not choke
thee. And the fire says to the Air, I will keep thee, for thou upholdest my
quality for me, that I also go not out. And then comes the Element [of]
(Earth) and says, What will you three do alone? you will starve and consume
one another; for you depend all three on one another, and devour your selves,
and when you shall have consumed the water, then you extinguish; for the air
cannot move, unless it have some water: for the water is the mother of the
air, which generateth the air: Moreover, the fire becomes much too fierce
[violent and eagar] (if the water be consumed) and consumes the body, and then
our Dominion or rule.
Region is out, and none of us can subsist.

24. Then thus say the three Elements (the fire, the air, and the water) to
the Earth; Thou art indeed too dark, too rough, and too cold, and thou art
rejected by the Fiat: we cannot take thee in, thou destroyest our dwelling,
and make it dark and stinking, and thou afflictest our virgin, which is our
only delight and treasure wherein we live. And the Earth says; yet pray take
my Its fruits.
Children in, they are lovely, and of good esteems, they afford you meat and
drink, and cherish you that you never suffer want.

25. Hereupon, thus say the three Elements: but so they may afterward get a
dwelling in us, and may come to be strong and great, and then we must depart,
or be in subjection to them: and therefore we will not take them in neither,
for they may come to be as rough and cold as thou art: yet this we will do:
thou may let thy children dwell in our In the stomach and Gutts.
Courts and Porches, and we will come and be their Guest, and eat of their
The virtue of their fruit.
fruit, and drink of their drink, else the water which is contained in the
Element would be too little for us.

26. Now thus say the three Elements (fire, water, and air,) to the Spirit,
fetch us children of the earth, that they may dwell in our Courts, we will
eat of their Or, substance.
Essences, and make thee strong. Here the Spirit of the soul (like a captive)
must be obedient, and must reach with his Essences, and fetch them forth. And
then comes the Fiat, and says, No: thou Or, may escape me.
might [so] outrun me: and [the Fiat] created the reaching forth, and
there came forth from thence, hands and all other essences and forms, as it is
before our eyes, and the Astronomicus [Astronomer] knows it well, yet he
knows not the secrecy of it, although he can expound the Marks or tokens.
signs according to the Constellation and Elements, which qualify [and
mingle] together in the Essences of the Spirit of the soul.

27. And now when the hands (in the will) reach after the children of the Earth
(which [reaching forth] yet, is no other than a will in the spirit of the
child in the Mothers body) then the Fiat is there, and makes a great room in
the Courts of the three Elements, and a tough firm enclosure round about it,
that they may not touch the flesh: for the flesh is afraid of the children of
the earth, because the earth is thrown away (for its rough stinking
darkness), and it trembles for great fear: and it looks still about after
the best [meanes] (least the children of the earth should be too rough for it,
and might cause a stink) that so it might have an Outlet.
opening, and might cast away the stink and the filth, and [so] it makes out
of the Court (which is the maw [or stomack]) an outlet and Gate: and environeth
the same with its tough [soure] harshnesse, and so there is a Gutt.

28. But because the The stink.
Enemy is not yet in substance, but only in the will of the Spirit, therefore
it goes away very slowly downwards, and seeks for the Port, where it will
make an outlet and Gate, that it may cast away the stink and filth, from
whence the Gutts are so very long and Vinding and bloubing like foulds.
crooked.

29. Now when this Conference (which is spiritual, between the three Elements,
fire, air, and water) was perceived by the Spirit of the earth ( viz. the
Essences in the Region of the Lungs) then The spirit of the earth.
it comes at last (when the habitation, or the Court was already built for the
children of the earth) and says to the three Elements, Wherefore will ye take
the body for the Spirit? Will you take the children of the earth, and feed upon
them? I am their spirit, and am pure, I can strengthen the Essences of the
soul with my virtue and essences, and uphold them well, take me in.

30. And they say, yes, we will take thee in, for thou art a member of our
spirit, thou shall dwell in us, and strengthen the Essences of our spirit, that
it may not faint; yet we must also have the children of the earth (for they
have our quality also in them) that we may rejoice: and the Spirit of the
Lungs says; Then I will live in you wholly, and rejoice my self with you.

The Gate of the Sydereall, or Astrall spirit.
starry Spirit.
31. Thus now when the light of the Sun; which had discovered and imprinted
it self in the fire-flash of the Essences of the spirit, and was shining in
the fire-flash (as in a strange virtue, and not in the Suns own virtue) [when
he] sees, that he has gotten the Rule, government, or predominancy.
Region, and that the Note, the Essences of the soul are the Worm or Spirit
that never dies.
Essences: of the soul (which are the Worm or the Spirit) as also the
Elements will rejoice in his virtue and splendor, and that the Elements have
made their four Regions [or Dominions] and habitations, for an everlasting
possession, and that The Sun.
he should be a King, and that The Elements.
they should serve at Court (in the Spirit of the Essences) in the heart, and
so exceedingly love him, and rejoice in their service, and have besides brought
the The fruits of the Earth.
children of the earth, that the spirit might present them (where then they
will first be frolic and potent, and eat and drink of the Or, virtues.
Essences of the children of the earth) then The Sun.
he thinks with himself, it is good to dwell here, thou art a King, thou will bring The worldly wise, or the Children of the Sun.
thy kindred [off-spring, or Generation] hither, and raise them up above the
Elements, and make thy self a Region [or Dominion]; art not thou the King?
(here is the Gate where the children of this world are wiser than the children
of light. O Man! Consider thy self!) And he draws the Constellations to him,
and brings them into the Essences, and sets them over the Elements, with
their wonderful and unsearchable various Essences (whose number is infinite,)
and makes himself a Region and Kingdom of his Generation in a strange
Country.

32. For the Essences of the soul are not this Kings own, he has not
generated them, nor they him; but he has, by lust, imprinted himself also in
its Essences, and kindled himself in its fire-flash, of purpose to find its
virgin, and live in her; which is the amiable divine virtue [or power:] because
the spirit of the soul is, out of the eternal, and had the virgin, before the
Fall, and therefore now the Spirit of the great world continually seeks the,
virgin in the Spirit of the soul, and supposes that she is there still, as
before the Fall, where the Spirit of the great world appeared in Adams virgin
with very great joy, and desired also to live in the virgin, and to be
eternal; because he felt his corruptibility, and that he was so rough in
himself, therefore he would feign partake of the loving kindness and
sweetness of the virgin, and live in her, that so he might live eternally, and
not break [corrupt or perish] again.

33. For by the great longing of the Darkness, after the light and virtue of
God, this world has been generated out of the Darkness, where the holy virtue
of God [shone or] beheld it self in the Darkness: and therefore this great
desiring and longing after the divine virtue, continues in the Spirit of the
Sun, Stars, and Elements, and in all things: All groan and pant after the
divine virtue, and would feign be delivered from the vanity of the Devil: but
seeing that cannot be, therefore all creatures must wait till their Corruption.
Dissolution, when they [shall] go into their Either, and get a place in
Paradise, yet only in the figure and shadow, and the Spirit [must] be
Corruption.
dissolved, which here has had such lust [or longing].

34. But now this lust [or longing] must be thus, or else no good creature
could be, and this world would be a mere Hell and wrathfulnesse. And now
seeing the virgin stands in the second Principle, so that the spirit of this
world cannot possibly reach to her, and yet that the virgin does continually
behold her self [or appeare] in the Spirit of this world, to [satisfie] the
lust and longing in the fruit and growing of every thing, therefore The spirit
of the great world.
he is so very longing, and seeks the virgin continually: he exalts many a
creature in great skill and cunning subtilty, and he brings it into the
highest degree that he can; and continually supposes that so the virgin shall
again be generated for him; which he saw in Adam before his fall; which also
brought Adam to fall, in that The spirit of the great world.
he would dwell in his virgin, and with his great lust so See more of this
strife in cap. 12. from 39 to the 47 verse.
pressed Adam, that he fell a sleep; that is, he set himself by force in
Adams Tincture close to the virgin, and would feign have qualified in her, and
[mingled] with her, and so live eternally, whereby the Tincture grew weary, and
the virgin withdrew.

35. And then Adam fell, and was feeble, which is called sleep: This was the
Adams inward tree of Temptation.
Tree of Temptation [to try] whether it was possible for Adam to live eternally
in the virgin, and to generate the virgin again out of himself, and so
generate an Angelical Kingdom.

36. But seeing it could not so be (because of the spirit of this world)
therefore was the outward Temptation first taken in hand by the Tree of the
fruit of this world. And there Adam became Or, at length.
perfectly a man of this world, and did eat and drink of the earthly
Essences, and infected, [or mingled] himself with the Spirit of this world,
and became that [Spirits] own, as we now see by woeful experience, how that
[Spirit] possesses a child in the mothers body in the Incarnation: for he
knows not any where else to seek the virgin, but in man, where he first of
all espied her.

37. Therefore he does wrestle in many a man (that is of a strong Complexion,
in whom the virgin does often behold her self) so very hard, continually
supposing he shall get the virgin, and that she shall be generated for him:
and the more the soul resists him, and draws near to the heart of God,
and pants to yield it self over thereto (where the amiable virgin not only
freely looks upon it, but dares even for a long time even to fit in its
neast, [ viz. in] the Tincture of the soul,) the more strong and [eagar or]
desirous does the spirit of this world come to be.

38. Where then the King ( viz. the light of the Sun) is so very joyful, in
the Spirit, and does so highly triumph, exult, and rejoice, that he moves all
the Essences of the Stars, and brings them into their highest degree, to
generate her; where then all Centres of the Stars fly open, and the loving
virgin beholds her self in them. Where then the Essences of the soul (in
the light of the virgin) can see in the Centres of the Stars, what is in its
In the original and wellspring of the soul.
original and source.

39. Of which my soul knows full well, and has also received its knowledge
thus; which The great learned Men in the univerties, not taught by the Holy
Ghost.
the learned Master in the Crowned.
Hood of his degree, cannot believe: because he cannot apprehend it, therefore
he holds it to be impossible, and ascribes it to the Devil (as the Jews
did by the son of the virgin, when he in [the virtue of] the virgin showed
signs and wrought miracles:) which my soul regards not, neither esteems
their pride, it has enough in the Pearl: and it has a longing, to show the
thirsty [where] the Pearl [lyeth]: the crowned Hood [or cornered cap] may play
merrily behind the Curtain of Antichrist; They that are not blind shall see
it.
till the Lilly grow, and then the smell of the Lilly will [cause some to]
throw away the Hood, [or Cap], says the virgin; and the thirsty shall drink
of the water of life: and [at that time] the son of the virgin will rule in
the valley of Jehosaphat.

40. Therefore seeing the mystery in the light of the virgin thus wonderfully
meets us, we will here, for the seeking mind, (which in earnest hope
seeks that it might find the Pearl) open yet one Gate, as the same is
opened to us in the virgin: For the mind asks: seeing that the Sun Stars
and Elements were never yet in the second Principle (where the virgin
generateth her self out of the light) therefore how could they be able to know
the virgin in Adam, so that they labor thus eagarly with longing after the
virgin?

The Depth in the Center.
41. Behold, thou seeking mind, that which thou see before thy eyes, that is
not the That one pure holy eternal Element.
Element, neither in the fire, air, water, nor earth: neither are there four
but one only, and that is fix and invisible, also imperceptible: for the fire
which burns is no Element, but [it is] the fierce [sterne wrath] which come
to be such in the kindling of the anger, when the Devils fell out of the That
one pure holy eternal Element.
Element: the Element is neither hot nor cold, but it is the inclination [to
be] in God, for the heart of God is Barm [that is, warmth] and its Rising up.
ascension is attractive and always finding: and then the hertz [that is, the
heart] is the holding the thing before it self, and not in it self: and then
the ig [the last syllable of the German word Barm-hertz-ig, (that is,
warme-hearted, or merciful) expounded according to the Language of Nature] is
the continual discovering of the thing, and this is altogether Ewig
[eternall;] and that is the ground of the inward Element, which makes the
anger substantial, so that it was visible and palpable, which [anger] Lucifer
with his Legions did awaken: and thereupon he now remains to be Prince in the
anger [or wrath] (in the kindled Element) as Christ (according to this form)
calls him a Prince of this world.

42. And the Element remains hidden to the anger and Grimnesse.
fierceness [or wrath] and stands in Paradise; and the Grimnesse.
fierce-wrath goes still out from the Element: and therefore God has
captivated the Devils with the Element in the Grimnesse.
fierce-wrath, and he keeps them [in] with the Element: and the Grimnesse.
fierce-wrath cannot [touch or] comprehend The Element.
it, like the fire and the light: for the light is neither hot nor cold, but
the Grimnesse.
fierce-wrath is hot; and the one holds the other, and the one generateth the
other.

43. Here observe: Adam was created out of the Element, out of the attracting
of the heart of God, which is the will of the Father, and therein is the virgin
of the divine virtue [or power] and the outward Begiment (which in the kindling
parted it self into four parts) would feign have had the same [virgin] in it
self; that is the fierceness of the Devil would feign have dwelt in the
heart of^ God, and have domineered over it, and have opened a Center there,
which the fierceness without the light cannot do, for every Center ^^s
generated and opened with the kindling of the light: thus the fierceness would
feign be over the meekness, and therefore has God caused the Sun to come
forth, so that it has thus opened four Centres, viz. the going forth out of
the Element.

44. And when the light of the Sun appeared in the fierce [sournesse or]
harshnesse, then the harshnesse became thin and Pleasant.
sweet, even water, and the fierceness in the fire-flash was extinguished by
the water, so that the anger stood still, yet the will could not rest, but went
forth in the mother, out of the water, and moved it self, which is the air:
and that which the fierce soreness had Coagulated.
attracted to it, that was thrust out of the Element, in the water, as you see
that earth swimmeth in the water.

45. Thus the evil child pants after the Mother, and would get to be in the
Mother in the Element, and yet cannot reach her; but in Adam that [childe] did
perceive the Element; and thereupon the four Elements have drawn Adam to
them, and supposed then that they had the mother; because the virgin there
showed her self in the living spirit of Adam.

46. Hereupon now the Spirit of the Stars and Elements would continually
[get] again into the Element; for in the Element there is meekness and rest;
and in the Viz. In the four Elements.
kindling thereof there is mere enmity and contrary will, and the Devil
rules also therein; and they would feign be released from that abominable and
naughty Guest, and they seek with great anxiety after The dissolu^tion.
deliverance; as Paul says; All creatures groan together with us, to be freed
from vanity.

47. Then says the mind: Wherefore does God let it move so long in the
Anxiety? alas! when will it be that I shall see the virgin? Hearken, thou noble
and highly worthy Mind, it must all enter in, [and serve] to the glory of God,
and praise God; as it is written, All tongues shall praise God; let it pass
till the number, to the praise of God, be full, according to the eternal mind.

48. Thou will say, How great is that [number] then? Behold, tell the Stars
in the Firmament, tell the Trees, the herbs, and every [spile of] Grass, if
thou can; so great is the number that shall enter in, to the glory and honor
of God. For in the end all Stars pass again into the Element, into the
Mother: and there it shall appear, now much good they have brought forth here
by their working: for the shadow, and the image of every [thing or] substance,
shall appear before God, in the Element, and stand eternally; in the same thou
shall have great joy, thou shall see all thy works therein; also all the
afflictions thou have suffered, they shall be altogether changed into great
joy, and shall refresh thee indeed, wait but upon the LORD; the Spirit
intimates that when the time of the Lilly is Or, come about.
expired, then this shall be done.

49. Therefore it is that God keeps it hidden so long (as to our fight) that
the number of the glory of his Kingdom may be great; but before him it is but
as the twinkling of an eye: have but patience, this world will most certainly
be dissolved, together with the fierceness which must abide in the first
Principle, therefore do thou beware of that.

50. My beloved Reader, I bring in my Figures or Parables.
Types of the Essences of the Incarnation in the Mothers body, in a [Colloquie
or] Conference of the Spirit with the Essences and Elements, Note.
I cannot bring it to be understood in any easier way: only you must know,
that there is no conference, but it is done most certainly so in the Essences,
and in the Spirit. Here you will say to me, thou do not dwell in the
Incarnation, and see it: thou did once indeed Were incarnate in thy mothers
womb.
become man, but thou knew not how, nor what [was done then]: neither can
thou go again into thy mothers body [or womb] and see how it came to pass
there. Such a Doctor was I also: and in my own reason I should be able to judge
no otherwise; if I should stick still in my blindness: But thanks be to God,
who has regenerated me, by water and the Holy Ghost, to [be] a living
Creature, so that I can (in his light) see my great inbred [native] vices,
which are in my flesh.

51. Thus now I live in the spirit of this world in my flesh, and my flesh
serves the spirit of this world: and my mind [serveth] God: my flesh is
generated in this world, and has its Kingdom or Dominion
Region [or Government] from the Stars and Elements, which dwell in it, and
are the master of the [outward] Or, body.
life: and my mind is Or, generated of God.
regenerated in God, and loves God. And although I cannot comprehend and hold
the virgin (because my mind falls into sins) yet the Spirit of this world
shall not always hold the mind captive.

52. For the virgin has given me her promise, not to leave me in any misery,
she will come to help me in the son of the virgin: I must but hold to him
again: and he will bring me well enough again to her into Paradise; I will
give the venture, and go through the thistles and thorns, as well as I can,
till I find my native Country again, out of which my soul is wandered, where
my dearest virgin dwells, I rely upon her faithful promise, when she
appeared to me, that she would turn all my mournings into great joy: and
when I lay upon the mountain toward the Or, Midnight.
North, so that all the trees fell upon me, and all the storms and winds
beat upon me, and Antichrist gaped at me with his open jaws to devour me;
then she came and comforted me, and married her self to me.

53. Therefore I am but the more cheerful, and care not for him, he rules
[and domineereth] over me no further than over the Over the transitory house
of flesh.
house of sin, whose Patron he himself is; he may take that quite away, and
so I shall come into my native Country: but yet he is not absolutely Lord over
it, he is but Gods Ape: for as an Ape (when its belly is full) imitateth all
manner of tricks and prancks to make it self sport, and would feign seem to
be the finest and the nimblest Beast [it can], so also does he: Note. I desire
not to write the exposition of this yet.
His power hangs on the Great Tree of this world, and a storm of wind can
blow it away.

54. Now seeing I have showed the Reader, how the true Element sticks wholly
hidden in the outward kindled [Elements], for a comfort to him, that he may
know what he [himselfe] is, and that he may not despair in such an earnest
manifestation [or Revelation as this is] therefore now I will go on with my
Conference between the Elements, Sun and Stars, where there is a continual
wrestling and overcoming, in which the child in the Mothers body [or womb] is
figured: and I freely give the Reader to know, that indeed the true Element
lies hidden in the outward man, which is the chist of the Treasure [or cabinet
of the precious gemme and jewell] of the soul, if it be faithful, and yield
it self up In.
to God.

55. So now when the heart, liver, lungs, bladder, stomach, and spirit,
together with the other parts [or members] of the child, are figured in the
Mothers body, by the Constellation and Elements, then the Region or Regiment
rises up, which at length figureth [fashioneth or formeth] all whatsoever was
wanting; And now it exceedingly concerns us to consider of the originality of
speech, mind, and Or; Senses, inward senses.
thoughts, wherein Man is an image and similitude of God, and wherein the noble
knowledge of all the three Principles does consist.

56. For every Beast also stands in the springing up of the life (formerly
mentioned) in the Mothers body; and takes its beginning after the same manner
in the [Dammes or] Mothers body, and its Spirit lives also in the Stars and
Elements, and they have their [faculty of] seeing from the glance of the Sun:
and in the same [beginning of the life] there is no difference between Man and
Beast. For a Beast eats and drinks, smells, hears, sees, and feels,
as well as man: and yet they have no understanding in them, but only to feed
and multiply. We must go higher, and see what the Image of God is, which God
so dearly loved, that he spent his heart and son upon it, and gave him to To
be incarnate.
become Man, so that he came to help Man again after the Fall, and freed and
redeemed him again from the beastiall Birth, and brought him again into
Paradise, into the heavenly Kingdom or Dominion.
Region.

57. Therefore we must look after the ground [of it] how not only a beastiall
man with beastiall qualifications [or condition] is figured [or formed] but
also a heavenly, and an Image of God, to the honor of God and [the magnifying
of] his deeds of wonder: to which end he so very highly graduated Man, that he
had an eternal similitude and Image of his own substance: for to that end, he
has manifested himself by heaven and earth, and created some creatures to
[be] eternal, understanding, and rational Spirits, to live in his virtue and
Glory, and some to [be] figures; so that (when their Spirit goes into the
Either and dissolveth) the Spirits which are eternal might have their joy and
recreation In.
with them.

58. Therefore we must search and see, what kind of Image that is, and how it
takes its beginning so, that Man bears an earthly Elementary, and also an
heavenly Image. And not only so, but he bears also a hellish [Image] on him,
which is inclined [or prone] to all sins and wickedness: and all this takes
beginning together with the beginning of the life.

59. And further, we must look, where then the own will sticks, [whereby]
Man can in [his] own power, yield up himself how he will [either] to the
Kingdom of Heaven, or to the Kingdom of Hell. To this looking Glass, we
will invite them that hungar and thirst after the noble knowledge, and show
them the ground, whereby they may in their minds be freed from the errors and
contentions Controversies in the Antichristian Kingdom. Whosoever now shall
rightly apprehend this Gate, he shall understand the Being of all beeings, or
substance of all substances.
Essence of all Essences, and if he rightly consider it [he shall so] learn to
understand what Moses, and all the Prophets, and also what the holy Apostles
have written, and in [or from] what kind of Spirit every one has spoken; also
what has ever been, and what shall or can be afterward.

The most precious Gate in the Root of the Lilly.
60. Now if we consider the three Principles, and how they are in their
Original, and how they generate themselves thus; then we [shall] find the
Essence of all Essences, how the one goes out of the other thus, and how the
one is higher graduated than the other, how the one is eternal, and the other
corruptible, and how the one is fairer and better than the other: also thus we
[shall] find, wherefore the one wills [to goe] In resignation.
forward, and the other In self.
backward: Also, [thus we shall] find the love and desire, and the hate [and
enmity] of every thing.

61. But now we cannot say of the Originalnesse of the Essence of all Essences
otherwise, than that in the Original there is but one only Essence, out of
which now goes forth the Essence of all Essences, and that one Essence is the
eternal mind of God, that stands [hidden] in the darkness, and that same
Essence has longed from Eternity, and had it in the will to regenerate the
light: and that longing is the source [or eternall] working property,] and
that will is the springing up, now the springing up makes the stirring and the
mobility, and the mobility makes the attracting in the will, and the will
makes again the longingnesse, so that the will always longs after light:
and this is an eternal Band, that is without beginning and without end: for
where there is a willing, there is also desiring, and where there is a
desiring, there is also in the wills desiring, an attracting of that which the
will desires. Now the desiring is sour, hard, and cold, for it draws to it,
and holds it: for where there is nothing, there the desiring can hold
nothing: and therefore if the will desires to hold any thing, the desiring
must be hard, that the will may comprehend it: and being there was nothing from
eternity, therefore the will also could comprehend and hold nothing.

62. Thus we find now that the Three, from eternity are a not beginning and
indissoluble band; viz. Attracting.
longing, willing, and desiring, and the one always generateth the other, and
if one were not, then the other also would not be, of which none know what it
is; for it is in it self nothing but a Spirit, which is in it self in the
darkness: and yet there it is no darkness, but a nothing, neither darkness
nor light. Now then the Attracting.
longing is an hunger [seeking] or an infecting of the desiring, and the will
is a retention in the desiring: and now if the [desiring] must retain the
will, then it must be comprehensible, and there must not be one [onely] thing
alone in the will, but two, now then seeing they are the two, therefore the
attracting must be the third, which draws that [which is] comprehensible,
into the will. Now this being thus from eternity, therefore it is found of it
self, that from eternity there is a springing and moving: for that [which is]
comprehended, must spring and be somewhat, that the will may comprehend
somewhat: and seeing that it is somewhat, therefore it must be sour and
attractive, that it [may] come to be somewhat. And then seeing it is sour and
attractive, therefore the attracting makes the comprehensibility, that so the
will [may] have somewhat to comprehend and to hold, and then it being thus
comprehensible, therefore it is thicker [grosser or darker] than the will, and
it shadoweth the will, and covers Which is comprehensible.
that [which is attracted] and the will is in Which is comprehensible.
that, and the longing makes them both, and seeing now that the will is in
that [which is] comprehensible, therefore that [which is] comprehensible, is
the darkness of the will: for it has with its comprehensibility enclosed the
will: now the will not being Gotten out.
out of that [which is] comprehensible, it longs continually after the light,
that it might be delivered from the darkness, which yet it self makes with
the longing and attracting.

63. From whence now comes the anxiety, because the will is shut up in the
darkness: and the attracting of the will makes the mobility, and that [which
is] moveable makes the wills rising up out of the darkness. Now therefore the
rising up is the first Essentia. Proceeding virtue.
Essence; for it generateth it self in the attracting, and is it self the
attracting. And yet now the will cannot endure the attracting neither, for it
makes that dark with the attracted Essence [being or substance] which the
will comprehends, and resists it, and the resisting is the stirring, and
the stirring makes a parting or breaking in that [which is] attracted, for it
severeth [it]: and this also the soreness in the attracting cannot endure,
and the anguish in the will is [thereby] the greater, and the attracting to
hold the stirring [is] also the greater. So when the stirring is thus very hard
knit together, and held by the sour attracting, then it eats [gnaweth,
presses, or nippeth] it self, and becomes prickly, and stingeth in the sour
anguish. And when the soreness attracteth the more vehemently [or strongly]
to it, and then the prickle becomes so very great in anxiety, that the will
springs up horribly, and set its purpose to fly away out of the darkness.

64. And here the eternal mind has its original, in that the will, will
[goe] out of that Property, or activity.
source, into another Flowing or working.
source of meekness, and from thence the eternal Property, or activity.
source in the anguish, has also its original, and it is the eternal Worm
which generateth and eats it self, and in its own fierceness in it self
lives in the darkness which it self makes: and there also the eternal
infection [or mixture] has its original, back from which there is no further
to be searched into, Then the eternal property of Hell.
for there is nothing deeper, or sooner, the same always makes it self from
eternity, and has no maker or creator: and it is not God, but Gods original
Grim-sternnesse.
fierceness [or wrath] an anxiety [or aching anguish], generating in it self,
and gnawing [eating or derancing] in it, and yet consuming nothing, neither
multiplying nor lessening.

65. Seeing then the eternal will, which is thus generated, gets in the
anxiety, a mind after somewhat else, that it might escape the soreness [or
fiercenesse], and exult in the meekness; and yet it cannot otherwise be done
than out of it self: therefore the mind generateth again a will to live in
the meekness: and the Originality of this will arises out of the first will,
out of the anguished mind, out of the dark soreness, which in the stirring
makes a breaking wheel: where the re-comprehended will discovers it self
in the breaking wheel in the great anxiety, in the eternal mind, where
somewhat [must] be which stood in the meekness: and this appearing [or
discovery] in the anxious breaking wheel, is a flash of a great swiftness;
which the anguish sharpneeh thus in the soreness so that the sharpness of
the flash is consuming, and that is the fire-flash, as it is to be seen in
Nature, when one A flint and a steel.
hard substance strikes against another; how it [grindeth or] sharpeneth it
self, and generateth a flash of fire, which was not before. And the re
comprehended mind, Or, conceives.
comprehends the flash, and discovers it self now in the soreness: and
the flash with its strong [or fierce] sharpness consumes the comprehended
soreness, which holds it ( viz. the will in the minde] captive in the
darkness; and now it is free from the darkness.

66. Thus the soreness receives the flash, and goes in the terror [shreek
or crack] backwards, as it were overcome, and from the terror [shreeke or
crack] becomes soft: in which meekness the flash discovers it self, as in
its own Mother: and from the meekness it becomes Or, bright.
white and clear: and in the flash there is great joy, that the will therein
is delivered from the darkness.

67. Thus now the eternal mind Appropriateth, or inclines.
uniteth it self in the re-comprehended [or re-conceived] will, in [or unto]
the meekness of the deliverance out of the darkness of the anxiety: and the
sharpness of the consuming of the eternal darkness stays in the flash of
the meekness: and the flash Sparkleth.
discovers it self in the anxious mind in many thousand thousands, yea,
Infinitely.
without end and number, and in that discovery, the will and the inclination
[or yielding up it self discover themselves] always again in a great desire
to go forth out of the darkness: where then in every will the flash stands
again, to [make an] opening, which I call the Centrum [the Centre] in my
Writings all over in this Book.

68. Thus then the first longing and desiring ( viz. the fierce [or sterne]
generating in the first will) with the dark mind, continues Or, for, or
before it self.
in it self, and [hath] therein the ^^^covering of the always enduring
fire-flash in the dark mind, and the same dark mind stands eternally in
anguish, and in the flash, in the breaking, attracting, rising up, and desiring
without intermission [to be] over the meekness, when as in the breaking, with
the fire-flash, (in the sharpness of the flash) in the Essence, the attracting
springs up like a Center or Principle.
Centrum or Principium.

The Gate of God the Father.
69. And thus now in the sharpness of the fire-flash, the light in the
eternal mind springs up out of the re-comprehended will to meekness and
light, that it might be freed from the darkness: and so this freedom from the
darkness is a meekness and Well-doing.
satisfaction of the mind, in that it is free from the anxiety, and stands
in the sharpness of the fire-flash, which breaks the sour darkness, and
makes it clear and light in its [first glimps shining or] appearing.

70. And in this [shining or] appearing of the sharpness, stands the
All-mightinesse [or Omnipotency]: for The appearing or flash.
it breaks the darkness in it self, and makes the joy and great meekness,
like that, when a man is come out of an anguishing [or scorching] fire to fit
in a temperate place of refreshment; and thus the flash in it self is so
fierce and sudden, yea fiercer and suddener than a thought, and out of the
darkness in it self (in its kindling) sees into the light; and then it is so
very much terrified, that it lets its power (which it had in the fire) to sink
down: and this terror [or skreek or crack] is made in the sharpness of the
flash: and this now is the terror [skreeke or crack] of great joy: and there
the re-comprehended will desires the crack of joy in the meekness: and the
desiring is the attracting of the joy, and the attracting is the infecting [or
mingling] in the will: and that [which is] attracted makes the will swell [or
be impregnated], for it is therein, and the will holds it [fast].

71. Now here is nothing which the will with the sharpness or essence could
draw to it, but the meekness, the deliverance from the darkness: this is the
desire of the willing, and therein then stands the pleasant joy, which the
will draws to it self: and the attracting in the will, dwells [or
impregnateth] the will, that it becomes full.

72. And thus the comprehended will is swelled [or impregnated] by the joy in
the meekness, which it desires (without intermission) to generate out of it
self; for its own joy again, and for its sweet taste [or relish] in the joy:
And the same will to generate, comprehends the meekness in the joy (which
stands in the swelled [or impregnated] will) and it brings the Essences (or
the attracting) of the willing, again out of the will, before the will: for
the desiring draws forth the swelling [(...) impregnation] out of the swelled
[or impregnated] will, before the will: and that [which is] drawn forth is the
pleasant virtue, Habitation.
joy, and meekness. And this now is the desiring of the eternal will (and no
more) but to eat and to draw again this virtue into it, and to be satiated
therewith, and [it can] desire nothing higher or more Habitation.
refreshing for therein is the perfection [or fulnesse] of the highest
Habitation.
joy and meekness.

73. And so in this virtue (which is in God the Father, as is beforementioned)
stands the Omniscience [or all knowledge] of what is in the Originalitie in
the Eternity; where the flash then Or, sparkleth into.
discovers it self in many thousand thousands Infinitely.
without number: for this virtue of joy in the [refreshment or] habitation, is
proceeded from the sharpness of the flash, and (in the sharpness of the All
mightiness over the Darkness) sees [or looketh] again in the eternal
sharpness into the dark mind: and that mind inclines it self to the
virtue, and desires the virtue, and the virtue goes not back again in the
darkness, but As the Sunn. does in the water.
beholds it self therein, from whence [it is] that the eternal mind is
continually longing [panting or lusting] after the virtue [or power]: and the
virtue is the sharpness, and the sharpness is the attracting; This is called
the Note.
Eternal Fiat which there creates and corporiseth, what the eternal will in
the Allmighty meekness, (which there is the might and the breaking [or
destroyer] of the darkness, and the building of the Principle,) and what the
will in the eternal [skill or] knowledge discovers, and in it self
conceives [apprehendeth or purposeth] to do: and whatsoever gives it self
up to the meekness, that will the will create by the sharp Fiat which is the
eternal Essence. And this now is the will of God, whatsoever inclines it
self to him, and desires him, that same he will ceate in the meekness: even
all whatsoever (out of the many thousand thousands, out of the infiniteness)
inclines it self in Or, his.
its virtue to him.

74. Now thus the infiniteness has the possibility (while it is yet in the
first Essence [or substance] that it can Enter into resignation.
incline it self to him, but here you must not understand it any more
concerning the whole, for God only is the whole [totum universale] the great
deep all over: but this [which is] in the infiniteness, is divided: and it is
in the appearing [flash or sparkling] of the plurality [or multiplicity], where
the whole, in and through himself in the eternal impregnated darkness,
[sparkleth or] discovers it self in infinitum, [or infinitely]: this
discovery [or Or, these infinite sparks.
these sparklings] stand altogether in the originality of the fire flash, and
may again, in the impregnated darkness ( viz. in the Or, bitterness of the
frost.
cold soreness, and in the flash of the fire) discover [flash or sparkle] and
Or, unite themselves.
give up themselves; or again conceive a will out of the darkness, to go out
of the anxiety of the mind (through the sharpness in the flash) In true
resignation.
in the meekness, to God.

75. For the sharpness in the flash is always the Centrum [or Centre] to the
Regeneration in the second Principle; to which now the Worm in the spark
inclines [or uniteth] to generate it self [in], whether it be in the eternal
cold out of the sharp essence through the flash in the fierceness [or
sternnesse] of the fire, or out of the sharpness in the Regeneration of the
meekness to God; therein it stands, and there is no Or, recalling.
recovery [back from thence]. For, the meekness goes not back again into the
dark fierce and cold Essence, in the first attracting (which from Eternity is
before the recomprehended [or re-conceived] will:) but it comes to help that
[darknesse], and enlighteneth whatsoever comes to it out of the strong might
of God, and this lives in the virtue, and in the light, eternity with God.

76. And the deep of the darkness is as great as the habitation of the light:
and they stand not one distant from the other, but together in one another, and
neither of them has beginning or end: there is no limit or place, but the
sharp regeneration is the mark [stroake, bounds] or limitation between these
two Principles.

77. Neither of them is above or beneath, only the Regeneration out of the
darkness in the meekness, is said to be above: and there is such a [barre or]
Clift, door, or Gulf.
firmament between them, that neither of them both does comprehend the one the
other; for the [barre or] mark of limitation is a whole Birth or Principle,
and a firm Center, so that none of them both can go into the other, but
[onely] the sharp fire-flash, the strong might of God, that stands in the
midst in the Center of the Regeneration, and that only looks into the Worm
of the darkness: and with its terror in the darkness, makes the eternal
anguishing source, the rising up in the fire, which yet can reach nothing but
only the anguish, and in the anguish, the fierce [sterne] flash: and so now
whatsoever becomes corporised there in the stern [fierce or strong] mind, in
the sparkling [or shining] of the infiniteness, and does not put its will (in
the corporising) In resignation.
forward, into the Center of the Regeneration, in the meekness of God, that
remains in the dark mind, in the fire-flash.

78. And so that creature has no other will in it self, neither can it ever
make any other will from any thing: for there is no more in it, but [a will] to
fly up in its own unregenerated might above the Center, and to rule [or
domineere] in the might of the fire, over the meekness of God, and yet it
cannot reach it.

79. And here is the Original [cause] that the Creature of the darkness,
wills to be above the Deity, as the Devil did: and here is the original of
selfe-Pride; for such as the Or, fountain.
source ( viz. its Worm) is [proceeded] out of the eternal will of the dark
mind.

80. And this will is not the will of God, nor it is not God neither, but the
Re-purposed.
re-conceived will In resignation.
to meekness in the mind, is Gods regenerated will; which stands there in
the Center of the Birth in the sharpness of the breaking [or destroying] of
the darkness; and in the pleasant Or, Well-doing.
loving kindness of the fullness of the joy and springing up of the light in
the re-impregnating of the will, and to generate the virtue of the eternal
Omniscience and Wisdom in the love, that is God: and the proceed from him, is
his willing [or desiring] which the essence ( viz. the sharp Fiat) creates:
and God dwells in the second Principle, which is eternally generated out of
the eternal Center out of the Eternal will, [and this] is the Kingdom of God
without number and end, as it further follows.

The Gate of the Son of God, the Pleasant Lilly in the Wonders.
81. Therefore as the will does thus impregnate it self from eternity, so also
it has an eternal willing [or desiring] to Generate.
bring forth the child with which it is big [impregnated or conceived]: and
that eternal will to Generate.
bring forth, does bring forth eternally, the child which the will is
conceived withal: and this child is the eternal virtue [or power] of
meekness, which the will conceives again in it self, and expresses [or
speaks forth] the Deepth of the Deity, with the eternal wonders of the
wisdom of God.

82. For the will [is it] that expresses: and the child of the [eternall]
virtue, and eternal meekness, is the word which the will speaks: and the
going forth out of the spoken word, is the Spirit, which in the sharp might of
God in the Center of the Regeneration, out of the eternal mind, out of the
anxiety in the fire-flash in the sharpness of the [destroying or] breaking of
the darkness, and Opening or unshutting.
breaking forth of the light in the meekness, out of the eternal will, from
eternity goes forth out of the word of God, with the sharp Fiat of the great
might of God: and it is the Holy Ghost [or Spirit] of God, which is in the
virtue [or power] of the Father, and goes eternally forth from the Father
through the Word, out of the mouth of God.

The Gate of Gods Wonders in the Rose of the Lilly.
83. Now Reason asks: Whither goes the Holy Ghost, when he goes forth out
of the Father and Son, through the Word of God? Behold thou sick Adam, here
the Gate of Heaven stands open, and very well to be understood, by those that
will [or have a mind to it]. For the Bride says come, and whosoever thirsts
let him come, and whosoever comes, drinks of the fountain of the knowledge
of the Eternal Life in the smell and virtue of the Lilly of God in Paradise.

84. As is mentioned above, so the Ground of the holy Trinity is in one only
divine and undivided Essence [being, or substance,] God, the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: from Eternity arising from nothing, always generated from and out
of it self from Eternity; not beginning nor ending; but dwelling in it self:
comprehended by nothing, having neither beginning nor end, subject to no
locality, nor limit [number] nor place: it has no place of its rest: But the
Deep is greater than we [can perceive or] think, and yet it is no Deep. But
it is the unsearchable Eternity: and if any here will think [to finde] an end
or limit, they will be confounded [or disturbed] by the Deity, for there is
none: it is the end of Nature: and whosoever [goeth about to] think [or dive
with his thoughts] Or, further.
deeper, does like Lucifer, who in [high mindedness or] Pride, would fly out
above the Deity, and yet there was no place, but he went on himself, into the
fiery fierceness, and so he perished [withered or became dry as] to the
fountain of the Kingdom of God.

85. Now see the Lilly, thou noble mind full of anguish and afflictions of
this world; behold the holy Trinity has an eternal will in it self, and the
will is the desiring, and the desiring is the eternal Essences, wherein then
stands the sharpness ( viz. the Fiat) which goes forth out of the heart,
and out of the mouth of God by the Holy Ghost [or Spirit] of God: and the will
[that is] gone forth out of the Spirit, [that] is the divine virtue, which
conceives [or comprehendeth] the will, and holds it, and the Fiat creates
it [ viz. that vertue] so that in it, as in God himself, all Essences are, and
[so that] the blossom of the light in it may spring up [and blossome] out of
the heart of God; and yet this is not God, but [it is] the chaste virgin of the
eternal wisdom and understanding, of which I treat often in this Book.

86. Now the virgin is [present] before God, and Uniteth.
inclines her self to the Spirit from which the virtue proceeds, out of
which she ( viz. the chaste virgin) is: this is now Gods companion to the
honor and joy of God: the same [appeareth] [or discovers her selfe] in the
eternal wonders of God: in the discovery, she becomes longing after the
wonders in the eternal wisdom, which yet is her self, and thus she longs
in her self, and her longing is the eternal Essences, which attract the holy
virtue to her, and the Fiat creates them, so that they stand in [or become] a
substance: and she is a virgin, and never generateth any thing, neither takes
any thing into her: her inclination stands in the Holy Ghost, who goes forth
from God, and attracteth nothing to him, but Hovereth.
moves before God, and is the Or, Gods fruit.
blossom [or branch] of the growth.

89. And so the virgin has no will to conceive [or be impregnated with] any
thing: her will is [onely] to open the wonders of God: and therefore she is in
the will in the wonders, to discover [or make] the wonders [appeare] in the
eternal Essences; and that virgin-like will creates the sour fiat, in the
Essences, so that it is [become] a substance, and stands eternally before
God, wherein the eternal wonders of the virgin of the wisdom of God are
revealed.

88. And this substance is the eternal Element, wherein all Essences in the
divine virtue stand open, and are visible: and wherein the fair and chaste
virgin of the divine wisdom always discovers her self according to the
number of the infiniteness, out of the many thousand thousands without end and
number: and in this discovering there go forth out of the eternal Element,
colors, arts, and virtues, and the Fruits.
sprouts of the Lilly of God; at which the Deity continually rejoices it self
in the virgin of the wisdom: and that joy goes forth out of the eternal
Essences; and is called Paradise, in regard of the sharpness of the generating
[or bringing forth] of the pleasant fruit of the Lilly [ in infinitum or]
infinitely: where then the Essences of the Lilly springing up in wonders, in
many thousand thousands without number, of which you have a similitude in the
[springing or] blossoming earth.

89. Beloved Mind, behold, consider this, this now is God and his heavenly
Kingdom, even the eternal Element and Paradise, and it stands thus in the
eternal original from eternity to eternity: Now what joy, delight, and
pleasantness is therein, I have no Pen that can describe it, neither can I
express it: for the earthly tongue is too much insufficient to do it; [all
that men can say of it] is like dross compared with Gold, and much more
inferior: yea although the virgin Discovers it in the mind.
b^ingeth it into the mind, yet all is too dark and too cold in the whole man,
so that he cannot express so much as one spark [or glimps] thereof
sufficiently: we will defer it, till [wee come] into the bosom of the
virgin: we have here only given a short hint of it, that the Author of this
Book may be understood: for we are but a very little drop out of the fountain
of the wisdom of God; and we speak as a little sparkle [or glimps]; but
[high] enough for our earthly [understanding] and Or, in respect.
for our weak knowledge here upon earth: for in this life we have no need of
any higher knowledge of the eternal substance [being or essence]: if we do
but barely and nakedly speak of what has been from eternity, it is enough.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Or, understanding.
knowledge of the Eternity in the corruptibility of the Essence of all Essences.
1. NOw if we consider of the Eternal will of God [and] of the Being of all
beeings, or substance of all substances.
Essence of all Essences; then we find in the Originalnesse but one [onely
being, substance, or] Essence, as is mentioned above: out of this [onely]
Essence is generated from Eternity the other [beeing, substance, or] Essence (
viz. the divine [Essence]) and we find that both the [beeings, substances or]
Essences stand in Divine Omnipotence, but not in one Or, working property.
source, neither do they mix together, nor can either of them both be
[destroyed, dissolved, corrupted, or] broken.

2. But yet they have two sorts of inclinations [or desires,] each in it self
for its own. Yet because the divine [beeing or] Essence from Eternity is
generated out of it self, therefore it is inclined to help the weak, and is
rightly called Barmhertzigkeit [Mercifulnesse].

3. And now seeing the virgin of the eternal wisdom has Or, Shone.
discovered her self* in the Eternal Original, and in the eternal mind in
the sharp Essence of the breaking of the darkness in the fire-flash, [hath
found] the depth of the [ Eben-Bildes.
very] Image of God (and that the similitude of God is there in the Eternal
Original), therefore she has longed after the similitude, and that longing
makes the attracting in the will, and the will stood [ Or, presented before.
right] against the similitude: and the Fiat in the attracting of the willing,
created the will in the similitude: out of which came the Angels altogether.
But now the Eternal Essences were in the similitude, and the wisdom
discovered [or manifested] her self in the Essences in many thousand
thousands, that the eternal wonders might be revealed [or made manifest]: and
thereupon there went forth (according to every essence, as out of a fountain)
many thousand thousands.

4. And from thence came the Names of the Thrones and Principalities, as
according to the Essences of the first and great Or, fountain.
source, which in the discovering of the Eternal wisdom of God goes forth
again into many thousand thousands (yet there is a certain number [of them]
and in the Center of God none: [or no number but infinitenesse]: and thus out
of the fountain of every Essence are gone forth, first the Or, Throne-Angels.
Thrones, and in the Throne many thousand thousands.

5. These the Fiat created to a similitude and Image of God: and overshaddowed
the same in the Fiat with the overflowing virtue of God: and the will of God
Or, presented it self before.
set it self [right] against the Image and similitude, and they now which
received the will, they became Angels (for they set their imagination, in the
will, in the heart of God, and they did eat of the Verbum Domini [of the Word
of the Lord]) but they that set their Imagination in the dark mind, as
Lucifer [did that he might] fly out above the Deity and meekness in the might
of the fire in the flash, in the sharp might of God, and be Lord alone, they
became Devils: and they have that name from their being thrust [or driven] out
of the light; for they were in the light when the Fiat created them, for the
Fiat which created them stood in the light.

6. Thus the Devil is the fault, and guilty of his own fall, for he suffered
himself to be moved by the Matrix of the Or, Grimnesse.
sternnesse [fiercenesse, soreness, or wrath] whereas he yet had his own will
to take hold of Light or Darkness: And Lucifer was a Throne (that is, a A
fountain with a great many veins, or as a stock with many branches.
source [or fountaine] of a great essence] from whence went forth all his
servants [or Ministers], and [they] did like him: and so they were thrust back
into the darkness, for the light of God goes not into the [grimnesse, wrath,
or] fierceness.

7. And there the Fiat (which created the fierce [wrathfull or grim] Devils, in
hope that they would of Devils become Angels, who set their imagination
therein, that thereby they might domineere over God and the Kingdom of Heaven)
was infected in the figuring of the similitudes: and so instantly kindled the
Element in the similitude ( viz. in the out-Birth [or procreation]) in the
speculating [or beholding], so that the Essence has generated to the highest
Essences, from whence go forth the four Elements of this world, of the third
Principle: and the sharp Fiat of God (which stood in the Out-Birth [or
procreation]) has created the out-Birth, out of which the earth and stones are
proceeded.

8. For when the Fiat kindled the Element in the Out-birth, then the kindled
Materia [or matter] became palpable [or comprehensible] this was not now fit
for Paradise, but it was ex-created: [or made externall]: yet that the Element
with its out-Birth might no more generate thus, therefore God created the
Heaven out of the The one pure Element.
Element, and [caused or] suffered out of the Element, (which is the heavenly
Limbus) the third Principle to spring up; where the Spirit of God again
discovered [or revealed] it self in the virgin, viz. in the Eternal Wisdom:
and found out, in the out-Birth, n the corruptible substance, the similitude
again: and the discovering stood in the sharp attraction of the Fiat, and the
Fiat created it so that it became Essential [or substantiall]; and the same
are the Stars, a mere Quinta essentia, an extract of the Fiat's, out of the
Limbus of God, wherein the hidden Element stands.

9. But that the sharp and severe Essence, with the attraction might cease,
therefore God generated a similitude according to the fountain of the heart of
God ( viz. the Sun) and herewith sprung up the third Principle of this world,
and that ( viz. the Sunne] put all things into meekness and Well-doing, or
kindness.
welfare.

10. Seeing then that the Eternal Wisdom of God ( viz. in the chaste virgin of
the divine virtue) had discovered it self in the Principle of this world (in
which place the great Prince Lucifer stood in the Heaven in the second
Principle) therefore the same discovering was eternal, and God desired to shed
forth the similitude out of the Essences, which the Fiat created according to
the kind of every Essence, that they should (after the breaking [or
dissolution] of the outward substance) be a figure and Image in Paradise, and a
shadow of this substance.

11. And that there should go nothing in vain out of the substance of God,
therefore God created Beasts, fowls, fishes, worms, trees and herbs out of
all Essences: and besides [created] also figured Spirits out of the Quinta
Essentia, in the Elements, that so, after the fulfilling of the Time (when the
out-Birth [shall] go into the Either) they should appear before him, and that
his eternal Wisdom in his works of wonder might be known.

12. But seeing it was his will also in this Throne, in the eternal Element,
to have creatures, that should be in stead of the fallen Devils, and possess
the place [of them] in the Heaven in Paradise; therefore he created Man out of
the The eternal one Element.
Element.

13. And as this place was now twofold, and Or, in.
with the eternal Originality threefold, ( viz. [having] the first Principle
in the great anxiety, and the second Principle in the divine habitation in
Paradise, and then the third Principle in the light of ihe Sun, in the
quality of the Stars and Elements) so must man also be created out of all
three, if he must be an Angel in this place, and receive all knowledge and
understanding, whereby he might have eternal joy also with [or in] the figures
and Images which stand not in the Eternal Spirit, but in the eternal figure,
as all things in this world are [or doe].

14. And there God manifests himself according to his eternal Will, in his
eternal Wisdom of the noble virgin, in the Element, which in Paradise
stands in the sharpness of the divine virtue [or power]: and the Fiat
created Man out of the Element in Paradise, for it attracted to it out of the
Quintessence of the Sun, Stars, and Elements in Paradise in the Element of
the Originality, from whence the four Elements proceed: and created Man to the
Image of God (that is, to the similitude of God) and breathed into him into the
Element of the body (which yet was nothing else but Paradisicall virtue) the
Spirit of the Eternal Essences out of the Eternal Originality; and there Man
became a living soul, and an Image of God in Paradise.

15. And the Wisdom of God, the pleasant virgin did Shine forth, or appear.
discover her self in him, and with the discovering opened Adams Center, in
[or to] many thousand thousands, which should proceed out of this fountain of
this Image: and the noble virgin of the wisdom and virtue [or power] of God,
was espoused [or contracted] to him, that he should be modest and wholly chaste
to his virgin, and set no desire in the first, nor in the third Principle, to
qualify [mix with] or live therein, but his inclination or longing must be to
get into the heart of God, and to eat of the The word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God.
Verbum Domini [of the Word of the Lord] in all the fruits of this world.

16. For the fruits were also good, and their inclination [or that which made
them to be desired] proceeded out of the inward Element, out of the The divine
habitation.
Paradise: now Adam could eat of every fruit in the mouth, but not Or, in the
stomach or maw, where the meat turns to corrupt dung.
in the corruptibility, that must not be, for his body must subsist eternally,
and continue in Paradise, and generate a chaste virgin out of himself, like
himself, without rending of his body: for this could be, being his body was
[proceeded] out of the heavenly Element, out of the virtue of God.

17. But when the chaste virgin found her self thus in Adam with great wisdom,
meekness, and humility, then the outward Elements became lusting after the
eternal, that they might Discover or manifest.
raise themselves up in the chaste virgin, and Or, mix with her, or work in her.
qualify in her; seeing that Adam was extracted out of them, [ viz. the four
Elements] out of the Quinta Essentia, therefore they desired their own, and
would qualify therein, which yet God did forbid to Adam, [saying] that he
should not eat of the knowledge of good and evil, but live in [the] one
[onely Element], and be contented with Paradise.

18. But the Spirit of the great world overcame Adam, and put it self in with
force, in Quintam Essentiam, [into the Quintessence] (which there, is the fifth
form, the extract out of the fou^e Elements and Stars:) and there must God
create a Woman [or wife] for Adam out of his Essences, if he must be to fill
the Kingdom, according to the appearing [discovering, shining, or sparkling]
of the noble virgin [with many thousand thousands] and build [or propagate] the
same. And thus Man became earthly, and the virgin departed from him in
Paradise; and there she warned [called and told] him that he should lay off
the earthlinesse, and then she would be his Bride and loving Spouse. And now
it cannot be otherwise in this world with Man, he must be Begotten, conceived,
borne, nourished, and preserved.
generated in the virtue of the outward Constellation and Elements, and live
therein till the earthlinesse fall away.

19. And thus he is in this life threefold, and the threefold Spirit hangs on
him, and he is generated therein, neither can he be rid of it, except he
[corrupt or] break to pieces: yet he can be rid of Paradise, whenever his
Spirit imagines in the fierceness [or wrath] and falsehood, and gives up
himself thereto, that so he might be above meekness and righteousness in
himself, as a Lord like Lucifer [and] live in pride [and statelinesse]; and
then Paradise Cease, vanishes, or disappeareth.
falls [away], and is shut up: and he loses the first Image which stands
in the hidden Element in Paradise.

20. For the Adamicall Though he lives in the four Elements.
however (according to the inward Element which stands open in the mind) can
live in Paradise: If he strive against evil, and wholly with all his strength
give himself up to the heart of God, then the virgin dwells with him, (in
the inward Element in Paradise,) and enlighteneth his mind, so that he can
tame the Adamicall Body.

21. For these Or, These three properties, darkness, light, and the four
Elements.
three Births are [inbred or] generated together with every one in the Mothers
[womb or] body, and none ought to say, I am not elected; for it is a lie, [and
he] belyeth the Element (wherein Man also lives) and besides [he] belyeth the
virgin of wisdom, which God gives to every one which seeks her with
earnestness and humility: so [likewise] the possibility of seeking is also in
every one, and it is inbred [or generated] in him with the all possible hidden
Element [to which all things are possible] and there is no other cause of
perdition in Man, than [was in or] with Lucifer, whose will stood free, he must
either reach into God in humility, chastity, and meekness, or into the dark
mind, in the climing up of malice and fierceness [or grimnesse] which yet (
The fierceness in its working would not lift it self above God.
in its flowing forth) desires not to lift it self up above God, but it
inclines it self only above the meekness, in the fire-flash, in the stern
[or fierce] Regeneration: But the Devils would (as creatures) be above all, and
be Lords wholly [of themselves] and Note: the evil of Nature is not in fault,
but the creature is in fault and guilty.
so it is also with Man here.

22. The pride of Nature indeed inclines one man more strongly than another,
but it forces [or compelleth] none that they must be proud: and if there be a
force [or strong compulsion upon any] then it is when Man willingly for
temporal honor and pleasure sake lets the Devil into his eternal Essences;
and then he [the Devill] sees presently how that Man is inclined [or led] by
the Spirit of this world, and in that way tempts him accordingly: if Man let
him but in, he is then a Guest very hardly to be driven out again; yet it is
very possible, if that man entirely and sincerely purpose to turn, and to live
according to the will of God, then the virgin is always ready [beforehand] in
the way to help him.

23. It goes very hard, when the [Graine of] Mustard Seed is sown (for the
Devil opposes strongly) but whosoever persevereth, finds by experience what
is written in this Book: and although he cannot be rid of the untowardnesse of
the incitements of the four Elements, yet nevertheless the noble seed in the
In the pure eternal one Element.
Limbus of God continues with him, which seed springs and grows, and at
last becomes a Tree, which the Devil savoureth [or relisheth] not* but he
goes about the Tree like a fawning curre which pisseth against the Tree; and
then by his servants he casts all mishaps upon him: and by his crew [of
followers and confederates] he trusts many out of Out of this earthly rotten
Tabernacle.
his house, that he may do him no more displeasure: But it goes well with him
[that fears God] and he comes into the land of the living.

24. Therefore we say now, (according to our high knowledge) that the source
[or active desire] of all the three Principles does imprint it self together
Or, in.
with the childs incarnation [or becoming Man] in the mothers body. For after
that Man is figured [or shaped] from the Stars and Elements, by the Fiat, so
that the Elements have taken possession of their Regions, [Kingdomes, or
Dominions] ( viz. the heart, liver, lungs, bladder, and stomach, wherein they
have their Regions) then must the Or, work-master the Fiat.
Artificer in his twofold form rise up out of all Essences: for there stands
now the Image of God, and the Image of this world, and also is the Image of the
Devil: now there must be wrestling and overcoming, and there is need of the
Treader upon the Serpent, even in the Mothers [womb or] body.

25. Therefore ye Fathers and Mothers be honest and live in the fear of God,
that the Treader upon the Serpent may also be in your fruit. For Christ says,
A good Tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, and an evil Tree cannot bring
forth good fruit: And although this indeed is meant of the mind that is Or,
comes to act of it self.
brought up: which has its own understanding [or meaning] thus, that no false
mind brings forth good fruit, nor no good mind evil fruit, yet it is
effectually necessary for the children [that the Parents be honest and
vertuous] because the child is generated from the Essences of the Parents.

26. And though it be clear that the Stars in the outward Birth [Geniture or
operation] do alter the Essences in every one according to their Operation.
source [quality, influence, or property], yet the Element is still there, and
they cannot alter that with their power, except man himself do it, they have
only the outward Region; and beside, the Devil dare not Or, give him self
into the Imagination.
Image [or imprint] himself, before the Time of the understanding, when Man
can incline himself to the evil or to the good: yet none must presume upon
this [impotency of the Devil, and four Elements]: for if the Parents be
wicked, God can well forsake a wicked seed: for he wills not that the Pearl
should be cast before swine: although he is very inclined to help all men, yet
it is [effectuall] but for those that turn to him: and although the child is
in innocence, yet the seed is not in innocence: and therefore it has need of
the Treader upon the Serpent [or Saviour]: Therefore ye Parents consider what
ye do: especially ye knaves and whores: ye have a hard lessen [to learn
here]: consider it well, it is no jesting matter, it shall be shown you In the
Book of Election and predestination.
in its place, that the Heaven thundereth [and passes away with a noyse]:
truly the time of the Rose brings it forth, and it is high time to awake, for
the sleep is at an end, there shall a great Cleaving asunder, shaking and
alteration, as by an earthquake.
Rent be before the Lilly; therefore let every one take heed to his ways.

27. If we now search into the life of Man in the Mothers [womb or] body,
concerning his virtue [or power] speech, and Or, thoughts.
senses, and the noble and most precious mind; then we find the cause
wherefore we have made such a long Catalogue, or Relation.
Register concerning the eternal Birth: for the speech, senses, and mind have
also such an Original as is above mentioned concerning the Eternal Birth of
God, and it is a very precious Gate [or Exposition].

28. For behold, when the Gate of this world in the child is made ready, so
that the child is [become] a living soul out of the Essences, and now
[henceforth] sees only [by or] in the light of the Sun, and not in the
light of God: then comes the true The Master the Fiat.
Artificer, instantly in the twinkling of an eye (when the light of the life
kindles) and figureth [that which is] his: for the center breaks forth in
all the three Principles. First, there are the four Essences in the Fiat in
the stern might of God, which there are the childs own, the Worm of its
soul, which stands there in the house of the great anxiety, as in the
Originality. For the seed is sown in the will, and the will receives the
Fiat in the Tincture, and the Fiat draws the will to it inwardly, and
outwardly [draweth] the seed to a Concretion, substance, or body.
Mass: for the inward and outward Or, Master.
Artificer is there.

29. When the will thus draws to it, then it becomes inwardly and outwardly
impregnated, and is darkened, the will cannot endure this, viz. to be set in the
dark, and therefore falls into great anxiety for the light: for the outward
Materia [or matter] is filled with the Elements, and the blood is choked
[checked or stopped]: and there then the Tincture withdraws, and there is
then the right Abyss of Death, and so the inward [ Materia or Matter] is
filled from the Essences of the virtue, [or power,] and in the inward there
rises up another will, out of the stern virtue of the essences [that it
might] lift it self up into the Light of the meekness, and in the outward
stands the desire to be severed, the impure from the pure, for that the
outward Fiat does.

30. We must consider in the virtue [or power] of the virgin, that the will
first is threefold, and each in its Center is fix [stedfast or perfect] and
pure, for it proceeds out of the Tinct^^e. In the first Center there
springs up between the Parents of the child the inclination [or lust] and
the beastiall desire to copulate, this is the outward Elementary Center, and it
is fix in it self. Secondly, there springs up, in the second Center the
inclinable love to the copulation: and although they were at the first fight
angry and odious one to another, yet in the copulating the Center of love
springs up, and that only in the copulating: for the one pure Tincture
receives [or catcheth] the other, and in the copulating the Massa, or
concretion.
Mass receives them both.

31. Now thus the love qualifieth [or mixeth] with the inward [one] Element,
and the Element, with the Paradise, and the Paradise is before [or in the
presence of] God: and the outward seed has its Essences, wbich qualify first
with the outward Elements, and the outward Elements qualify with the outward
Stars, and the outward Stars qualify with the outward sternnesse
[grimnesse, fierceness, frowardnesse] wrath and malice, and the wrath and
malice in the fierceness [severity or austernesse] qualifieth with the
Original of the first fierceness of the Abyss of Hell, and the Abyss
qualifieth with the Devils.

32. Therefore O Man! Consider what thou have received with thy beastiall body,
to eat and to drink of evil and good, which God did forbid. Look here into
the ground of the Essences, and say not with Reason; It was merely for
disobedience, which God was so very angry at, that his anger could not be
quenched: thou art deceived, for if the clear Deity were angry, it would not
have become Man for thy sake to help thee; look but upon the Or, aim.
mark, in the Eternity, and then thou will find all.

33. Thus also the Kingdom of Darkness and of the Devil is sown together in
the copulating, and the third Center of the Or, hot zeal.
great desire springs up along with it, out of which the fierceness
[grimnesse, or wrath] and the house of flesh is generated: for the pure love,
which reaches the Element and consequently the Paradise, has a wholly modest
and chaste Center, and it is Perfect, or complete.
fix in it self, of which I here give you a true Example.

Diligently and deeply to be considered.
34. Behold two young Text, Menschen.
people, who have attained unto the Or, flower.
blossom of the noble Tincture in the Matrix and Limbus, so that it be
kindled; how very hearty, faithful, and pure love, they bear one toward
another, where one is ready to impart the very heart within them to the other,
if it could be done without death: this now is the true Paradisicall blossom,
and this blossom Mixeth or uniteth.
qualifieth, with the [one] Element and Paradise: but as soon as ever they Or,
Merry.
take one another, and copulate, they infect one another with their Or, brand,
or lust burnt to ashes as it were a firebrand.
inflammation [or burning lust] which is generated out of the outward Elements
and Stars, and that reaches the Abyss, and so they are many times at deadly
enmity [or have venomous spiteful hatred] one against another: and though it
happen that their Complexions were noble, so that still some love remains,
yet it is not so pure and faithful as the first before copulation which is Or,
Warm.
fiery, and that in the burning [or burnt] lust [is] earthly and cold (for that
must indeed keep faithful while it cannot be otherwise:) as is seen by
experience in many, how afterward in wedlock they hunt after whoredom, and
seek after the Devils Wanton lust.
Sugar, which he stroweth in the noble Tincture, if Man will let him*

35. Whereby then you see here, that God has not willed the earthly
Copulation: Man should have continued in the fiery love which was in Paradise,
and generate out of himself: But the The divided nature in lust and
wantonness.
Woman was in this world in the outward Elementary Kingdom, in the inflammation
of the forbidden fruit, of which Adam should not have eaten. And although now
he has eaten and thus destroyed us, therefore it is now with him [the
Adamicall Man] as with a Thief that has been in a pleasant Garden, and went
out of it to steal, and comes again and would feign go into the Garden, and
the Gardener will not let him in, he must but reach into the Garden with his
hand for the fruit, and then comes the Gardener and snatcheth the fruit out of
his hand, and he must go away in his burning lust and anger, and comes no
more into the Garden: and in stead of the fruit there remains his desirous
burning lust with him, and that he has gotten in stead of the Paradisicall
Fruit, of that we must now eat, and live in the In the divided nature, and in
the earthly tabernacle, and feed and multiply therein.
Woman.

36. Thus I give you accurately to understand what Man is, and what Man sows,
and what grows in the seed ( viz. Three Kingdoms, as is abovementioned:)
and seeing the three Kingdoms are thus sown, so are they in like manner
before the Tree of Temptation: and there begins the struggling and great
strife, there stand the three Kingdoms in one another: the Element in
Paradise, will keep the pure mind and will, which stands in the love in the
Tincture of the seed: and the outward Elements ( viz. that which went forth
from the Element) will have the Element, and mix it self therewith: and then
comes the outward fierceness of the Stars, and draws it together Or, by
with the outward Fiat, and sets it self [in the rule or dominion] whereby
the inward will in the love together with the Element and the Paradise becomes
darkened, and the love in the Paradise goes into its Either, and is
extinguished in the Tincture of the seed: and the heavenly Center goes under,
for it passes into its Principle.

37. And then comes the Woman with her stopped [or congealed] blood, with the
Stars and Elements, and sets her self in [the Dominion.] And here is the
Paradisicall Death, where Adam, in the living body, dyed; that is, he dyed [as]
to Paradise and the Element, and lived to the Sun, Stars, and the outward
Elements; concerning which, God said to him, That day thou eatest of good and
evil, thou shall dye the Death; and this is the Gate of the first Death in the
Paradise, in which now Man lives in the Elementary Woman of this world in the
corruptibility.

38. And it highly concerns us to know and apprehend, that when the seed is
sown in the Matrix, and that it be drawn together by the Fiat (when the
Stars and the outward Elements set themselves in [the dominion] and that the
love and meekness is extinguished; for there comes to be a fierce substance
in the stopping [or congealing] of the Tincture) that before the kindling of
the light of life, in the child, there is no heavenly Creature: and although
The creature.
it be figured [or shaped] with all the forms [or parts] of the body, yet for
all that, the heavenly Image is not therein, but the beastiall* and if that
body perish [corrupt, or breake] before the kindling of the Spirit of the soul
in the springing up of the life, then nothing of this figure appears before
God on the day of the Restitution but its shadow and shape; for it has yet had
no Spirit.

39. This figure does not (as many judge) go into the Or, Hell.
Abyss, but as the Parents were, so is also their figure: for this figure is
the Parents, till the kindling of its life, and then it is no more the Parents,
but its own: The Mother affords but a lodge, and the nutriment: and therefore
if she destroys it willingly in her body, she is a murtheresse, and the
Divine Law judges her to the Temporal Death.

40. Thus now the Stars and the Elements (after the withdrawing of the love
in the Tincture) take the house into possession, and fill it the first Or,
Moon.
Month: and in the second, they sever the Members [or parts,] (by the sour
Fiat) as is mentioned before: and in the third, the strife begins about the
Regions of the Stars and Elements, where then they separate, and every
Element makes its own house and Region for it self; viz. the Heart, Liver,
Lungs, Bladder, and Stomach; as also the Head to be the A dwelling for the
senses and thoughts.
house of the Stars, where they have their Region [or dominion], and their
Princely Throne, as it follows further.

41. And now after that the Stars and Elements (as is mentioned before) have
gotten their Region and the house to dwell in, then begins the mighty strife
in great anxiety about the King of the life: for the chamber of the building
[or fabrick] stands in very great anguish, and [here] we must consider the
Original of the Essence of all Essences, the Eternal Birth and the Root of
all things: as that there is in the house of the Anguish, first one only
Essence [or Beeing], and that Being.
Essence is the mixing of all Or, Beeings.
Essences, and it has first a will to Or, bring forth.
generate the light, and that will is attractive [astringent or soure].

42. For the desiring is the attracting of whatsoever the will desires: and
that will is first pure; neither darkness nor light; for it dwells in it
self, and it is even the Gate of the divine virtue that fills all things.
And thus the attracting fills the will with the things which the will
desires: and although it be pure, and desires nothing but the light, yet
there is no light in the dark anxiety, that it can attract, but it draws the
Spirit of the Essences of the Stars and Elements into it self, and therewith
the will of the divine virtue is filled, and the same is all rough and dark.
And thus the will is set in the darkness, and this is done also in the heart.

43. The will now standing thus in the dark anxiety, it Or, conceives.
gets another will to fly out of the anxiety again, and to generate the
light: and this other will is the mind, out of which proceed the senses [or
thoughts] not to continue in the anxiety: and the will [appeareth] discovers
it self in the Essences of the soreness, as in the fierce hardness of
Death: and the glimps [or glance] breaks through the Essences of the sour
hardness, as a swift [or sudden] flash, and sharpeneth it self in the sour
hardness, that it becomes [pale, white, or] Text, Blanck.
glimmering like a flash of fire, and in its sudden flight breaks the sour
darkness: and there stands the hardness and the harsh soreness of Death
like a broken turning wheel, which with the flash of the breaking flies
swiftly as a thought; as also then the re-conceived will (which is the mind)
appears so very suddenly: and seeing it cannot fly forward out of the
Essences, it must go into the turning wheel, (for it cannot get from that
place) and so it breaks the darkness: and when the darkness is thus Or,
dispelled.
broken, [then] the sharp glance discovers it self in the pleasant joy
without [or beyond] the darkness in the sharpness of the will ( viz. in the
mind) and finds it self habitable therein, from whence the flash (or
glance) is terrified, and flies up with strong might through the broken
essences out of the heart, and would out at the mouth, and raises it self
far from the heart, and yet is held by the sour [or harsh] Fiat, and yet
then makes it self a several Region ( viz. the Tongue) wherein then stands
the skreeke [or the crack] of the broken Essences: and seeing then it
reflecteth [or recoileth] back again into the heart, as into its first
dwelling house, and finds it self so very habitable and pleasant (because
the Gates of the darkness are broken) then it kindles it self so highly in
the loving will, by reason of the meekness, and goes no more like a stern
[or fierce] flash through all Essences, but [it] goes trembling with great
joy: and the might of the joy is now many hundred times stronger, than first
the flash [or glance] was, which yielded [or discovered] it self through the
sour harsh Essences of the Death, and goes with strong might out of the heart
into the head, in the will [or purpose] to possess the heavenly Region.

44. For The Will.
it is Paradisicall, and it has its most inward root therein: when Adam in
sin, dyed the first Death, then said God, The seed of the Woman shall Break
with treading upon it.
break the Serpents head: the same word Imagined, figured, or formed it self.
imprinted it self in Adam, in the center of the springing up of his life, and
so forth, with the Creation of Eve in the springing up of her life, and so
forth, in all Men, so that we can, in our first mind, through the word and
virtue of God in the Treader upon the Serpent (who in the time became man [or
was incarnate]) trample upon [or breake] the Head and will of the Devil, and
if this might [or power] were not Viz. in the place of the springing up of the
life.
in this place, then we were in the eternal Death. Thus the mind is its own,
in the free will, and moves in the virtue [or power] of God, and in his
promise, in the Free substance [or beeing].

45. Seeing then that the skreek of joy in the virtue of God (which breaks
the doors of the deep Darkness) thus springs up in the heart, and flies
with its glimpse [or sparkling] into the Head; then the virtue of the joy
sets it self above, as being the strongest, and the flash [or glance]
beneath, as being the weakest: and so when the flash [or glance] comes into
the Head into its seat, then it makes it self two open Gates: for it has
broken the doors of the deep Darkness, and therefore it continues no more in
the Darkness, but it must be free as a victorious Prince [or Conquerour], and
will not be held captive: (and this signifies to us, the resurrection of
Christ from the dead, who is now free, and will not be held [therein], which in
its due place shall be very deeply described.) And those Gates which the glance
holds open, they are the eyes, and the spirit of joy is their root, which
[spirit] springs up at first in the kindling of the life.

46. Thus then the strong re-conceived will, (to fly out from the Darkness
and to be in the Light in the Heart) generateth it self; and therefore we
cannot know [or apprehend] it to be any other than the noble virgin, the
wisdom of God; which thus springs up in joy, and in the beginning, marries
her self with the spirit of the soul, and helps it to the light, which
after the springing up of the soul ( viz. after the kindling of the virtue of
the Sun in the Essences) puts her self into its Paradisicall Center, and
continually warns the soul, Of the ways of the ungodly.
of the ungodly ways, which are held before it, by the Stars and Elements,
and brought into its Essences. Therefore the virgin keeps her Throne thus in
the heart, and also in the head, that she may defend and keep them off from
the soul, all over.

47. And we must further Think, or conceive.
consider, that when the skreek [or crack] makes its dwelling house, in its
strong breaking through, out of the Gate of the anxious Darkness, ( viz. the
Tongue) that the skreek [or crack] has not then yet seen the virgin: but when
it reflected [or shined] back again into the heart, into the opened darkness,
and found her so habitable, there then first sprung up its joy, habitablenesse,
and pleasantness, and it became Paradisicall, and desired not [to goe] into
the Tongue again, but into the Head, and [desired] there to have its Region
out of the source of the Heart. Therefore the Tongue ought not in all [or
altogether] to be believed, for it fitteth not in the heavenly Region, as the
friendly pleasant virtue [doth]: but it has its Region in the crack and flash,
and the flash is as near the hellish Region, as the crack is, for they are
both generated in the Or, stern grim sharpness.
sharpness of the Stars, in the Essences, and the Tongue speaks both lies
and truth, in which of the two the Spirit armeth it self according to that it
speaks: also it many times speaks lies in Such as have esteem, authority,
and riches, or such as are high mended, and stout, and have the world at will.
great Men, when it is armed from the Essences, then it speaks in the crack,
like a Rider in his [haughty, furly, vaunting state] or high mindedness.

The Life of the Soul. The Gate.
48. Thus now when the virtue of the life, and the Spirit of the second
Principle, Or, was.
is generated in the first Originality of the first Principle, ( viz. in the
Gate of the deep Darkness, which the will of the virtue of the virgin, in the
fierce earnest flash of the fierce might of God, did break, and set it self
in the pleasant habitation) then instantly the Essences of the Stars and
Elements, in the flash of the springing up of the life, pressed in also; yet
after the building of the pleasant habitation first [made].

49. For the habitation is the Element, and the virtue of the inward Element,
is the Paradisicall Love, which the outward Elements (being generated out of
the Element,) will have for their mother, and the sharp Fiat brings them into
the habitation: and there the light of the life becomes rightly kindled, and
all Essences live in the habitation. For in the beginning of the life, each
Principle Or, catches.
takes its Light.

50. The first Principle ( viz. the Darkness) takes the fierce and sudden
fire-flash; and so when the Re-conceived, or re-purposed.
re-comprehended will, in the first will of the first attracted darkness of
the harshnesse, discovers it self, and breaks the Darkness in the flash,
then the harsh dark fire flash remains in the first will, and stands over
the heart, in the Gall, and kindles the fire in the Essences of the heart.

51. And the second Principle retains its light for it self: which is the
pleasant Or, joy.
habitation, which shines there, where the darkness is broken, [or
dispelled,] wherein the courteous loving virtue, and the pleasantness arises,
from whence the skreeke [or crack] in the strong might becomes so very
joyful, and Or, alayeth it with trembling for joy.
turns its forcible rushing, into a joyful trembling: where then the
fire-flash of the first Principle sticks to The skreek or crack.
it, which causes its trembling: but its source [or active property] is
pleasantness, and joy, that cannot sufficiently be described, happy are they
that find it, [by experience].

52. And the third Principle retains its light wholly for it self, which (as
soon as the light of life springs up,) presses into the Tincture of the
soul, to the The inward one Element.
Element; and teaches after the Element: but it attaineth no more than to the
light of the Sun, which is proceeded, out of the Quinta Essentia, out of the
Element: and thus the Stars and Elements rule in their light and virtue which
is the Suns, and qualify with the soul: and bring many distempers and also
diseases into the Essences, from whence come stitches, agues, swellings and
[other sicknesses [as] the Plague, etc. into those [Essences], and at last
their corruption and death.

53. And now when the light of all the three Principles shines, then the
Tincture goes forth from all the three Principles, and it is highly [worthy]
to be observed, that the middlemost Principle receives no light from Nature,
but as soon as the darkness is broken up, [or dispelled,] it shines in most
joyful habitablenesse, and [hath] the noble virgin dwelling in the joy, viz.
in that Tincture: and the Deity appears so very highly and powerfully in Man,
that we cannot find it so, in any other thing, let us take what we will else
into our Consideration.

54. In the first Principle is the fire-flash, and in the Tincture thereof is
the The dazzling light of the Sun.
terrible light of the Sun, which has its original very sharply out of the
eternal Originalnesse, out of the first Principle, with its root out of the
fifth Essence, through the Element: which may be expounded in another place, it
would be too long to do it here. And besides it should be hidden, he that
knows it, will conceal it, as he would also [conceale] the springing up of
the Stars and Planets: for the cornered Cap will needs have it under the
jurisdiction of his School learning, though indeed he apprehends little or
nothing at all in the light of Nature: let it remain [hidden] till the time of
the Lilly, there it stands all Free discovered or known.
open: and the Tincture is [then] the light of the world.

55. And it is here very exactly seen how the third Principle Appropriateth,
or yields it self up to it.
uniteth it self with the first, and how they have one [onely] will: for they
proceed from one another: and if the second Principle were not in the midst
[between them] then they were but one [and the same] thing. But speaking here
of the Tincture in the life, we will therefore show in the light of Nature,
the true ground of all the three Births.

56. The noble Tincture is the dwelling house of the Spirit, and has three
forms, one is eternal, and uncorruptible: the other, is mutable [or
transitory], and yet with the holy, [or Saints,] continues eternally: but with
the wicked, it is mutable [or transitorie] and flies into the Either: the third
is corruptible Or, as in death.
in Death.

57. The first Tincture of the first Principle is properly the Or, the
refreshment.
habitation in the fire-flash: which is the source, [life, or active property,]
in the Gall, which makes the Brimstone Spirit ( viz. the indissoluble Worm of
the soul, which rules powerfully in the sharp Essences, and moves and
carries the body whither soever the mind, in the second Center, will:) to be
its dwelling house; its Tincture is like the fierce [austere or grim] and sharp
might of God: it kindles the whole body, so that it is warm, and that it grow
not Numb.
stiff [or congealeth with cold] and upholdeth the wheel in the crack in the
Essences, out of which the hearing arises: it is sharp, and proves the smell
of every thing in the Essences: it makes the hearing, though it self is
neither the hearing nor smelling: but it is the Gate that lets in good and
evil, as the tongue and also the ear [doth]: all which comes from hence,
because that The active life of the Gall.
its Tincture has its ground in the first Principle: and the kindling of the
life happens in the sharpness, in the breaking through the Gate of the
eternal Darkness.

58. Therefore are the Essences of the Spirit of the soul so very sharp and
fiery, and [therefore] the Essences go forth out of such a sharp fiery
Tincture: wherein now stand the five senses ( viz. seeing, hearing, smelling,
tasting, and feeling:) for the fierce sharpness of the Tincture of the first
Principle, proves, in its own Essences [in or] of the soul, (or [in the
Essences] of the Worm of the soul, in this place rightly so called) [proveth
I say] the Stars, and Elements, ( viz. the out-birth out of the first
Principle,) and whatsoever uniteth [or yeeldeth] it self to it, it takes that
into the Essences of the Worm of the soul; viz. all whatsoever is harsh [or
soure] bitter, stern, [or fierce] and fiery: all whatsoever generateth it
self in the fierceness, and all whatsoever is of the same property with the
Essences: all that which rises up along there, in the fiery source, and
elevateth it self in the breaking of the Gate of the Darkness, and boyleth
[springeth, or flows up] above the meekness: and all whatsoever is like the
sharp austere Eternity, and qualifieth [or mixeth] with the sharpness of the
fierce anger of the God of the Eternity, wherein he holds the Kingdom of the
Devils Captive.

O Man! consider thy self here, it is the sure Ground, known by the Author,
in the light of Nature, in the will of God.

59. And in this Tincture of the first Principle, the Devil tempts Man: for
it is his source [well-spring, or property] wherein he also lives. Herein he
reaches into the heart of Man, into his souls Essences, and leads him away
from God, into the desire to live in the sharp ( viz. in the fiery) Essences,
that it might be elevated above the humility and the meekness of the heart of
God, and above the love and meekness of the Creatures, [of purpose to seeme]
to be the only fair and glistering Worm in the fire-flash, and to domineere
over the second Principle: and [thus] he makes the soul of Man so extreme
proud, as not to vouchsafe himself to be in the least like any meekness, but
to be like all whatsoever lives in a quality [or property] contrary to it.

60. And in the bitter Essences The Devil.
he makes the Worm of the soul prickly, spiteful, envious, and malicious,
grudging every thing to any: as the bitterness indeed is friends with nothing,
but it stingeth and grindeth, raveth and rages like the Abyss of Hell, and it
is the true house of Death as to the pleasant life.

61. And in the sour [or harsh] Essence of the Tincture of the Worm of the
soul, he infecteth the sour Or, Astringent substance.
harsh Essence, whereb^ it becomes sharply attractive, and gets a will to
draw all to it self, and yet is not able to do it: for the conceived will, is
not easily filled; but is a dry hellish thirsty hunger to have all: and if it
did get all, yet the hunger would not be the less, but it is the eternal
hunger and thirst of the Abyss, the will of Hellfire, and of all Devils, who
continually hunger and thirst, and yet eat nothing; but it is their satiating,
that they [suck or] draw into themselves, the strong source of the Essences of
the harsh, bitter might of the fire, wherein consists their life and
satiating, and the Abyss of the wrath and of Hell is also such [a thing].

62. And this is the source of the first Principle, which (without the light of
God) cannot be otherwise, neither can it change or alter it self; for it has
been so, from Eternity; and out of this source, the Essences of the Worm of
the soul, in the time of its creating, were extracted by the Fiat of God, and
created in Paradise, [and set] Or, for.
before the light of God, which enlightened the fire-flash, and put it into
very high meekness and humility.

63. For because Man was to be Eternal, therefore he must also come to be, out
of the Eternal: for nothing is created out of the fountain of the Heart of
God: for that is the end of Nature, and has no such Essences; no
comprehensible [or palpable] thing enters therein; otherwise it would be a
filling and darkness, and that cannot be: also from Eternity, there has been
nothing else but only the source [or working property] where the Deity
continually rises up, as is mentioned before.

64. And this source of the Spirit of the soul is Eternal, and its Tincture
is also Eternal: and as the source is [in it] at all times Or, in.
of this world, (while it sticks in the Elementary house of flesh), so is the
Tincture also, and the dwelling house of the soul, and in which source the
mind inclines it self, whether it be in the divine or hellish, in that
[source] the Worm lives, and of that Principle it eatteth, and is either an
Angel or a Devil; although its judgment is not in this [lifes] time (for it
stands in both the Gates, so long as it lives in the flesh) except it dive
[or plunge it selfe] wholly into the Abyss, whereof (when I write of the sin
of Man) I shall treat deeply and exactly, read of it, concerning Cain.

65. The mind (which knows [or understandeth] nothing in the light of
Nature) will marvel at such writings, and will suppose that it is not true,
that God has extracted and created Man out of such an Original. Behold thou
beloved Reason and precious Mind, bring thy five senses hither, and I will
show thee whether it be true [or not]: I will show thee [plainly] that thou
have not the least spark [of cause] to allow any other Ground [to build upon],
except that thou will let thy heart be imbittered by the Devil in beastiall
reason; and except thou will wilfully contemn the light of Nature, which
stands in the presence of God: and indeed if thou art in such a beastiall
way, leave my writings, and read them not, they are not written for such
swine, but for the children [of wisedome] that are to possess the kingdom of
God, but I have written them for my self, and for those that seek, and not
for the wise and prudent of this world.

66. Behold, what are thy five senses? in what virtue do they consist? or how
come they in the life of Man? whence comes thy seeing, that thou can see by
the light of the Sun, and not otherwise? consider thy self deeply, if thou will be a Searcher into Nature, and wilt boast of the light of Nature? Thou
can not say that thou see only by the light of the Sun, for there must
be somewhat which can receive the light of the Sun, and which does mix with
the light of the Sun (as the Star does which is in thine eyes) which is not
the Sun, but consists of fire and water: and its glance, which receives
the light of the Sun, is a flash, that arises from the fiery sour and
bitter Gall, and the water makes it soft [or pleasant]. Here you take the
meaning to be only, concerning the outward, viz. the third Principle, wherein
the Sun, Stars, and Elements are; but the same is also true in every the
Creatures in this world.

67. Now what is it that makes the hearing, that you can hear that which
stirs and makes a noise? will thou say that it is caused by the noise of
that outward thing which gives the sound? no! there must also be somewhat that
must receive the sound, and qualify or mix with the sound, and distinguish the
sound of what is played or sung, the outward cannot do that alone, the inward
must receive and distinguish the noise; behold, here you find the beginning of
the life, and the Tincture wherein the life consists: for the Tincture of the
crack in the springing up of the life, in the breaking open of the dark Gate,
stands in the sounding, and has its Gate open, (next the fire-flash near
the eyes), and receives the noise of whatsoever sounds.

68. For the outward sounding qualifieth with the inward, and is severed [or
distinguished] by the Essences: and the Tincture receives all, be it evil or
good; and thereby testifies that it self, with its Essences that generate it,
are not generated out of the Deity, else the Tincture would not let in the
evil and [that which is] false into the Essences of the soul.

69. Therefore we must consider, that the noise in the Tincture of Man is [of
a] higher [nature]* than [that] in the Beasts; for Man searches and
distinguishes all things, which give a sound, and knows from whence it
comes, and how it does exist, which the Beasts cannot do, but stareth at it,
and knows not what it is: whereby it may be understood, that the Original of
Man, is out of the Eternal: because he can distinguish all things, that in the
Out Birth, came out of the Eternal: and hence it is, that the body, (being all
things out of the Eternal nothing, are caused to be something which is
comprehensible [or palpable], and yet there, that nothing, is not a mere
nothing, but it is a Or, active property.
source) after the corrupting shall stand in the Eternal Figure, and not in
the Spirit, because it is not out of the Eternal Spirit: for otherwise if it
were out of the [Eternall] Spirit, then it should also search out the beginning
of every thing, as [well as] Man, who in his sound receives and distinguishes
all things.

70. Thus now the habitation of Man's sound, wherein the understanding is, must
be from Eternity, although indeed in the fall of Adam, Man has set himself in
the corruptibility, and in great want of understanding, as shall follow here.
In like manner also we find concerning the smelling: for if the Spirit did
not stand in the sound, then no smell of any thing would press [or pierce]
into he Essences: for the Spirit would be whole and swelled. But it standing
thus in the Gate of the Disrupt.
broken darkness in the crack and in the sound, therefore every virtue of all
things press in, into that Gate, and try themselves by one another, and what
the Essences of the Spirit do love, that it desires, and draws the same
into the Tincture: and then hands and mouth fall to it, and stuff it into the
stomach, into the Or, Atrium.
outward Court of the four Elements, from whence the earthly Essences of the
Stars and Elements do feed.

71. And the Taste also is, a trying and attracting of the Tincture in the
Essences of the Spirit. And so the feeling also: if the Spirit of Man with its
Essences did not stand in the sound, there would be no feeling; for when the
sour Essences draw to them, then they awaken the bitter prickle [or sting] in
the fire flash, which stirs it self, either by griping, thrusting, or
striking, and thereupon in all driving, the bitter prickle in the fire-flash is
awakened: and therein stands the moving; [and] all in the Tincture.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Noble Mind, of the Understanding, Senses and Thoughts.

Of the threefold Spirit and Will, and of the Tincture of the Inclination, and
what is inbred in a child in the Mothers body [or womb].

Of the Image of God, and of the Beastiall Image, and of the Image of Abyss of
Hell, and similitude of the Devil, to be searched for, and found out in Or, in
very one.
[any] one Man.

The Noble Gate of the Noble Virgin. And also the Gate of the Woman of this
world, highly to be considered.

1. IF we consider our selves in the noble knowledge, which is openned to us
in the love of God, in the noble virgin of the wisdom of God, (not for our
merit, honesty, [vertue] or worthiness, but merely of his own will, and
original eternal purpose) even in those things which appear to us in his
love; then we must needs acknowledge our selves to be unworthy of such a
Revelation: and being we are sinners, we are deficient in the Glory that we
should have before him.

2. But being it is his Eternal will and purpose to do us good, and to open
his Secrets to us according to his counsel, therefore we ought not to
withstand, nor to bury the bestowed Talent in the earth, for we must give
account of it in the appearing of his coming: Therefore we will thus labor in
our Vineyard; and commend the fruit to him, and will set down in writing a
Memorial for our selves, and leave it to him. For we can search or conceive
no further, than only what we apprehend in the light of Nature: where our
Gate stands Or, our comprehensibility.
open: not according to the measure of our purpose, when and how we will, but
according to his gift, when and how he will: we are not able to comprehend the
least sparkle of him, unless the Gates of the Deep be opened to us in our
Mind; where then the zealous [earnest] and highly desirous kindled Spirit, Or,
goes.
is as a fire, to which the earthly body, ought to be subject, and will grudge
no pains to serve the desirous fiery mind. And although it has nothing to
expect for i^ labor, but scorn and contempt from the world, yet it must be
obedient to its Lord, for its Lord is mighty, and it self is feeble, and its
Lord leads [driveth] and preserves it, and yet in its [ignorance or want of]
understanding, it knows nothing of what it does, but it lives like all the
Beasts: and yet its will is [not] to live thus, but it must follow the worthy
mind, which searches after the wisdom of God* and the mind must follow the
light of Nature: for God manifests [or revealeth] himself in that light, or
else we should know nothing of him.

3. And now when we consider our mind, in the light of the Nature; and what
that is, which makes us zealous [or earnest,] which burns there [in] as a
light, and is desirous [thirsty or covetous] like fire, which desires to
receive from that place where it has not sown, and would reap in that
Country where the body is not at home [or dwells not]; then the precious
virgin of the Wisdom of God meets us, in the middlemost seat in the Center
of the light of life, and says: the light is mine, and the [power or] virtue
and glory is mine, also the Gate of knowledge is mine, I live in the light of
Nature, and without me you can neither see, know, nor understand any thing of
my virtue, [or power]. I am thy Bridegroom in the light: and thy desire [or
longing] after my virtue [or power], is my attracting in my self, I sit in my
Throne, but thou know me not: I am in thee: and thy body is not in me: I
distinguish [or separate] and thou see it not, I am the light of the senses,
and the root of the senses is not in me, but near me. I am the Bridegroom
of the root, but she has put on a rough coat: I [will] not lay my self in
her arms, till she puts that off, and then I will rest eternally in her
arms, and adorn the root with my virtue [and power], and give her my
beautiful form, and will espouse my self to her with my Pearl.

4. There are three things which the mind has in it, and do rule it, yet the
mind in it self, is the desirous will: and those three things, are three
Kingdoms, or Principles: one is eternal, and the second is eternal, but the
third is corruptible: the one has no beginning, the second is without
beginning, eternally generated: and the third has a beginning and end, and
corrupts again [or perisheth].

5. And as the eternal mind is in the great unsearchable Depth, and from
Eternity, is the Indissoluble Band, and the Spirit in the Or, perpetual
working properly.
source, which continually generateth it self, and never decays, and that
therein in the Center of the deep is the reconceived will to the light: and
the will is the desiring, and the desiring attracteth to it, and that which is
attracted makes the darkness in the will, so that in the first will, the
second will generateth it self again, that it might fly out of the darkness:
and that second will is the mind, which discovers it self in the darkness,
and the [discovery or] glance, breaks [or dispelleth] the darkness, so that
it stands in the sound and in the crack: where then the flash sharpeneth it
self, and so stands eternally in the broken darkness, so that the darkness
thus stands in the sound of the Stars: and in the breaking of the
darkness, the reconceived will is free, and dwells without the darkness, in
it self: and the flash which there is the separation and the sharpness, and
the noise [or sound] is the dwelling of the will, or of the continually
conceived mind; and the noise and the sharpness of the flash, are in the
dwelling of the will, free from the darkness: and the flash elevateth the
will, and the will triumphs in the sharpness of the flash, and the will
discovers it self in the sharpness of the sound in the flash of the light,
Extra.
without the darkness in the breaking, in the infiniteness: and in that
infiniteness of the flash, there is in every discovery of the whole Or, into a
particular.
in the particular (in every reflection) again a Center of such a Birth as is
in the whole: and those particulars are the senses, and the whole is the mind
out of which the senses proceed: and therefore the senses are mutable [or
transitory] and not in the Whole or fix.
substance: but the mind is whole, and in the substance.

6. My beloved Reader, just thus is our mind also: it is the Indissoluble
Band, which God by the Fiat in the moving Spirit breathed into Adam out of the
Eternal Mind, [from whence] the Essences are a particular, or a sparkle out
of the Eternal Mind, which has the Center of the breaking, and in the
breaking has the sharpness in it self: and that will drives [forth] the
flash [or glimpse] in the breaking, and the sharpness of the consuming of the
darkness is in the glimpse [or flash] of the willing, and the will is our
mind: the glimpse is the eyes in the fire-flash, which discovers it self in
our Essences The glance of our eyes can look upon the evil and good both
within and without us.
in us, and without us, for it is free, and has both the Gates open, that
[Gate] in the Darkness, and that Gate in the Light. For although it do
continue in the darkness, yet it breaks the darkness, and makes all light
in it self: and where it is, there it seeeth: As our thoughts, they can Or,
see into.
speculate a thing that is many miles off, when the body is far from thence,
and it may be never was in that place; the discovery or glimpse [or piercing
sight of the eye of the minde] goes through wood and stone, through bones and
marrow, and there is nothing that can Let or hinder it.
withhold it, for it pierces and breaks the darkness every where without
rending the body of any thing, and the will is its horse whereon it rides.
Here many things must be concealed, because of the Devilish Enchantment: (or
else we would reveal much more here) for the Nigromanticu^ [or Nigromancer]
is generated here.

7. But now the first will in the mind is out of the source anxiety, and its
glimpse [or discovery] in the Original, is the bitter, strong, [or soure]
fire-flash in the sharpness, which makes the stirring and noise, and also the
seeing in the Glance of the sharpness of the fire-flash, that so the
reconceived Glimpses [discoverings or Glances] in the thoughts] have a light in
them from whence they see, when they run [along] like a flash.

8. Yet this Or, Earnest will.
first will in the mind, ought not to stay behind in the Abyss of the sour
fierceness (in which the fierce malice is) but ought to go forward in the
Center of the breaking forth out of the darkness into the light: for in the
light there is mere meekness, lowliness, humility, good will, and friendly
desires, that it might with its re-conceived will go out of it self, and to
open it self in its precious Treasury: for in the re conceived will to the
Birth of the Light, there is no source of anxiety, but only mere friendly
desires: for the Glimpse rises up out of the darkness in it self, and
desires the light: and the desiring draws the light into it self: and there
the anguish becomes an exulting joy-in it self, an humble cheerfulness, a
pleasant habitation: for the re-conceived will in the light, is impregnated,
and its fruit in the body, is virtue [or power] which the will desires to
generate, and to live therein: and this desiring brings the fruit out of the
impregnated will, [and presents it] before the will, and the will discovers
it self [glimmereth or shineth] in the fruit in an infinite pleasant number:
and there goes forth, in the pleasant number, in the discovered [or
manifested] will, the high Benediction [or Blessing] favor, loving kindness,
pleasant inclination [or yielding pliablenesse], the taste of joy, the well
doing of meekness [or affability], and [further] what my Pen cannot express:
The mind would much rather be freed from vanity, and live therein without
molestation or disturbance.

9. Now these two Gates are in one another, the nethermost goes into the
Abyss, and the uppermost goes into Paradise: and a third Gate comes to these
two, out of the Element with its four issues, and presses in together with
the fire, air, water, and earth; and their kingdom is the Sun and Stars,
which Or, Mingle.
qualify with the first will: and their desire is to be filled, to swell and
to be great: these draw into them, and fill the Chamber of the Deep, [viz.]
the free and naked will in the mind: they bring the Glimpse [or Glance] of the
Stars into the Gate of the Mind, and qualify with the sharpness of the
Glimpse [or flash]: they fill the broken Gates of the Darkness with flesh, and
wrestle continually with the first will (from whence they are gone forth) for
the Kingdom [or Dominion], and yield themselves up to the first will, as to
their Father: which willingly receives their Region [or Dominion]: for he is
obscure and dark, and they are rough and sour, also bitter and cold: and
their life is a seething source of fire, wherewith they govern in the Mind,
in the Gall, Heart, Lungs, and Liver, and in all Members [or parts] of the
whole body, and Man is The four Elements own.
their own, the Spirit which stands in the flash, brings the Constellation
into the Tincture of its property, and infecteth the thoughts, according to the
Dominion of the Stars: they take the body and tame it, and bring their bitter
roughness into it.

10. Now the Gate of the Light stands between both these Regions, as in one
[onely] Center enclosed with flesh, and it shines in the Darkness in it
self, and it moves toward the might of the Darkness and fierceness, and
sheddeth forth its rays, even unto the noise of the breaking through, from
whence the Gates of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling, go forth,
and when these Gates apprehend the sweet, loving, and pleasant rays of the
Light, then they become most highly joyful, and run into their highest Region
into the heart (as into their right dwelling house) into the Essences, of the
Spirit of the soul, which receives it with joy, and refreshes it self
therein; and there its Sun springs up ( viz. the pleasant Tincture in the
Element-water.
Element of Water) and by the sweet joy becomes blood: for all Regions rejoice
therein, and suppose that they have gotten the Noble virgin again, whereas it
is but her Rays, as the Sun shines upon the earth, from whence all Essences
of the earth, rejoice, spring, grow, and blossom. Which is the cause that the
Tincture rises up in all herbs and Trees.

11. And here we must accurately consider wherein every Region rejoices: for
the Sun and Stars apprehend not the Divine Light, as the Essences of the
soul [doe] (and yet only that soul which stands in the new Birth:) but The
Sun and Stars.
they taste the sweetness which has imprinted [or Imaged] it self in the
Tincture: for the blood of the heart, wherein the soul moves, is so very
sweet, that there is nothing to be compared to it. Therefore has God by Moses
forbidden Man to eat the flesh in its blood; for the life stands in it: For
the beastiall life ought not to be in Man, that his Spirit be not infected
therewith.

12. The three Regions receive every one of them their light, with the
springing up of the Tincture in the blood: and each [Region] keeps its
Tincture. The Region of the Stars keeps the light of the Sun: and the
first Principle, [keepeth] the That is, the Tincture or kindling of the life of
the Abyss.
fire-flash: and the Essences of the holy souls receive the most dear and
precious light of the virgin; yet in this body, only her Rays, wherewith she
fights in the mind against the crafty assaults of the Devil, as Saint Peter
witnesses: and although the Dear light stays for a while in many in the
New Birth [or Regeneration], yet it is not steady in the house of the Stars
and Elements, in the outward Birth, but it dwells in its [own] Center in the
Mind.

The Gate of Or, Language.
Speech.
13. Seeing now that the Mind stands in free will, therefore the will
discovers in self according to that which the Regions have brought into the
Essences, whether it be evil or good; whether it be fitting for the Kingdom
of Heaven, or for the Kingdom of Hell, and that which the glimpse [or flash]
apprehends, it brings that into the will of the mind. And in the mind
stands the King, and the King is the light of the whole body: and he has
five Counselors, which sit altogether in the Or, sound of the kindling.
noise of the Tincture: and each of them tries that, which the glimpse with
its infection, has brought into the will, whether it be good or evil: and
these Counselors are the five Senses.

14. First the King Or, Sends.
gives it to the eyes, to see whether it be good or evil, and the eyes give
it to the ears, to hear from whence it comes, whether out of a true or out
of a false Region, and whether it be a lie or truth: and the ears give it to
the nose, (the smell) that must smell, whether that which is brought in (and
stands before the King) comes out of a good or Or, false.
evil Essence, and the Nose gives it to the Taste, which must try whether it
be pure or impure, and therefore the Taste has the Tongue, that it may Or, spew.
spit it out again if it be Or, false.
impure, but if it be a thought to [be expressed in] a word, then the lips are
the door keepers, which must keep it shut, and not let the Tongue forth, but
must bring it into the Region of the air, into the Text, Blasen or Breath.
Nostrills, and not into the heart, and stifle it, and then it is dead.

15. And when the Taste has tried it, and if it be good for the Essences of the
soul, then it gives it to the feeling, which must try what quality it is of,
whether hot or cold, hard or soft, thick or thin, and then the feeling Or,
gives.
sends it into the heart, [presenting it] before the flash of the life, and
before the King of the Light of life: and the will of the mind Flasheth or
discovers.
pierces further into that thing, a great depth, and sees what is therein,
[considering] how much it will receive and take in of that thing, and when it
is enough, then the will gives it to the Spirit of the soul, ( viz. to the
Eternal Chief Ruler.
Emperor) who brings it (with his strong and austere might) out of the
heart, in the sound upon the Tongue under the roof of the mouth, and there the
Spirit distinguishes according to the senses, as the will has discovered [or
manifested] it, and the Tongue Divides or seperateth.
distinguishes it in the noise.

16. For the Region of the Air must here drive the work through the Throat,
where then all the veins in the whole body tend and concur, and bring the
virtue of the Noble Tincture thitherwards, and mingle themselves with the Word;
and thither also all the three Regions of the Mind come, and mingle themselves
with the distinguishing [framing, articulating, or separating] of words: and
there is a very wonderful ferme, [or manner of work]; for every Region [or
Dominion] will distinguish [or separate] the Word according to its Essences,
for the sound goes out of the heart, out of all three Principles.

17. The first will fashion it according to its fierce might and pomp, and
mingleth therein prickly [stinging] soreness, wrath and malice. And the
second Principle with the virgin stands in the midst, and sheddeth its Rays
of loving meekness therein, and resists the first [Principle]. And if the
Spirit be kindled in The second Principle.
that, then the Word is wholly gentle, friendly, and humble, and inclines it
self to the love of our neighbor; it desires not to seize upon any with the
haughty sting [or prickle] of the first Principle, but it Bluntteth or
mollifieth.
covers the prickles of the Thorns, and qualifieth the Word with
cleerenesse, [and plainness,] and armeth the Tongue with Righteousness and
Truth, and it sheddeth abroad its Rays, even into the will of the Heart. And
when the will receives the pleasant friendly Rays of love, then it kindles
the whole mind with the love, righteousness, chastity of the virgin, and the
truth of all those things that are by all Regions tried upon the Tongue: and
thus it together with the five senses, makes the Tongue shrill, and [thereby]
the dear Image of God appears inwardly and outwardly, so that it may be
heard and seen in the whole Or, Deep of the Mind.
Abyss, what form it is of. O Man! behold, what the Light of Nature
discovers to thee.

18. Thirdly, there comes the Or, The third Principle.
third Regiment to the Imaging [or forming] of the Word, from the Spirit of the
Stars and Elements, and it mingleth it self in the house and senses of the
mind, and desires to frame the Word from the might of its own self, for it
has Greatest.
great power, it holds the whole Man captive, and it has clothed him with
flesh and blood, and it infecteth the will of the mind, and the will Looks
upon it self.
discovers it self in the Spirit of this world, in lust and beauty, might
and power, riches and glory, pleasure and joy, and on the contrary, in sorrow
and misery, cares and poverty, pain and sickness, also, in art and wisdom,
and on the contrary, in folly and ignorance.

19. All this the glimps [or discovery] of the senses, brings into the will
of the mind [and sets it] before the King, before the light of the life,
and there it is tried: and the King gives it first to the eyes, which must see
what good is among all these, and what pleases them. And here now begins
the wonderful form [or framing] of Man, Or, according to the Complexions.
out of the Complexions, where the Constellation has formed the child in the
Mothers body [or womb] so variously in its Regions. For according to what the
Constellation, in the time of the Or, the childs becoming Man.
Incarnation of the child, in the wheel that stands therein, has its
aspect (when the dwelling of the four Elements, and the Or, the dwelling of
the senses and thoughts
house of the Stars in the head, in the Brains, are built by the Fiat)
according to that is the virtue also in the brains, and so in the Heart, Gall,
Lungs, and Liver, and according to that is the inclination of the Region of the
Air, and according to that also a Tincture springs up, to [be] a dwelling of
the life, as may be seen in the wonderful [ Different thoughts.
variety in the] senses and forms [or shapes] of Men.

20. Although indeed we can say this with ground of Truth, that the
Constellation Imageth and forms no man, as to [make him to be] the similitude
and Image of God; but [it forms onely] a Beast in the will, manners, and
senses, and besides it has no might nor understanding, to be able to figure
[or forme] a similitude of God: though indeed it elevateth it self in the
highest [it can] in the will after the similitude of God, yet it generateth
only a pleasant, subtle, and lusty Beast in Man (as also in other creatures)
and no more: Only the eternal Essences, which are propagated from Adam in all
men, they continue with the hidden Element (wherein the Image consists)
standing in man, but yet altogether hidden, without the New Birth in the water,
and the Holy Ghost [or Spirit] of God [be attained].

21. And thereupon it comes, that Man many times in the dwelling of the
Brains, and of the Heart, as also in all the five senses, in the Region [or
Dominion] of the Stars, is in his mind Or, suddenly.
often like a Wolf, churlish Dog, crafty, fierce, and greedy, and Or, suddenly.
often like a Lion, stern, cruel, sturdy and active and devouring of his
prey: Or, suddenly.
often like a Dog, snappish, envious, malicious: often like an Adder and
Serpent, subtle, venomous, stinging, pysonous, slanderous in his words, and
mischievous in his deeds, ill conditioned and lying, like the quality of the
Devil in the shape of a Serpent at the Tree of Temptation: Or, suddenly.
often like a Hare, timorous, or fearful, starting and running away: Or,
suddenly.
often like a Toad, whose mind is so very venomous, that it poysoneth a tender
[or weak] mind to the temporal Death, by its Imagination (which many times
makes Witches and Sorcerers, for the first Ground serves enough to it): Or,
suddenly.
often like a tame Beast: and Or, suddenly.
often like a merry Beast, etc. all according as the Constellation stood, in
The childs.
its Incarnation in the wrestling wheel, with its virtue of the Quinta
Essentia, so is the starry mind on In the mind of the child.
its Region figured: although the hour of Man's Or, Nativity.
Birth alters much, and does Or, over-powereth the first Complexion of the
hour of the Incarnation or becoming Man.
hold-in the first, whereof I will write hereafter in its place, concerning
Man's Birth [or Nativity].

22. And now if the glance out of this mind, out of this or any other form
not here mentioned, glance [or dart] through the eyes, then it catches up its
own form out of every thing, as its starry kingdom is most potent at all
times of the Heaven, in the good or in the bad, in falsehood or in truth. And
this is brought before the King, and there must the five Counselors try it,
which yet are unrighteous knaves themselves, being Or, poisoned.
infected from the Stars and Elements, and so set in their Region [or
Dominion]: and now those [Counsellours] desire nothing more than the Kingdom
of this world: and to which sort the starry house of the brains and of the
heart is most of all inclined, for that, the five Counselors also give their
advice, and will have it, be it for pomp, pride, stateliness, riches, beauty,
or voluptuous life, also for art and Or, virtue.
excellency of earthly things, Or, the sick soul is not regarded.
and for poor Lazarus there is no thought; there the five Counselors are
very soon agreed, for in their own form they are all unrighteous before God:
but according to the Region of this world they are very firm: Thus they
counsel the King, and the King gives it to the Spirit of the soul, which
gathers up the Essences, and falls too with hands and mouth: But if they be
words [that are to be expressed] then it brings them to the roof of the
mouth, and there the five Counselors distinguish [or separate] them according
to the will of the mind: and further [the Spirit brings them upon the
Tongue, and there the senses [divide or] distinguish them in the flash [Glance,
or in a Moment.]

23. And there stand the three Principles in strife. The first Principle ( viz.
the kingdom of sternnesse [or wrathful fiercenesse]) says, go forth, in the
midst of the strong might of the fire, it must be [so]: then says the second
[Principle] in the mind, stay and consider, God is here with the virgin, fear
the Abyss of Hell: and the third [Principle] ( viz. the kingdom of this
world) says, here we are at home, we must have it [so], that we may adorn
and sustain the body, it must be [so]: and it takes the Region of the air (
viz. its own Spirit) and brings that [Region] out at the mouth, and keeps
the Difference or separation.
distinction according to the kingdom of this world.

24. And thus there goes forth out of the earthly Or, thoughts.
senses and mind, lies and folly, deceit and falsehood, [also] mere subtilty,
[with lust and desire] to be elevated; many, [to be elevated] in the might of
the fire, as by force and anger, and many, by humane are and Or, virtue.
policy of this world, World.
which is but a knave, in the sight of God, yet wrestleth [or holds fast]
till it has prevailed: many in the form of a tame and gentle Beast, very
cunningly alluring, and drawing to it self, under a Or, color of good.
fair pretense: many in pride, and stateliness of body [in carriage] and
manners, which is a right diabolical Beast: who contemns all that does not
please him, and elevateth himself above all meekness and humility, and over
the Image of God: yea, there is so very much of false untowardnesse, that I may
not mention it: every one follows the Region [Rule or Dominion] of the
Stars, even that which serves most to the voluptuousness of the earthly
life.

25. In Summa.
In brief, the Regiment of the Stars [or starry Region] Or, generateth no
holy Man.
makes not a holy Man: and although men may converse under a holy show, yet
they are but hyprocrites, and desire to get honor [and esteeme] thereby, their
mind sticks nevertheless in covetousness and pride, and in fleshly
pleasure, in mere base lechery and lust, and they are in the sight of God
(according to the Will or Lust.
desire of this world) no other than mere knaves, proud, wilful, [selfe
conceited] thieves, robbers, and murderers; There is not one, who (as to the
Spirit of this world) is righteous, we are altogether children of deceit and
falsehood; and according to this Image (which we have received from the Spirit
of this world) we belong to eternal Death, but not to Paradise; except it be,
that we become regenerated anew, out of the Center of the precious virgin, who
with her rays averteth the mind from the ungodly ways of sin and
wickedness.

26. And if the love of God (which so deerly loved the Image of Man, that it
self is become Man) did not stand in the Center of the mind in the [midst or]
Or, parting limit or mark.
point of separation, then man had been a living Devil, and he is indeed such
a one, when he despises the Regeneration, and Or, depart.
goes on according to the inbred nature of the first and third Principle.

27. For there remain no more than two Principles eternally; the third
[Principle] wherein he lives here, perishes: and if he desires not now the
second [Principle], then he must remain in the first Original eternally with
the Devils: for after this time it will be no otherwise, there is no source
which can come to help him [hereafter]: for the kingdom of God goes not back
into the Abyss, but it rises up forward in the light of meekness: this we
speak seriously and in earnest, as it is highly known in the light of Nature,
in the Ray of the The wisdom of God.
Noble virgin.

The Gate of the Difference between Man and Beast.
28. My dear and loving Reason, bring thy five senses hither, and consider thy
self, according to the things abovementioned, what thou art, how thou were
created the Image of God, and how thou in Adam (by the infection of the Devil)
did let thy Spirit of this world take possession of thy Paradise, which now
sits in the room of Paradise. Will thou say, that thou were created thus
[as] to this world in Adam at the beginning? then behold and consider thy
self: and thou shall find another Image in thy mind and speech.

29. Every Animal or living creature.
Beast has a mind, of.
having a will, and the five senses therein, so that it can distinguish therein
what is good or ill for it: But where remain the senses in the will [that
come] out of the Gates of the Deep, where the will discovers it self [or
glimmereth] in the first Principle in infinitum, [infinitely], out of which the
understanding proceeds, so that Man can see into all things into their
Essences, how high they are graduated, whereupon follows the distinction [or
different articulation] of the Tongue? for if a Beast had them, then it could
also speak, and distinguish voices, and speak of the things that are in
substance [or beeing] and search into the Originality: But because it is not
out of the eternal, therefore it has no understanding in the light of Nature,
be it never so nimble and crafty: neither does its strength and force avail to
the lifting it up into understanding, no it is all in vain.

30. Man only has understanding, and his senses reach into the Essences and
qualities of the Stars and Elements, and search out the Ground of all things
in the Region of the Stars and Elements. And this now has its Original in
Man, in the Eternal Element, he being created out of the [Eternall] Element,
and not out of the Out-Births of the four Elements: and therefore the Eternity
sees into the Inecptive.
beginning Out-Birth in the corruptibility: and the Or, Inception.
beginning in the Out-Birth cannot see into the Eternity; for the Or, Inception.
beginning takes its Original out of the Eternity, out of the Eternal mind.

31. But that Man is so very blind and ignorant, or void of understanding, is
because he lies captive in the Regiment [or Dominion] of the Stars and
Elements, which many times figure [or fashion] a wild Beast in the mind of
Man, a Lion, a Wolf, a Dog, a Fox, a Serpent, and such like: though indeed Man
gets no such body, yet he has such a mind; of which Christ spoke to the
Jews, and called some of them Wolves, Foxes, and Serpents: Also John the
Baptist said so of the Pharisees, and we see apparently, how, many men live
wholly like Beasts, according to their beastiall mind; and yet are so
audacious, that they judge and condemn those that live in the Image of God,
and Tame, or bring under subjection.
subdue their bodies.

32. But if he speaks or judges any thing well, he speaks not from the
beastiall Image of the mind, wherein he lives, but he speaks from the
hidden Man, which is hidden in the beastiall [Man], and judges against his own
beastiall life; for the hidden Law of the eternal Nature stands hidden in
the beastiall Man, and it is in a hard restraint, and judges [or condemneth]
the [malicious] wickedness of the Fleshly.
carnal mind.

33. Thus there are three in Man that strive against one another, viz. the
eternal proud malicious anger, [proceeding] out of the Originality of the
mind. And secondly, the Eternal holy chaste humility, which is generated out
of the Originality. And thirdly, the corruptible animal wholly beastiallnesse,
generated from the Stars and Elements, which holds the whole house in
possession.

34. And it is here with the Image of Man, as Saint Paul said; To whom you give
your selves as servants in obedience, his servant you are, whether it be of
sin unto Death, or of the Obedience of God unto Righteousness, that driving
[or property] you have. If a Man yield his mind up to malice, pride, self,
power, and force, to the oppressing of the miserable, then he is like the proud
haughty Devil, and he is his servant in obedience, and loses the Image of
God, and out of the Image comes a Wolf, Dragon, or Serpent to be, all
according to his Essences, as he stands figured in the mind. But if he yield
up himself to another swinish and beastiall condition, as to a mere beastiall
voluptuous life, to gurmandizing, gluttony, and drunkenness, and lechery,
stealing, robbing, murdering, lying, cosening, and [cheating deceit, then the
eternal mind figureth him also in such an Image as is like an unreasonable
ugly Beast and Worm. And although he bear the Elementary Image in this life,
yet he has indeed the Image of an Adder, Serpent, and Beast, hidden therein,
which will be manifested at the breaking [or deceasing] of the body, and it
belongs not to the Kingdom of God.

35. But if he give himself up to the Obedience of God, and Or, unite.
yield his mind up into God, to strive against malice and wickedness, and the
lusts and desires of the flesh, also against all unrighteousness of life and
conversation, in humility under the Cross; then the Eternal mind figureth
him in the Image of an Angel, who is pure, chaste, and virtuous, and he keeps
this Image in the breaking of the body, and hereafter he will be married with
the precious virgin, the Eternal Wisdom, chastity, and Paradisicall purity.

36. And here in this life he must stick between the door and the hinges,
between the kingdom of Hell, and the kingdom of this world, and the noble
Image must suffer much wrong, [or to be wounded] for he has not only enemies
outwardly, but also in himself: he bears the beastiall and also the hellish
Image of wrath in him, so long as this house of flesh Lasts.
endures. Therefore that causes strife and division against himself, and
also without him, against the wickedness of the world, which the Devil
mightily Or, drives.
presses against him, and tempts him on every side, mis-leadeth and wringeth
him every where, and his own household in his body, are his worst enemies:
therefore the Children of God are bearers of the Cross in this world, in this
evil earthly Image.

37. Now behold thou child of Man (seeing thou art an eternal Spirit) thou
have this to expect after the breaking [or deceasing] of thy body; thou will be
either an Angel of God in Paradise, or a hellish ugly Diabolical Worm, Beast,
or Dragon, all according as thou Have behaved thy self.
have been inclined [or given] here in this life; that Image which thou have
borne here in thy mind, with that thou shall appear: for there can no other
Image go forth out of thy body at the breaking [or deceasing of it], but even
that which thou have borne here, that shall appear in Eternity.

38. Have thou been, a proud vainglorious, selfvishly potent, and one that
have for thy pleasure sake oppressed the needy, then such a Spirit goes forth
from thee, and then so it is in the Eternity, where it can neither keep nor get
any thing for [to feed] its covetousness, neither can it adorn its body with
any thing, but with that which is there, and yet it climeth up eternally in its
pride: for there is no other Or, working rising property.
source in it, and thus in its rising it reaches unto nothing else but the
stern might of the fire in its elevation: it inclines its self in its will
continually, in such a purpose as it did in this world, as it was wont to do
here, so all appears in its Tincture, therein it climeth up eternally in the
Abysie of Hell.

39. But have thou been a base slanderer, liar, deceiver, false murtherous Man,
then such a Spirit proceeds from thee, and that desires in the Eternity
nothing else but mere falsehood; it spitteth out from its fiery jaws, fiery
Darts full of abomination and reproach, it is a continual stirrer and breaker
in the fierce sternnesse: devouring in it self, and consuming nothing: all its
[things, beeings, essences, works, or] Or, whatsoever he has ever been.
substances appear in its Tincture: its Image is figured according as its
mind has been here.

40. Therefore I say, a Beast is better than such a Man, who gives himself up
into the hellish Images: for a Beast has no Eternal Spirit, its Spirit is
from the Spirit of this world, out of the Or, fragility.
corruptibility, and passes away with the body, till [it come] to the figure
without Spirit, that [figure] remains standing: seeing that the Eternal
mind has by the virgin of the Eternal wisdom of God, discovered it self in
the Out-Birth, for the manifesting of the Great Wonders of God, therefore those
[creaturely figures] and also the figured wonders, must stand before God, or
the eternal mind.
him eternally; although no beastiall figure or shadow suffers or does any
thing, but is as a shadow or painted figure [or limmed Picture].

41. Therefore in this world all things are given into Man's power, because he
is an Eternal Spirit, and all other creatures [are] no other than a figure in
the Wonders of God: and therefore Man ought well to consider himself, what he
speaks, does, and purposes, in this world: for all his works follow after
him, and he has them eternally before his eyes, and lives in them; except it
be, that he is again new regenerated out of evil and falsehood, through the
blood and Death of Christ, in the water and the Holy Ghost, and then he
breaks forth out of the hellish and earthly Image, into an Angelical [Image]
and comes into another kingdom, into which its untowardnesse [or vices]
cannot follow, and that [untowardnesse, waywardness, or vice] is drowned in
the blood of Christ, and the Image of God is renewed out of the earthly and
hellish.

42. Thus we are to consider, and highly to know in the light of Nature, the
ground of the Kingdom of Heaven, and of Hell, as also, [the ground] of the
kingdom of this world, and how Man in the Mothers body inheriteth three
kingdoms, and how Man in this life bears a threefold Image, which our first
Parents by the first sin Or, purchased.
inherited for us, therefore we have need of the Treader upon the Serpent, to
bring us again into the Angelical Image: and it is needful for Man to tame
his body and mind [or bring them under subjection] with great earnestness
[and labour], and to submit himself under the Cross: and not to hunt so
eagarly after pleasure, riches, and the bravery of this world, for therein
sticks perdition.

43. Therefore said Christ; A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
Heaven; because they take such delight in pride, haughtiness, and fleshly
voluptuousness, and the noble mind is dead to the kingdom of God, and
continues in the Eternal Darkness. For the Image of the spirit of the soul
sticks in the mind; and to whatsoever the mind inclines and gives up it
self, in that is the Spirit of the soul figured by the Eternal Fiat.

44. Now if the spirit of the soul remain unregenerated in its first
Principle (which it has inherited out of the Eternity, with the beginning of
its life) then also (at the breaking [or deceasing] of its body) there
proceeds out of its Eternal Mind, such a creature, as its continual will
has been here in this life.

45. Now if thou have had an envious [spitefull] dogged mind, and have
grutched every thing to others (as a Dog does with a bone, which himself
cannot eat) then there appears such a doggish mind, and according to that
source [or property], is its Worm of the soul figured, and such a will it
keeps in the Eternity, in the first Principle: and there is no revoking, all
thy envious wicked proud works appear in thy Or, active property.
source, in thy own Or, kindling.
Tincture of the Worm of the soul, and thou must live eternally therein: nay,
thou can not conceive or apprehend any desire [or will] to abstinence [or
forbearance of it] but thou art Gods and the holy souls eternal enemy.

46. For the door of the Deep to the light of God appears to thee no more:
for thou art now a perfect creature in the first Principle: and now though thou
do elevate thy self, and would break open the door of the Deep, yet
that cannot be [done]: for thou art a whole Spirit, and not merely in the will
only, wherein the door of the Deep can be broken open; but thou fliest out
aloft over the kingdom of God, and can not enter in: and the higher thou
fliest, the deeper thou art in the Abyss, and thou see not God yet, who is
so near thee.

47. Therefore it can only be done here in this life (while thy soul sticks
in the will of the mind) so that thou breakest open the Gate of the Deep, and
pressest in to God through a New Birth: for here thou have the highly worthy
noble virgin of the Divine Love for thy assistance, who leads thee in through
the Gate of the Noble Bridegroom, who stands in the Center in the parting Or,
limit of separation.
mark, between the kingdom of Heaven, and the kingdom of Hell, and generateth
thee in the water and life, of his blood and Death, and therein drowneth and
washes away thy false [or evill] works, so that they follow thee not [in such
a source and property,] that thy soul be not Or, figured therein.
infected therein: but according to the first Image in Man before the Fall, as
a new, chaste and pure noble virgins Image, without any knowledge of thy
untowardnesse [or vices] which thou had here.

48. Thou will ask, What is the New Or, second Birth.
Regeneration? or how is that done in Man? Hear and see, stop not thy mind,
let not thy mind be filled by the Spirit of this world, with its might and
pomp: Take thy mind and break through [the Spirit of this world] quite: Or,
unite or give up thy mind.
incline thy mind into the kind love of God: make thy purpose earnest and
strong, to break through the pleasure of this world with thy mind, and not to
regard it: consider that thou art not at home in this world, but that thou art
a strange Guest, captivated in a close Prison, Cry and call to him, who has
the key of the Prison: yield thy self up to him, in obedience, righteousness,
modesty, chastity, and truth: and seek not so eagarly after the kingdom of
this world, it will stick close enough to thee without that; and then chaste
virgin will meet thee in thy mind highly and deeply, and will lead thee to
thy Bridegroom, who has the key to the Gate of the Deep; thou must stand
before him, who will give thee to eat of the heavenly Manna, which will Or,
quicken.
refresh thee, and thou will be strong, and struggle with the Gate of the
Deep, and thou will break through as the Aurora, Morning red, or day star.
Day-breake: and though thou lie captive here in the night, yet the rays of
the break of Day will appear to thee in the Paradise, in which place thy
chaste virgin stands, waiting for thee with the joy of the Angels: who will
very kindly receive thee, in thy newborn mind and Spirit.

49. And though indeed thou must Swim or bath.
walk here with thy Body in the dark In contempt and dis-esteeme.
night among thorns and thistles (so that the Devil and also this world does
read and tear thee, and not only buffet, despise, deride, and vilify thee
outwardly, but also many times stop thy dear mind, and lead it captive in
the lust of this world into the Bath [or Lake] of swines) yet then the Noble
virgin will help thee still, and will call upon thee to desist from thy ungodly
Or, doings.
ways.

50. Look well to it, stop not thy mind and understanding: when thy mind
says, Turn, do The evil.
it not, then know that thou art so called by the dear virgin: and turn
instantly, and consider where thou art lodged, in how hard a house of bondage
thy soul lies imprisoned: seek thy native Country, from whence thy soul is
wandered, and whither it ought to return again.

51. And then if thou will follow The Counsel of the wisdom of God.
it, thou will find in thy self, not only after this life, but in this life
also in thy Regeneration, that she will very worthily meet thee, and out of
what kind of Spirit this Author has written.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the horrible, lamentable, and miserable Fall of Adam and Eve in Paradise.
Man's Looking-glass.
1. IF the Gate of the Deep were not opened to me in my mind (so that I can
see the strife that is against the kingdom of God) then I should also suppose,
that the matter [of the Fall] were merely a Disobedience about the biting of an
Apple, as the Text in Moses barely passes it over, though Moses has written
wholly right.

2. For [the matter] was about the earthly eating and drinking, wherewith the
Paradisicall Man was captivated by the Spirit of this world: which now must
qualify [or mix] with all Men. This the Holy Scripture witnesses, and also
Reason, that Man is not at home, in the Elementary kingdom of this world: For
Christ said; My kingdom is not of this world; and to his Apostles he said; I
have called you out from this world: Also, Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God.

3. Also we see that the kingdom of this world, dies to Man, and [passeth
away or] breaks; seeing then, that Adam did bear the Image of the kingdom
of God (which was eternal and uncorruptible, and stood in Paradise) therefore
we can with no ground say, that he Before the Fall.
did bear the Image of the kingdom of this world: For this world is
transitory and Or, fragile.
corruptible: but the Image in Adam was not transitory, but corruptible: also
if we will say, that Adam (before his fall) lived in the source [or property]
of the four Elements; then we can no way maintain, that Adam was not a
corruptible Image. For at the end, the four Elements must pass away, and go
into the Eternal Element.

4. Besides, he should have been subject to the Or, stirring property of the
four Elements.
source, for heat and cold should have ruled over him; which we may see
plainly in Moses, that God first after the fall (by the Spirit or Angel of the
Counsel of this world) made clothes of skins, and put them [then first] upon
them; as the veil of Moses does cover it, that men cannot see his face, as is
to be seen by [the people of] Israel. Besides, if he had been merely of Earth,
and of the four Elements, then he might have been bornt in the fire, or
drowned in the water, and be stifled in the air; Also wood and stone could
have bruised him and destroyed him, and yet it is written, that he [the
Adamicall Man] at the Day of the Restitution shall pass through the fire, and
be approved, and the fire shall not hurt him.

5. Now no other Man shall rise [againe] but that which God created in the
beginning; for he is created out of the Eternal will, as to his soul, which
was breathed into him; and his body is created out of the Eternal Element,
which was and is Paradise: and the four issues (of the four Elements) out of
the one [Eternall] Element, Or, Constitute.
are this world, wherein Adam was not created.

6. The Text in Moses says; He was created in the Paradise in Hebron; that is,
in the Gate of the Deep between the Deity and the Abyss of the kingdom of
Hell: His body was out of the [one pure] Element, and his Spirit was breathed
into him out of the Eternal Mind of God the Father, from the chaste virgin of
the Divine Wisdom and Love.

7. For the Element As man's body without the Spirit is void of understanding.
is without understanding, and that is that [which is attracted or] concreted
in the will of God, wherein the Eternal Wisdom of God does [sparkle or]
discover it self in infinitum [infinitely], and in that spring up, colors,
arts, virtues, and the Eternal Wonders: out of which [Element] in the
beginning (in the kindling of the fire in the stern fierceness) are the four
Elements proceeded.

8. For this is very well to be apprehended and perceived in the earth and
stones, that the four Elements are of one only substance, and that the earth
and stones were generated in the fierceness from the kindling of the Elements;
For a stone is but water; and therefore we should do well to consider, what
kind of fierceness there must have been, that has Congealed or knit.
drawn the water so hard together.

9. Moreover, the issue of the four Elements may be perceived in the
fierceness of the fire, how instantly the strong air goes forth from the
fire; and the stone or wood, is nothing else but a Or, Body.
Sulphur from the water and from the earth: and if the Tincture be consumed by
the fierceness, then the [wood or stone] would come to ashes, and at last to
nothing; as indeed at the end, this world with the four Elements will come to
nothing, and there shall remain nothing else of The four Elements,
them in the Eternal Element, but the figure and the shadow in the Wonders of
God; How then can thou think that God has created the Eternal Man out of
the four Elements, or That which has gone forth.
Issues, which are but corruptible.

10. Yet as concerning Eve, we must acknowledge that she was created to this
corruptible life, for she is the Woman of this world; and at this time it
could not be othewise: for the Spirit of this world with its Kindling or life.
Tincture, had overcome and possessed Adam, so that he fell down into a sleep,
and could not generate out of himself, the Image of the virgin according to
the Or, appearance.
discovery of the noble and chaste virgin (the wisdom of God) which was the
Matrix in him, which was joined [or espoused] to him out of the heavenly Out of
the heavenly extract, seed, or substantiality.
Limbus; where according to which (in his being overcome) the Elementary Woman
was given to him (viz. Eve) who (in the Spirit of the worlds overcoming) was
figured after a beastiall form.

11. But that we may in a brief sum give the Reader to understand, what our
knowledge and high Or, perception.
sense in the light of Nature has highly apprehended: we therefore set it
down thus, according to our knowledge. Adam was the Image of God, according to
the similitude of God, which God (the holy Trinity in one only divine
substance) through the virgin of his Eternal Wisdom, in the wisdom had
[manifested or] Foreseen, or resolved.
discovered [or purposed] (in the Eternal Element) to have in the room of the
fallen Devil; for his counsel (in the Eternal will) must stand: there should
and must be a Throne and Princely Region in this Place, which should manifest
the Eternal Wonders.

12. And so now God created the Image, and similitude, out of the Eternal
Element (in which the Eternal Wonders are Originally) and [God] breathed into
him the Spirit of the Essences, out of his Eternal Original will, out of the
through broken Gate of the Deep, where the wheel of the stirring and
breaking-through, stands in the Eternal Mind, which reaches the clear
true and pure Deity of the Heart of God.

13. This [Image] is not the Heart of God, but it reaches into the Heart of
God, and it receives virtue, light and joy from the Heart and Light of God:
for it is in the Eternal will of the Father, out of which he [the Father]
continually generateth his Heart and Word from Eternity; and Adams Essences.
his Essences, which, in the Element of his body ( viz. [in the Element] Or,
wanting understanding.
of Ignorance in the Eternal Wonders of God) now breathed into him, they (in
respect of the high triumphing Light, out of the Heart and Light of God) were
Paradise: his meat and drink was Paradise, out of the The one inward pure
Element.
Element, in his will: whereby then he drew the virtue (of the Eternal Wonders
of God) into him, and generated the noise [voice] sound, or the Eternal Hymn
of the Eternal Wonders of God, out of himself before the will; and all this
stood before the chaste, high, noble, and blessed virgin, (the Divine Wisdom)
in a pleasant sport, and was the right Paradise.

14. But now, what this is, my Pen cannot describe: I rather long after it to
comprehend it more in perfection, and to live therein: which we here in the
light of Nature (in the Gate of the Deep) Apprehend or understand.
know and behold: but we cannot raise our threefold mind into it, till our
Adams Garment, or this Earthly Tabernacle.
rough Garment be put off, and then we shall behold it without molestation.

15. But because the four Elements went forth now further out of the [one]
Element, and made, with the quintessence of the Stars, and with the heart of
the Essences ( viz. the Sun) the third Principle, wherein also the great
Wonders stood; and because there was no creature found that could manifest
those [wonders], but only that Image and similitude of God ( viz. Man) who had
the chaste virgin (the wisdom of God) in him; therefore the Spirit of this
world pressed so hard upon the Image, for the virgin, that it might manifest
its wonders, and did possess Man; from whence he first gat the name Menseh,
[Man], as a mixed Person.

16. But when the Wisdom of God saw, that man from the Spirit of the world
came to lust, to mingle himself with the four Elements, then came the
Commandment and said: Thou shall not eat of the knowledge of good and evil;
Now the knowledge of good and evil is not manifest in the Paradise, and in the
kingdom of Heaven, but only in the The four Elements that are issued or gone
forth out of the inward one Element.
issue out of the Element, in the fierceness, there only stands the
knowledge of evil manifest: and there only the Essences are kindleable: and
so therein Death sticks; of which God said, When thou eatest thereof thou
shall dye.

17. God intended that the body which he should get from the infection of the
four Elements, must dye: and it did also presently (in his tender Virgin-like,
or maydenly.
virgin mind) dye to the Paradise, and gat the mind of this world, wherein
sticks nothing but patching and piecing, as also frailty, and at last, Death.

18. But that the four Elements, with the Sun and Stars, had such power to
press upon Adam, and to Or, poison him.
infect him, the cause of it was, because he was extracted out of them ( viz.
out of the Element; and had (in the Originality) all the three Kingdoms (all
three Principles) in him; and therefore it was that he must be tempted whether
he could stand in the Paradise, (in the Kingdom of Heaven): and there, both
heavenly, and also earthly fruit, was set before him.

19. For the Tree of Temptation was earthly (as now adays all the Trees are):
all the other were Paradisicall, from which Adam could eat Paradisicall virtue
in his mouth, and had no need of stomach and gutts for they [the Trees] were
like his body and [like] the One pure Element.
Element, and the Tree of Temptation, was like the four Elements.

20. But that Moses presses so hard upon it, and faith: God created Man of a
lump of Larth; there the veil is before his face, so that the earthly Man
cannot look him in the face; indeed he was rightly a ^ump of earth and earth,
when he had eaten earthly fruit which God did forbid him; but if Adam (before
the Fall) had been of the earth earthly, then God would not have forbidden him
the earthly fruit* as also, if he had been created out of the earthly Element,
wherefore did not the Earthly Element put its clothes upon him instantly with a
rough skin? Wherefore did that [Earthly Element] leave Man naked and bare; and
when it had plainly possessed him, yet it left him naked.

21. Moses speaks only of the Tables of God, which were Or, engraven.
graven-through with the Ten Commandments, so that they could see through them
into the Paradise: he hung the veil before his face (as is to be seen
concerning [the people of] Israel): because Man was become earthly, and
therefore must put off the earthly again, and then he must with Josua (or
Jesus) enter into the Paradisicall Promised Land, and not with Moses stay in
the Wilderness of this world, where the veil of this world hangs before
him, before the Paradise.

22. Reason must not imagine, that God ever made any Beast out of a lump of
Earth, as a Potter makes a Pot: but he said, Let there come forth all sorts of
Beasts, every one after its kind: that is, out of all Essences, every one
after the property of its Essence; and so also it was (by the Fiat) figured
according to the property of its own Essnce, and in like manner, all Trees,
Herbs, and Grass, all at once together; how then should the Image of God be
made out of the fragile [or corruptible] Essences? But it [must be and] was
made in the Paradise out of the Eternal [Essences]?

23. The earth is not Eternal, and for the sake of the fragility [or
corruptibility] therefore man's body must break [or perish]; because he has
attracted the corruptibility to him; thus also the Paradisicall knowledge,
delight and joy is departed from him, and he is fallen into the kindled anger,
of the kindled four Elements, which (according to their fierceness,) Or,
mingle.
qualify with the eternal anger in the Abyss; although the outward Or,
working.
Region of the Sun is mitigated, so that it is a pleasant habitation, as is
seen before our eyes; yet if the Sun should vanish away, then thou would
well see and feel the anger of God, consider it well.

24. Thus it is showed us in the light of Nature, that when Adam was thus
impregnated [or possessed] from the Spirit of this world, then God Or, planted.
built [or made] a Garden in Eden upon earth, In the Divine and Angelical
habitation and joy.
in the Paradise, and caused to grow up, all sorts of Paradisicall fruit,
pleasant to behold, and good to eat, and the Tree of the Temptation in the
midst [of the Garden of Eden] which had its Or, out-flowing substantial
virtues.
Essences from the Spirit of this world; and the other [Trees and Fruits] had
Paradisicall Essences.

25. In this [Garden] now the Image of God stood altogether free: it might
embrace [and take] what it would, only the Tree of Temptation, that was
forbidden; there he was forty days in the Paradisicall knowledge, joy, and
habitation; where yet there was neither day nor night to him, but only the
Eternity, he saw with his eyes [from or] out of the Divine Power [and vertue]:
there was in him, no shutting of his eyes: he had no need of the Sun at all,
yet all things must serve and be subject to him. The Out-Birth [or issue] of
the four Elements did not touch him; there was no sleep in him, nor pain,
nor fear: A thousand years were to him but as a day: he was such an Image as
shall rise at the last day: there will rise no other Image, than that which God
created in the beginning, therefore consider it well.

26. But that I have said, that he was forty days in the Paradise, the second
Adams (Christ's) Temptation testifies so much to me, as also the Temptation of
Israel at Mount Sinai, by Moses [stayings] on the Mount, both which lasted
forty days: which you may read in Moses, and concerning the Temptation of
Christ, and you will find wonders.

27. But when Adam was infected, from the lust to eat of the knowledge of good
and evil, and that the Spirit of this world pressed [or swayed] Adam, where
also the subtle Devil (which in the Spirit of this world slipped in) shot
mightily at Adam, so that Adam became weary, and blind to the Kingdom of God;
[then] said God, It is not good for man to be alone, for he will not now
Generate or beget.
bring forth the Paradisicall virgin; because he is infected from the Spirit of
this world, so that the chastity of the modesty is quite Gone.
at an end: we will make a help for him, to be with him, out of whom he may
build his Principality and propagate himself, it cannot be otherwise now; and
he let a deep sleep fall upon Man, and he slept.

28. Here it may be very properly and well understood, how the virgin in Adam
departed into the Either, into her Principle; for the Text says, God let a deep
sleep fall upon Adam; now where sleep is, there the virtue [or power] of God
is hidden in the Center: for where that [vertue of God] grows, there is no
sleep; for, the Keeper of Israel neither slumbreth nor sleeps; as it is
written.

If thou ask, How long Adam slept.
29. Then consider Christ's Rest in the Grave, and thou shall find the ground:
for the second Adam must (with his resurrection out of the Grave) awaken [or
raise] the first, (out of his Eternal sleep of the darkness of Hell) out of
the Grave of this world again.

30. And so God, in Adam.
his sleep, made the Woman for him out of himself, by which he must now
generate his kingdom, for now it could not otherwise be. And when he awaked,
he saw her, and took her to him and said: This is flesh of my flesh, and bone
of my bone; for Adam was (in his sleep) become clean another Image: for God
had permitted the Spirit of this world in him, to make his Tincture weary unto
sleep.

31. Adam was in an Angelical form before the sleep; but after the sleep he
had flesh and blood: and he was (in his flesh) a lump of earth: and he saw from
a threefold spirit: with his eyes he apprehended the light of the Sun, and
knew the first Image no more; although the four Elements had not yet fallen
upon him, nor touched him: for he was yet in innocence.

32. And there the Devil bestirred him, and slipped into the Serpent (which he
himself is, in his own proper form,) and laid himself at the Tree, and Or,
set the sweet light and pleasantness forth.
strewed Sugar upon it; for he saw well the Eve was a Woman, and that she was
infected with the four Elements, and although she did strive a little, and
objected Gods Command [against the Devill], yet she suffered her self very
easily to be persuaded when the lying Spirit said, That the fruit would make
her wise, and that her eyes should be opened, and she be as God, knowing Good
and Evil; yet he told her not, that (if she eat thereof) she must dye: but
[he said] she should be wise and fair; which disease [desire or lust]
sticks still in the brains of the Woman, that she would feign be the
fairest Beast.

33. So she pulled off an Apple and did eat, and gave to Adam also, and he
eat of it likewise. That was a bit at which the Heavens might well have
blushed, and the Paradise have trembled, as it was indeed really done, as is to
be seen at the Death of Christ, (when he entered into Death, and wrestled with
Hell,) that the Earth and the Elements trembled, and the light of the Sun was
darkened; when this bit of the Apple was to be Or, cured.
healed up.

The Gate of the great Affliction, and Misery of Man.
34. Reason sticks at the veil of Moses; and sees not through the Tables
that were graven-through, which God gave him upon Mount Sinai: as also Reason
cannot take off the veil from before The eyes of Moses.
his eyes, and look him in the face, for he has a brightned [clarified or
shining] countenance in the crack of the fire: it [Reason] is afraid of it
[that countenance] and trembles at it: it says continually to Moses: Speak
thou with the Lord, for we are afraid; and moreover, altogether naked [and
uncleane].

35. It presents indeed the wrath of God to it self, and trembles at its
fall, but it knows not what has happened to it, it only presents the
disobedience before it self, and makes [as if] God were, an angry malicious
Devil; that cannot be reconciled: having indeed put on the Garment of anger
(in Adam and Eve) on to it self in body and soul, and has set it self
(against the will of God) in the Bath [or Lake] of anger, on which God took
such Or, mercy.
pity [or compassion], that he has not spared his own Heart, to send it into
the depth of Anger, into the Abyss of Hell; [as also] into the Death and
breaking of the four Elements from the eternal holy Element, to help fallen
Man, and to deliver him out of the anger and Death.

36. But since the veil (in the Death of Christ) was taken away from the face
of Moses; in the stead whereof, the stars with the four Elements have yet
cast a mist and cloud (through the infection of the Devil) before Man; (for
the Or, the worldly kingdom.
Region of this world has generated the Antichrist, and set [him] before the
countenance of Moses, in a Or, darkness.
cloud, as if he were Christ; so that the countenance of Moses cannot be
apprehended [or beheld],) therefore we have need of the Lilly, which grows
through the Tables of Moses, (that were graven through,) with its strong smell,
which reaches into the Paradise of God: from whose virtue, the People [or
Nations] shall be so virtuous and strong, that they shall forsake the
Antichrist, and shall run through the darkness to the smell of the blossom;
for the breaker-through the Gates, has planted the Lilly, and he has given it
into the hand of the Noble virgin, and this [Lilly] grows in the Element
(wonderfully) against the horrible storm of Hell, and [against] the Or,
dominion.
kingdom of this world; where then many Or, Twigges.
branches will fall to the ground, from whence Antichrist becomes blind, and
grows stark mad and raving in the fogge and mist, and stirs the The
anger and malice in the four Elements.
four Elements in the [wrath or grimme] fierceness; and then it is needful
for the children of God to awake from the sleep of the fogge; this the Spirit
intimates, in the light of Nature seriously and earnestly.

37. Therefore, according to our knowledge, we will set down an Exposition of
the fall of Man, which is very perfectly manifested, and appears in the light
of the Day, and Over-witnesseth.
convinces us: and we have no need of the Fopperies or foggy expositions.
fooleries of the Antichrist, who with the blood and death of Christ does but
seek his own covetousness, pride, and voluptuousness, and draws the veil
of Moses before our eyes, that we should not see through the Tables that were
graven through ([through] Josua or Jesus) into the promised Land of Paradise:
that he may only sit and ride upon his horrible and devouring Beast of
covetousness and pride: which [Beast] is become so very great and strong, that
it shaddoweth the circuit of the Earth, and rules so wonderfully over High and
low.
Mountains and Valleys, with his fierceness: which [Beast] yet shall be
broken by the Lilly without hands; at which the [People or] Nations shall
wonder, and say, How art thou (O terrible and great might [and power]) founded
upon so weak and loose a ground.

38. Now then if we consider the miserable fall of Adam and Eve, we need not
to run long after the mad Antichrist, to fetch [or learne] wisdom from
him, he has none: Let us only consider our selves, and compare the heavenly
and earthly Image one with the other, and so we [shall] see the whole Or, drift.
root and ground thereof: we have no need of a Doctor, nor of any strange
language about it, it stands written in our body and soul; and when we see
it, it terrifieth us so much, that we tremble at it, as Eve and Adam did in
their Fall.

39. And if we do not come to know [or have a glimpse of] the Treader upon the
Serpent in the mark of the partition [or limit of seperation] in the Gate of
the Deep, between the world and the Kingdom of Hell, then we see [indeed]
nothing else but mere misery and Death, which might Persuade us to awake.
well awaken us from sleep.

40. Do but behold thy self thou blind Mind, and consider thy self, where
is thy Angelical Or, Image.
form in thee? Why art thou so angry, stern, [fierce, froward] and malicious?
Wherefore do thou elevate thy self still in thy wickedness, in pride, in
might [or authority] and pomp, and boastest thy self for a brave and potent
Beast? What is it that thou do? Wherefore have thou let the Spirit of this
world into thee, which seduceth thee (as it lists) into high mindedness,
into [proud] stoutnesse, into Authority and stateliness.
potency and pomp, into covetousness and lying, into falsehood and treachery,
as also into sickness and corruption? [or frailty?]

41. What is it now that thou Keep or take with thee.
have after thy corrupting, when thou dyest? Consider thy self, what is it
that thou art [then]? Thou art a Spirit: but what kind of source [or property]
is it that thou have in thee? [surely thou have in thee] anger, wickedness,
pride, self-seeking, wilfulness, (in raising up thy self after temporal
pleasure, but finding none;) [thou hast] a false mind in the Spirit, full of
lies and deceit, and murtherous, [arising in thee] out of the Essences: as thou
were upon Earth toward Men, just so it is [then] with such a Spirit as is gone
forth from thee out of the corruptible body of the Elements. And where shall
that [then] remain when this world perishes? Do thou suppose that it shall
[then] be an Angel? has it an Angelical quality [source or property]? is its
source [or quality] in love, humility, and meekness? is it in the Divine
Obedience, in the light of Joy?

42. O thou blind Mind, with thy might and stateliness, full of wickedness
and devilish fierce wrath [wilt thou know where thou art after that thy body
perishes?] thou art even with all the Devils, in the Abyss of Hell; if thou
do not turn and (by earnest unfeigned sorrow and repentance for thy
abominations) enter into the Angelical footsteps, that the Savior and Treader
upon the Serpent of fierce wrath, wickedness, lying, and deceit, may meet
thee, and embrace thee in his arms, and [that thou] may be newborn in
him, and be yielded up into the bosom of the The wisdom and mercy of God.
chaste virgin, and become an Angel; or else thou art in the Eternal Death, in
the Eternal Darkness, and can in all Eternity not reach the kingdom of God
any more.

43. Or do thou suppose, that [write of the fall of Man without Or,
knowledge.
light and understanding? Or that I do not look and see into the holy
Scripture, what that says of it, [when I say] that Man before his fall was
Angelical in his mind and body? Then hear and see what Christ says of it,
Matthew. 13. verse. 22. In the resurrection of the Dead, they will neither marry,
nor be given in marriage, but they are as the Angels of God; and such an Image
God created in the beginning, [according] to his similitude.

44. For an angry, malicious, proud, self-seeking for honor and dignity,
mend^cious, [or lying] theeving, robbing, murtherous, lascivious, lecherous
mind, is not the similitude of God; but an humble, chaste, modest, pure,
courteous [minde] which inclines it self with a longing desire and love to
the Heart of God, that is the similitude of God; in which the fire flaming
Spirit in the joy and the meekness goes forth out of the will, and for its
brethren, the will of its Spirit (which goes forth from it) readily inclines
toward them; and as the Proverb says, Imparteth the very heart to them, which
is done in Spirit, wherein the heavenly joy (in the Eternal Element) springs
up, and the Wonders of God are manifested in the virgin, by a Hymn of praise
to the Eternal Mind of God; where the mind plays upon the Harp of David an
Hymn to God: where then (in the eternal holy Mind) there springs up
knowledge and colors in the [Eternall] Element, and in the Spirit wonders,
with works and powers [or vertues].

45. And this is the Image of God, which God created for his glory and joy, and
no other; and let not the mad Antichrist persuade thee concerning any other
[Image of God] for there is no other: thy body and soul convinces thee of it,
as also Heaven and Earth, the Stars and Elements; look upon what thou will,
all things convince thee; and if thou do not turn and enter into that Image
to which God created thee, then in the breaking of thy body (when thy mind in
the Spirit of the soul shall stand naked without a body) thou shall be ashamed
before all creatures, this we speak according to its high worth, as it is
highly known in the will of God.

46. Thus it is highly [necessary] for us to know the miserable Fall of our
first Parents: wherefore it was so with God, that his anger is in us, and that
we must dye, and (if we apprehend not the Treader upon the Serpent) must also
perish eternally. But that we may set down a short Summary of the Fall
(because of our simple, cold, dull, and dark mind) for the Readers
understanding, who it may be does not yet apprehend our sense and knowledge:
therefore we will explain it briefly and clearly, and also readily impart our
knowledge and mind to him, as indeed ( Or, in.
according to the Divine Image) we ought to do.

47. Adam stood forty days in an Angelical Image before his sleep, and there
was neither day nor night in him, also no time; though indeed he was not (as an
Angel) a mere Spirit: for his body was out of the The inward Element.
Element, which is no understanding Spirit, but [is] the attraction [concretion
or congelation] in the will of God, or the Or, the eternal Earth.
Limbus, which stands before god, wherein the chaste virgin (the Divine
Wisdom dwells) which discovered and created the Image out of the Element by
the Fiat.

48. And out of this Limbus (at the time when the Earth was corporised) went
forth the four Elements, as out of a fountain; and that which was discovered
[or manifested] by the virgin (the wisdom of God) in the innumerablenesse,
were the Stars, as a virtue [power] or procreation out of the Limbus: and
they are the Quintessence Or, before.
of the four Elements, not severed from the four Elements, but qualifying [or
mixing vertues] one with another, The Stars with their fierce property, are
extracted out of the four Elements.
and yet extracted from the four issues, with their sharp Essences; and they
are the seeking [longing or hunger] of the four Elements (or as I may express
it by a similitude) [they are] the Man, and the Elements are the Woman; and the
heart of these things is the Element, in one only substance, and the Essences
in that [one Element] are the virtues [or powers] of the Wonders of the Wisdom
of God, and are called Paradise, an exulting Joy.

49. And the Spirit of the Eternal Essences (which has understanding and
knowledge, and also the trial and proving of every thing, in which the source
[or active property of quality] which is in Man, consists) that was breathed
into him, by the wisdom of God, through the driving will, which goes Or, into
Resignation.
forward, out of the Eternal Mind, out of the opened Gates of the Deep,
through the Word, [together] with the moving Spirit of God; and he had the Or,
stirring.
Touch of the Center of the Abyss [viz.] the Eternal source Or, as the fire
is behind the light.
behind him, as a Band, and before him, the heart and light of God, as a
Glance of the joy and kindling of Paradise, which springs up in the Essences
with the light of the joy; and beneath him [he had] the four Elements in the
budding out of the Limbus which was in him.

50. And as long as he set his Imagination in the Heart of God, the Paradise
was in him [and he in the Paradise] and the B^^d of the Abyss, in him (in the
Or, property, as the fire is the cause of the light and shining.
source) was a Paradise of transcendent Joy: and the Kingdom of this world
held him from beneath also in the Band, because it goes forth from the
Element: but so long as he set his mind in the Heart of God, it [the kingdom
of the four Elements] could not, lay hold on him [or master him], and it was
impotent, as to him, as this world is impotent as to God.

51. And thus the Spirit and soul of Adam stood in the midst, (in the joyful
Paradise) forty days, as one [onely] day, and all Three had a desire to have
him.
inclined to him; one [whereof was] the kingdom of Hell, of the Eternal
Originality out of the dark Mind, out of which his Worm of the soul (in the
opened Gate) was gone forth: and secondly, [there inclined to him] the Deity of
the Kingdom of Heaven in the opened Gate, in the pleasant Luster: and thirdly,
the Spirit of the Stars and Elements [inclined to him] drawing him to their
Bands, and heartily desiring him.

52. And thus Adam stood upright in the Temptation: for his angry mind (out of
the Originality of the first Principle) stood in Joy [being enlightened] from
the light of God; and the source of the fierce wrath, made the rising joy, for
the light made all meek and friendly, that he might incline himself to love,
and thereby he stood (on earth) rightly in the Paradise.

53. The four Elements of this world, together with the Sun and Stars,
they could not qualify [or mix] with him: he drew no Air into him: but the
Spirit of God (in the virgin) was his breathing and [his] kindling of the fire
in the Spirit.

54. But while he thus stood (between the kingdom of Hell and the kingdom of
this world) in the Paradise, bound with Bands, and yet also wholly free, in the
might of God; he [reflected himself into or] discovered himself in the great
Deep of the kingdom of this world: in which the great wonders also stand
hidden in the Center, as we see, that Man has (by his Eternal Mind)
discovered it and brought it to Or, the day.
Light, as is seen before our eyes; and in his discovering [or reflecting] he
imagined, and fell into lust, for the Spirit of the world took hold of him
([and] as a Mother makes a mark upon a child in the Mothers womb) and [he]
became (in the lust) impregnated from the Spirit of this world: and then was
blind, as to God, and saw, neither God nor the virgin any more in his mind.
And thus the Kingdom of Heaven continued in the opened Gate of the Omnipotence
[or Almightinesse] (in the Paradise) in its [own] Principle, to it self (and
the virgin in it) hidden in the Center, and was in Adam, and yet Adam (with his
mind) was not in God, but in the Spirit of this world, and he became feeble as
to the kingdom of Gods and so fell down and slept.

55. And then God (by the Spirit of this world, through the Fiat) built [or
formed] out of Adam.
him, the Woman of this world, by whom he Multiplied or propagated.
increased his Kingdom. The Woman was out of the Matrix, which (before the
infection) was a chaste virgin, which Adam should have Or, generated.
brought forth out of himself; but when the modesty of the wisdom, and
ability [or potency] departed from him, (when he passed into the Spirit of this
world) he could not then bring forth [or generate]; for in his sleep the
Spirit of this world clothed him with flesh and blood, and figured [formed or
shaped] him into a Beast, as we now see by very woeful experience; and know
our selves to be blind and naked as to the kingdom of God, [being] without
any virtue, [or strength], in the sleep of the great misery, clothed with
corruptible [fraile and transitory] flesh and blood.

56. And now when Adam awaked from sleep, then he was a Man and no Angel: he
drew breath from the air, and therewith kindled his Or, Astrall Spirit.
Starry Spirit, which had taken possession of him: he knew his wife to be a
Woman, and that she was Or, generated.
taken out of him, and took her to him, as all Beasts couple together: yet he
had then pure eyes, for the fierceness [or grim wrath] did not yet stick in
them, but the infection [or longing]: The Element of fire with its bitterness
(which qualifieth [or mixeth properties] with the Abyss of Hell) had not
pressed him wholly.

57. Thus now Adam with his wife, went (in great lust and joy) into the Garden
of Eden, where Adam told her of the Commandment concerning the Tree; but Eve
(being a Woman of this world) regarded it but little, and turned her from Adam
to the Tree, and looked upon it with lust: and the lust instantly took hold of
her: and the lying Devil (when she was talking with him, whom she knew not,
neither had heard of any Devil) persuaded her, and she laid hold on the Tree,
and brake off [an Apple] and did eat of the fruit of the four Elements and
Stars, and gave to Adam; and when Adam saw that Eve dyed By eating.
not, then he eat also.

58. And then their eyes were opened, and they knew that they had flesh and
blood, and were quite naked: for the Spirit of the great World took them
captive with the four Elements, and figured ([or framed in] them) Stomach and
Gutts; though indeed in the sleep of Adam (when the Matrix was severed from
the Limbus) the same forms were already figured, but they knew it not, till
after the biting of the Apple: and then the Spirit of the fierceness first gat
in, and made its Region, (as may be seen, in the Heart, Liver, Lungs, Gall,
and Bladder, as also in the Stomach) this Regiment, had Adam gotten in his
sleep, and with the biting of the Apple, the Spirit of the great world has
set it self in that [Government].

59. And then they looked one upon another, and were ashamed one before
another, and they were afraid of the wrath [or severity] that entered into
them, for it was the anger of God; and thus they were captivated by the first
Principle (as by the Abyss of Hell), and held Adam and Eve captive in their
souls in the Eternal [part]: for it sprung up with terror, fear, and doubt,
concerning the kingdom of God: and they could have no comfort, [in that
condition]; for they saw the Paradise no more, but the Garden in Eden: so also
they had lost the Deity, they could set no will [or desire] into it: for the
wrath and doubt stood in the way.

60. Then came the Spirit of this world with its rough Garment, with heat and
cold, and pressed upon them, as upon naked people: and so struck the Image of
God half dead, (with their fierceness, anguish, and doubt, with their quality
[or property] of hot and cold) and let it lie in pain, anguish, and doubt. And
here Man went from Jerusalem (out of the Paradise) to Jericho, into the house
of murthero^rs, who stripped him of his Paradisicall Garment, and robbed him, and
struck him (with their poison, torment, plague, and sickness, from their
infection) half dead, and so left him and went their way, as the second Adam
said in the Gospel, in a similitude [or Parable].

61. And here now was no remedy, neither in Heaven, nor in this world, they
were captivated in hard slavery (in misery and death): the Abyss of Hell did
hold the soul, and the Spirit of this world held the body [captive]: Death and
corruption was in the body: and there was nothing else in them but enmity to it
self, [proceeding] from the tart Essences of the Stars, wherein one source
[or quality] striveth against the other, and one breaks [or destroyeth] the
other with greater pain and torment to the body, with trembling and skreeking,
and at last [comes] corruption and death, as it is before our eyes.

62. There the Devil gat the Game: for the kingdom of this world to be his
again, he gat an entrance into Man, and he could reach into the Essences of
his soul; for they were Man and the Devil were both in the wrath void of
grace.
now both in one kingdom.

63. He [the Devill] supposed [saying] the kingdom of this world is thine,
thou shall sport thy self according to thy power, with the Image of Man, which
should have possessed thy Throne, his Spirit is in thy kingdom: and so [the
Devill] mocked God in his mind; [saying] Where is now thy noble Image, which
though did create to Rule over my Throne? am not I Lord of the great Might of
the fire? I will rule over thy Throne, the might [or strength] and virtue is
mine: I fly up above the Thrones of virtue and strength, and no might [or
power] can withstand me.

64. Yes indeed the flies up above the Thrones: but he cannot fly into the
Thrones; he flies up in the first eternal source of fire, which is stern,
four, dark, hard, cold, rough, and burning; but he cannot get through the open
Gate of the Deep, into the Light of God, but he flies up aloft in his Abyss,
in the Eternity, in the wrathful source [or quality] of Hell, and reaches
nothing else. And therefore he is a Prince, (though in the Abyss of Hell,)
which was well enough known to Man after his Miserable Fall.

65. And because I may not be well understood by the Reader, in that I write,
that Man dwells in the Abyss of Hell with the Devils; therefore I will show
him the ground, that he may touch and handle it: and if he will not feel it,
yet it is given to him that he may know it, and it shall be a witness against
him.

66. It is not without a cause, that Christ calls the Devil a Prince of this
world, for he is so, according to the first Principle, according to the
kingdom of wrath, and continues so to Eternity; but he is not so, according
to the kingdom of the four Elements and Stars; for if he had full power in
that, then there would be no vegetative [fruit] nor living creature upon the
Earth: he cannot master the That which proceeds, or issues.
exit of the four Elements: for he is in the Originality, and there is a
[whole] Principle between; only when the Or, aspects of the Stars.
Costellations do awaken the fierce wrath of the fire, in the Elements, as in
a tempestuous storm, then he is Master Jugler [in mischiefe] and rejoices
himself [therein:] though indeed he has no power there neither, except it be
permitted to him from the anger of God, then he is the Hangman [or
Executioner], and executes the The Sentence, Judgment, or Justice.
Right as a Servant [Minister or Officer], but not as a Judge, but as an
Executioner.

67. He is Executioner in the kingdom of this world, the Stars are the
Council, and God is the King of the Land, and whosoever departs from God,
falls into the Council of the Stars, which run many upon the sword, and
make them lay violent hands upon themselves, and [bring] some to a Rope, others
to the water: and there he is very busy, and is the Driver or Executioner.

68. Into this great misery Man is fallen; and he is fallen quite Into the
bosom.
home to the kingdom of the Stars and Elements, as to his body, what these
do with him, that he is, and that stands in the substance; they make one
great, another small: one straight, another stooping and crooked: they send one
fortune and riches, and another poverty: of one they make a crafty subtle Man
according to the counsel and kingdom of this world, and of another they make
an Idiot, they make one a King, and they break and pull down another: one
they kill, another they bring into the world: and continually drive the mind
of Man, yet into nothing else but into vain turmoile, discontent, and vexation.

69. Besides the kingdom of Hell and of [fierce] wrath always gape after the
soul, and set their jaws wide open to devour the captive soul: which is
held fast fettered with two strong chains: the one of the kingdom of Hell:
the other of the Kingdom of this world, and is continually led by the heavy,
lumpish, beastiall, and sickly body, as a Thief who is often led to the place
of Execution, and still by a Petition reprieved, and laid in prison again: and
the poor soul must lie thus in Prison the whole time of the body: where the
Devil on the one side very suddenly rusheth upon it with his devouring
fierceness, wrath, and malice, and would carry it into the Abyss: then
instantly [it is beat upon by] the glistering [flattering] world, with pomp,
bravery, covetousness, and voluptuousness o^ Perdition: presently [againe
comes upon it] sickness and fear, and it is continually trembling and
quaking: and when Man goes but in the dark, how is it amazed, and continually
afraid that the Executioner will take it, and Or, Execute Justice.
do execution upon it.

The Gate [or Exposition] of the great sin, and contrariety of will against
God, Committed by, or through Man.
in Man.
70. If we did well consider the abominations and great sins of Man before
God, which our first Parents inherited for us, then we should scarce ever be
merry in this world at all, if the Spirit of this world did not cast foolish
fancies, and seeming joys and pleasures before us, in our imprisonment; or if
the Regeneration did not cause us so highly to rejoice that we shall once be
delivered out of this Prison; for in this life, we find nothing else but
mere abomination, sin, misery and death, and scarce attain (in this
[temporary] life) so much as a glimpse of the Eternal Joy.

71. Now the mind asks, What is sin then? How is it sin? Wherefore has
God a loathing against the substance which he has created? Behold thou child
of Man, there is no sin in Heaven in the presence of God: only in thy self
there is sin, and sin seperateth us and our God asunder: otherwise all
things are fix, [or perfect], and good, in their own being [or substance]; the
kingdom of Hell and of wrath is good in it self, according to its [own]
Region, it does not vex or torment it self: but its woe [paine or smart] is
its birth, and the rising of its source; also it desires nothing else.

72. And so also the Kingdom of this world is fix [or perfect] and good, in it
self: neither does it vex or torment it self; but the elevating of the
Elements ( viz. the kindling of the heat, cold, air, and water,) is its
growing and springing: neither does it torment it self in it self; nor has
in any distress or fear in it self.

73. Only Man (who is proceeded out of another Principle) has in both those
[forementioned] Principles, woe, misery, sorrow, and distress; for he is not
in his native Country: and none of these two Principle can attain his native
Country. Therefore the poor soul must be thus Pinched and squeesed.
plagued and tormented, that it may attain its native Country again: it must
go again through the Gate of the deep anguish of Death; it must break
through two kingdoms, and it sticks here In the chinck, cra^^y, or closing
of the door.
between the Door and the hinges, and is continually infected with those
things which keep it back and plague it, it sticks as it were in a Press.

74. If it straineth to God [wa^^], then the Devil holds it on one side with
one Band, and the world, with another Band; and they Or, assault it.
set upon it: the Devil handles it in fierceness, [sternnesse, frowardness,
or] wrath, which is a source [or quality] and sin, which cannot attain to
the kingdom of God; and the world leads it into pride, covetousness, and
fleshly lust, so that the Or, budding substantial virtues.
Essences of the soul grow full [or impregnated] with the fleshly will, for
the will of the mind, draws these things into the soul, and so the soul
(from that which is attracted) becomes wholly unclean, Mudded.
swelled and dark, and cannot attain the light of God; its Essences that
should give up themselves to God, cannot: for they are too rough and cannot get
into the light, that kindles not it self in its Essences; the Gates of the
Deep must be broken open first, and then the Essences [of the soul may]
press into the liberty, Beyond.
without the darkness: but if the mind be Or, big with pride, covetousness,
envy, anger, might and pomp.
filled, then it cannot [come into the liberty,] and then begin horror, fear,
distress;, and despair of the kingdom of God, and this makes mere torment
[woe, pain, and smart] in the soul.

75. Thus thou shall know in what manner it is sin before God: thou have in
thy self the [one eternal pure] Element, which is a joy in the presence of
God: and now if thou rage and rave with the source [quality or property] of
Hell, then thou touchest [or troublest] the Element: and though stirrest up the
Or, fierce grimnesse.
wrath [and make it] to go forth, and thou do as the Devil did, when he
awakened [or stirred up] and kindled the fierce Or, fierce grimnesse.
wrath in the Fiat, whereby the Or, fierce grimnesse.
fierceness generated earth and stones; thou finnest [piercing] into the
Heaven in the presence of God, upon which the Prophets complained in many
places, That the disobedient did grieve their God: though (in himself) he felt
no pain, yet his wrath was kindled in the first Principle, in the Gate of the
Deep, wherein the soul stands, and that is a mere abomination before him.

76. Behold, all whatsoever thou let into thy mind (if thy soul be not
inclined [or yielded up] to God, so that It stand^ (...) belief and confide^^
(...) God and ^^^dnesse.
it believes and trusts in him) then all whatsoever thou do is sin: for
thou bring an earthly Mind into the Gate of the Deep, where the Spirit of
God [moveth, walks, or] goes, and thou defilest the Element which is in the
presence of God.

77. Thou will say, How? God dwells in Heaven. O! thou blind Mind, full of
Darkness; the Heaven where God dwells is also in thee, as Adam was both upon
Earth, and also in Paradise at once, and give not way to Antichrist to direct
thee aloft without [the place of] this world above the Stars, for he tells
thee a lie, as the Devil himself did. God is every where, as the Prophet
David says: If I fly to the Daybreak, or into Hell; thou art there. Also
where is the place of my rest? am not I be that (...) to all things? yet I
behold the miserable and those that are of a broken Spirit, and I will dwell in
them: Also, I will dwell in Jacob, and my Or, Tent.
Tabernacle shall be in Israel: understand it right, he will dwell in the
contrite and broken Spirit, which breaks the Gate of Darkness, he will
press into that [Spirit].

78. Therefore beware of the Infection or hunger.
longing [lust or desire]: and say not in thy self, I stand in the dark, the
Lord sees me not [nor] what I think and do; he stands in the Gate of thy
Mind, where the soul stands (before the clear face of God) in the opened
Gate: and all thy abominations are known before God, and thou make the
Element of God blush [or change colour] with them: thou grievest the chaste
virgin (which dwells in her own Center, and is given to be a companion to
thee in thy mind) and make her sad: she warns thee of the way of the
ungodly: if thou follow [her counsell], and turnest, and breakest in unto her,
by earnest Repentance, then she crowns thee in thy mind with wisdom and
understanding, that thou may then very well avoyde the Devil; but if thou
do not then thou fallest out of one sin and abomination, into another, and
make thy measure full and running over, and then the Devil helps thee into
his kingdom, and thou art very serviceable to him: for thou art a true Rod or
Whip.
scourge to the children of God, not only with reproaching, but also in deeds
[or in the work of thy hands] which the Devil dare not do, thou do him
acceptable service. He tickleth thee finely with the Name [ Of a godly zealous
Man, professor, or godly Divine.
of God] so that thou bring forth from thy lips, and teach it; but thy
heart is a Thief and a Murderer, and thou art wholly dead to the kingdom of
Heaven.

79. Therefore O thou beloved Mind! Examine thy self to what thou art
inclined: whether thou art inclined to righteousness, love, fidelity, and
truth: Also to chastity, modesty, and mercifulness: if so, it is well for
thee; but if not, then dive into thy bosom, and consider thy fleshly heart,
and try it, wrap thy Or, thoughts.
senses together, and put them in prison, and storm thy fleshly heart, that
the Elements in thee may quake and tremble: The flattering and lying Devil
(who has possessed thy fleshly heart) shall feel these Earnest zeal of
Repentance.
strokes (which he will not like) and then he must be gone: and thou will be
of another mind; This is no Or, invention.
conceit from a mind not opened, it self has tried this, and therefore it
shall stand for a Memorial and a continual Monitour: and whosoever pleases,
let him try it, and he shall find wonders indeed.

80. Now when Adam and his wife had eaten of the earthly Fruit, then they were
ashamed one of another, for they perceived the beastiall Members for Bodily.
Propagation: and they broke off Or, branches of leaves.
boughs, and held them before their Privities.
shame: and the voice of God went into the Garden, highly into their Minds,
and they hid themselves behind the Trees in the Garden.

81. Here we see clearly, yes we feel, that God (in the beginning) created no
such Image with beastiall Members for Propagation, for that which God created
for Eternity, that has no Or, Privities.
shame before it. Yet also they then first perceived that they were naked: the
Elements had taken possession of them, and yet put no earthly Garment [like the
Beasts hairy skin] upon them: for the Spirit of Man was not from the essences
and properties of the Elements [as the Spirit of the Beasts] but [Man] was out
of the Eternal.

82. And here in this place, there is nothing more palpable, than that it is
seen and known, that Adam had no Beastiall form before his sleep, before
his wife; [was formed]; for he was neither Man nor Woman, but, a chaste virgin
without Beastiall form: he had no Or, Privities.
shame nor beasts, neither had he need of them: he should have generated in
love and chastity (without pain, or opening of his Body) a virgin as himself
was; and it should have been possible, that the whole Host of Angelical Men,
should have proceeded out of one only Man, (as the Angels did,) out of one
fountain; if he had stood in the Temptation; even as all those (who come to
the only Arch-Shepherd, to his Rest) were redeemed (by one only Man,) from
the Eternal Death and Torment of Hell.

83. Here now we find, that they heard the voice of God in the Garden: for
the Element (which is before God, wherewith Man qualifieth [or mixeth]) that
did tremble because of sin: and sin was manifested in the Element of the
Mind, first in Adam and Eve; and then fear and terror fell into the Essences
of the soul: for the first Principle in the [fierce] sternesse was stirred: so
that [Principle] gat (as a Man may say) fuel for its source of fire. And is
risen up in the kindling, in contrariety of will, in the Essences, where one
form has continually opposed the other, viz. the sour ^artnesse, and the
cold with their attracting, have awakened the bitter stinging and tormenting in
the Essences of the Tincture of the blood in the Spirit: and the bitter ^^ging
and rising has awakened the fire.

84. And so instead of the Paradisicall Joy and refreshment, there has been a
mere Brimstone-Spirit, which stands in anguish and trembling of corruption
[or fragility]; which kindles the Tincture of the Blood, wherein tearing,
stinging, and tormenting is wrought; and if the fire in the Brimstone Spirit be
too much kindled, then it burns the Tincture up; and the light of Life goes
out, and then the body falls away to be a dead carcass: and if the tart
soreness be kindled too much by the hard attracting and holding, then also
the light of Life goes out, and the body perishes; so also of the water; if
the Tincture kindles it self in the meekness, then it becomes Pursie with
fatt.
windy, gross, swelled, wholly dark, also infectious and Sore or aching.
corrupt, wherein the flash of the life is as a pricking Thorn: and so Man's
life is every where begirt with enemies, and the poor soul is always in a
close prison fettered with many chains: and is continually in fear that (when
the body shall [dye or] break) it may fall into the kingdom of the
Executioner, the Devil.

85. Thus, in Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden (after the biting of the
Apple) there sprung up the first fruit in the Gate of the Deep, where the
soul stands before God, and qualifieth [or mixeth] with the will of the
Justice of the Father: who sets his will before him (in the breaking of the
Darkness) in the light of the Meekness, and continually generateth his
beloved Heart and Son (in the virtue of the meekness of the will) viz. his
Eternal Word, from Eternity.

86. And so should the Angelical Man also set his will in the broken Gates of
Darkness, through the will of the Father (wherewith the soul qualifieth [or
mingleth]) in the meekness of the Heart of God, and then the source [or
quality] of the Darkness in the [fierce] wrathfulnesse, should not have
Touched or hurt him.
stirred him, but he should have continued a glorious Prince of Paradise, in
triumph over the kingdom of Hell and of this world.

87. But when he set his Thoughts, mind, desire, or lust.
Imagination in the kingdom of this world, then the bright and clear will of
his soul, drew the swelled kingdom of the out-Birth to the soul into its
will: and so the pure Paradisicall soul became dark, and the Element of the
body did get the The concretion, mass, or lump.
Mesch or Massa, which the will of the soul of the mind attracted into the
Element [of the body]; and then he was a fleshly Man, and gat the fierceness
of the first Principle, which the strong breaking through to God, in the Gate
of the Deep, did make to be hard Or, joints.
Grissles and Bones.

88. And we are seriously and highly to know (for it is seen in the light of
Life,) that the marrow in the bones, has the noblest and highest Tincture,
wherein the Spirit is sweetest, and the light clearest, which may be known in
the fire, if you be not blind with your gainsaying; and it is accurately
known, that those Issues, passages or ways.
places (where the hard bones now are) were wonders and virtue [or power] which
have broken the Gates of the Darkness, in which [power] the Angelical Man in
the Light, stood.

89. Therefore the Providence of God (when Adam fell into longing [desire or
lust]) environed that virtue and strength, with the might of the first
Principle ( viz. with the might of the Stars and sharpness of God) that the
source [or quality] of the first and third Principle, might not so easily touch
it; and this was done in Adam sleep, when God built Adam to [or for] this
world, from whence Saint Paul also says; That the natural Man was created in
the corruptible life of this world: which was done at the Temptation of Adam,
at that time when God made his natural wife out of him: but he was a holy
Image before, and The Adamicall Man.
he must be the same again in his Restoration of the Last Day.

90. Though the Devil and this world rage and rave against this; yet it is
nevertheless the ground of Truth, highly known in the wonders of God: and not
from the Fables or Suppositions, such as the proud appearing holy or
hypocritical world now ground their Or, Inventions, conceits, and notions.
Babble upon, about the Cup of Jesus Christ, for the advancing of their pomp
and haughtiness, their own honor and supposed wisdom, for their pleasure,
and the Gourmundizing.
filling of their Bellies; Like the Proud Bride in Babylon, who rides upon the
Evil Beast, which devoureth the miserable; Therefore thus says the Spirit,
against Babell in the Confusion, I have spewed thee out: in the time of the
wrath, thou shall drink of the Cup of thy Pride, and thy source [or Torment]
shall rise up in Eternity.

Of the voice of God in the Garden of Eden, and the Conference between God and
those Adam and Eve.
two, about sin.
91. So now when Adam and his Eve (after the biting of the Apple) beheld
themselves, then they perceived the monstrous Image and Beastiall Form, and
they felt in themselves the wrath of God, and the fierceness of the Stars
and Elements: for they took notice of the Stomach and Guts, into which they
had stuffed the earthly fruit, which began to Qualify or mingle in them.
take effect, and they saw their beastiall shame: and then they did lift up
their minds toward Paradise, but they found it not: they ran trembling with
fear, and crept behind the Trees: for the wrath had stirred (their Essences
in the Spirit,) with the earthly fruit, and then came the voice of God in the
Center of the Gates of the Deep, and called Adam, and said: Adam, Where art
thou? And he said, Here am I: and I am afraid, for I am naked; And the Lord
said; Who has told thee that thou art naked? Have thou eaten of the Tree,
whereof I said unto thee, that thou should not eat thereof? And he said,
the Woman gave to me and I did eat; and he said unto the Woman, Why have thou
done so? And she said, the Serpent beguiled me, so that I did eat.

92. Here it may be seen very plainly, that the Devil had lost his Angelical
Image: and comes now in the form of a Serpent, with his murtherous lying, and
Or, deceives.
beguileth the Woman: because he had not been able to overthrow Adam wholly,
therefore he sets upon the Woman: and promises her Cunning, subtilty, or
skill.
wisdom, and the riches of this world, and that she should be therein like
God; the Devil mingled lies and truth together, and said, She should be as
God: but he meant, according to the Kingdom of this world, and according to
the first Principle of the [fierce] wrath: and let Paradise out; But Eve
understood it, that she should continue in the Paradise, in the divine and
pleasant Joy.

93. Therefore it is not good to prattle with the Devil, he is a liar and
murderer from the beginning of his kingdom, and a thief also, he comes
only to murder and to steal, as here [with Eve]: and the Devil is the
highest cause of the Fall: for he strewed The sweetness of sin.
Sugar upon Adam, so that he imagined [or lusted] after the kingdom of this
world; though Adam indeed did not see him, yet he slipped into the Essences of
the [fierce, soure] sternnesse: and did there strew Hells-Paradisicall Sugar
before him, so that Adam lusted.

94. But because he beguiled Adam and Eve with his Sugar, therefore God has
prepared such a dwelling house for him, as Adam lets forth (from the From the
earthly voluptuousness, and dainty delicacies, the Dung.
earthly Sugar) at the nethermost Exit: and that shall be left for him at the
corruption of the Earth, when it goes into its Either; and then that pleasant
smell of the stinck of sin and abominations (in the kingdom of the fierce
wrath) shall remain for him, and that Sugar he shall eat Eternally, and frame
his will continually therein to get other Sugar in the Or, Oven.
furnace of the fire, and then he may make that ready for him, as may best suit
with his pallat: at which he quaketh and trembles, when he hears the Spirit
declare such things; and hereby it is also signified to all the ungodly, that
they shall also eat the same Sugar Eternally, which they have continually
baked here, with their blaspheming, cursing, covetousness, scorn, backbiting,
[thorny-taunting] murdering, robbing, and taking the sweat of the needy and
miserable to maintain their haughty stately Pride.

95. And now when these two thus captivated by the Devil and this world, stood
before God with fear and great horror, and felt the anger of God, and the
severe Judgment: then the Heart of God, which had made them pitied them, and
it Appear, or discover it self to see.
did look whether there were any [remedy or] counsel that might help poor Man,
and redeem [or deliver] him from the Bands of the Eternal [fiercenesse or]
wrath, and from the mortal body of this world: but there was nothing found,
neither in Heaven, nor in this world, that could make them free, there was no
Principality or Throne-Angel, which had the ability to do it: all was lost,
they were in the Eternal Judgment of the Temporal and Eternal Death. For
the first Principle had captivated them, in the Spirit of the soul, and
qualified [or mingled] with the soul; the Kingdom of Heaven in the Light was
shut up [and there was a firm enclosure] of a whole Principle between, and The
soul.
it could not reach the kingdom of Heaven again, except that it were borne of
God again, otherwise there was no counsel nor help nor refuge in any thing at
all.

96. Then the Devil mocked the Image, and Hell opened its jaws wide, and had
the bridle in their Essences, and continually drew them therewith toward the
hellish fire of the fierce wrath: and then there was trembling and horror in
the mind, and they could not reach the love of God: Heaven was their Enemy, no
Angel came near them, but the horrible Devils, they showed themselves, and
hooped, crying, Ho, ho! we have gotten the Game, we are Princes over Men, we
will torment them soundly, because they would have possessed our Throne: we
should have been their footstool, and now we are their Judges; what care we
for God, he dwells not in our kingdom: wherefore has he thrust us out, we
will be sure to wreake our spleen upon his Image.

The most pleasant and most lovely Gate [or Exposition] of the promise of the
Treader upon the Serpent, highly to be considered.
97. Now when no counsel [or remedy] was found, and that Man was sunk down
into Hell, to the great Triumph of the Devils: then said God to the Serpent
(the Devil;) Because thou have done thus; be thou cursed; and the seed of the
Woman shall tread upon [or break] thy Head, and thou shall bruise [or Or, sting.
wound] his Heel: at which the Abyss of Hell did quake and tremble, but the
Devil understood not wholly what that should be: only he saw, that the word
imagined [or represented it selfe] in Adam and in Eve, in the Center of Life,
and that it opposed the fierceness of the kingdom of Hell, of which he stood
in fear, and his jollity was lessened, for he did nor relish that.

98. Moses writes here as if the Serpent had beguiled Eve, because God cursed
it, [and said] That it should eat Earth, and creep upon its belly; but Moses
here puts the veil before our eyes, that he cannot be looked in the Face:
for all Prophecies stand in dark words, that the Devil may not know [nor
apprehend them] and learn the Times, and that he may not strew his false
seed, before the wonders of God appear; as may be seen in all the Prophets,
who prophesied of the Treader upon the Serpent.

99. We know, that the Devil slipped into the Serpent, and spoke out of the
Serpent; for God did not mean [by it] that the Treader upon the Serpent,
should tread upon the head of the beastiall Serpent: but that he should destroy
the Devil and the Abyss of Hell. But that was the Punishment of the Beastiall
Serpent, that it should remain a poisonous Worm, without feet, and eat
Earth, and have communion with the Devil; for so all Evil Spirits in Hell
appear, in their own form, according to their source [or quality] as
Serpents, Dragons, horrible Worms and evil Beasts.

100. This now the Devil did not understand: because God spoke of the Serpent,
and cursed it to [be] a horrible Worm, and he supposed that it did not
concern him: neither does he yet know his own judgment, he knows only what
he learneth from Men, that do Or, Prophecy.
declare [things] in the Spirit of God; yet the Spirit of God does not wholly
intimate his Judgment to him, but all in the Depth, afar off, so that he
cannot wholly understand it. For to the enlightened Men, all Prophesies (even
concerning the wickedness of Men) are thus given, and they dare not set them
down clearer, that the Devil may not wholly learn the Counsel of God, and
strew his Sugar upon it: though in this place there are very excellent things,
that ought not to be revealed to the world, for they remain till the Judgment
of God; that the Devil may bring no new sects into it, and lead men into
doubt; and therefore they shall be passed over till the time of the Lilly.

101. So now when we consider the great love and mercifulness, in that he
has turned to Man; we find cause enough to write and teach these Matters or
wondrous works, and deeds.
things: for it concerns our eternal Salvation, and Redemption out of the
Jaws of Hell; therefore I will set down the ground of the promised Messiah,
that the following writings may be the better understood, especially Moses in
his Book of the Law, where there is need of it; now he that will see nothing,
God help, he must needs be blind; for the time of the visitation of the
hardened Jews, Turks, and Heathens, comes now. Whosoever will see, let them
see: the Lamps for the Bridegroom are shortly to be kindled: he comes,
whosoever desires to be a Guest, let him prepare him a Wedding Garment.

102. Now, says Reason, how could Adam and Eve know what God meant by the
Treader upon the Serpent? Indeed, they did not wholly and altogether know;
only they saw that the Devil must depart from them, and not show himself
outwardly any more; but the mind (in the Center, of the breaking through of
the life, into the Element; into the presence of the chaste and modest virgin,
the wisdom of God) that understood it well: for Man.
he lodged a precious and worthy Guest; for the Word (which God the Father
spoke concerning the Treader upon the Serpent) went out of the Heart, and out
of the Mouth of God, and that was the spark of Love [proceeding] out of the
Heart of God, which was from Eternity in the Heart of God, wherein God the
Father had known and elected Mankind (before the foundations of the World
were laid) that they should live therein; and that the same [spark or promise]
should stand in the rising up of the life, and Adam, also in his Creation,
stood therein.

103. And this is it which Saint Paul said; That Man is elected in Christ,
before the foundation of the world, and not those dregs of despair that are
now taught about the Election of Grace: they are not the right understanding; I
will show thee Paul's [meaning about] his Election of Grace, in its due place,
when I shall write of the This the Author writes of in his Book of the
Election of Grace.
beastiall, wolvish, and doggish minds of Men, that will not Or, desire.
give way that the Treader upon the Serpent may enter into them, so that the
heavenly Father (in his Son Jesus Christ, through his Incarnation, sufferings
and Death) might draw them to him: they will not endure that drawing: for they
have the Essences of the Serpent which draw into Hell; but this is not from
God, (as if he did willingly leave them,) no, but from their doggish nature,
ingrafted from the Stars and from the Devil: which God knows well, and
will not cast the Pearl before swine; whereas [neverthelesse] it were
possible, if they did but turn, and did step into the New Birth, they should
obtain the Jewel, though indeed it seldom happens, therefore God knows
[who are] his.

104. As is mentioned above; so has that same Word out of the Heart of God
(which God spoke to Adam and Eve) Imaged [or formed] it self in Adam and Eve,
in the light of the Life in its own Center; and espoused it self with the
dear and worthy The wisdom of God.
virgin of chastity, to continue eternally with Adam and Eve, and to defend
them from the fiery Essences and Darts of the Devil: as also if they would
incline to that same Word, that then they should thereby receive the rays of
the holy Trinity, and also the wisdom of the virgin.

105. And this word, should enlighten the soul, and at the departure of the
body, be the light of the soul, and bring the soul through the Gate of the
Darkness into Paradise, (before the bright countenance of God,) into the
second Principle, into the Element, where there is no pain.

106. For [there] the Word clothed the soul, and shut up the kingdom of Hell,
and there it shall wait till the day of the Restitution: and then it shall get
a body again out of the Element, out of the body that was here [in this life]
(when the Wrath, corruption; (...) the grimnesse.
fierceness shall be washed and melted away in the fire) at the last day; and
not a strange body, but the same it did bear, in the [one] Element hidden in
the four Elements, that same shall go forth and flourish as Adam [had done]
in [his] Creation.

The Gate of the Redemption.
107. And the same Word is propagated by the two first Men (...)
Persons, [or People] from one to another, [and that] in the Birth of the life,
and [in the] kindling of the soul, yet, in the Center: and the kingdom of
Heaven is near in every ones mind, and they can attain it, if they will
themselves: for God has bestowed it to every one, out of the Grace.

108. Yet thou must know that the Word sticks not in thy [mortall] flesh and
blood; as thy flesh cannot inherit the kingdom of Heaven, so therefore it
cannot stick in the flesh: but [it sticketh] in the Principle in the (...) of
the ^^ule, and it is the Bridegroom of the soul: Or, continue in true
resignation.
if the (...) rests in its bosom: but if it turn (...) or] goes away out of
the Worth.

The soul.
109. For (...) in the door [way]) between^ (...) in the Heaven: and if the
soul give^ (...) that Gate, then it loses the Word, Incline to resignation.
but (...) forward again, toward the Gate, then it attaineth that (...) and
the virgin (who is the servant of the Word) goes continually [along] with the
soul, and warns it of the evil ways.

110. But if the soul be a Dog, an Adder, or Serpent, then the virgin goes
away to the Word into the Heaven, and then the door is shut: And then there is
a whole Birth between the soul and the Word (whereas else there is but half a
[Birth between the Word and the soule]:) and then there is need of hard
striving, and [such a soule] will hardly enter into the kingdom of Heaven: yet
it is possible enough.

111. This word has brought the souls of Men (which have Yielded to the word.
inclined their minds to it,) ever since the beginning of the world (when
their bodies have been dead) into the bosom of Abraham, into the Element, into
the Rest, [which is] without source, [or pain,] and there the soul ([being
yet] without a body) has no Paradisicall source, [or active property or
faculty,] but dwells in the Or, Opened.
broken Gate, in the meek Element, in the bosom of the Or, wisdom of God.
virgin, in the presence of their Bridegroom, Or, upon.
after the long strife of unquietness, and waits for its body without pain:
and as to the soul there is no time, but it is in stillnesse: it sleeps not,
but it sees (without disturbance) in the light of the Word.

112. But because the Essences of the soul were infected with the poison of
the Devil, and of Hell, so that the soul could not be helped again, except
it were Newborn, or regenerated.
borne a new through the word, out of the mouth of God, viz. through his
beloved Heart, (if ever it should attain the Paradisicall Joy and source
[condition or quality] again, and qualify or mingle in the Or, be
strengthened with Paradisicall power.
Paradisicall Essences, and if ever its body should come out of the Element
again to the soul) then the Word (in the virgin-chastity) must Or, be
incarnate.
become Man, and take Man's flesh and blood, and botome a humane soul, and
enter into Death, as also into the first Principle, into the dark Mind of the
Eternity (where the soul has its Original) into the ground of Hell; and
break in pieces the Dark Gate in the ground of the soul, and the chains of
the Devil, and generate [or beget] the foul anew again out of the ground
[thereof,] and present it as a new child (without sin and wrath) before God.

113. And as the first sin did [passe or] press from one upon all, so also
the Regeneration, [passeth] by one upon all: and none are excluded, except they
will themselves: whosoever says otherwise, has no knowledge in the kingdom
of God, but tells mere stories [or speaks but according to the History or
Letter onely] without the Spirit of Life.

114. Here following we will, highly and orderly set down Gods great deeds of
Wonder, for the comforting of the sick Adam, which for the present sticks in
the Press; and must suffer Squeezing and oppression.
anguish: yet this [which is set down) shall stand against all the Gates of
the Devil, also against all Sects and Schisms: and that in the ground of the
Light (as it is given to us of God) and besides, out of the ground of the holy
Scriptures, upon the highly precious words of the Promise in the Prophets, and
the Psalms, as also the Apostolical [writings] which, though we do not here
allege their Scriptures: yet we will sufficiently prove it to every one
[themselves which will not be contented with this summary description.

The Gate of the Or, becoming Man.
Incarnation, of Jesus Christ the Son of God.
The firm Articles of the Christian Faith.
115. Beloved Mind, we write no conceits and tales, it is in earnest, and
it is as much as our bodies and souls are worth: we must give a strict account
of it, as being the Talent that is committed to us: if any will be Or, offended.
scandalized at it, let them take heed what they do, truly it is high time to
awake from sleep: for the Bridegroom comes.

116. The Confession of Faith.
I. We Christians believe and acknowledge, that the Eternal Word of God the
Father became a true self-subsisting Man (with body and soul) in the body [or
womb] of the virgin Mary, without Man's Or, ^^^ing any thing to do in it.
interposing: for we believe that he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and
borne of the body of the Virgin, without Or, defiling.
blemishing of her virgin [purity or] chastity.

II. Also, we believe, that (in his humane body) he dyed and was buried.

III. Also, [wee beleeve] that he descended into Hell, and has broken the
Bands of the Devil (wherewith he held Man captive) in pieces, and redeemed the
soul of Man.

IV. Also, we believe, that he willingly dyed for our iniquities, and
reconciled his Father, and has brought us, into Or, Grace.
favor with him.

V. Also, we believe, that he rose again from the dead on the third day, and
ascended into Heaven, and there sits at the right hand of God.

VI. Also, we believe, that he shall come again at the last day, to judge the
living and the dead; and take his Bride to him, and condemn the ungodly.

VII. Also, we believe, that he has a Christian Church here upon Earth, which
is begotten in his blood and death, [and so made] one body with many members,
which he cherishes; and governs with his Spirit and Word, and uniteth it
continually (by the holy Baptism, of his own appointing, and by the Sacrament
of his body and blood) to [be] one only body in himself.

VIII. Also, we believe, that he protecteth and defends the same, and
keeps it in one mind.

And now we will here following set down all out of the Deep Ground
(according to every things own substance) what our knowledge is, as far as is
now necessary.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the promised seed of the Woman, and Treader upon the Serpent: and of Adams
and Eves going forth out of Paradise, or the Garden in Eden.

Also, Of the Curse of God, how he cursed the Earth for the sin of Man.

1. That is, we must not speak of the mysteries with the mouth only, but with
an earnest zealous Heart.
WE will not concoct the meat in the mouth, and play with the mysteries, to
write one thing, and con^^^^e another with the mouth, to please the c^re, as is
used now adays, where they cover themselves continually with a strange cloak,
whereas all is nothing else but mere hypocrisy, appearance, and [jugling] or
fighting with a shadow, The Spirit of God is not in such a one, but he is a
Thief and a Murderer: and he uses his Pen for nothing else but his own
Pride: if he had Or, if he were from the true Spirit.
power, then he would himself cast all away, though he should [under a strange
cover] acknowledge it* but with half a mouth: He is to speak freely out of
the Abyss of his heart, and to write without a cover; for Christ has done
away his covering [or vayle] and his loving countenance appears to the whole
world, for a witness to all People.

2. Therefore let every one look to it, and take heed of the appearing holy
hyprocrites and flatterers, for they are Antichrists (and not Christ's)
Ministers [or servants]; for Antichrist has set his foot upon the breadth of
the Earth, and rides upon the abominable devouring Beast, which is as Great as
himself and indeed Greater: Therefore it is highly necessary, that every one
feel [or groape] in his own bosom, and consider his heart how it is inclined,
that he do not deceive himself, and unknown to himself, yield himself to
be the [servant or] Minister of Antichrist, and fulfill that Prophecy: for
Antichrist.
he stands now Manifest.
in the light of the eyes: the time of his visitation is at hand: he shall be
manifested in the light of the life. And beware of covetousness, for thou sha
not enjoy it: for the wrath of the Beast breaks the Mountains and Hills to
pieces: and thy covetousness will partake of the Or, Grimnesse and wrath or
plagues.
fierceness, the time is near.

3. Now when poor fallen Man (viz. Adam and Eve) stood thus (in great fear,
horror, and trembling) being fast bound with the bands of the Devil, and of
Hell, in great scorn and shame before the Heaven and Paradise; Then God the
Father appeared to them, with his angry mind of the Abyss, into which they
were fallen, and his most loving heart went (forth through the Word of the
Father) (...) Adam and Eve, and Or, opposed.
placed it self before the wrath, highly in the Gate of Man's life, and
enlightened the poor soul again, yet they could not comprehend it in the
Essences of the soul: but received the Rays of the Almighty Power, whereby
Adam and Eve became Or, were comforted.
glad again: and yet stood trembling (by reason of the wrath [or fierce
horror or grimmesse] that was in them, and heard the sentence which God
pronounced: for God said ( because thou have eaten of the Tree whereof I told
thee that thou should not eat) cursed be the ground for thy sake, with care
thou shall maintain thy life thereon all thy life long, Thorns and Thistles
shall it bring forth to thee: and thou shall eat the herb of the field, till
thou become Earth again, from whe^^e thou were taken: for thou art now Earth,
and to Earth you shall return again.

4. Here now stand the great secrets (which we cannot see with Or, with the
eyes of reason.
our earthly eyes) wholly naked and plain, and there is no veil before it,
only we are blind to the kingdom of God, for God cursed the Earth and said,
it should now bear Thorns and Thistles, and Man Or must.
should eat the fruit of the accursed Earth; This indeed is a new thing. He
allowed them not in Paradise, to eat of the earthly herbs, but of the
pleasant fruit. And if he had eaten of the herbs of the fields, yet that which
he had eaten, was heavenly; and when the Lord cursed the Earth, then all became
earthly: and the holy Element was withdrawn, and the fruit did grow in the
issuing of the four Elements, in the kindling of the fierceness, out of which
Thorns and Thistles grew.

5. We must conceive, that there Before the Curse.
was then a very pleasant habitation upon the Earth: for all the fruits did
grow [spring and bud] out of the hidden Element (through the fierceness of the
four Elements); and although the four Elements had also their fruits, yet Man
should not, (but the Beasts of the field should) have eaten thereof: but now
when the Lord cursed the Earth, then the Element withdrew from the root of the
Fruit; (for Gods cursing is nothing else, but his flying from a thing) and thus
Gods holiness is flien from the root of the fruit, and so the root [of the
fruits] remains in the four Elements; in the out-birth; and Adam and Eve
were also fallen Into the four Elements.
thereinto: and thus now like came to like: his body also was become earthly,
and must turn to Earth again.

6. But that God did say, Thou shall turn to Earth from whence thou were
taken, that is also very true; but the understanding is [hidden] in the Word,
and the earthly veil hangs before it, we must look under the veil. For
Adam was taken out of the earth, not out of the four issuings of the Elements,
[but he was] an Extract out of the Element, which qualified [or mingled] with
the Earth: But when he fell into the four Elements, then he became Earth, as
also, fire, air, and water: and now what should the Beastiall Man do [with]
the heavenly Paradisicall fruit, he could not Or, enjoy it.
eat of it: and therefore God does not cast his heavenly kingdom to beasts
and swine, but it belongs to Angels.

7. So also it is very clear and manifest, that (before the curse) there grew
such venomous [or poysonous] Thorns and Thistles, and poisonous fruits: and if
God had not cursed the Earth (from the [one] Element), then no Beast should
have been so fierce and [mischievous or) evil; for God said; Let the Earth be
cursed for thy sake. From whence now is also arisen the disobedience of the
Beasts toward Man, and their wildness, [or flying in their face] as also,
that they are so [cruell] fierce [mischievous] and evil, and that Man must
hide himself from their fierce rage [and fury] whereas God (in the Creation)
gave all into his power, all Beasts of the field should be in subjection under
him, which now is cl^ane contrary: for Man is become a Wolf to them [in
devouring the Beasts] and they are [like] Lions against him, and there is mere
Enmity against one another: he can scarce order the tame Beasts, much less the
wild.

8. And we are to know, that there was a great difference in the Beasts before
the curse: for some ( viz. the tame ones) were very near a kin to the
Element, with whom Man should have had joy and delight; on the contrary, some (
viz. the wild ones, which fly from Man) [were very near a-kinne] to the
four Elements: for the The wonderful reason why one beast was better than
another.
causes of those wonders stuck wholly in the Essences, and they were very well
known and seen in the light of the life in the knowledge of the Or, Divine
Wisdom.
virgin: there is nothing so deep that Man cannot search into, and see it most
Infallibly.
assuredly, if he do but put away the veil, and look (through the Tables Or,
transparent Law.
graven through;) with Or, Jesus.
Joshua, into the promised Land.

9. And God said; In the sweat of thy Or, Brows.
face, thou shall eat thy Bread, till thou turn to Earth again. Here now all
is clear [and manifest] in the light: for he had lost the heavenly fruit,
which grew for him without labor [or toil of his]; and now he must dig and
delve in the earth, and sow and plant, and so in the four Elements must get
fruit, in cares, labor, toil and misery; for while the Element or the virtue
[or power] out of the Element, sprung forth through the Earth, there was so
long, a continual lasting root to the fruit; but when the Element (by the
curse) withdrew, then the Or, frozen.
congealed Death, frailty, and transitory fading, was in the root, and they
must now continually be Or, transplanted.
planted again: Thus the turmoyling life of Man took beginning, wherein we
must now Or, swelter our selves.
bath our selves.

10. God could well have created creatures which should have managed the
Beasts, [so] that Man might well have stayed (in Paradise) in the Angelical
form: and besides that, there are already, in all the four Elements,
creatures without a soul; God would well have laid the labor [or charge] (of
managing the Beasts), upon another generation which were also Or, of the four
Elements.
earthly: But he saw well that Man would not stand, therefore instantly the
burden was laid upon him, as Moses also writes of it.

11. But if God Had desired.
would have had Beastiall Men, then he would have created them so in the
beginning, and given them no Commandment (neither should they have been
tempted) as indeed the Beasts have no Or, Commandment laid upon them.
Law.

12. Therefore all Objections, which fall into Reason, are nothing else but the
subtle contradictions [or fallacies] of the Devil, who would very feign
maintain, that God did will the Fall of Man: There are also Men, that dare to
say, that God did will it: [and say] that he fitted the tongue of the Serpent
to seduce Eve; whose judgment is very justly upon themselves, because they
[offer to] confirm the Devils word with lying, and [goe about to] make God a
liar.

13. It Is very true according to the first Principle ( viz. the Abyss of Hell)
he has willed it: but that kingdom is not called God: there is yet another
Principle and fast enclosure between; but in the second Principle [where God
Or, manifests himself.
appears) he has not willed it; Indeed all is Gods: But the first Principle
is the Band of Eternity, which makes it self: from whence God the Father
issues forth from Eternity, into the second Principle; and therein he
generateth his Heart and Son [from Eternity to Eternity] and there the holy
Ghost goes forth from the Father and the Son, and not in the first
[Principle] and Man is created for the second Principle.

14. And therefore also the Heart of the second Principle (by himself) has
new regenerated him [Man] (out of the Band of the first Principle) and
delivered him from the harsh [or wrathfull] Band: and each [Principle] shall
stand, to it self, in its own Eternity: And yet God alone is Lord and alone
Almighty; but the Eternal Band is Indissoluble, or else the Deity also would
be dissoluble; but now all must be to his honor, glory, and joy: and he is
alone the Creator of all things: and all must stand [naked] before him: as the
Scripture says; Thou shall see, and rejoice, when the wicked are recompensed;
whereas in the second Principle, there is no desire of revenge As the light of
the fire does not consume any thing.
at all: but in the sharpness of the breaking through out of the first
[Principle] into the second, where the soul straineth through from the torment
into the joy, there it rejoices that the Hunter or Tormentor.
Driver (who plagued [and vexed] it) is imprisoned, and because now it is
securely freed from him; even as it is the joy of the Kingdom of Heaven, that
the Devil (in the first Principle) is imprisoned, so that he cannot molest the
Heaven any more, and kindle the habitation of the Element.

15. Therefore there is also very great Joy in Heaven, ( At.
for this world,) because there is a Principle generated, so that the Devil
can make no more use of the fierce wrath (which he powered forth and kindled in
the time of his Creation): but is imprisoned between the The second and the
third.
two Principles, which are both Good.

16. Thus you must understand what it is [or meaneth] when the Scripture
speaks of revenging the ungodly, that there is joy in the Saints, at it; for
the fierce wrath [or grimnesse] and the source [or torment] of Hell is the As
the fires consuming is the joy of the light.
Joy of the Heaven: for if there were no source [or paine], there would be As
there would be no light without fire.
no flowing up [or springing]: but if the light comes [to be] in the fierce
[austere, soure] source, then there is mere Joy: and in the Darkness there is
a peculiar enmity in it self, and therein is the Eternal Worm generated.

17. Therefore we must know, that (God as he is all in all) so where he is not
(in the love) in the light, there he is (in the darkness) in the fierceness,
and source [or torment]; for before the time of the Creation there was nothing
but the source, and over it the Deity, which continues in Eternity: there is
no other ground: you [can] find nothing more, therefore give over your deep
searching, for it is the end of Nature.

18. Although such Or, manifestations.
Revelations, have been hidden [or concealed] from the beginning of the world
(yet because The world.
it must now go into its Either, and into the breaking through,) therefore all
stands naked, whatsoever has been hidden in Nature; and there shall very
great things (which have been hidden) be revealed: [or manifested]: and this
Mysterium.
Mystery is the break of Day. Therefore it is time to awake, for the awakening
of the dead is near at hand.

19. Now when God had pronounced his sentence upon Adam, and ordained the
Treader upon the Serpent for him, for his comfort and assistance in his toil
and misery upon Earth, then he pronounced Eves [sentence] also, and established
her perfectly to be a Woman of this world, and said to her; Thou shall bear
Children with much pain, and thy wilt shall be in subjection to thy Husband
[or Man] and he shall be thy Lord, and I will cause many pains to thee, when
thou art conceived with child.

20. And here it is as clear as the Sun, that it was not intended, that Man
(in the beginning) should generate in such a manner, for it should all have
been done without Or, Smart.
pain, without Beastiall Conception, or growing big with child.
impregnation, without a wife [or Woman] and without a Husband [or Man]. And
therefore the Treader upon the Serpent was borne of a virgin, without the seed
of Man: although now that [also] must be to be done in such a humane manner,
yet that was to this end only that the Deity might enter into flesh, and [so
might] generate the soul of flesh again out of the dark flesh, out of Death
into Life. But else, the Savior [or Champion] is wholly the Virgins Son, and
a virgin-minde, as the first Adam [was] in the Creation; for you must earnestly
and accurately [consider and] understand what manner of Person he is.

21. First, he is God, and is in the Father of Eternity, generated out of the
Father of Eternity from Eternity, without beginning and end, out of the Depth
of the Allmightinesse, out of the broken Gates of the Sharpness [or Depths] of
God in the Joy, [or habitation] where the Father Or, begets.
attracteth the pleasant Joy in his Eternal will, whereby the will is
impregnated, with the attracted virtue of the light, out of which impregnation,
the Father Or, comprehends.
conceives the other [or second] will, to generate the virtue: and that
conception [or comprehension] is his Word, which the Father speaks (out of
the will, For, or to be the will.
before the will) out of himself: and this speaking remains in the mouth of
the Father, as A word comprehended by the second will.
a comprehended word, with the second will: and the issue out of the spoken
word (which goes forth out of the will through the Word) is the Spirit; and
that which is spoken forth Or, for to be the will
before the will, is the Eternal wisdom of God, the virgin of the chastity.

22. For, God generateth nothing else but his Heart and Son, and will never
generate any other thing out of himself. Therefore that which is spoken forth
before [or from] the will, is a virgin of chastity, which never generateth any
thing else neither: but she discovers her self (in the Holy Ghost in
infinitum [infinitely] in the Deep of the wonders of the Allmightinesse, and
opens them: and she has the strong Fiat of God for an Instrument [to work
with], whereby she creates and did create all in the beginning, and she
discovers her self in all created things, so that (by her) the wonders of
all things are brought to the Daylight.

The strong Gate of the [Incarnation or] becoming Man, of Jesus Christ the
Son of God.
23. And out of this Heart and Word of God the Father, (with and through the
chaste virgin of God, of his wisdom of the Omniscience) is proceeded, the
Treader upon the Serpent, in and with the Word of the Promise of God the Father
to Adam and Eve and their children, and has Imaged [or imprinted] it self in
Adam's and Eve's mind, and espoused it self in Eternity [therein:] and opened
[for] the soul, the Gate to the Kingdom of Heaven; and has with the chaste
The wisdom of God.
virgin, set it self in the Center of the light of life, in the Gate of God,
and has given the virgin to the soul for a perpetual Companion, from whence
Man has his skill and understanding, or else he could not have understanding:
she is the Gate of the Or, thoughts.
senses, and yet she Or, avoydeth.
leaves the Counsel of the Stars, because the soul lives in the source
[or quality] of the Stars, and is too rough, [crude or sour,] and therefore
she cannot imprint, [or unite] her self with the soul, yet she shows it
the way of God; But if the soul become a hellish Worm, then it withdraws
into her Gate, and stands before God, before his Word and Heart.

24. But because the soul of Adam and of Eve, (and of all the children of Men)
were too rough, wild, and too hard kindled from the first Principle, so that
they had the source of Hell, in them, being inclined to all evil [malice or
mischiefe], therefore the Word and the Treader upon the Serpent did not so
instantly Image [or imprint] it self in the soul of Adam, but stood opposite
to the Kingdom of the Devil and of Hell, and [against] their poisonous Darts,
in the mind, and (in the Mind of those men which incline and yield themselves
to the Treader upon the Serpent) it breaks the head of the Serpent, the
Devil.

25. And so it was tried for a long time, whether it were possible that Man
should be recovered this way, so that he might yield himself wholly to God,
that the soul might be borne in the Word and at last stand before God: yet all
was in vain, the kindled soul could not stand, but there came to be
Man-slayers and Murderers, also self-willed people, in mere lechery and
unchastity of the flesh: also aspiring in state, pride, and domineering,
according to the Rule or Dominion.
Regiment of the Stars and Elements: that drives the body and soul of Man
at all times: and there were but few that did cleave to the Word of God.

26. Then God sent the Deluge [of Flood] upon the whole world, and drowned all
flesh, except Noah, who did cleave to the Word of God, he (and his sons and
their wives) were preserved; and so the world was tried whether it would be
afraid of the horrible judgment, and cleave to the Word, but it was all in
vain. Then God chose to himself the Generation of Sem, (which did cleave to
the Word) that so he might erect a light and office of Preaching, that the
world might learn from them. But all availed nothing: the Starre^ ruled Men
according to their source [or quality] in mere covetousness, unchastity, and
pride; which was indeed so very great that they purposed to build a Tower,
whose top should reach to Heaven: such blind people they were as to the
kingdom of God.

27. And then God confounded their Language: that they might yet see that they
had only confounded senses [or thoughts,] and should turn them to God: that
they also might see that they did not understand the Language of the Saints [or
holy people,] of the stock of Sem: and that they must be scattered abroad over
the whole world, so that a holy seed might be preserved, and that all might
not perish; but it availed nor, they were wicked.

28. Then God (out of the fierceness of the first Principle) burnt Sodom and
Gomorrah, those five kingdoms, with fire, for a Terror: but it availed not,
sin grew like a green Branch. And then God promised the chosen Generation,
that if they would walk before him, he would bless them as the Stars of
Heaven, and make them so great [that they should not be numbered] and yet there
were still among them evil Birds hatched. And then God brought them into a
strange Land, and prospered them, to try whether they would acknowledge his
goodness, and depend on him, but they were yet worse.

29. Then God did stir up a Prophet among them, (even Moses) who gave them
Laws, and sharp Doctrines, as Nature Promoted or thrust forth.
required: and these were given them (through the Spirit of the Macrocosme.
great world) in zeal, in the fire. Yet seeing they would live still in the
roughness, therefore they were tried [or tempted to see] whether they would
live in the Father; and God gave them Bread from Heaven, and fed them forty
years, to try what manner of people they would be, and whether they would by
any means be brought to cleave to God: he gave them Ordinances and Customs
[to observe] in meats and drinks, and also a Priestly Order, with heavy and
hard precepts and punishments which he published also to them; but it availed
not, they were only wicked, and walked in the Dominion [or Regiment] of the
Stars, and yet far worse [they walked] altogether according to the
wrathfulnesse of Hell.

30. And there is a great matter for us to see in the several Meats which God
forbad them; especially Swines flesh, whose source [quality or property] will
not subsist in the fire, but affords only a stinck: and so it does also in
the fire of the soul (which reaches [or stirreth] the Originality of the
first Principle) from whence the first Principle (in the soul) stincketh [or
makes a stinck], which is Or, loathsome.
contrary to the Word, and the noble virgin, and it makes the Gates of the
breaking through [into the light] swelled [thick, misty, fumy] and dark; for
the soul is also a fire, which burns: and if it receive such a Or, fuel for
its burning.
source [quality or property] then that darkeneth it the more, and burns in
the vapor, like a flash [of lightening], as may be seen in the fat of swine:
for which cause God did forbid it them.

31. And there was no other cause of their employment about offering sacrifice,
than because Man was earthly: and so the Word standing near the soul in the
Gate of the light of life, God.
he heard their Prayers, through the earthly source [quality or property] of
their smells, [ Or, Offerings of Incense.
or Incense], and so they had a token in the fire, that their prayer was
acceptable to God: as may be seen in many places in Moses, which shall be
expounded in its due place.

32. And there is a very great matter to be seen in Moses, concerning his
Glorious shining.
brightened face; where it was tried whether it were possible that the soul
could be ransomed, by the Fathers clarity [or brightnesse] in the fire, if they
did live in his Law, which was sharp and consuming, and a great piercing to the
soul; but it was in vain, it might not be.

33. And there the noble virgin (in the Spirit of the Prophets) did Or,
prophecy of.
point at the seed of the Woman, at his Incarnation [or becoming Man], his
suffering and dying for the poor soul of Man, that it might be delivered from
the Eternal Death, and be regenerated anew, in the Son of the virgin: which
was done after three thousand nine hundred and Seventy years: 3970 years.
and then the Word of the Promise, which God promised to Adam and Eve in the
Paradise in the Garden of Eden, when they fell into sin, (and which Imaged
[or imprinted] it self in the Center of the life, through which all Men that
come to God are justified) became Man.

34. It continued a long time in the Covenant of Circumcision, (in the life and
light of the Father) with the shadows and types of the Incarnation of the
Son: But these could not Or, comprehend the rising again.
reach the earnestness, of the coming again of the body out of the grave: But
the Word must become Man, if Man must rise again out of the grave. It [the
Covenant] ransomed the soul indeed, so that it could stand before the Father
(in the Gate of the corruptibility) in the fire of the sharpness, but not in
the pleasant Joy, before the light of the holy Trinity; and besides it could
not bring the new body forth out of the Element, for it was defiled too much
with sin.

35. Thus in that forementioned year, the Angel Gabriel came, being sent of
God the Father to Nazareth, to a poor (yet chaste and modest) virgin, called
Mary, (her name signifies plainly in the Language of Nature, A Redemption out
of the valley of misery: and though it be plain, that we are not borne of the
Universities, or Academies.
High Schools, with School-learning or tongues.
many Languages, yet we have the Language of Nature in our School of Wonders
[or Miracles] fixed [stedfast or perfect,] which the Or, learned Doctor.
Master of Art, in his Pontificalibus, will not believe) and he Greeted her Or,
from.
through God, and brought the Eternal Or, message.
Command of the Father, out of his will, and said to her; Luke 10. from verse.
28. to the end of ver. 35.
Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with thee thou blessed among Women: And when
she looked upon him, she was terrified at his saying, and [considered] in her
thoughts what manner of salutation this was. And the Angel said to her, fear
not Mary, thou have found Grace with God, behold, thou shall Be impregnated.
conceive in thy womb [or body] and bear a son, whose name thou shall call
Jesus, he shall be great, and be called the son of the most High, and God the
LORD will give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall be King
over the house of Jacob Eternally, and of his Kingdom there will be no end.
Then said Mary to the Angel, How shall that come to pass, since I know not a
Man? And the Angel answered to her and said; the Holy Ghost will come upon
thee, and the virtue [or power] of the most High will overshadow thee,
therefore also that holy One, that shall be borne of thee, shall be called the
Son of God. Then said Mary, Behold! I am the Handmaid of the Lord, let it be
done to me as thou have said; and the Angel departed from her. Now when this
Command [or Message] from God the Father came, then the nature of the spirit of
the soul in Mary was astonished, as the Text says: for The spirit of the
soul.
it was stirred by a precious Guest, who went into a wonderful Lodging [or
Inne].

36. But the Reader must not here understand it, as if the word, for this
Incarnation, at this time did first come down, out of the highest Heaven above
the Stars, hither beneath, and became Man, as the world teaches in
blindness: No, but the Word, which God spoke in Paradise to Adam and Eve,
concerning the Treader upon the Serpent, (which Imaged [or imprinted] it self
in the door of the light of life, Or, being.
standing in the Center of the Gate of Heaven, and waiting perceptably in the
minds of the holy Men, even till this time) that same Word is become Man; and
that same Divine Word, is again entered into the virgin of the Divine Wisdom,
which was given to the soul of Adam Or, joined to.
near the Word, to be a light, and a Or, maidservant or Ministresse.
handmaid, as to the Word.

37. And the will of the Heart of God in the Father, is from the Heart entered
into the will of the Wisdom, before the Father, into an Eternal Or, espousall.
contract; and the same virgin of the Wisdom of God, in the Word of God, has
in the bosom of the virgin Mary, given it self into her virgin-Matrix, and
united it self, as a propriety, not to depart in Eternity; [you must]
understand, into the Essences, and into the Tincture of the Element, which is
pure and undefiled before God: in that, the Heart of God is become an
Angelical Man, as Adam was in the Creation; and the going forth out of the
Heart of God, with the whole fullness of the Deity (out of which also the holy
Ghost [or Spirit] of God, and out of the Spirit the virgin, goes forth) makes
this high Angelical Image greater than Adam, or ever any Angel was: for it is
the blessing, and the might of all things, which are in the Father Eternally.

38. For the Word (by its being given into the Element, into the virgin-Matrix)
is not severed from the Father: but it continues eternally in the Father, and
it is (in the Heaven of the Element) every where present: into which [Element]
the same [word] is entered, and is become a new creature in Man: which [new
creature] is called God. And you must here very highly and accurately
understand, that this new creature in the holy Element, is not generated of the
flesh and blood of the virgin; but of God, out of the Element, in a total
fulness, and union Or, with.
of the holy Trinity: which [creature] continues with total fulness without
Fading.
ending, therein eternally: which [creature] every where, fills all, in all
the Gates of the holiness, whose depth has no ground, and is without number,
[measure] and Name.

39. Yet you must know, that the corporeity of the Element of this creature is
Or, less than the Deity.
inferior to the Deity: for the Deity is Spirit: and the Element is generated
out of the Word from Eternity: and the Lord entered into the servant, at which
all the Angels in Heaven do wonder: and it is the greatest wonder, that is
done from Eternity, for it is against Nature: and that may [indeed rightly] be
[called] Love.

40. And after that this high Princely Angelical Creature (in the twinkling
of an eye) in the Word and Holy Ghost (in the Holy Element) was figured
[fashioned, formed, or made] a self subsisting creature (with perfect life and
light) in the Word: then also (in the same twinkling of an eye) the four
Elements (with the Dominion of the Sun and Stars) in the Tincture of the
blood, together with the blood and all humane Essences (which were in the body
of the virgin Mary) in her Matrix (according to the Counsel of God) in the
Element, Assumed.
received the creature, wholly and properly, as one [onely] Creature, and not
two.

41. And the holy [pure] Element of the Heaven (which incloseth the Deity) that
was the Limbus (or the Masculine seed) to this creature: and the Holy Ghost,
with the holy Fiat, in the virgin of the Divine Wisdom, was the
Master Builder, and the first beginner; and every Regiment, built its own (in
its own Center) therein.

42. The Holy Spirit of God, built the formation in the wisdom of the virgin
(in the [holy] Element, in its Center of the Heaven) even the highly worthy
Princely and Angelical formation: and the Regiment of the Stars and Elements
of this world, formed the outward Man (wholly, with all Essences of our humane
bodies,) with a natural body and soul (wholly like us) in one only Person.

43. And yet every form has its own height, source, [or quality] and
perception: and [yet] the Divine [source] has not so mixed, that [thereby] it
is the less: but what it was, that it continues to be: and that which it was
not, that it is, without severing from the Divine substance; and the Word did
abide in the Father: and the natural humanity, in this world, in the bosom of
the virgin Mary.

Of the three Regions of the [Incarnation or] becoming Man; the forming [or
Imaging] of the Lord Jesus Christ.
44. The forming of this highly worthy Person is severally [done]; first there
is the Word, or the Deity: which has had its forming from Eternity in the
Father: and assumed in the becoming Man no other forming [or Image], but
continued in the Father, as it was from Eternity, in its seat.

45. The second forming is done naturally, in the same time of the Angel
Gabriels Greeting, when the virgin said to the Angel, Let it be done unto me
as thou have said: in the performance of the same word, the Imaging [or
forming] in the Inward Element.
Element was done, which [Image] was like the first Adam before the Fall: which
then should have generated such an Angelical creature out of himself: and the
whole Propagation of the Angelical Men [should have been] so, and that he
could not do now, because he had entered into the Spirit of this world; and
therefore there must be such a virgin-like creature, borne in the Earthly
virgin, and bring the earthly virgin (with her brethren and sisters) out of the
earthlinesse again into the [pure] Element (before God) through himself. And
this forming [or Imaging] is done in the twinkling of an eye, wholly and
perfectly without any defect: and there is nothing at all happened to it the
more, with the length of time.

46. And the third forming was together in the same twinkling of an eye, with
the other formings also at once (out of the [pure] Element,) produced (just as
if an earthly seed were sown, out of which a whole child springs forth)
and took its beginning naturally: and the new creature (in perfection of the
Element) was the Masculine seed of the earthly Man, which the earthly Matrix
of the virgin, conceived in the bosom of the virgin Mary; yet the earthlinesse
defiled not the Limbus of the New Creature in the holy Element: for the word of
the Deity (which was the mark of the limit of separation) did hinder that.

47. And the Angelical Image, as to the Limbus of the [holy pure] Element,
came naturally to be flesh and blood, with the infecting and figuring of all
natural Regions of humane members, as all the children of Men: and attained
his natural soul in Or, in the end.
the beginning of the third Month, as all other children of Adam: which has
its ground out of the first Principle: and has raised up its Throne and seat,
into the Divine Element, into the Joy [or habitation] wherein it sat (in the
Creation) in Adam; and there has attained its Princely Throne (in the Kingdom
of Heaven, before God) again, out of which it was gone forth, with sin, in
Adam.

48. And thither the second Adam, (with his becoming Man) brought it in again,
and [there] (as a loving child) was bound up, with the Word of God, in love
and righteousness. And there the new creature (out of the Element) came to be
the body of the soul. For in the new Creature of the Limbus of God, the soul
was holy: and the Earthly Essences (out of flesh and blood) clave to it, in the
time of the earthly body: which [Essences] Christ (when his soul with the new
creature went into Death) left in Death: and (with the new body in the natural
soul) arose from Death, and triumphed over Death: as hereafter you shall see
the wonders concerning the Death and Resurrection of Christ.

49. But that the soul of Christ, could be generated both in the new, and also
in the old earthly creature: is because the Gate of the soul in the first
Principle, stands in the source [or quality] of the Eternity, and reaches
into the Deep Gate of the Eternity, in the Fathers original will, wherewith he
breaks open the Gate of the Deep, and shines [or appeareth] in the Eternal
Light.

50 Now then as the Word of God is in the Father, and goes forth out of the
Father into the [pure] Element, and that the same Word was given to Man again
in the Fall, (from out of the [holy] Element, through the voice of the Father,
with the promise of th Treader upon the Serpent) out of Grace, in the Center of
the light of life; so the natural soul of Christ, with its first kindling in
its Center of the light of life (where the Word, with the consent of the virgin
Mary had set it self, by the Word in the Father of Eternity) received the
Principle of the Father in the Light.

51. Thus Christ ( In this manner or way.
according to this form) was the natural Eternal Son of God the Father:
and the soul of Christ (in the Word) was a self subsisting natural Person in
the Holy Trinity.

52. And there is in the Depth of the Deity, no such wonderful Person more, as
this Christ is: which the Prophet Isaiah calls (in the Spirit highly known
by him) Wonderful, Power [or virtue, Champion or] Savior, Eternal Father,
and Prince of Peace: whose Dominion is great, and upon his shoulders; Over the
creatures of the inward Element.
understand [upon] the creatures of the Element.

53. And the second Birth of the soul of Christ, stood in the natural
propagation, like [the souls of] all men: for he also as well [as other Men]
was in six Months wholly figured [framed or formed], with a natural body and
soul, with all the Gates of the Mind and senses; the soul in the first
Principle, and the body in the third Principle, and then Christ (the true
breaker through) continued standing in the second Principle, in the Kingdom of
God: and after nine Months was borne a Man, out of the body [or womb] of the
virgin Mary, and we saw his Glory as the Glory of the only begotten Son of
God the Father.

54. And here the light shone in the Darkness of the natural outward body: as
Saint John witnesses; He came into [or to] his own, and his own received him
not for they knew him not: but those which received him, [to them] he gave the
might to be the children of God: and they were through him begotten to the
Kingdom of Heaven: for his is the Kingdom, the [Power or] Might, and Glory in
Eternity, Amen.

55. Thus consider here thou beloved Mind, thou shall here find the The
foundation, hit the mark, or get the prize.
root, whereby Men (before the Or, nativity.
Birth of Christ) entered into salvation: if you understand this writing aright
(as the same is known, by the Author, in the Grace of God) then you understand
all whatsoever Moses and the Prophets have written: as also all whatsoever the
Mouth of Christ has taught and spoken, thou have no need of any Or, dead
teaching or other Man's exposition.
Mask or Spectacles about it: that knowledge needs not to be Or, approved.
confirmed by the Antichristian Throne [or Stoole], who says, The Divine
Ordinances must be established by his Sea or Throne, and whatsoever Men must
teach and believe, [as if] That which we call I or self in our Reason.
he could not err.

56. The light of Nature shows us now (in the love of God) clean another
Throne, which God the Father with his Son Jesus Christ has established: the
same is the Eternal The Throne of Resignation in the mercy of God.
Throne in [or of] Grace, where our soul may be new Regenerated, and not in
the Antichristian Throne: that is nothing else but the Throne of Babell the
Confusion, where he may continue to be the Ape of Christ upon Earth with his
brave Or, Degree of Master or Doctor.
Hood: where of late we saw a young Lad [Disciple or Scholler] who plucked the
Pearl from his His might, power, and authority.
Hatband, and his Hatband broke: and then he became as another Earthly Man, and
none saluted [reverenced or regarded] him.

The difference [or Distinction] between the virgin Mary, and her Son JESUS
CHRIST.
The Earnest and true Gate of Christian Religion, and of the Articles of
Belief, earnestly to be considered for Man's salvation-sake, and because of the
inventions and opinions of Heretics and Schismatics, forged by the confused
Babell of Antichrist.

The high and deep Gate of the Aurara and Dayspring in the Root of the Lilly.

57. The Mysterium [or Mystery] which we knew not before, meets us, nor did
we know the Ground of it; neither did we ever esteem our selves worthy of
such a Revelation; but seeing it appears unto us of Grace, through the Mercy
of the Gracious Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, therefore we must not be
so Lazy, but Labor in the Garden of the Lilly, in love to our Neighbor, and
for the sake of the Children of Hope, especially for the sake of the poor sick
Lazarus, who lies wounded in Babell: who (after his painful sickness) shall
be healed, Or, by.
in the smell of the Lilly: and when he shall begin to go out from Babell, we
will set a Root before him in Hebron, which shall afford him strength, to get
quite out of Out of the contentious wrangling opinions.
Babell for his health.

58. For the virgin [the wisdom of God] has graciously bestowed a Rose upon
us, of which we will write in such words as we behold in that Wonder, and we
cannot [write] otherwise, but our Pen is broken, and the Rose taken from us,
and then we are as we were before the time [of our knowledge]: whereas yet
the Rose stands in the Center of Paradise, in the hand of the virgin, which
she reaches forth to us, in the same place, where she came to us in the Gate
of the Deep, and proffered us her love: when we lay on the Mountain toward
the Or, midnight.
North, in the strife and storm before Babell, which [virgin] our Earthly Man
has never seen nor known.

59. Therefore we write out of a School wherein the earthly body (with its
Or, Reason.
senses) never studied, nor never learned the A, B, C; for in the Rose of the
virgin we learned that A, B, C, which we supposed we could have learned from
the Or, Senses.
thoughts of the Mind: but that could not be, they were too rough, and too
dark, they could not comprehend it: and therefore the earthly body must not
learn in this School: and its tongue cannot raise it self up to it; for the
mind of this School stood hidden in the Gate of the Deep, in the Center:
therefore we ought not to boast of this School at all; for it is not the
proper one of the senses [or thoughts] and mind of the earthly Man; and if we
go forth from the Center of the noble virgin, then we know as little from
this School as others: just as it was with Adam when he went out of the
Paradise of God, into the sleep of being overcome, then at his awaking in this
world, he knew no more of Paradise, and he knew his loving The Noble Sophia,
the Eternal Wisdom of God.
virgin no more.

60. Therefore we have no ability, might, nor understanding (in our earthly
Will) to teach of the Wonders of God, we understand nothing thereof, according
to our inbred nature: and none ought to require any thing from our own will,
for we have nothing [in it].

61. But the Spirit Declares or foretells.
intimates; that if you shall go out from Babell into the meekness of Jesus
Christ, then the Spirit in Hebron will give you Teachers with great power, at
whose Power the Elements will tremble, and the Or, the secret Mysteries.
Gates of the Deep fly open: and thou shall go out from Lazarus his
sicknesses [and sores] through the word and wonders of these men, for the time
is near, the Bridegroom comes [to fetch home his Bride.]

62. And now if we consider in our own Reason, and (in the consideration of
our high knowledge) look upon what the world at Babell, has introduced in this
high Article [of Prayer] whereof we are about to treat; in that Antichrist
has set himself therein, and showed his great Or, Authority.
Power therein; then our Reason might well keep us back, because of the great
sting and danger that might befall us from the fierce wrath of Antichrist: But
seeing it appears to us without our knowledge, therefore we will rather obey
the voice of God, than the earthly fear, in hope to be recompensed. And though
it should happen that Antichrist should destroy our earthly body, (which yet
stands in the permission of God, which we must not withstand) yet we will
more highly esteem that which is to come, than that which is transitory, which
[things to come] if we attain them, are our true Native Country, out of
which we (in Adam) are gone forth: and the Spirit inviteth all men's attention
before this Glass.

63. Hitherto the honor of Invocation [or worship] has been done and afforded
to the virgin Mary and other Saints [or holy People] that have been here [in
this life]; whereas yet (in the ground of the light of Nature) this Command or
Law was not known at all, and it is most highly necessary to be known, that
the ground thereof has been taken in the confused Babell, when men were weary
of the poor Christ, who in this world had not whereon to lay his Head: then
they did as Israel with Moses, who made themselves a Calfe to be their God and
said; Behold, Israel, these are thy Gods, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt; and they made a calvish worship of God, for their voluptuous life; and
looked no more after Moses, but they said; We know not what is become of this
man Moses: and they said to Aaron, Make thou us Gods which may go before us:
and he made them the Calfe; but when Moses came and saw it, then he was wrath,
and took the Tables of God, and brake them, and threw them away, and said:
Hearken, ye that belong unto the Lord, Gird every Man his sword to his side,
and slay his brother, the worshippers of the Calfe.

64. In such a form [or condition] also is the confused Babell (in the
kingdom of Christ upon Earth) in the blind earnestness of man's own reason:
where men seek Christ in the Or, in the bravery and glory of this world.
kingdom of this world: whereby they could not find him, as Israel [could not
finde] Moses, while he was on the Mount. And thereupon they have made other
Gods (to [goe before] them): and [have instituted and set up] their
Divine-service [or worship] of God, with the richest [and costliest Ornaments]
and holy show: and they continually say [in their minde] We know not what is
become of this Jesus, for he is gone from us: we will erect a Divine-service
for him in our Country, and we will make merry at it, and that shall be done
according to our own will and pleasure, that we may be rich and fat with it,
and refresh our selves fully with this Jesus.

65. Are we not Lords in his Kingdom? And being in his Ministry [service or
worship] we are the most holy and best, who may compare himself with us? He
is ascended into Heaven, and he has given us his Dominion on Earth: The Keys
of Peter, he must be [Deputy, Viceroy, Vicar, or] Keeper of the City, and those
he has left us to [open] the Kingdom of Heaven, and of Hell: who will take
them away from us: we can get into Heaven well enough though we be evil, it
matters not, we have the Keys that can open it: we are Priests in Power [or
Ministers having Authority], we will let those in that make much of us [fatten
us] and give much to our Kingdom; and then the Christian Church will be in
great honor, [glory, and esteeme]; when they so highly honor her Ministers
[or servants] that will well please our Lord [and Master]: where is there such
a Kingdom as we have: should not that [Kingdome] be crowned with the With
riches, or the best Treasure of this world.
gloriousest Crown of this world, and should not all bend and croutch before
it?

66. Yes, indeed say they, we our selves confess that we are evil wicked
Men, but this Holy Orders, Ordination of Ministers, Presbyters, or Institution
of the Spiritualty or Clergy.
Order makes us holy; our Office is holy, we are the true Ministers of Christ
in his service; and although we be evil [meere natural wicked carnall] Men,
yet our Office remains holy: and the highest dignity is due to us for our
Office sake. As Aaron (with his worship of the Calfe) must be called holy in
his Office: and although they forgot Moses, and rose up ( Their gluttony and
drunkenness.
from eating and drinking) to dance and to play, and so also Aaron must be
highly honored [and reverenced] for his Ministry or service to the Calfe.

67. But that the Kingdom of Christ on Earth in Babell might stand in great
earnest [zeale] they say, we will ordain a holy Divine service [and worship
of God] that may be diverse [or separated and set apart] from the world, and
procure there, that our Laws may be in force [and put in execution by them]:
we will impose great fasting Days and holy Days of feasting, that the world
also may have a looking Glass of Holiness, and highly honor and reverence
us, and acknowledge that our Ministry [or worship] which we perform [when we
pray] before God, is holy; we must be the Holy Priests of God, whosoever
judges otherwise, we will condemn them: and we do right in it, and do God
good service by it. For though an Angel should come from Heaven, and preach any
other Doctrine than we, he is accursed, as Paul says.

68. Whatsoever we have Or, concluded.
ordained at the Convention of the Chief Fathers, [Rulers, Elders, or
Presbyters] with the whole consent of our Concilium [or Councell] that is holy;
for it is written, Thou shall not curse the chief [or Ruler] of thy People.
And when our hearts (before the light of Nature) Challenge, accuse and affright
us.
condemn us, or that we must stand ashamed of our selves before God, and
acknowledge our selves great sinners) then we will invocate the Holy Mother of
Christ, and his Disciples, that they may pray for us, that so our sins may
not be known: when we go in Pilgrimage (to honor them) and perform divine
service, or worship, then she will make intercession, and speak to her Son
for us, and pray for us, so that we may thus (in her service) be holy: and
although we stick continually in Beastiall lechery, selfe-honour, and
voluptuousness, yet that is no matter; we have the Keys of Peter; and the
Mother of Christ for our Assistance.

69. [Thus it is with the holy Priests] as it was not Isreal's meaning (in
Moses) concerning the Calfe, to acknowledge it for a God, and to account it for
the true God: because they knew that [the Calfe] was Gold: and that the true
God had made himself known to be otherwise: and also they had good experience
[of the true God] by the wonders [which were wrought] before Pharaoh; but they
would thereby worship and reverence the absent God, and make a remembrance and
worship of God for themselves; As King Jeroboam with his Calfe-worship: where
yet the honor must be Intended by it.
done to the true God.

70. And as Jeroboams Calves were an abomination to God (which he yet with
earnest zeal set up to serve the true God thereby, only, that he might but
preserve his worldly Kingdom, that the People might not fall from him, when
they were to go up to Jerusalem to offer sacrifice) and God rejected him and
his whole house for it: and as Moses came (in wrath) because of their Divine
service before the Calfe, and brake the Tables of the Divine Law, and took his
sword: and one brother must slay the other, because of their abominations and
sins of false worshipping of God; so also (thou blind world in Babell of
confusion) seeing thou art fallen away from the every where present, all
knowing, all-seeing, all hearing, all smelling, and all-feeling Heart Jesus
Christ, and set upon thy own conceited ways, and do not desire, to see the
gracious countenance it self of Jesus Christ: and wilt not lay aside thy shame
and whoredom, thy appearing show of holiness or hypocrisy, thy self
conceited wilful pride, might, authority, pomp and state; but live in thy
invented holiness, for thy pleasure, in covetousness, gourmundizing,
gluttony, and drunkenness, and in mere exalting of thy self in honor;
therefore the second Moses (which was promised by the first, and which Men
should hear) has broken the Tables of his Law (whereupon his precious Or,
becoming Man.
Incarnation, suffering Death, Resurrection, and entering into Heaven, stood)
and has stopped their entering into thy ears: and he has sent thee strong
delusions (out of the spirit of thy own invented shew-holinesse) as Saint Paul
says: so that thou beleevest the Spirit of lying, and live according to thy
fleshly lust: that so thy own invented shew-holinesse with thy false Key (which
does not open the suffering and dying of Jesus Christ in his Death) does
deceive thy self.

71. For thou art not entered into the Father by the intercession of men; but
by the precious Incarnation of Jesus Christ, and if thou do not instantly
turn in the last voice of Gods call (whereas many of you have been much
called) and go out from Babell; then Moses stands in wrath, and says, Gird
every one his sword to his side, and slay his brother in Babell: and so thou
destroyest thy self: for the Spirit of thy own mouth will destroy thy self;
so that thou shall be no more called Babell, but fierceness, wrath and sword
within thy self, which will consume thee, and not spare: for thou murtherest
thy self, thou great wonder of the world.

72. O how have all the Prophets written of thee: and yet thou knew not thy
self; thou ridest so upon thy fatt pampere^t Beast: and that riding pleases
thee so well, that thou will rather go to the Devil into the Abyss of Hell,
than that thou will light off thy Beast. What shall become of thee then thou
blind Babell? do but yet light off from thy great ugly Beast [which indeed is]
thy might, pomp, state, and pride; behold! thy Bridegroom comes, and reaches
forth his hand to thee, and would lead thee out of Babell.

73. Did not he walk on foot upon earth? He did not ride so; He had not
whereon to lay his head: what kingdom do you build for him? Where is the
place of his Rest? Does he not rest in thy Arms? Wherefore do thou not
embrace him? Is he [according to thy Reason] too poor in this world, yet he is
rich in Heaven; who will thou send to him, to be reconciled to thee? The Mother
of Jesus? O no, that will not avail: he does not stand behind thee and
absolve thy wickedness, for thy inclination of falsehood: He knows not thy
Thy Embasses and Messages.
Letters which thou sendest to him by the Saints, who are in the still Rest
before him in the heavenly Element.

74. The Spirit of their souls is in the stillnesse, in the still habitation
before God: it does not let thy rough sins come into it to sleep upon them,
but its Imagination and whole will, stands directly bent into the Heart of
God, and the The original property of the Spirit of their souls, says.
Spirit of the first Principle of its original source says; Lord, when
avengest thou our Blood? And the meekness of Jesus Christ says; Rest in the
stillnesse, till thy Brethren also come to thee, who shall be slain in Babell
for the witness of Jesus.

75. The holy souls do not pray for thee.
They make no intercession for thee: neither does it avail any thing: for thou
must be Regenerated anew, through earnest sorrow and repentance: thou must
light down from off thy Beast, and must go on foot with Christ over the
Brook Kidron, into his sufferings and Death: and through him thou must rise
again out of his Grave; thou thy self must come to this: another cannot save
thee: thou must enter into the Birth of Jesus Christ, and with him, be
conceived by the Holy Ghost: thy soul must in the Word, and in the New Man
Christ, in the [one Eternall] Element, be borne [or brought forth] out of the
four Elements, into the water of the Element of Eternal Life; thy
Antichristian fained Fables help thee not; for it is said, such Or, Faith.
belief as a People have, such a God also they have to bless them.

76. But that thy Forefathers.
Predecessors after their Death have Or, done Miracles.
appeared in Deeds of Wonder (upon which thou buildest) that was caused by the
Faith of the Living, and their Or, Imagination.
Imaging in [or impresse upon] their Tincture, which is so strong that it can
remove Mountains: An evil Faith also (if it be strong) can (in the first
Principle) stir up Wonders, as may be seen by Of Witches and Conjurers.
Incantation, and by the wicked shewers of signs before Pharaoh: Or, it was
done according to their Faith.
as they believed, so it was done.

77. And while the Faith of the Living [at the time of thy forefathers] was yet
somewhat good and pure ([as] to the kingdom of God) still, (and they did not
seek their Bellies and pomp [as they do now]) therefore their Faith [or
Beliefe] pierced into the Heaven, into the [pure] Element, to the Saints [or
holy soules]: who thus did also naturally appear with Works of Wonders [or
Miracles] to the Living Saints (in their Element) in the strong Faith, which
[Works of Wonder] were only comprehended [or taken hold of] in the Faith, and
that Or, the ungodly did not partake of them.
not imparted to the ungodly.

78. For one Tincture caught hold of the other: so that the Saints [departed,]
(in the Element) became longing after the strong faith: especially those
[Saints departed] that on Earth had turned many to Righteousness, for as every
ones works of Faith follow after them: so also their will to turn more Men
still, follows after them; and therefore one Faith (in the Tincture of the
Holy Element) caught the other, and so [Miracles, or] Works of Wonder, were
done at the Memorialls of the Saints; this God permitted for the Heathens
sakes, that they might see, that the Saints that were slain, [or departed]
were in God, and that there was another So that God is the God of the living,
and not of the dead.
life after this, that they should turn and be converted, and therefore God
suffered these works of wonder to be done.

79. But in the Ground of the Originality, it is not so, that one that is
departed has power to help one that is living, into the kingdom of Heaven: or
that they should undertake to bring and report the miseries of the living,
before God, and pray for them; for that were a great disrespect to the Heart of
God, which without intercession or their prayer, powers forth his Mercy over
all Men with stretched out Arms: and his voice is never any other than only
thus: Come ye all to me, ye hungry and thirsty, and I will refresh you,
Matthew. 11. He said, Come to me, I will do it willingly. Also, It is delight
to me, to do well to the Children of Men.

80. Who is it that will presume to undertake, to stand before the source [or
spring] of the Mercifulness, and make intercession [or pray] for one that
invocateth them? As if the Love in the Heart of God were dead, and did not
desire to help those that call to him, whereas his Arms continually without
end stand stretched out, to help all those that turn to him with their whole
Heart.

81. Thou wicked Antichrist, thou say, that faith alone does not justif^e
the soul, but thy invented works, (for thy avarice or covetousness) these
must do the Deed: wherein will thou be regenerated? in thy Mausim? [or
Belly-God,] or through the Birth of Jesus Christ? Which is nearest of all to
the Deity? thy works pass away, and follow thee, in the shadow; yet the soul
has no need of any shadow; but it must be earnest: it must enter in through
the Gates of the Deep, and must pass through the Center of the [grimme]
fierceness of Death, through the wrath of the Eternal Band, to the meek
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, and become a member of the body of Christ, and
receive of his fullness, and live therein; his Death must be thy Death: his
Essences must flow in thee: and thou must live in his source, [property or
vertue]: thus thou must be regenerated anew in him, if thou will stand before
his Father: else nothing will help: if there had been any thing in the whole
depth of the Deity, that could have helped, God would have bestowed it upon
Adam, and would not have let his Heart, (against the course of Nature) to
become Man. But there was no Counsel [or Remedy), neither in Heaven, nor in
this world, except God did become Man. Therefore be thou in earnest and do not
seek by-ways to Babell.

82. God indeed (in former times) permitted much (for the conversion-sake of
the Heathen): but he has not ordained the Antichrist to be so (in his
Covetousness, Ordinances [or Lawes] and brabble in their Counsels:) where Men
have stopped the mouth of the Spirit of God, that it should speak no more: but
that the Viz. Those that are learned in Reason, in the universities.
Spirit of this world should speak, and build a Kingdom of Heaven, upon
Earth, in Laws, Disputations, and great talkings; and therefore that Kingdom
of Heaven, upon earth, must be bound up with precious Oaths or Covenants,
(because it stood not in the Liberty of the Holy Ghost) that so it might be
fatt and lusty, great and wanton, and never be broken. But it is come to be a
Babell of Confusion thereby; and in the Confusion it breaks [or destroyeth]
it self.

83. If now thou will behold the virgin Mary, with her Son Jesus Christ, then
thou shall find that she has been justified and saved through her Son:
although she is come into great Perfection, as a A holy or half morning star
or as a half Lucifer before he fell.
Bright Morning Star, above other Stars: and therefore also the Angel
called her blessed among Women, and said; The Lord is with thee: But she has
not the Divine Omnipotence.

84. For the Word (which God promised in the Garden of Eden) sprung [and
budded) in the light of her life, in the Center of God; and when the Angel
Gabriel (from the Command of the Father) stirred that [Word of the promise]
with the Message, then it let it self into the chaste virgin ( In the Element
before God.
in the Element) in: and not so wholly and altogether into the soul of the
virgin, or into the earthly body that she was Or, Godded.
Deified; no; for Christ himself says, None goes into Heaven but the Son
of Man, who is come from Heaven, and who is in Heaven: all others, must go
through him into Heaven: He is in the Father and his members are in him.
he is their Heaven, and the Father is his Heaven; he was in the Heaven and
also (in the bosom of the virgin) in this world; the world was made through
him, how then could it comprehend him?

85. The virgin comprehended [or contained him] as a Mother does her child,
she gave him the natural Essences which she inherited from her Parents,
those he assumed to the Creature, which was God and Man, the Essences of his
Mother (in her virgin-Matrix, out of flesh and blood) he assumed to the Limbus
of God (out of the [holy] Element) and in these became a living soul, without
blemishing of the [holy] Element: and the Word was in the midst: the might
[strength] height and depth of the soul, reaches even into the Father: and
the outward kingdom of this world hung to the inward, as the four Elements
hang to the [one] Element, Four Elements.
which in the end shall pass away again, and go through the fire.

86. And as the child is another person than the Mother; and as the childs
soul, is not the soul of the Mother, so also here in this place. For the
outward virgin could not comprehend, that she did bear the Savior of the
world: but she committed that (in her virgin-chastity) to God, whatsoever he
did with her, she would still be contented with it.

87. But thou abominable Antichristian Beast, that would devour all, this
thou shall know concerning the holiness of the virgin Mary: that the virgin
Mary is higher, and has a greater fulness of the Glance [or Lustre] than
another child, out of another body; although (thou evil Beast) art scarce
worthy to have this told thee, thou art such a devourer: yet, because the
Counsel of God has concluded so, It shall be manifested.
it shall stand for a witness against thee, in thy Judgment.

88. Behold, do thou know how a child comes to be flesh and blood? and in
the end a living soul? and do you not know that the Tincture of the Mother is
the first, when a child shall be conceived? which is done in the desire of the
will between Man and Woman: where then the seed [for the childe] is sown, and
then the Tincture in the Matrix assumeth it, with the mixture of the L mbus of
the Man. And though the outward Mother does not desire [to have] Or, the
impregnation.
the child, (but desires many times only to have her pleasure) yet the
inward [Mother] does desire it, and also first of all impregnateth it self in
the Tincture; and then attracteth the Or, the Word which then forms and
creates.
Fiat to it, and holds the Limbus of the Man, and becomes impregnated.

89. But now that Tincture qualifieth [or mixeth] with the whole body, and also
with the soul; for if it [the Tincture] be faithful, then it reaches the
virgin of God in the Element, and it is rightly the habitation of the holy
soul, in which God assisteth The soul.
it.

90. Now thus the child qualifieth [or mixeth] with the Mother, and with all
Essences, till it kindles the light of Life, and then the child lives in its
[own] spirit, and the Mother is its dwelling house: but now seeing the soul of
the child is generated out of the Limbus, and out of the Essences of the
Mother, therefore The soul of the child.
it is indeed, half the Mothers, though now it is become the proper own of it
self.

91. Thus also in Christ: the will [to the childe] was the Mothers, when the
Angel declared the Message to her, and the Tincture (which received the Limbus
of God, and brought it into the will that she was thus impregnated in the
Element) that was also the Mothers, and thus the Deity was conceived, in the
Mothers Tincture, in her will, like another natural child.

92. Seeing then that the soul of her child was in the holy Trinity, what
do thou think here? being it went forth out of the Mothers Essences, whether
might not the holiness of the child (especially his high Light) in the Mother
shine bright and gloriously? and whether this Mother may not rightly stand upon
the Moon, and despise that which is earthly? as is to be seen in the
Revelations [of Saint John].

93. For she bare the Savior of all the world, without any earthly mixture:
and she is also a virgin of chastity, highly blessed by her Son Jesus
Christ, in the Divine Light and Clarity Or, above the clarity of the Heavens.
more, than the Heavens, like the Princely Thrones of the Angels. For out of
her went forth the body, which attracteth all members to it; which are the
children of God in Christ. And therefore her Glance [Lustre or brightnesse] is
above the Glance of Heaven: and the Glance of her soul is in the holy Trinity,
where all other children of Adam (which are borne [or begotten] in Christ) are
also Members therein, in that One Christ Jesus.

94. Or do thou think I make a God of her: no: the Invocation does not
belong to her: for the might [or ability] to help, comes only out of the
Father, through the Son; for in the Father only is the source [or fountaine]
of the Omnipotence which he in the Son speaks forth, for the might, of the
strength, is in the first Principle, which is the Father himself, and the
Son is his Love, and Brightness or Glance.
Light: so now the virgin Mary dwells in the Heaven, in the Light and in the
Love of the Father: as also all other Saints [doe].

95. But that they feine, [or babble,] that she was taken up into heaven alive
with soul and body, and that she can carry our miseries, and present them
before her Son: I would feign know what understanding and knowledge the
Author of such an invented fable, has had of the kingd me of Heaven: surely,
he took the kingdom of this world, to be Heaven.

96. I let it pass, and it is true, that she may be in Heaven with body and
soul: but with such a body, as Moses and Elias had upon Mount Tabor (in the
Apparition before Christ [at his Transfiguration]) viz. that new body out of
the Element: the transitory [corruptible body] belongs to the Earth, for if
we could have subsisted in God, with this [transitory and corruptible] body,
God would not have become Man, and have dyed for us. Even as all the Apostles
of Christ are dead, and yet live; and so may it also be, that the body of the
virgin was changed into a heavenly, and laid off the Earthly. What does that
avail us? She is no Goddess.

97. And the Invocation of the Saints, is wholly against the nature of the
first Principle. She is with God indeed, we need not to dispute that; but we
should only look to it, that we also may come to her [where she is] in her
Son, and then we shall have eternal joy with her, for that she is (from
the Grace of God) become the blessed of [all] Women, and that we see the
green Lilly twigge on her, and that she is the Mother of our salvation, out
of whom salvation is borne, through God.

Of Or, purifying Fire.
Purgatory.
98. That invented and well forged Purgatory has some ground in Nature, but in
such a way (as it is taught) it is a lie: and the greedy [desire of] filling
the unsatiable Belly of the fierce [ravening] Beast, sticks therein: for it
has founded its kingdom of Heaven thereon, and has taken upon it to have the
Keys of Peter, (which it never had at all) to [open and shut] Purgatory.

99. Yet I grant that it has the Key, to open Purgatory with; but the other
Key which it has, will not open the kingdom of Heaven; But only the rich
Chist of Gold, out of which the [supposed] Maids [or virgins] receive their
wages, and are sent (with brave passports) into Purgatory, then the The Whore
the Apostate unfaithful soul.
Strumpet thinks she goes to Heaven, to Saint Peter, and thus the false God
beguileth the false Goddess.

100. O! thou blind world with thy forged Masses for souls, such as thy
Blessing is, such thou art thy self; thou do all for money: if nothing be
given thee, thou will keep no Solemnity or Procession. If thou will pray for
thy Neighbors soul, do so while it is between Heaven and Hell, in the body
of this world, then thou may effect somewhat: and it is very pleasing [and
acceptable] to God, that thou desire to be one body in Christ: and thou
helpest the necessity [or want] of thy fellow-member, and to bring him into
God, it is the pleasure and will of God, that one [help] to bear the burden
of another: and to be saved in one brotherly Love, and in one body.

101. Thou blind Minister to the Kingdom of Antichrist, when thou say
Mass for souls: How is it, that sometimes thou take upon thee to ransom a
soul which is in Heaven, or altogether in the Abyss with the Devil? Do
thou not think that the Devil mocketh thee? Or how can thou help them that
are in Heaven? Thou criest out [and sayest] they are in pain [and torment],
and thou art a liar in the presence of God: and how then will that holy soul
bless thee, and give thee thanks? How is it, when thou thy self art in the
Abyss with all Devils? that thou stand, and wilt ransom others out of
Purgatory, and that for money, which thou afterward spendest with Whores? O
fie upon thee! thou great Whore [or Harlot] how have thou made for thy self a
heavenly kingdom upon Earth, for thy voluptuousness, and deceivest the poor
soul of Man: thou must either turn, or go into the Eternal Purgatory.

102. And now seeing there is somewhat in Purgatory, and that all is not so
dead; Or, the Wolf of the Beast gives it forth.
as the Wolf of the Beast feigneth; whereby he may devour the Beast (and the
Woman that sits thereon,) and he is himself a Wolf, and there hangs a
Fox behind him, and in the Fox there grows up an [other] Antichrist again,
never a whit better than the first; he goes flattering with his Or, Foxes
Tail.
Foxes skin; smelling about (and the Wolf sticks therein) till he gets
the kingdom [or Dominion]: if he should come to be old enough, how would he
devour the poor peoples Hens, in the fierce [cruelty]? therefore the Lilly
in the Wonder destroys him, which grows toward the North [or midnight] in
the [bitter or] fierce storm.

103. Seeing the world forgeth so much concerning Purgatory, therefore I will
also set down the Ground of it in the Light of Nature, and see how it will be
endured, and whether we can search it out or no: for we must look upon Life
and Death: and upon the Gate where the soul enters through Death into Life,
and [upon] all the three Principles: because the Root [the Pith or Kernell]
lies therein.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Entering of the souls to God, and of the wicked souls Entering into
Perdition.
The Gate of the Bodies breaking off [or Parting] from the Soul.
1. IF we consider now (in the light of Nature) of Man (the Image of God,) of
his beginning, and of his Eternal enduring, being [or substance]; and then of
the breaking of his body, how body and soul part asunder; and whither the
souls go, when the Spirit of their breath does break [or dissolve] in them,
and the springing or moving in the Tincture of this world does cease; then we
find the ground of the unquietness of the soul, when it is severed from the
body [being] unregenerated: from whence lamentation and desiring arises: from
whence then the Babell of Confusion has arisen: so that very many things have
therefore been invented to Ransom souls [out of Distresse].

2. Many of which [things] have no foundation in the light of Nature, nor can
be found [therein]: But were rather invented for Covetousness, and for For
Livings.
filling of the Belly, and for deceit, upon which the Antichristian kingdom is
founded: and thereout is a right Babell of Confusion come to be, out of which
then also the [Grimme, fierce, cruel enmity and hatred is arisen, from whence
Babell is broken in her self, and [Enmity] is generated out of Wrangling,
dissension and warring
Babell: and it is the fierce wrath of God which appears in the breaking [or
destruction] of Babell, because she is generated in the Deceit.

3. But now that the wrath devoureth all, and wholly darkneth the Mysteria,
[Mysteries or hidden secrets,] and makes the source [or quality] of the
Eternal Birth [to be] a Darkness, (only that it may exalt its wrath,) and
sees nothing in the Birth of Eternity, but brings all things that are
therein, to nothing; that is a very great Babell, for it not only devoureth it
self, but makes it self Or, Stock-blinde.
stark blind in Nature; and it makes of Man's Image, mere evil wolvish
Beasts, which think that they are gone out from Babell, and yet are begotten in
Babell, and are in the body of the evil devouring Beast, and so devour the
house of their Mother, and manifest it to be a vile stinking Lake, and yet
themselves will not go out from it, and it is altogether a Kingdom, which
continually generateth it self, in its own voluptuousness and pride, and also
continually manifests its own shame, and devoureth it self in the wrath of
its own sins, and is rightly called Babell.

4. But if we go out from Babell into the New Regeneration, and consider our
corruption, wherein the poor soul lies captive, and also consider our
Regeneration in Christ Jesus, how we are regenerated out of God, and then, how
Man must enter into this new Regeneration, and be regenerated in the Birth of
Christ; then we shall well find what the unquietness of the soul is after
the [departure] or breaking off of the body.

5. For, the soul which is out of the first Principle (out of the Band of the
Eternity) was breathed into the Element of the body, to [be] the Image of God,
out of the strong Might of God, and enlightened from the Divine Light, so that
it has received an Angelical source [or quality]; but when it went forth, out
of the Light of God into the Spirit of this world, then there sprung up in it,
the source of the first Principle: and it neither saw nor felt the kingdom of
God any more; till that the Heart of God set it self in the midst again; into
that, the soul must enter again, and be borne anew.

6. And that it might do this, therefore the Heart of God became a humane One
Copy has humane body.
soul, and slew (by his entering into Death) the Spirit of this world: and
brought the fullness of the Deity again into his humane soul: so that we
also may altogether in his (as in our own) humane soul, through him, press
into the holy Element before God; and now there is nothing to hinder us but our
own vile sluggish drowsinesse, that we suffer our selves to be so wholly and
altogether lead by the Spirit of this world, with pride, exalting of our selves
to honor and esteem, and greedy filling of the Belly [with plenty]: and we
look no further, [to consider] that we are but Pilgrims: and that as soon as
the Spirit of this world has laid hold of us in the Mothers body [or womb],
we are then Pilgrims, and must travail with our souls into another Country,
where the earthly body is not at home.

7. For as this world breaks and passes away, so also all flesh (which is
generated out of the Spirit of this world) must break and pass away.
Therefore now when the poor soul must depart out of this body, wherein yet it
is generated; if then it has not the new Garment of the Regeneration of the
Holy Ghost in it, and is not clothed with the Mantle of Christ, with his
Incarnation, suffering, Death, and Resurrection, in him; then there begins
great sorrow and unquietness; [viz.] in those only, which at the breaking of
their bodies are but in the Gate: and so swim between Heaven and Hell; and
there then Or, begins the wrestli^^.
is need of wrestling and struggling, as is to be seen by very many when they
are a dying.

8. There then the poor soul in the first Principle does Swing, (...) swimme^*
move in the Door of the Deep, being clothed with the virtue [or power of the
Dominion or] Region of the Stars, appearing in that [shape or] form of the
body, which it had here: and many of them desires this or that, which was its
last Will, in hope thereby to attain abstinence and [quietnesse or] Rest: also
many by night (according to the sydereall spirit) show themselves very disquiet
with tumbling and tossing of the body; which our Learned Men from the School
of this world, ascribe to the Devil, but they have no knowledge [or
understanding] in it.

9. Seeing therefore that this is the weightiest Article; and cannot be
apprehended in such a way; we will describe the dying of Man, and the
departure of the soul from the body, and try, if it might so be brought to
knowledge, that the Reader may comprehend the [true] Or, understanding of it.
meaning of it.

10. Man's Image borne of a Woman, here in this life, is in a threefold form,
and stands in three Principles [or beginnings]; viz. the soul, that, has
its original out of the first Principle, out of the strong and sour Might of
the Eternity; and it swimmeth [or moveth] between two Principles, begirt with
the third [Principle]: it reaches with its original Root, into the Depth of
the Eternity, in the source [or quality] where God the Father from Eternity
enters (through the Gates of the breaking through, and opening,) in himself,
into the Light of Joy: and it is in the Band, where God calls himself a
Jealous angry and austere God: and is a sparkle out of the Allmightinesse,
Sparkling forth, or discovered.
appearing in the great Wonders of the wisdom of God, through the dear virgin
of Chastity; and with the form of the first Principle, [it standeth] in the
Gate of the soreness of Eternity [mingled, united, or] qualified, with the
Region of the Sun and Stars, and begirt with the four Elements; and the
holy Element ( viz. the Root of the four Elements) that is the body of the
soul, in the second Principle, in the Gate [before or] toward God; and
according to the Spirit of this world, the Region of the Stars, is the body
of the soul; and the issue of the four Elements is the source-house
[conduit-house, or workhouse,] or the Spirit of this world, which kindles the
Region, so that it [springeth forth or] works.

11. And thus the soul lives in such a threefold source [or working quality]
being bound with three Or, Reins.
coards, and is drawn of all three. The first coard is the Band of Eternity,
generated in the rising up of the Anxiety, and reaches the Abyss of Hell. The
second coard is the Kingdom of Heaven, generated through the Gates of the
Deep in the Father, and Regenerated out of the birth of sins, through the
humanity of Christ, and there the soul also (in the Or, becoming (...) ^an.
Incarnation of Jesus Christ the Son of God) is tied up, and is drawn by the
dear virgin, in the word of God. The third coard, is the Kingdom of the
Stars, qualifying [or mingling] with the soul, and it is hard drawn and
held by the four Elements, and carried and lead by them.

12. But the third Kingdom is not also in the Eternity, but is generated out
of the one Element in the time of the kindling of the Fiat; that now is
corruptible, and has a certain seculum, limit and time, [how long it shall
last]; and so this Region in the soul (when the light of Life kindles it
self) has also a certain seculum, and time of its breaking; and that kingdom
Or, Educateth Man.
brings Man up, and gives him the source of his manners [conditions and
disposition] will and desires to evil and good: and sets him in beauty,
glory, riches and honor: and makes him an earthly God: and it opens to him
the great Wonders In the Kingdom of the four Elements.
in him, and runs along with him inconsiderately to the end of his seculum,
term, and end: and then it departs from him; and as it did help Man to his
life, so it helps him also to Death, and breaks off from the soul.

13. First, the four Elements break off from the [one] Element, and then the
source [or working faculty] of the third Principle cease; and that is the
most horrible thing [of all] when the four Elements break in themselves; and
that is the Death, when the Brimstone Spirit (which has its original from the
Gall, and kindles the Tincture of the Heart) is choked; where then the
Tincture with the shadow of Man's substance, goes into the Either, and remains
standing with the shadow, in the root of the one Element; from which [one
Element] the four Elements were generated and gone forth; and therein only
consists the woe in the breaking, where one source-house is broken off from
the soul.

14. But if now the Or, issuing substantial faculties, or virtues.
Essences of the first Principle of the soul, have been so very conversant
about [or addicted to] the Kingdom of this world, so that the Essences of the
soul have sought after the pleasures of this world only, in temporary honor,
power, and bravery; then the soul (or the Essences out of the first Principle)
keeps the starry Region to it still, as its dearest Jewel, with a desire to
live therein; but then [the starry Region] has the Mother ( viz. the four
Elements) no more, and therefore it consumes, with the time it self, in the
Essences out of the first Principle: and so the Essences of the first Principle
continue raw, [or naked without a body].

15. And here stands the Or, Refining fire.
Purgatory; thou blind world, if thou can do any th^^^, then help thy soul
through the Or, Strong.
strait Gate: now here if the Treader upon the Serpent has not hold of the
coard, then it must indeed continue in the first Principle. Here now is the
great Life, and also the great Death, where the soul must enter into the one
or the other, and that is its Eternal Country for afterward. For the third
Principle falls away, and leaves the soul, and it can use that no more in
Eternity.

Of the Exit.
going-forth of the Soul.
16. Seeing then, that Man is so very earthly, therefore he has none but
earthly knowledge: except he be Regenerated in the Gate of the Deep. He
always supposes that the soul (at the deceasing of the body) goes only out
at the mouth: and he understands nothing concerning its Deep Essential
virtues or faculties which are of a higher original than the four Elements.
Deep Essences above the Elements. When he sees a blew vapor go forth out
of the mouth of a dying Man, (which makes a strong smell all over the chamber)
then he supposes, that is the soul.

17. O no, beloved Reason it is not so; the soul is not seen nor comprehended
in the outward Elements; but that is the Brimstone Spirit, the Spirit of the
third Principle: for as when thou put out a Candle, a filthy smell and
stinck comes from it, which was not before, when the Candle did burn; so here
also, when the light of the body breaks, then the Brimstone Spirit is
smothered, from whence that vapor and deadly stinck proceeds, with its
working [Spirit or infecting] poison.

18. Understand [or consider] it aright: it is the source-Spirit [or working
Spirit] out of the Gall, which kindles the Heart, (whereby the life was
stirred) which is choked, so soon as the Tincture in the Blood of the Heart
is extinguished: The right soul has no need of such going forth, it is much
more subtle than the Brimstone Spirit, although (in the life time) it is in
one only substance.

19. But when the Spirit of the four Elements parts, then the right soul
(which was breathed into Adam) stands in its Principle; for it is so subtle
that it cannot be comprehended; it goes through flesh and bones, also through
wood and stone, and Breaks or disturbeth.
stirs none of them.

20. It may be comprehended [as followeth]: if it has Been enamoured, and not
broke off from it.
promised somewhat (in the time of the body) and has not recalled it, then
that word, and the earnest promise comprehends it (which we ought to be
silent in, here;) or else there is nothing that comprehends it; but only its
own Principle wherein it stands, whether it be the kingdom of Hell, or of
Heaven.

21. It goes not out at the mouth (like a bodily substance): it is raw [or
naked] without a body: and instantly passes (at the departure of the four
Elements) into the Center, into the Gate of the Deep; [in the hidden Eternity];
and that which it is clothed withal, that, it comprehends, and keeps it:
if its treasure, be voluptuousness, might, [or power,] honor, riches, malice,
wrath, lying, or the falsehood of the world, then the fierce might of the
Essences out of the first Principle comprehends these things, through the
sydereall Spirit, and keeps them: and Buddeth or flows.
works therewith according to the Region of the Stars; yet the [starry
Region] cannot bring the Spirit of the soul into its own form; but it
practices its juggling therewith, and so there is no rest in its Or, Conscience.
Worm, and its Worm of the soul hangs to its Treasure; as Christ said:
Where thy treasure is, there is thy heart also.

22. Therefore it happens often, that the Spirit of a deceased Man, is seen
walking, also many times it is seen riding in the perfect form of fire; also
many times in [some] other manner of disquietnesse; all according as the
clothing of the soul has been in the time of the body, just so has its
source [or condition] been: and such a form, according to its source, it has
(after the departing of the body) in its figure: and so rides (in such form,)
in the source [or working] of the Stars, till that source also be consumed:
and then it is wholly Or, without a body.
naked, and is never seen more by any Man: but the Deep Abyss without end and
number is its Eternal dwelling house; and its works which it has here
wrought, stand in the figure, in its Tincture, and follow after it.

23. Has it wrought good here, then it shall eat that good: for all sins
stand before it in its Tincture, if it think inwardly in it self of the
kingdom of Heaven, (which yet it neither sees nor knows) then it sees the
causes, wherefore it is in such a source [or misery]: for it self has made
that. And there all the tears of the oppressed and afflicted are in its
Tincture, and they are fiery, stinging and burning in a hostile manner,
fretting and gnawing in themselves; and make an Eternal Despair in the
Essences, and an hostile will against God; the more it thinks of Or,
Forbearance.
Abstinence, the more the gnawing Worm rises up in it self.

24. For there is no light, neither of this world, nor of God, but its own
fiery kindling in it self, and that is its light, which stands in the
horrible flash of the grimnesse: which also is an Enmity to it self; yet the
source is very unlike: all according to that which the soul has here
burdened it self with. For such a soul there is no [remedy or] counsel, it
cannot come into the Light of God; and although St Peter had left many thousand
Keys upon Earth, yet none of them could open the Heaven for That soul.
it; for it is separated from the Band of Jesus Christ: and there is between it
and the Deity, a whole Principle or Gulf.
Birth; and it is as with the Rich Man, Luke 16. where those that would come
from thence to us cannot. And this must be understood of the unrepentant
souls, which thus in hypocrisy [or shew-holinesse] depart from the body being
unregenerated.

25. But there is a great difference in souls, and therefore Or, their
departure is also unlike.
the going to Heaven is very unlike; some of them are through true repentance,
and sorrow for their Or, evil deeds.
misdeeds, through their Faith (in the time of their bodies) set [or ingrafted]
into the Heart of God [and] new regenerated through the Birth of Jesus Christ:
and they instantly (with the breaking of their bodies) leave all that is
Transitory or corruptible.
Earthly, and instantly also lay off, the Region of the Stars: and they
comprehend in their Essences of the first Principle, the mercy of God the
Father, in the kind Love of Jesus Christ; and [these] also stand, in the time
of their bodies according to the Essences of the soul; (which they receive
from the Passion and Death of Christ) in the Gate of the Heaven: and their
departure from the body is a very pleasant entering into the Element before God,
into a still Rest, expecting their bodies, without [irksom] longing: where then
the Paradise shall flourish again, which the soul tastes very well, but
effects no source [or worke] till the first Adam ([as he was] before the
Fall) Or, be its clothing again.
be again upon it.

26. These holy souls works also follow them, in their Tincture of the Spirit
of the soul, in the holy Element, so that they see and know, how much good
they have wrought here; and their highest delight and desire is, still
continually (in their Love) to do more good; although without the Paradisicall
body (which they [shall then] first attain at the Restoration) they work
nothing, but their source [qualitie or property] is mere delight and soft Or,
Well-doing.
welfare.

27. Yet you are to know, that the holy souls are not so void of ability [or
power]; for their Essences are out of the strong Might of God, out of the first
Principle; although (because of their great humility toward God) they do not
use that [might] (whereas they continually expect their bodies in that still
rest with great humility) and yet their love and delight is so very great, that
at several times they have wrought great Wonders [or Miracles] (among the
faithful) upon Earth: which [faithfull People] so vigorously set their love
and desire in them; that one holy Tincture took hold of the other, and so
through the Faith of the Living, wonders are thus done, for, th^re is nothing
impossible to Faith.

28. And it is not hard (for the holy souls, which are departed from the body)
to appear Or, upon.
to a strong Faith of one that is Living; for the firm faith of the living (if
it be borne of God) reaches also unto the kingdom of Heaven, into the holy
Element, where the separated souls have their Rest.

29. And now if the deceased (or separated) soul, was here in this world a
Candlestick, and a declarer [of the Name] of God, and that it has turned many
unto Righteousness: then it appears also to the Living Saints, which incline
their Faith so strongly to them; and it is not a jot harder now than in former
times, when (in the ti^es of the Saints) great Wonders were done: for the Faith
of the Living, and the Love of the separated [soules] toward the Believing
Saints, has wrought them, in the strong Might of God; and God has permitted
it, for the conversion of People, that they might see the great Might (of those
[that were] deceased) in God, and that they are, and live, in another kingdom,
that so they might be assured of the Resurrection of the Dead, by the great
Miracles of the deceased souls; All which, in general were put to Death for
the witness of Jesus; that the Heathen and all People might thereby see, what
manner of Reward the holy ^People] had, when they laid down their life for the
Testimony of Christ: by whose example many People also were converted.

30. But now that a B^bell of confusion is come out of this (in that, it is
come so far, that the Saints departed, are invocated [or worshipped] as
Intercessours to God, and that Divine honor is done them) this the holy souls
departed, are not guilty of, neither here they desired any such thing, neither
do they present the miseries and necessities of Men before God; But the fault
lies in the forged Superstition of the wicked deceitful Antichrist, who has
founded his Chair or Throne.
Stool of Pride thereon; not as a living Saint, which (with the holy)
inclines himself to God: but as an earthly God: he thereby arrogateth Divine
Omnipotence to himself, and yet has none; but is the greedy, covetous, proud
Antichrist, riding upon the strong The Arm of the Civil power.
Beast of this world.

31. The souls departed, do not present our wants before God: for God is
nearer to us than the souls departed are; and [besides] if they should do so,
then they must have bodies: as also Paradisicall sources [or flowing
properties] springing up, and working, whereas they are in the still humility,
and meek Rest, and do not suffer our sour miseries to enter into them, but
one holy Tincture takes hold of another to [increase] the love and delight But
they make not of Christ (their Great Prince) a Deaf Hearer, as if he did
neither hear, feel, nor see any thing himself: who stretches out his arms,
and himself without ceasing calls with his holy Spirit, and inviteth all the
children of Men to the wedding, he will readily accept all, if they would but
come.

32. How then should a soul come before Christ, and pray for a Living
Invocatour, whereas Christ himself does stand, and invite Men, and is himself
the atonement of the anger in the Father: For the Father has given Men to the
Son: as himself witnesses: They were thine, and thou have given them to
me, and I will that they be with me, and see my Glory, which thou have given
me.

33. O thou confounded Babell, go out from Antichrist, and come (with a
penitent heart and mind) before thy merciful Brother, and Savior of all Men:
he will more readily hear thee, than thou come to him: Step only out of this
wicked Babell into a new Birth, and be not so much in love with the kingdom of
this world; thou art but a mere Guest and stranger in it: what avails thee,
thy Or, corruptible.
transitory honor [from men] which scarce lasts one moment? Thou shall
indeed get much greater [surpassing] joy and honor in the new Regeneration:
where the holy souls in the Heaven and the Angels will rejoice with thee:
Consider what joy and gladness thou will stir up thereby in the Heart of
Jesus Christ: where then instantly the precious Talent (the Holy Ghost) will be
given thee: and thou will get the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that thou thy
self may open it: or do thou think it is not true, do but seek and try
with an earnest mind, and thou will find wonders indeed: thou thy self shall
know [understand] and (without any doubt at all) assuredly see in thy mind,
out of what School this is written.

34. Now the mind thinks, that if all the works of a soul (which it
wrought here) shall follow it in the figure; then how shall it be, if a soul
here has for a long time Or, wrought great crimes, sins, and blasphemies.
committed great abominations, then they will be great shame to it, if they
must stand in the figure before its eyes? This is a great stumbling block of
the Devils, which plagueth the poor soul, and usually forces it thereby
into despair, so that it self continually presents its sins before it,
and despaireth of the Grace of God.

35. Now behold, thou beloved soul, who art dearly redeemed by thy Savior
Jesus Christ (with his entrance into the humanity, and with his entrance into
the Abyss of Hell) and plucked off from the Kingdom of the Devil, (in the
Might of the Father) and sealed with his blood and Death, and covered with his
Ensign of Triumph; all thy works ([both] the evil and the good) which thou
have done, follow thee in the shadow, but not in the substance, nor in the
source [or in the working property.] Yet they will not be any Detraction,
shame, or disgrace
prejudice in the Heaven to the holy souls (which have turned into the
Regeneration, in Christ): but they shall have their highest joy concerning
them, in that they have stuck in such hard misery and sins, and have been
plucked out of them by their Savior Christ, and from thence will arise mere
joy, and rejoicing, that they are redeemed from the Hunter, or the Devil.
Driver of their sins, and from great misery, and that the Hunter, or the
Devil.
Driver is captivated, which tormented them day and night in such Sinfulness.
sins.

36. And there all the holy souls and Angels, (in one Love) will highly
rejoice, that the poor soul is delivered from such great necessity [or
misery]; and the great Joy then takes its beginning from thence, of which
Christ said; That there is more joy for one sinner that repents, than for
ninety and nine righteous that need no repentance: And the soul will praise
God that he has redeemed it out of these great sins; and herewith the praise
of Christ [in] his merit, passion, and dying for the poor soul, springs up
in Eternity, and it is the right Song of the redeemed Bride, which rises up in
the Father; where the souls so highly rejoice that the Driver is captivated,
and his Dependents. Accomplices.
confederates [or followers].

37. And here is fulfilled that which King David descanteth upon; Thou shall
rejoice to see, how the wicked are recompensed: how the wicked Driver [Hunter
or oppressour] and Occasioner, or stirrer up of evil.
Incendiary of malice and wickedness is tormented, in his Prison: for the
sins that are washed away, shall not appear in Heaven (as in the Abyss of
Hell) in the form of fire: but as Isaias said; Though thy sins were as red
as blood [or scarlet] (if thou turn) they shall be like wool, white as snow:
they shall stand in a heavenly figure, for Men to sing of, in a Hymn of
Praise, and a Psalm of Thankesgiving, for their deliverance from the Driver.

38. And now seeing the departure of souls is various, so also their Or,
torment.
source [quality or condition] after their departure is various: so that many
of the souls departed Or, have a Purgatory for a tedious while
are indeed for a (...) time in Purgatory, if the soul had been defiled with
gross (...) and have not rightly stepped into the true earnest Regeneration:
and yet do hang a little to it; as it uses to be with those that have been
laden with temporal honor and might [or authority and power]: where many
times their own power and profit prevails over right: where wickedness or
malice (and not wisdom,) is the Judge; and here a great burden is laid upon
the poor soul: and that poor soul also would feign be saved.

39. Here comes Man and prays before God for forgiveness of sins, and the
Fox hangs behind his cloak: he would be justified and his unrighteousness
sticks in the Abyss, and that will not suffer him to enter into the New
Regeneration: his covetousness has taken too much hold of him: his wicked
Babell (of Antichrists opinions) will not let him come to the true earnest
conversion: they bar up the Gate of Love, [and] the Spirit of this world (in
the lust of the flesh) continues always [predominant or] chief.

40. And yet how ever, when the point [or houre] of Death comes, that the
Conscience is rouzed, and that the poor soul begins to tremble for great
fear at the [Torment or] source of Hell; then these also would feign be saved:
though there is very little faith in them, only mere unrighteousness,
falsehood, and pleasure of the Earthly life: the groanings and tears of the
poor, stand hard before it, and the Devil reads the Book of Conscience to
the mind: and there stands also before the mind, the pleasure of the world,
and [the party] would feign live [somewhat] longer: and promises to lead a
life in [forbearance of evil or] abstinence; and the mind inclines a little
toward God, [or Goodnesse]: but the sins beat that [inclination] down
again: and then there arises great doubt in Or, unrighteousness.
unquietness: yet nevertheless, many of them lay hold on the Savior by a
Thread.

41. And now when Death comes and severeth the body and soul asunder; then
the poor soul hangs by a Thread [of Faith] and will not let go: and yet
its Budded essential virtues.
Essences stick fast in the anger of God, the source [or paine] of the gross
sins Boil up in it.
torment it, the Thread of Faith (in the New Regeneration) is very weak; and
here therefore now they must press through the Gate of the Deep, through the
passion, and through the Death of Christ [through the kingdom of Hell] to God:
and Hell has yet a strong Band about the soul, the falsehood is not yet washed
off.

42. There then says the Bridegroom, Come: on the other side says the poor
soul, I cannot yet, my Lamp is not yet trimmed, nevertheless, it holds the
Savior fast by the Thread [of Faith!] and sets its Imagination [or Desire]
(through the Thread of Faith, and confidence) further into the Heart of God:
where then at last it is Ransomed out of the Putrefaction, through the Passion
of Christ.

43. But what its Putrefaction is, my soul does not desire to try by
participating with them; for it is their abominable sins, which are kindled
in the anger of God, there must the poor soul Or, swim.
Bath, till it come into the Rest, through the small faith; where its
Clarification [or Glorification] shall not in Eternity be like the true-borne
Saints. Although indeed they are Redeemed out of Hell, and have fruition of the
heavenly Joy: yet the greatest Joy stands in the earnest Regeneration,
wherein there springs up Paradisicall virtue [or power] and wonders.

44. And thy worldly Bravery, Glory, Beauty, and Riches, will not exalt thee
before God, as thou supposest, nor yet thy Office which thou did bear here,
be it the Kingly or Priestly Office; if thou desire to be in Heaven, then
thou must (through thy Savior) be newborn; thou must endeavor to bring thy
Subjects unto righteousness, and then thou will shine (with thy Office) as
bright as the luster of Heaven, and thy works will follow thee. O Man consider
thy self in this.

45. But thou earthly Babell, what shall I write much of thee for? Indeed I
must show thee the ground, that thy hypocrisy may be brought to light, and
that the Devil may not continue (in such a manner) to stand in an Angelical
form, and in the voluptuous kingdom of this world (in Man) be a God, which is
his highest endeavor.

46. Behold, thou call thy self a Christian, and thou boastest [that] thou
art a child of God: this thou confessest with thy mouth, but thy heart is a
thief and a murderer: thou endeavourest after nothing else but honor and
riches: and thy Conscience regards little by what means thou attainest them
[whether by hook or by crooke]; thou have a will, one day, to enter into
earnest Repentance, but the Devil keeps thee back that thou can not; thou
say to morrow [to morrow] and that is always so, from time to time: and thou
think with thy self, if I had my Chist full, then I would give to him that
has need [and become another Man]: If I had but enough to serve my turn
[aforehand] that I may not come to want my self; this is thy purpose till thy
end, which the Devil persuades thee, that it is far off from thee.

47. In the mean while, thou consumest the sweat and blood of the needy, and
thou gatherest all his miseries and necessities on a heap in thy soul: thou
take his sweat, to maintain thy pride therewith: and yet thy doings must be
accounted holy; thou give scandal to the poor, so that by thy example and
doings, he come^^ to be vile [and wicked], and to do that which is not right
in the presence of God; he curses thee, and therewith causes himself to
perish also; and thus one One sin brings forth another.
abomination generateth another; but thou art the first cause thereof; and
though thou set forth thy self never so wisely and handsomely, yet the
Driver is still before thee, and thou art the Root of all those sins [which
thou causest in others by thy hardness or oppression].

48. And though thou Prayest, yet thou keep thy Dark Garment on still: which
is defiled with mere Slander.
calumny, with Usury, covetousness, high-mindednesse, lechery, whoredom,
wrath, envy, and robbery, [thy minde] is murtherous, envious, and malicious,
thou criest to God that he should hear thee, and thou will not pull off this
furred coat: do thou think that such a Devil shall enter into God, or that
God will let such a rough Devil into him? thy mind stands in the figure of
a Serpent, Wolf, Lion, Dragon, or Toade: and when thou Do pranck thy self
so demurely and devoutly.
carriest thy self so sprucely, thou art scarce [thought] a subtle Fox; but as
the will and the source [or quality] of thy heart is, so stands thy figure
also [before God], and such a form thy soul has, and do thou suppose,
that thou shall bring such a pretty Beast into the Kingdom of God?

49. Where is thy Image of God? Have thou not turned it into a horrible Worm
and Beast? O! thou belongest not to the Kingdom of God, except thou be borne a
new, and that thy soul appear in the Image of God, then the Mercy of God is
upon thee, and the Passion of Christ covers all thy sins.

50. But if thou perseverest in thy Beastiall Form till the end, and do
then stand, and give God good words, that he should receive thy Beast into
Heaven: whereas there is no Faith in thee at all; and thy Faith is nothing else
but a Historical knowledge of God, which [Historie] the Devils also know very
well; then thou art not fastened to the Band of Jesus Christ: and thy soul
continues to be a Worm and a Beast: and it bears not the Image of God; and
when it departs from the body, it continues in the Eternal Fire, and never
more reaches the Gate of the breaking through.

The Earnest Gate of the Purgatory.
51. Then the Mind asks, May not a soul (by the Intercession of Men [or
their Praying for them]) be ransomed out of Purgatory? Antichrist has played
many juggling tricks with this, and has built his Kingdom upon it: but I shall
here show you the root, which is highly known [by us] in the light of Nature.

52. Men's Or, Intercession.
Praying for, prevails thus far; if a soul hang to the Thread of the new
Regeneration, and that it is not a total Worm and Beast, and that it presses
into God with an earnest desire: and if there be true Christians [there] which
stand unfeinedly in the new Birth, and that their spirit of the soul (in their
burning Love toward the poor soul) does press in to God with the Thread, of
the Band of the poor soul, then indeed it helps the poor soul to wrestle,
and to break in pieces the Chains of the Devil: especially if it be done
before the poor soul be departed from the body: and especially by Parents,
children, sisters, and brothers, or kind^ed of the blood; for their Tinct^res
qualify [or mingle] therewith, as being generated from one and the same blood:
and the spirit of their soul, enters much more freely and willingly into
this great Combat, and gets victory much sooner and more powerfully than
strangers; if they stand in the new Birth; but without the new birth no victory
is gained: there is no Devil that does destroy another [Devill.]

53. But if the soul of the dying Party, be quite loosed off from the Band of
Jesus Christ, and that it self (by its own pressing in) does not reach the
Thread [of Faith]; then the Prayers of those that stand by, about it, help not,
but it is with them, as Christ said to his seventy Disciples, which he sent
abroad; When you enter into a House, salute them [that are in it]: and if there
be a child of Peace in that house, then your salutation of Peace shall rest
upon ^t, but if not, then your salutation shall return to you again: thus
also their hearty wish of love, and their earnest pressing into God, returns
again to the faithful, who were so heartily inclined to the soul of their
friend.

54 But concerning the feigned Masses for souls which the Pope or Ministers.
Priests say for money, (without any true devotion, and without hearty pressing
into God) that is altogether false, and Or, is founded.
stands in Babell, it helps the soul little or nothing: it must be an
earnest fight that must be had with the Devil, thou must be well armed: for
thou enterest into Combat with a [mighty] Prince, look to it that thy self (in
thy In thy unrepentant Garment of sins.
rough Garment) be not beaten down.

55. I will not say, that one, that is a true Believer, [or truly faithfull] in
the new Birth, cannot (with earnest Combating) help a soul, which moves ^n
the Or, between Time and Eternity.
Door of the Deep between Heaven and Hell; but he must have sharp weapons
(when he has to do with Princely Potentates.
Principalities and Powers) or else they will deride and scorn him; as it is
done for certain, when the Pope or Minister.
Priest, with his Glistering Coape [or other fine cloaths], comes between
Heaven and Hell, and will [undertake to] fight with the Devil.

56. O! Hear thou Pope or Minister.
Priest, there belongs neither gold nor money, nor any selfe-chosen holiness
about it; there is a very worthy Champion which assisteth the soul: and if it
gets no victory in him, then thy hypocrisy shall not help it. Thou take
money, and say Mass for every one, whether they be in Heaven or in Hell,
thou do not inquire after that, and besides, thou art altogether uncertain
of it, but only thou may be sure, that thou appearest before God to be a
perpetual liar.

57. But that they have hitherto ascribed such acute knowledge to the soul,
after the departure of the body; that thing is very various, according as the
soul is variously armed. If it here (in this body) entered into the new Birth,
and if it self were entered (with its Noble Champion [Jesus Christ]) through
the Gates of the Deep, to God (so that it has received the Crown of the high
wisdom, from the Noble Virgin,) then indeed it has great wisdom and
knowledge, even above the Heavens, for it is in the bosom of the virgin,
through whom the Eternal Wonders of God are opened; this [soule] has also
great joy and clarity [brightnesse or lustre] above the Heavens of the
Elements: for the Glance of the Holy Trinity shines from it, and clarifieth
[brightneth or glorifieth] it.

58. But that they should ascribe great knowledge to a soul (which scarce at
the end, with great danger, is loosed from the Band of the Devil, and which in
this world did not so much as once care for the wisdom of God, but looked
after its pleasure only, and which has not in this world been once crowned
with the Holy Ghost) that is not so; does not Christ himself say? The children
of this world are wiser in their Generation than the chi dren of Light?

59. If the soul be freed from the Bands of the Devil, then it lives in
meekness, and in great humility, in the stillnesse of the Eternal Element, or
mercy of God.
Element, without the springing up of any works, it does no Miracles, [or
shows no works of wonder,] but humbles it self before God. Yet it is
possible for the highly-worthy Champion-like souls to do Wonders: for they
have great knowledge, and power, [or virtue,] though they all appear (in
humble Love) before the Countenance of God, and there is no grudging among them.

The true Door of the Entrance into Heaven, or into Hell.
60. Reason always seeks for Paradise, out of which it is gone forth: and it
says; Where is the place whither the souls go to rest in? Whither flies it
when it departs from the body? Does it go far, or does it stay here?

61. Although we may be hard to be understood, in our high knowledge; (because
a soul that desires to Or, understand it.
see it, must enter into the New Birth, or else it stands behind the veil
[of Moses] and asks continually, Where is the place?) therefore we will set
it down for the sake of the Lilly-Rose, where then the Holy Ghost will open
many Doors in the Wonders, which men now hold for Impossible To be opened.
, and in the world none is Or, at home.
therein, but they are Or, at Babell.
in Babell.

62. Therefore now if we will speak of our Native Country, (out of which we
are wandered with Adam) and will tell of the Resting Place of the souls: we
need not to Or, to think of some far distant place.
cast our minds a far off: for far off and near is all one and the same
thing with God: the place of the Holy Trinity is Or, Every where.
all over: Heaven and Hell is [every where] all over in this world, and the Man
(Christ) dwells all over, for he has laid off the corruptibility, and has
swallowed up Death, as also that which is [fragile or] temporal, and he lives
in God: his body is the substance of the Element, which out of the word of the
Mercifulness, is from Eternity generated out of the Gates of the Deep: it is
the Or, refreshment.
Habitation, where the sharpness of God breaks open the Darkness: where the
Eternal virtue [or power] appears in wonders: and it is the Tincture of the
Deity, which is before God: out of which the heavenly virtues are generated:
its Name is wonderful: the Earthly Tongue cannot express.

63. And Adams body was also created out of it: and the whole world was made
through the Element out of its issuing forth. Now therefore this Gate is [every
where] all over: that which is most inward is also the most outward, but the
middlemost is the Kingdom of God; the outward world hangs to the outermost,
and yet is not the outermost, but the ground of Hell is the outermost; and none
of them all comprehends the other, and yet they are in one another, and the
one is not seen in the other, but the Or, property is felt.
source which is broke forth.

64. We find indeed the virtue of the Kingdom of Heaven in all things: and
also we find the virtue [or effect] of the Kingdom of Hell in all things:
and yet the thing is not hurt [or disturbed] by either of them, but what is not
generated out Or, the one Eternal.
of one [of them alone].

65. The soul of Man is generated out of the Gates of the breaking through out
of the outward into the inward, and is gone forth out of the inward, (in The
Spirit of this world.
the out-Birth of the inward) into the outward: and that [soule] must enter
again into the inward; if it remain in the outward, it is in Hell, in the
deep great wideness [vacuum or space] without end, where the source [or the
rising tormenting quality] generateth it self according to the inward, and in
it self goes forth into the outward.

66. The source in the breaking forth out of the outward into the inward, is
the sharpness and the Allmightinesse of the Kingdom of the Heavens over the
outward: the outward is the Eternal Band, and the inward is the Eternal
virtue and light, and cannot perish: and thus God is all in all, and yet there
is nothing that comprehends or detaineth him, and he is included in nothing.

67. Therefore the soul (when it departs from the body) needs not to go
far: for at that place where the body dies, there is Heaven and Hell: and
the Man Christ dwells every where: God and the Devil is there, yet each of
them in his own Kingdom: The Paradise is also there: and the soul needs
only to enter through the deep Door in the Center. Is the soul Holy? then it
stands in the Gate of Heaven, and the earthly body has but kept it out of
Heaven; and now when the body comes to be broken, then the soul is already in
the Heaven: it needs no going out or in, Christ has it in his arms: for
where the four Elements break, there the root of them remains, which is
the holy Element, and therein the body of Christ stands, and also the
Paradise, which stands in the springing source of Joy: and that Element is
the soft still Habitation.

68. So also, it is with the damned, [soule,] when the body breaks, the soul
needs no flying forth, or departing far away: it remains in that which is
outermost Beyond.
without the four Elements, in the darkness, and in the Or, Aching property.
anguishing source, its source is [that which cometh] after the light, and its
rising [or springing up] is enmity against it self, and so climeth continually
aloft over the Thrones of the Deity, and finds them not, to Eternity, but it
rides in its pride aloft over the Thrones, in their own Game, with the strong
might of the grimnesse; of which you shall find at large, about the
Description of the last Judgment.

CHAP. XX.
Of Adam and Eve's going forth out of the Paradise, and of their entering into
this world.

And then of the true Christian Church upon Earth, and also of the
Antichristian Cainish Church.

1. HEre we shall not be acceptable to the Antichrist, much less to his stout
Horse [or stately Beast]: but seeing it thus appears to us, (in the wonder,)
we will describe it for a Memorial to our selves, and behold how the
beginning and end of every thing is; that we also (in our Combat) may labor
in the Or, in the hidden Mysteries.
Gate of the Deep, although it be plain, that we have nothing else to
expect, in this world (for this Revelation [or Manifestation]) from Antichrist
and his Beast, but scorn, [contempt] disgrace, and danger of our temporal
life, yet we comfort our selves with the Eternal Conquest in our Savior
Christ: wherein we have to expect our great recompense: the glimpse of which
appears to us here, Or, in great wondering.
in the great Wonder: for which cause we will proceed, and not look upon this
world, but esteem that which is to come greater than all.

2. Our writing also will serve in its due time, when the The blossom of the
sweet smelling Purity.
Lilly-Rose shall blossom: for in these [writings] there is many a Noble
Rose-Bud, which at present (because of the great darkness in Babell) cannot be
known: but there is a time, wherein it shall Or, be known.
stand according to its Spirit.

3. Now if we here discover the Antichrist, the Devil ( Or, by.
in his Beast) will mightily resist us, and cry out upon us, as if we would
stir up [sedition] tumults and uproares; but that is not true: do but
earnestly consider what a Christian is: it belongs not to him to make
uproares, for he is a sheep, in the midst among Wolves: and must be in the
form and mind of a sheep, and not of a Wolf.

4. Though indeed the Spirit of God (in zeal and in the great might of the
Father) armeth many in the fierceness [or wrath], as may be seen by Elias:
where sometimes the sword of the wrath of God is given to the Angel, for the
slaying of Baals Priests in Babell by Elias: Also, where Moses Brake the
Tables, and imployeth the sword against the sin of the worshippers of the
Calfe: which neither Moses does, nor Elias; but the fire of the wrath of God,
by Elias, on the Mount.

5. Now when God the Lord had pronounced Adam and Eves sentence, about their
Earthly misery, labor, cares, and hard burden, which they must bear: and
[that he had confirmed them] husband and wife: and also bound them in the Oath
of Wedlock, to keep together as one [onely] body, and to love and help one
another, as the Members of one [and the same] body; they were then wholly
naked, they stood and were ashamed of their earthly Image, and especially, of
the Members of their Or, privities.
shame: also [they were ashamed] of the The dung.
excrement of the earthly food of their bodies; for they saw that they had a
Beastiall condition, according to the outward body with all its substance; also
heat and cold fell upon them: and the chaste Image of God was Or, lost.
extinct: and now they must propagate after a Beastiall manner.

6. And then God the Lord, (through the Spirit of this world made them clothes
of the skins of Beasts, and put those on them (through the Spirit of this
world:) that they might see, that (according to this [outward] world,) they
were Beasts; and [he] taught them how they should seek the wonders, (in the
Spirit of this world,) and manifest them, and cloth themselves out of the
wonders.

7. And here it may be seen very perfectly, that Man in this world, is not at
home, but he is come into it as a Guest, and has not brought the clothes of
this world with him (as all other creatures, that are at home therein, do;)
but must borrow clothing from the Or, from the creatures of the four Elements.
children of the Stars and Elements, and must cover himself with strange
cloaching, which he brought not along with him when he entered into the Spirit
of this world; with which he strutteth it like a proud Bride: and shows
himself, supposing that he is very fine and brave in it: and yet it is but
borrowed from the Spirit of this world, which in its due time takes it away
again, and lends it him but for a while, and then consumes it again.

8. And this is done to the end (because the Spirit of this world continually
seeks the Noble virgin of the Divine Wisdom, and knows that she is in
Man,) that Man should seek the great wonders (that are in The Spirit of this
world.
it) and bring them to light: The Spirit of this world.
It still supposes, that it shall through Man, bring the noble Tincture to
light, that the Paradise might appear, and that The Spirit of this world.
it might be freed from vanity.

9. For the holy Element continually Or, labors.
longs [or groaneth] through the four Elements, to be released from the
vanity, of the four Elements; in like manner also the qualifying [or
influence] of the grimme [constellations or] Stars [laboureth:] and therefore
it drives man to seek such wonderful forms [or wayes] that the Eternal
wonders of God might be Or, discovers.
manifested, which (in the breaking of the world) shall stand all (in the
Figure of the world.
figure) in the shadow.

10. Therefore all Arts and Sciences [or Trades] are (through the Starry Spirit
of this world) from God, Or, brought to light.
manifested in Man, that they may appear in wonders: and to that end God
created this world, that his wonders might be made Or, known.
manifest: and therefore God permitted, that Man is entered into the Spirit of
this world, that he might manifest his wonders through him. Yet he desires
also that Man.
he should not misuse this world, but that he should go again out of this
world into him: he desires that Man should be where he is. And therefore he
instantly showed Adam and Eve their monstrous form, by the The clothing of
the skins of Beasts.
Beast all clothing which he put on them, per spiritum majoris mundi, [by the
Spirit of the great world].

11. But now if Adam had continued in Paradise, he should have been able to
manifest the wonders much better, for they should have been much nearer to the
form of Angels, and such great sins and abominations had not been brought to
effect with Many Arts, and Sciences or Trades.
many, as is usually done now.

12. But the Spirit of the Grimnesse [or f^ercenesse] (in the Eternal source
[or working property]) would also be manifested, and open its wonders: of which
^uch may not be written, for it is a Mysterium [mystery or hidden secret] that
belongs not to us to open, though indeed we have the knowledge of it: let it
stay till the time of the Lilly; wherein then the Rose will blossom, and then
the Thorns (in Babell) will not prick us.

13. When the Or, snares of the Hunter.
chains of the Driver are broken, and the Thorny-Bush is burnt, then one may
go more safely by the Thorns of the Burner; and then this Mysterium [or
hidden secret] may well stand in the light: for it is great and wonderful: and
reaches into the Gate of the Father.

14. The Rose-branch in the wonders, will understand us well: but Babell is not
worthy of it: she seeks nothing but the Thorns, and loves to strike with
them; therefore we will give the Hunter or oppressor.
Driver no cause [to do so]: but rather Or, reserve these mysteries.
let these Mysteries stand, for the children of the Lilly Rose: they are Or,
understanding.
wise, and have the Noble Tincture Or, in their knowledge.
in the light, the luster of the Driver, will be no more so esteemed, for the
Guests of this world have that [Government] in hand.

15. Thy proud Horse [or Beast] (thou shameful Whore) shall ride no longer
alone, over the bended knees; in that time it will no more be said, The power
[might or Authority] sticks in my Chist of money: that Mineral [or Metall]
becomes a blossom in the light: and the Tincture stands in the blossom of
the Lilly: stones are of as much worth [as that metal is:] Or, the humility
of the Divine Wisdom.
the clothing of the virgin is brighter than thy pride: how finely does the
ornament of this world stand on modesty and the fear of God, if the heart be
humble? How do thy silken and golden clothes adorn thee? Do thou not
appear in Gods deeds of Wonder? Who will call thee a false Woman, if thou
be so very chaste? Do thou not stand to the honor of the Great God? Art
thou not his work of Wonder? Is there not a friendly Mirth or cheerfulness.
laughter before thee? Who can say that thou art a wrathful Woman? Thy modest
countenance shines over High and low.
mountains and valleys: Art thou not at the end of the world, and [will not]
thy Glance [or lustre] be espied in Paradise? Wherefore stands thy Mother in
Or, in confused jangling.
Babell, and is so very malicious? O! thou shameful Whore; Get thee out (for
Babell is With wrath, or with the devouring sword.
on fire) or else thou will be burnt thy self.

16. Or do thou suppose that we are mad? If we did not see thee, we would
be silent: thou boastest now, (by thy flatterers;) of a Golden Time: but they
are most of them Wolves of Babell: when the Day breaks, then they will be
known. Or should I not tell thee this, thou proud Whore? Behold, when thou
with Adam and Eve wentest out of Paradise into the Spirit of this world, then
thou were as a God in the Spirit of this world: thou might seek all
Mysteries, and use them for thy Ornament: If thou had always gone clothed
in silk and purple [or scarlet] yet thou had not [thereby] offended God:
but thou had gone [in them] to the honor of the Great God in his Deeds of
Wonder; Wherefore have thou forsaken the Or, God and Goodness.
Love, and art become a Murderer? Was not covetousness thy sin, in that
thou affordest not thy Members so much as thy self? thou desire to be only
fine thy self alone: thy way only Or, must.
should be holy; Wherefore was the fratricide between Abel and Cain? The
selfe-honouring pride brought it about, so that Cain envied Abels Honesty.
uprightness (for the sake of which he was so much beloved of God;) wherefore
was not Cain also humble and pious?

17. Will thou say, the Devil beguiled him? Yes indeed, and he beguileth thee
too, so that thou enviest the comeliness and beauty of others: Has God made
thee a degree higher? are thou not a child of Eve? Prithee tell me the truth;
art thou not the Antichrist, which under a cloak [of being counted the
Minister and servant of God] ridest upon the Devils Horse? Me thinks I see
thee. Hearken! When thou wentest out of Paradise into this world, wherefore
did thou not continue in one [onely] Love? Wherefore did thou not rejoice
in thy Neighbor? Wherefore did thou not love the members of thy body? Why
do thou not adorn thy brother with thy ornament? Did thou not see him
plainly? Was not the Earth thy own? thou might have made what thou would
of it: who did hinder thee in it? Why did thou not eat with thy Brother?
thou might have had fully enough; there would never have been any want: if
thy humility toward thy brother had continued, then his also had continued
toward thee: and then what a fine habitation and dwelling had there been upon
Earth? what need had there been for thee to have coined silver and gold, if
unity had continued? thou might have made thy ornaments of it well enough:
if thou had adorned thy Brother and Sister, then they would have adorned
thee again (with their ready serviceable Love:) do thou think it had been a
sin, if thou had gone in pure silk and gold, for the benefit of thy
Brother, and to the honor of the Great God?

18. O thou blind Babell! I must tell thee, how thou becamest thus mad; thou
have suffered thy self to be possessed by the Region of the Stars, and to be
lead by the abominable Devil, and art become a perjured [or forsworne] whore
to God: and nevertheless, thou have built thy self a Kingdom upon Earth: as
The Stars order their government.
they lead their Region, thou leadest thine: as they generate by the Elements,
and consume it again, so do thou with thy children also: thou generatest
them and killest them again: thou make war: and art a murderer for thy
pride and covetousness sake, so that thou have no room at all upon the Earth.

19. Do thou suppose that God takes pleasure in it? Yes Sir, the Spirit of
the Great World is pleased with it; and through that Spirit the fierce anger of
God [is also pleased], because they qualify [or mingle] one with another, and
out of one and the same root.

20. Do thou suppose that all the Prophets have spoken from the pleasant
kind love of God, from the Heart of God, when they said to the Kings of
Israel; Enter into Battle, thou shall overcome, God shall give you victory?
Indeed they spoke from God, but from his fierce wrath against sins, through
the Spirit of the Great World, which would devour again what it has made,
because the Love was extinguished.

21. Or do thou suppose that God sent Moses, to slay the Kings of the
Heathens in the Promised Land, and that he is so well pleased with murtherings?
No friend, look under the veil of Moses, and thou shall find it clean
otherwise.

22. Why did God keep Israel forty years in the Wilderness, and fed them with
With Manna.
Heavenly Bread? that they should be a people, full of love, such as love one
another, and should depend on God in one Love; and therefore he gave their
Laws brightness [or clarity] to see if they could live in the Love of the
Father, and then he would have sent them among the Heathens, to turn them with
their wonders; as was done at the time of the Apostles: and in that he fed them
from the Heaven, and that none of them (which gathered much or little) had any
want; thereby they ought to have known, that the Kingdom [the power and all]
is Gods, and that they were in him: they ought to have left their
covetousness, and to converse among one another with brotherly Love, none
ought to look after covetousness: because he horribly punished Covetousnes.
it.

23. Also when the Heathens should hear, that God would send this People
(which he had brought out of Egypt with great Wonders [or Miracles]) among them
to destroy them, that they should turn to God, and depart from covetousness,
and enter into brotherly love: therefore he gave The Heathens.
them a long time of respite; as also to Israel (whom he fed from Heaven) for
an Example, that one people should be an Example to the other, that there is a
God that is Almighty. But they being earthly both of them, and only evil,
and being they did live in the Fathers fierce anger, therefore the anger and
severity of God lusted also to devour them, because they continually kindled
His wrath.
it.

24. Therefore he said to Joshua, Pass over Jordan, and destroy that people:
and leave none of them among you, that you be not polluted. This (saying of
his) proceeded not out of his Love, when he did bid him to kill the Heathens:
as also the Prophets did not all speak from his Love, but from his Anger, which
was awakened by the wickedness of Man; so also he speaks many times through
the Spirit of the Prophets in the Great World (in the Prophets and in Moses) in
the fire, or in other terrors in an angry Zeal.

25. And should we therefore say that God is well pleased with anger and
strife? No: the Prophets complained often (in the Holy Ghost [or Spirit] of
God) that this evil people offended their God, when they moved him to anger,
so that accordingly his severe wrath went forth and devoured them. David says
in the fifth Psalm: Thou art not a God that art pleased with wicked ways.

26. Now if Man awaken sin, then the fierce anger [or severity] of God is
stirred in himself ( viz. in Man) which otherwise (if Man did stand in
humility) would rest and be turned into great Joy, as was often mentioned
before: But now when he burns [in wrath] then one people devoureth the other,
and one sin destroys another; if Israel had been Honest virtuous, or had
feared the Lord.
upright, they had not been put to make war, but they should have entered in
with Wonders, and have converted the People, Moses should have lead them into
the [promised Land] with his [Miracles] or Deeds of Wonder: but because they
were wicked, they could not enter in (with the brightness of Moses; with deeds
of wonder, in the luster [or glance] of the Father) to convert the Heathens:
but Moses (with his deeds of wonder) must stay in the Wlldernesse: and the
whole People was consumed and devoured in the wrath: and Joshua must war with
the Heathens, and destroy them, for one Or, one sin.
wrath devoured the other.

27. Whereas Joshua was an Image and similitude, that Israel (because they
could not subsist in the Fathers clarity and love) should be led by the second
Joshua (or Jesus) out of the wrath into the Love, through the breaking of his
body, and entering into Death. Moses must enter through Death into life, and
bring his clarity, through Death into life: even as he appeared with Elias, on
mount Thabor, to the second Joshua (or Jesus), in the claritie of the Father,
and showed him the pleasure of the Father, [viz.] that he (the second Joshua)
should bring Israel (through his Death and clarity) into the Promised Land of
Paradise.

28. Yet it could not be (how vigorously soever it was sought after) that Man
(in his own power) could enter into Paradise: and therefore poor captive Man
must sit in this world in the Devils murdering Den: where now the Devil
has built his Chapel close by the Christian Church, and has quite destroyed
the love of Paradise, and has in the stead thereof set up mere covetous proud
selfe-willed [or selfe-conceited] faithless, sturdy, malicious Blasphemers,
Thieves and Murderers, which lift themselves up against Heaven and Paradise,
and have built themselves a Kingdom (according to the Dominion of the fierce
four [Starres or] Constellations,) wherein they domineere (with silver and
gold, and consume the sweat one of another, whosoever is but able, oppresses
the other to the ground. And though he fly before him, yet then he only
puts forth his Dragons tongue, and spitteth fire upon him: he terrifieth him
with his harsh voice, and plagueth him day and night.

29. What can be said of thee O Cain? do thou suppose that God does not see
thee? Thou Monstrous Beast, thou shall stand naked, as the Spirit in the
Wonders does signify, that thy Ornament may be made known. How art thou
become thus? O Eve! are not all, thy children which thou have brought forth?
all come out of thy loins. Was it then the purpose of God that the evil
should domineere among the Good, and one plague another?

30. O no: But the Devil who is a cause of the From the grimme wrath the
Devil or Weeds or Tares are sown among the Wheat.
wrathfulnesse. Adam was made good out of the pure Element: but the longing
[desire or lust] of the Devil deceived him, so that he went into the Spirit of
this world.

31. And now it cannot be otherwise, the two Kingdoms wrestle one with another
in the children of Men; the one is the Kingdom of Christ, [Generated] through
the New Birth into Paradise: that (in this world) is miserable amd contemned,
there are not many that desire it, for it has mere scorn and contempt from
the Devil and his followers: it consists in righteousness and truth: and
that is not valued in this world: and therefore it must lie at the Rich Man's
door with poor Lazarus, and at his feet: if any do but let it appear that
they are the child of God, then the Devil will away with them presently: or
else will put them to such scorn and disgrace, that they cannot be known;
that so the Devil may continue to be the Great Prince upon Earth, and that the
world may not learn to know him.

32. The other Kingdom is that of Antichrist, with a Golden [Splendour or]
Glance, Prancing in state, Glittering on every side: every one says, it is a
happy thing: for it adorneth it self most sumptuously, and sets its seat
over the Hills and Mountains: every one saluteth it: [or does it reverence:]
it draws the Tincture of the Earth to it self, that it may glister alone: it
bereaveth the Kingdom of Christ of its temporal [food, livelihood, or] bread,
it devoureth the sweat of the needy: and says to him, You are mine, I am your
God, I will set you where I please: you are the dog that lies at my feet:
If I had a mind to it, I could hunt you out of my house: you must do what I
will; and the needy Worm must say, I am your poor servant, do but spare my
life; and if he squeeze out the sweat of his brows, so that it smarteth,
(which his Lord, or Superior.
Master consumes [or spendeth]) then he grows impatient with his Master, and
curses him, and seeks out ways of lying and deceit, and by what way he
might make his heavy burden lighter.

33. And then if he find his Master so unjust, he rises up against him, and
takes away his Or, false.
unrighteous Bread, which he thinks to eat under a soft yoke, and Or,
plagueth.
worrieth him to the uttermost, and leaves him no time to escape; but sticks
full of impatience under that heavy burden: he grumbleth and ^^aundereth, and
seeks all evil devices to ease his yoke, that he might eat his bread in
quietness, and yet it will not be, the Driver [Hunter, cruel Tyrant his
^aster] is behind him, and takes away his bread, and feeds him with sorrow
under his yoke.

34. And then he studieth cunning and deceit, and casts about, [to finde]
which way he may by shifts and tricks fill his belly and live: he curses his
Master secretly, and though he steal away closely by some slight the bread of
another needy Man, yet that must be right [with him]: and his Master does not
regard it, so he eat not of his cost, and so that he continue to be his dog
under his yoke. Thus the Master [Lord or Superiour] is unrighteous and Evil
or false.
wicked, and makes also that his servant is unrighteous and Evil or false.
wicked: whereas otherwise (if he might eat his bread under an easy yoke) he
would not be so cursed and cunning in Theevery.

35. But what will the Spirit of this Kingdom say? Art thou not shining in
Bravery? Have thou not taken possession of all? Have thou not the Earth in
possession freely as God gave it thee? Do thou not right? Do thou not
punish the wicked, and look to it, where the enemy breaks it? Do thou
not defend thy Country? Are thou not a light to the blind, and appointest
Teachers for them, which Or, Exhort.
drive them to patience? The Kingdom is thine indeed, thou have purchased it,
the poor is thy servant indeed, that [in thy opinion] cannot fail, [but be
right].

36. But the Divine Answer in the Light of Nature says to me; Behold, out of
what art thou grown? Have I planted thee? art thou not grown in my wild
Garden? When Adam went into the wild Garden, there he Grifted or inoculated.
planted thee, how art thou grown so great? who has given thee virtue [or
sappe] thou wild Tree? My Love never stirred thee up, all thy branches are
wild, and thy fruit is wild; Do thou think that my soul lusts after thy
food? I will not eat of thy fruit; I am strong, and the Kingdom is mine, he
that comes under my Or, fatness.
wings, I will shelter him, no storm can touch him: moreover, the Country is
mine: I have left it to you, to be used in unanimous Love: and have set you out
of one [and the same] root, that you should be alike, and love one another,
and prevent one another in chaste Love.

37. Thou wild Beast, how come thou so great and strong? Have thou not
trampled in my Garden of Roses, and there made thee a Goutch? Where are thy
Brothers and Sisters? Haw comes it to pass, that they lie at thy feet? and
that they are so lean, and thou only art strong [and lusty]? Have thou not
devoured my Branches, and brought forth young Wolves, which devour thy Kine,
Calves, Sheep, Lambs, etc.
Cattle also? and thou art a Beast with thy young ones: should I suffer thee in
my Garden of Roses? Where is the Noble fruit which I did sow? Have you not
turned them all into wild branches? And where now shall I seek for the fruit
and profit of my Garden of Roses? And my soul would feign eat of the Good
fruit: but thou have trampled all underfoote, an^ ^ade it a den of Murder.

38. Besides, I hear a great howling, and lamentation, that all thy servants
cry woe over thee, because thou plaguest them: and moreover, thou have shed my
Noble seed, and not sown it, but [thou have sowen] thy wild [seede] for [the
promoting of] thy great devouring and pomp; behold, I have spewed thee out
toward Babell in the Press of my fierce wrath, and there I will press thee:
and I will plant my Lilly-Branch in my Garden of Roses, which brings me
forth fruit, after which my soul lusts, of which my sick Adam shall eat,
that he may be strong, and may go into Paradise.

Of the Thrusting Adam and Eve out of the Paradise, of the Garden in Eden.
39. And when God had thus provided Adam and Eve a Beastiall Garment, to cover
their shame, and to defend them against the cold: then he let them out of the
Garden, and set the Cherubine with a naked Or, warning flaming sword
two edged sword before it, to keep the way to the Tree of Life, and he [Man]
must now till the Ground. But the understanding of us poor children of Adam
and Eve is Darkened, chilled, shut up, or frozen so hard.
sunk so much, that at our last old age, we scarce reach [the understanding
of] any thing concerning the lamentable Fall of Adam and Eve: Seeing we must
seek very deep for it in the Center of the Light of Life* for it is very
wonderful which Moses says, God s^t the Cherubine before the Garden, to keep
and guard the way to the Tree of Life. Who could understand it? If God did not
open our eyes, we should speak simply of a keeper with a sword: and Reason
sees nothing else.

40. But the Noble virgin shows us the Door, [and] how we must enter again
into Paradise, through the sharpness of the sword: yet the sword cutteth the
Earthly Body clean away from the Holy Element: and then the New Man may enter
into Paradise by the way of Life. And the sword is nothing else, but the
Kingdom or Gate of the f^ercenesse in the anger of God, where Man must press
in, through the f^erce [bitter] Death, through the Center, into the second
Principle, into the Paradise of the holy Element before God; where then the
fierce [grimme] Death, cutteth off the Earthly Body ( viz. the four Elements)
from the holy [one] Element.

41. And the keeper of the Garden, is the Cherubine, the cutter off of the
source [or quality] of the Stars, which holds the four Elements for a
while, and then breaks them, and with its bitter sharpness severeth them
from the soul, and passes away it self also with its sword: this [keeper] is
here in the way, that we cannot come to the Tree of the Eternal Life, he is
in the midst, and suffers us not to come into Paradise: the gross Garden
of Eden (which is our Earthly Flesh) is the hedge [or fortification] before the
Garden.

42. Now if any body would come into the Garden, he must press in through the
sword of Death; though indeed Christ has broken the sword, so that now we can
much easier enter in with our souls; yet there is a sword before it still: but
he that finds the way aright, him it does not cut very much: for it is blunt,
and it is bent; and if the soul go but into the Gate, into the Center, then
it is presently helped by the Noble Champion Christ; for he has gotten the
sword into his Into his power or jurisdiction.
hands: he is the slain Lamb of the House of Israel, in the Revelation of
John; which took the Book of the Shut, barred, or closed.
first Principle, out of the hand of the Ancient [of Dayes] who sat upon the
Throne, with his four and twenty Elders (which [Book] had seven seals, or
seven Spirits of the Generation or operation.
Birth of God) and opened them: where the Elders fell down before him, and
worshipped the Lamb that was slain: and gave praise and honor to him which
sat upon the Throne, because the Champion of the House of Israel had overcome.
The seven Golden Candlesticks are his Humanity, the seven Stars are his
Deity, as the Divine Working or revelation.
Birth in it self stands in a sevenfold form, as it is expounded in the
beginning of this Book, in the first four Chapters.

43. Thus Moses has a veil before his eyes: and if thou would see his face,
then thou must only set Christ thy Champion before thee, that he may lift up
his veil, and then thou shall see, that Moses has (...) Law.
no Horns, but that he is a patient Lamb, fast bound to the Death of Christ:
and that his veil was the Book that was shut so that we could not be well
enough, till the Champion came, and brake its seven seals with his entering
into Death: and there the veil [or covering] was done away: and in that Book
there stood the holy Evangelium.
Gospel of the Kingdom of God, which our worthy Conqueror Jesus Christ has
Instead of the Law, or read or declared it to us.
left us.

44. Now when Adam and Eve went out of the Garden, they kept together, as now
married People do, and now would make trial of their beastiall condition, [to
trie] what wonders might proceed from them: and the Spirit of the great world
did well enough teach them, in their Reason, what they were to do. And Adam
knew his wife Eve, and she conceived and bare a son, and called him Cain:
for she said, I have a Man from the Lord; These are sealed words which Moses
writes, that she said, I have a Man from the Lord: ([for] then said the The
great world, or Macrocosme.
Major Mundus, I have the Lord,) of this world. Eve spoke no otherwise, than as
the Apostles thought, that Christ was to erect a worldly Kingdom: so Eve
thought that her son (as a strong Champion) should break the Head of the
Devil, and set up a Glorious Kingdom: from whence instantly a twofold
understanding [or different conditions) followed, and two sorts of Churches:
the one [built or relying] upon the mercy of God; and the other, upon their own
might; [authority or power]; and therefore Cain could not endure his brother,
because Abel pressed hard upon the mercy of God, and Cain [relyed] upon his own
power [might and authority]. He thought himself to be the Lord of the whole
world, as his Mother had instructed him: and therefore now he would break the
Head of the Serpent in his own might as a Warrior [or Souldier] and began with
his brother Abel, for his Faith relied not on God, but on his own power; and
here the Serpent did sting the Treader upon the Serpent in the Heel the first
time.

The Gate of the Mysteries [or the Exposition of the hidden secrets.]
45. Reason says how might that come to pass, that the first Man borne of a
Woman was [so evill] a malicious Murderer? Behold, thou immodest vile whorish
world, here thou shall find a Glass, behold thy self [and see] what thou
art. Here again the great secrets meet us, in the light of Nature, very
clearly and plainly to be understood. For Adam and Eve were entered into the
Spirit of this world, and the Region of the four Stars, with the infection
of the Devil, had miserably possessed them: and although they did somewhat
stick to the word of the promise, yet the true longing and love toward God was
very much extinguished, and on the contrary, the longing and desire after this
world, was kindled in them, and besides, they gat (from the Region of the
Stars) a Beastiall lust [or wanton desire] toward one another, so that their
Tincture thus became a fierce beastiall [lust or] longing: for they had no Law
but the Light of Nature, which they suppressed, and kindled themselves in
wanton [lust], to which the Devil helped them.

46. And now when Eve Nor began to be conceived with child.
was impregnated, her Tincture was wholly murtherous and false, for her Spirit
in the Love, looked not upon God with a total trust and confidence: Also the
wisdom of God stood hidden in the Center of the light of her life: Eve did not
Or, incline.
unite [or yield her selfe] to it with love and confidence, but much rather to
the lust of this world: she must bring it to pass, if any thing were to be
done: and being her Trust was not in God, so also God was not in her, but in
his own Center [or Principle]: and the wrath began to flow forth [boyle or
worke]; and this is that which Christ said, An evil Tree brings forth evil
fruit, and so out of a false Tincture grew a sour evil root, and
consequently such a Tree and fruit. Also that which goes forth [is] as the
Tincture in the Or, Copulation.
mixture was, and such a child is generated, for the Spirit of the life,
generateth it self out of the Essences.

47. And seeing Adam was gone out of Paradise into the Spirit of this world,
therefore now the strife was already between the two Kingdoms ( viz. the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of Hell) about the children of Eve: and
here it is seen that the wrath had the victory; and the Spirit of God
complains, not without cause; [saying]; I am as a Grape-gatherer that
gleaneth, and yet would feign eat of the best fruit.

48. But the fault lies in Man; if he did put his Trust in the love of God,
then the Kingdom of God would have the victory: but if he put it in his evil
lust and wantonness, in himself in his own ability [or power] then he is
captivated by the wrath, and his body and soul is in the wrath. But when he
puts his mind and confidence in God, then he goes out from the wrath, and
the Kingdom of God works (in him) to righteousness: and thus it is seen as
clear as the Sun, what the cause is, that the first Man borne of a Woman
became a murderer.

49. For as the Tree was, so was the fruit: and though the Tree was not wholly
evil [or false]: yet as to the Or, incarnation.
becoming Man, the Tincture (by the wrestling Or, Kingdoms.
of the two Regions) became false [or evill[. And besides, afterward Eve (his
Mother) helped Cain.
him forward very much, because she sought after an Earthly Lord and Treader
upon the Serpent, and instructed him, [telling him] that he was the Warrior
[or Soldier to overcome] against the Devil, he must do it; and so the wrath
held him captive, and his offering [or sacrifice] was not acceptable to God,
because (in wrath) he built upon himself, and so his Prayer reached not the
Gate of Heaven, but the The Hunter the Devil.
Driver did take it up, because it proceeded out of selfe-pride (like the proud
Pharisee) out of an [evill or] false mind.

50. And In Eve's fruit.
here (thou lascivious Whore in Babell, full of immodesty and lechery in such
whoredom) thou have a Gloss, in thy [evill or] false Copulation without the
fear of God: thou should look [well to it] what thou sowest, that there
grow not a Tree in Hell fire. Thou supposest that it is a small matter to
commit whoredom: But I pray consider thy self, whither do thou send thy
Tincture? Which (if it be true [or faithfull]) reaches the Element of God: and
now if you power it forth thus, in such a false [or evill] way (in the
impulsion of the Region of the Stars, with the infection of the Devil), and
also into such an unclean vessel, what do thou suppose shall accept it?
Do thou not know that the Tincture in the seed is a blossom of the life
which qualifieth [or mingleth] with thy body and soul? Which (as often as it
is generated) is a figure before God: how do thou think, whether does it
stand in th love or anger of God?

51. O thou Babylonish Whore, when thou thus committest whordome, and Or,
destroyest.
breakest afterward the Limbus, together with the Matrix (wherein the figure
of the Image of God stands,) only for thy filthy lechery sake; What do
thou think, how shall this figure appear? seeing all (whatsoever is generated
at any time out of the Tincture) shall after the breaking of this world, stand
before God: and will not these figures appear in the anger of God? Or have
thou an Absolution for that which thou sowest in Hell? Look to it that this
figure does not qualify [or mingle] with thy body and soul; for the Tincture
[then] is not yet become a Spirit: it reaches thy self: if thou art not
newborn (through the blood of Christ), then thou must bath [swimme or
swelter] therein Eternally; It Is not I that say this, but the High Spirit in
the bosom of the Virgin.

52. Therefore consider thy self: and say not, I stand in the dark, and Or,
play a trick of youth.
exercise Love, none sees it: thou stand before the clear countenance of
God: also thou stand before the Abyss of Hell, before the Council of all
Devils, who mock at thee; and besides, thou have an evil [false] or
unfaithful Love, and it is no other than a [wanton] Lechery; if The Love.
it were faithful, thou would not defile thy brother or sister: both of you
miserably defile the Image of God: and are the worst enemies one of another:
you cast one another into the Devils murdering Den, and are in the
wrestling; but the Devil tickleth you, and stroweth Sugar, that he may catch
you and bind you fast: and then he leads you Or, into the world.
to Jericho, and scourges [woundeth] and plagueth you sufficiently.

53. And then when the poor soul shall travail [home] there are great
Mountains in its way: and then thy fair Tincture will appear before the
[holy] Element like a defiled cloth; and there stands the Devil and reads
the Or, the sentence of the Law concerning it.
Law to you about it: and then the poor soul quaketh, and begins to doubt:
and when it is to break through the bitter Gate [of the Cherubine], then it
continually fears that the fierce anger of God shall seize upon it [as upon
hellish Brimstone] and kindle it; as it comes to pass for certain, if it be
not borne anew in Christ, through earnest repentance.

54. Therefore O Man, consider; what thou sowest here, that thou shall reap;
take an Example in Cain. Or do thou suppose, that it is an invented Fable?
[which I here write] do but ask thy own mind, that will convince thee:
except thou art too much captivated by the Devil: behold the horrible
punishments from the anger of God, since the beginning of the world: the Flood
[or Deluge] was a punishment for the unchastity, [or uncleannesse], whereby God
would drown the Mother or Root.
Matrix of the burning lust of lechery: and therefore he punished the World
with Water; for the Water is the Mother or Root.
Matrix of all things.

55. Therefore God established the state of wedlock with Adam and Eve, and
bound it fast with a strong chain, in that he said; A Man shall leave Father
and Mother, and cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. And God
tolerateth their Or, their burning unchastity.
lust, because it is to be bound with faithful chaste Love, as one body, Or, in.
and its members: and must aim (in the fear of God) at the getting of
children: or else the wantonness [or lust] in it self, (without that true
love, of the state of wedlock) is Or, every way
continually a Beastiall lust, [infection] and sin: and if you, (in the state
of wedlock,) seek nothing, but the lust and lechery, then in such a condition,
thou art not a jot better than a Beast: and do but consider it rightly, that
without this, thou stand [already] in a Beastiall Birth [or Generation]
(contrary to the first Creation) like all Beasts. For the holy Man in Adam, was
not fore-appointed to have propagated so, but in great modest Love, out of
himself.

56. Therefore O Man look to it! [have a care] how you use the beastiall lust:
it is (in it self) an abomination before God, whither it be in the state of
wedlock, or out of it; But the right love and fidelity [or faithfulnesse] (in
the fear of God) covers it, before the countenance of God: and (through the
Son of the Virgin) it is Regenerated to be a pure undefiled creature again,
in the Faith, if thy confidence be in God.

57. But for the Whores and Rogues (who run a whoring without marrying in
lustful lechery) we have no other Language for them Then that which is
mentioned a little before.
: neither can we find any otherwise in the Light of Nature, than that it is
an abomination [or loathing] in the anger of God: and if earnest Repentance
(with Mary Magdalen) be not there performed in the Regeneration [then we find
nothing else but] the anger of God and Hellfire, to be their wages, Amen.

Of the innocent and righteous Abel. The Gate of the Christian Church.
58. Seeing then that Adam and Eve, had yielded themselves to the Spirit of
this world, and did live in two [Kingdomes] ( viz. in the holy Element before
God; and also in the Out-Birth [viz.] the four Elements, which reaches that
which is most outward, [viz.] the Kingdom of the [soure, fierce] grimnesse) so
there were also two sorts of children generated out of them; viz. one a Mocker
[or scorner] and another a plain honest Man; as is sufficiently to be seen by
Isaac and Ishmael [the sons of] Abraham; also by Jacob and Esau.

59. And although the Church in Babell will prattle much here, about the
Election from the purpose of God: and yet has as little knowledge thereof as
the Babylonish Tower (whose top should reach to Heaven) [had] of God. As if it
were not possible that a child could go out of the Anger into the Love of
God, whereas the Love in the breaking of the Anger does Or, imperfection.
fully appear [or shine forth]: and it is for want of repentance: that Man
suffers himself to be held by the Devil.

60. And the hardening is not so wholly in the Birth, that the soul (from the
Mothers womb) should be quite dead to God, or that God did not desire it. The
anger is in the flowing [working or boyling] of the Father, and the Father is
God indeed, and generateth his dear Heart and Love (in the breaking of the
Gate in the Habitation) out of himself: should he then be at odds with
himself, because his anger is under the root of his Love? Should he be at
Enmity against himself? his Anger is his Strength and Omnipotence [or
Allmightinesse], and Consuming fire: and his heart in the Love, is his Or, hum
lity.
meekness; and so now, that which approaches and enters into his Anger, is
captivated in the Anger.

61. But it is possible to go out from the Anger; as his dear heart is
generated out of the Anger; which [cooleth, pacifieth, or] stilleth the Anger:
and is rightly called the Paradise, or the Kingdom of Heaven. And his Anger is
not known in the Heaven: and so there also; his Election goes always over
the children of Love, which belong to the Kingdom of Heaven; and St Paul
speaks no otherwise of his Election: but means [it of] them that draw near
to him, and enter into his Covenant, and give up themselves to him: and these
the Father draws with the Holy Ghost, through the Death of Christ into the
pure Element [that is] before the Father: Isa 44.2. Fear not thou [O] my
servant Jacob, and thou Honest, sincere, obedient, faithful one.
upright [one] whom I have chosen.

62. But that God (out of his purpose) should harden the will of any, and make
it dark, that is not true; the Spirit of God is withdrawn from the wicked,
who only wrestle for the might [or power] of the fire, for he himself goes
out from God, and desires not [to enjoy] God. God withdraws himself from
none: Man has a free will, he may lay hold on what he will: but he is held by
two (by Heaven and by Hell) to which he yields, he is in that.

63. Cain was not rejected in the Mothers womb [or body,] though it be plain,
that God does not love such a false [or evill] seed, yet it stands free, it
may press into the Love, or into the Anger, and Or, both will receive it.
the one as well as the other, will receive it, as Paul also says; To whom you
yield your selves servants in obedience, his servants you are, whom you obey;
whether it be i^ the obedience of God to righteousness, or of sin unto Death.

64. Now God have no malicious soul [to be] in the Love but in the Anger: and
he is the Or, knower of the hearts.
Searcher of the Hearts, and knows well what is in Man, and what he will do
(even wh^le [Man] is in the seed) and will not cast the Pearl before swine;
and yet the false [or evill] seed is not [come] out of his will and purpose,
else he must also have willed the Devil [to be a Devil.)

65. And know you not that the band of the Eternity stands free, and makes
it self? but that which inclines to him is also Or, borne of God.
generated in God. And yet the Love presses not into the Anger; As the light
is generated out of the burning of the fire, and is free from the fire.
but the Love is generated out of the Anger, and is wholly free; and therefore
the Heart of God in the Love, is As the light is another thing than the fire.
another Person than the Father, and the As the Air goes forth from the fire
and the light.
issue [or going forth from them] is the Holy Ghost, who goes not [back]
again into the Anger.

66. Then wherefore does not the soul of Man go also [therewith] out of the
Anger into the Love, and so it should be generated [to be] another creature in
the Love? Saint Paul says; Whom he has foreseen, those he has sanctified,
that they may be like his Image; the foreseeing; is in his Election: he always
electeth [or chooseth] his Sheep. Those who come to him, he assures them the
Eternal Life. But that he hardens (those that desire Sincerely, or
unfeinedly.
earnestly to come to him) and will not foresee [Predestinate or elect them]
that is not so. His will is to help all Men: and Christ himself says: Come
ye all to me that are weary and heavy laden, (here it is, those that are
laden with sins) I will refresh you; that is, certainly, foresee [or Elect]
and draw [them] to me: and there wants but to Come.

67. What is it now, that lies in the way of the wicked, that he cannot come?
It is the Angry-Sword of the Angel (or Cherubine) which he will not break, the
fair, glistering, hypocritical, dainty world in his bosom [malice or
wickednesse] in flesh and blood, pleases him too well: he will not break his
mind, which yet he is able to do: and if he do break it, then he is drawn
of God (by Christ) to the Father: and instantly is chosen to [be] a child of
God: and out of the Image of the Serpent there comes [to be] the Image of an
Angel.

68. For so long as the Image stands in the Anger, it is the Image of the
Serpent; but if it go forth [from the lust of sin, or desire of evill], into
the breaking [or destroying thereof] then a Heavenly Image is figured (by the
Treader upon the Serpent); and The Evil is overcome with Good.
the Serpents Head is broken; the two Kingdoms fight [or wrestle] one with
another, and that which overcomes figureth the Image.

69. Whereby it is seen, how great the Anger was in Adam and Eve, in that the
wrathful Kingdom sooner overcame, than the Kingdom of Heaven: and the
scorner is sooner generated than the Honest or Innocent.
upright. But yet the fault of this was in the Parents: had they not sinned,
and let the Anger into them, then it had not been so, as at this Day.

70. Although indeed, Nature takes hold of the child (in the Mothers body [or
womb]) and [shapeth, figureth, or] Imageth it: yet the Or, Dominion.
Region of the Stars has no other than the Or, the four Elementary Image in
the Holy Element.
Image in the four Elements, and not [that] in the Holy Element. And although
indeed it Image [or frame] a Man in the outward Beastiall Mind with a little
understanding many times, yet that is no matter: the outward Man is the Beast
of the Stars; but the inward (in the [one] Element) is the Image of God: and
the divine framing [figuring or Imaging] is not performed in the Four
Elements, but in the one holy Element.
outward, but in the inward Element.

71. For a Man is many times (in the outward) so very evil natured [or
malicious froward conditioned] from the Stars, that he becomes Or, angry, or
vexed with, and abhors himself.
loathsome to himself; but when he considers himself, then he enters into
himself (into the inward Man) and reaches after Abstinence [or forbearance of
evill] and yet cannot be quite loosed from, [or rid off] the outward wicked
malicious Man: but must continually (with the inward) break the head of (the
outward) the Serpent.

72. For the Serpent stingeth many in the outward: but if it Or, overcome the
inward.
get the Inward Man, then the Image of God is gone. The evillnesse [or malice]
of the Stars drives many [strongly] to murder, steal, lie, and Or, cheat.
deceive; till they come to the Gallows, and sword, [or block], and yet have
not wholly [captivated] the inward: he is yet in the Gate, and is able (through
Repentance) to go into another Image, which is not like the outward: Man
cannot judge the inward Man so wholly according to the outward: except they see
that he despises God, and blasphemeth the Holy Ghost; in such a one there is
Or, no Image of God.
no Divine Image. And it is hard [ Or, for him to attain the Image of God.
with him]; yet his Judgment is not [in the time of] this body: the Gate of
the Mercifulness stands open toward him, while he is in this Tabernacle.

73. But after this life he shall attain it no more, except he has [hold of]
the Mercifulness [of God] by a Thread: for God will not quench the smoking
flax, as Isaiah says; though indeed he must bathe [swimme or swelter] in his
sins, Between Time and Eternity: see more Chap. 19.
till the Anger (through the Death of Christ) be overcome; on which Thread he
must hang: and the Putrefaction is his Purgatory in his sins, and no strange
[or distinct Heterogene Purgatory] (of which Antichrist feigneth and prateth)
but his own self, [Purgatory,] in his sins.

74. And it is all vain and idle [which is said,] concerning Purgatory, as the
Wolf of the Whores Beast feigneth, [or conceiteth]: for it is well known,
that after the [outward] life, there is an Eternal life, and that all sins
are Or, forgivenes
remitted here; but as long as thou art between the Door and the Hindges, and
hangest by a small hair, thou art yet not wholly in the The Eternal hellish
or heavenly life.
Eternal Life: but if thou be once in the Eternal Life, then thou art
perfect; [or fully there] whether it be in the Heaven or in the Hell, out of
that there is no Redemption, for it is the The Eternal hellish or heavenly
life.
Eternal Life.

75. But while we are thus speaking of the Innocent.
upright Abel, we cannot say, that the Kingdom of Heaven was not assisting in
him, and that he merely out of his own might and power, made himself such an
upright [honest] Man; for The Heaven.
it was in the wrestling, and overcame the Anger: for Man is weak, and Or,
void of understanding.
ignorant, and can do little by his own Power [or ability]; Note what
Free Will is.
yet he has the Imagination, and the choosing, or the free yielding, [to a
thing] where then the Maker is ready before hand, which makes him [to be]
according as his lust [or desire] is: as is to be seen by Adam, for when he
longed and lusted in the Spirit of this world, there instantly the Maker was
present, and made (of an Angelical Image,) a Man.

76. The Lust [or longing Desire] is the introducing Or, of.
into a thing, and out of the Lust comes the form [or Image] of the Lust, (
viz. a Body,) and the source [or active quality] of sins sticks therein;
and you may easier hinder the Lust, than break the Body, which is very hard;
therefore it is good, to turn away the eyes, and then the The kindling is not
brought into the issuing Essential powers.
Tincture goes not into the Essences by which the Spirit is impregnated; for
the lust indeed is not the mind wholly, but they are sisters: for when the
lust impregnateth the mind, then it is already a half Or, Body.
substance, and there must necessarily follow a breaking, or there comes to be
a whole substance, and an Essence of a thing.

77. Now Abel is the first Christian Church in Patience, which God established,
that the Cainish Church should be converted by Abel: he has not therefore so
rejected the Cainish Church, that he would have no member out of it. Understand
it thus; the true Christian Church stands like a sheep among Wolves; though
indeed we are Men and not Wolves, but in Mind and in Figure. The Abellish
Church.
It teaches the wicked: and if he be converted, then it has gained him, and
he is figured into an Image [of God]: and thereby Joy is caused among the
Angels of God, that the Kingdom of Heaven has the victory.

78. Or do thou suppose, that the word in Daniel is nothing, Chap. 10.
concerning the Angel Gabriel, who said; that the Prince in Persia withstood him
one and twenty days, and that our Prince Michael came to help him. Thereby it
may be seen how the Princes and Throne-Angells strive against the Kingdom of
the fierce wrath, and assist Men; the cause whereof is this; The Devil
awakeneth the Anger against Men: and the Angels of God ( viz. the
Throne-Princes) keep it back, because God For all the Devils stirring up, or
awakening of his Anger.
yet wills not Evil.

79. We are especially to observe in Cain and Abel, what their purpose was.
Cain was a Plowman [or Tiller of the Ground] and Abel was a Shepherd [or
keeper of sheepe]: Abel relied upon the blessing of God toward his flock, to
maintain himself by the blessing of God: Cain relied upon his own labor, to
maintain himself by his own skill and industry. Eve took part with Cain, and
Adam with Abel; for Eve counted him to be the Prince on Earth, to whom the
Kingdom did belong, and supposed that he (as a Champion) would chase and hunt
away the Devil; although she knew The Devil.
him not.

80. But if Men search very Deep, this [that follows they will finde] is the
very Ground. Eve was the Child in the Matrix of Adam, which Adam (if he had
not been overcome) should have generated out of himself, in great modesty
[purity] and holiness; but because Adams Matrix was impregnated from the
Spirit of this world, therefore God must frame a fleshly woman out of it, which
afterward (in her first fruit) became lustful, and infected from the Devil,
as well as the Limbus in Adam.

81. And therefore they also generated such a towardly child as looked only
after covetousness: as Eve also did, who would be like God: and surely Adam
had some mind that way, or else he should not have entered into the spirit of
this world.

82. And such also now was their Son Cain: he supposed that he was Lord on
Earth; and therefore he grutched that his Brother should have any thing:
especially when he saw that he was accepted before God, that vexed him; and he
thought that Abel should come to be Lord on Earth: in his sacrifice, he
regarded not the fear of God, though he (as an appearing holy Man [or
hypocrite]) sacrificed also; but he regarded only the The highest place of
Earthly Dominion.
Region.

83. And here the Antichristian Kingdom took its beginning, where Men Or,
speak good words before God.
give God good words, and their heart is possessed with covetousness, and seek
after nothing but power and authority, to domineere over the needy and
miserable, who trust and rely upon God. Therefore Antichrist has his God in
his Chist, and in the strength of his power: and behind his cloak there
hangs a Fox. He prays, yet he desires nothing else but the Kingdom of
this world: his heart does not leave off to persecute and to hunt poor Abel.
But Abel prays to the Lord, and his heart inclines it self to the Love of
God, in the true Image, for he desires the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Blessing of God here, for his Necessity, or subsistence of the body.
maintenance.

84. Now the Devil cannot endure that a holy Church should grow up in his
Dominions, he will murder Abel still, as he did then; because Cain feared not
God, therefore the Devil gat an access to him, and stirred up the inbred
wrath in Cain against Abel, that he slew him. Here surely all the Devils
danced at it, and thought, now is the Kingdom ours again: whereat Adam and
Eve were much amazed and affrighted, when they saw that he whom they accounted
for a Prince became a murderer; and as the History says, they copulated [or
knew one another] no more in seaventy years after.

85. Now it being thus, therefore they sought for quite another Treader upon
the Serpent: also now they inclined their heart to God, so that seventy years
after this murder, they begat a very upright [vertuous] holy Son that feared
God, (who established again the pure Church of the fear of God and promised
seed of the Woman;) whose name was Seth; who also begat a very upright
[vertuous] Son, whose name was E^os, and then Men began to preach openly [or
plainly] of God: and the Christian Church always rose up like a small flock,
in spite of all the Ragings of the Devils.

86. But Cain exalted himself to be a Lord over his kindred: from whence arose
the Dominion, and Rule or Government of this world, all (according to the
influence of the Stars) generated per Spiritum Majoris Mundi, [by the Spirit
of the Or, Macrocosme.
Great world]: and is not as Cain supposed, so ordained, by the clear Deity.

87. It is true indeed, when the world became so evil, malicious, and
murtherous, then there must needs be Judges and Magistrates that the fierce
wrath might be stopped by punishment and fear; but if thou had continued
in Love, then thou should have had no Lords, but loving Brothers and Sisters.
O Cain! thy potent Kingdom comes not from God, but has its influence from
the starry Heaven in Anger, which domineereth over thee, and many times gives
thee Tyrants, who consume thy sweat in Pride, and this thou have for thy
Paradise.

88. Saint Paul writes very well, that there is no [power, authority, or]
Magistracy but of God; but he says, it is an Or, for the punishment of evil
doers.
avenger of the wicked, and bears not the sword in vain; herein thou have
ground enough, that God uses the worldly Government, and the sword thereof for
the wicked's sake, under which thou must now (for the sake of sin) bear thy
yoke, because thou art a continual devourer and murderer: do but behold thy
self, together with the avenging sword, perhaps thou will see, thy self.

89. But if any say, that God does [abhorre or] loath the Great Tyranny and
Oppression, when they domineere and take away the sweat of the poor and needy,
and consume it in pride and stateliness; that Cain cannot endure: if the
terrible Example of the Flood [or Deluge] did not stand there, then [Tyranny]
would be accounted holiness; but thy The time will not bear the Exposition of
this, let every one find it with their own eyes.
Kingdom O Cain! is set up in Babell, and thy Beast Rules in Sodom and
Gomorrha, there is a fire from the Lord of Heaven in it: it is time to go with
Lot out of Sodom, sin is awakened in Cain.

90. Now when Cain had murdered his Brother, then he went securely as a Lord:
and thought, now thou art sole Prince on Earth; but the voice of the fierce
anger of God came, and said; Where is thy Brother Abel? and he answered, I know
not, Shall I be my Brothers keeper? And Gods Anger.
He said, What have thou done? Behold the voice of thy Brothers blood, cries
to me from the Earth: and now thou art accursed upon the Earth, which has
opened its mouth, to receive thy Brothers blood from thy hands: When thou shall
till the Ground, it shall not yield its strength to thee henc^forward; thou
shall be a vagabond and fugitive upon Earth.

91. And now when the Anger of God stirred the sin in Cain, then it became
awakened: and he was perplexed [or troubled]: and then his false Faith was
seen: for he despaired, and said; My sins are greater, than that they can be
forgiven me: behold thou drivest me away from the Lord this day, and I must
hide my self Or, Before.
from thy Countenance, and I must be a fugitive and vagabond upon the Earth:
and it shall befall me so, that whosoever Or, meets.
finds me will slay me.

92. Here there appears to us the most terrible Lamentable and miserable Gate
of despair, upon the committing of sins: for when God said; This concerns
Christendom to consider it.
Cursed art thou upon the Earth, which has opened its mouth, and received thy
Brothers blood from thy Hands: then the lofty, self potent, glistering,
hypocritical, flattering Kingdom of Antichrist was rejected of God: and it
has (with it entering into the fierce wrath, in the Murder) separated it self
from God.

93. Therefore said God; Be thou accursed; and the distinction of this cursing
or flying out of the fierceness, Or, shows.
is, that the Love of God will not dwell in the fierceness, and that Kingdom
must not be called after his Name: for God consented not to the Murder, but
the fierceness [or wrath] of which God warned Cain, at his sacrificing,
[saying,] B thou upright, and thou shall be accepted; if not, then sin (and
the Kingdom of the fierce wrath) lies at the Door; he should not let The
wickedness or fierceness.
it have any power, but should rule over it, but when he lets it have power,
then it rules, and vanquisheth him.

94. Thus also God withdrew, that is, Cain went out from God: from the Kingdom
of God, into the Kingdom of the fierceness of the Driver: therefore also his
affairs (which he further [managed, held forth, and] pretended) were not of
God, but from the Kingdom of the fierce wrath; that [fiercenesse] lead him,
and generated or awakened The wonders of the fierce wrath.
its wonders through him, that the [Kingdome of the fiercenesse] might be also
manifested, even as it was a great wonder, Or, that.
how the Noble Image in Abel, by the fierceness of Hell, and of this world Or,
was.
could be separated in the Dissolution.
breaking of the body: whereas the Kingdom of Hell would feign have found [or
felt] it: and therefore the first Death must be hastily [or suddenly], where
then the Treader upon the Serpent showed his first Schollership.
Masterpiece, when the Kingdom of this world Or, was severed.
parted from Abel: when the Cherubine did this first time With his sword.
cut off the four Elements from the holy Element.

95. And there the Word, or the Treader upon the Serpent, stood in the new
regenerated Element, in the soul of Abel, in the Center, in the Gate of the
Deep, and did break the Serpents (that is, the Kingdom of the fiercenesses)
head of its might; for the Head, signifies, the strong Might of the fierce
Anger. And there the Love of God (out of the Heart of God Or, put.
let it self into the Hell of the Anger, and did smother, the kindled fire of
the poor soul, in the Love again: and here the first work was proved,
according as was promised from God to Adam and Eve.

96. Secondly, also, the terrible work of the entering into the fierceness [or
Anger] was proved in Cain, for each Kingdom, proved its own. And now when
Cain went into the Anger, then the Love of God stood in the Center before him,
wholly hidden; there Cain (as a Champion) should have broken the Serpents Head:
which he before supposed that he was the Man that should do it, and would do
it in his own power and might; and here it was rightly tried, whether it were
possible in ones own selfe-power (through the luster of the Father in the fire)
to possess the Kingdom of God.

97. But it was miserable, and all in vain, for Cain (in his tender humanity)
cried woe woe is me; his sins were greater than Or, above his power.
he, he could not in his own power press in to God: he trembled and at length
stood amazed before the Abyss of Hell, which had captivated him, and held him
in it: he Separated.
severed himself now also from [the company of] Men: and said, Now whosoever
shall find me will slay me, for I must fly from thy face.

98. And here is seen the seperating of the Christian Church from the Cainish,
where God expelled Cain, that he must dwell in another place; and the true
understanding of these high hidden secrets sticks wholly in the Word, under
the veil [of Moses] and was almost never known [yet], but (in the time of the
Lilly) it shall Or, be known.
stand in the Wonders; and thou Antichristian Church on Earth, should know,
that all (whatsoever thou inventest without the Spirit of God, for thy trimming
and pride, also for thy strength and power) is gone forth with Cain from Abel,
out from the Church of Christ, beyond Eden, into the Land of Nod: if thou art
so highly learned, and do understand This speech of Moses.
this in the Language of Nature, what it is, as thy flatterers in their Bonnet
[or promotion] suppose [they doe]; but they apprehend nothing but the Or, the
strife, contention, and wrangling disputations.
four Elements in the going forth with Cain, and not the [One] Element before
God; therefore the same is the Babell of Confusion and of various Opinions, and
not the Ground In the agreeing love and unity.
in the [One] Element, which stands in one alone, and not in multiplicity.

99. Thou have been a clear Or, Example.
Glass (in him) of Men's own conceits [or opinions], what ones own good meaning
(without the Spirit of God) is. Cain went not into the Sheepfold at the Door
(which God made for Adam and Eve with the Word, and Treader upon the Serpent)
but climed into it another way, by his strong Lyonish mind, and would be a
Lord over the Sheep, and became a thief and murderer of the Sheep, and the
Sheep followed him not, but they went (with Abel) through the sword of the
Angel [or] Cherubine (out of this frail and corruptible life) with the Treader
upon the Serpent into their resting sheepfold, where there is not one wolf:
for the Cherubine will let none of them in: and if any of them do come, then
he cutteth their Wolves heart of the fierceness of the Kingdom of this world
clean away, and then they also become Sheep, and lay themselves patiently
among the Sheep, and seek no more after the Wolf, for The Wolf.
he is beyond Eden in the Land of Nod: but they are gone through the sword of
the Cherubine into Paradise: where no Wolf enters in; there is a Wall of a
Principle and whole Or, a great cliffe or gulf before Paradise.
Birth before it.

100. And thou Cainish Church (with thy Laws and Pratings, thy acute Comments,
and Expositions of the Writings of the Holy Men (or Saints], who have spoken in
the Spirit of God) should look well upon thy self, and do not build thy
voluptuous and soft Kingdom so much upon those things: for They that have
spoken and written in the Spirit of God.
they When they speak and write in this world.
are most of them in Paradise: they speak out of the Root of the Holy Element
through the Or, strife.
out-Birth of the four Elements, and many times apprehend (in the out-Birth)
the fierce wrath, which Men had awakened: therefore look to it, that thou build
no stubble, straw, or weeds thereupon: if thou have not the Spirit of
understanding out of the Holy Element, then let them alone, do not Defile them
with siding and divisions.
daube them with the four Elements, or else those things stand in Babell, it
is not good to build the four Elements thereupon: for the Cherubine stands
between, and he will cut off whatsoever does not belong to the Sheepfold: thou will have no benefit of it, for thy labor [or work] stays In se^fe.
in the Land of Nod.

101. O Cain! look but upon thy Kingdom, and consider what befell thy Great
[Grand] father Cain, who built this Kingdom, who cried out woe is me! my
sins are greater than can be forgiven me, when he saw himself (with his
Kingdom) to be without God, in the Abyss of Hell. And if the loving Word of
God, had not recalled it, (when it said, No; Whosoever kills Cain, it shall
be avenged sevenfold, and God made a mark upon him, that none that met with him
should kill him) he had been quite lost. Those are wonderful words, Moses face
is so very much under the veil: for the veil is rightly the Cainish Church,
which covers the Kingdom of Christ.

102. Here is the clear and plain ground and root of the false Cainish
Church; for Cain had made himself a Lord of this world, and built [or relyed]
upon himself. Yet now he had in himself nothing for a propriety, but the
first and the third Principle: for as to his soul, he was in the first
Principle, as all Men [are]: and as to the body, he was in the third Principle
in the Kingdom of this world. And now he should with his soul go out of the
Kingdom of this world, and press into the second Principle ( viz. into the
Trust in God, into the Word of the Promise) to God, as Abel did: and labor
with his hands in this world, and Plant and Build; but his mind should be
directed to God in confidence, and should commend the Rule or Government.
Kingdom of this world to God, and carry himself therein as a travailing
stranger, which only with this strange body is in his propriety, as to the
body, and a stranger only as to the soul, and besides as an ashamed Guest
like a Prisoner in it: whose only study should be, to get again into his true
Native Country, out of which he is gone forth with his father Adam; but he let
the second Principle, the Kingdom of Heaven go, and yielded himself wholly
with his soul into the Kingdom of th^s world, where he would be Lord; and so
the Anger took hold on him: for he went out from the Word, the Promise of Grace.

103. And then the Word stood against him, in the Center of the Heaven: and he
stood (in the Root of the fierceness) against the Word; for his Spirit went
out of the Gate of the Center of Heaven, and stood in the source [or active
property] of the Original of the Creation in the fierce Root of the fire, and
desired the Out-Birth out of the Holy Element, (which also stood in the
kindling in the fierceness;) viz. the four Elements.

104. His Anger against Abel came from hence, because Abel Or, took no
pleasure in the Kingdom of this world.
stood not in this Birth, and his Spirit would not endure the Kingdom of Abel
in his Kingdom: for he would rule (as by his own power,) in the The first and
the third.
two Principles (wherein he stood:) and therefore he slew Abel.

105. Yet God would not have it so: but Or, awakened the gnawing Worm.
kindled the Anger in Cain, which rested before in the swelled Kingdom of the
four Elements, and was only climed up in great and mighty Joy, whereas Cain
did not know the Anger, nor understand any thing of it; only the Essences of
the soul knew that they dealt falsely: but they knew not the fierce source in
the kindling of the fire, till that they went forth from the Center of God into
the Or, wickedness.
falsehood, and there they felt the fire of the Anger with great horror,
trembling and crying; for they were gone out from God, and neither saw nor felt
the heavenly source any more: and therefore they despaired, because they found
[or felt] themselves in the source of the wrath: and the Body with all its
Essences cried; My sins are greater than that they can be forgiven.

106. And here is apparently seen the Glass of the Abyss of Hell, and [of
the] Eternal despair; when the Anger of God rises up in the source, that the
malice [and wickednesse] is made stirring, and there begins trembling,
galling, and crying, and despair in it self as to God: there the soul
seeks abstinence in the Kingdom of this world, and finds Or, no comfort.
none: and then it leaves the Kingdom of this world also, and runs into
the Originality, into the Root of the Eternal Birth, and seeks abstinence,
and yet finds nothing; and then casts it self into the abominable Deep,
supposing to reach the Original of the Abstinence, or the Gate of the breaking
in; but it mounteth only above the Heaven, out (into the most uttermost) into
the fierce [wrathfull, grimme] Eternity.

107. Then it begins venomously to hate the body, wherein it has borne the
Image of God: and many run headlong into the water, or take a roape, or a
sword, and murder the body, which has bereaved it of the Image of God,
through temporal pleasure, through false confidence, standing upon it self,
to contemn and scorn its brother and sister, to murder him, to take away his
daily bread, and also to give occasion of wantonness to their brethren and
sisters.

108. And thou Cainish Church, here thou have a Glass, in thy rising up in
pride, and self power, also in thy voluptuous self honoring life; behold thy
self [in it:] for thou art gone into the Spirit of this world, and thou have
made the Kingdom of this world thy Kingdom of Heaven, and thou trustest only
in thy self: thou make thy self a Lord over Babell, and thou drawest the
Kingdom of this world to thee only by Tricks, devices, or deceit.
cunning [subtilty]; and thou make thy self a Patron therein, and therewith
thou go out from God: thou supposest that thou art holy, though thou
suppressest the poor Abel under thy yoke, and vexest him day and night: he
must here be thy Bloud-hound, and thou accountest him thy slave, though thou
have not right to the least hair of his head as thine own: and therefore thou
art no other than his Driver [or Hunter] in Jericho, thou art his murderer,
who strippest him, beatest and killest him.

109. Do thou ask wherefore? Behold, I will tell thee: thou art Ca^n the
Lord of the world, for thou have made thy self so; and now Abel is thy
servant, who is entered into this world as a Guest, yet he stands, and
desires to be Regenerated.
gone out of this world into his Native Country, which thou can not endure,
thou pressest him to the ground, two manner of ways, very subtilty and in
self power. First, with thy hypocritical false Doctrine [Teaching or
Preaching] Babell, where he shall and must believe whatsoever thou Or,
enjoynest him as Orthodox.
prescribest him, without the Spirit of God, that thereby thou may but
strengthen thy gorgeous Or, stately Dominion.
fat Kingdom, whereby thou drawest him away from God, into the Spirit of this
world, so that he must Or, must esteem your artificial teaching as the means
of salvation.
gape upon thy Prating: and if he do not so, then thou murtherest him, as Abel
[was murthered].

110. And secondly, thou have set thy self to be Lord over him, and have made
him thy slave; and so bravest it over him, as the proud woman of this world,
thou Plaguest or tormentest.
vexest him day and night, and consumest his sweat in high-mindednesse; all
according to the Kingdom, vengeance, or rage.
fury of the wrath [or fiercenesse]. And so he sticks not only in the
Contempt and scorn.
Darkness, but [also] in great misery, cares, and perplexity, and seeks
ways to get out of them, and how to come to the light again, and escape the
Driver.

111. But he finds nothing in thy Gates but the way of falsehood, Bribery,
cunning, subtlety, lying, and deceit, also covetousness, and to wind himself
about so under thy yoke, that he may but live: and so himself murthereth his
own poor soul, under thy yoke, and re^ideth himself off thus, from the
Kingdom of God, and gives himself up to the Or, Spirit.
Kingdom of this world, kneeling and praying before thy Beast, and honors
thy proud Bride that rides upon thy Beast, as the Spirit of God in the
R^velation of John witnesses.

112. Thus thou continually murtherest poor Abel, two manner of ways and
give him great occasion of stumbling, by thy pomp and power thou drawest him
away from God into the Spirit of this world, where he then grows stark
blind, and so he will continually ride Use all the might and authority he can
as thou do.
after thee he will still sit upon thy Beast, and be Lord also, and ride over
the bended knees: and thus the Kingdom of this world is a right Den of
Thieves, and in the presence of God a Lake of Abominations.

113. The Spirit of thy stout Beast, is the Hellish Dragon or Serpent.
Worm; The Crowned B^^de that sitte^h upon it, is the false Woman [or Whore] of
Babel^: she drinks only out of the Cup of Whoredom and Abominations, her
drink in that Cup is the fierceness of the Anger of God, of which the People
[or Nations] drink, and become drunk, and so in their drunkenness, they become
Murderers, Robbers, Thieves, false perfidious mockers, jeerers, scorners,
proud, high-minded, selfe-honourers, stern malicious people; there is no end
of the number of those that hate one another: every one supposes, his way is
right, and that he walks in the right Path: if his brother and sister go not
in the same way with him, he scorneth them and calls them Heretics; and so
one Wolf biteth another: his way is in his own Opinion, as his Master teaches
him, who yet never regards any thing but his His own Elected God Mausim.
Belly God; that his esteem and glory may be great among Men; thus one
hypocrite deceives the other, and are scorners and persecutors one of another
among themselves ^^^nd one is a Wolf as well as another: and the poor Abel
(who stands in true Resignation, and relyeth upon God) must continually be
their As the dust under their seat.
footstool, he is continually murdered in a twofold manner.

114. One is, that he is deceived, and goes along into Babell, and is
murdered, as to the Kingdom of Heaven. The other is, that if he remain
constant, then the Devil, (with Cain,) will not endure him, but murthereth him
outwardly, as to the body, or takes away his good name and credit, and With
all manner of slanders and lies.
covers him so that he may not be known, that so the Kingdom of Cain and
the Antichrist may remain in Babell: of which we know well how to speak by
our own experience, if wrath and anger did please us. But it fares very well
with our Abel, and our being scorned springs up in the blossoming of the
Lilly, whereat we will rejoice well enough, when we return again from
Jericho to Jerusalem, to our Father Abel.

115. And now what have thou to expect, (thou proud Bride of Babell) for thy
stately Pride (from the Spirit of this world) that thou servest it so
faithfully? Behold, thou have a threefold [reward to expect]; First, that the
Spirit of this world leave thee, and departs from thee, and teareth away thy
proud body from thee, and turns it to dust and ashes, and it takes thy
goods, power, and pomp, and gives them to another, and tormenteth him for a
while therein.

116. And secondly, that it receives all thy purposes and deeds, and sets
them in the Tincture of thy soul, and makes of it another dwelling house for
thy soul, that it may not send thee so naked away from it.

117. And then thirdly, that he has brought thy soul out of Heaven into the
pleasures of this world: and now leaves it in its misery, wholly naked and
bare, fitting in its filthiness, and goes away, and regards no more, where
the soul is, or how it is with it, if it Or, should go into Hell.
were in the Abyss of Hell [it were all one to the spirit of this world;] this
thou have to expect for thy recompense from the spirit of this world, because
thou have so truly served it.

118. Therefore O Cain! fly away from the Spirit of this world, there is a fire
(out of the Root of the Originality) from the Lord of Heaven in it: thy
swelled secret Kingdom is kindled, that Men may see [or know] thee in every
place: thou shall stand quite open [or naked] with all thy Or, Mysteries.
secresies; for the Spiritus Majoris Mundi [or Spirit of the Greater World]
has found the Tincture, and its Roses blossom in the Wonders.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Cainish and of the Abellish Kingdom: how they are both in one another.
Also of their Beginning, Rise, Essence, and drift: and then of their last Exit.

Also Of the Cainish Antichristian Church, and then of the Abellish true
Christian Church: how they are both in one another, and are very hard to be
known [asunder.]

Also Of the variety of Arts, Conditions and Courses.
States, and Orders of this World.

Also Of the Office of Rulers [or Magistrates] and their Subjects: how there is
a Good and Divine Or, Order.
Ordinance in them all; as also a false Evil and Devilish.

Where the providence of God is seen in all things; and the Devils deceit,
subtilty and malice [is seen also] in all things.

1. WE find by the Divine Providence, in all things, as also in Arts and Or,
Conditions of things.
States, that the things of this world are all good and profitable: and that
only the Devils poison brought into them is evil: and so we find also all
States [or conditions] high and low, come out of one Or, spring.
only Tree, and one always proceeds out of the other, so that the Divine
Providence comes to help all things, and so the Eternal Wonders (in ail the
three Principles) are Or, discovered.
manifested: to which end God brought to light the Creation of all things,
which from Eternity in themselves stood only in the [flowing, budding, or] As
the thoughts in the mind flow or spring up.
springing up; but by the Creation of this world are put into the Wonders.

2. Therefore now we can speak or write of nothing else but of his Wonders;
for we have a great Example of them in Cain, when the Kingdom of the fierce
wrath (after his murder) awaked in him, and would have By making him despair
in God.
devoured him: that God came to help him, when the Divine Justice (in his
Conscience) sentenced him to Death, then the Divine Answer spoke against it,
[saying] No: Whosoever slays Cain, it shall be avenged sevenfold; by which
speech the fierce vengeance of the Abyss of Hell, was driven away from him, so
that Cain did not despair; and though he were gone forth from God, yet the
Kingdom of Heaven stood toward him, he might turn, and enter into
Repentance: God had not yet quite rejected him; but his malicious, murtherous,
and his false confidence, he accursed, and would not Or, consent thereto.
be therein.

3. For God departed not from Cain, but Cain went himself from God: if he had
been strong in Faith and Confidence in God, then he might have been able to
enter into God again: even as he thought before the fall [into the murther],
that he would break the head of the Serpent: but there it was seen, what Man's
ability was; If he had laid hold on the true Treader upon the Serpent, then he
might have gone instantly (in the virtue of the Treader upon the Serpent) into
God again.

4. But Cain Or, was.
had flesh and blood, and understood not the meaning of the Eternal Death: yet
when he was assured from God, that none should slay him, he became cheerly
again; for the His faculties that were in doubt were again assured of Gods
grace.
Essences of his soul, were refreshed again by Gods recalling [him]: for the
Door of Grace stood open toward him, he should return, for God would not the
Death of a Sinner.

5. And here may be seen very exactly, who was the accuser of Cain: viz. the
blood of Abel, which cried to God from the Earth, and awakened the fierce Anger
against Cain; where the Essences of the soul of Abel, through the deep Gate of
Anger, pressed in to God, through the Treader upon the Serpent; and so stirred
the Root of the fire in Cain, whereby the Anger was awakened. Here consider
what the sighings of the righteous, and their pressing into God (in their
unequal being oppressed) can do, how it kindles the Anger of God, as in
Cain: whereas then fiery Coals are heaped upon the Drivers [or oppressours]
head.

6. But when The wrath, or the gnawing Worm of his Conscience.
it was allayed again by the voice of God, then Cain did not know how that
came to pass, and set his murder at Rest, like one, who has a secret gnawing
Dog sitting in the Dark; yet he proceeded and built his powerful Earthly
Kingdom, and did not wholly put his trust in God: for when he saw, that he
must seek for his Bread out of the Earth, and must take his clothing from the
The Beasts and that which grows out of the Earth.
children of the Earth, therefore all his business lay in the Art of Seeking,
how and which way he might find, and how to possess the treasure of that
which was found, that he might always have enough: because he saw God no more,
therefore he did like Israel, who were brought out of Egypt by Moses, and when
they saw him not (because he was on the Mount) then they began their dancing
and false worship of God, and asked after Moses no more.

7. Thus Cain now built his earthly Kingdom, and began to search all manner of
Arts, not only in Husbandry, plowing or Tilling of the ground.
Agriculture, but also in Mettalls, and further [all Arts] according to the
seven Spirits of Nature, which in the In the Name of Cain, and the other
Circumstances.
Letter is well to be seen, wherein our Schools [or Universities] will now be
Masters; but they are not yet Scholars in the Ground.

8. And it is excellently shown, that they had That is, in Cains time they had
the Tincture in their power.
the light of the Tincture in their hands, wherein they found [their
Inventions] though it was not wholly known; for sins were not then in such
multiplicity upon the Earth: and therefore the The mysteries were not so dark
to them.
Mysteries were not so very hard and close hidden to them, but all was found
out very easily: especially by Adam who had the Mysteries Or, naked, open and
plain.
in his hands: and was [but] entered out of the Wonders of Paradise, into the
Wonders of this world, who kwew not only the Essences, Or, kinds.
Natures and properties of all the Beasts, but also of all Plants and Mettalls:
he knew also the ground of the seven liberal Arts [arising] out of the seven
forms of Nature; yet not so altogether out of the Ground: [or fundamentally]:
But he was the Tree, out of which afterward all the roots and branches grew.

9. But the Depth in the Center of the Birth, he knew much better than we in
our Schools: [or Universities]: which is showed by that Speech or word.
saying, That he gave names to all things, to every thing, according to its
Essence, Or, kind.
Nature, and property, as if he had stuck [or dwelt] in every thing, and tried
all Or, beeings.
Essences; whereas he had the knowledge of them only from their sound, also
from their form and aspect, smell and taste: the Metalls he knew, in the Glance
of the Tincture, and in the fire, as it may yet well be known.

10. For Adam was the Heart of every thing in this world, created out of the
Originality of all things: his soul was out of the first Principle; thoroughly
Or, shining, or enlightened.
illustrated with the second [Principle:] and his body was out of the [one]
Element, out of the Or, warm hatching.
Barm, or Birth, out of the Divine virtue [which is] before God, which [body]
was entered into the out Birth of the [one] Element, ( viz. into the four
Elements) and wholly gone into the Spirit of this world, viz. into the third
Principle. And therefore he had the Tincture of every thing in him, by which he
teached into all Essences, and proved [or searched] all things in the Heaven,
Earth, fire, air, and water, and all whatsoever is generated from thence.

11. And so one Tincture took hold of the other, and the stronger has proved
[or tried] the weaker, and given names to all things, according to their
Essences; and that is the true ground of Adams fall, that he went out of the
Eternal [being] into the Out birth of the corruptible [being,] and has put on
the Or, transitory.
corruptible Image, which God forbad him.

12. And here the two strong Kingdoms of the Eternity are to be seen, which
have been in strife with one another, and are always so; and the strife
continues to Eternity, for it is also from Eternity ( viz. [between] The wrath
and the Love.
the fierceness and the meekness) If the fierceness were not, there would be
no mobility: but it overcomes in this world only The wrath rules in all that
is evil in the four Elements, and in that which is good it makes the
exalting joy.
according to the K^ngdome of Hell, and in the Heaven it makes the ascending
Joy: and the Meekness:

13. And it is h^ghly to be sound and considered by us, in the light of Nature,
how the fierceness [or wrath] is the Root of all things, and moreover the
Originality of the Life, therein only consists the Might and the Power, and
from thence only proceed the Wonders: and without the fierceness [or wrath]
there would be no enmity, but all [would be as it were] a noth ng, as is
formerly mentioned.

14. And then we find also, how the Meekness is the virtue and the Spirit,
so that where the meekness is not, there the fierceness (in it self,) is
nothing but a Darkness and a Death, where no Working, fruit, or bringing forth.
growing can spring up, and it cannot generate nor discover its wonders; and
thus we find that the fierceness [wrath or sourenesse] is a cause of the
Essences, and [that] the Meekness [is] a cause of the joy, and a cause of the
rising and [budding o^] growing forth of the Essences: and then that the Spirit
is generated by the flowing [working, springing] and rising up, out of the
Essences: and that the fierceness so becomes the Root of the Spirit, and the
Meekness is its Life.

15. Now there can be no meekness without Light, for the Light makes the
Meekness, and there can be no fierceness without the light for the light
makes a A desiring, or attracting.
Longing in the darkness: and yet there is no darkness there, but the longing
makes the darkness in the will, so that the will attracteth to it self, and
impregnateth the longing, so that it becomes thick and dark: for it is thicker
than the will, and therefore it shadoweth the will, and is the darkness of the
will.

16. And if the will be thus in darkness, then it is in anguish: for it
desires to be out of the darkness: and that desiring, is the flowing [or
working] and the attracting in it self: where yet nothing is attained but a
fierce source in it self, which by its attraction makes hardness and
roughness, which the will cannot endure, and thus it stirs up the Root of
the fire in the flash, (as is aforementioned) whereupon the re-comprehended
will, goes forth from the flash, into its self, and Dispelleth.
breaks the darkness, and dwells in the broken darkness, in the light in
a pleasant [joy or] habitation in it self; after which [joy or] habitation,
the will (in the darkness) continually lusts, from whence longing arises:
and thus it is an Eternal Band, which can never be Or, Dissolved.
loosed; and thus the will now labors in the broken Gate, that it may
manifest or discover his wonders out of himself, as may be seen well enough
in the Creation of the world, and all Creatures.

17. But we should not here again wholly set down the Ground of the Deity
(so far as it is meet and known by us) we account that needless [here]:
for you may find it before the incarnation of a Child in the Mothers [womb
or] body. We set down thus much here, to the end that the Region of this
world may be understood; and thus we give the Reader exactly to understand and
know how the Region of Good and Evil are in one another: and how it is an
unfadable thing [or substance] so that one is generated out of the other, and
that also the one goes forth out of the other into another substance [or
being] which it was not in the beginning; as you may learn to understand this
in Man, who in his beginning, in the will of Man and Woman ( viz. in the
Limbus, and in the Matrix) is conceived in the Tincture, and sown in an
Earthly Field, or Ground.
soil: where then the first Tincture (in the will) breaks, and his own Or,
Life.
Tincture springs forth out of the anxious [or aking] chamber of Darkness,
and of Death, out of the anxious source [or property]: and blossometh out of
the Darkness, in the broken Gate of the darkness in it, as a pleasant
habitation: and so generateth its light out of the anxious fierenesse out of it
self; where then (in the Light) there goes forth again the endless source
of the [thoughts or] senses, which make a Throne and Region of Reason, which
governs the whole house, and desires to enter into the Region of the Heaven,
out of which it proceeded not. And therefore now this is not the Original
will, which there desires to enter into the Region of the Heaven; but it is
the Or, recomprehended, or re-taken will out of the property.
reconceived will, out of the source of the anxiety [which will is in a desire
to] enter through the deep Gate of God.

18. Now seeing it was impossible for the humane Spirit; (how much soever it
was attempted [tryed or sought]) therefore God must enter again into the
humanity, and help the humane Spirit, to break the Gate of Or, of Death.
Darkness, that so it might be able to enter into the Divine [power or] virtue.

19. And thus he dwells in two [properties] both which draw him, and desire
to have him; viz. one fierce [property] or source, whose Original is the
Darkness of the Abyss: and the other is the Divine [power or] virtue, whose
source [or active property] is the Light and the Divine Joy in the broken Gate
of Heaven; as the word H^mmel [Heaven] in the Language of Nature has its
proper acute Meaning, or signification.
understanding, from the pressing through, and entering in, and then with its
Root continuing to fit in the stock of Eternity; wherein the Omnipotency is
rightly understood: which my The Learned in their own Conceit, or Reason.
Master in Arts, will scarce give any credit to; for he has no knowledge
therein; it belongs to the Lilly.

20. Thus Man is drawn and held of both: but the Center stands in him, and
[he] has the Balance of the Scales or the Weights.
Balance between the two wills ( viz. between the Original and the
re-conceived [will] to the Kingdom of Heaven: and in each scale there is a
Maker, who forms what he lets into his mind: for the mind is the Center
of the Balance: the senses [or thoughts] are the Or, Hindges.
weights that pass out of one scale into the other: for the one scale is the
Kingdom of the fierceness, and of Anger: and the other is the Regeneration
(in the virtue [or power] of God) in the Heaven.

21. Now behold O Man, how thou art both Earthly and also Heavenly, as [it
were] mixed in one [onely] Person, and thou bear the Earthly, and also the
Heavenly Image in one [onely] Person; and thou art also the fierce [wrathfull
property or] source, and thou bear the Hellish Image, which Or, grows.
springs in the Anger of God, out of the source of the Eternity; thus is thy
mind, and the mind holds the Balance, and the Or, thoughts.
sen^es put [weight] into the scales.

22. Therefore consider what weight thou put in by the Or, thoughts.
senses: thou have the Kingdom of Heaven in thy power: for the Word of the
Divine virtue [or power] In Christ, has given it self to thee to be thy own:
and so also thou have the Kingdom of Hell in a Bridle, in the Root, and thou
have it for thy own by the right of Nature: and thou have the Kingdom of this
world also (according to thy Humanity, received from Adam,) for thy own.

23. Now consider what thou let^est into thy mind by thy senses, for thou have
in each Kingdom a Maker which these Forms, fashioneth, or Creates an Image.
makes [an Image of] whatsoever thou layest into the scales, by the senses:
for all lies in the making [or formation] and thou art (in this body) a field
[Ground or soyle]: thy Mind is the sower: and the three Principles are the
seed: what thy Mind sows, the body of that grows, and that thou shall
reap to thy self, and so when the earthly field or soil does break, then
the new grown Body stands in [its] perfection, whether it be Or, figured.
grown in the Kingdom of Heaven, or in the Kingdom of Hell.

24. By this now you might find and understand the Ground, how the Kingdom of
this world is generated, and how one Kingdom is in the other, and how one is
the Chist and receptacle of the other, where yet there is no captivating at
all; but all is free in it self; and Man stands manifested in all three
[Principles]: and yet knows neither of them in the Ground; except he be
generated out of the Darkness into the Light, and then that Or, property.
source knows the fierce Eternity; as also the The third Principle, or the
created world.
Out Birth [or Issue] of the Eternity; but he is not able to search out the
Light, for he is environed therewith, and it is his dwelling house: whereas yet
he is (with this body) in this world, and with the Originality of the soul, in
the ground of the Eternal source: and with the Noble blossom of the soul, in
the Kingdom of Heaven with God; and is thus rightly a Prince in the Heaven,
over Hell and Earth: for the fierce source [or torment] touches it not: but
the blossom makes out of the fierce source [or quality] Paradise, [viz.] the
high exulting Joy in the springing up.

25. And thus thou Earthly Man may see, how thou live here in three
Principles, if thy mind incline it self to God: but if it give up it self to
the Kingdom, or course.
source of this world, then thou stand Or, without.
before Heaven, and thou sowest two Principles, viz. the spirit of this world,
and the fierce source of Eternity.

The Wellspring [or fountaine] of the Antichristian Kingdom.
26. Man possesses this world, and has built him a glorious Kingdom (for his
own Glory) as is plain before our eyes: yet he is not to be condemned therein,
(though indeed that is cause of sins) because God (of his Grace) has sent
his beloved Heart into the Flesh, that Man might (thereby) go out from the
Flesh again, and enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; But now his Earthly body
must have sustenance, that it may live and propagate: and all the Governments
and Arts of this world stand in this necessity, for the earthly body cannot
want them: and they are Or, permitted.
borne withal, (by Divine Patience), that the great Wonders may thereby be
manifested.

27. But this is Man's condemnation, that he sows only the earthly and the
Hellish seed, and lets the Heavenly stay in his Barn; he stays without,
before Heaven, and enters not in, for the Noble seed: but he gives God good
words, that he may be gracious to him, and receive him into his Kingdom: and
sows nothing but the Devils weeds in body and soul: and then what new body
shall there grow? Shall it stand in the Heaven in the Holy Element, or in the
Abyss? or shall the Pearl be cast before swine?

28. If thy Maker in thee, does not make the Image of God, but the Image of the
Serpent, how will thou then bring thy Beast into the Kingdom of Heaven? Do
thou suppose that God has Adders and Serpents in the broken Gate of the
Regeneration in the Pleasant Habitation? or do thou suppose that he looks
after thy hypocrisy, that thou buildest great Colleges, Churches, or
Monasteries.
Houses of stone for him, and therein do exercise thy hypocrisy and pomp?
What cares he for thy songs and roaring noise, if thy Heart be a murderer and
devourer? He will have a Newborn Man, who yields himself up to him in
righteousness and in the fear of God; him, the Treader upon the Serpent
takes into his Arms, and makes him an heavenly Image, such a one is a child
of Heaven, and not thy Or, thy subtle cunning seeming holiness.
Fox.

29. Now it may be asked, wherefore thou art called the Antichrist? Hearken,
thou art Or, against Christ.
the Opposer of Christ, and thou have built thy self a seeming [holy]
hypocritical Kingdom, with a great show: [and patience]: therein thou
exercisest thy hypocrisy: thou carriest the Law of God upon thy lips, and thou
teach it, but with thy deeds thou deniest the power thereof: thy heart is
only bent upon the spirit of this world, the Kingdom of thy hypocrisy tends
only to thy own honor [and repute] under a pretended holiness: all knees
must bend before thee, as if thou were Christ; and thou have the heart of a
greedy Wolf.

30. Thou boastest that thou have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet
thy self is in the Abyss: thy heart hangs on thy Keys, and not on the Heart
of God, thou have the Keys of the Chist of Gold, and not of the breaking
through, by confidence in God: thou make many Cannons, Ordinances, and Orders.
Laws, and yet thy self keep none: and thy Cannons, Ordinances, and Orders.
Law is to as much purpose, as the Tower of Babell [was] which should have
reached to Heaven; and thy Cannons, Ordinances, and Orders.
Laws reach to Heaven as much as that did.

31. Thou prayest before God, but in thy wolvish Beast: the Spirit of this
world, (and not God,) receives thy Prayers; for thy heart is a devourer, and
enters into the devourer; thou desire not earnestly to enter into God, but
merely with thy historical hypocritical mouth, and thy heart presses
earnestly into the spirit of this world: thou desire only much temporal
goods, honor, power, and authority in this world, and so thereby thou drawest
the Or, Kingdom.
Region of this world to thee.

32. Thou suppressest the miserable and needy under thy feet, and thou
constrainest him with necessity, and make him vain [or carelessly wicked] so
that he runs after thy Beast and gazeth upon thee, and also becomes a
servant of the Opposer of Christ: thy Beast whereon thou ridest, is thy
strength and power, which thou usurpest to thy self: thou fatnest thy Beast
with the fatness of the earth, and thou crammest it with the sweat of the
needy: it is filled up with the tears of the miserable; whose sighs and
groans press in through the Gate of the Deep to God, and (with their
pressing in) they Or, stir up.
awaken the Anger of God in thy Beast; as the blood of Abel did the Anger in
Cain.

33. Thus thou come galloping with thy prancing Horse, and thou ridest before
the Gate of Heaven, and desire Rest, forgiveness or comfort.
abstinence, and in thy shape thou art a Wolf. What shall Saint Peter say to
it, do thou suppose that he will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven? O no! he has none for Wolves: he has but one for himself, he had
never any to spare for others.

34. Would thou get into Heaven? then thou must put off thy Wolf, and get
into a Lambs skin: not with hypocrisy, in a Corner, [ Closet, Cell, or in
secret.
Chamber] Cloister, or Wilderness [and Hermitage] but with earnestness in the
New Birth: and thy Light must shine forth in Righteousness and Mercifulness,
to the overthrow of the Kingdom of the Devil, and it must destroy his Nest,
with kind well-doing to the needy.

35. Hearken thou Antichristian scorner: it is not enough for thee to stand and
say; I have the true ground of the knowledge [that leadeth] to the Kingdom of
Heaven? I have found the true Religion; and do condemn every one that has
not thy knowledge, or does not consent to thy opinion: thou say such a one
is a Heretic, and of the Devil; and thou art a Wolf, and do nothing else
but confound the sheep with thy fierceness, and causest them to offend, and
to calumniate those whom neither thou nor they know, as the Ephesians did by
Paul. Do thou suppose that thou have hunted away the Wolf by this means?
or have thou not rather generated a heap of young scornful Wolves, which
houle and yell, and every one would devour, and yet know not where the evil
Beast is, nor especially, that evillist Beast of all, which generated them: O
blind Babell, the Kingdom of Christ does not consist herein, but the
abominable Antichrist of Confusion in Babell.

36. But what can be said, the Devil will have it no otherwise? When his
Kingdom begins to be stormed [battered and assaulted] at one place, then he
blows up the storm all over [as well in one as in another] in the children
of God the Spirit of Punishment [vengeance or reproofe] is stirred up; and in
the worldly Beastiall Man, the Devil blows up mere scorning and disgracing
Mockers: for they have the Kingdom of Christ in the History, and the Devils
Kingdom in themselves as their own possession.

37. What does thy knowledge avail thee thou Opposer of Christ, that thou
know how to speak of the Kingdom of Heaven, of the suffering and Death of
Christ, and of the New Birth in Christ, when thou art without it, sticking
merely in the History? Shall not thy knowledge be a witness against thee,
which shall judge thee? or will thou say: thou art not the Antichrist of
Babell? Surely thou art the hypocrite, and thou fatenest thy evil Beast ye
more and more, and thou art the devourer in the Revelation of John: thou
dwell not only at Rome, but thou have possessed the breadth of the Earth, I
have seen thee in the Spirit? and therefore it is, that I write of thee, thou
Wonder of the World, of Heaven, and of Hell.

38. Thus this Kingdom took beginning with Cain: and it has its ground from
the Devil, who is a Mocker of God; for the Devil desires nothing else but
strong and mighty exalting in his own power above the Thrones of Heaven: but he
cannot get in, and therefore he is so maliciously enraged: and his source [or
quality] stands in the anguish, not toward the Birth, but toward the Or,
Torment of fire.
source of fire.

Of the Kingdom of Christ in this world.
39. Seeing now Man is entered into the Spirit of this world, and has all
Gates in [him] viz. the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of Hell, and also
the Kingdom of this world: and must thus live in the press [or narrow chink]
between heaven and this world; where the Devil stirs up one Mocker after
another (who are brought up by the Kingdom of fierceness,) and continually
stirs them up against the Children of God, so that the world is full of
Tyrants, and Beastiall bloody incestuous persons: also murderers and thieves:
and because covetousness grew up; therefore the Office of Ruling was most
profitable, that the wicked Hunter, persecutour, or oppressor.
Driver might be stopped by power [and authority].

40. And so it is seen how the Providence of God is come to the help of the
Kingdom of this world: and has by the Spirit of this world stirred up Rulers;
who have inflicted punishment; yet the Spirit of God complains of them, that
they are turned Tyrants, who suppress all with their power: and the Abellish
Church in love consist not therein, but the strong might of God, for the
suppressing of evil Doers.

41. It is true indeed, the Judges and Kings, as also Princes and Rulers [or
Magistrates] are the Officers of God in the house of this [foure Elementary]
world, whom God (because of sin) has set to punish secretly, that thereby
the wicked drivers [and oppressours] might be stopped.

42. And their state [condition, Jurisdiction, or authoritie] is founded in the
Originality of the Essence of all Essences, where God in the beginning created
the Thrones, according to his Eternal Wisdom: where then (both in Heaven and
also in Hell) there are Or, Throne-Princes.
Thrones and Principalities, and also a Region [or Dominion] according to the
seven Spirits of the Eternal Nature, of which here much ought not to be said,
for the World holds it impossible to know such things: whereas yet a Spirit
borne in God Or, has knowledge of.
searches into the Kingdom of He^ven.

43. But a true Judge, who judges according to righteousness, he is Gods
Steward [Viceroy or Vicegerent] in the Kingdom of this world; and that it
might not be needful that God should always power forth his wrath upon the
people [and Nations], therefore he has put the sword into their hands to
protect and defend the righteous, and to punish the Evil: and if any do so,
in earnest uprightness (in the fear of God, and nothing partially for Or, for
by-respects.
favor) then he is Great in the Kingdom of Heaven; for he bears the [sword]
for righteousness, and he shines, as the Sun and Moon, exceeding the
Stars.

44. But if he turn tyrant, and does nothing but devour the bread of his
subjects: and only adorneth his state and dignity in pride, to the oppression
of the needy, and hunteth after nothing but covetousness, accounting the needy
to be but his dogs, and places his Office only in voluptuousness, and will
not hear the oppressed; then he is an insulting tormenting Prince and Ruler in
the Kingdom of Antichrist, and is of the number of the Tyrants, and he rides
upon Antichrists Horse.

45. And we are to consider, how the true Christian Church, is environed with
the Cainish Antichristian Church, and how they live in one only Kingdom in
this world. As the first Principle incloseth all, and yet can comprehend or
hold nothing; but the Kingdom of Heaven is (from Eternity) brought forth out
of the Anger, as a fair sweet smelling flower, out of the Earth; so also the
holy Church stands in the Antichristian; where they both together go to pray
before God, and one is accepted by God, and the other [is accepted] by the
Spirit of this world, each Image goes into its own Region [or Kingdome].

46. There is nothing more secret in this world, than the Kingdom of Christ;
and also nothing more manifest than the kingdom of Christ; And it is often so,
that he who supposes he has it, and lives therein, has it not, but has the
Kingdom of Antichrist, and he is an hypocrite and scorner, and has the
Serpents Or, Image.
figure: and his heart also is but the heart of a greedy Wolf, and he stands
not in the Angelical Or, Image.
Figure.

47. On the contrary, many a one is in great anguish and longs after The
kingdom of Christ.
it, and generateth very painfully, he would feign have The kingdom of Christ.
it; but then the Devil rusheth upon him: and after stirs up irksomeness
[vexation] and discontent, and also overwhelmeth him with great sins, so that
he knows not himself: and then dejecteth him with impatience and doubting:
and his heart stands continually in anguish, it would feign get out of Evil,
and endeavors continually for abstinence or Forgiveness, comfort or rest.
forbearance, many times with groans, sighing, and longing: But then the
Devil holds his sins before him, and barreth up the door of the Grace of
God, that he might despair.

48. Yet he sows the Pearl in his afflicting anguish: and the Devil
covers it in him, that he may not know it, neither does he know himself: he
sows into the Kingdom of God, and knows not his own seed; but the seed
of Sin, and of the Hunter. And so he consents not to the sins which he
commits; but the Devil (with his Sect.
followers [or associates] over-powre him, so that the Adamicall Man in the
Anger does that which the newborn [Man] in the holy Element wills not: now
though he does it, yet the new Man in the Image does it not, but the old Man in
the Or, in the striving sour Elements.
Anger; And therefore there is in him a continual strife, and he runs
continually to repentance; where yet the hidden Man in the Or, in the striving
sour Elements.
Anger cannot reach the Lilly, but the hidden Man [doth it].

49. Therefore he stands often in doubt and impatience: and in such a Man
there is great strife; he knows not himself: he sees and knows nothing
else but his wickedness, and yet is borne in God; for his Spirit continually
breaks the gate of the Darkness: but then the Anger in him does hold him
back that he cannot enter in; but yet sometimes he reaches a Glimpse: from
whence the soul is cheared, and the Pearl is sown in a very dark valley.

50. And then when he considers the sweet fore taste of the Pearl, which he
had, then the soul would feign go through, and it seeks the Pearl; but
then comes the Black Spirit, and covers it from him, and then the storm and
strife about the Pearl begins, each would have its right: the soul would
have it: and then the Devil covers it, and casts the wrath and Or,
infirmities in the way of the Pearl.
sin before it, that the soul should behold it self therein; then there
falls to be weakness and neglect, so that the poor soul becomes weary,
faint, and timorous, and so sits still, and thinks continually of some
other way to Abstinence, [or Comfort or Rest.
Amendment] how it might best get the Pearl.

51. But the Driver or Persecutour the Devil.
Hunter is a cunning Artist, which comes then with the Region of this world,
with worldly lusts of the flesh, with temporal honor and riches, and holds
them before the poor soul, that it might bite at his Husks, or Crabbs.
Swines-Apples: thus he leads many a one for a long while, with his Chains,
captive in the Anger of God.

52. But if the Noble Grain of Mustard-seede be sown, then the Noble virgin
of God preserves it, and makes the poor soul continually careful, to
endeavor for Abstinence, and to enter into fight with the Devil. O what a
wonderful way is it the Children of God go in this miserabfe house of flesh!
which the Reason of the Hypocrites neither comprehends, nor can believe,
only they that have tried it, know it.

53. Though indeed the high precious knowledge is not [attained] except one
has overcome in the storm, and has vanquished the Devil: so that the soul
has once attained the heavenly Gate, and gotten the Garland of Victory, which
the lovely virgin of chastity sets up, as a triumphant Ensign, of its
conquest in its dear Champion, Christ, and there rises up the Or, the
knowledge in the wonders which neither eye has seen nor ear heard, nor ever
entered into the heart to conceive.
wonderful knowledge, yet not in perfection.

54 For the old Enemy is subtle, and strong: who still assaulteth the soul
again, to try, how he may afflict and deceive it; if he cannot overwhelme it
with sins, then he begins an outward war with it, and stirs up the
children of Or, Iniquity.
malice against it, so that they contemn, mock, deride, and vilify it, and
do all manner of evil to it; and so they lay wait for its body and goods,
they jeere, reproach, and scorn it; and account it as the of-scouring of the
world: they upbraid it for its infirmities: if it do but reprove their faults
and unrighteousness, then it must be an hypocrite [with them].

55. Not only the Children of malice do thus, but the Devil many times
brings the Children of God, by his snares to be against it, so that in their
blindness they grow furious and raging, as Saul at Jerusalem did against
Stephen. Thus the poor soul must be afflicted among Thorns and Thistles, and
continually expect when the evil world shall tear away the body.

The victorious Gate of the poor soul.
56. Now says Reason, What is the best Counsel and Remedy for the poor
soul? What shall it do in this Bath of Thorns and Thistles? Behold, we will
show thee the counsel of the Or, Wisdom of God.
virgin, as it is given us for a victorious comfort: and we will write it for
a firm Memorial to our selves; for it may come that we our selves may stand
in need of it: as we have already for a tedious while sweltered in this Bath
of Thorns and Thistles: wherein we also attained this Garland; and therefore
we must not be silent, but set forth the gift of the virgin (which helps)
against all the Or, power.
Gates of the Devil.

57. Behold thou poor soul in thy Bath of Thorns, where is thy home? Are
thou at home in this world? Wherefore then do thou not seek the favor and
friendship of the world? Wherefore do thou not hunt after temporal honor,
after pleasure and riches, that it may go well which thee in this world? Why
do thou make thy self a fool to the world, and art every ones Owl and
footstool? Wherefore do thou suffer thy self to be despised and abused by
those that are inferior to thee, and know less than thou? Why should thou
not be stately and brave with those appearing holy hypocrites? and then thou
would be beloved, and no body would abuse thee: and thou would be more safe
and secure in thy body and goods, than in this way, wherein thou art but the
worlds Owl and fool.

58. But my loving virgin says: O thou my beloved Companion, whom I have
chose^, go with me, I am not of this world: I will bring thee out o^ th^s
^orld into my Kingdom, there is mere pleasant rest and welfare: in my
Kingdom is mere joy, honor, and glory: there is no Hunter, persecutour or
oppressor.
Driver in it: I will adorn thee with the glory of God, and put thee on, my
bright Ornament. I will make thee a Lord in Heaven* and a Judge over this
world; thou shall help to judge the Hunter, persecutour or oppressor.
D^iver in h^^ w^ckednesse: he shall be laid at thy feet for a footstool: and
he shall not open his jaws against thee: but he shall be barred up for ever in
his fierce Gate: thou shall eat at my Table, there shall be no grudging nor
want: my fruit is sweeter and pleasanter, than the fruit of this world; thou
shall never have any woe arise from it: all thy doings shall be pleasant
cheerfulness and amiable discourse: mere humility in great love shall shine
before thee. All thy Companions are so very beautiful, thou shall have joy in
them all: wherefore do thou esteem thy corruptible life? thou shall enter
into an Incorruptible Life that shall endure Eternally.

59. But I have a little against thee: I have drawn thee out of the thorny
Bath, wherein thou were a wild Beast, and have figured thee for my Image; and
yet thy wild Beast stands in the Thorny Bath, which I will not take into my
bosom, thou stand yet in In the four Elements in flesh and blood.
thy wild Beast; now when the world takes its wild Beast which belongs
thereto, then I will take thee, and so every one shall have its own.

60. Wherefore do thou love that wild Beast so much, which does but afflict
thee? And besides, thou can not take it with thee, neither does it belong to
thee, but to the world: let the world do what it will with it, stay thou with
me: it is but a little while before thy Beast breaks, and then thou art
unbound, and abidest with me.

61. But I al^o have a Law in my Love, viz. I not only desire [to have] thee,
but also thy brothers and sisters which are in the world, who are yet in part
unregenerated, whom the Hunter, or persecutour.
Driver holds captive; thou must not hide nor bury thy Pearl, but show the
same to them, that they also may come into my Arms; thy mouth must not be
shut, thou shall walk in my Law and Or, Tell the Truth.
declare the Truth.

62. And although the Driver compasses thee about, and will fetch thee away,
yet there is a limit set for thy Beast how far it shall go, the Hunter
cannot break [or destroy] it, sooner than the limited time: and then if he do
break it, it is done only for [the manifesting of] Gods deeds of wonder, and
for thy best good: all thy stripes in the Thorny Bath, shall stand in my
Kingdom for a fair ensign of thy victory; and moreover, thou shall have
great joy in it, before the Angels of God, in that thou have despised the
Hunter, and art gone out of a wild Birth into an Angelical one; O how thou will rejoice when thou shall think upon thy wild Beast, which Vexed and
tormented.
plagued thee day and night, in that thou art Or, Released.
loosed from it.

63. Then thou have great honor for thy great shame; and therefore why art
thou so sad? lift up thy self out of thy wild Beast, as a fair flower
springs out of the Earth; or do thou suppose, thou wild Beast, that my
Spirit is mad, that it so little esteems thee? Thou say I am indeed thy
Beast, yet thou art borne out of me, if I had not grown forth, thou had not
been neither: Hearken thou my Beast: I am greater than thou: when thou were to
be, there I was thy Master-framer: my Essences are out of the Root of the
Eternity, but thou art from this world, and thou breakest [or corruptest] but I
live in my source [or quality] Eternally; therefore am I, much nobler than
thou: thou live in the fierce [wrathfull] source; but I will put my strong
fierce property into the Light, into the Eternal Joy: my works stand in power,
and thine remain in the figure; when I shall once be released from thee, then
I shall take thee no more to be my Beast again; but [I will take] my new body
which I brought forth in thee, in thy deepest root of the holy Element. I will
no more have thy rough issues of the four Elements, Death swalloweth thee up:
But I spring and grow out of thee, with my new body, as a flower out of its
root; I will Or, Leave thee.
forget thee. For the glory of God (which Or, fled from thee.
cursed thee together with the Earth) has grafted my root again in his
Son, and my body grows in the holy Element before God. Therefore thou art
but my wild Beast, which do plague me, and make me sick here, upon which
the Devil rides, as upon his accursed Horse: and although the world scorn
thee, I regard not that; it does that for my sake: and yet it cannot see me?
neither can it know me, and wherefore then is it so mad? It cannot murder
me, for I am not in it.

64. But thou mad world, what shall the Spirit say [of thee]? Art thou not my
Brother: the Essences of my Spirit stir thee: go forth out of thy Beast, and
then I will go with my Companions into the Garden of Roses, into the Lilly of
God; why keep thou back, and suffer thy self to be held by the Devil?
Is he not thy enemy, he does but hunt after thy Pearl; and if he get it, then
thy Spirit becomes a Worm and Beast in its figure; why suffer thou thy
Angelical Image to be taken away, for temporal pleasure sake? Thy pleasure is
only in the corruptible Beast, but what does that avayle the soul? If thou
do not go out from it, thou will get Eternal woe and sorrow by it.

65. Or what shall thy Noble Warrior Christ say to it? Have not I [saith
Christ] broken thy wild Beast? am not I entered into Death? I have cut off from
thy soul, the four Elements, and the wickedness [or malice] of the Devil:
and have Or, ingrafted.
inoculated thy soul into my virtue [or power] that thy body might spring and
grow again out of my body, out of the holy Element before God; and I have
bound my self to thee by my Spirit: have I not made a Covenant with thee, that
thou should be mine? Have I not given thee my body for food, and my blood for
drink? Have I not given thee my Spirit for a Or, leader.
Conductour, and allotted thee my Kingdom for thy own? Wherefore do thou
despise me, and go away from me? Thou runnest after the Wolves and the
Dogs, and howlest with them, and thou seek only after anger, and how thou
may bite [and devoure]: thou swallowest nothing but Wrath, malice, or sins
and wickedness.
fierceness [into thee]; What shall I say? I have in my suffering and Death
(by my regeneration) generated no such Beast; and therefore I will not have it:
except it be again borne anew in me, to an Angelical Image, and then it
shall be with me.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the New Regeneration in Christ [from] out of the Old Adamicall Man.

The Blossom of the Holy Bud.

The Noble Gate of the Right [and] True Christianity.

1. BEcause we have written hitherto, of the Originality of the Essence of all
Essences, how all [things] take beginning: and have showed the Eternal
Enduring [substance] and also the transitory; therefore we will now show
further, what is most profitable for Man.
him to do, and to leave undone; wherein we will show, what God, by his
Eternal Word has ever spoken (by his Holy Spirit) by Moses, and by the
Prophets; as also what the Mouth of Christ and his Apostles have spoken, what
God will have us Men to do, and leave undone.

2. Seeing we poor Adamicall Men, are with our Father Adam and Mother Eve,
gone forth out of the incorruptible, and unchangeable Inheritance, out from our
true Native Country, into a strange Inn, where we are not at home, but are
merely Guests: and where we must in so great misery continually expect, when
our strange Host will thrust us out: and bereave us of all our ability, and
take away from us all we have, so that we are truly swimming in a deep Sea of
misery, and swelter in a strange Bath of Thorns and Thistles: and we know for
certain, and see it also daily before our eyes, that we are no other than
Pilgrims in this Inn, which must continually expect when the breaker [or
destroyer] will come, and take our heart, senses, and mind, also our flesh and
blood, and goods; therefore it is indeed most necessary for us to learn to
know and find the way to our true Native Country, that we may avoid the
great misery and calamity, and enter into an Eternal Inn, which is our own,
whence none may drive us out.

3. But because there are two of these Innes, which are Eternal without end
and expulsion: and the one standing in Eternal Joy (in great brightness and
perfection) in mere love and meekness: but the other in great perplexity,
anguish, misery, distress, hunger, and thirst, where never any refreshment
from the Love of God comes; therefore it is very necessary that we learn
with great earnestness, to know the true way of Entrance into the Eternal
Joy, that we may not with the Devils Dogs howl Eternally in the anguishing
Inn.

4. And now if we look round about us every where, upon Heaven and Earth, the
Stars and Elements; yet we can see and know no way [or passage] where we
may go to our Rest: we see no other than the way of the entrance in, of our
Life, and then of the end of our Life, where our body goes into the Earth, and
all our Labor (also our Arts and Glory) is inherited by another, who also
vexes himself therewith for a while, and then follows after us: and that
continues so from the beginning of the world to its end.

5. We can in our misery never Understand, or comprehend.
know, where our Spirit does abide, when the body breaks, and comes to be a
Carcass, except we be again newborn out of this world, that so we may
dwell in this world as to our body, and as to our mind in another eternal
perfect new life, wherein our spirit and mind puts on a new Man, wherein he
must and shall live Eternally: and then we first know what we are, and where
our home is.

6. Seeing then we clearly see and understand, that we have our beginning
altogether Earthly: and are sown in a field (as Grain is sown in the Earth);
where our life springs up, grows, and at length flourishes as Corn [or
graine] does out of the Earth; where we can know in us nothing but an earthly
life; yet we see very well that the Or, Stars.
Constellations and Elements qualify [or work] in us, and nourish, drive,
govern, and guide us, also fill us and bring us up, and so preserve our life a
while: and then break it again, and turn it to dust and ashes; like all
Beasts, Trees, Plants, and all [things] that grow, but we see not how it is
with us afterward, whether all be ended with it, or whether we go with our
Spirit and Conversation into another life: and therefore it is most necessary
to learn and to seek the right way.

7. Now that is testified to us by the Writings of those who have been
regenerated out of this Or, transitorinesse.
Earthlinesse, and at length are entered into a holy and uncorruptible life, who
have written and taught of an Eternal joyful Life, and also of an Eternal
perishihg and anguishing Life: and have taught us how we should follow after
them; and how we should step into a new Birth, where we should be regenerated
out of this Earthlinesse, into a new Creature: and that we should do nothing
else about it but follow them: and then we should find Or, really.
in deed and in truth, what they had spoken, written, and taught: yea even in
this life we should see our true Native Country in the new Regeneration, and
Uunderstand, or apprehend.
know it (in the newborn Man) in great Joy, whereas then our whole mind
would incline to it: and in our new knowledge (in the new Man) true Faith would
grow, and the hearty desire of the unfeigned love toward the hidden God; for
which noble knowledge sake, many times Holy people.
they have yielded their earthly body and life, to the unregenerated gainsayer
(according to his Devilish, malicious, revengefulnesse) into Death, and have
taken it with great Joy; and have chosen for themselves the Eternal
uncorruptible Life.

8. Seeing then, there is the greatest and highest Love in the new Birth, not
only toward God, or ones self, but also toward Men, our brothers and
sisters: and seeing those that were unregenerated, have had their desires and
love so carried toward Men, that they have very earnestly taught men with
meekness and reproving: and that their love to them in their Teaching, has
been so great, that they have even willingly yielded their life up to Death,
and left their earthly goods, and all they had, in assured hope, (in their
strong and firm knowledge) to receive all again in great honor [and glory].

9. And therefore we also have longed to seek after that Pearl, of which we
write at present; and though now the unregenerated (in the Kingdom of this
world) will give no credit to us (as it has happened to our forefathers, from
the children of this world) we cannot help that, but it shall stand for a
witness against them, which shall be a woe to them Eternally, that they have
so foolishly ventured [and lost] so great an Eternal Glory and holiness, for
a little pleasure of the eye, and lust of the flesh.

10. And we know (in our deep knowledge) that The holy forefathers.
they have rightly taught and written, that there is one only God, which is
threefold in Personal Distinction, as is beforementioned. And we also know
that he is the Creator of all things, that he has generated all out of his
own Essence or Being.
substance, both light and darkness, as also the Thrones and Or, Regiments.
Dominions of all things. Especially we know (as the holy Scripture witnesses
throughout) tnat he has created Man to his own Image and similitude that he
should Eternally be, and live in the Kingdom of Heaven, in him.

11. And then we know also, that this world (wherein we now are and live) was
generated, out of the Eternal Original, in time; (through the pure Element)
in the Fiat, and so created; and so, The world of four Elements.
it is not the substance of the holy pure Element; but an issue [or out-birth]
out of the Eternal Limbus of God, wherein the Eternal Element consists, which
is before the clear Deity, wherein consists Paradise, and the Kingdom of
Heaven: and yet the Limbus, together with the pure Element, is not the pure
Deity, which is alone holy in it self, and has the virtue of the Eternal
Light shining in it: but has no Essences (in the light of the Clarity) in it:
for the Essences are generated from the virtue, Or, of.
according to the Light, as a Desire; and the desire attracteth to it, from
whence the Essences proceed, as also the Eternal Darkness in the source, as
is beforementioned.

12. Seeing then God is all in all, and has created Man to his Image and
similitude, to live with him Eternally in his Love, Light, Joy and Glory;
therefore we cannot say, that he was merely created out of the corruptibility
of this world: for therein is no Eternal perfect Life, but Death, and
perplexity, anguish, and necessity; but as God dwells in himself, and goes
through all his works, incomprehensibly to them: and is hindered by nothing; so
was the similitude before him out of the pure Element: it was indeed created in
this world, yet the Kingdom of this world should not comprehend that [Image],
but the similitude (Man) should mightily, and in perfect [power or] virtue,
Rule through the Essences, (with the Essences out of the pure Element of the
Paradisicall holy Limbus) through the Dominion of this world.

13. Therefore he breathed into him the living soul out of the Eternal will
of the Father: (which will goes thither only to generate his Eternal Son:)
and out of that will, he breathed into Man; the same is his Eternal soul,
which must set its regenerated will in the Eternal will of the Father, merely
in the Or, Son of God.
Heart of God, and so it receives the Or, power.
virtue of the Heart of God, and also his holy Eternal Light, wherein
Paradise, the Kingdom of Heaven, and also the Eternal Joy springs up; and
in this virtue [or power] it goes through all things, and Hurts or moves.
breaks none of them, and is mighty over ill [things] as God himself is: for
it lives in the virtue [or power] of the Heart of God, and eats of the Word
[that is] generated out of God.

14. Thus also we know, that the Soul is a Spirit: generated out of God the
Father, in the Throne and entrance out of the recomprehended [or reconceived]
will, out of the Darkness into the Light, to the generating of the Heart of
God: and that [soule] is free, to Elevate it self above Above the Heart of God
as Lucifer did.
it, in the will, or in the Meekness in the will of the Father, to comprehend
and incline it self to the Birth of the Heart of God the Father.

15. But its body (which is the true Image of God, which God created) stands
before the clear Deity, and is in and out of the holy pure Element: and the
Limbus of the Element (out of which the Essences generate) is the Paradise, an
Habitation of God the holy Trinity; Thus was Man an Image and similitude before
God, wherein God dwells, in which (through his Eternal Wisdom) he would
manifest his Wonders.

16. And now as we understand, that Man (with die similitude wherein God
dwells) is not merely at home in this world, much less in the stinking
Cadaver. Corpse.
Carkesse; so it is manifest (in that we are so very blind as to Paradise)
that our first Parents (with their Spirit) are gone out of the heavenly
Paradise, into the Spirit of this world: where then the Spirit of this world,
instantly captivated their body, and made it Earthly; so that body and soul
are perished: and now we have the pure Element no more for our body, but the
issue [or Out-Birth] ( viz. the four Elements, with the Dominion of the
Stars) and* he Sun only is the light of the body: also this body does not
belong to the Deity: God does not discover himself in the stinking Carkesse
[or Corps]; but in the holy Man, in the pure Image which he created in the
beginning.

17. Now Man being thus fallne, out of the holy into the unholy, out of the
Image of God into the Earthly corruptibility, therefore his body stood in the
corruptible Death, and his soul in the Eternal will of the Father; yet Or,
averted.
turned away from the Heart of God, into the Spirit of this world; captivated
by the Eternal Darkness: for whatsoever goes out from God, goes into the
Eternal Darkness, and without the Heart of God there is no Light.

18. And now there was no [remedie or] Counsel for this Image, except it were
new regenerated by the soul, through the Heart and Light of God, through which
the new Element before God ( viz. the body of the soul) is regenerated; or
else the Deity would not nor could not dwell therein; this, Man (by his own
virtue or power) was not able to Or, bring to pass.
attain: therefore if it were to be done, then the Barmherzigkeit,
Mercifulness, or Mercy of God must do it.

19. And here we give the Reader (that loves God) to understand clearly in
the Great Deep, what the pure Element is, wherein our body (before the Fall of
Adam) stood, and in the new Regeneration now at present stands also therein;
It is the heavenly Corporeity, which is not barely and merely a Spirit, wherein
the clear Deity dwells: it is not the pure Deity it self; but [it is]
generated out of the Essences of the holy Father, when as he continually and
Eternally goes in through the Eternal Gate, in the Eternal mind in himself
(through the recomprehended will) into the Eternal Habitation, where he
generateth his Eternal Word.

20. Thus the pure Element is the Barm [or warme] in the Esseces of the
attracting to [be] the Word: the Essences are Paradise, and the Barm [or warme]
is the Element: thus now the Father continually speaks the Eternal Word, and
so the Holy Ghost goes forth out of the speaking: and that which is spoken
forth is the Eternal wisdom: and it is a virgin: and the pore Element ( viz.
the Barm [or warme] is her body: wherein the Holy Ghost discovers himself
through the out-spoken Wisdom; and so the flash [or glance] out of the Light
of God in the Holy Ghost, is called hertz [or heart]; this receives the
Element in the Essences of Paradise, that it may be substantial, and then it
is called ig [or ed]: and the strength of the Father, and the great Might of
the fire, goes as a flash into the Essences, and that is called keit [or
nesse], like a might [or force] which presses through, as a sound [or noise]
which severeth not the substance asunder; and this together is called
Barm-hertz-ig-keit [Warm-heart-ed-nesse] or Or, Mercy.
Mercifulness, and this stands before God: and God (the holy Trinity)
dwells therein.

21. And the virgin of the Wisdom of God is the Spirit of the pure Element:
and is therefore called a virgin, because it is so chaste [or pure], and
generateth nothing: yet as the flaming Spirit in Man's body, generateth nothing,
but opens all secresies, and the body is that which Or, brings that which
is hidden, to Essence.
generateth, so also here; the wisdom, (or the Eternal virgin) of God,
opens all the great Wonders in the holy Element; for there are the Essences,
wherein the buddes [or fruits] of Paradise spring up; and if we take the
Eternal Band (and that together) wherein the Deity generateth from Eternity,
then it is called the Eternal Limbus of God, wherein consists the Essence of
all Essences.

22. For in the root of the Limbus in the dark Anxiety, is the Anger and the
Darkness, and the first cause of the Essences; but because we have before
handled it at large, therefore here we leave it thus, for we should not be
well understood [in briefe]: and so we will reach after our Immanuel.

23. Thus know (my beloved Reader) that our Father Adam is gone out of this
Glory into the Out-Birth of the substance of this world: and now if he be to be
helped, then the Barmhertzigkeit, or Or, Mercy.
Mercifulness of God (as above mentioned) must new regenerate him: and in this
Or, Mercy.
Mercifulness of God Man was Or, Predestined.
foreseen (before the foundation of the world was laid, to live eternally
therein, for (as to his soul) he is out of the eternal will of God the
Father, out of which this Mercifulness is generated.

The Gate of Immanuel.
24. Therefore know (beloved Christian Mind) how thou art helped: and consider
this Gate diligently, it is an earnest one: for Moses and all the Prophets
witness concerning these things ( viz. concerning our salvation in restoring
[us]:) be not drown here, it is the fairest Gate of this Book, the more thou
read it, the more thou will be in love with it.

25. Seeing now we know, that we lost our heavenly Man in our first fall, so
also we know that a new Heavenly Man.
one is generated to us in the Mercifulness of God, into we should and must
enter, if we will be the children of God: and without Heavenly Man.
this we are the children of the Anger of God.

26. And as the Prophets have written of it, so the New Man, (which is borne
Or, in.
to us of God) is the Son of the Virgin: not of Earthly flesh and blood, also
not of the seed of Man, but conceived by the Holy Ghost, and borne of a pure
divine chaste virgin: and (in this world) revealed [or manifested] in our flesh
and blood: and is entered with his holy body into Death: and has separated the
earthly [body] together with the might of the Anger, from the holy Element, and
has Brought it into the soul again.
restored the soul again, and has opened the Gate to the Light of God
again, so that the averted soul can (with the Essences of the Father in the
holy will) reach the Light of God again.

27. Therefore now we know, that we were not created to generate [ Or, in an
Earthly, but heavenly manner.
that which is] Earthly, but Heavenly, out of the body of the pure Element;
wvhich [body] Adam had before his sleep, and [before] his Eve [was], when he
was neither Man nor Woman [male nor female], but one only Image of God, full
of chastity, out of the pure Element; he should have generated an Image again
like himself: but because he went into the Spirit of this world, therefore his
body became earthly; and so the heavenly Birth was gone, and God must make the
Woman out of him, as is before mentioned; Now if we the children of Eve be to
be helped, then there must come a new virgin, and bear us a Son, who should
be God with us, and in us.

28. And therefore instantly at the Fall, the Word of God the Father (and in
the Word the Light) through the holy Ghost-entred into the ^^ey Element, and
into the chaste virgin of the wisdom of God, and made a precious Covenant, to
become a creature in this virgin, and to take away the Devils power in the
Anger, and to destroy his Kingdom; and this Christ would yield himself to be
in the perished humanity: and with his entering into Death, separate the Hell of
the Anger, and the kingdom of this world from us; and God the Father
discovered this Word (of the promised seed of the Woman) instantly (after the
Fall) in the Garden of Eden, where instantly it gave up it self (in the
Eternal Espousall) into the Center of the Light of Life, and separated all the
souls of Man (who have inclined themselves, and yielded themselves up to him,)
in the dying of their bodies; from the Anger of God, and from the Kingdom of
this world, and brought them in to him, (into the pure Element of the Paradise)
into the Joy, and into the chaste virgin of God, there to wait, till God break
the kingdom of this world, with the Stars and Elements; where then instantly
the pure Element shall be instead of the Out-Birth; and there shall spring and
grow the new body, upon the soul, in the holy Element before God eternally.

29. Now if we [would] consider his precious incarnation [or becoming Man],
then we must rightly open the eyes of the Spirit, and not be so earthly
minded, as at present they are, in Babell; and we must rightly consider, how
God is become Man; for the Scripture says; He was conceived and borne without
sin, of a pure virgin. Here consider now beloved Mind, what kind of virgin
that was? for all whatsoever is borne of the flesh and blood of this world, is
impure, and there is no pure virgin be generated, in this corrupted flesh and
blood; the Fall of Adam destroyed all: and it is all under sin, and there is
no pure virgin generated of Man's seed: and yet this Christ was conceived and
borne of a pure virgin.

30. Here the learned (of the Schools [or Universities] of this world must
stand still; and the Scholar (borne of God) must here begin to Or, teach.
learn concerning this Birth; for the Spirit of this world apprehends no
more here, this is foolishness to it: and though he go very far In studying
the literal wisdom of Reason, and be excellent therein.
, yet he is but in Babell, in his own Reason.

31. Therefore we set it down here (according to our knowledge) that the pure
chaste virgin (in which God was borne [or generated]) is the chaste virgin [that
is] in the presence of God: and it is an Eternal virgin; before ever Heaven
and Earth was created, it was a virgin, and that without blemish; and that pure
chaste virgin of God, put it self into Mary, in her In Mary's beginning to be a
humane Creature, or her becoming Man.
Incarnation, and her new Man, was in the holy Element of God: and therefore
she was the blessed among all Women, and the Lord was with her, as the Angel
said.

32. Thus now we may know, that God is All in All, and fills All, as it is
written; Am not I he that fills all things; and therefore we know, that the
holy pure Element in Paradise is his dwelling; which is the second Principle:
and is in all things, and yet the thing (as a dead dark out-Birth) knows it
[the second Principle] not (as the pot [knoweth not] its Potter) so also that
[thing] neither comprehends nor apprehends that [second Principle]. For I
cannot say (when I take hold of, or comprehend any thing) that I take hold of
the holy Element, together with the Paradise and the Deity, but I comprehend
the Out-Birth, the kingdom of this world, ( viz. the third Principle and the
substance thereof) and I move [or stirre] not the Deity therewith. And so we
are to know [and understand] that the holy new Men [is thus] hidden in the Old,
and not separated, but in the Temporal Death.

33. And now seeing the holy [thing] is in all plates, and seeing the soul is
a Spirit; therefore there is nothing wanting, but that our soul comprehend the
holy [thing], so that it has that for its own, and if once it be united with
that, then it attracteth [and putteth] on, the pure Element, wherein God
dwells.

34. And therefore thus we say of Mary: she has comprehended the Holy
Heavenly Eternal Virgin of God, and put on the Holy and Pure Element,
[together] with the Paradise, and yet was truly a virgin in this world
[generated] by Joachim and Anna. But she was not called a holy pure-virgin
according to her earthly Birth: the flesh which she had from Joachim and Anna,
was not pure, without spot; but her holiness and purity is according to the
Heavenly The wisdom of God.
virgin: besides, she brought not the heavenly virgin to her out of her own
ability; for the Angel said to her, The Holy Ghost shall came upon thee, and
the Power of the most High shall over-shadow thee; therefore that holy [thing]
that shall be borne of thee shall be called the Son of God.

35. Here understand [and consider] it rightly: the virtue [or power], is the
heavenly virgin (for she is the Mercifulnes.
Mercy of God: and the holy [thing] is the Center in that [vertue or power] and
that is the eternal Birth of the holy Trinity: and the Holy Ghost (which goes
forth out of the Center of God) overshadowed the Humanity of Marie. Thou must
not think, that the corrupted Humanity, has comprehended the holy Deity as its
own; so that we might as it were say, that Mary (in her corrupted humanity) is
like God; No: the very pure Element, together with the Paradise is inferior to
God: and though indeed we are generated out of his [power or] virtue; yet that
[vertue] is substantial, and God is purely Spirit; for the Name of God, has
its Original in the Center of the Spirit, and not in the Heaven: only the
Light in the Center, is the holy [thing], and [the light] ham no Center, for it
is the end of Or, of Nature.
All things.

36. Therefore we say of Mary, that she has received the heavenly Pledge,
which was unknown to Nature, and which she (in her outward Man) knew not at
all; viz. the heavenly chaste virgin of God; and in that [shee received], the
eternal Word of God the Father, which continues eternally in the Father: out
of which the Holy Ghost goes forth Eternally, wherein the whole Deity is
comprehended.

37. We cannot say that the heavenly virgin of the Barmhertziegkeit,
Mercifulness.
Mercy of God ( viz. that which entered into Mary out of the Counsel of God) is
become Earthly; but we say that the soul of Mary has comprehended the
heavenly virgin: and that the heavenly virgin has put the heavenly new pure
Garment of the holy Element, out of the chaste virgin of God ( viz. out of the [
Barmhertzigkeit, Mercifulness or] Mercy of God) on to the soul of Mary, as a
new Regenerated Man: and in that same she has conceived the Savior of all
the world, and borne him into this world. Therefore he said to the Jews; I am
from above, but you are from beneath, and of this world; I am not of this
world: and be said also to Pilate; My kingdom is not of this world.

This ought highly to be Considered.
38. You are to know, that as Mary did bear the heavenly Image ( viz. a new
Man borne out of the Mercy of God) in the old Earthly [Man] ( viz. in the
kingdom of this world) which kingdom she had in her as her own, which yet
did not comprehend the New Man; so also the Word of God entered (into the body
of the virgin Mary) into the heavenly Matrix, into the Eternal virgin of God,
and that [word] in that [Eternall virgin of God] became a heavenly Man, out of
the Paradisicall holy pure Element, in the Person of the new Regenerated Man of
the virgin Mary: and (with his Eternal Deity) was together generated in the
beginning own soul of Mary, and (with his entrance of his Deity) has brought
the soul of Mary again into the holy Father; so that the souls of Men (which
were gone out from the Deity) were newborn again in the soul of Christ, and
begotten to the Heart of God.

39. For Christ brought no strange soul out of Heaven with him, into the
highly blessed heavenly pure virgin; but as all souls are generated, so Christ
also received his soul in his body, though in his undefiled body of holiness,
which was become Mary's own: For we must say, that the pure Element in the
Barmhertzigkeit, Mercifulness.
Mercy of God, became Mary's own, wherein her new body ( Or, belonging to.
in her Original soul) consists.

The most precious Gate.
40. For no New or strange.
other soul is generated in any Man, (but a new body;) but the soul is
renewed Or, by.
with the pure Deity: and Christ with his entrance into Death (where he severed
his holy Man from the Kingdom of this world) severed The soul.
it also from the fierceness of the eternal Anger, and from the Or, working
property.
source of the Originality.

41. And as the pure Element (which is in the presence of God, and wherein God
dwells) is truly every where in the whole space of this world, and has
attracted to it the Kingdom of this world, ( viz. The pure one Elements own
Out-birth.
its own Out-Birth) as a body, and yet this very body does not comprehend the
Element, no more than the body [comprehended] the soul: so Christ also has
truly, in the body of the virgin Mary, attracted to him [or put on] our humane
Essences, and is become our Brother; yet these humane Essences cannot
comprehend his Eternal Deity, only the new Man, borne in God, comprehends
the Deity, after the same manner as the body does the soul, and no otherwise.

42. Therefore the body of Christ is inferior to the Deity; and in these onr
humane Essences he suffered Death, and his Deity of the holy Man in the pure
Element, entered together also into Death, and bereaved Death of its power, and
did separate the natural soul (which Christ commended to his Father, when he
dyed on the Cross) from the Kingdom of this world, also from Death, from the
Devil, and from Hell (in the strong divine Might [or power]), and opened a
Gate for us all, who come to him, and incline our selves (with mind and
thoughts) to him; then the Father draws our soul (which is in him) into the
pure love of Christ: where then it puts its Imagination again through
Christ Or, in true Resignation.
forward into the holy Trinity, and is fed again from the Verbum Domini [the
Word of the Lord]; where then it is an Angel again, clean separated from the
Kingdom of the Devil, and of this world, in the Death of Christ.

43. And for this cause, God became Man, that he might in himself new generate
the soul of Man again, and might redeem it from the chains of the
fierceness of Anger: and not at all [for the Beastiall bodies sake) which must
melt again into the four Elements and come to nothing; of which nothing will
remain, but the shadow in the figure of all His or Man's works.
its works, and Or, substance, things or business.
matters, which he has wrought at any time.

44. But, in the New Man (which we attract on to our souls in the bosom of
the virgin) we shall spring and flourish again; and therein is no necessity
nor Death, for the Kingdom of this world passes away. Therefore he that has
not this Image in the new Birth, shall in the Restoration of the Spirit of the
Eternal Nature) have the Image of what his heart and Confidence has been set
upon here, put upon him: for every Kingdom Imageth [or figureth] its Creatures
according to the Essences, which were groyne here in their will.

45. And that you may rightly and properly understand us: we [meane or]
understand here, no strange Christ, who is not our Brother: as himself said,
at his resurrection: Go to my Brethren, and your Brethren, and till them, I
go to my God and to your God. As indeed the body (which we here carry about
us) is not the Image of God, which God created; for the Kingdom of this world
put its Image upon us, when Adam consented to yield to it: and we (if we be
regenerated,) are not at home in this world, with our New Man; as Christ said
to his Disciples; I have called you out of this world, that you should be where
I am: and Saint Paul says, Our Conversation (as to the New Man) is in Heaven.
Thus we understand also that our Immanuel [who is] the most holy of all, with
his true Image of God (wherein also our true Image of God does consist) is not
of this world; but as the Old Mortal Man (from the Kingdom of this world)
hangs to us, so our Mortal Man also hung to the Image of God in Christ,
which he drew from his Mother Mary, as the pure Element [draweth] the Kingdom
of this world [to it].

46. But now we must not think, that the holy Man, (in Christ,) dyed, for that
dies not: but the mortal [Man] from the Kingdom of this world [is that which
dyeth]; that [was it which] cried (on the Cross) My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me: and we see very clearly the great Might [and power] of the holy
Man in Christ, when the mortal (which was taken from this world) went into
Death: how the holy Allmighty [Man] wrestled with Death, in so much that the
Elements did shake with it, and the Sun (which is the Light of the Nature of
this world) lost its splendour, as if it were then to perish; and then the
living Champion in Christ, fought with the Anger, and stood in the Hell of the
Anger of God, and loosed the soul (which he commended into his Fathers hands)
quite off from the Anger of God, also from the source [or Torment] of Hell; and
that was it which David said; Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, nor permit
thy holy [one] to Rot, consume, or corrupt.
perish.

47. The Deity was in the humane soul, and here it brake the sword of the
Cherubine; so that, as Adam had brought his soul into the Prison of Anger, and
so afterward all souls from Adam are generated such, and are all of them, as
in one Root, imprisoned in the Anger of Death, till Christ; so the Noble
Champion Christ here destroyed Death, in the humane soul; and brought the
soul (through Death into his eternal New Humanity, and put it into an
Eternal Contract, Espousall, or Marriage.
Covenant.

48. And as Adam had opened the Gate of the Anger, so has the Deity of Christ
opened the Gate of the Eternal Life, so that all men can press in to God, in
this opened Gate. For the third Principle is broken here, and Judgment passed
upon the Prince of Darkness, which so long held us prisoners in Death.

49. But since Man is so slow of apprehension, it may be we shall not
sufficiently be understood; aod therefore we will once more set it down
briefly and accurately, how these great Mysteries are; for we know what
Adversary we have ( viz. the Prince of this world) he will not sleep, but try
what he can to suppress this Noble Grain of Mustard-seede.

50. Behold thou Noble Mind, thou who desire the Kingdom of God, to thee
we speak, and not to the Antichrist, in Babell, who desires nothing else but
the Kingdom of this world; take notice of it, the time of sleep is past, the
Bridegroom comes, for the Bride says, Come, be in earnest, gaze not at the
hand that used this Pen, it is another Pen that has written this, which
neither thou nor I do know; for the Mind (if it be faithful) apprehends
the Deity: and do not so slight thy self; if thou art borne in God, then thou
art greater and more than all this world.

51. Observe it; the Angel said to Mary; Thou shall conceive and bear a Son,
and shall call his Name Jesus: he shall be great, and be called a son of the
most High: and God the Lord shall give him the Throne of his Father David, and
he shall be a King over the house of Jacob Eternally, and of his Kingdom there
shall be no end.

52. You must understand, Mary was to conceive in the body, viz. in her own
body; not in a strange assumed [body] as the unenlightened (who apprehend not
the Kingdom of God) might interpret our Writings to mean. Besides, it is not
the ground neither, which the Ancients and those heretofore, have set down,
(which yet went very high) as if Mary from Eternity had been hidden in Ternaris
sancto [the holy Ternary or Trinity], and that she entered at that time only
into Anna, as into a Case, [or house]; and were not of the seed of Joachim,
and blood of Anna. They say, she was an Eternal virgin out of the Trinity, of
whom Christ was borne: because he came not out of the flesh and blood of any
Man: and as himself witnesses, that he was not of this world, bur was come
from Heaven: he says, That he came forth from God, and must return again to
God: and to Nicodemus he said, None goes into Heaven, but the Son of Man which
is come from Heaven, and who is in Heaven.

53. And there he spoke clearly of the Son of Man, of his humanity, and not of
his Deity merely; for he says plainly, The Son to Man: But God from Eternity
was not the son of Man, and therefore no son of Man can proceed from the
Trinity; therefore we must look upon it aright. If Mary had proceeded out of
the Trinity, where should our poor captivated souls have been? If Christ had
brought a strange soul from Heaven, how should we have been delivered? Had it
been possible to redeem Man [without it] what needed God to come into our
form, and be crucified? If it could have been so, then God should instantly
have separated or freed Adam from Death, when he fell; or do thou suppose
that God is so maliciously zealous, as to be so angry without a Cause?

54. Indeed, when his wrath was sprung up in Man, then he would manifest his
wonders, but that was not the purpose of God when he created Adam; but it was
tried which of them should get the victory, the Meekness or the fierceness in
the Eternal Root: but the soul in Ad m was yet free: and there was nothing
else that could perish but the Self-will, or free will.
own will.

55. And so now the soul was the will, which was breathed into Adam, by the
Spirit of God out of the Eternal will of the Father: and yet out of that place
where the Father ( viz. God) out of the Darkness, in his own re-conceived
will, enters into himself, and in himself generateth the meekness in his
own re-conceived will.

^6. And so the soul of Man is out of the same Balance in the Angle of the
re-comprehended will, toward the light: and also in the first will in it
self, in its own Center; where behind it the Darkness is comprehended, and
before it, is the end of the Eternal Band: and in it self there would be
nothing, but an anxious source [or property]; and if any thing else were to be
in it, then the first will (in the eternal Band) must conceive another will
(in it self) to go out of the dark source [or property] into a joyful
habitation without a source.

57. If now the first eternal will do thus conceive another will, then it
breaks the source of Darkness, and dwells (in it self) in the joyful
habitation, and the darkness remains darkness still, and a source [or
working property] in it self, but touches not the re-conceived will: for that
dwells not in the Darkness, but in it self: thus we understand the souls
own power [to be] which God breathed into Adam, out of the Gate the breaking
through, in himself, into the Light of the habitation of joy.

58. This soul (being clothed with the pure Elementary and Paradisicall Body)
severed its will, [which came] out of the Fathers will (which tends only to
the conceiving of his Or, Son.
virtue [or power], from whence he is impregnated to beget his Heart) [and
severed it] from the-Fathers will, and entered into the lust of this world;
where now (backward in the breaking [or destruction] of this world) there is no
light; and forward there is no comprehensibility of the Deity: and there was no
Counsel [or remedy] except the pure will of the Father enter into it again,
and bring it into his own will a gain, into its first seat, that so its will
maybe directed again into the Heart and Light of God.

59. And now if it be to be helped again, then tht Heart of God with its
Light, (and not the Father) must come into it; for it stands in the Father
however: yet turned away from the Entrance, (to the Birth of the Heart of God)
backward into this world, where no Light is to be comprehended, either behind
or before it: for the substance of the body breaks, and then the poor soul
stands imprisoned in the dark Dungeon; and here the Love of God (toward the
poor imprisoned soul) is [made] known; Consider thy self here; O dear
Mind.

60. Here was no remedy now, neither in God, nor in any Creature; only the
mere Deity of the Heart of God must enter in Ternarium Sanctum [into the holy
Ternary]; viz. into the Barmhertzigkeit [the Mercifulnesse] which is from
Eternity generated out of his Holiness, wherein the Eternal wisdom (which
[coming] out of the speaking of the Word, through the Holy Ghost) stands as a
virgin before the Deity: and is the Great Wonder, and a Spirit in the
Barmhertzigkeit, [the Mercifulnesse], and the Mercifulness makes the holy
Ternary (the holy Earth) the Essences of the Father (in the attracting to the
Word) viz. the holy Constellations: as may be said in a similitude.

61. And as we perceive that in this world there is Fire, Air, Water, and
Earth, also the Sun and the Stars, and therein consist all the things of
this world: so you may conceive by way of similitude, that the Father is the
Fire of the whole [holy] Constellations, and also in the [ One Eternal Element.
holy] Element: and that the Son, ( viz. his Heart) is the Son, which
sets all the Constellations in a light pleasent habitation: and that the
Holy Ghost is the Air of the Life, without which neither Sun nor
Constellation would subsist: and then that the concreted Spiritus Majoris Mundi
[or Spirit of the great World] is the chaste virgin before God; which Spirit of
the great World, in this world gives to all Creatures, Mind, sense, and
understanding (through the influence of the Stars); and so also [doth the
chaste virgin] in the Heaven.

62. The Earthly Earth, is like the holy Ternary, wherein is the heavenly Or,
Water-Spirit.
Aquaster ( viz. in the heavenly Earth, which I call the [one Holy] Element)
which is pure. Thus God is a Spirit, and the pure Element is heavenly Earth;
for it is substantial: and the Essences in the heavenly Earth, are
Paradisicall Buds [or Fruits]: and the virgin of wisdom, is the great Spirit
of the whole heavenly World (in a similitude) and that not only opens the
great Wonders in the heavenly Earth, but also in the whole Deep of the Deity.

63. For, the Deity is incomprehensible, and invisible, yet Findable, or
palpable.
perceptible; but the virgin is visible like a pure Spirit: and the [one holy]
Element is her body, which is called Ternarius sanctus [the holy Ternary], the
Holy Earth; and into this holy Ternary, the invisible Deity is entered, that
she may be an Eternal Espousall [or union]: so that (in a similitude) the
Deity is in the pure Element, and the Element is the Deity; for God and
Ternarius sanctus is become one thing; not in Spirit, but in substance, as
body, and soul. And as the soul is above the body, so also God is above the
Holy Ternary.

64. And this now is the Heavenly virgin, of which the Spirit of God spoke, in
the Wise men Formerly.
of old: and Ternarius sanctus, is our true body in the The Image of God.
Image which we have lost: which now the Heart of God has taken to him for a
body; and this noble body (as also the virgin of God) was put upon Mary; not as
a Garment, but very powerfully in her Essences; and yet incomprehensibly as to
the Essences of this world, of flesh and blood in the body of Mary, but
conprehensible as to the soul of Mary; for the soul did pass into the holy
Ternary: and yet she could not so be severed from the Or, corruptibility.
fierce wrath, but that was to be in the breaking of the earthly Body from the
heavenly, in the Death of Christ.

65. Thus the Word in the holy Ternary let it self into the Earthlinesse, and
received to it a true soul out of the Essences of the soul of Mary (like all
other Men) in the Time ( viz. in the end of three Months); not out of the holy
Ternary; but our soul: yet not our body, wherein the Kingdom of this world,
and sin, did stick.

66. It Is true indeed he took our body on him, but not mingled with the holy
Ternary: for Death stuck in our body, and the Ternarius sanctus was Or, its
death. The death of the death of our body.
Death, and Victory: and in the holy Ternary was his Deity: and that Man is
come from Heaven; and has put on the Earthly [Man], and brought to pass the
Redemption, (between the Earthly and the Heavenly,) whereby the soul was Or,
freed.
severed from the Anger and Wrath.

67. You must not say that whole Christ with body and soul came from Heaven?
He brought no soul out of the holy Ternary: the Heavenly virgin was the soul
in the holy Ternary; and that he brought with him for a Bride to our soul, as
this whole Book does treat of it. For what would it help me, if he had
brought a strange soul with him? Nothing at all But that he has brought my
soul into the holy Ternary, I rejoice at that: and thus I can say, that
Christ's soul is my Brother, and his body is the food of my soul; as he says
in the fixed Chapter of John; My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed.

68. Come hither ye contentions Pastors, Priests, Presbyters, or Ministers.
Shepherds of Babell, open your eyes, and consider what his Testaments, of the
Baptism, and his Last Supper, are: I shall show you well enough, if you be but
worthy; how ever, we write for the children of the Lilly: therefore let every
one see where he harbors; it is in earnest. We slight not the understanding
of the Ancients. It may be it was purely generated in the beginning, but we
find, how Antichrist has set up himself upon it, and made Gods of the
Creature.

69. Yet Men cannot say, that Mary was borne out of a barren womb, although the
body of Anna was unfruitful, which was from the Counsel of God: (in that they
were honest [vertuous] people fearing God) that their Tincture might not be
defiled, because they were to generate that which the Lord would highly bless.
God knew how to open It in due time, and that in old age, when the wanton lust
(of this world from the Elements) was extinguished, as in Sarab Abraham's wife.

70. For if the soul stands in the fear of God, then the Tincture also (in
which the soul springs up) is purer; although that be not free from the
Original [or inherited] sin. Thus Mary is indeed truly generated of Joachim:
and Christ has his natural soul from the Tincture of Mary, yet but half:
for the Limbus of God was the Man [or Masculine seede], and therein was the
chaste virgin of God in the holy Ternary, and in the holy Ternary, the Trinity,
the whole fullness of the Deity: and the Holy Ghost was the Work-Master.

71. Here we clearly find what Christ said to his Father concerning us Men;
Behold the Men were thine, and thou have given them to me: and I will that
they he with me where I am, that thy may see my Glory. When the Word (or Heart
of God) went into the holy Ternary, there it was the Son of the Father, and
also his servant, as Esayah says, and as it is in the Psalms: for he had
[united or] espoused himself In or into.
to the Element, and had the form of a servant; but the Word which went into
the [pure] Element, was his Son: and thus he took our soul upon him, not
only as a Brother; for the Limbus of God (in the heavenly Tincture) was the
Man, and that was our Lord: for the whole world stands in the Might thereof:
and that Might shall sweep the threshing floare of this world. And thus we
are his servants, and also his Brethren in respect of his Mother; but in
respect of his Father we are his servants; and before the Fall we were the
Fathers, also till his humanity [or becoming Man,] though in the Word of the
Promise [it was], in which, the faithful entered into God.

72. Thus he is a King over the house of David Eternally, and his Kingdom has
no end, and he has the Throne of his father David: for this world is become
his: he is entered into this world, and has taken possession of it: he stands
in the holy Ternary, and in the Trinity, and also in this world; he has the
Or, Fan.
Casting shovell in his hand, as John the Baptist says, the Judgment is his,
at which the Devils do tremble. He has the Throne of David from the Counsel
of God: for David was a Type of him, and had the Promise, and God set him upon
the Throne, in the Promise: for the Scepter of his Kingdom was the Scepter of
the faithful, who looked upon God who was the King; and so also indeed the
outward Kingdom was his. Thus also Christ was a King in the holy Ternary, and
this world also was his own.

Of the dear Name Immanuel.
73. And thus we can truly say Immanuel, God with us, God in us. In the
Language of Nature it sounds right; but our Tongue [wee have] from this world
does but stammer it, and The outward Tongue cannot express the secret of this
Name.
cannot name it according to our understanding. For Im, is the Heart of God in
the holy Ternary, for it is conceived [or comprehended], as thou may
understand it in the conception [or comprehending, or expressing] of the Word:
Ma, is his entering into the Humanity in the soul: for that word (or syllable)
presses one from the Heart: and we understand that he conceived [or
comprehended] the Heart ( viz. the virtue of the Father) in the soul, and
goes with the word [or syllable] nu, aloft, which signifies his ascension
into Heaven, as to his soul. El, is the name of the great Angel, which with
the soul triumphs above the Heaven; not only in the Heaven, but in the
Trinity.

74. For the word Himmel, [Heaven] has another meaning in the Language of
Nature. The syllable Him, goes out from the Heart ( viz. out of the virtue of
the Father) or out of the Essences of the soul, and pntteth forth upwards into
the holy Ternary: and then it compresseth it with both the Lips, and brings
the Angels name downwards ( viz. the syllable Mel) which signifies the
Humility of the Angels; that they dee not exalt their heart in pride, flying
into the Triniry; but as Isaiah says, that they cover their faces in humility
(before the holy God) with their wings, and continually cry, Holy, holy, holy
is the Lord Zeharth.
of Hosts.

75. So now you understand that this Angel is greater than any Angel in Heaven,
for the has a heavenly humane body, and has a humane soul, and has the
eternal heavenly Bride, the virgin of wisdom, and has the holy Trinity: and
we can truly say [he is] a Person in the holy Trinity in Heaven, and a true
Man in Heaven, in this world, an eternal King, a Lord of Heaven and earth.

76. His name Jesus, shows it more properly in the Language of Nature; for
the syllable Je, is his humbling [in-coming] out of his Father, into the
Humanity; and the syllable sus, is the bringing in of the soul above the
Heaven, into the Trinity: as the syllable sus indeed presses aloft through all.

77. Much more is understood in the Name Christus, which comprehends not his
incarnation, but goes (as a Man [that is] borne,] through Death; for the
syllable Chris, presses through the Death: and the syllable tus, signifies
his strong might, in that he thus goes forth from Death and presses throught
and it is very properly understood in the word, how he severed the Kingdom of
this world, and the Angesicall Man asunder, and continues in God, (in the
Angelical Man,) for the syllable tus is pure without Death.

78. Though indeed here we shall be tas one that is dumb to the world, yet we
have written it for our selves, for we understand it very well: and it is
plain enough to the Tree of the Lilly. But that the Person of Christ, with his
Deeds and Essence, might be rightly demonstrated to the Reader, that he might
apprehend it aright, I therefore direct him to the Temptation of Christ in the
Wilderness after his Baptism: whereat thou should open thine eyes, and not
speak like the Spirit in Babell, which says, we know not what his Temptation
was: and lay the fault upon the Devil, that he was so impudent to presume to
tempt Christ, saying moreover, we ought not to dive into it [nor be so
inquisitive about it] we will let that alone till we come thither, [into the
other life] and then we shall see what it is. Besides, they forbid him that
has eyes to see, none must search into it, [if they doe] they are called
Enthusiasts, and are cried out upon for Novelists [such as broach new opinions
and pretend new Lights] and for Heretics.

79. O ye blind Wolves of Babell, what have we to do with you? we are not
generated from your The Schools and universities.
Kingdom: why will you rend and tear our dear Immanuel out of our hearts and
eyes, and so would make us blind? Is it a Or, heresy.
sin, for us to enquire after God (our salvation,) and after our true Native
Country? Sure it is much more Or, heresy.
sin, to hearken after your partaking and blasphemy, whereby you make our
women and children scoffers, so that they learn nothing but scornful and
reproachful speeches, and so persecute and vex one another therewith in In the
contentious wrangling.
Babell. Can the Kingdom of Christ be found in such things? or rather do you
not build the scornful and reproachful Church of Babell? where is your
Apostolical heart, [consisting] in Love? Is your scorn and derision of
others, Christ's Meekness? Who said, Love one another, be ye followers of me,
and so it shall be known that ye are my Disciples? To you it is said; the Or,
wrath of God.
Anger burns in Babell, when the flame thereof rises up, then will the
Elements shake and tremble, and Babell shall be burnt in the fire.

80. The Temptation of Christ rightly shows us his Person: therefore open thy
eyes, and let not Babell trouble thee, it is the price of thy body and soul;
for that [Temptation] in the hard Combat of Adam in the Garden of Eden, which
Adam could not hold out in, here the worthy Champion went through with it, and
hath-obtained victory, in his humanity in Heaven, and over this world.

81. As we have demonstrated the true Christ, who is God and Man in one
undivided Person, so we must now show what kind of Man he is, according to
the Kingdom of this world; for the great Wonders cannot sufficiently be
described, they are still greater: there is need of an Angelical Tongue as
well as of an Earthly, and because we have but an Earthly, therefore we will
write from an Angelical Mind, and speak the great wonders of God with the
Earthly Tongue.

82. Let us look upon his Baptism, and then upon his Temptation, instantly
after his Baptism, and so we shall find our New Regeneration, as also in
what Kingdom we lie imprisoned: and we very highly rejoice (in this
knowledge) that God is become Man: and if now we would apprehend it, we must
first set down the Baptism of Christ, and then the Temptation in its right
Order.

Of the Baptism of Christ upon Earth, in Jordan,
83. It is known to us, that (in Adams Fall) we are fallen into the Anger of
God, when as the Spirit, or soul of Adam turned from the Heart of God into the
Spirit of this world, where instantly the holy heavenly Image was extinguished,
and the Anger in the Darkness held the poor soul captive, and where the
Devil instantly gat his entrance and habitation in the Anger of the humane
soul: and if the Treader upon the Serpent, had not entered instantly into the
mark of separation, in the Center of the Light of Life, then the wrath would
have devoured us, and we should have continued Eternally to be Companions of
the Devils; but when the Treader upon the Serpent thus As a Mediator or
Arbitratour.
entered into the middle (though not so presently into the Humanity, but into
the Center of the Light of Life) then the poor imprisoned souls which turned
themselves to God again, were (in the Center) bound or knit to the Deity
again, till the Champion [or Saviour] came into the Humanity, where (in his
conception and humanity) he received the whole Man again, and this we see
clearly in his Baptism; for there was that one Person which was both God and
Man, he had the Heavenly and also the Earthly Body.

84. But now Baptism was not instituted in respect of the Earthly corruptible
[Man] which belongs to the Earth, nor for the Heavenly [Mans] sake, which was
pure and spotless without that; but for the poor souls sake Seeing the
heavenly Man in Christ our natural soul (in the body of the virgin Mary) to
his heavenly Man, and that also the earthly Man hung to the soul; therefore
the holy Trinity (by the hand of Man) took the water of the Erernall Life in
the pure Element, and dipped the soul therein; as I may so speak.

85. See thou beloved soul, thou were gone out from God; but his Love caught
bold of thee again, and tied or knit.
fastened thee (with the promise) to his Thread: and then came the fulfilling of
the Promise, and put another new body on to thee: but thou can not have
another soul; for thy soul was out of the Eternity however. Therefore now as
the Holy Ghost Overshadowed and filled [or impregnated] Mary, so the Water out
of the heavenly Matrix (which has its beginning out of the Trinity) in the
Baptism of Christ (and in all baptized Chistians) overshadowed and Or,
impregnated.
filled the soul of Christ in the Baptism in Jordan, and also the souls of
all Christians; and so renewed the Earthly Water (of the Out birth) in the
soul, and washed it clean, that it is In true Resignation.
in it self, a pure Angel; which of it self may cate of the heavenly fruit:
and that is the cause of the Baptism.

O Man consider thy self.
86. Now when the poor soul was thus bathed in the water of Eternal life
(out of the pure Element) which is In Ternario Sancto.
in the Holy Ternary, that it not only enjoyed the same outwardly, but was
also filled [or impregnated] therewith, as the HoJy Ghost impregnated Mary in
the Holy Ternary; then it stood [inclined] In true Resignation.
forward, viz. right forward toward God, and into God, as a new half
generated and washed Creature, and In self.
behind it was the anger of the Darkness in the Kingdom of this world still
fast bound to it, so that it coold not be wholly freed from it, except it
entered into Death, and quite break off the Kingdom of this world.

Of the Temptation of Christ.
87. Therefore must Christ now (after the Baptism) be tempted: and he was set
against the Kingdom of the fierce wrath: to see whether this [second] Adam
thus new prepared, could stand in the new and old Man, with the hake newborn
and washed soul, and set his Imagination upon God, and eat of the Word of the
Lord. And there it was tried whether the soul would press in to God, or into
the Spirit of this world again.

88. And here you may clearly know, that the Spirit of God brought this Christ
into the Wilderness to be Tempted; in that the Devil was permitted, in the
Kingdom of Gods Anger to set upon him, and to tempt this second Adam, as he
had tempted the first Adam in the Garden of Eden.

89. And there now was no earthly meat or drink: and the soul in Christ
understood now very well what Inn [or house] it was in, that it was in God;
and that it could of Stones make Bread, seeing there was none there: but it
must eat no Earthly bread, but havenly [Bread] out of the Holy Ternary, in its
heavenly Body: and the earthly Body must be hungry, that the soul might be
rightly tempted. For the earthly Body was an hungered, as me Text in the Gospel
says very right.

90. Now the heavenly [Body] must overcome the Earthly, that the earthly may be
as it were dead and impotent, and that the heavenly may Or, be predominant.
keep the Dominion. And now as Adam stood in the Pin of the Balance.
Angle (between love and wrath) when he was tempted; there stood both
Kingdorres against him, and pulled at him: and as God the Either (direct
forward, in his reconciled will) is the Kingdom of Heaven, and the clear
Deity; and backward (in the Eternal root of Nature) there is his wrath and
anger, and yet The Kingdom of Heaven and the Kingdome] of Hell.
both of them are in the Eternal Father: and as in the Eternal Nature of the
Wrath, the Light or the Kingdom of Heaven is not known; and also in the
Eternal Light, the Kingdom of fierceness and of wrath is not known, because
each Kingdom is in it self, so is the soul of Man also: it has Kingdoms in
it, in which it Imagines, is inclined, or yields it self to, or converseth
with.
tradeth, in that it stands. If it trade in the Kingdom of Heaven, then the
Kingdom of Hell is dead in it; not that it is ceased, but the Kingdom of
Heaven is Text. Res.
Predominant, and the Kingdom of fierceness, is changed into joy, so also, if
it trade in the Kingdom of Wrath, then that is Text. Res.
predominant, and the Kingdom of Heaven is as it were dead; although indeed
(in it self it does not vanish) yet the soul is not in it.

91. Thus also the Temptation was, to try, which Kingdom in the soul might
overcome, and therefore the food and drink was withdrawn from the earthly
Body, and the Kingdom of Heaven was predominant in him, (in the holy Ternary,
and in his Deity) and the Kingdom of Wrath and the Kingdom of the Devil was
against him. And there the new-washed and half regenerated soul stood in the
midst, and was pulled at by both Kingdoms, as Adam, in Paradise.

92. The Deity in Christ in the holy Ternary, said, Eat of the Word of the
Lord, and go forth from the outward Man, rest in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
live in the new Man, and then the old Man is dead, for the new Man's sake: on
the contrary, the Devil said to the soul, Thy earthly Body does hunger
(because there is no Bread for it) therefore make Bread of stones, that thou
may live: and the strong soul is Christ as a Champion stood and said: Man
lives not by Bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God; And he rejected the earthly Bread and life, and put his Imagination
into the Word of God, and did eat of the Word of the Lord, and then the soul
in the Kingdom of Heaven was predominant, and the earthly Body was as it were
dead for the Kingdom of Heavens sake; whereas yet it was not dead, but it
became the servant of the heavenly Body, and lost its potent Regiment, or
Government.
Dominion.

93. And now when the Kingdom of Hell had this mighty blow, and was thus
overcome, then the Devil lost his right in the soul: yet he said in himself;
thou have a Or, jurisdiction over the Earthly Body.
right in the earthly Body, and somewhat was permitted to him; and then he took
the body, with the soul, and set them upon the Pinnacle of the Temple, and
said; Cast thy self down (for thou art powerful and can do all things)
and then the People shall see that thou art God, and have overcome; this is the
right fluttering Spirit, wherewith the Devil would feign always fly above
the Thrones over the Deity, and yet goes but in himself, into the Hellish
fire, and apprehends not the Deity.

94. And Or, herein.
here also was Adam tempted, [to try] whether he would steadfastly put his
Imagination into the Heart of God, and then be should have continued in
Paradise: but when he turned away his Mind from the Heart of God into the
Spirit of this world, and would fly out beyond the humility, and would be like
God; then he went forth beyond the Throne of God, in the Spirit of the
fierceness of the Anger. Therefore here the soul of Christ must be accuratly
tempted, [to try] whether it would (seeing it had retained the heavenly Bread),
fly out also in Pride in the might of the fire; or whether it would in
humility look only upon the Heart of God, and Or, submit to it.
give it self up to that, that it might be carried only in the will of God,
and become an Angel in humility, and not rely only upon it self, to fly in
its own might [or power].

95. And here the Devils Masterpiece is seen, in that he Alleges Scripture.
uses the Scripture, and says; The Angels will bear thee up; whereas here
the matter was not about the body, but about the soul; which he would bring
into Pride, that it might tear it self off from the love of God, and rely
upon the Angels bearing it up; and that it should break it self off again
from the new body (which can fly well enough with that) and leap down in the
old Body, and rely upon the Angels, and so should fly out from God into the
Spirit of this world again.

96. But here his valor is seen: though he stood (with his earthly Body) upon
the pinnacle of the Temple, yet he committed his Earthly Body to God, and
trusted in him, and that he was every where in God: and said to the Devil, It
is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Here the Devils Pride (in
the Kingdom of wrath) was rightly overcome: and the humility, the strength,
and the might remained to be our Christ's: and the soul of Christ is entered
into the holy Ternary, as into the humble Love, and espoused it self with the
humble chaste virgin of the Divine Wisdom.

97. Now when the Devil had lost twice, then he came at last, with his last
powerful Temptation (as he did also to Adam) he would give him the whole
world, if he would fall down and worship him. The business with Adam also was
about this world, he would draw this world to him, and so be like God with it,
that as God had drawn this world to him, to manifest his great Wonders
therewith, so the soul in Adam thought [with it selfe] thou art the similitude
of God, thou will do so too, and so thou shall be like God: but thereby he
went forth from God, into the Spirit of this world. Now therefore the second
Adam must hold out the standing of the first Adam; whereby it was tempted [or
tried] whether the soul would continue in the new holy heavenly Man, and live
in the Barmbertzigkeit [the Or, Mercy.
Mercifulnesse] of God, or in the Spirit of this world.

98. And thus stood the soul as a valiant Champion, and said to Satan; Get
thee hence Satan, thou should worship the Lord thy God, and serve him only;
I have no more to do with thee: there the Devil, Hell, and the Kingdom of
this world was commanded to be gone, and the valiant Champion has gotten the
victory; and the Devil feign to get him gone: and the earthly [part] was
overcome. And here now the Noble Champion stands upon the Moon, and receives
all might, in Heaven, Hell, and on Earth, into his power, and rules (with his
soul, in the holy Ternary, in this outward body) over Death and life: and here
this world is become Christ's own, for he had overcome it, be could live in
God, and needed not the earthly food nor drink.

99. And the Reader must know, that the Combat (with the Temptation) was held
in body and soul; and that this Temptation concerns us als; ohe has
overcome for us: if we put our whole trust in him, then we have victory in
him, over sins, Death, Hell, and the Devil, and also over this world: for he
held the last victory in his Death, when he brake the sword of the Cherubine,
and destroyed the Hell of the Devil, and has led captivity captive: that
thereby thou might live by the Death of Christ.

100. And we see that all is true, as is abovementioned; for when he had
overcome in the Temptation, and had stood forty days, then he had wholly
overcome till the last victory in Death: for so long Adam was in the
Temptation, in the Garden of Eden: and Viz. after the Temptation.
there he began his Priestly Kingdom (as a King over Heaven and this world)
with signs and wonders: and in his first Miracle, turned water into good wine,
he also healed the sick, made the blind to see, the lame to go, and cleansed
the Lepers: also he raised the dead: and showed himself to be the true King
over the Over the living and the dead.
quick and dead; and face upon David's Throne of Promise and was the true Priest
in the Order of Melchisedech. All whatsoever Aaron was (in the Fathers might)
in a Type, that this high Priest was in virtue [and power] with deeds and
wonders: which we will clearly describe in the other Book following this, if
we live, and God shall give us leave to do it.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the highly precious Testaments of Christ, viz. Baptism and his last
Supper, which he held in the Evening of Mandy Thursday with his Disciples;
which be left us for his Last [Will, as a Farewell for a Remembrance.
The most Noble Gate of Christianity.
1. IT is apparent how they have hitherto in Babell danced [or contended] about
the Cup of Jesus Christ, and about his holy Testaments, for which they have
caused many wars and bloud-sheddings, but what kind of knowledge concerning
those [Testaments] they in Babell have, appears by their works of Love, among
one another; which their Councels have brought to pass, where Men have stopped
the mouth of the Holy Ghost, and have made a worldly Rule or Government.
Dominion out of the Priesthood of Christ.

2. O you high Priests and Or, the learned in the Scripture.
Scribes, what answer will you make to Christ, when you shall be found thus [at
his comming]? Or do you suppose you stand in the dark? No, you stand in the
presence of the clear countenance of Jesus Christ, who is Judge of the quick
and dead, do but open your eyes, and rightly feed the flock of Jesus Christ,
he comes and demands chem of you. You are not all Shepherds or Pastors,
but intruded covetous Wolves; you rely on your Schoole-Art [or University
Learning and Schollership]: O that avayleth nothing in the presence of God: the
Holy Ghost speaks not from that, he will not be bound up; if you will be
Pastors, then you must hold out in the Temptation: and put on the Garment of
the Lamb in your heart, you must not take the wool of the sheep only from
them: but you must give them the food of the Holy Ghost in true Love, and be
practisers of it your selves; Note this.
But how will you give it, if you be in the Wilderness still, and have chosen
the Kingdom of this world to your selves in the Last Temptation. What shall be
said of you? Is not the Anger broke out and burning? carry fuel to it: for
Babell is on fire, the Humility and Love.
water is dried up: or what have I to do with thee, that I must write thus.

3. We have showed in few words the Incarnation and Birth of Jesus Christ the
Son of God, and yet we are so very earthly, and cannot apprehend it: but are
continually asking whereis Christ with his body? where shall we seek for him?
and therefore our soul longs to write of his Omni-presence, and that
notwithstanding all the raging and fury of the Devil, and of Antichrist.

4. We having clearly described, how God, out of his love and mercifulness,
of Grace, has turned his beloved heart to us again, and how he has opened
the Gate to the Kingdom of Heaven for our souls; therefore now we are
further to consider of the Body of Christ; for reason says continually: the
body of Christ is gone up into Heaven, he is far from us, we must erect a
Government, Discipline, or form of Religion.
Kingdom, that we may serve him in his absence, as Jeroboam did with the
Calves; and so that Kingdom is rightly called Babell.

5. Do thou boast thy self to be a Christian, why do thou not then
believe his Word? when he said; He would be with us to the end of the world,
and said moreover, He would give us his body for meat, and his blood for
drink: Also his body is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed: What do
you understand by this, an absent [Christ] O thou poor sick Adam: Wherefore
art thou gone again out of Paradise? Has not Christ brought thee in again,
wherefore then did thou not stay there? Do thou not see, that the Apostles
of Christ and their Successors (who dwelt in the Paradise of Christ with their
souls) and did great Wonders? Wherefore art thou again entered into the
Spirit of this World? Do thou suppose that thou shall find the Paradise
with thy Reason in thy Art? Do thou not think it has another Principle; and
that thou shall not find it, except thou be borne anew?

6. Thou say, Christ is ascended into Heaven, how then can he be in this
world? and when thou reachest farthest, thou think that he is present only
with his holy Spirit, here in his Testaments, and that the Testaments are only
Symboles of his satisfaction.
fignes of his Merits. What say thou then of thy New Man? When indeed the
soul is fed with the Holy Ghost; What [food] has thy new Man then? The new
Man feeds upon the pure Element, and the outward Man eats of the four
Elements.
for each life feeds upon its Mother.

7. Now if the Soul eats of the clear Deity, what [food] has the body
then? For thou know that the soul and the body are not one and the same
thing: it is indeed a [very] Corpus. And they differ, as body and spirit.
body: but the soul is a Spirit, and must have spiritual food, and the body
must have bodily food. Or will thou give the new Man earthly food? If thou
meanest so, thou art yet far from the Kingdom of God. The heavenly body of
Christ did eat no earthly food, but the outward body only did eat that? Is
not Christ's body now in the The pure holy substantiality, viz. the Angelical
world, the holy earth.
holy Ternary, and eats Paradisicall food? Wherefore then shall not our pew
Man do so? did he not eat heavenly food forty days in the Wilderness, and
always afterward? and did he not tell his Disciples at Jacobs Well; I have
meat to eat that ye know not of: and further; It is my meat to do the will
of my Father which is in Heaven? Is the will of God his food, why then is it
not ours, if we live in him? Has not the Deity of Christ put on the Kingdom
of Heaven for a Body? is not the pure Element (wherein the Deity dwells) his
body?

8. But reason says, the Body of Christ is but in one place, how can he then
be every where? He is indeed a Creature, and a Creature cannot be in all places
at once. Hearken beloved Reason, when the Word became Man in the body of Mary,
was he not at that time also aloft above the Stars? When he was at Nazareth,
was he not then also at Jerusalem, and every where in all the Thrones [of
Heaven]? Or do thou suppose, when God became Man, that he was shut up and
confined within the Humanity, and was not every where? Do thou suppose, that
the Deity (in Christ's becoming Man) divided it self? O no: he never went from
his place, that cannot be

9. And now he is become Man, therefore his humanity is every where,
wheresoever his Deity was; for thou can not say, that there is any place in
Heaven or in this world, where God is not; now wheresoever the Father is, there
also is his heart in him, and there also is the Holy Ghost. Now his Heart is
become Man, and in the Humanity of Christ; and therefore if you will think,
that the body of Christ is far of in Heaven, yet you must also say, that the
Heart of God is in him: and now (when you say that God the Father is here
present) will you say, that the heart in hint is not here present with him? Or
will thou divide the Heart of God, and wilt only make it, that there is but a
spark of it in the body of Christ, and that the rest of it is every where all
over? What do you do? Desist, and I will truly and exactly show you the true
Ground.

10. Behold God the Father is every where, and his Or, Son.
Heart and Light is every where in the Father; for it is always from Eternity
begotten every where of the Father, and his birth has neither beginning nor
end, he is even at this very day continually generated of the Father; and then
also when he was in the body of Mary, yet he stood then in the Fathers Birth,
and was continually begotten of the Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeded
continually from Eternity, from the Father through his Son or Word.
Heart: for the whole Geniture or working.
Generation of the Deity is no otherwise, neither can it be otherwise.

11. Now the Father is greater than all, and the Son in him is greater than
all, and his Barmhertzigkeit. Meryc.
Mercifulness is also greater than all: and the [one pure] Element consists
in his Barmhertzigkeit. Mercy.
Mercifulness, and is as great as God: only, it is generated of God, and is
substantial, and it is under [or inferior to] God, and so therein is the
Ternarius sanctus, with the wisdom of God in the Wonders; for all Wonders are
manifested therein, and that is the heavenly body of Christ, with our (here
assumed) soul in it, and the whole fullness of the Deity is in the Center
therein; and thus the soul is environed with the Deity, and eats of God, for
it is Spirit; thus my beloved soul, if thou art regenerated in Christ, then
thou put on the body of Christ, [which is] out of the holy Element, and
that gives thy new body food and drink: and the Spirit of this world in the 4
Elements gives our old Earthly [Body, Earthly meat and drink that is Earthly
and Elementary].

12. Thus understand and know this precious depth; as Christ made a Covenant
with us, in the Garden of Eden, that he (as abovementioned) would thus become
Man, so also after he had laid off that which was Earthly, he made a Covenant
with us, and has appointed his body for food, and his blood for drink: and the
Water of the Eternal Life (in the Originality of the Deity) for a holy
Baptism, and commanded, that we should use it till he comes again.

13. Now thou will say, what did Christ give to his Disciples in his Last
Supper, when he sat with them at Table? Behold, the Deity is not comprehensible
[or circumscriptive], and the holy Body of Christ is also not measurable (it is
creaturely indeed, but not measurable:) he gave them his holy heavenly Body,
and his holy heavenly blood, for food and for drink, as his own words import;
do thou say, how can that be? Then tell me, how it can be that the holy
Element has put on this world, and has another Principle in the body of this
world; that holy Element is the heavenly body of Christ. Thus he gave them
outward bread and outward wine in the kingdom of this world, and therewith his
holy heavenly body in the Second Principle; which comprizeth the outward, and
likewise his heavenly blood, wherein the heavenly Tincture, and the holy life
consists.

14. Now says reason; That was another body, in another blood, and not his own
creaturely body; prithee reason tell me, how can it be another body, indeed it
is in another Principle, but of no other Creature: Did not Christ say; I am not
of this world; and yet he was really according to the outward man of this
world: or do thou understand it only of his Deity? What becomes then of his
eternal humanity, according to which he was a King of the promise upon the
Throne of David? if the promise had been able to ransom us; then the work
need not have followed: and Moses likewise had been able to have brought the
people of Israel into the true promised Land; which verily Joshua (who was a
type of this Christ) could not do; but he brought them only into the Land of
the Heathen, where there was continually war and strife; and was only a
valley of misery.

15. But Joshua, and King.
this Christ fitteth upon the Throne of David, upon the Throne of the Promise:
like as David was aa outward King, and in his spirit a Prophet before God; and
so sat outwardly as a Champion in the world, and inwardly as a One Cpie has
Prophet.
Priest before God; who prophefied of this Christ that he should come; and
commanded all doors to be set open; and alt Gates to be lift up on high, that
this King of glory might eater in. Thus he speaks not only of his Deity,
from which he prophesied (for that was however with him, and in the Power and
knowledge of the same he spoke) but he prophesied of his Eternal humanity for
that was not a King, who only sat therein the Spirit; we could neither see
him, nor converse with him; but that is a King who sits in the humanity.

16. Now this Kmg was promised of God; that he should possess the Gates of his
Eniemies; and should lead his enemies captive; and the Devils are these
enemies. Now how do thou conceive; that when this Creature bound the Devils
at Jerusalem, and as a confined creature that did reach no further, did lead
them captive; who then did bind them at Rome? thou say; his Deity; O no!
that was not its office; the Devils are however in the Fathers most internal
root; in his Anger; A Creature must only do it, who was so great as could be
every where with the Devils.

17. Therefore must Christ in his Temptation overcome the Kingdom of the
Anger, and this externe birth; and by his Entrance into death, he brake the
head of the Serpent: viz. the Devil and all Devils; and took them captive.
Thou must understand it thus; That the inward Element (which comprizeth the
whole body of this world) became Christ's Eternal body; for the whole Deity in
the Word and Heart of God, entered thereinto; and Uniteth or contracteth.
espoused it self to remain therein to all Erernity; and this same Deity
became a creature, even such a creature, as can be every where, as the Deity it
self; and this same creature has captivated all Devils in the Kingdom of
this world; And all men who with their mind draw near to this Christ, and
desire him in right Earnest, they are drawn by the Spirit of the Father, (
viz. of the clear and pure Deity) into the humanity of Christ; that is, into
the Pure Element Wherein the presence of the Trinity is every where manifest.
before the Trinity. And if they continue steadfast, and do not again depart
from God into the Desire of the Devil; then the precious Pearl, viz. the
light of God is sown in their soul, which [light] attracteth to it self the
precious body of Jesus Christ, with Paradise, and the Kingdom of Heaven; And
thus the right new Man (Christus) grows on the soul in the heavenly Virgin of
Gods Wisdom; in the holy Ternary; in the Kingdom of Heaven. And thus such a
man is according to the new Man in Heaven in the body of Jesus Christ; and as
to the old earthly Man, which hangs unto the holy [Man] he is in this world
in the house of sin, and the Deity acts the new humanity, and the Spirit of
this world the old, until he puts him off in death; for he is a man in Heaven;
borne in the Barmhertzigkeit, Mercifulness.
mercy of God in the body of Jesus Christ.

18. I set you a deep consideration: behold; how the Angelical Thrones and
Principalities Sparkled, beheld, or appeared.
were in the beginning beheld, apprehended or aspected] by the Wisdom of God;
which Aspect [manifestation or idea] the Fiat took to Create; And in the
Angelical Throne the infinite multiplicity, according to the Eternal Wisdom
in the Wonders of God: All which was so created in the Fiat of God, according
to all the Essences of the Eternal Or, Extract.
Limbus of God; So that all Angels, in every Throne, did give their will unto
the Angelical Throne or Arch Angel; as it is sufficiently to be known by the
fall of Lucifer; and also may be discerned in the Regions of the Kingly
Governments of this world; if the Devil did not so destroy the right
Agreement, or compact.
union; as is very clearly to be seen. Thus likewise (understand us I prithee
thou very precious and noble mind) this second surpassing, excellent Creation
is in the Fiat; When God saw and took notice of our miserable Fall; he did
illustrate [or manifest] himself by the holy Eternal Virgin of his Wisdom in
the Eternal Wonders; in Barmhertzigkeit.
mercy which always flows out of his heart; and did comprehend with his
speculation [or manifestation] the Throne; and did further illustrate himself
in the Throne into many millions without number; and established his Covenant
with his Oath therein; with his precious Promise of the Woman's Seed.

19. Thus my very precious mind, apprehend it aright; This same Throne was
made in Time (when as the Time of his Covenant was revealed) an Angelical
Principality in the mercy of God; in the holy Pure Element, in the Sacred
Ternary, that is, in the holy Earth, wherein the Deity is substantially known;
so that the whole Mercy of God (which is unmeasurable, and every where in the
Sacred Ternary; which is likewise so great in the holy Element, that comprizeth
Heaven and this world) became a Man; that is, a substantial Similitude of the
Spirit of the Trinity, in which (likeness) the Trinity dwells with
compleat-fulnesse; and in this great Angelical Throne and Principality stood
in the beginning and from Eternity the Aspect in the infinite multiplicity
proceeding from all the Essences in the Limbus of the Father; and became truly
illustrate [or manifest] in the Time of the Promise.

20. Thus now even unto this very day all things are yet in the Fiat (or
creating), and the Creation has no end until the judgment of God, where that
which has grown on the holy Tree, shall be separated from the unholy Thistles
and Thorns; and we men are these innumerable aspects (or idea's) in the Fiat
of the great Princely Throne, and we, who are holy; shall be created in the
body of this Prince in God; but we that degenerate (or perish) shall be cast
out as naughty Fruit.
apples unto the swine of the Devil.

21. Thus we were foreseen [or elected] in Christ Jesus before the foundations
of the world were laid; that we should be his Angels and Servants in his high
Princely Throne, in the body of his Element, in which his Spirit; viz. the holy
Trinity will dwell.

22. This I would clearly demonstrate unto thee Or, upon it; as by an Example.
in the Kingdom of this world, yea in all things; thou shall not be able to
name any thing out of which I will not demonstrate it unto thee, if God gave us
leave; but seeing it will here take up too much room, I will write a book by
it self of it; if the Lord permit.

23. Therefore my beloved soul, be lively, and see what thy noble Bridegroom
has left thee in his Testaments for a Legacy; as namely, in the Baptism, the
water of his Covenant, flowing from his holy Original body, whereas we in this
world; viz. in the externe birth of his body, do acknowledge four things;
namely, fire, air, water, and earth; wherein our earthly body consists. So
likewise in the heavenly body there are four such things: The fire is the
enkindling of the divine desire, The water is that which the fire desires,
whence it becomes meek, and a light; The air is the joyful spirit which
blows up the fire; and makes in the water the motion; And the earth is the
true Essence which is borne in the Three (Elements) and is rightly called
Ternarius Sanctus [the Sacred Ternary] in which the Tincture is brought forth
in the light of the meekness; and therein also is borne the holy blood out of
the water; being an oil of the water, in which the light shines, and the
spirit of life consists.

24. Understand it thus, that water, is the water of the Eternal Life in the
Or, seed.
Limbus of God in the Holy Ternary: and that is the water which baptizeth the
soul, when we keep the Or, Celebration.
use of his Testament; for the soul in his Covenant is dipped and washed in
that water, and it is rightly the Bath [or Laver] of Regeneration; for by its
dipping in the Holy Water, it is received and quickened by the holy Water, and
comes (in the Covenant of Christ) into the soul of Christ: indeed not fully
into his soul, but into his body, and becomes the Brother of the soul of
Christ; for Christ's soul is a Creature, (as our souls are,) and is in the
body of the Mercifulness in the Trinity, being surrounded therewith, and has
the same in it for food and strength [or refreshment]. So also our souls in
the Covenant, if they be faithful, and continue in God, they are the brethren
of Christ's soul.

25. For Christ has taken this Pledge ( viz. our soul) from us Men, in Mary:
at which we rejoice in Eternity, that the soul of Christ is our Brother, and
the Body of Christ, our Body, in the Mew Man. And should I not rejoice that my
soul is in the body of Christ, and that the soul of Christ is my brother, and
that the Holy Trinity is the food and virtue [or strength] of my soul? Who
can judge me, lay hold of me, and Spoil or hurt me.
destroy me, when I am (in my true Man) in God? When as I am Immortal in my
new Man; wherefore should I be much afraid in the Earthly Man, which belongs
to the Earth? Let every thing take its own, and then my soul will be Or, rid
of the Driver.
freed from the Or, from corruption.
Driver.

26. Or, what shall I say? Must I not in this Body (which I here in the
Earthlinesse carry about me) through the New Man, reveal the Wonders of God,
that so his Wonders might be manifested? I speak not only concerning my
self, but concerning all Men, good and bad: every one must manifest the Great
Wonders (wherein he stands) in Gods.
his Kingdom, whether it be in Love or Anger, (after the breaking [or
dissolution] of this world) it must all stand in the Figure: For at present
this world stands in the Creating, and in the Or, seed time.
Sowing, and is like a field which bears fruit.

27. Thus we every one of us labor and finish our dayes-worke, every one in
his own field, and in the Harvest every one shall stand Or, be in his
employment.
by his Labor: and enjoy his fruit which he has sown; therefore my hand
shall not be weary of Diving or searching.
digging, this we speak seriously, according to its high worth in the Wonders
of God, known in the Counsel of the The wisdom of God.
Noble Virgin.

Of the Celebration or Participation.
use of the highly Precious Testaments of Christ the Son of God.
28 Christ began the use of the Baptism, by John, who was his forerunner: and
John was borne into this world before Christ, which has its signification,
therefore open thy eyes. As the water is in the Originality, and a cause and
beginning of the life, and [then] in the water (by the Tincture) the Or,
beginning of the body.
Sulphur is first generated, wherein the life becomes stirring, and the
Beginning of the life.
Tincture generateth again the Sulphur and the water, wherein afterward the
blood in the Tincture comes to be; And thus now as the beginning of the life
is, so much also the Or, Ordinance.
Order in the Regeneration be, that the poor soul first receive the water of
Eternal Life, and be Baptized therein: and then God gives it the Grain of
Mustard Seed of the Pearl, that so, if it receive the same, it may become a
new fruit, in God.

29. And therefore he sent his Or, Messenger.
Angel hither before him, that he should baptize with the water of the Eternal
Life: for so Come or began.
can the Eternal Body (into which the soul must enter, and in its Tincture,
in its blood, be newborn again,) be translated into the body of Christ; to
describe which, a great space is requisite. But I will finish here briefly, and
mention it more in another Book: and now we will handle the matter of the use
[or Celebration] for it is very hard to be apprehended by the simple. And
therefore we will deal with him after a childish manner, to try whether he
may come to see, and find the Pearl, for all shall not find, what we in the
Love of God have found: though indeed we could earnestly wish that all might
have it: yet there is a great, matter between it; viz. the The vapouring
foure-Elementary Life in the Learned.
swelled puffed up Kingdom of this world, and the Devil, will set themselves
against it, as raging Dog, but the smell of the Lilly will make The Devil.
him faint: and so now we will speak as a child.

30. The Or, servant of Christ.
Minister (in a Brotherly Christian office) of the Covenant and Testament of
Christ, takes water, and (upon the Commandment of Christ in his Covenant and
Testament) sprinkleth [or powreth] it upon the Head of he In^^t* in the name of
the Covenant, and in the name of the Holy Trinity (of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost): this was the Command of Christ, and therewith, he has
set up his Covenant with us, and it is a Testament which he afterward
confirmed with his Death, and we must do it also, and not leave it undone: it
is not in the Arbitrium, or free will.
liberty of a Christians will to do it, or leave it undone; but if he will be
a Christian, he must do it, or else he contemns his Testament, and will not
come to him.

31. For the Testatour stands in the Covenant, and says, Come, and whosoever
does not desire to Come, goes not in to him. Therefore it lies not in our
high knowledge: for he stands in his Covenant: and the child that is newly
Borne is as acceptable to him, as an old finfull Man that repents and
steppeth into his Covenant. For it lay not in us that he became Man, and
received us into his Love, but it lay in his Love, in his Barmhertzigkeit.
Mercifulness.
Mercy; for we knew nothing of him, nor did we know whether we could be
helped or no: but he alone chose us, and came to us out of Grace, Or, into.
in our Humanity, and took pity on us: and so also the Covenant of his Promise
was a Covenant of Grace, and not out of our foreknowing or merit. And therefore
whosoever teaches otherwise; is in Babell, and confounds the Covenant of
Christ.

32. For Christ said also, Let little Children come to me, for to such
belongs the Kingdom of God. Say not, What does Baptism avail a child,
which understands it not? The matter lies not in our understanding, we are
altogether ignorant concerning the Kingdom of God. If the child be a bud,
grown in thy Tree, and that thou stand in the Covenant; wherefore bring
thou not also thy bud Or, in.
into the Covenant? Thy Faith is its Faith, and thy confidence toward God in
the Covenant, is its confidence. It is indeed thy Or, Children are thy Branches.
Essences, and generated from thy soul. And thou art to know, according to its
exceeding worth, if thou art a true Christian, in the Covenant of Jesus Christ
that thy child also, (in the kindling of its life,) p^sseth into the Covenant
of Christ; and though it should die in the Mothers womb, ir would be found in
the Covenant of Christ. For the Deity stan^^eth in the Center of the Light of
Life: and so now if the Tree stand in the Covenant, then the Branch may well
do so.

33 But thou must not o^mt Baptism for all that: for when the child is borne
into the world, then it is severed from its Tree, and is in this world, and
then it self must p^sse into the Covenant: and thou must with thy Faith
present it: and with thy Prayer give it to God, in his Covenant; there needs
no Bravery, sump uousnesse, or solem^^y.
pomp about it, thar does dishonor the Covenant: A^^ not a show or sceae to be
acted.
it is an earnest thing

34. Thee are three Witnesses to this Covenant, the one is called God the
Father, the other God the Son, and the third, is God the Holy Ghost; these
are the work masters who do the office, they Baptize [or Administer Baptisme].
But if thou filthy trimmed whore, now come thus stately, and bring the
poor soul to the Covenant of Christ, and do but stand there in pomp and
bravery, and understandest very nothing of the Baptism, and do not put up
the least Prayer to God, what think thou? how do thou stand in this
Covenant before the Holy Trinity? even like a swine before a looking Glass.

35. Or shall I be silent? I must speak, for I see it; do what thou will,
this is the Truth: thou carriest a new washed soul from the Baptism, but thou
are a filthy swine, even in the Kingdom of all the Devils. But the Or, Bath.
Laver of Regeneration, (if thou are a Beast, and far from the Kingdom of
God) lies not in thee, but it lies in the Covenant of Christ.

36. But this I say, according to my knowledge, (and not out of any command)
that if the Parents be wicked, and indeed in the Kingdom of the Devil, and
that they have thus begotten their fruit out of their false [or evill] Essences
(in which [Parents] there is no Faith, but only a false hypocrifie, and yet
will Much Christ, and yet be accounted Christians.
in an Apish mockery see counted Christians; and as the Devil oftentimes
changes himself into the likeness of an Angel, so they also send their
children with the like trimmed false Angels before the Covenant of Christ) such
doings is very dangerous, which also instantly shows it self (in the growing
of the Tree), indeed the Covenant continues still, but there must be
earnestness in avoiding of the Devil: It may be that very many are Baptized
in the Anger of God; because they do but contemn the Covenant, and many times
wicked drunken Priests use it, who even stick in Hell, fire over head and
ears, and therefore the Covenant of Grace stands as a Testimony against the
The heap or multitude.
Congregations of the wicked. And that which they see and know (and do not
perform it with earnest sincerity) that shall judge and condemn them.

37. Now says Reason, how is the Baptism then? I perceive nothing but water,
and words? I answer: Hearken beloved Reason, thy outward body is in this world
only; and therefore outward water is requisite. But as the hidden Man Christ,
with his pure Element, holds the Out-Birth of this world ( viz. the four
Elements, wherein our body consists) and as all is his; so he holds also
the outward water, and baptizeth with the Inward water of his Element, with the
water of the Eternal Life, [coming] out of his holy Body. For the Holy Ghost
in the Covenant baptizeth with the Inward water, and the Minister baptizeth
with the outward; the outward [Man] receives the Earthly Elementary water, and
the suole [receiveth] the water of the washing in the Regeneration.

38. The soul is washed in the Holy water, and the Word is presented to it,
and the soul stands in the Covenant. And now it may reach afrer the Pearl,
although the soul be tied backward in the Kingdom of this world, yet it
stands in the Covenant for all that. And if, in the unfeigned Faith of the
Parents, of the Priest, and of the standers by, it be thus washed in the Laver
of Regeneration, and so pass into the Covenant, then the Devil may not touch
it, till [the time] that it Or, perceives or discerns.
understands what evil, and good is, and enters into one of them, in a free
will.

39. And now if it enter into the Wickedness, or malice.
Evil of this world, and suffer it self to be drawn by the Devil, then it
goes away out of the Covenant, and forsakes God and the Kingdom of Heaven;
and there then the Noble virgin of God, stands in the Center of the Light of
Life (which instantly in the entering of the Light of Life, yielded her self
into the Center of the Light of Life, as a Conductour and loving Companion to
the soul) and warns the soul of the ungodly ways, that it should turn,
and step into the Covenant again. But if it do not, and that it continue in
the Kingdom of the Devil, then she continues standing in the Center of the
Holy Paradise: and she is a Virgin of her self, but the soul has afflicted
her, and so they are parted: except the soul return again, and then it will
be received again by its virgin, with great honor and joy.

40. And therefore it is that Christ made two Testaments, the one in the Warer
of the Eternal Life, and the other in his Body and Blood; that (whenever the
poor soul should be defiled again by the Devil) it might yet in the other,
enter into the Body of Christ again; and if it turn wirh sorrow for its
sins, and puts its trust in the mercy of God again, then it steppeth
again into the first Covenant, and then it may come to the other Testament,
and draw near to God, and then it will be received again with joy; as Christ
says; That there is more joy in Heaven (for one poor sinner that repents,)
than for ninety and nine righteous that need no Repentance.

41. Then says Reason: I can see nothing but Bread and Wine; and Christ also
gave his Disciples but Bread and Wine. I answer: AS the Baptism outwardly is
outward water, and the Inward is the water of the Eternal Life, and the Holy
Trinity Baptizeth; as may be seen in Jordan, that three Persons appeared; the
Son of God, in the water; the Father, in the voice of the words; and the Holy
Ghost over the water, moving upon the Head of Christ; and so all Three Persons
in the Deity Baptized this Man Christ; And thus it is also in the Supper.

42. The outward is [Earthly] Bread and Wine, as thy outward Man also is
Earthly; and the Inward (in his Testament, is his Body and Blood, and that thy
Inward Man receives: understand it right: the soul receives the Deity, for
The soul.
it is Spirit: and thy [Inward] New-Man receives Christ's real Body and Blood;
not like a thought in the Faith, although Faith must be, but in substance;
incomprehensible to the outward Man.

43. Not that he Holy is changed into the Outward, that thou should say (of
the Bread which thou eatest with the outward Mouth, and also the Wine) that the
outward, is the flesh and blood of Christ: no but it is the Case, shell, or
Cabinet.
Christ, and yet it cannot be comprehended or enclosed by the Case, shell, or
Cabinet.
Christ, ^s this world cannot comprehend the Body of Christ in the holy
Element, or as our outward Body cannot comprehend the inward new [Body] of the
soul. Also the first Supper of Christ, teaches you this, when Christ sat
with them at Table, and gave them his holy hidden body and blood to eat and
drink (afterl Or, in his own way.
a perculiar manner) under Bread and Wine.

44. For thou can not say (when thou do handle the blessed Bread) here I
hold the body of Christ in my hand, I can feel and taste it: no my friend: the
outward is earthly Bread, from the outward Element: and the Incomprehensible in
the holy Element, is the Body of Christ; which (in this his Covennant and
Testament) is offered to thee under the outward Bread, and that [Body] thy new
Man receives: and the Old [Man receiveth] the Bread; and so it is with the
Wine.

45. Make me no absence of the Body and Blood of Christ, the soul needs not
run far for it; and besides, the body of Christ in his blood (in this
Testament) is not the food of the soul; but the mere Deity is the food of the
soul: and the Body of Christ, is the food of the New Man, which the soul has
put on from the Body of Jesus Christ: the body and the blood of Jesus Christ
feeds the new Man: and if the new Man abides faithful in the body of Jesus
Christ, then the Noble Pearl of the Or, Divine Light.
Light of God, is given to him, so that he can see the Noble Virgin of the
Wisdom of God: and that Virgin takes the Pearl into her bosom, and goes
continually with the soul into the new Body, and warns the soul of the
false [or evill] way. But what manner of Pearl this is, I would that all men
might knot it. But how much it is known, is plain before our, eyes: It is
brighter than the splendor of the Sun, and of more worth than the whole
world, but how clear soever it is, yet it is also secret.

46. Now then Reason asks, What does the wicked receive which is
unregenerated? I answer: Hearken my beloved Reason, what Saint Paul says;
because he distinguishes not the body of Christ, therefore he receives it to
this own Judgment: As the Prophet says; They draw near to me with their
its, but their hearts are far from me; and as beforementioned, whosoever
goes away from God, enters into his wrath

47. How will thou receive the holy Body in the Love, if thou art a Devil?
Has not the Devil also been an Angel, wherefore went he away from God? if my
old Man (captivated] in the wrath) be only on thy soul, and no new [Man,]
then thy soul receives the wrath of God, and thy old Man receives the
Elementary Bread and Wine; the Noble Pearl is not cast before swine; indeed
the Testament is there, and the Or, He that made the Testament.
Testatour inviteth thee to it, but thou make a mockery of it: he would same
help thee, and thou will not.

48. I say not that thou receivest the wrath of God in the Bread and in the
Wine, but in thy false confidence: thou art with thy body and soul in the
anger, and wilt not go out from it: wherefore then do thou approach often
to the Covenant of God, seeing thou art captivated of the Devil? Do thou
think that God.
he will adorn thy hypocrisy, and will hang his Pearl on thee? Thou art a
Wolf, and how lest with the Dogs: thy mouth prays, and thy soul is Ein
schalck.
abominably wicked [and naught], when it goes from the Testament of Christ, it
enters into the stall of Robbery again, and is a Murderer: it howleth with
the Dogs: it is a perfidious whore: when it goes away from the Covenant, it
steppeth into whorish corners, into the den of Thieves: and there they stand,
and pretend Great Holiness: O, this day is a holy Day to me, I must not
sin? and yet they think, to morrow, or next day, they will go thither again.

49. O thou Knave, if thou bring not another Man than so, to it, stay away
from the Testament of Christ: thou art but a Murderer, and do scandalize
thy neighbor, so long as thou art in such a way; thy Prayer is false, it
comes not from the bottom of the Heart: thy Heart desires only the pleasure
of this world, and the Hunter, persecutor, or the Devil.
Driver receives thy Prayer, he is thy God: therefore consider what thou do.

50. O Babell, we have a great deal to say to thee, but not here: thou shall
once be talked withal, in the Anger, at which the Elements shall shake and
tremble, go forth (it is high time) that the Anger may be allayed.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of true Repentance: How the Poor Sinner may come to God again in his
Covenant, and how be may be released of his Sins.

The Gate of the Junistification of a Poor Sinner before God.

A Clear Looking Glass.

1. MY beloved Reader we tell thee this, that all things from the Original of
the Essence of all Essences (every thing from its Originality) has its driving
[or impulsion] in its own form: and it always makes that very thing, with
which the Spirit is impregnated: the body must always labor in that wherein
the Spirit is kindled. When I confider and think, why I write thus [many
wonders]: and leave them not for other sharper wits; I find that my Spirit is
kindled in this matter, whereof I write; for there is a living running fire of
these things in my Spirit; and thereupon (let me purpose what I will) yet this
thing continually moves and swimmeeh on the top, and so I am captivated
therewith in my Spirit: and it is laid-upon me as a work which I must
exercise. Therefore seeing it is my work that my Spirit drives, I will wrire
it down for a Memorial, in such a manner, as I know it in my Spirit, and The
way how I attained to it.
in such a manner as I attained to it, and I will set down no Other thing than
my self have tried.
strange thing, which my self have not tried [and knowne], that I be not sound
Or, to write lies of my self.
a liar concerning my self before God.

2. Now then if there be any that have a desire to follow me, and would feign
have this knowledge, whereof I write, I advise him that he follow me in this
following Table [Patterne or way] (not presently with the Pen, but with the
Labor of the Mind,) and then he shall find, how I could come to write thus;
whereas I was not taught from the Schools of this world, but only a little of
this mean handwriting, as may be seen here.

3. But now seeing I have in hand the Articles of Repentance, therefore I
certify the Reader, that in my Earnestness, this Pen was given me, which the
Hunter would have broken: with whom I began an earnest storm, in so much that
he had cast me down to the ground under his feere: but the breath of God
helped me up, so that I stand up, and have the first Pen in my mind still,
wherewith I will write further, though the Deviil for malice should storm Hell.

4. Therefore now if we will speak of this most serious Article, we must go
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and see how we lie among Murderers, who have so
wounded us, and beaten us, that we are half dead, and we must look about us
for the Samaritan with his Beast, that he may dress our wounds, and bring us
into his Inn. O how lamentable and miserable it is, that we are so beaten by
the murderer (the Devil) that we are half dead, and yet feel out smart no
more. O if the Physician would come, and dress our wounds, that our soul
might revive and live, how should we rejoice: thus speaks the desire, and
has such longing hearty w^she; and although the Physician is present, yet the
mind can no where apprehend him, because it is so very much wounded, and lies
half dead.

5. My dear Mind, thou supposest thou art very sound, but thou art so beaten,
that thou feel thy disease no more; art thou not very near unto Death, how
then can thou accouut thy self to be sound? O my dear Soul, boast not of
thy soundness, thou lie fettered in heavy Bonds, yea in a very dark Dungeon:
thou swimmest in a deep water, which rises up to thy very lips, and thou must
continually expect Death; Besides, the Or, Corrupt Nature
Hunter is behind thee with a great company of thy worst Enemies, whereby he
draws thee continually down by his chains into the horrible Deep, into the
Abyss of Hell, and his crew thrust thee on behind thee, and run upon thee on
all sides, yelling and hunting, as if they had the Hind they ha^^ after.

6. Then says Reason, wherefore do they so? O my dear Soul, they have great
cause for it: behold, thou have been their Hind, and thou art broken out of
their Or, Park.
Garden, besides thou art so strong, that thou have broken down the Hedge of
their Garden, and have taken possession of their dwelling: besides, thou have
made their meat as bitter as Gall, that they cannot eat it: thu have broken
their Throne which thy Horns, and have brought a strong Company, or Army.
host into their Garden, and thou have used a strange power, to drive them out
of their Garden; and though they have thee in their Fetters, yet thou opposest
them as if thou would destroy their kingdom: thou breakest their coards in
pieces, and breakest their Bands, and thou art a continual stormers of their
Kingdom, thou are their worst Enemy, and they thine; and if thou were but gone
out of their Garden, they would be contented, but thou being in it still, the
strife continues, and has no end, till the Ancient [of dayes] comes, who
will part you asunder.

7. Or do thou suppose, that we are mad that we write thus? if we did
not see aod know it, we should then be, silent. Or can thou not once know
the thorny Bath, wherein thou swimmest? Do thou still say, thou art in the
Garden of Roses? If thou think thou art there, see well whether thou art not
in the Devils. Pasture, and art his most beloved Hind, which he fatneth to the
slaughter, for his food.

8. I tell thee for certain, and it is in earnest; when I was at In, or of the
world.
Jericho, there my beloved companion opened my eyes for me, thar I saw: and
behold, a great Generation of Men and multitudes of People and Nations were
together, one part were like Beasts, and one part like Men, and there was
strife between them: and beneath there was the Abyss of Hell, and the Beasts
saw not that, but the Men were afraid and would be gone: to which the Devil
would not consent, because his Garden had no doors [open]: but they Or,
stroyed.
brake open his Garden; and so he must watch at the Door that they do not run
away from him; but the Beasts, (which were Men also) they did ear of his food,
and drank of his drink, and he did nothing to them, because he fatned them for
his slanghter, and there was accoutinuall Enmity between the right Men, and the
Beastiall Men.

9. Or do thou suppose this is not true; which my beloved companion has
showed me when he opened my eyes, that I saw? then come, and go with me to
Jerusalem, we will go together along the way to Jericho, and see it well
enough; and by the way is this Garden, wherein the Devil, with this great
Generation, dwells: we will show thee great Wonders, thou shall see and know
all that which we mentioned above, if thou art but a Man, and not the Devils
fatted Beast.

10. Behold, we understand by Jerusalem, the Paradise; and by the way to
Jericho, the going forth out of Paradise into this world, where then the world
captivated us in her Garden, where continually the great Sea of misery is,
wherein our soul swimmeth: Also the Devil is therein, who has bound us with
the chains of the Anger of God, and he leads the poor soul captive, (in
the dark Garden of flesh and blood,) into his fierce Garden of Anger; where the
newborn souls continually break out of his Garden, and break his Hellish
kingdom in pieces: also they have taken possession of his Regal or Kingly.
Royal Throne, where he was an Angel, and with their Horns (which are the
Spirit of God) have broken in pieces his hellish Kingdom which he set up; also
they oppose him with their storm out of Hell into Heaven, and assault his
Kingdom: but he holds the poor soul captive with the chains of the Anger,
in this evil flesh and blood: and continually sets on the crew of the
wicked, that they seduce it, and Or, Dip it.
baptize it in the Anger of God up to the very lips; and there the poor soul
stands up to the neck, in the Sea of misery, ready to be drowned: and there
the Devil thrusts it down with the vices and sins of the body, and would
drown the poor soul in the Anger of God in the Abyss of Hell.

11. All malicious captived Men (whom he has captivated) are his hounds, which
hunt the poor soul, with haughtiness, bravery, covetousness, unchastity,
anger, cursing, and wrongful oppression, so that the poor soul is infected
with these things, and is very often set upon the Devils Horse, as one of the
[Devils] Captives, and then the Devil will ride with it into Hell into the
Anger of God. O how often does he rob the poor soul of her fair Garment (of
the knowledge of God) how does he rend away the Word of God from their ears
and hearts, as Christ says clearly! Now if it will not do as he will, and
that it break out of his Garden; then he casts his dirt and filth upon it:
and then he stirs up all his Bloud-hounds, they must bawle at it, and cast
mere disgrace upon It; and then it stands as an Owl among the Birds, who
one and other will have a fling and a pluck at it: and so it is also with the
poor soul, which steppeth through earnest Repentance (out of die Devils net,)
into the New Regeneration.

12. On the contrary, those others (who feed upon the weeds of the Devil, in
vices and sins) are in peace; for he fastneth them in the Anger of God; and
they are his Blood hounds wherewith he hunteth the Hind, the poor soul,
which would escape and storm his Hellish Kingdom. The Devil would be well
contented, though some souls should escape (though he had rather increase than
weaken his Kingdom) but that his Kingdom would be broken by it, which he
cannot like.

13. For as he goes a hunting in his Kingdom, and catches the poor souls
which way soever he can, and lays wait for them by his servants, with all
manner of vice and wickedness, and so continually sets such looking-glasses
before the soul, that it should behold it self, in its own wickedness: and
tickleth it also with fair promises of great honor, power, and Authority, he
sets the poor despised sort before the soul, and says; Will thou only be
the fool of the world, come along with me, I will give thee the Kingdom of
this world for a possession, as he said to Christ; so in like manner, when the
soul has put on the Kingdom of Heaven and yet sticks in the dark valley in
flesh and blood, and sees the Devils Or, Massacring.
murdering of its brethren and sisters, then it comes to be armed of God to
fight against the Devil, and to discover his T^an, snare, or pit-fall.
burrow: for the love to its neighbor constrains it to do so, because it
would help to increase the Kingdoms of Heaven: therefore it teaches and
reproves thus, it warns against sin, and teaches the way to the Kingdom
of Heaven; which indeed the Beastiall Body does not understand, it goes away,
like the rude Ass: and thinks with the Starry and Elementary Mind, as
follows.

14. O! what mischief I do to my self, in making my self the fool of the
world: what do I get by it, but scorn and disgace; I am not sure of my life,
thereby I bereave me and mine of our daily bread and livelihood, and must
always be expecting of death, and swelter in the scorn of People. O! how
suddenly thou committest a fault, and then thou art persecuted, and art thrown
away like a rotten apple: and what reward have those thou leavest behind thee,
but to suffer [the more] for thy sake.

15. Thus Man in flesh and blood, judges: and when the Devil understands
it; how soon is he there watching) as a Cat watches for a Mouse, saying; O!
who can tell, whether that be true or no, which thou teach: thou have not
seen it: neither has any come from the dead, and told it thee, there are many
dead, that have taught just as thou do: and yet does not the world stand in
its old Or, Order.
course, at one time as at another? They were counted fools, and so art thou,
and after thee again things will be still as they were before: to what purpose
then is thy care and pains.

16. At length The Devil.
he comes with a subtle snare, and says, through the Spirit of the great
world in the Mind, in himself; O! The Heavens have caused thee to be borne to
it, that thou do such foolish tricks, and would play juggling feats in thee,
thy gifts are not from God; God has never spoken with thee? and what can
thou know then? Leave off, let it alone, thou may be a Christian well
enough, and be quiet: let the Priests teach, they have their Livings, Pay, or
Hire for it.
wages for it; what have thou to do with it? Beloved Reader, with these blows
this Pen was once thrown to the Ground: and the Driver would hare broken it:
but the Breath of God took it up again; therefore it shall write, what
happened to it; to be an Example for all well-willers: and it is an exceeding
precious one.

17. Now when the Devil had thus thrown it down, then it was silent: and
desired not only to write no more, but the Devil rushed in upon it, and beat
it along, and would have broken it. He came forth with his sour Apples, and
held them before the soul of this Pen, and would have it eat of his
dainties: also he strewed Sugar upon them [as he did for Eve]: If he had gotten
the soul again into his claims, how would he have been revenged on it; as
was afterward known in the Storm, where his mind was known very well. Now
when it was thus, the Lilly faded and lost its fragrant smell, the Pearl did
hide it self, and the Virgin of the Pearl stood mourning, and the Noble Mind
sunk down in great unquietness.

18. Indeed the Driver said at the beginning, that it should have rest with
being quiet: but it was a rest only to flesh and blood, and yet it was no
quietness neither, but a furtherance to the Hunting. But when the Mind found
it self in great unquietness of soul, it recollected the soul, and sought
the Pearl which the soul had before, and supposed that it lay as a Treasure
in the Or, Cabinet.
case of the soul, but it was gone: and then the Mind sought that [Pearle] in
body and soul, and behold it was not there, it could not be found: and there
was nothing to be seen but the Devils sour Apples, which were strowed before
the soul, that it should feed oh them. But the soul stood in great
perplexity, and would not eace of its evil fruit, it called its virgin, but
she sat as if she were a sleep.

19. Thus the soul stood with great longing and desire: also was many times in
great Combat with the Hunter, who would still throw it to the ground: when it
set it self in opposition against him, then he took all the vines (which stuck
in flesh and blood) and cast them upon the soul, that he might entangle it
with them, and hinder it from comprehending the virgin again; he made a great
Mountain of the sins in the flesh and blood, and therewith covered and shut
close up the Barmhertzigkeit. Mercifulness.
Mercy of God ( viz. the New Man in Christ): and the Gates of Heaven which
stood open before, were shut up close, misery and great trouble were heaped
upon the soul, till at length once again, from the Breath of God (which came
into it again) it was moved to break the Devils chains in pieces, and entered
into Combat with him, so that he was quite thrown to the ground, and its
covering was rent in pieces, and then the soul saw its beloved virgin again:
what Note. No Penia this world can describe it enough.
friendly welcoming there was then, I had rather the Reader might find it by
experience, than that I should wrire of it.

20. Thus the soul desired the Pearl again, but it was gone, and must be
generated anew, and be sown as a Grain of Mustard Seed, which is small and
little, and afterward there grows a great Tree out of it; and thus the Pearl
grows in the Bosom of the The wisdom of God.
Virgin (in the soul). Therefore keep whit thou have, for misery is an ill
Guest; regard not what Sugar the Devil stroweth, though the Kingdom of this
world seem as sweet as Sugar, it is nothing else but Gall: consider that the
poor soul in this world, and in the flesh and blood is not in its true home,
it must travail into another Country. Therefore suffer not the Devil to
cover it thus with the untowardnesse of the flesh, for great earnestness is
requisite for the driving away of the Devil; though that would not be in our
ability [and power,] if the exceeding worthy Champion did not aid and assist
us.

21. Therefore none should be so presumptuous, as to mock and despise the
Children of God, who are in the Combat against the Devil; but think that it
will come to thy turn also: if thou will not go about it when thou art well
and in health, thou must come to it at thy Death: when the poor soul, comes
to part from the body, then it must enter into the Combat, there is no remedy:
for it must depart from the body out of the Spirit of this world; and then two
Gates stand open; viz. Heaven and Hell, it must go in at one of them, there is
no other place out of this world.

22. If now it be hard captivated in sins, and still goes on in sinning from
day to day, so that it is clothed with the Anger of God, and has laden it
self with mocking the children of God, and so sticks over head and ears in
the Anger of God, and scarce hangs by a Thread [to Christ]. O! how hard it is
with that soul. Must not that soul needs swelter a tedious while in the
scorn which it has put upon the children of God; how can it suddenly reach
the Noble Virgin in the Love and Mercy of God, and then where is the Noble Tree
of Pearl [in the mean while] which is sown as a small Grain of
Mustard Seed, and in the growing of it comes to flourish like a Bay Tree?
Whence has it irs sap, if the soul stand thus in the Bath of the Anger? O! it
will (in many) not grow green, in Eternity: and therefore says Christ; In the
Resurrection they shall excel one another in Glory, as the Sun, Moon, and
Stars.

23. And what then will thy gold and silver, thy money, goods, honor, and
authority, which thou had here, avail thee, when thou must leave all, and
part from them? What will it profit thee, that thou lust scorned and contemned
the children of God, also what will thy covetousness, and envy, avail thee,
now thy self must swelter therein with great shame and Anguish, where thou
have so great shame before the Angels of God, and where all the Devils mock
thee, that thou have been Gods branch, and have had so long a time [that thou
might have been a great Tree] and art now but a dry withered twig.

24. Or what think thou, if thy Twig be thus very dry and withered, and that
thou must eternally swelter in the Auger of God, where instantly thy humane
Image will be taken away, and thou will be in the Or, figure.
shape of the most abominable Beasts, Worms, and Serpents, all according to
thy deeds and practice here, where then all thy deeds will stand in the Figure
in the Tincture eternally before thy eyes, and will gnaw thee sufficiently, so
that thou will continually think, if thou had not done this or that, thou
should have attained the Grace of God? Thy mocking stands before thy eyes,
and thou art ashamed, to let the least good thought into thy soul: for Good is
as an Angel before thee, and thou dare not (for great shame) so much as touch
it with thy mind, much less look upon it: But thou must eternally devour
into thy self thy great scorning, with all thy vices and sins, and thou must
eternally despair; and though thou think to go forth after Ease, or
refreshment, or forbearance of evil.
Abstinence, yet the Light strikes thee down again, and so thou go but
forth aloft (in thy devouring fretting Worm in thy self) without the Thrones
of God: and it is with thee, as with one who stands upon a high stony cliffe
of a Rock, and would cast himself into a bottomless Galfe, and the further he
sees, the deeper he falls. Thus thy own sins, scornings, deridings,
cursings in contempt of God, are thy Hellfire, which gnaweth thee eternally,
this I speak in the Word of Life.

25. Therefore O dear soul, turn, and let not the Devil captivate thee, and
regard not the scorn of the world: all thy sorrow must be turned into great
Joy. And though in this world, thou have not great honor, power, and riches,
that is nothing; thou know not whether to morrow will be the day, it will
come to thy turn [to dye.] Does not a bit of Bread taste better to the needy,
then the best dainties to the Great ones. What advantage has the rich man
then, but that he sees much, and must be tormented and vexed in many things,
and in the en must give an account of all his doings and Stewardship, and how
he has been a Planter in this world, he must give an account of all his
servants; and if he has been an evil Example unto them, and has been a
scandal to them, so that they have walked in ungodly ways, then their poor
souls cry Eternally, Woe be to those Superiors.
for vengeance upon those their Superiors, there all stands in the figure in
the Tincture. Why then do thou contend and strive so much after worldly
Honor that is transitory? rather endeavor for the Tree of Pearl, which thou
carriest along with thee, and shall rejoice eternally in its growing and fruit.

26. O! is not that a cheerful welfare, when the soul dares to look into
the Holy Trinity, wherewith it is filled? so that its Or, faculties.
Essences grow [flourish and blossome] in Paradise, where always the
Hallelujahs or Songs of Praise break forth in Gods deeds of Wonder, where the
perpetual growing fruit springs up [in infinitum] endlesly, according to thy
will, where thou enjoyest all; where there is no fear, envy, nor sorrow: where
there is mere love one of another, where one rejoices at the form and beauty
of another: where the fruit grows to every one according to their Essences
[and taste or relish], as there was a type of it in the Manna to the children
of Israel, where it tasted to every one according to their Essences [or Desire].

Of the way [or manner] of the Entrance.
27. Beloved Mind, if thou have a desire to this way, and would attain it,
and the Noble Virgin in the Tree of Pearl, then thou must use great
Earnestness: it must be no Lip-labor, or flattery with the Lips, and the
Heart far from it; No thou can not attain it in such a way. Thou must
collect thy Mind, with all thy thoughts [purposes] and reason, wholly together
in one will, [and Resolution] to desire to turn, and resolve that thou will
forsake thy Abominations, and thou must set thy thoughts upon God [and
Goodnesse] with a steadfast confidence in his mercy, and then thou will obtain
it.

28. And though the Devil (in thy sins) says, it cannot be now, thou art
too great a sinner: let not any thing terrify thee, he is a liar, and makes
thy mind fearful: he makes as if he were not present, but he is present, and
snarleth like a mad Dog; and thou may know for certain, that all doubting
whatsoever, that comes into thy mind, is nothing else but his suggestions
[and objections].

29. For there are but two Kingdoms, that stir in thee; the one is the
Kingdom of God, wherein Christ is, which desires to have thee: and the other
is the Kingdom of Or, of the anger or wrath of God.
Hell, wherein the Devil is, which desires also to have thee. Now there must
be striving here in the poor soul, for it stands in the midst; Christ
offers it the New Garment, and the Devil presents the Garment of
Sinfulness to it. And when thou have but the least thought or inclination
toward God, [and Goodnesse]; that thou would feign enter into true
Repentance; then truly that thought is not from thy own self, but the Love of
God, does draw thee, and invite thee, and the Noble Virgin of God, calls thee
thereby, and thou should only come, and not neglect it. And so truly when
(in such a way) thy great sins come before thee, and hold thee back (so that
thy heart many times receives no comfort) this is the Devils staying of thee;
who casts into thy thoughts, that God will not hear thee, thou art yet in
too great sins, he will let no comfort come into thy soul, he lays the
sinful Kingdom of this world over Comfort.
it: but be not discouraged, he is thy Enemy: It is written; If your sins
were as red as Blood, if you turn, they shall be as wool white as snow: Also,
As true as I l^ve, I have no pleasure in the Death of a poor sinner, but that
he turn and live.

30. Thou must continue steadfast in this resolute purpose: and though thou
gettest no virtue [or strength] into thy Heart, and though the Devil also
should beat down thy Tongue, that thou could not pray to God: yet then thou
should desire and sigh to him: and continually hold and go on in this
thought and purpose, with the Cananitish Woman: the more thou pressest forward,
the weaker the Devil is; thou must take the suffering death and satisfaction
of Jesus Christ before thee; and must throw thy soul into his Promise; where
he says; My Father will give the Holy Ghost to them that ask him for it.
Also, Knock, and it shall be opened unto you; seek and you shall find: ask
and you s^all receive; and the more earnestly thou pressest forth from the
Devil, and from thy sins, the more mightily does the Kingdom of God press
into thee; but have a care that thou do not depart from this thy will,
before thou have received the Jewel; and though it hold off from morning till
night, and still from day to day; [let not that discourage thee] if thy
earnestness be great, then thy Jewel will also be great which thou shall
receive Or, in thy victory.
at thy overcoming.

31. For none knows what it is, but he that has found it by experience. It
is a most precious Guest: when it enters into the soul, there is a very
wonderful Triumph there: the Bridegroom there embraces his beloved Bride:
and the Halleluj^h of Paradise sounds; O! must not the Earthly Body needs
tremble and shake at it: and though it know not what it is, yet all its Members
do rejoice at it. O what beauteous knowledge does the Virgin of the Divine
Wisdom bring with her; she makes learned indeed: and though one were dumb,
yet the soul would be crowned in Gods works of Wonder, and must speak of his
Wonders; there is nothing in the soul, but longing to do so; the Devil must
be gone, he is quite weary and faint.

32. Thus that Noble Jewel (and in it the Pearl) is sown. But observe it
well: it is not instantly become a Tree; O how often does the Devil rush upon
it, and would feign root up the Grain of Mustard Seed, how many hard storms
must the soul undergo and endure: how often is it covered with sins: for
all, that is in this world, is against it, it is as it were left alone and
fo^saken: even the children of God themselves rush upon it: for the Devil does
plague the poor soul thus, to try if he can lead it astray, either with
flattery and hypocrisy, that the soul might flatter it self; or else with
sins in the Conscience; he never cease, and thou must always strive
against him; for so the Tree of Pearl grows, as Corn does in the
tempestuous storms and winds; but if it grow high, and come to blossom, then
thou will enjoy the fruit well enough, and understand better what this Pen
has written, and where it was borne: for it was a long time in this condition,
many storms went over its head: and therefore this shall be for a lasting
Memorial, and continual remembrance to it: seeing we must sit here in the
murdering den of the Devil, if we do but overcome, our great reward will
soon follow us.

33. Now says Reason; I see no more in thee nor in any such as thou art, then
in other poor sinners, it must needs be but a hypocritical pretense; besides
says Reason, I have been also in such a way, and yet I stick in my wickedness
still, and do that which I would not do: and I am still moved to anger,
covetousness, and malice: What is the matter, that a Man does not perform
what he purposes, but that he does even what himself reproves in others, and
that which he knows is not right?

34. Here the Tree of Pearl stands hidden; behold my beloved Reason, the
Tree of Pearl is not sown into the outward Man, he is not worthy of it, he
belongs to the Earth, and the Man of sin sticks in him, and the Devil
often makes his seat therein, who heapeth together anger and malice therein,
and brings the poor soul often into Abominable sins and wickedness.
lusts, unto which it does not consent, so that the body medleth with that
which the soul is against: and now when this is so, it is not always the
soul that does it, but the Spirit of the Stars and Elements in Man; the
soul says it is not right, nor well: but the [outward] Body says, we must
have it, that we may live and have enough: and so it is one time after
another: so that a true Christian knows not himself, how then should he be
known by others; also the Devil can cover him sufficiently, that he may not
be known: and that is his Master piece, when he can bring a true Christian
into wickedness, to fall into sins, so that outwardly nothing is discerned
by him, but that he reproves the sins of others, and yet sins outwardly
himself.

35. But now when he does thus commit sins, yet he commits them not in New
Man: but the old [Man] in sin, who is subjected under sin, who is in the
Anger of God, he is driven by the Anger, so that he does not always that which
is right: and if he do any thing that is Good, yet he does it not (out of his
own will and ability) but the new Man compels him to it, that he must do
it; for the old [Man] is corruptible, but the soul is uncorruptible; and
therefore the poor soul is always in strife, and sticks In the chinck of
the Door.
between the Door and the Hinges, and must be often pinched and bruised.

36. But yet we do not say, that sin in the old Man is no Or, evil.
hurt; though indeed it cannot sway the new Man, yet it gives Scandalizeth it.
offense: and we must with the new Man, live to God [and serve him] though it
is not possible to be perfect in this world, yet we must continually go on
and hold out: and the new Man is in a field, where the ground is cold, bitter,
sour, and void of life.

37. And as an Herb (by the pleasant Sunshine) grows out of the Earth, so
our new Man in Christ, grows out of Old, sour, cold, harsh Man of our
Earthly flesh [and blood.] And that is the true Light of the Pearl, when we
apprehend it truly and really (in the knowledge,) in the new Man: and it is the
sword wherewith we can fight against the Devil: only we must take the sword
of the Death of Christ into our hand, which cutteth so sharply, that the Devil
must fly away.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Suffering, Dying, Death, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ the Son of
God: Also of his Ascension into Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God
his Father.
The Gate of our Misery, and also the strong Gate of the Divine Power in his
Love.
1. IF we consider our selves in our right Reason, and behold the Kingdom of
this world (in which we stand with our flesh and blood, also with our Reason
and senses) then we find very well, that we have the substance and stirring
of it in us: for we are its very proper own. Now all whatsoever we think,
do, and purpose in the outward Man, that the Spirit of this world does in us
Men: for the Body is nothing else but the Instrument thereof, wherewith it
performs its work; and we find that as all other Instruments (which are
generated from the Spirit of this world) decay, corrupt, and turn to dust, so
also our earthly Body, wherein the Spirit of this world works [and acteth]
for a while.

2. Therefore none should scorn or despise another, though he lead not the
same course, that he does himself; or though he be not of that way in his
mind and will, which himse^fe is: or that another cannot learn and follow the
same stately Courtly manners and behavior, with himself; for the Natural
heaven makes every one, according as its form (in its Influences) is, at all
times: and so every Creature gets its condition, form [or shape]
inclination and will: which cannot wholly be taken away from the outward Man,
till the [Naturall] Heaven breaks its Beast. Therefore we ought to consider
the great strife in us, when we are regenerated out of the Eternal, then the
Eternal striveth against the Corruptible, against the malice and falsehood of
the Corruptible.

3. And now each Kingdom Works or performs.
effects its will, the inward goes right forward, and consents not to the
wickedness of the outward, but it runs to its It aims at.
Mark; and the outward also goes forward with its desire, and performs its
work according to the Influence of its Constellation.

4. But if it happen, that the outward do not what its desire will, that
proceeds not from its wisdom, but the Heaven has altered it by another Or,
aspect.
Conjunction; but if The outward Man.
it be compelled to leave off that which is evil; that is not From the
influence or acting.
by the course of the Heavens: but the new Regenerated Man (who is in strife
with the Earthly) does many times overcome, but cannot swallow up the Earthly;
for the Earthly gets up again: as we see by our Anger; for if my new Man
have the upperhand, he will have no Anger, nor any evil desire: but if this
worlds Driver assault him, then the fire of Anger rises up in the old Man, and
his desire is often kindled, to do what he rejected, and reproved a little
before.

5. Now we cannot say, that the Spirit of this world alone consents to, and
does that which is evil and wrathful: for the whole Man oftentimes runs
with all his thoughts, and his whole will after it. And here we Or, know.
find our great Misery, for the poor soul (which lies yet tied in the Bands
of Anger) is often kindled, that it burns like a fire, and runs after
[evill]: for it is in the Band of Eternity, in the Father, and reaches (in its
most inward Root) the Anger of God: and that is even the Birth of its Life,
and its Originality; and the Noble Grain of Mustard-seede (that was the new
Garment of the soul, which was new put upon it in its Repentance) is many
times destroyed: therefore none should be secure; though he do once attain
the Garland of Pearl: he may loose it again; for when the soul consents to
sin, then it goes forth from Christ, into falsehood, and into the Anger of
God.

6. Now therefore as we know, that Christ (by his entrance into the
Incarnation) has opened a Door into Heaven, into his holy Body, so that we
(through a true Repentance and Confidence) may come to him and put the new
white Garment (of his Innocence, in his Love,) upon our souls; so we know
also that the soul stands yet fast bound with two chains; one is the Birth
of its own Life, whose most inward root is poison and wrathfulnesse: and so,
the soul being [sprung] out of the Eternal source, and having its originality
out of the Eternity: none can redeem it Or, bring it back.
in its own root of Eternity, or bring it out of the Anger, except there come
one who is the Love it self, and be borne in its own very Birth, that so he
may bring it out of the Anger, and set it in the Love in himself, as it was
done in Christ.

7. The other Gate, or Chain, is the flesh and blood, with the Region [or
Dominion] of the Stars; there the soul is fast bound, and swimmeth therein,
as in a Great Sea, which daily so Infecteth it, that it burns.
stirs up the soul that it is kindled.

8. Concerning these two chains; we know in our deep knowledge, and see them
in the Ground of the Originality, and know very exactly, that we could not be
redeemed, except the Deity did go into the soul, and Or, Regenerate.
bring forth the will of the soul again out of the fierceness in it self,
into the Light of the Meekness; for the Root of Life must remain, or else
the whole Creature must be dissolved.

9. But because the soul stood with its most inward Root in the Abyss of
Hell, and according to the Kingdom of this world in the hard [frozen] Death;
so that (if the flesh and blood, as also the Dominion of the Stars should
leave it) then it would continue inwardly in a Or, st^ffnesse.
hardness, wherein there is no source [or active property]: and it self in
its own property, would be but in the fierceness of the Originality, in great
Misery; and therefore it was necessary not only for God to come into the
soul, and generate it to the Light, (for there was danger, that the soul with
its Imagination might go forth out of the Light again) but also for God to
assume a humane soul, from our soul, and a new heavenly body (out of the
first Glorious Body before the fall) and put it on to the soul, with the old
earthly body hanging on it; not only as a Garment, but really [united as one]
in the Essences: so that it must be a Creature that is the whole God, with all
the Three Principles.

10. And thus yet the one must be parted from the other; ( viz. the Kingdom of
this world, which is a Root or stir up of the Root of the fierceness) and
therefore it was necessary that God should pass with the new Body into the
Separation of the Root, and of the Kingdom of this world, as into the Death
of the fierceness, and should destroy Death, and spring with its own virtue
and power through Death; as a flower springs out of the Earth: and so hold
the inward fierceness captive In the new bodies own virtue or power.
in his own virtue of the New Body.

11. And this we understand of Christ: who is truly entered in such a manner,
and has taken the strong Anger, (and the Devil in it) captive, and has
sprung with his holy heavenly body through Death, and has destroyed Death, so
that the Eternal Life springs forth through Death; and thus Death was taken
captive by the New Eternal Body, and it is an Eternal imprisonment: so that
an Eternal life is grown in Death; and the New Body treads upon the Head of
Death, and of the fierceness: the property of Death stands in the Prison of
the New Eternal Life.

12. And so the Woman (in whom the Eternal Life springs) stands upon the
Earthly Moon, and despises that which is Earthly, for, that which is Earthly
perishes: and then there remains (of that which is Earthly) the hard
[frozen] Death; and so now the Word of God (as a living Source or act^ve
property.
fountain) is entered into Death, and has generated the soul in its self,
and springs forth out of the soul through Death like a new flower; and that
flower is the new Body in Christ.

13. After this manner you may understand how he destroyed Death; by the
Springing of the Eternal Life in the Deity through Death; and you may
understand how the new Body in the Love of God, holds the Eternal source of
the Anger captive; for the Love is the prison [of the Anger:] for the source of
the Anger cannot enter into the Love, but continue^h only by it self, as it
was from Eternity, and therein the Devils are imprisoned: for the Light of God
strikes them down: they neither can nor dare behold that Light in Eternity, a
Principle is between: for the Love springs forth in the Center of the soul,
and therein the Holy Trinity appears [or shineth].

14. Thus we have gotten a Prince of the Eternal Life, and we need do no
more, but to press in to him with a firm trust and strong Belief, and then
our soul receives hi^ Love, and springs forth with him through death, and
stands upon that which is Earthly, viz. upon flesh and blood, and is a fruit
in the Kingdom of God, in the body of Jesus Christ, and triumphs over the
fierceness, for the Love holds that captive, and that is a reproach to
Death: as Paul says; O Death, where is thy Sting? O Hell, where is thy
Victory? Thanks be to God, who has given us victory.

15. And because we clearly understand and apprehend it in the Spirit,
therefore we are indebted, to show the light to those that apprehend it not,
and do lie thus captivated in Reason, and continually search into the
Circumstances, why it happened so [in the Passion of Christ]. For Reason says;
If it must needs be so, that Christ must enter into Death, and destroy Death,
and spring up through Death: and so draw us unto him; what is the cause then,
that he must be so despised? and Or, whipped.
scourged, and crowned with a Crown of Thorns, and at last be Crucified
between Heaven and Earth? Could he not dye some other Death; and so spring
through Death, with his Heavenly Body?

16. These hard Points, cast down all Jews, Turks, and Infidels or Heathens.
Pagans, and they keep them back from the Christian Faith. Therefore now we
must write for the sake of the Tree of Pearl; and not conceal what appears
to us in the Great Wonder. Behold thou Child of Man, consider what we set
down here, gaze not on the hand of the Pen, if you do, you err, and will
loose the Jewel, which in all Eternity, you will be sorry for; consider thy
self only, and thou shall find in thy self all the causes [of the Passion
of Christ] that are here written down; for there was a Wonderful Pen in the
writing of it: and neither thou nor the Hand knows him sufficiently that
directed it in the writing: though indeed the Spirit knows him very well, yet
the natural Man is blind in it: neither can it be expressed with earthly
words. Therefore consider thy self, and if you search into the new-borne-Man,
then you will find the Pearl.

The very horrible wonderful Gate of Man's Sins.
17. As we have in the beginning of this Book, mentioned the Eternal Or,
working.
Birth in the Originality, so we have mentioned the Birth of the Essences, and
the seven Spirits of the Eternal Nature: and therein we showed, how there is
a Crosse-Birth in the Eternal Birth in the fourth form, where the Essences in
the turning wheel, make a Crosse-Birth, because they cannot go out from
themselves, but that the Eternal Birth is every where so in all things, in the
Essence of all Essences.

18. And we give you to understand thus much (in very exact knowledge) at the
instant of this Text: that all Essences in all qualities at the time of the
overcoming of Death (when Christ was to overcome death, and destroy hell, and
captivate the Devil) were predominant: for so it must be; he must release the
soul from all Essences.

19. Now the Crosse-Birth is the middlemost in the Essences, yet before the
Fire: The Crosse-Birth.
it stands in the Anxious Death in the fierceness of the Hell, as you may
read before; for from the fierce flash in the Brimston Spirit, the fire comes
forth, and in the flash, the Light: and the fierceness it self makes the
Brimstone-Spirit, and out of that (in the Light) comes water: as is
beforementioned. Now then the soul of Man is discovered in the flash, as a
Spirit, and held by the Fiat, and so is created or generated, and was brought
in it self into the fifth form of the Birth, as into the Love, where then it
was an Angel, in the Light of God.

20. But this world being created (as a Principle) in the fourth form (as an
out-Birth): and the Paradise [being] between the fourth and the fifth form:
and the The one pure Element.
Element [being] in the fifth form, and therein, the Eternal Light of the
Deity having opened another Center: and the soul having reflected back again
into the fourth form, and entered thereinto; it made all Essences predominant
in it, which stood in the fourth form.

21. And now when the body of the soul in the fourth form, was come to be a
Mass out of the water, with a mixture of the other forms, then stuck all
Essences, out of the fourth form, upon the soul: and it was captivated with
this body: and it had continued in an Eternal Prison, if the Eternal Word had
not instantly Or, put.
given it self into the Center of the fifth form, as was manifested in Adam
and Eve in the Garden of Eden.

22. And now when the time came that the Word became Man, then the Dear Life
came into the soul again. But when the strife came that the fourth form
should be broken, then the outward body of Christ (and we all) in the fourth
form were environed with death, and then all the forms in Nature did stir,
and were all predominant together, whereupon the Person of Christ (in the
Garden) did sweat blood out of his body, when he cried; Father, if it be
possible, take this cup from me: Thus the outward Man cried out: and the
Inward said, yet not my will (understand [my] outward will) but thy will be
done.

23. And now because the Devil had so highly triumphed, and had Man in the
Eternal Prison, therefore it was now permitted to the Spirit of this world,
that they ( viz. the Pharisees who lived only according to the Spirit of this
world) all of them might do and bring to pass, whatsoever the Devil had
brought into the Essences, in the Garden of Eden: and there all was turned into
a substance, and to an Essential work; for a terrible Example to [shew] us,
that all (whatsoever we suffer to come into the soul, and fill the soul full
of, with a total will) stands in the figure, and must come to light, at the
Judgment of God.

24. For when Adam went out of the Angelical form into the fierceness of the
form of the Serpent, then the Devils mocked him: and that mocking must at this
time be essentially [or actually done] upon the outward Man Christ: and the
Devils fatted swine (the high Priests) must have their pleasure upon him.

25. And so, when Adam went out of the Angelical form and property into the
fourth form, then all the fierce [wrathfull] Essences fell upon him, and
Qualified or mingled in him.
wrought in him, and scourged him exceedingly. But the Word of God in the
Promise mitigated that again: though indeed we must still feel it enough; if
thou have any Reason, consider it. And now the outward Man Christ underwent
this pain also outwardly, when he was scourged: for all the Inward forms,
which the Man Christ must bear inwardly for our sakes, which caused him to
sweat drops of blood; they stood also outwardly on his body; to show, that the
outward Man in this outward world stood and dwelt in such a source [property or
condition].

26. And as Adam (in Pride) desired the Kingdom of this world, and would be
like God in it, and wear the Crown of this world; so must Christ wear a
Crown of Thorns, and must endure to be mocked by it, as a false King; for so
the Devils also did to Adam, when they had set the Crown of folly upon him;
the Kingdom of this world.

27. And as Adam (after his entrance, into the Spirit of this world) must have
his Essences broken: (when the Woman was made out of him, and a ribbe was
broken from his side for a wife) so must blood flow out of all the Essences of
Christ in his scourging, and his side must be opened with a Spear, that
therein we may behold the broken Man within us, which the Devil had mocked:
thus this Christ must bear the reproach (...) us, in his body.

28. And as Adam went out from the Eternal Day, into the Eternal [darke]
Night, wherein the Anger of God was: so this Christ must be bound in a dark
Night, and be lead before the angry Murderers, who all opened their Jaws, and
would power out their fury upon him.

29. And as Adam in confidence of himself (desiring to be high and wise like
God himself) went into the Spirit of the fierce source [or property] in this
world: so the second Adam must endure all mocking, torment, and pain, to be
inflicted upon him from the wise Who were learned in the Scriptures.
Scribes, that we might see that in our greatest Art (which we suppose to
have from the Schools and Universities in this world) we are but fools, and
that such wisdom is but folly before God: and our own opinions and conceits
stick therein, as in Adam, who thought, he could not now fail, he was become
Lord therein [ viz. in his selfe-wisdome], and he was but a fool. Thus also,
when we fall from God, and rely upon our own Reason, we are [but] fools.

30 How will ye then (O Antichristian fools) bind us to your Art, that we
should turn away from the Heart of God, to behold your invented fables and
fopperies? Whereas in your wisdom of this world ye are but fools, as Adam
also was when he drew away his Spirit from the h^^rt of God. The ^^ame Shame or
reproach.
^gnomin^^ must our dear Lord Christ bear upon his shoulders. Or do ye
think again, that we are mad; Truly our folly will be set before your eyes
at the Last Judgment, and thither we appeal.

31. And as Adam must carry the untoward gross body, that the Spirit of this
world had put upon him, and was scorned of all Devils, because he had changed
his Angelical [Body] into a monstrous Vizard, so Christ must carry his heavy
wooden Cross, and was for our sakes scorned of all these wicked people.

32. And as the fierce [wrathfull] Essences of the Anger of God, pressed into
Adam, whereby he entered into Death (of which God spoke, saying, If thou eatest
of the Tree, thou shall dye the Death, understand the Death in the flesh, even
while they were in the earthly life) so the sharp Nails must pierce through
the hands and feet of Christ, and so he must enter into Death: and as there is
in the humane Essences (before the Light of God) a Cross Birth; so when the
Light of God shines therein, all is turned into a pleasant flourishing
blossom, wherein the sharp Essences are not found or perceived.

33. And when Adam with his soul entered into the fourth form, into the
Spirit of this world, then that Cross Birth was stirred: and (when his wife
was made out of his Essences) he was Parted asunder or broken.
divided in that Cross Birth; and so the Woman has the one half of the
Cross, and the Man the other half; which you may see Upon the Brain-pan of a
Man's skull, and of a Woman's skull. thus. ^
in the skull: as also in the Essences; and therefore Christ must dye u^^n the
Cross, and destroy Death, on the Cross.

34. And as the soul of Adam hung between two evil Kingdoms, (as between the
Kingdom of this world, and the Kingdom of Hell) so Christ hung on the Cross
between two Or, Thieves.
Murderers: And thus Christ must restore again all that Adam had lost. And as
the one Malefactor turned and desired to be with Christ in his Kingdom, so the
one Kingdom, v^z. the Earthly Man, must also turn again, and the poor soul
must enter into Christ again through the earthly Death, and spring up again,
like this Murderer, [Theefe, or Malefactour] on the Cross, who desired the
Kingdom of Christ.

35. And thus you may well believe, that all whatsoever happened in the Fall of
Adam, whereby Adam is fallen; the same was the second Adam feign to bear upon
his shoulders; for Adam.
he was fallen into the Anger of God: and now if that must be allayed and
reconciled: then the second Adam must set himself therein, and yield his
outward body, with an Essences therein; and he must go through Death, into
Hell, into the Anger of the Father: and reconcile it with his Love: and so
himself must undergo that hard condition, wherein we must have been in
Eternity.

36. And now when this earnest business was taken in hand, that the S^^io^^ of
the World, hung on the Cross, as a curse, and wrestled with Earth and Hell; he
said, I thirst. O that Great Thirst! the fierce wrathful Kingdom was weary:
as also the Kingdom of this world, they desired strength: and the Kingdom of
Heaven, thirsted after our souls; it was a Thirst of all the Three Principles.

37. And when he saw John, with his Mother under the Cross; he said, Behold,
that is thy Mother; and to her he said, Behold, that is thy Son, and
instantly that Disciple took her to him. His Mother, signifies his Eternal
new Humanity, which he had Assumed.
received in his Mother ( viz. in the holy Ternary) which we should take to
us, and refresh our selves with his Mother; and therefore he showed her to
John: of which very much might be written; but this shall be expounded in
another place.

38. And this is as clear as the Sun, that (as the poor soul in us,
hangs between two Kingdoms, which both keep it altogether imprisoned) so
must Christ hang between two Malefactors; take this into great consideration,
and weigh it well: it is a most serious matter, and we see the whole terrible
earnest [severity,] that when the soul of Christ brake off from the Earthly
Body; when it passed into the Anger of the Father; viz. into Hell: then the
Earth trembled, and the stony Rocks cleft in sunder: also the Sun lost its
Light: and this we see clearly, and understand it from the mouth of Christ.

39. When he now had undergone all the reproach and sufferings; he said on the
Cross; It is finished: while he yet lived in the Earthly Body, he said it was
finished; understand, all that should have remained upon us Eternally; and
should have sprung up in us, with all the ignominy, in which we stood before
Hell, and the Kingdom of Heaven, he had all that laid upon him: concerning
which, Esaiah says; Surely, he bare our infirmities, and took upon him our
transgressions: yet we held him as one smitten of God, tormented, and
afflicted; but he took upon him our diseases, and all our miseries were laid
upon him, and through his wounds we are healed: we all went astray like
sheep, every one has looked upon his own way: and yet we could not help our
selves, but we went as miserable half slain sheep, and we must let the
Devil (in the Anger of God) do with us what he will: for we bear on us a
monstrous Garment, and stand in great ignominy before Heaven and Hell.

40. Even as God Or, scorned.
reproached Adam, in the Garden of Eden, when he had put the outward Garment
upon him, saying; Behold, Adam is become as one of us. All this reproach [and
scorne] must the Man Christ take upon him: also all torment and misery into
which Adam was fallen, this Champion in the Battle must bear upon him before
his heavenly Father; and there was the Lamb of God, and he hung upon the
Cross as a Patient Lamb, in our stead: for we should have been afflicted
Eternally in our Crosse-Birth: and therefore there hung in great Patience (as
an Obedient Lamb for the slaughter) the Prince of the Eternal Life, and set
himself before his Father, as if he himself were Or, Guilty.
the Transgressour.

The Gate of the Great Or, hidden Mystery.
Secret.
41. Hear my beloved Reader: if thou art borne of God, open the eyes of thy
Spirit wide, that the King of Glory may enter into thee, and open thy
understanding: consider every syllable: for they are of great moment, they are
not Or, Dumb.
mute, neither are they, from a blind Center, brought forth into the Light.
Behold, here hung on the Cross God and Man: there was the Holy Trinity: there
were all the Three Principles; and the Champion stood in the Battle.

42. Now which was the Champion in the Battle? Behold, when Christ had
finished, he said; Father I commend my Spirit into thy hands, and he inclined
his head, and departed. Behold, his Father is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory,
and in him is All; and All is his: the Love is his Heart; and the Anger is his
Eternal Strength; the love is his Light; and the Anger, is the Eternal
Darkness, and makes another Principle, wherein the Devils are.

43. Now it was the Love that became Man, and had put on our humane soul: and
the soul, that was enlightened from the Love, and stood with its Root in the
Anger, as in the strong Might of the Father; and now the New Man in the Love,
commended the soul to the Father into his Might, and Quitted or left.
yielded up the Earthly Life, [which proceeded] from the Constellations and
Elements; viz. Kingdom of this world and so the soul now stood no more in the
Kingdom of this world, in the Or, active property.
source of Life, but it stood in Death: for the Kingdom of this world, (the
blower up [of Life,] the Air,) was gone.

44. And now there was nothing more on the soul, but only that which it self
is (in its own Eternal Root) in the Father. And here we should have remained
in the Anger, in the dark Hell: but the bright Father in his Glory, took the
soul to him, into the Trinity. Now the soul was clothed with the Love in the
Word, which made the Angry Father (in the innermost source of the soul)
pleasant, and reconcilable, and so in this Moment (in the Essences of the
soul) the lost Paradise sprung up again: whereupon the Earth trembled, [ viz.
the Out-Birth our of the Element, and the Sun, the King of the Life of the
Third Principle, lost its Light: for there rose up another Sun, in Death;
understand, in the Anger of the Father, the Love was shining like a bright
Morning Star.

45. Note out of what the Sun is proceeded.
And thus the Body of Christ (on the soul) was the pure Element before God
(out of which the Sun of this world is generated) and the same Body included
the whole world, and then the Nature of this world trembled, and the Stony
Rocks cleft in sunder; for the fierce wrathful Death, had (in the Fiat)
congealed and concreted the Stony Rocks together: and now the Holy Life went
into the fierce wrathful Death, whereupon the Stones did cleave asunder, to
show, that the life stood up again in Death, and did spring forth through
Death.

46. And then also the holy Bodies went out of the Graves; (consider this well;
those that had put their trust in the Messiah, had (in the Promise) gotten the
pure Element for a new Body; and now when the Promised Savior, went through
Death into Life, and put on that pure Element for a Body, then their souls in
the Savior, (in whom they stood) in hope, gat the upperhand, and put on their
new Body, (in the Body of Christ,) and lived in him, in his [power and) virtue;
there were the holy Patriarchs and Prophets, who in this world, had put on the
Treader upon the Serpent, in the Word of God: wherein they had prophesied of
him, and wrought Miracles; they were no quickened, in the virtue of Christ: for
the virtue of Christ sprung through Death: and reconciled the Father, who held
the souls captive in the Anger; and they now enter^d, with Christ, into Life.

47. Here ye beloved Sheep observe: When Christ dyed, he did not cast away
his Body (which he had here), and yielded it up to the four Elements to be
swallowed up, so that he must have wholly a strong Body; no: but He has laid
off.
the source [or property] of this world, which is in the Stars and Elements,
and the Corruption put on Incorruption.
Incorruptible swallowed up the Corruptible, so that it is a Body, which lives
(in the virtue of God) in God; and not in the Spirit of this [foure Elementary]
world: and Paul says concerning the Last Judgment; That the Incorruptible
(viz. the New Man) shall over-cloath the Corruptible, and shall swallow up the
Corruptible; so that Death shall be made a scorn; according to that saying; [O
Death] where is thy Sting? O Hell, where is thy Victory?

48. You must known, that Christ (while he lived upon the Earth, and all we,
that are newborn in him) have and carry the heavenly flesh and blood in the
earthly [Man]: and we carry it also in the New M^n, in the Body of Christ. And
when we die thus, in the old Earthly Body, then we live (in the New Body) in
the Body of Jesus Christ, and spring up in him out of Death: and our springing
up, is our Paradise, where our Essences spring up in God, and Earthly is
swallowed up in Death, and we put on our Lord Jesus Christ; not only in the
Faith and Spirit, but in the virtue [an power] of the Body, in our Heavenly
Flesh and Blood; and so we live to God the Father in Christ his Son, and the
Holy Ghost confirms all our Doings; for all what we shall do, it is God
does it in us.

49. And thus there will be A Tabernacle of God with Men: and the Body of
Christ will be Our Temple, wherein we shall know and see the Great Wonders of
God, and speak of them with rejoicing. And that is the Temple, the New
Jerusalem, of which the Prophet Ezekiel writes.

50. And behold, I tell you a Mystery: as all whatsoever Adam was guilty of,
must stand yet [and be manifested] in this world on the Body of Christ, and
must be seen in this world; so also you shall see this Temple (before the
time, that the Incorruptible shall wholly swallow up the Corruptible) in the
Lilly in the Wonders: where the Fierceness and Tyranny.
Anger opposes the Lilly, till it be reconciled in Love, an till the
Oppressor.
Driver be put to open shame (as was done also in the Death of Christ) which
the Jews hope for. But their Scepter is broken, and the life stands in the
Birth of Christ; yet they come from the ends of the world, and go out from
Jericho again into the Holy Jerusalem, and eat with the Lamb; this is a
Wonder; but the Persecutor, Suppressour, Oppressor, or Tyrant.
Driver is taken captive: and therefore we speak thus wonderfully: and at
present we shall not be understood; till the Persecutor, Suppressour,
Oppressor, or Tyrant.
Hunter is destroyed: and then our life comes to us again, and stands in
the Or, Victory.
valley of Jehosaphat.

The other Gate of the sufferings of Christ.
51. It is clearly showed to us, wherefore the Man-Christ, must thus suffer
himself to be mocked, despised, scourged, Crowned [with Thornes], and
Crucified: also wherefore he must endure to be cried out upon for one that had
a Devil: and wherefore he must be so spoken against by the wise and Prudent:
also wherefore the simple people only hung to him, and but some few of the
Honorable and Rich of this world. Though indeed we shall not please every
one, yet we speak not our own words, but we speak (in our knowledge, and
driving in the Spirit,) that which is shown us of God: therefore understand
[and consider] it aright.

52. Behold, the Innocent.
Guiltless Man Christ, was set instead, in the Anger of the Father: he must
reconcile [and satisfie] not only all that which Adam had made himself guilty
of, (by his going forth from Paradise into the Kingdom of this world, and so
fell foulely in the presence of God, and was scorned of all the Devils;) but
[he must make atonement for] all that which was done afterward, and which is
still done, or [will be] done by us.

53. And this we set before your eyes, in the knowledge of God, and in true
earnest Sincerity; not that we will despise any Man, and exalt our selves: we
would rather be banished from this world, than that we should seek our own
Praise, in Pride; that is but dung and dross, and the Spirit of knowledge
would not stay with us; this ought well to be considered. Therefore we will
write (in our knowledge) for our selves, and leave the event to God.

54. Behold, when Adam entered into this world, Pride wrought in him, he would
be as God, as Moses says; the Serpent (the Devil) persuaded him to it; He
[Man] would have the Third Principle working and flowing in him; and thereby he
lost God, and the Kingdom of Heaven: But that it is true that Pride acted in
Man, look upon Cain, he would be Lord alone, he would not that his brother
should be accepted before God, fearing that he should then get the Dominion,
and therefore he slew him.

55. And so Cain and his Successors have set up a Potent Kingdom: from whence
Dominion proceeds, whereby one Brother aspireth above another, and have made
them slaves. And thus horrible Tyranny has been hatched; and the Potent have
done whatsoever they listed: he has oppressed the needy at his pleasure: he
has gotten to him the Kingdom of the Earth, and therewith exercises Tyranny,
wickedness, and wrong, and yet men must say to him, it is right: he has
contrived all sorts of Policy and cunning Devices, and made Laws of them [and
established them for Right] and afterward sold them to others for Rights, and
has brought up his Children with wickedness and falsehood. He has beaten down
the Conscience of the simple-hearted in his good meaning: he has invented
Rights, which in his Laws, serve to promote his deceit, contrary to the light
of Nature: all reproach and Blasphemies have subsisted in his strength and
authority, whereby he has terrified the simple-hearted, that his power might
be great.

56. Thus falsehood is wrought with falsehood, and the Inferior is become false
also: who has set lies to sale for truth, and so falsely cheated his superior;
from whence is grown, cursing, swearing, stealing, and murdering, so that
they have continually held one another for cozening cheaters, liars, and
unjust; for they are so indeed, and The Superior and the Inferior have
returned the reproach one upon another.
they have exchanged words for words, and therewith in lying and in truth also,
they rub one another with the bitter unsavory salt of Devils in the Anger of
God, whereby the Name of God is blasphemed and abused, and the World is found
[to be] in the Anger of God, and is become a Den of Thieves and Murderers.

57. Seeing then out of this unrighteous people, there should an host [or
Generation] be borne to the Kingdom of Heaven; and seeing none lived upon
Earth that was not defiled with this wickedness: and yet that, in the Love of
God there was a possibility found [that such a Generation might be brought
forth out of Mankinde]: so that we (who are sorry and grieved at this
forementioned evil Beast, and desire to go out from it) might come to the
Grace of God, and yet no otherwise, but in this Christ: And yet that it is
daily found among the Regenerated Christians, that the Old Earthly Body is so
kindled in such wickedness, and that (although they would feign go out from
it, and leave it quite,) yet they cannot; for the Anger holds us captive in
the Old Man, and the Devil is Lord therein, who drives the Body (in the
Spirit of this world) often into evil and wickedness, which Man intended not
to do; for the wickedness of the ungodly (by his cursing and falsehood)
kindles the Anger of the Wherein the New Man lives.
Old Man: and although he be inwardly [new] borne in God, yet it is not known.

58. Therefore (seeing our falsehood and unrighteousness, as also our offenses
are manifested before God, and appear in the Tincture, and that we could not
[otherwise] be freed from such evil) Christ has taken upon him all our
transgressions, and suffered himself to be accounted one that had a Devil,
and a sorcerer, seducer, and deceiver, as if he would have set up an Imperial
Crown for himself, as the High Priests laid to his charge; he suffered
himself to be mocked, scourged, spit upon, and smitten on the face: he
suffered a false Crown of Thorn to be set upon his head; and as we proceed
against one another, and vex one another with falsehood and malice, upon Earth,
where the Potent does what he lifts, to satisfy his anger; and as we
revile, deride, mock, vilify, and send one another to the Devil, to deprive
one another of their credit and reputation through falsehood; so must Christ
therefore take all this upon him.

59. And you see clearly, that the wicked Pharisees and Scribes put these
things upon him; for these things did not happen to him for nothing, or without
cause; for it was of necessity to be so: for the Pharisees, Scribes, and
Rulers, had put that in his dish, for him, which he must eat. Or shall we be
silent, we must tell it, though it should cost us our life.

60. Behold thou wicked Antichrist, thou art the same which thou have always
been, thou art an old, and not a new [Antichrist,] thy cunning policy is borne
in the Anger of God; the Devil teaches thee to do what thou do: Among
Princes and Kings (who have their ground and foundation in Nature) thou
stirrest up to wars and dissentions, that thou might be advanced by them,
through thy deceit, hypocrisy, and knavish subtle cunning policy: this thou
do out of Pride; thou pervertest the Scriptures of the Or, Holy Men.
Saints, to promote thy vapouring haughtiness, and art a Murderer of souls,
thou causest mockings among the ignorant, so that they think (when they many
times persecute a holy soul) that they do God good service in it: thou
teach them so, or else they would not think any such thing; thus thou
workest Confusion, and art Babell, a Habitation of Whoores, and of all Devils;
even so says the Spirit.

61. This is their course one among another, one reproacheth and condemns
this, the other that, and it is a continual howling of Devils; all manner of
Love, charity, and union is extinct, the mouth speaks one thing, and the
heart thinks another: they all cry out one among another, and none knows
where the woe lies; And Christ must thus take all this upon him; Many
ignorantly cried (by the instigation of the High Priests) Crucify h m,
Crucify him, he has made uproares and disturbance among the people, and yet
knew not any cause why they said so. And so it is at this day, if Antichrist
Find any that reprove evil and wickedness.
entrappeth any in his fierceness; he cries out upon him. for a sectary, a
schismatic, a disturber of the peace, and maker of uproares, and then all cry,
A Heretic, A Heretic, and yet their hearts can say no evil of him.

62. Thus behold, thou false Opposer of Christ, and Author of all uproares,
mischief, and disturbance upon Earth, how many ignorant silly people are there
under this thy reproachful blaspheming, which thou many times causest to lay
aspertions upon a holy soul. Behold, now if that persecuted soul shall cry to
God for deliverance, then it all comes to be a Substance, Or, in remembrance
before God.
and an Essence before God; And now if those poor souls many times (which
thus ignorantly have slandered a holy soul) come before God, and would feign
be saved; then if Christ now had not taken all these false reproaches and
aspersions upon him, and reconciled his Father in himself with his Love, where
would you poor sinners abide? Therefore Christ commands us to forgive
[others], as his Father in him has forgiven us: if we do not so, the same
measure that we mete to others, we shall have measured unto us.

The Gate of a Poor Sinner.
63. Therefore thou beloved Soul: if thou art fallen into heavy sins and
blasphemies, through the deceit of the Antichrist, and the seduction of the
Devil and his followers: Consider thy self instantly, continue not therein,
nor do not despair in that condition: forgive thy adversary his faults, and
pray to God the Father, for Christ's sake, who has borne all our wickedness
and iniquities upon him (as a patient Lamb); and they shall be forgiven thee.
Nay, we should not in Eternity have ever been able to come our of this evil
and wickedness, if the Barmhertzigkeit; Mercifulness.
Mercy of God (without our knowledge or desert) had not helped us out of it.

64. O how wholly of mere [Mercy and] Grace has God the Father given us his
Son, who has taken upon him our transgressions, and reconciled The Father.
him in his Anger; All Men are invited to this Grace, of what condition soever
they are, they may all come, whether they be Turks, Jews, Heathens, or
Christians, or what name soever they are called by, none are excluded: all that
are weary and heavy laden may come to Christ, he will receive them and refresh
them all, as himself says: and whosoever teaches, or says otherwise, or
seeks any other way, is the Antichrist, and enters not by the true Door
into the Sheepfold. Amen.

65. And now if we consider the scorning despisings, and mocking of Christ,
and that all was done by the instigation of the Great ones: and that commonly
they were the poor silly people that followed him, except some few that were
wealthy: we then clearly find that which Christ said; That a rich man will
hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This is not meant concerning their
riches, but concerning their vain, glorious, proud, and covetous life, whereby
they consume the sweat of the needy in Pride, and forget God. O how hard it is
for one that is proud, to humble himself before God and Man: and the Kingdom
of Heaven consists only in the virtue and power of Humility.

66. Yet it is seen that some wealthy people did draw near to Christ: whereby
it may be perceived, that the Kingdom of Heaven consists not in misery
only, but in Joy in the Holy Ghost; and none ought to esteem himself happy,
because he is poor and miserable: he is in the Kingdom of the Devil
nevertheless, if he be faithless and wicked. Also none that is rich ought
therefore to cast his goods and wealth away, or give them to be spent lavishly,
in hope to be saved in so doing: no friend; the Kingdom of God consists in
Truth, in Righteousness, and in Love toward the needy, to be rich damneth
none, that use it aright; thou need not to lay down thy Scepter, and run
into a Or, solitary reserved life, in a Cloister or Monastery, or Private life.
Corner, crying, that is but hypocrisy: thou may do righteousness, and
better service to the Kingdom of God, in holding thy Scepter by helping the
oppressed, protecting the Innocent; and granting Right and Justice, not
according to thy Covetousness, but in Love, and in the fear of God; and then
thou art also a Brother to Joseph of Arimathea, and shall shine brighter than
others, as the Sun and Moon compared with the Stars. It is only the
pride, covetousness, envy, falsehood, and anger, that is the Crown of the
Devil; therefore conceive it aright.

Of Christ's Rest in the Grave [or Sepulcher.]
67. We know that the Body without the Spirit, is a thing that lies still;
for though the body of Christ (the Holy Element generated in the
Barmhertzigkeit.
Mercy) is from God; yet the mobility and life stands only in the Deity, and
in us Men, in the Spirit of the soul, and in the Spirit of the Great World,
which are unsevered in this Body upon Earth.

68. Therefore now the question is, Where the soul of Christ was all the time
that the body did Rest in the Grave? Beloved Reason, do not like those, that
are blind concerning God, who say, the soul [of Christ] went away from the
Body down into Hell into the Earth, and during that time, in the Divine power
and virtue; assaulted the Devils in Hell: and bound them with chains, and
destroyed Hell. O it is clean another thing. The Saints rising out of the
Graves at the hour of the Death of Christ; declares otherwise.

69. Reason knows nothing at all of God, and if it be not possible to attain
further from the Gift of God, do not descend down into that Deep, but in
singleness of heart stay Rest contented with that which the Scripture says.
on the Article; it will not endanger thy happiness: God looks only upon
the will of the Heart. Thou must not search so deep into every thing, if it be
not given thee, as it is to this Pen; this Pen writes in the Counsel of God,
(that which the hand knows not, and scarce understands the least spark of
it) and yet very deeply, as thou see, that the things to come are shown in a
very difficult depth, which God alone will discover in due time, which is One
Copy has it, known to us.
unknown to us.

70. Thou know that God himself is all, and there are but Three Principles
( viz. Three Births of distinction) in his Essence; or else all things would be
one thing, and all were merely God, and if it were so, then all would be in a
sweet meekness: but where would be the Mobility, Kingdom, Power, and Glory?
Therefore we have often said; the Anger is the Root of Life: and if The Anger.
it be without the Light, then The Anger.
it is not God, but Hell fire but if the Light shine therein, it becomes
Paradise and fullness of Joy.

71. Therefore we can say no otherwise of the soul of Christ, but that he
commended it into his Fathers hands, and the Father took it into his Divine
power; it stood with its Root therein before: but its own Root, was (without
the Light of God,) in the Anger. And now the soul of Christ came with the
Light of God into the Anger; and then the Devils trembled, for the Light took
the Anger captive, and the Father (understand, his Anger) in the Kingdom of
Heaven was Paradise, and in Hell remained to be Anger still. For the Light shut
up the Principle of Hell, so (to be understood,) that no Devil dares to take
one glimpse [of light] in thither, he is blind before the Light, and [the
Light] is his terror and shame.

72. And so thou must not think that the soul of Christ was then gone a great
way from his Body; for all the Three Principles were on the Cross, why also
not in the Grave? at that very moment, when Christ laid off the Kingdom of
this world, the soul of Christ pressed into Death, and into the Anger of God,
and in that very moment, the Anger was reconciled in the Love in the Light, and
became Paradise: and the Devils were captivated in the Anger in themselves,
together with all wicked souls: and so instantly the life did spring up
through Death, and Death was destroyed, and made a scorn; yet to the wicked
(which remain in the Anger) it is a Death, but in Christ it is a Life.

73. Thus the soul of Christ rested in the Grave, in the Father, forty hours
present with its body; for the Heavenly Body was not dead, but the Earthly
only, the soul sprung up in the Heavenly through Death, and stood forty
hours in Rest; these were the forty hours, in which Adam was asleep, when
his wife was taken out of him: as also the forty days when Moses was on the
Mount [and Israel was tempted to try] whether it were possible to live in the
virtue or power of the Father in the Kingdom of Heaven. But when it was found
to be impossible, then presently the people fell away from the Law of the
Father ( viz. from the Law of Nature): and worshipped a Calfe that they had
made, to be instead of God: and Moses brake the Tables of the Law.

74. And God spoke further to Israel in the fire, that they should see, that it
was not possible to enter into the Land of Promise ([into] Paradise) till the
right Joshua or Jesus came, who should bring them through Death into Life:
consider this further: I will set it down very clearly in the other Books
concerning the Tables of Moses; search for it, and you will find the whole
ground, of whatsoever Moses has spoken and done.

Of Christ's Resurrection out of the Grave.
75. As Adam went out of the clear Light of God, into the dark Kingdom of
this world, and the soul of Adam stood between two dark Principles (as between
Death and Hell) and grew up in the body; so also would Christ (in his growing
body) rise up from the dead at midnight, and make the night in his holy body to
be a clear Eternal Day, whereinto no night ever came, but the Light of God
the Father, and of the Lamb shone therein.

76. Thou should not think that the soul of Christ these forty hours was
in any other place than in the Father, As fire goes out in the Iron by the
waters quenching or killing of it, and yet remains in the Iron in its own
Principle.
and in his body, where it sprung up (in great meekness upon the persecution
[it had]) as a Rose, or fair flower out of the Earth; as also our souls in
our Rest, in the Body of Jesus Christ (at the Last Judgement-day in the
destruction of this world) shall in the new body break forth again out of the
Old: and in the mean while the soul grows up in the Holy Element, in the
body of Christ, till Our appointed time.
our forty hours also come about, and not one hour longer, than the appointed
time is. Thus is the body of Christ in the power or virtue of the Father,
(through the soul) risen again and gone forth, and has in it the Light of
the Holy Trinity.

77. It was not needful that the Stone should be rolled away [from the Grave],
but to convince the blind Jews, that they might see it was but folly in them
to go about to detain or shut up God: also because of the Disciples weak
Reason, that they might see that he was risen for certain: for [when the Stone
was rolled away] they could go into the Grave and see it themselves.

78. Also the Angel appeared to them there, and comforted them: Thus will
Christ comfort his afflicted ones, who are afflicted for his sake: yea he is
[present] with them, as he was with Mary Magdalene, and with the two Disciples
going to Emaus.

79. Thou must know, that no Stone or Rock, can keep or retain his body, he
pierces and penetrateth through all things, and breaks nothing: he
comprehends all things, and the thing comprehends not him: he comprehends
this world, and the world comprehends not him: he is hurt by nothihg, the
whole fullness of the Deity is in him: and is not included in any thing: Note.
he appears a Creature, in our Humane form, in the same Circumscription and
bigness.
dimensions that our bodies have: and yet his body has no end or limit; he is
the whole Princely Throne of the whole Principle.

80. When he was here upon Earth in the earthly Man, his outward body was
circumscribed and limited, as our Bodies are: but the Inward body is unlimited:
for we also (in the Resurrection in the Body of Jesus Christ) are unlimited,
yet visible and palpable or comprehensible, in the heavenly flesh and blood, as
the Prince of life himself is; Note.
we can in the heavenly figure [or shape] be great or little, and yet nothing
be hurt or wanting in us, there is no need of compressing the parts of that
body.

81. O dear Christians, leave off your Contentions about the body of Jesus
Christ: he is every where in all places, Note.
yet in the Heaven; and the Heaven (wherein God dwells) is also every where:
God dwells in the body of Jesus Christ, and in all holy souls of Men, even
when they depart from this outward body; and if they be regenerated, then they
are in the body of Jesus Christ, even while they are in this Earthly body: A
soul here in our body upon Earth, has not the body of Christ in a palpable
substance, but in the word of power [or vertue] which comprehends all things:
in Christ indeed body and power is one [thing]; but we must not understand
[this, of the four Elementary] Creature [which is] in this world.

82. And the Spirit Or, witnesses.
signifies, that if you do not leave off this Contention, you shall have no
other sign [given you] then the When the fire devoured the unbeleeving
Captains and their fifties.
sign of Elias, in fire, in zeal, the zeal shall devour you, and your
contention must devour your selves, you must consume your selves; therefore
are you not madd? Are ye not all Brethren, and are ye not all in Christ? If
you did converse in Love, what should you need to strive about your Native
Country (wherein you dwell)? O leave off, your cause is evil in the sight of
God, and ye are all found to be in Babell: be advised: the day breaks: how
long will ye keep Company with that adulterous Whore? Arise, your noble
Virgin is adorned in her Orient Garland of Pearl: she we^reth a Lilly which
is most delightsome: be brotherly, and she will adorn you indeed, Note.
we have seen her really, and in her Name we write this.

83. There is no need of Contention about the Cup of Jesus Christ, his body is
really received in the Testament, by the faithful, as also his Heavenly Blood,
and the Baptism is a Bath [or Laver] in the water of the Eternal Life (hidden
in the outward [Baptisme with water]) in the Word of the Body of Christ.
Therefore all Contention [or Disputation] is in vain: be in Brotherly Love,
and forsake the Spirit of Pride, and then ye are all in Christ.

84. These very deep and difficult matters are not profitable for you, you
ought not to look after them; we must only set them down, that you may see
what the ground is; and what the Error is. For we are not the cause of these
Writings, but you (in your high puffed up Lust) have stirred up the Spirit,
that you might find out the thoughts of your hearts, let the Resurrection of
Christ be powerful [and effectuall] to you: for his Resurrection is your
Resurrection: and in him we shall grow, and flourish, and live Eternally:
only stick to him, and then you cannot perish in any distress: for if you
have him, you have the Holy Trinity of God.

85. If you will pray to God, then call upon God (your Heavenly Father) in the
Name of his Son Jesus Christ, [desiring] that he would forgive you your
sins, for the sake of his sufferings and death: and give you what is good for
you, and may further your salvation: Give up and yield all whatsoever is
earthly, to his pleasure and will; for we know not what we should desire and
pray for, but the Holy Ghost helps us in Christ Jesus, before his Heavenly
Father. Therefore there is no need of many words [or Long Prayers]; But a
believing Soul, which with its whole Earnest [resolved purpose,] yields it
self up into the Mercy of God, to live in his will, in the Body of Jesus
Christ: and continues constant, then he is sure and safe from the Devil.

86. That Fantasy about the Intercession of the Saints, is unprofitable: it
is but a vexation, whereby you disquiet the Saints in their Rest. Does not God
himself call you continually: and does not your Virgin wait for you with a
Longing Desire: do but come, and she is yours: you need not send any foreign
Ambassadors: it is not here, as at Court; Christ would always feign increase
his Heaven, in his Joy: Why stand you so long in doubt, because of your sins?
Is not the Mercy of God greater than Heaven and Earth: what do you mean?
There is nothing nearer you than the Mercy of God; only in your sinful
impenitent Life, you are with the Devil, and not with Christ Say what you
will: though you sent a Million of Ambassadors to him, if your self be
wicked, you are but with the Devil still: and there is no remedy, but you must
your self rise with Christ, and be borne anew, in the body of Jesus Christ,
(through the power of the Holy Ghost) in the Father, i^ your own soul. If thou
make a feast [or keep a solemnity] do it for the benefit and Or,
Maintenance.
relief of the afflicted and needy, whereby God is praised in thy Love, and
that is well; but if it be for the Rich Glutton, who only uses it out of
pride and laziness, thou have no benefit of that: for God is not praised
therewith, neither does Paradise grow therein.

87. And do not rely upon the hypocrisy of the Antichrist, he is a liar, and
covetous, and a dissembler: he minds only his Idol the Belly, and is a
Thief, in the sight of God: he devoureth the Bread, that belongs to the
needy: he is the Devils Hell-hound, learn to know him.

88. Speaking then of the true Resurrection of Christ; we will also show
[somewhat] concerning his conversation (those forty Days) after his
Resurrection, before his Ascension: Because we know that he is become a real
Lord over Heaven, Earth, and Hell, therefore we show you, how the Kingdom of
this world with all the Essences and qualities thereof, has been subjected to
him. And although he did not always converse visibly with his Disciples, yet
many times he showed himself to them visibly, palpably, and staying with them,
According to the ruling property of the four Elements.
according to the Kingdom of this world, according to his body which he had
here, which was swallowed up by the new Body, which he must present again, as
God would have it to be presented: for God is Lord of every thing, and every
thing must be changed, (as he pleases,) that he might thus show his Disciples
his real Body, and the Print of the Nails: which stand in the Holy Christ, in
his holy Body in Eternity (as a sign of his victory) and shine brighter than
the Morning-Starre.

89. He thereby confirmed his Disciples weak faith: and so showed, that he is
Lord also over the Kingdom of this world: and that all whatsoever we sow,
build, plant, eat and drink, is fully in his Almighty power, and that he can
bless and increase it, and therefore he is not severed or parted from us,
(...) a flower grows out of the Earth, so his Word, Spirit, and power [or
vertue] grows in every thing; and if our mind be sincerely inclined to him,
then we are blessed of him, in body and soul: but if not; then the curse and
the Anger of God is in all things, and we eat death in all fruits [or food].
And therefore it is that we pray, that God will bless our meat and drink,
also our bodies and souls in Christ, and that is right.

90. Secondly, we intimate also, how Christ conversed upon Earth, forty days
after his Resurrection, (understand, in the Kingdom of this world, whereas yet
he was in Heaven) yet he bare that Image without any outward Glory or Clarity
before the eyes of Men: and he had the body wholly with every Essence, as it
hung on the Cross, except the Or, working property of the four Elementary
world.
source of the Principle, which he had not; but else he had all Essences in
flesh and blood, and yet the outward flash stood in the might [and power] of
the Heavenly. This we see, by his going in to his Disciples, the Door being
shut: and passed with his body through the wood of the Door: Thus you may
understand, that the world is as nothing to him, and that he has power over
all things.

91. And further also we intimate to you, that these forty days, are the
forty days of Adams being in Paradise before his sleep ere the Woman was made
out of him, where he stood in the Paradisicall Temptation, where he was still
pure and heavenly; And so this Christ must also stand forty days in the
Paradisicall source [or condition] in the Temptation [to try] (whether the body
would continue Paradisicall) before he was Glorified: and therefore he did eat
and drink with his Disciples in a Paradisicall manner, (as Adam should have
done) into the Mouth, and not into the Body, for the consuming consisted in the
virtue [or power].

92. Here it was rightly tempted, whether the body would live in divine virtue
and power, as Adam also should have done, while he was in Paradise in this
world: and though he were there, yet he was in this world, and yet he lived not
in the source of this world, but in the Paradisicall property above the world,
and also above the wrath of the Anger in the Hell: he should have lived in the
source of Love, Humility, Meekness, and Barmhertzigkeit; Mercifulness.
Mercy is the friendly will of God: and so he should have ruled over the
Stars and Elements, and there should have been no death nor frailty or
corruption in him.

93. Therefore ye Turks and other superstitious People, you should observe
and understand aright; wherefore Christ gave us ^^ch Laws: as command us not
to be revengefull: and that when any strike us on the one cheek, we should
present the other to him, and so further; that we should bless them that
curse us, and do well to them that hate us, and hurt us, understand ye this?

94. Behold, a true Christian (who lives in the Spirit of Christ) must also
walk in the conversation of Christ: he must not walk in the fierce stern
revenging Spirit of this world; but as Christ lived and conversed in this
world, after his Resurrection, and yet not in the source or property of this
world. And though it is not possible for us (while we live in the source of
this world) to do so, yet in the new Man in Christ (whom the Devil hides and
obscureth) we may; if we live in meekness, then we overcome the world in
Christ: if we recompense Good foa Evil, then we witness, that the Spirit of
Christ is in us: and then we are dead, to the Spirit of this world, for the
sake of the Spirit of Christ, which is in us and though we are in this world,
yet the world does but hang to us, as it hung to Christ after his Resurrection,
and yet he lived in the Father in the Heaven, even so do we also, if we be
borne in Christ.

95. Therefore let this be told you ye Jews, Turks, and other Nations: ye
need not look for any other, there is no other Time at hand, but the Time of
the Lilly; and the sign of that [time] is the Sea verse. 82.
sign of Elias. Therefore take heed in what Spirit you live, that the fire of
Anger do not devour you, and Or, consume you.
eat you up. It is high time to cast Jezabel with her whoredoms out of the
house: least you receive the wages of the whore; and as you revile one another,
so you devour one another. Truly, if the contentious Disputations be not
suddenly stayed [and these courses mended], the fire will burn out aloft over
Babel; and then there will be no remedy, till the Anger eat up and consume all
whatsoever is in it.

96. Therefore let every one enter into himself, and not speak of another,
and hold his way to be false, but look that he turn himself, and have a care,
that he be not found in Anger of the devourer; else if he should hoope, and
hallow, and laughing say, look how Babell burns, then he must be burnt and
consumed also, for he is fuel for that fire: and whosoever feels a thought
in himself, that does but wish for the Anger, [to devoure], And he is of
Babell.
that proceeds from Babell.

97. Therefore it is very hard to know Babell: every one supposes that he is
not in it: and yet the Spirit shows me, that Babell Includes and
incompsseth.
encloseth the whole Earth; therefore let every one look to his own ways, and
not hunt after covetousness, for the The wrath devoureth all that
covetousness gathers together.
Driver destroys it, and the Stormer eats it up and consumes it; the
Counsel of the Wise Man will not help then: all the Wisdom of this world is
folly: for that Or, the devouring punishment.
Fire is from the Anger of God: your Wisdom will turn to your hurt and scorn.

Of Christ's Ascension into Heaven.
98. As we know, when Adam had lived forty days in the Paradise, then he went
into the Spirit of this world, whereas he should have gone into the Trinity;
for he stood in the Time of the Temptation; and if he had held out these forty
days, then he had been fully with his soul in the Light of God, and his body
in Ternario sancto, [in the Holy Ternary], like this Christ.

99. For when he had conversed forty days (after his Resurrection) in the
Proba [or Triall] in this world; then he went up into a Mountain, whither he
had appointed his Disciples to come, and went up aloft visibly, with his own
body which he had offered up on the Cross (till a cloud came and did hide him
from their fight) for a sure sign that he was their Brother: and that he (in
this Earthly form and body) would not forsake them; as he also said to them,
Behold, I am with you to the end of the world.

100. Now then says Reason, whither is he gone? is he gone out of this world,
aloft above the Stars into another Heaven? Hearken my beloved Reason, incline
thy Mind to Christ and behold, I will tell it thee: for we see it and know it:
not I: for when I say we, you must not barely understand it of my Earthly Man:
for the Spirit that drives this Pen is spoken of also; therefore I write and
say we, when I speak of my self, as of the Author; for I should know
nothing, if the Spirit of knowledge did not stir it up in me: and there
could be nothing found but in such a way, the Spirit would not be in any other
way: but he did hide and withdraw himself: and then my soul was very much
disquieted in me, with great longing after the Spirit, till I did learn how
it was.

101. Behold that which the Ancients have invented and taught, is not the
Ground; They took upon them to measure how many hundred thousand miles it is
to Coelum Empyreum, they call it.
the Heaven whither Christ is gone. They did it to this end, that they might be
Gods upon Earth themselves, as their invented Kingdom shows and declares,
which stands merely in Babell. Behold, when we speak of the Thrones, it is
clean another thing than that they mean: and their blindness and ignorance
is found, though there is a Spirit in their knowledge which is not so much
rejected: but that Spirit is not [or comes not] ex Ternario sancto [out of the
Holy Ternary] out of the Body of Jesus Christ, but it is out of the High
Eternity, which flies up above the Thrones; which may be mentioned in another
place.

102. We must continue in this Throne [which is ours], what are the other
Thrones to me, where the Principalities of Angels are: they are indeed our
friends, and faithful helpers in the service of God; we must look upon our
own Throne wherein we were created and made Creatures, and upon our Prince in
that Throne; upon God. The first Purpose of God (when he created us, and beheld
us in the Eternal Band) that must stand.

103. This was the Throne of Lucifer, with his Legions: but when he fell, he
was thrust out into the first Principle: and then the Throne in the second
Principle was empty: in the same Principle God created Man, which should
continue therein, and it was tempted [to try] whether that were possible; and
to that end it was, that God created the Third Principle, (in the place of this
world,) that Man also (in the fall) might not become a Devil, but that he
might be helped again. Therefore the Enmity of the Devil against Christ is,
because he fitteth upon his Royal Throne, and besides holds him captive with
his Principle.

104. Thus the place of this world (according to the Heavenly Principle,) is
the Throne and Body of our Christ: and all (whatsoever is in this world in the
Third Principle) is his own also; and the Devil (who dwells in this place in
the first Principle) is our Christ's captive [or Prisoner].

105. For all Thrones are in God the Father, and without him is nothing; he is
the Band of the Eternity; but his Love in the Body of Christ (as in his Throne)
holds the Anger in the Band of Eternity (together with the Devils) captive.
And you must understand, that all is creaturely, his Love, and also his Anger;
and as is mentioned before, so the difference [distinction or division] is a
Birth; and so it cannot be said, that the Devils dwell far from Christ, no;
they are near, and yet in Eternity cannot reach to him: for they cannot see
the clear Deity in the Light, but are As those creatures that see in the dark
are blinded by the Sun.
blinded by it, and we shall in Eternity not see nor touch them, as at present
we see them not, because they are in another Principle, and so that Principle
remains.

106. Thus my dear Mind, know; As the Sun is the Center of all that live,
move, and spring in the four Elements.
that the creature of Christ is the Center of this Throne, from whence every
life proceeds, viz. whatsoever is heavenly; for in that Center is the Holy
Trinity, and not alone in this Center, but also in all Angelical Thrones, also
in the souls of holy Men: only we must thus speak, that it may be
understood. Now the Body (understand the Creature, the Man Christ,) is set in
the midst of this Throne: and stands also in Heaven, (understand in his
Principle) sitting Or, with.
in his Throne at the right hand of God the Father.

107. The right hand of God, is where the Love quenches the Anger, and
generateth the Paradise, that must needs be the Right hand of God, where the
Angry Father is called God in the Love and Light of his Heart, (which is his
Son); and this bodily Throne ( viz. the whole body of Christ) is wholly at
the Right hand of God; but when it is said, at the right hand of God, then
understand, the most inward Root of the sharp Might of the Father, wherein
the Omnipotence consists, where the Father himself goes forth, into the
re-conceived will, into the meekness, and opens the Gate (in the dispelling
of the Darkness) in himself: thus Christ is set therein, and sits thus at
the Right hand of the virtue [or power] and Omnipotence, in such a manner, as
we cannot more highly express it with our Tongue, we understand it well in
the Spirit: therefore it is not needful for you to search any further into it:
but only look that you attain the Body of Christ, and then you have God, and
the Kingdom of Heaven, but we must write thus, because of the Errors in the
world, and for their longings sake that are therein.

108. But when you ask; Does Christ sit or stand, or lie along? then you ask,
as if an Ass should ask about his sack he carries, how the Tailor made it:
yet the Ass must have provender given him, that he may carry the burden the
longer. Behold, Christ sits in himself, and stands in himself, he
needs no chair, nor footstool: his power is his stool, there is neither
above nor beneath there. And as you see in the vision of Esaias, that was full
of eyes behind and before, above and beneath; so the body of Christ, the holy
Trinity shines in the whole Body, and needs no Sun, nor daylight.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Whit suntide.
Feast of Pentecost. Of the sending of the Holy Ghost to his Apostles, and the
Believers.
The Holy Gate of the Divine Power.
1. NOw says Reason, if Christ ascended thus with his body, which he
Sacrificed.
offered up on the Cross, when was he Glorified in his body? Or how is his
body now? is it now as his Disciples saw him ascend into Heaven? My beloved
Reason, my Earthly eyes see it not, but the spiritual [eyes] in Christ see it
very well. The Scripture says; He is Clarified or Brightened.
Glorified and Lord over all; but we will open to you, the Gate of the Great
Wonders, that you may see what we see.

Exodus 24.
2. Behold, when God the Father had brought Israel into the Wilderness to Mount
Sinai, and would give them Laws, in which they should live: then he commanded
Moses to come up the Mountain to the Lord, and the rest of the Elders must
stay a far off, and the people below the Mountain: and Moses went up the
Mountain alone to the Lord; and there appeared the brightness [or Glory] of
the Lord; and on the seventh Day he called Moses, and spoke with him concerning
all the Laws? And the countenance of Moses was Became bright and did shine
like the Sun.
Glorified from the Lord, so that he could stand before him, and speak with
him. Thus also the Man Christ in Ternario sancto [in the Holy Ternary (when he
was ascended into his Throne) was Glorified on the ninth Day in the Holy
Trinity.

3. Understand it right: his soul in the Creature was not first Glorified, but
his whole Body, or Princely Throne: there went forth out of the Center of the
Holy Trinity, the Holy Ghost; as you see clearly, that those (who had put on
the Spirit of Christ) were highly enlightened: for the Holy Ghost went forth
from the Center of the Trinity into the whole holy Element, and did flow into
the Barmhertzigkeitz; Mercifulness.
Mercy of God: and as he Triumphed in the Body of Jesus Christ, so also in his
Disciples, and in the Believers.

4. There were opened all the Doors of the Great Wonders, and the Apostles
spoke with the Languages of all Nations: and so it may be seen clearly, that
the Spirit of God had opened all the Centres of all Essences, and spoke out of
them all; for Christ was the Lord, and the Heart of all Essences, and therefore
the Holy Ghost went out of all Essences, and filled the Essences of all Men,
which turned their ears with a desire to it, and in that he pressed into all:
and every one heard (out of his own Essences and Language,) the Spirit of God
spoke out of the Disciples: and the Holy Ghost was borne in the bodies of all
their hearers, which had but an earnest desire to it, and they were all filled:
for the Spirit of God pierced through into their hearts, as he pressed forth
out of the Center of the Trinity into the whole body and Princely Throne of
Jesus Christ, and filled all outwardly in the Clarity [or Glory].

5. Thus all the holy souls were filled, so that their whole body in all
Essences was made stirring from the exceeding precious virtue [or power] which
went forth in the Wonders in power and in Or, Miracles.
Deeds that were done there. And here is set before us the virtue [or power] of
the Father in the Fire, in his severe Omnipotency on Mount Sinai, also the
Still Loving virtue of the Son of God in the Love and Mercy; for we see that
we could not at all live in the Father (in the source of the Fire): and
therefore Moses brake the Tables, and the people fell away from God.

6. But now when the Meekness was in the Father, then the Love held the Anger
captive, and [the Love] went out of the source of the Father (and that was the
Holy Ghost) in the Wonders: There stood the highly worthy heavenly Virgin (of
the Wisdom of God) in her highest Ornament, with her Garland of Pearls: there
stood Mary in Ternario Sancto, of which the Spirit (in the Ancients) has
spoken wonderfully; And here Adam was brought into Paradise again.

7. And now if we will speak of the Glorification of Christ, and of his body,
which he visibly (and in that form in which he had conversed upon Earth)
ascended withal; then we must say, that as the Love of the Heart of God has
reconciled the Anger of the Father, and holds it as it were captive in it; so
also the Holy Ternary has comprehended the hard palpable body of Christ, viz.
the The ruling property.
Kingdom of this, world, as if in were wholly swallowed, up, whereas it is not
swallowed up, but the Or, working property.
source of this world, it destroyed in Death* and the holy Ternary has put on
the body of Christ; not as a Garment, but virtually [or powerfully] in the
Essences, and he is as it were swallowed up (to our apprehension and sight) and
yet is really: and shall come again at the Last Judgement-Day, and manifest
himself in his own body which he had here, that all may see him, be they good
or bad: and he shall also come in his same form to keep the Judgment of the
Separation; for in his Divine Glorified form, we cannot behold him before we
be Glorified, especially the wicked. But thus all Generations shall see and
know him, and the unbeleeving shall weep and wayle, that they went so out of
their flesh and blood into another source [or condition], when they should and
might in their own Essences have put on God, and yet did put on the Kingdom of
the fierceness of the Anger of God, with the Devils; and let the same into the
Essences of their souls, and caused themselves to perish.

8. Therefore we say, that in the soul of Christ, in its Essences, the clear
Deity ( viz. the Light of God is comprehended, which has quenched the Anger in
the source of the soul: and thus that Light Glorifieth or brightneth.
clarifieth the soul, and (through the proceeding virtue) the Tincture is
always generated out of the soul, and the Fiat in the Essences makes it
comprehensible and palpable; and that is the Ternarius Sanctus, or the Holy
Earth, that is, the holy flesh, for God enlighteneth in this body, all in all.

9. Thus his earthly body is swallowed up in God, though indeed he never had
such an earthly body as we have, for he was not of the Seed of a Man; but we
speak only of the comprehensibility and visibility of it to our eyes,
according to which he is our Brother: and he shall appear at the Last
Judgement-Day in our fleshly form, in the power of God, as Lord over all, for
all power in Heaven and in this world is subjected under him, and he is Judge
over all, A Prince of Life and Lord over Death.

10. And so the Kingdom of Heaven is his own body, and the whole Princely
Throne of his Principle is Paradise, wherein the blessed fruit in the virtue of
God springs up: for the Holy Ghost is the virtue [and power] of the fruit; as
the Air in this world is, so the Holy Ghost is the Air and Spirit of the
soul in Christ, and of all his children: for there is no other Air in Heaven,
in the body of Christ; and God the Father is All in All. Thus we live and are
(in Christ) all in the Father, and there is no soul that searches out to the
depth; but we live all in singleness of heart and in great humility and love
one toward another, and rejoice one with another, as children do before their
Parents: and to this end God created us.

11. This my dear Or, friend.
soul, seek Christ and incline thy self to him, and so thou shall receive
the Holy Ghost, who will new regenerate thy soul, and enlighten, drive, and
lead thee; and he will reveal [and manifest] Christ to thee: Leave off all
opinions and humane Inventions; for the Kingdom of God is near thee; and thou
art kept out from God only by thy own unbelief, by thy evil works (viz.) by
thy pride, covetousness, envy, anger, and falsehood: for thou clothest thy
self with them, and so thou art in the Devils clothes, without God.

12. But if thou leavest them off, and passest with the desire of thy heart
into the Mercy of God, then thou go into Heaven, into God the Father, and
thou walk in the body of Christ in the pure Element; and the Holy Ghost
goes forth out of thy soul, and leads thee into all truth: and the old
corrupt Man does but hang to thee, which thou shall destroy in Death: and with
thy Love in Christ, still, overcome, and captivate the Anger of the Father in
thy soul: and thou shall spring up with thy New Man through Death, and appear
in the same at the Last Judgment Day.

The The Gate by which Babell first entered.
Gate to Babell.
13. when we consider with our selves, the many Sects, and Controversies in
Religion, and from whence their come and take their Original: it is as clear
as the Sun, and it manifests it self indeed, and in truth: for there are
great Wars and Insurrections stirred up for the cause of [Religion or] Faith:
and there arises great hatred and envy about it, and they persecute one
another for opinions sakes; because another is not of his opinion, he sticks
not to say, he is of the Devil; and this is yet the greatest Misery of all,
that this is done by the Learned in the high Schools [or Universities] of this
world.

14. And I will show (thee simple Man) their venom and poison: for behold
every one among the Layety looks upon them, and thinks, Sure it must needs
be right if our Minister, Pastor, Preacher, or Teacher.
Priest say it: he is a Minister of God: he fitteth in Gods stead, it is the
Holy Ghost that speaks out of him. But Saint Paul says; Try the Spirits:
for every on^s Teaching is not to be believed: and Christ says; By their works
thou shall know them: for a good Tree brings forth good fruit, and an evil
tree brings forth evil fruit; also he teaches us plainly that we should not
gainsay the Prophecy that is of God, but should learn to try them by their
fruits.

15. We speak not of perfect Works done by the body, which is captivated in
the Spirit of this World; but [wee speake] of their Doctrines, that we [must]
try them, whether they be generated of God. For if that Spirit teaches
blasphemies, slanders, and persecutions, then it is not from God, but it
proceeds from the covetousness and haughtiness of the Devil. For Christ
teaches us meekness, and to walk in brotherly Love: wherewith we may
overcome the enemy, and take away the Might of the Devil, and destroy his
Kingdom.

16. But when any fall to fireing, killing with the sword, to undo people,
ruin Towns and Countries, there is no Christ, but the Anger of the Father,
and it is the Devil that blows the Or, the Cole.
fire. For the Kingdom of Christ is not found in such a way, but in Power; as
the Examples of the Apostles of Christ declare, who taught no revenge, but they
suffered persecution, and prayed to God, who gave then signs, and great
Wonders, so that people flocked to them: and so the Church of Christ grew
mightily, so that it overshadowed the Earth. Now who is the Destroyer of this
Church? Open thy eyes wide and behold: it is Daylight, and it must come to the
Light, for God would have it so, for the sake of the Lilly. It is the Pride of
the Learned.

17. When the Holy Ghost spoke in the Saints with power and Miracles, and
converted people powerfully, then they flocked to them, they honored them
greatly, they respected them, and submitted to them as if they had been Gods.
Now this was well done to the Saints, for the honor was given to God, and so
humility and love grew among them, and there was all loving Reverence, as
becomes the children of God, and as it ought to be.

18. But when the Saints comprised their Doctrine in Writings, that thereby in
their absence it might be understood what they taught; then the World fell upon
it, and every one desired to be such a Teacher, and thought the Art, skill, and
knowledge stuck in the Letter: thither they came running, old and new, who for
the most part only stuck in the Old Man, and had no knowledge of God: and so
taught according to their own conceits, from the written words: and expounded
them according to their own meanings.

19. And when they saw that great respect and honor was given to the Teachers,
they fell to ambition, pride, and greediness of money: for the simple people
brought them presents or gifts, and they thought that the Holy Ghost dwelt in
the Teachers, whereas the Devil of Pride lodged in them: and it came to that
pass, that every one called himself after his Masters name [whose Doctrine he
prized most] one would be of Paul; another of Apollo; another of Peter; and so
forth And because the Saints used not the same kind of words and expressions
in their Teaching and Writings (though they spoke from one and the same Spirit)
therefore the Natural Man (which being without the Spirit of God, knows
nothing of God) began all manner of strife and Disputations, and to make Sects
and Schisms: and they set themselves up for Teachers among all sorts of
People: not for Gods sake, but for temporal honor, riches, and pleasure sake,
that they might live brave lives. For it was no very hard labor and work, to
hang to the bare Letter: and such strife and contention arose amongst them,
that they became the most bitter enemies and haters one of another: and none of
them were borne of God: but their Parents held them close to the Scripture,
that they might come to be Teachers, that so they might be honored in and for
their children, and that their children Might have good maintenance, or great
Livings for their Beastiall Man.
might live bravely.

20. And so it fell out, that every one would get the greatest conflux of
people be could, that he might be esteemed by most people; and these Lip
Christians did so multiply; that the sincere hearty desire to God was lest, and
they only looked upon the Lip Priests, who did nothing but cause strife and
contentions; and they all vapoured and boasted of their own Art and skill which
they had learned in the Schools and Universities: and cried, lo here is
Christ, come running hither, thus and thus has Paul written; and another
says, come hither, here is Christ, thus and thus has Peter written, he was
the Disciple of Christ? and had the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, this
cannot be amiss: they do but deceive you, follow after me.

21. Thus the poor ignorant people looked upon the Such as Apishly Teach the
words of Holy Men, without the understanding they had.
Mouth-Apes, those greedy covetous Men, which were no other than Mock Priests,
Monsters of Priests, or Priests in a Play.
vizard-Priests: and so lost their dear Immanuel; for Christ in them (from
whence the Holy Ghost goes forth, which drives and leads Men, and who at
first had begotten them with power and Miracles) must now be nothing but a
History, and they became but History-Christians; yet so long as the Apostles
and their true Disciples lived, they stopped and reproved such things, and
showed them the right way; but where The Apostles and their Disciples.
they were not, there the History Priests misled them, as may be clearly seen
in the Ephesians.

22 And so the Kingdom of Christ grew not in Power only; but for the most
part in the History; the Saints borne in Christ, they confirm that many times
with great Wonders [or Miracles] and the History-Priests of Baal, they always
built upon those [Miracles of the Saints], same that which was good for the
promoting virtue and good manners: many brought forth thistles and thorns,
that they might make strife and wars: many sought only great honor,
dignity, and glory, that it should be conferred upon the Church of Christ and
her Ministers, as it may be seen in Popery, out of what Root it is grown:
And it came so far, that they mingled the Jewish Ceremonies in their Doings,
as if the Justification of a poor sinner did lie in them, because they were of
Divine appointment; for which cause, the Apostles held the First Council at
Jerusalem where the Holy Ghost concluded, that they should only cleave to
Christ in true Love one to another, and that was the only Justification before
God.

23. But it availed not, Pride would erect its Throne, and set it above Christ,
the Devil would be God: and they made Fair subtle pretenses and Expositions
of Scripture.
Glosses, that they might bring it to pass in such a way, that the simple
people might not take notice o^ it; there the Keys of Peter must govern the
City, and they drew together with the Keys, Jus Divinum.
Divine Authority to them, and so could use the Divine Power in deeds and
wonders no more: for they desired to be rich and wealthy upon Earth, and not to
be Poor with Christ, who in this world (as himself witnesses) had not
whereon to lay his head; they would not be such Christians in power and
wonders: As Adam, who would not live in the Power, but in a great Heap [of
Earth], that he might have something to take hold of. And here may be rightly
seen our Misery which Adam brought us into, that our Essences always reach
after the Spirit of this world, and desire only to fill themselves with a
great Heap, from whence Adam, and we all, have gotten such a swelled gross
untoward body, full of sicknesses, contrariety, and contentious desires.

24. Now when the Historical Christendom, and the true Christians grew
together, the Scepter was always among the Learned, who exalted themselves,
and made themselves potent, and great, and the simple [Church] yielded to it as
right: and yet there was a desire after the Kingdom of God found in Men, v^z.
the Noble Word of God (which had Imaged or figured it self in the mind.
imprinted it self in the Promise [in Paradise] in the Light of Life, and
which was made stirring by Christ) that drove them indeed to the fear of God.
And then they built great Temples or Churches.
Houses of Stone, and called every one thither, and they said that the Holy
Ghost was powerful there, and they must come thither: Saying, do as we say,
and not as we do.
besides, they durst be so impudent to say (when they were found to be so
wicked and malicious) that the Holy Ghost was powerfully in the mouth of the
wicked.

25. But thou Hypocrite, thou lie: if thou are ungodly, thou can not raise
The dead in trespasses and sins.
the Dead, thou can convert none, that in this world lies drowned in sins;
thou may stir the heart of the Believer indeed (through thy voice,) which
is a work of the Spirit; but thou bring forth none out of Death [into life];
it is an impossible thing. For if thou will convert a poor sinner (which is
drowned in sin, and lies captive in the Anger), then the Holy Ghost must be
in thy mouth, and thy Essences must take hold of his, and then thy Light will
shine in him, and thou shall raise him out of the Death of sins, and with thy
Love, in thy Tincture, catch him: and then he will come to thee with a hearty
desire, longing after the Kingdom of Heaven: and then thou art his Confessor,
and have the Keys of Peter: and if thou art void of The Holy Ghost.
that, thou have no Keys.

26. As the Confession is, so is the Absolution. Is the Patient an Historical
Christian? so is the Physician too; and in them both there is a Mouth
Hypocrisy: But has the Patient any virtue [or power], then the voice blows
that virtue [or power] up; not from the power of the Physician, but in the
virtue [or power] of God, who with his power even in a Thorne-Bush makes it to
grow, which is the power in all things, and so also in a voice, which in it
self has no ability.

27. Thus it became a Or, fashion.
Custom, that every one was bound [to come] to the Temple made of Stones, and
the Temple of God in Christ, stood and stands very empty: but when they saw
the Desolation in the Disputations and Controversies.
Contention, they called Councels, and made Laws and Cannons, that every one
must observe upon pain of Death. Thus the Temple of Christ was turned into
Temples made of stones, and out of the Testimony of the Holy Ghost a worldly
Law was made: then the Holy Ghost spoke no more freely, but he must speak
according to their Laws. If he reproved their Errors, then they persecuted
him; and so the Temple of Christ in Man's knowledge, became very obscure, if any
came that was borne of God, and taught by the Holy Ghost: and were not
conformable to their Laws, he must be a Heretic.

28. And so their False power, usurped supposed Jus Divinum.
Power grew, and every one had great respect to it; and they strengthened their
Laws still more and more with the Power of Saint Peter, till they raised
themselves so high, that they impudently set themselves as Lords over the
Doctrine of the Apostles, before God: and gave forth, that the Word of God, and
the Doctrine of the Saints, must receive their value, worth, and authority from
their Councels, and what they ordained and instituted, that was from God, they
were Gods dispencers of the Word, Men must believe their Ordinances: for that
was the way and means Means of salvation.
for the poor sinner to be Justified before God.

29. But where then is the New Regeneration in Christ through the Holy Ghost?
Art thou not Babell, a Habitation of all Devils in Pride? How have thou adorned
thy self? not for Christ; but for thy own Pride, for thy God Maufim the belly
God.
Idol the bellies sake, and thou art a Devouter. But thy Or, Idol.
Belly is become a stinck, and has gotten a horrible source: there is a great
fire of Terrible devouring, in that which thou have made thy God.
Anguish in thy source, for thou art naked and manifest before God, thou
stand as an impudent whorish woman. Why do you Layety, hang [and depend] on
such a Strumpet? Her own Usurped Jus Divinum.
usurped Authority is her Beast whereon she rides: behold and consider her in
the Revelation of John, how the Holy Ghost sets her forth in her colors.

30. Will thou be an Apostle of Christ, and wilt be but a Minister for the
Belly, and teach only according to thy Art? from whom do thou teach? from
thy Belly, that thou may fatten thy self thereby. It Is true, thou should
be fed, and thou should have subsistence from Men, if thou art Christ's
Disciple; but thy Spirit should not stick in covetousness, but in Christ: thou
should not rely only upon thy Art, but should give up thy self to God,
that God may speak from thee, and then thou art in the Temple of God, and not
in the Temple of the institution of Man's Inventions.

31. Look upon Saint Peter, on the day of Pentecost, who converted Three
Thousand souls at one Sermon, he spoke not from the appointment of the
Pharisees, but out of the Spirit of Moses, and the Prophets, out of the Temple
of the Holy Ghost, that pierced through and enlightened the poor sinners. But
thou teach Persecution only, consider thereby whence thou did grow: viz.
out of that first stock, where they fell from the Temple of Christ to humane
conceits and Inventions; where they sent forth Teachers, according to Man's
itching ears, for a fair show, that thereby thou might grow great in thy
Pride; and because thou have sought nothing else, therefore God has suffered
thee to fall into a Reprobate confounded sense.
perverse sense, so that out of thee there come those that blaspheme the true
Doctrine of Christ.

32. Behold, out of what are the Turks grown? Out of thy Reprobate confounded
sense.
Perverse sense; when they saw that thou regardedst nothing but thy Pride, and
did only contend and dispute about the Temple of Christ, that it must stand
only upon Man's foundation and Inventions; then Mahomet came forth, and found
an Invention that was agreeable to Nature: because those other followed after
For greediness of money and gain, or filthy Lucre.
covetousness, and fell off from the Temple of Christ, as also from the Light
of Nature, into a confusion of Pride, and all their aim was, how the
Antichristian Throne might be adorned; therefore he also made Laws and
Doctrines [raised] from Reason.

33. Or do thou suppose The rising up and Doctrine of Mahomet.
it was for nothing? It is most certain, that the Spirit of the great world
has thus set him up in great wonders, because the other were no better, and
therefore it must stand in the Light of Nature in the Wonders, as a God of this
world, and God was near the one as the other. Thy symboles or signs in the
Testament of Christ which thou usest (which Christ left for a Covenant) they
stood in Controversy, and were in Disputation; and thou did pervert them
according to thy Pride, and thou did bend them to thy Institution, Ordinances
and appointment: thou did no more regard the Covenant of Christ, but the
Custom of Celebration or performance of it; the custom most serve the turn:
whereas wood that burns not is not fire, though when it is kindled it comes
to be fire: so^ also the custom without faith is like wood that burns not,
which they will call a Fire.

34. Or shall not the Spirit set it down before thy eyes thou lascivious
filthy Strumpet? Behold, how have thou broken the state of wedlock, and opened
a Door to whoredom, so that no sin is regarded; have thou not ridden Upon
thy power, might, and Authority.
upon thy Beast, when every one gazed on thee, and did ride after thee [in thy
Traine]? Or art thou not that fine painted [adorned Whore]? Do thou suppose
we set thee forth in vain? The Judgment stands over thee, the sword is
begotten, and it will devour, Go out [from] Babell, and thou shall live;
though we saw a fire in Babell, and that Babell was burning, yet it shall not
burn those that go out from The strife, contention, and warring that is in it.
it.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Last Judgment, Of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of the Eternal
Life.
The most horrible Gate of the wicked, and the joyful Gate of the Or, Saints
and holy people.
Godly.
1. WE know Christ has taught us, that a Judgment shall be kept: not only
for the Punishment of the despisers of God, and for a reward to the good; but
also for the sake of the Creature, and of The outward Nature.
Nature, that they may once be delivered from vanity: and we know that the
substance of this world and the property thereof must pass away, the Sun and
the Stars, and also the four Elements, must pass away as to their source
[or property] and all must be restored again, and then the life will spring
forth through Death, and the figure of every thing shall stand Eternally before
God, for which end it was created: also we know that our souls are immortal,
generated out of the Eternal Band; and when this world passes away, then also
all its Essences pass away, which are generated out of it, and the Or, the
ground of the Essences or substance.
Tincture remains still in the Spirit.

2. Therefore O Man! Consider thy self here in this world, in which thou
stand in the Birth, thou art sown as a seed or Grain, and a Tree grows
out of thee; therefore now see in what Field or soil.
Ground thou stand, that thou may be found to be Timber for the great
building of God in his Love, and not for a threshold [or footstoole] to be
trodden under-feete, or that is fit for nothing but for the fire, whereof
nothing will remain but dust and ashes.

3. It is said to thee, that the wood [or fewell] of thy soul shall burn in
the Last Fire, and that thy soul shall remain to be ashes in the fire, and
thy body shall appear like black soote; why will thou then stand in a
wilderness, yea in a Rock where there is no water? How then will thy Tree grow
again? O! what great misery it is that we are ignorant in what Ground or
field.
soil we grow, and what kind of Sap, juice, or substance.
Essences we draw to us, seeing our fruit shall appear and be tasted: and
that which is pleasant shall stand upon Gods Table; and the other shall be cast
to the Devils swine. Therefore let it move you, to look that you grow in the
Ground or soil of Christ, and bring forth fruit, that may be set upon Gods
Table, which fruit never perishes but continually springs, and the more it
is eaten of, the pleasanter it is, how will thou rejoice in the Lord.

4. The Last Judgment is appointed for that end: and as we know that all
things [in this world] have had a beginning, so they shall also have an end:
for before the Time of this world, there was nothing, but the Band of Eternity,
which makes it self, and in the Band the Spirit, and the Spirit in God, who
is the highest Good, which was always from Eternity, and never had any
beginning; but this world has had a beginning from the Eternal Band in the
Time.

5. For this world makes a Time, therefore it must perish: and as it has been
Nothing, so it will be Nothing again; for the Spirit moves in the Or,
upholder.
Either; And therein the The seed.
Limbus (which is corruptible) is generated, from whence all things proceed:
and yet there was no * fashioner, but the Spirit (or the * Vulcan) in the
Essences, and so also there were no Essences, they were generated in the will
of the Spirit, and in that will is the Framer, moulder, or former.
fashioner which has fashioned all things out of nothing, but merely out of
the will.

6. Seeing then it is fashioned out of the Eternal will, therefore it is
Eternal; not in substance but in the will, and after the breaking of the
substance, this world stands wholly and altogether (like a figure*) in the
will for [a Figure or Picture.
Glass of] Gods works of Wonder. And so we know now, that where there is a
will, it must comprehend it self so that it be a will, and that comprehension
makes an attraction, and that which is attracted is in the will, and it is
thicker than the will, and is the darkness of the will, and a source in the
darkness: for the will desires to be free, and yet cannot be free, except it
go again in it self our of the Darkness, and if it do, then the Darkness
continues in the first will, and there conceived will remains in it self in
the Liberty or freedom.
Light.

7. Thus we give you to understand, that this world (when the will was moved),
was created out of the Darkness, and the out-going one of the will in it
self, is God: and the out-going out of God, is Spirit, which has discovered
it self in the dark will, and that which was discovered were the Essences, and
the Or, the striker of fire, which strikes up the thoughts of the mind.
Vulcanus was the wheel of the Mind, that divided it self into seven Forms.

8. And as is mentioned before, these seven Forms divide themselves again
every one in it self into infinite many forms, according to the Or, sparkling.
discovery of the Spirit, and therein stands the Essence of all Essences, and
it is all a great wonder: and our whole Teaching does but aim at this, that
we, Men, might enter into the Light holy wonders: for at the end of this Time
all shall be manifested, and every thing shall stand in that wherein it is
grown: and then when that substance (which at present it possesses and
brings forth) perishes, then it is all an Eternity.

9. Therefore let every one have a care, how he uses his Reason, that he may
therewith stand in great honor in the wonders of God. We know that this world
shall perish in the Fire; it shall be no fire of straw or wood, (that would
turn no stones to ashes, and further, to nothing) neither will there any fire
gather together, into which this world shall be thrown; but the fire of Nature
kindles it self in all things, and will melt or dissolve the body of every
thing (or whatsoever is palpable), and turn it to nothing.

10. For as all in the Fiat was held and created according to the [will of the]
Framer, or Artificer.
fashioner (which was the sole and total work-master in all things, in the
seven Spirits of Nature, which brake nothing when he fashioned it, not threw
one [part] from the other when he had made it, but every thing separated it
self, and stood in the source of its own Essences) so there shall not need
much blustering, Thunder and Lightening, and breaking, (as this world in Babel^
teaches) but every thing Or, passes away.
perishes in it self: the source [or flowing forth] of the Elements cease, as
a Man when he dies [ceaseth from working], and all passes into its Either [or
receptacle].

11. And at the Time (before this Fabric [of Heaven and Earth] perishes and
passes into its Either) comes the Judge of the Living and the Dead; there all
men must see him in his, and in their flesh; and all the Dead must rise through
his voice, and stand before him; and there the Angelical world shall be
manifested. And all the Generations of the Earth (which are not comprehended in
the body of Christ) shall howl; and then they shall be separated into two
flocks: and the Sentence of Christ passes over all, both good and bad; and
there will be howling, trembling, yelling, roaring, and cursing themselves, the
Children cursing their Parents: and wishing that they had never been borne.

12. Thus one of the wicked curses the other, who has caused him to commit
such wickedness: the Inferior his Superior that has given him offense, [and
been a stumbling block to him]: the Layety curse the Clergy, or Ministers or
Teachers.
Priests, who have given them evil Examples, and seduced them with false
Doctrine: the wicked Curser, swearer, and blasphemer, biteth and knaweth his
Tongue, which has so murdered him, the Mind beats the Head against the
stones: and the ungodly hide themselves in the caves and holes of the Earth,
before the Terror of the LORD: for there is great quaking and stirring in the
Essences of the Anger and fierce wrath of the LORD: and the Anguish breaks
the heart; and yet there is no dying; for the Anger is stirring, and the life
of the ungodly flows up in the Anger. There the ungodly curse the Heaven and
the Earth that did bear him, as also the Constellation [or Starres] that lead
him; and the hour of his Nativity.
Birth: all his uncleanness stand before his eyes, and he sees the cause of
his horror, and condemns himself: he cannot look upon the Righteous for
very shame: all his works stand in his mind, and (in the Essences), cry woe to
him, that did them, they accuse him: the tears of those he has afflicted and
oppressed, are like a fiery stinging Serpent; he desires Abstinence.
Rest or ease, but there is no comfort, despair rises up in him, for Hell
terrifieth him.

13. Also the Devils tremble at the Kindling of the Wrath, whose faces appear
before the eyes of the ungodly: for they see the Angelical world before them,
and the Hellish Fire in them: and they see how every life burns, and every
one in its own source, in its own Fire. The Angelical world burns in
Triumph, in Joy, in the Light of the Clarity, Luster, or Brightness.
Glory, and it shines as the clear Sun (which neither Devil, nor any of
the wicked dare look upon,) and there is Praise [and Halelujahs] that the
Driver is overcome.

14. And there then the Judgment is set, and all Men (both the Living and the
Dead) must stand there, every one in his own body: And the Angelical Quire of
the holy Men (who have been killed for the Witness of Jesus) is set: there
stand the holy Patriarchs of the Tribes of Israel, and the holy Prophets, with
their Doctrine: and all that they have taught is made manifest and revealed,
and stands before the eyes of the wicked: they must give an account of all
their murtherings of the Saints: for they that have been murdered for the
Truths sake, stand before the eyes of their murderers, whose lives the
murderers must give an account for, and yet have no excuse to make, but stand
speechless; all his slandering reproaches which he has cast upon the
Righteous, stand there before him Really.
in substance, and is a substance, about which, the Law is there read to him.

15. Where is now thy Authority, thy honor, thy riches, thy pomp and bravery,
thy power, wherewith thou have terrified the needy, and have made the Right bow
and bend to thy will? Behold, it is all in substance, and stands before thee,
the oppressed read thy lesson to thee, all that was rightly spoken [by thee]
in this world, is there recalled again: and thou abidest (in thy
unrighteousness) a liar, and thou must be judged by those that thou have here
judged in falsehood: all lying and deceit, stand Are really discovered in the
Light.
manifest in the substance, all thy words stand in the Tincture in the
substance of Eternity, before thee, and are thy Looking-glass: they will be
thy Eternal knawing Whelps, and the Book of thy Comfort and Trust. Therefore
do but think what thou will do, will thou not then curse and judge thy self?

16. On the contrary the Righteous stand there in unspeakable great Joy: and
their Joy rises up in the source [or Well-spring] of the Holy Ghost; all their
sorrow and heaviness (which they have had here) stands before them in
substance, and it appears how they have suffered wrongfully: their comfort
springs up in the body of Jesus Christ, who has redeemed them out of so
great misery: all their sins are washed, and appear as white as snow; and
there then they return thanks to their Bridegroom, who has redeemed them out
of such necessity and misery, wherein they lay captive here; and there is mere
hearty Joy that the The evil, malice, wickedness, or the Devil.
Driver is destroyed: all their good works, their teaching and well-doing,
appear before them: all the words of their teaching and reproving (wherewith
they have showed the ungodly the right way) stand in the Figure.

17. Here will the Prince and Arch-Shepheard pronounce his Sentence, saying to
the Honest, virtuous, or innocent. Matthew. 25.
Godly; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom that has been
prepared for you, from the Beginning; I have been hungry, thirsty, naked, sick,
in prison and misery, and you have fed me, given me drink, clothed me,
comforted me, and visited me, and have come and helped me in my misery,
therefore enter into Eternal Joys. And they will answer; Lord, when have we
seen thee hungry, thirsty, naked, in prison, or in misery, and have served
thee. And he will say, what you have done to the least of these my brethren,
you have done that to me. And to the wicked he will say: Away from me ye
cursed into the Eternal Fire: for I have been hungry, thirsty, naked, in
prison, and in misery, and you have never ministered unto me. And they will
answer; Lord, when have we seen thee so, and not ministered unto thee. And he
will say; What you have not done to the least of these my poor brethren, that
you have not done to Me; and they must depart from him.

18. And in that moment of departing, there Perishes.
passes away Heaven and Earth, Sun, Moon, Stars, and Elements, and
thenceforth, Time is no more.

19. And there then in the Saints, the incorruptible attracteth the corruptible
into it self, and the Death, and this Earthly flesh is swallowed up: and we
all live in the great and holy Element of the body of Jesus Christ, in God the
Father, and the Holy Ghost is our comfort: and with this world, and with our
Earthly Body, all knowledge and skill of this world perishes: and we live as
children, and eat of the Paradificall fruit, for there is no terror, fear,
nor death any more: for the Principle of Hell, together with the Devils (in
this last hour) is shut up: and the one [Principle] cannot touch the other any
more in Eternity, nor conceive any thought of the other: the Parents shall no
more think of their wicked children that are in Hell, nor the children of their
Parents: for all shall be in Perfection, and that which is in Part shall cease.

Note. Read more of this, in the Answer to the thirtieth Question, in the Book
of the forty Questions concerning the soul.
20. And there then this world shall remain standing in a Figure and shadow in
Paradise, but the substance of the wicked perishes in that [figure of the
world] and remains in the Hell, for the works of every one follow after them:
and there shall be Eternal Joy over the Figures of all things, and over the
fair fruit of Paradise, which we shall enjoy Eternally.

To which help us, O Holy Trinity, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.

What is wanting here, you may seek for in the other Parts of my Writings,
especially, concerning Moses and all the Prophets, and concerning the Kingdom
of Christ.

In the fourth Part of these Writings, being the forty Questions of the
Original of the soul, and what it is from Eternity to Eternity, this is
clearly described.

A true Information concerning the Confounded Babell.

To the Comfort of such as seek: and set beer for a Witness against the
Mockers and Despisers.

21. Though now there be so many Doctrines and opinions Or, broached.
manifested, yet the scorner (who is borne of this world only) ought not to
fall on so, and cast all down, which he cannot apprehend; for all is not
false, there is much that is Generated by Heaven, which [Heaven] will at
present make another Seculum or Age, which discovers it self highly with its
virtue [or power], and seeks the Pearl, it would feign open the Tincture in
its substance, that the virtue [or power] of God might thereby appear in it,
and that it might be freed from the irksome vanity, this was done in all Ages,
as Histories show: and as is well known to the enlightened.

22. For now there are many that seek, and they find also: One Gold, another
Silver, another Copper, another Tin: but this must not be understood of
Mettalls, but of the Spirit, in the Power, in the great Wonders of God, in the
Spirit of the Eternal Power.

23. And though there be such seeking in the Mystery by the instigation and
driving of the Spirit of God, yet every one seeks (in his own Or, form.
manner) in his field wherein he stands, and there he also finds; and so
brings his Invention to Light, that it may appear, and this is the Or,
Decree.
Purpose of the Great God, that he may so be manifested in his Wonders. And it
is not all from the Devil, as the world in Babell (in its great folly) does
Or, babble.
teach: where they cast all down to the Ground, and will make a Bon-fire of
it, and set Epicurisme in its place.

24. Behold, I give you a fit similitude in a Sower, a Sower tilleth his Ground
the best he can, and sows good wheat, but now there is other seed among the
wheat, and though that were indeed wholly pure, yet the Earth puts forth
weeds among the wheat, even Thorns and Thistles: and now what shall the Sower
do? Shall he therefore reject the whole crop, or burn it, for the Thistles
and Dar^ells sakes? No: but he thresheth it, and fanneth it, he severeth the
weeds and dross from it, and uses the good seed for his food, and gives
the chafe to his Cattle or Beasts, and with the straw he makes Or, dung for
his Land.
Compost, for his Ground, and so makes good use of his whole crop.

25. But to the Mockery be it spoken, he is a weed, and shall be thrown to
the Beast. And now though other seed be found among the wheat (when it is
fanned and fisted) that he cannot get out, shall he therefore not use his
wheat for food? Every kind of Grain has its virtue, one strengthens the
heart, the other the stomach, another the other members of the Body: for one
Essence alone makes no Tincture, but all the Essences together, make the
senses, [Thoughts] and understanding.

26. Go into a Meadow, and look upon the herbs and flowers, which grow all
out of the Earth, and always one is fairer and more fragrant in smell than the
other, and the most contemptible [hearb] has many times the greatest virtue.
Now then the Physician comes and seeks, and often turns his mind to the
lustiest and fairest, because they thrive so in their growing* and smell
strong; then thinks he, these are the best; whereas many times a small
regardlesse herb, will serve his turn better in his Physic for his Patient,
whom he has under cure.

27. Thus I must tell you: the Heaven is a sower, and God gives him seed, and
the Elements are the ground into which the seed is sown: now the Heaven has
the Constellation, and receives also the seed of God, and sows all together
one among another, now the Essences of the Stars receive the seed in the
Ground, and qualifieth [or is united] with it, and carry themselves along in
the herb, till a seed also be in the herb.

28. Now since there is variety of Growth, according to the Essences of the
Stars, and yet the seed of God (which was sown in the beginning) is in the
Ground, and so they grow together, should God now therefore cast away the whole
crop (because all have not the same Essences) does it not all stand in his
wonders? and is it not the Joy of his life, and the quickening of his Tincture,
[this is] spoken by way of similitude.

29. Therefore my beloved Mind, look what thou do: and judge not so
hastily and unadvisedly, and do not turn Beast (because of the multitude of
Opinions,) to whom belongs only the Chafe of the Noble seed. The Spirit of
God shows himself in every one that seeks him, yet according to the manner
and kind of his Essences; and yet the seed of God is sown along in the
Essence; and if the seeker, seeks in a Divine desire, then he finds the
Pearl according to his Essences, and so the great Wonders of God are
manifested thereby.

30. If now you desire to know the difference, and which is a false seed or
herb (understand, a false Spirit, in which the Pearl, or the Spirit of God is
not), consider it in its fruit, smell, and taste: if he be vain glorious, a
seeker of his own honor, covetous, a blasphemer, a slanderer, and despiser of
the children of God, which casts down all under his feet, and would be Lord
of All Men's minds and opia^ous.
all; then know, that such a one is a naughty Or, Spirit.
seed: and he is a Thistle, and shall be fisted out from the seed of God: Go
out from Or, be at en^it^ with such a property in thy self, say^ng with Paul,
Who shall deliver me from this body of Death.
such [a Spirit]: for he is a confounded wheel, and has no foundation: nor no
sap or virtue from God, for the growing of his fruit: but he grows as a
Thistle which pricketh only, and bears no good seed.

31. The good smell in the herb (which you should now look for, in the many
Opinions) is only the New Regeneration (out of the old corrupted Adamicall
mixed Man) in the body of Jesus Christ, in the Power of the Holy Ghost, viz. a
new Mind toward God in love and meekness: which is not set upon pride,
covetousness, and seeking his own honor, credit, and esteem, nor upon war,
or any manner of stir or insurrection of inferiors against their superiors:
but grows in patience and meekness, as a Grain of wheat among thorns, and
brings forth fruit in its season. And consider, that where there is such
fruit [in thy minde] that is borne of God, and it is the Noble virtue in that
[Man]: Go out from the other fruit, which teaches uproares and dissension,
between inferiors and superiors, for such [fruits] are thistles, and will
prick, and sting [like Nettles], God will fan his wheat himself.

32. The Lil^y will not be found in strife or wars, but in a friendly humble
loving Spirit, together with good sound Well-grounded conve^cing satisfactory
Reason.
Reason, this will dispell and drive away the smoke of the Devil, and flourish
in its time. Therefore let none think, that when strife goes on, and he
gets the upper hand, now it is well and right: and he that is under, and
subdued, let him not think, sure I am found to be in the wrong, I should now
go to the other op^^ion or side, and help that party, to prosecute the other:
no; that is not the way, such a one is merely in Babell.

33. But let every one enter into himself, and labor to be a righteous Man,
and fear God, and do right, and consider that this his work shall appear in
Heaven before God, and that he stands every moment before the face of God,
and that all his works shall follow after him, and then the Lilly of God
springs and grows, and the world stands in its Seculum. AMEN.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX. OR Fundamental and true Description of the Threefold Life in Man.
First, Of the Life of the Spirit of this world in the qualities and Dominion
of the Stars and Elements.

Secondly, Of the Life of the Originality of all Essences, which stands in
the Eternal [indissoluble] Band: wherein the Root of Man's soul stands.

Thirdly, of the Paradisicall Life in Ternario sancto: viz. the Life in the New
Regeneration, which is the Life of the Lord Jesus Christ: wherein the
Angelical Life is understood, as also the Holy Life of the New Regeneration.

All searched out, very fundamentally, in the Light of Nature, and set down
for the comfort of the poor sick wounded soul* that it might seek the holy
life in the new Regeneration, wherein it goes forth out of the earthly, and
passes into the life of Jesus Christ the Son of God.

By the same Author.
1. BEcause in our The Aurora, and the Three Priciples.
foregoing Writings, there are some words which the Reader may not perhaps
apprehend, especially where we have written; that in the Resurrection of the
Dead, we shall be in the Body of Christ, in Ternario Sancto: where we call the
Ternarius sanctus, Holy Earth: which must not be understood of Earth, but of
the holy Body out of the holy virtue [or power] of the Trinity of God: and that
by Ternarius sanctus is properly understood in our writings the Gate of God the
Father, from whence all things proceed as out of one only substance: Therefore
we will instruct the Reader of the The Three Principles.
Second Book of our Writings a little more fundamentally, that he may not hang
so to the bare letter, and make a Historical matter of our Writings, but that
he may observe the mind and spirit, what that [Sprit] means, when it
speaks of the Divine Life, and uses not always the same words and names.

2. For if we look into the Creation of God, we find very wonderful things,
which yet in the beginning proceeded out of one only Fountain: for we find
evil and good, life and death, joy and sorrow, love and hate, weeping and
laughing: and we find that it all sprung out of one only substance, for that
may very well be seen in all Creatures, especially in Man, who is the
similitude of God, as Moses writes, and the Light of Nature convinces us.
Therefore we ought to consider of the Threefold Life in Man, which is found
so, also in the Gate of God the Father.

3. If we consider of the alteration how the mind is changed as it is, how
suddenly joy is turned into sorrow, and sorrow into joy, then we ought well to
consider from whence that takes its Original: For we find it all to be in
one and the same mind; and if one form [property or quality] rises and
gets above the other (there then presently Or, a substance, or reality.
something follows, so that the mind collecteth all its thoughts together,
and sends them to the Members of the Body, and so the hands, the feet, the
mouth, and all go to work, and do something, according to the desire of the
mind) and then we say that form [or property that drives the work] is
predominant, qualifying and working above other forms, wherein yet all other
forms of Nature lie yet hidden; and are subject to that one form: And yet the
mind is such a wonderful Essence, or substance.
thing, that suddenly (out of one form, that is now predominant and working
more than all other) it brings forth and raises up another, and quenches
the [forme] that was kindled before, so that it becomes as it were a nothing,
as may be seen in joy and sorrow.

4. Now therefore when we consider whence all takes its Original, we find,
especially three forms, in the mind; we speak not here of the Spirit of
this world only; for we find that our mind has also a desire [or longing]
after another mind, and that it is anxious for that which the eyes of the body
see not, and which the mouth tastes not, and the feeling of the earthly body
does not perceive, neither does the earthly ear hear it, nor the nose smell
it, which yet the Noble Mind can see, taste, feel, perceive and hear, if the
form of the Divine Kingdom in that mind, be predominant or qualifieth more
than the other two: there then instantly the other two are as it were half
dead and overcome, and the Divine [forme] rises up alone, and then it is in
God.

5. And we see also how instantly the Mind raises up another form, and
makes it predominant ( viz. the Spirit of this world) in covetousness, pride,
in the oppressing of the needy, and lifting up it self only, and so drawing
all to it: whereupon then instantly also the third form breaks forth out of
the Eternal [Indissoluble] Band; as falsehood, envy, anger and malice; so that
the Image of God is as it were dead and overcome: where then the mind (in this
manner) Or, stands.
is in the Anger of God, in Death, in the Jaws of Hell, over which Hell in the
Anger of God insulteth; for hereby its Jaws are set wide open, and it becomes
predominant: but when the Divine form breaks forth again, then the Kingdom
of Hell is overcome, and as it were dead, and the Kingdom of Heaven comes to
be predominant and working again.

6. Therefore St Paul says, To whom you yield your selves as servants in
obedience, his servants you are, (whether of sin unto Death, or of the
obedience of God to righteousness) and that source or property we have, and
in that Kingdom we live, and that Kingdom with the property thereof drives
us: seeing then here in this life, all is in the sowing and in the growing,
therefore the harvest also shall one day follow: where then the one Kingdom,
shall be separated from the other.

7. For there are in the mind of Man Three Principles, all which Three in the
Time [of this four Elementary Life] he may open: but when the body is broken,
then he lives in one Principle only, and then he has lost the Key, and can
open no other Principle more, he must continue Eternally in that source [or
quality] which he has kindled here. For we know that Adam (with his going
out of Paradise into this world) brought us into Death; And Hell in the Anger
of God grows from Death, and so our soul is capable of [going into] the
Kingdom of Hell, and stands in the Anger of God, where the Jaws of Hell
then stand wide open against us, continually to devour us, and we have [made]
a Covenant with Death, and wholly yielded our selves up to it, in the sting of
the Anger, in the first Principle.

8. We not only know this, but we know also, that God has regenerated us in
the life of his Son Jesus Christ to a living Creature, to live in him. And as
he is entered into Death, and again through Death into Eternal Life, so must
we enter into the Death of Christ, and in the life of Jesus Christ, go forth
out of Death, and live in God his Father: and then our life and also our flesh
is no more earthly, but holy in the power of God, and we live rightly in
Ternario Sancto, in the Holy Trinity of the Deity. For then we bear the holy
flesh (which is out of the holy Element in the presence of God) which our
loving Brother and Savior, or Immanuel, has brought into our flesh: and he
has brought us in and with himself out of Death into God his Father, and then
the Holy Trinity of the Deity is substantially [or really] working in us.

9. And as the Eternal Word in the Father, is become true Man, and has the
Eternal Light shining in him, and has humbled [and abased] himself in the
Humanity, and has put upon the Image which we here bear in this Life, the
Image [which is] out of the pure unspotted Element in the presence of God,
(which we last in Adam, which stands in the Mercy of God), as is clearly
mentioned in our second Book with all the Circumstances of it: so must we
also put on to us that Image [which is] out of the pure Element, out of the
body of Jesus Christ, and live in that bodily substance, and in that source
[condition] and virtue wherein he lives.

10. We do not here mean his Creature, that we must enter into that, but
we understand, his source, for the depth and breadth of his life in his source
is unmeasurable: and as God his Father is unmeasurable, so also is the Life of
Christ so: for the pure Element in the source of God the Father in his
Barmhertzigkeit; Mercifulness;.
Mercy, is the Body of Christ: and as our Earthly Body stands in the four
Elements, so the new Man stands in a pure Element, out of which this world
with the four Elements is generated: and the source of the pure Element, is
the source of the Heaven, and of Paradise, and so also it is [the source] of
our Body in the New Regeneration.

11. Now that Element is in the whole Principle of God every where, in all
places, and so is unmeasurable and infini^e, and therein is the Body of Christ
and his quality; and in that is the Trinity of the Deity: so that the Father
dwells in the Son, ( viz. in the Body of Jesus Christ,) and the Son in
the Father, as one only God, and thus the Holy Ghost goes forth from the
Father in the Son, and is given to us, to regenerate us to a new life in God,
in the life of Jesus Christ, and the Earthly Man (in his Image and source [or
quality and property]) hangs but to us in this [Life] time, [which is] well
understood, if we be borne of God with our Mind.

12. For as God the Father in his own substance, comprehends all the Three
Principles, and is himself the substance of all substances, wherein both joy
and sorrow is comprehended, and yet goes forth in it self, out of the source
of the Anguish; and makes the Kingdom of Joy to himself, unconceivable to
the sorrow, and incomprehensible to the source of his Anger in the Anguish, and
Generateth to himself his Heart in the Love, wherein the Name of God takes
original. So also the Mind has in it all the Three Principles, and therein
the soul is comprised, viz. in the Band of Life: The soul.
which must enter again into its self, and create a will in the Life of Jesus
Christ, and endeavor after it, desiring it with a strong will and purpose, and
not stay merely in the History, or in the knowledge of it, and being able to
speak of it, and suppose the words and discourse make a sufficient Christian,
when the Mind is still in mere doubt in Babell: no: that is not the
Regeneration, but it must be an Earnest Resolution: the Mind must in it self
go forth into the humility toward God, and enter into the will of God, in
Righteousness, Truth, and Love.

13. And though indeed the Mind is not able to do this in its own ability
(because it is captivated with the Spirit of this world) yet it has the
Purpose in its power, and God is presented with [and in] the Purpose, and
receives it in his Love, and sows therein the seed of Love in his virtue
[or power], out of which the New Man in the Life of Jesus Christ grows.
Therefore all lies in the true Earnest [Purpose], which is called True
Repentance: for the Receiving of the Word of God in the obedience of Love,
grows not in the Earthly Life, but in the Newborn, in the Life of Jesus
Christ.

14. Therefore the Kingdom of Heaven is a bestowed Bounty of Grace for all
those that earnestly desire it; not that it is enough to say to ones self; I
have indeed a will to yield my self earnestly to God, but I have need to have
this world for a while, and afterward I will enter into the obedience of God,
and that continues from one time to another, and from one day to another, and
in the mean while the Or, the child of perdition.
evil Man grows: if you defer it to the end, and then desire [and think]
to be a Heavenly fruit or Birth, when all the Time of your life, you have
grown in the anger of God, in the Abyss of Hell; no: that is deceit, thou
deceivest thy self.

15. The Priests in Babell have after that, no Key to open the Kingdom of
Heaven for thee; thou must enter in thy self, and be newborn, or else there
is no remedy for thee in this world, nor in Heaven: thou stand here in this
[life] time, in the Ground, and art a Plant, but when Death comes, and cutteth
down the stock, then thou art no more in the growing, but art a fruit: and
then if thou art not food for God, thou do not belong to his Table, and
then God will not dwell in thee.

16. For we know that the Deity only, is the virtue to the New Birth, which
[vertue] (if thou longest for it, and desire it with earnestness) sows it
self in thy mind, and in thy soul, out of which the New Man in the Life of
Christ grows, so that in this world the Earthly [Man] does but hang to it.
Thus the New Man is in God in the Life of Jesus Christ, and the Old Man is in
this world; of which Saint Paul writes clearly in his Or, Epistle.
Letter to the Romans, that, if we thus live in the New Birth, we live to
God, but as to the old Adam we are in this world: where then the source of the
Eternal Band in the soul is also changed, and the soul enters in it self
into the Life of Christ, into the Holy and Pure Element: which in some places
of my Second Book I call the Ternarius Sanctus.

17. Not according to the understanding of the Latin Tongue, but according to
the understanding of the Divine Nature; by which words is excellently expressed
the Life of Jesus Christ in God the Father; as also the Characters or Letters
themselves, and the Spirit in the syllables do signify: wherein the Birth
[unigeniture, or Eternal working] of the Deity is excellently understood,
though indeed it is hidden to the Historical Man of the Or, universities.
School of this world, yet it is wholly comprehensible to those that are
enlightened from God, who then also understand the source [or working property]
of the Spirit in the Letter, which is not at this time fit to be set down
here, and yet it shall be brought to the understanding.

18. And there is nothing more profitable for Man for his beginning to the New
Birth, than true earnest sincere Repentance, with great earnest Purpose and
Resolution: for he must press into the Kingdom of Heaven, into the Life of
Christ, where then his Regeneratour is ready, deep in his Mind, in the Light
of Life, and with desiring and earnestness helps [to wrestle], and so sows
himself as a Grain of Mustard seed into the soul of Man, as a Root to a
New Creature. And if the earnestness in the soul of a Man be great, then the
earnestness in his Regeneratour is also great.

19. And it is not possible to describe the New Birth in Christ fully: for he
that comes into it, can find it only in himself by experience: there
grows another Bud in his Mind, another Man with other knowledge, he is
taught of God: and he sees that all the labor in the History, without the
Spirit of God, is but a confused work of Babell, from whence strife and
contention (in selfe-Pride) comes, for they aim only at Pride and
Advancement, to Recreate themselves in the Lusts of the Flesh, and in self.
They are no Shepherds or Pastors of Christ, but Ministers of Servants of the
Antichrist, they have set themselves upon Christ's Throne; but they have erected
it in this world.

20. Yet the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, but consists in Power;
and there is the true knowledge of God in no Man, except he be Regenerated in
God, out of his corrupted house of sins, where then the fierceness changes
it self into Love, and he is a Priest of God in the Life of Jesus Christ, who
always seeks that which is in Heaven in the Wonders of God: and the New Man
is hidden in the Old Man, and is not of this world, but he is in Ternario
Sancto, in the holy Body of Jesus Christ, understand, in the virtue of his Body.

21. For such also his Covenant with us is, both in the Baptism and the Last
Supper. He took not the flesh of his Creature and gave it to his Disciples,
but he took the Body of the Pure Element [that is] before God, wherein God
dwells, which is present in all Creatures, but comprised in another
Principle, and gave it to his Disciples to eat and to drink under Earthly
Bread and Wine: so also he Baptized the Outward Man with Earthly Elementary
Water, but the inward New Man he Baptiseth with the Water in the holy pure
Element of his Body and Spirit, which substance appears only in the Second
Principle, and is present every where, yet is hidden to the Third Principle,
viz. to the Spirit of this world.

22. For as we know, that our Mind reaches all over this world, and also
into the Kingdom of Heaven to God; so also the Life of the Pure Element
(wherein the Creature Christ, and our New Man is Christ stands) reaches
every where all over, and it is all over full of the fulness of the Life of
Jesus Christ, but only in the [One Pure Holy] Element, and not in the four
Elements, in the Spirit of the Stars.

23. Therefore there needs not in our Writings much toil nor hard
consideration or study, we write out of another Principle, no Reader
understands us rightly in the Ground, except his Mind be borne in God: there
ought no Historical skill and knowledge to be sought for in our Writings: for
as it is not possible to see God with earthly eyes, so also it is not possible
that an unenlightened Mind in the Earthlinesse can comprehend The Ground of
our Writings.
it, Heavenly thoughts and meanings ^n comprehend. The Ground of our Writings.
it, like must be comprehended by like.

24. Indeed we carry the Heavenly Treasure in an Earthly Or, receptacle.
vessel, but there must be a Heavenly Or, vessel.
receptacle hidden in the Earthly, else the heavenly Treasure is not comprised
nor held. None should think or desire to find the Lilly of the Heavenly Bud,
with deep searching and studying; if he be not entered by earnest Repentance
into the New Birth, so that it be grown in himself; for else it is but a
History where his Mind never finds the Ground, and yet it self supposes
it has comprehended it, but his Mind makes it manifest, Of what Spirit it is
generated.
what Spirits child it is: for it is written; They are Taught of God.

25. We know that every Life is a fire that consumes, and must have somewhat
to feed its consuming, or else it goes out: so also we know that there is an
Eternal Band of Life, where there is a matter whereon the Eternal fire
feeds continually, for the Eternal fire makes that matter for food to it
self.

26. So also we know that the Eternal Life, is twofold in a twofold source
[quality or property] and each stands in its own fire: The one burns in the
fierceness, and in the woe, and the matter thereof is Pride, Envy, and Anger,
its source is like a Brimstone Spirit: for the rising up of the Pride, in
covetousness, envy, and anger, makes together, a Brimstone, wherein the fire
burns, and continually kindles it self with this Materia, or Material.
matter: for it is a great L ke Gall.
Bitterness, wherein the Mobility of the Life confisteth, as also the Or,
Vulcan.
Striker up of the fire.

27. Now we know also, that every fire has a shining and Glance, and that
Glance goes in it self forth from the source [or quality], and enlighteneth
the matter of the source, so that in the source there is a knowledge and
understanding of a [thing or] substance, from whence a Mind and the Might,
takes its Original, of doing and comprehending a will to somewhat, and yet
was not there in the Originality: and that will in it self, in the source,
goes forth, and makes a liberty for it self in the source, and the will
desires the liberty that it might stand therein, and has its life from the
will in the Light, and in it self, in the habitation, lives without source,
and yet there it stands in the Originality in the Ground of the source.

28. Thus my Beloved, worthy seeking Or, friend.
Mind, know and observe, that every Life stands upon the Abyss of the
fierceness: for God calls himself, A Consuming fire, and also, A God of
Love, and his Name GOD, has its Original in the Love, where he goes forth
out of the source in himself, and makes it, in himself, Joy, Paradise, and
the Kingdom of Heaven.

29. We all in the Originality of our Life, have the source of the Anger, and
of the fierceness, or else we should not be alive: but we must look to it,
and in our selves go forth out of the source of the fierceness, with God, and
Generate the Love in us, and then our Life shall be a joyful and pleasant
habitation to us, and then it stands rightly in the Paradise of God. But if
our Life stay in the fierceness, ( viz. in covetousness, envy, anger, and
malice,) and goes not forth into another will, then it stands in the
Anguishing source, as all Devils do, wherein no one good thought or will can
be, but a mere enmity in it self.

30. Therefore these two Lives, viz. the Life in the Loving Regeneration, and
the Life in the Originality of the source [or property]; are one against
another: and because the Life in the Love, is not Enimicitious; therefore it
must suffer it self to be pinched, pierced-through and wounded, and upon it
the Cross is laid to be borne with Patience of Meekness, and in this Bud, in
this Ground, [soyle, or field] a child of God must be a bearer of the Cross:
and for this end has God appointed in himself, a Day of Judgment, and of
Separation, where then he will reap what is grown in every Life, and herewith
shall all forms of the Eternal Life be manifested, and all must stand to [the
manifesting of Gods Deeds of Wonder.

31. Therefore O Man! look to it, destroy not thy self: see that thou grow in
the Ground [or field] of Love, Meekness, and Righteousness, and enter with
thy Life in thy self, into the Meekness of Jesus Christ, in the Regeneration
to God, and then thou shall live in Gods source of Love: and so when the field
of this Or, End.
sprout is taken away, then thy Life is a fruit and Plant of God, and thou
shall spring and grow with a New Body out of the holy and pure Element before
God, in the Life of thy dear Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ; give up, [or
dedicate] thy self to it (in this contentions Life) wholly and altogether, and
so thou shall, with him, through his Death and Resurrection, grow up in a New
Man before God.

The Table to the Three Principles.
Aaron. Chapter. 11. IN the Time of the Lilly Aaron gives his Garments to the
Lamb. Verse. 28 Abell. Chapter. 20. Abell was not Righteous by his own Power
and ability. Verse. 75 20. Of the Church of Abell. from 77. to the Verse. 118.
Ability. Chapter. 20. Man's Ability Described. Verse. 75 Chapter. 20. Man's own
Ability was tried in Caine. Verse. 96
Above. Chapter. 14. How Above and beneath is in the Eternity. Verse. 77 Adam.
Chapter. 4. Of Adams misapprehension. Verse. 4 Chapter. 9. Adam was in the
Garden of Eden and also in Paradise at once. Verse 6 Chapter. 10. Adam and Eve
were Earth after their F^ill. Verse. 3 Chapter. 10. What flesh Adam had before
the Fall. Verse. 4 Chapter. 10. Of Adams knowledge and Beastiall Member after
the Fall. Verse. 6, 7 Chapter. 10. How Adam was an unreasonable Beast. Verse. 5
Chapter. 10. Out of what Adam was Created. Verse. 10, 11 Chapter. 10. How Adam
should have Generated an Angelical Host or numerous Offspring. Chapter. 10.
A Description of Adams properties, or Condition before the Fall. Verse. 17 to
the 21. Chapter. 11. Before the Fall Adam had other Qualities. Verse. 9. to the
11 Chapter. 11. Why Adam was Tempted. Verse. 14 Chapter. 11. Adams Temptation
at large, with all the Circumstances. Verse. 31. to the 38 Chapter. 12. How
long Adam was in Paradise. Verse. 2. to the 10. Chapter. 12. Of Adams feeding,
before his sleep. Verse. 16 Chapter. 12. Adam slept not before his Fall.
Verse. 17 Chapter 12. Adams Image, and the Image in the Resurrection is all
one. Verse. 17 Chapter 12. Adams spirit which he had from God, discourses with
his spirit which he had from this world. Verse. 36. to the 47. Chapter. 12.
Whence the Original spirit, soul, and Worm of Adam proceeded. Verse. 49. to
the 51 Chapter 12. What the difference is between Adams young man and young
maid or virgin. Verse. 52, 53 Chapter. 13. How the Heavenly body of Adam was
changed. Verse. 2 Chapter. 13. Of the Pit out of which Adam is supposed to be
taken. Verse. 4 Chapter. 13. How Adams side repaired by Christ side. Verse. 17
Chapter. 13. How Adams property was before his sleep. Verse. 18 Chapter. 14.
The Fall of Adam, his inward Tree of Temptation, and Tempting. Verse. 34. to
the 36 Chapter. 15. How Adam could have eaten and Generated in Paradise. Verse.
16 Chapter. 15. The Adamicall Man likened to a Thief. Verse. 35 Chapter. 17.
Adam was captivated by the Spirit of this world. Verse. 2 Chapter. 17. Adam had
not the Image of the world before his Fall. Verse. 3, 4 Chapter. 17. Adam was
before the Fall, as the Just shall be when they shall rise again. Verse. 5
Chapter. 17. Where Adam was Created; both body and spirit. Verse. 6 Chapter.
17. Adam was not Created to Corruptibility. Verse. 10 Chapter. 17. Out of what
Adam was; and the Spirit of his Essences. Verse. 12 Chapter. 17. Adams food
before his sleep. Verse. 13 Chapter. 17. Adam was not a Lump of Earth, but be
became such. Verse. 20 Chapter. 17. How, and how long he stood in the Garden:
and concerning his properties. Verse. 25 Chapter. 17. What Light Adam saw by,
in Paradise. Verse. 25 Chapter. 17. How long Adam slept. Verse. 29 Chapter. 17.
Adam became another Image in his sleep. Verse. 30 Chapter. 17. How Adam was
before and after his sleep. Verse. 31 Chapter. 17. In Paradise Adam saw from a
Threefold Spirit. Verse. 31 Chapter. 17. Adam and Eves horrible biting of the
Apple. Verse. 33 Chapter. 17. Adams Condition before his sleep. Verse. 47
Chapter. 17. Out of what Adams body was. Verse. 47 Chapter. 17. What was
behind, before, and beneath Adam. Verse. 49 Chapter. 17. How and how long Adam
was in Paradise. Verse. 50. to the 53 Chapter. 17. How Adam fell into Lust and
into sleep. Verse. 54 Chapter. 17. Adams Properties after his sleep. Verse.
56 Chapter. 17. How Adam and Eve conversed in the Garden. Verse. 57 Chapter.
17. How Adam and Eve became altogether Earthly. Verse. 58 Chapter. 17. How Adam
and Eve were both ashamed. Verse. 80 Chapter. 17. What and how Adam was before
his sleep. Verse. 82 Chapter. 17. How Adam should have propagated. Verse. 82
Chapter. 17. How Adam and Eve heard the voice of God. Verse. 83 Chapter. 17.
How Adam became a flesly Man. Verse. 87 Chapter. 17. What Adam and Eve
understood concerning the Treader upon the Serpent. Verse. 102 Chapter. 18.
Adam did eat in another manner after his Fall. Verse. 4 Chapter. 18. Adam
could eat of no Paradisicall fruit after the Fall. Verse. 6 Chapter. 20. Adam
and Eve were ashamed after the Fall. Verse. 5 Chapter. 20. How Adams clothes
were made. Verse. 6 Chapter. 20. How Adam and Eve kept together after their
being driven forth of the Garden. Verse. 44 Chapter. 20. What was in Adams and
Eves mind, was manifested in Cain. Verse. 81 Chapter. 20. Adam and Eve were
terrified at the Murder. Verse. 84 Chapter. 21. Adams Great knowledge of the
Mysteries. Verse. 9 Chapter. 21. Out of what Adam was Created both body and
soul. Verse. 10 Chapter. 21. The True Ground of Adams Fall. Verse. 11 Chapter.
22. Adam and Eve gat a Body that belongs not to the Deity. Verse. 16 Chapter.
22. Of Adams body and soul after the Fall. Verse. 17 Chapter. 22. Adam should
not have generated in an Earthly manner. Verse. 27 Chapter. 22. Adams own will
only, could perish. Verse. 54 Chapter. 22. From whence Adams soul or will was
breathed in. Verse. 55, 56 Chapter. 25. Why Adam went into the world. Verse. 54
Chapter. 25. Adams sleep and Christ's rest in the Grave is all one. Verse. 73
Chapter. 25. How Adam should have lived in Paradise. Verse. 92
Angels. Chapter. 5. From whence the Angels have their Bodies. Verse. 24, 25
Chapter. 7 From whence the Angels are. Verse. 24 Chapter. 9. Why Angels and
Spirits are Eternal, and Beasts not. Verse. 42 Chapter. 10. Whence the Angels
are Generated. Verse. 41. Chapter. 11. How the Angels were propagated. Verse. 4
Chapter. 14. Out of what they are Created. Verse. 9 Chapter. 15. Whence the
Angels have their being. Verse. 3 Chapter. 15. Which of the Angels are fallen.
Verse. 5 Chapter. 17. What kind of bones the Angelical Man had. Verse. 88
Chapter. 18. How the Angel Gabriel was sent to a poor Maid or Virgin. Verse.
35 Chapter. 20. The care and striving, the Angels have for Man. Verse. 78
Chapter. 22. Of the Angels great Humility. Verse. 74
Anna. Chapter. 22. Why Anna was so long unfruitful. Verse. 69 Antichrist.
Chapter. 18. Of Antichrists visitation. Verse. 1 Chapter. 20. Whence
Antichrists Kingdom takes beginning. Verse. 83 Chapter. 20. Antichrists
Kingdom is rejected of God. Verse. 92 Chapter. 21. A Large Description of
Antichrist. Verse. 28. to the 38
Arts. Chapter. 20. Why Arts or Trades were discovered. Verse. 10 Astronomer.
Chapter. 14. The Astronomer knows nothing of a Childs Incarnation in the
Mothers womb. Verse. 26 Author. Chapter. 1 Why the Author writes of God as
if he had a Beginning. Verse. 4 Chapter. 2. How the Author came by his
knowledge. Verse. 6 Chapter. 3. The Author writes how the Eternal Birth must
be understood Verse. 3 Chapter. 3. Wherefore the Authors wirtings serve.
Verse. 3 Chapter. 4. The Author has no more Authority or power than another.
Verse. 6 Chapter. 4 The Author warns the Reader concerning his writings.
Verse. 43 Chapter. 12. The Author writes no News. Verse. 15 Chapter. 14. The
knowledge which the Authors soul has. Verse. 39 Chapter. 14. All the Author
speaks concerning God, Heaven, the Element, and of Paradise, is but as a
small drop, in comparison of the wisdom of God. Verse. 89 Chapter. 15. For
whom the Author has written. Verse. 65 Chapter. 16. From whence the Author
has his knowledge. Verse. 1 Chapter. 16. From what Spirit the Author writes.
Verse. 51 Chapter. 20. When the Authors writings shall be serviceable. Verse.
2 Chapter. 24. The Author will write no lie of himself. Verse. 1 Chapter. 24.
The Author counsels us to follow him. Verse. 2 Chapter. 24. The Authors
Earnestness, and excellent discourse. Verse. 3. to the 10 Chapter. 24. The
Authors hard Combat. Verse. 17. to the 20 Chapter. 25. The Author Appealeth
to the Last Judgment. Verse. 36 Chapter. 25. The Author is not zealous, out
of any desire of his own Praise. Verse. 53 Chapter. 25. The Author Admonishes
to continue in simplicity. Verse. 69 Chapter. 25. Why the Author must write so
deeply. Verse. 84 Chapter. 25. Why the Author must write as he does. Verse.
107 Chapter. 27. What the Authors teaching tends to. Verse. 8

Babell. Chapter. 18. Why Languages were confounded at Babell. Verse. 27
Chapter. 18. Out of what, Babell is sprung. Verse. 82 Chapter. 18. Babell shall
be served as the worshippers of the Calfe were. Verse. 71 Chapter. 19. Babell
has invented the Ransoming of souls. Verse. 2 Chapter. 19. Babell breaks
within it self. Verse. 2 Chapter. 19. What Babell is. Verse. 3 Chapter. 20.
Babell and the Stars have the same Government. Verse. 18 Chapter. 22. Babell
blames the Devil for Tempting of Christ. Verse. 78 Chapter. 22. Babell
condemns them that search after hidden Mysteries. Verse. 78 Chapter. 22. Of
Babells punishment. Verse. 79 Chapter. 23. Babell is on Fire and burns.
Verse. 2 Chapter. 23. Babell shall be so talked with by the Anger, that the
Elements shall tremble. Verse. 50 Chapter. 25. Babell destroys, and devoureth
it self. Verse. 82 Chapter. 25. We must not rejoice at her Burning. Verse. 96
Chapter. 25. Babell is hard to be known; she is every where all over. Verse.
97 Chapter. 27. Babel will bring in Epicurisme. Verse. 23
Band. Chapter. 20. The Band of Eternity stands free. Verse. 65 Baptism.
Chapter. 4. Why Baptism is commanded. Verse. 14 15 Beast. Chapter. 3. The
Beast shall stand naked. Verse. 8 Chapter. 4. The Beast shall be spewed out.
Verse. 23 Chapter. 4. Why the Beasts have no sin imputed to them. Verse. 38
Chapter. 8. Of the Creating of the Beasts. Verse. 37 to 39 Chapter. 11. Whence
the venomors Beasts are. Verse. 20 Chapter. 11. How the Beast is enraged.
Verse. 28 Chapter. 13. Why the Beastiall Propagation is an Abomination to God.
Verse. 6 Chapter. 15. What the Beasts or living Creatures are created for.
Verse. 11 Chapter. 16. A Beast is better than Man that dies without Repenting.
Verse. 40 Chapter. 17. The Beasts are not made of Lumps of Earth. Verse. 22
Chapter. 18. The Beast is greater then the Antichrist. Verse. 2 Chapter. 18.
How the Beasts should have been Managed, if Adam had continued in Pardise.
Verse. 10 Chapter. 18. God desired not that the Beastiall Man should be. Verse.
10 Chapter. 20. The Beast shall stand naked and bare. Verse. 20 Chapter. 20. A
Lamentation, because the Beast has made the Garden of Roses, a Den of
Murderers and Thieves. Verse. 37, 38 Chapter. 20. The Beast will be squeezed
forth by the press in Babell. Verse. 38
Blood. Chapter. 16. How Blood comes to be. Verse. 11 Chapter. 16. The Blood
wherein the soul stirs, is very sweet. Verse. 11 Chapter. 16. Why Blood is
forbidden. Verse. 11
Body. Chapter. 4. Of what the Body is Created. Verse. 19 Chapter. 21. The Body
cannot be destroyed before the appointed time. Verse. 62 Chapter. 22. Of the
Body which we lost. Verse. 64 Chapter. 23. What is the food of the New Body.
Verse. 45 Chapter. 25. The Body of Christ can be withheld by nothing in the
Resurrection. Verse. 79 Chapter. 25. How the Body of Christ shines in the
Heaven. Verse. 79 Chapter. 25. The Body of Christ is infinite. Verse. 79. to
the 81 Chapter. 25. How the Body of Christ is received. Verse. 83 Chapter. 25.
How the Body of Christ is after the Resurrection. Verse. 90, 91
Book, Books. Chapter. 8. A field full of flowers is the most Glorious Book.
Verse. 11 Chapter. 3. The Books of Theologists are mere Histories. Verse. 5
Bridegroom, Bride. Chapter. 3. The coming of the Bridegroom. Verse. 8 Chapter.
17. The Bridegroomes coming. Verse. 115 Chapter. 20. The Bride of the Beast
has three things to expect. Verse. 115. to 117 Chapter. 24. Where the
Bridegroom embraces his Bride. Verse. 31

Caine. Chapter. 20. Why Cains hatred was against Abell. Verse. 44 Chapter. 20.
Why Caine became a Murderer. Verse. 45 Chapter. 20. Caine was not rejected in
the womb of his Mother. Verse. 63 Chapter. 20. The Description of the Cainish
Church. Verse. 77. to the 118 Chapter. 20. Why Caine grutched his brother any
thing. Verse. 82 Chapter. 20. How Caine was stirred up to the Murder. Verse.
84 Chapter. 20. Cains false Faith was manifested. Verse. 91 Chapter. 20. Caines
amazement and fear. Verse. 97 Chapter. 20. Caines expulsion beyond Eden into
the Land of Nod. Verse. 98 Chapter. 20. Caine is a Looking Glass for Men's own
Conceits. Verse. 99 Chapter. 20. How Caine was Comforted again. Verse. 101
Chapter. 20. Whence Caines Anger against Abell proceeded. Verse. 104 Chapter.
21. Caine was not wholly Rejected. Verse. 2 Chapter. 21. Caine was chearly
again. Verse. 4 Chapter. 21. Who was Caines accuser. Verse. 5 Chapter. 21.
Caine sought out Arts, and depended upon his inventions. Verse. 6, 7 Chapter.
21. Caines Church and Christ's Church dwell together. Verse. 45, 46
Called. Chapter. 16. How, and when it is that we are called. Verse. 50
Center. Chapter. 10. What the Center is. Verse. 40 Chapter. 14. What is the
Center. Verse. 67
Candlesticks. Chapter. 20. What the seven Candlesticks are. Verse. 42
Champion. Chapter. 18. What manner of person the Champion in the Battle is.
Verse. 21 Chapter. 22. How the Champion or Savior was conceived in Mary.
Verse. 37 Chapter. 25. Who was the Champion. Verse. 42
Child. Children. Chapter. 15. After the life is kindled, a child is of it
self. Verse. 39 Chapter. 15. How a child shall be in the Resurrection, that
perishes before the kindling of the Light of Life. Verse. 38 Chapter. 23. A
child newly borne is as acceptable to God, as one in years that repents of
sin. Verse. 31 Chapter. 16. We are all the children of Iniquity, according
to the Spirit of this world. Verse. 25 Chapter. 20. Why two sorts of children
are Generated from Adam and Eve. Verse. 58 Chapter. 22. How we are the
children of wrath. Verse. 25 Chapter. 23. How it is with many of the children
of wicked Parents. Verse. 36 Chapter. 24. The very children of God, hinder the
Tree of Pearl. Verse. 32
Christ. Christian. Christendom. Chapter. 12. The Temptation of Christ. Verse.
12. to the 14 Chapter. 18. The veil of Christ is done away. Verse. 1 Chapter.
18. The Corporiety of Christ is Inferior to the Deity. Verse. 39 Chapter. 18.
What was the seed to the Creature of Christ. Verse. 41 Chapter. 18. Christ's
Incarnation, or becoming Man. Verse. 35. to the 54 Chapter. 18. Christ the most
wonderful person in the Deity. Verse. 52 Chapter. 18. Christ is the Heaven of
those that are his Members. Verse. 84 Chapter. 18. Christ's Incarnation. from
Verse. 85. to the 91 Chapter. 19. Christ Inviteth all. Verse. 31 Chapter. 22.
Christ is born of a pure Virgin. Verse. 29 Chapter. 22. How Christ received or
assumed his soul. Verse. 39 Chapter. 22. The Incarnation of Christ. Verse. 41
Chapter. 22. How Christ is our Brother. Verse. 45 Chapter. 22. Christ has
opened the Gate of Life for all. Verse. 48 Chapter. 22. From whence Christ is.
Verse. 52, 53 Chapter. 22. How Christ assumed or received our Body. Verse. 66
Chapter. 22. Christ's soul is from Heaven, and not from Heaven. Verse. 67
Chapter. 22. Christ's soul is our Brother. Verse. 67 Chapter. 22. Christ's body
is the food of our soul. Verse. 67 Chapter. 22. How Christ is a King. Verse.
72 Chapter. 22. How Christ is a Person in the Trinity. Verse. 75 Chapter. 22.
Of the Name Christus in the Language of Nature. Verse. 77, 78 Chapter. 22.
Christ's Tempting. from Verse. 80. to the 100 Chapter. 23. Of Christ's presence
every where. Verse. 3. to the 11 Chapter. 23. What Christ's Disciples received
in the Lords Supper. Verse. 13, 14 Chapter. 23. Christ bound the Devils every
where. Verse. 16 Chapter. 23. How we are foreseen in Christ. Verse. 21 22
Chapter. 24. A Christian does not rightly know himself. Verse. 34 Chapter. 25.
Christ springs up with his holy body through Death. Verse. 11 Chapter. 25. Of
Christ's New Body. Verse. 12 Chapter. 25. The contemptible Death of Christ is a
stumbling block to the Jews, Turks, and Pagans. Verse. 15, 16 Chapter. 25. How
Christ sweat drops of blood. Verse. 22 Chapter. 25. Christ's Passion or course,
compared with Adams whole course of what happened to him. Verse. 23. to 40
Chapter. 25. What Christ laid off in Death. Verse. 47 Chapter. 25. Christ had
Heavenly flesh in the Earthly Man, and we too. Verse. 48 Chapter. 25. How we
put on Christ. Verse. 48 Chapter. 25. Christ has also borne our actual
sins. Verse. 52 Chapter. 25. Wherefore Christ's Passion was. Verse. 57. to the
61 Chapter. 25. Christendom must expect the sign of Elias. Verse. 82 Chapter.
25. Christ's Conversation forty days after his Resurrection. Verse. 88
Chapter. 25. Christ is not separated from us. Verse. 89 Chapter. 25. Christ did
eat after his Resurrection. Verse. 91 Chapter. 25. The Description of Christ's
Ascension. Verse. 98. to the 108 Chapter. 25. What Christ's Body, and his Throne
is. Verse. 104 Chapter. 25. How Christ sits at the Right hand of God. Verse.
106 Chapter. 25. Of Christ's Creature. Verse. 106 Chapter. 25. How Christ is in
Heaven. Verse. 108 Chapter. 26. How the Body of Christ was after his
Resurrection. Verse. 1. to the 7 Chapter. 26. When Christ's body was Glorified.
Verse. 2. to the 4 Chapter. 26. Christ had not a body that was altogether
Earthly. Verse. 9
Commandment. Conversion. Chapter. 17. Why the Commandment was given to Adam.
Verse. 16 Chapter. 24. What is required in Conversion. Verse. 27
Contention. Chapter. 25. No Contention is necessary or profitable. Verse. 83
Councillors. Chapter. 16. There are five Councillors sitting in the brain.
Verse. 22 Covenant. Chapter. 18. What the Covenant did profit, before Christ
came in the flesh. Verse. 34 Coining. Chapter. 20. How the coining of Gold and
Silver had not been needful. Verse. 17 Creation. Creatures. Chapter. 23. How
the Creation endures till the Last Judgment. Verse. 20 Chapter. 9. Why the
Essence or Substance of the Creatures is not Eternal. Verse. 37 Chapter. 9.
The figure or shape of the Creatures remain eternally. Verse. 38, 39 Chapter.
14. In what form the Creatures shall be in Paradise. Verse. 33 Chapter. 14.
Whence the Creatures have their skill. Verse. 34 Chapter. 18. The Eternal and
Temporary Creature in Christ were one. Verse. 40
Curse. Chapter. 18. What Gods cursing is. Verse. 5 Chapter. 18. Before the
curse there was no such evil weeds nor living Creatures as there are now.
Verse. 7 Chapter. 18. There was Great Difference of Beasts before the curse.
Verse. 8 Chapter. 18. After the curse fruit must be planted. Verse. 9 Chapter.
20. What the Curse of God is. Verse. 93

Darkness. Chapter. 4. From whence Darkness has its Name. Verse. 48 Chapter.
7. How the Darkness longs after the Light. Verse. 13
Death. Chapter. 13. What the first dying or Death is, and whence it comes.
Verse. 53 Chapter. 15. The Abyss of Death is in a young child. Verse. 29
Chapter. 15. What Death Adam dyed in Paradise. Verse. 37 Chapter. 17. Wherein
it is, that Death sticks. Verse. 16 Chapter. 19. What Dying or Death is.
Verse. 12, 13 Chapter. 19. What that is which is called the Great Death. Verse.
15 Chapter. 19. Conversion in the last hour of Death. Verse. 43
Deity. Chapter. 8. The Deity is manifest in all things. Verse. 3 Chapter. 22.
The Deity is invisible. Verse. 63
Deluge. Chapter. 18. Why the Deluge, or Noah's flood came. Verse. 26. to the 28
Despair. Doubting. Chapter. 20. Whence Despair arises. Verse. 107 Chapter.
24. All Doubting comes from the Devil. Verse. 28
Devil. Chapter. 2. The Devils look into the first Principle. Verse. 3
Chapter. 4. What the hell of the Devil is. Verse. 36 Chapter. 4. Neither the
Devil, nor the wicked, is made out of any evil Matter. Verse. 37 Chapter. 4.
Whence the Devils, Angels, and souls are. Verse. 46 Chapter. 4. The whole
Description of the Devils and their Fall. Verse. 64. to the 74 Chapter. 8. The
Devil is the worlds Teacher. Verse. 13 Chapter. 9. The Devil knows not
Paradise. Verse. 7 Chapter. 10. The Devil cannot be helped or saved. Verse. 50
Chapter. 10. How the Devils should have been if they had not fallen. Verse. 51
Chapter. 11. The Great Number of Devils: wherefore they fell. Verse. 1, 2
Chapter. 11. The Devils mind was the cause of the lifting up of himself.
Verse. 1. to the 3 Chapter. 14. The Devil would Domineere over the Heart of
God. Verse. 43 Chapter. 15. Whence the Devils have their Name. Verse. 5
Chapter. 15. The Devils are the Cause of their own Fall. Verse. 6 Chapter. 15.
Out of what the Devils are Created. Verse. 7 Chapter. 15. The Devils Impotency
over a child. Verse. 26 Chapter. 15. The Devils Kingdom is sown also in the
Copulation. Verse. 33 Chapter. 15. How we can tread upon the head of the
Devil. Verse. 44 Chapter. 15. How the Devils Kingdom is held Captive. Verse.
58 Chapter. 15. The Devil Tempts Man in the first Principle. Verse. 59
Chapter. 15. What the hunger and satiating of the Devil is. Verse. 61 Chapter.
17. How the Devil won the Game of Adam. Verse. 62 Chapter. 17. After the
Fall the Devil and Man were both in one Kingdom. Verse. 62 Chapter. 17. How
the Devil mocked God in his mind when Adam was fallen. Verse. 63 Chapter. 17.
Whither the Devil flies in his Pride. Verse. 64 Chapter. 17. The Devil is
Executioner. Verse. 66 Chapter. 17. The Devil is the Driver forward to all
Mischief. Verse. 67 Chapter. 17. The Devil holds the soul fast. Verse. 74
Chapter. 17. The Devil is the highest cause of Adams Fall. Verse. 93 Chapter.
17. The Devils sported with Man's Image when it was fallen. Verse. 96 Chapter.
17. The Devil understood not the promise of the Treader upon the Serpent.
Verse. 97 Chapter. 17. The Devils Judgment is hidden to him. Verse. 100
Chapter. 20. The Devil has sown Tares or weeds. Verse. 30 Chapter. 20. The
Devils danced at Caines Murdering his brother. Verse. 84 Chapter. 21. The
Devil holds his Swines Apples before the soul. Verse. 51 Chapter. 21. The
subtlety of the Devil against the constant soul. Verse. 54 Chapter. 21. The
Devil also stirs up the children of God against the soul. Verse. 55
Chapter. 21. What the Devils saddle horse is. Verse. 63 Chapter. 23. Where the
Devils are. Verse. 16 Chapter. 23. The Devils have no power of the soul of a
child before the time of its understanding. Verse. 38 Chapter. 24. Who are the
Devils Bloudhounds. Verse. 11 Chapter. 24. How the Devil seduceth the soul.
Verse. 13 Chapter. 24. The Devil watches for the soul when flesh and blood
judges of any thing, as a Cat watches for a Mouse. Verse. 15 Chapter. 24. The
Devils tricks to entrap the Author. Verse. 16, 17 Chapter. 25. Where the
Devil and the Wrath are captivated. Verse. 13 Chapter. 25. In what place the
Devils are. Verse. 42 Chapter. 25. The Devils bitter salt, wherewith men rub
one another. Verse. 56 Chapter. 25. How the Devils tremble at Christ's Death.
Verse. 71 Chapter. 25. The Devil is blind in the light. Verse. 71 Chapter.
25. The Devils dwell not far from Christ. Verse. 105 Chapter. 26. How the
Devil would needs be God, when the Gospel began. Verse. 23 Chapter. 27. How
the Devils shall tremble at the Last Judgment. Verse. 13
Discourse. Chapter. 12. The wonderful Discourse of Adams Spirit in Paradise.
Verse. 36. to the 47 Chapter. 14. The discourse and agreement between the
Elements in the Incarnation of a child. Verse. 22. to the 25 Chapter. 24. The
discourse of him who fell among the Murderers between Jericho and Jerusalem.
Verse. 4
Doctor. Chapter. 9. The Doctor who is in the school of Pentecost, is in
respect of the Author, as Paul was in respect of the other Apostles. Verse. 47
Chapter. 13. The Doctors kill men, thinking to find how the Incarnation of a
child is, by Anatomies, but in vain. Verse. 42
Doctrines. Chapter. 27. The several sorts of Doctrines must not all be
rejected. Verse. 21 Dominion Chapter. 10. Dominion comes not from the Love of
God. Verse. 36 Chapter. 20. Whence Dominion arises. Verse. 86. to the 88
Chapter. 25. Whence Dominion comes. Verse. 55

Earnestness. Chapter. 16. The Earnestness that we must use in taming our
Body. Verse. 42 Chapter. 16. With what Earnestness we must set upon the New
Birth. Verse. 48 Chapter. 17. The Earnestness that the Mind must use. Verse.
79 Chapter. 24. The Earnestness of the soul, makes the Devil weak and
faint. Verse. 30
Earth. Earthly. Chapter. 5. From whence Earth has its Consolidation. Verse. 7
Chapter. 5 Whence Earth, water, and the Rocky cliffs came to be so as they are.
Verse. 29 Chapter. 15. Of what, Earth and Stones are. Verse. 7. to the 9
Chapter. 15. God willed not the Earthly Copulation. Verse. 35 Chapter. 17.
Where Earth and Stones are Generated. Verse. 8 Chapter. 25. Why the Earth
trembled at the Death of Christ. Verse. 44 Chapter. 27. Earthly knowledge
vanishes in the Judgment. Verse. 19
Election. Chapter. 17. Of Election before the foundation of the world. Verse.
102, 103 Chapter. 20. How little knowledge Babell has of the Election. Verse.
59
Element. Elements. Chapter. 14. A description, what the one Element is. Verse.
41, 42 Chapter. 14. Of the one Element, and of the four Elements. Verse. 44.
to the 46. Chapter. 14. What the One Pure Element is. Verse. 88 Chapter. 17.
Where the Elements have their Original. Verse. 48 Chapter. 17. The Element out
of which the four Elements proceeded in the beginning, that is without
understanding. Verse. 7 Chapter. 22. What the Eternal Element is. Verse. 19,
20 Chapter. 22. Why the Elements trembled. Verse. 46 Chapter. 22. The One
Element is Substantial. Verse. 62
Eve. Chapter. 13. Eve's Creation described. Verse. 12. to 20 Chapter. 13. The
soul and form of Eve, before the Fall. Verse. 34. to the 36 Chapter. 15. Why
God must make Eve. Verse. 18 Chapter. 17. Eve was Created for the
Corruptibility. Verse. 10 Chapter. 17. How Eve was beguiled. Verse. 32 Chapter.
17. How Eve Created. Verse. 55 Chapter. 17. Eve was beguiled through her
carlesnesse. Verse. 57 Chapter. 18 The sentence upon Eve. Verse. 19 Chapter.
20. Eve, and the Apostles, thought the same thing. Verse. 44
Evil. Chapter. 1. The Evil is not God. Verse. 2 Chapter. 1. What is the
first Matter of Evil. Verse. 5. to the 14 Chapter. 20. The Evil Domineereth
over the Good, but God has not ordained that it should be so. Verse. 29
Chapter. 21. Evil and Good are in one another. Verse. 17 Chapter. 24. From
whence Evil thoughts come. Verse. 29

Fall. Chapter. 11. Of Lucifers and Adams Fall. Verse. 5 Chapter. 11. How their
Fall was foreseen. Verse. 22 Chapter. 11. Reason speaks against the Fall.
Verse. 29 Chapter. 18. How God willed not, and yet willed, the Fall. Verse. 12,
13
Father. Chapter. 15. How Father and Mother are warned. Verse. 25 Chapter. 17.
Where God the Father Generateth the Son. Verse. 85 Chapter. 20. Of the
Drawing of the Father. Verse. 61 Chapter. 25. How God the Father is Reconciled.
Verse. 44
Faith. Chapter. 17. The Author sets down eight Articles of Faith. Verse. 116
Chapter. 18. What Faith is able to do. Verse. 76
Fear. Chapter. 23. Why we ought not to fear or be afraid. Verse. 25 Feast.
Chapter. 25. What is a Good Feast. Verse. 86 Figures. Chapter. 20. The Figures
of all things remain Eternally. Verse. 9 Fire. Chapter. 5. How the Fire is in
the water. Verse. 20 Chapter. 7. The Original of the Fire, Air, Water, and
Earth. Verse. 12 Chapter. 8. The Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, have every one
their Creatures, according to their Quality. Verse. 31, 32 Chapter. 10. What
the Fire in this world, and in Hell, is. Verse. 45. 47 Chapter. 14. The
Blossom of the Fire moves above the Heart. Verse. 22 Chapter. 15. How the
Fire is kindled in the Heart. Verse. 50 Chapter. 27. Of the Fire by which the
world shall perish. Verse. 9. 13
Fox. Chapter. 19. How some have the Fox hanging to their Coat when they Dye.
Verse. 39
Gall. Chapter. 14. The Gall kindles the warmth in the Heart. Verse. 20
Chapter. 14. How the Gall comes to be in the Incarnation. Verse. 15 Chapter.
14. How the Gall, Heart, Liver and Lungs are set in order. Verse. 18
Garment. Chapter. 19. He that will be heard of God, must put off the Garment
of abomination. Verse. 48 Ghosts. Chapter. 19. Concerning Ghosts of Deceased
people that walk. Verse. 22 God. Chapter. 1. What God is. The Essence of all
Essences is generated out of him. Verse. 1, 2. Chapter. 1. How he is called an
Angry God. Verse. 6 Chapter. 1. God is not called God according to the first
Principle. Verse. 8 Chapter. 2. The Eternal working, or Generation of God.
Verse. 8 Chapter. 4. Where we must seek God. Verse. 8. 44 Chapter. 4. God is
sought, by Antichrist, above the Stars. Verse. 23 Chapter. 4. Without God
there would be Nothing. Verse. 31 Chapter. 4. God knows neither beginning nor
End in himself. Verse. 54 Chapter. 7. Where we must seek God. Verse. 15. to 19
Chapter. 7. Why God is called God. Verse. 19 Chapter. 10. How God it near to
us. Verse. 48 Chapter. 14. Where God dweleth. Verse. 80 Chapter. 15. Whom God
desires to have. Verse. 26 Chapter. 16. We should want our boasting in God.
Verse. 1 Chapter. 17. God was not so wrathful at the mere biting of the
Apple. Verse. 1 Chapter. 17. How God is King of the Land. Verse. 67 Chapter.
19. God is nearer us than the Saints Departed. Verse. 31 Chapter. 20. God has
no pleasure in Judgment. Verse. 20. to the 26 Chapter. 20. God is not at odds
with himself. Verse. 60 Chapter. 20. God hardens none. Verse. 62 Chapter. 20.
God did not will there should be any Devil. Verse. 64 Chapter. 20. God knows
what will come to pass. Verse. 64 Chapter. 20. Gods foreseeing. Verse 66
Chapter. 20. Whom God draws. Verse. 67 Chapter. 20. God did not consent to
Caines Murder of his brother. Verse. 93 Chapter. 21. God comes to help all
things. Verse. 2 Chapter. 21. All things in this world are of God. Verse. 1
Chapter. 22. God and Paradise it Incomprehensible, and stand in all things.
Verse. 32 Chapter. 22. From what the Name of God has its Original. Verse. 35
Chapter. 22. Why God became Man. Verse. 43 Chapter. 22. God and the Pure
Element is become one. Verse. 63 Chapter. 23. Both Good and Bad Men must
manifest the wonders of God. Verse. 26 Chapter. 24. God armeth the soul
against the Divills treachery. Verse. 13 Chapter. 25. Why God must come into
the soul. Verse. 9 Chapter. 25. Wherefore God must enter into Death. Verse. 10
Chapter. 25. God mocked Adam when he said, He is as one of us. Verse. 40
Chapter. 25. God and Man b^ng on the Cross. Verse. 41 Chapter. 25. The grace
of God is for All Men. Verse. 64 Chapter. 25. The Anger of God is neither Good
nor Evil. Verse. 70 Chapter. 27. What God is. Verse. 7 Chapter. 27. God gives
the seed to be sown. Verse. 27 Chapter. 27. God will not cast all away. Verse.
28
Good. Chapter. 17. Why God said it is not Good. Verse. 27 Ground. Chapter. 27.
What the Ground is wherein the Heaven sows seed. Verse. 27 Gutts. Chapter.
14. How the Gutts are made. Verse. 21 Chapter. 14. Wherefore the stomach and
Guts are. Verse. 27 Chapter. 14. Wherefore the Gutts are long and folded.
Verse. 28

Hand. Hands. Chapter. 25. What the Hand of God is. Verse. 107 Chapter. 14.
What Hands are in the Incarnation. Verse. 27
Hearing. Chapter. 15 What the Hearing is. Verse. 67 Heart. Chapter. 9. Out of
what the Heart of God is Generated. Verse. 43 Chapter. 10. The Heart of God is
unchangeable. Verse. 41 Chapter. 12. What the Heart of God is. Verse. 3
Chapter. 15. Nothing is Created out of the Heart of God. Verse. 63 Chapter. 19.
Why the Heart of God became a Human soul. Verse. 6 Chapter. 23. The Eternal
Birth of the Heart of God. Heaven. Verse. 10 Chapter. 6. Why Heaven is so
called. Verse. 17 Chapter. 7. What the Heaven i^ wherein God dwells. Verse.
14 Chapter. 17. Of the Heaven wherein God dwells. Verse. 77, 78 Chapter. 19.
Heaven and Hell is every where all over. Verse. 62 Chapter. 19. The Kingdom of
Heaven is in all things. Verse. 64 Chapter. 20. Heaven and Hell strive about
the children of Eve. Verse. 47 Chapter 21. What Heaven is. Verse. 19 Chapter.
22. What Heaven [Himmel] signifies in the Language of Nature. Verse. 74
Chapter. 24. What the Joy of Heaven is. Verse. 26 Chapter. 27. The Heaven will
new make another Age. Verse. 21 Chapter. 27. Heaven is the sower of the seed
that God gives. Verse. 27
Hell. Chapter. 9. What Hell shall be. Verse. 22 Chapter. 19. The Kingdom of
Hell is in all things. Verse. 64 Chapter. 9. What Hellfire is. Verse. 30
Chapter. 17. What the Paradisicall Sugar of Hell is. Verse. 93 Chapter. 18.
The source or Torment of Hell is the Joy of Heaven. Verse. 16
Humanity. Chapter. 22. Of Christ's Humanity, what Man dyed, and what Man dyed
not, in Christ's Death. Verse. 46 Chapter. 23. David Prophesies of the Eternal
Humanity of Christ. Verse. 15

Jesus. Chapter. 22. What Jesus signifies in the Language of Nature. Verse.
76 Chapter. 25. How we put on Jesus Christ. Verse. 48
Jehosaphat. Chapter. 9. Christ comes with the fair Lilly in the valley of
Jehosaphat. Verse. 17 Chapter. 13. In the valley of Jehosaphat, the Angel of
the Great Counsel comes with a Golden Charter. Verse. 11
Jews. Chapter. 25. How the Jews shall eat with the Lamb. Verse. 50 Chapter.
25. Jews, Turks, and other Nations are admonished. Verse. 95
Jezabell. Chapter. 25. The throwing out of Jezabell is coming. Immanuel.
Verse. 95 Chapter. 22. The fairest Gate of this Book is Immanuel. Verse. 24
Chapter. 22. What Immanuel signifies in the Language of Nature. Verse. 73
Image. Chapter. 10. What the Image of God is. Verse. 9 Chapter. 14. Wherein
the Image of God consists. Verse. 55 Chapter. 17. Whence the Image of God
is. Verse. 13 Chapter. 21. The Image of Heaven, Earth, and Hell in one Person.
Verse. 21
Innes. Chapter. 22. How there are two Eternal Innes. Verse. 3 John. Josua.
Israel. Chapter. 23. Why John was born before Christ. Verse. 28 Chapter. 20.
Josua was a Type of Jesus. Verse. 27 Chapter. 20. Wherefore Israel stayed 40
years in the Wilderness. Verse. 22, 23.
Judge. Judgment. Chapter. 27. When the Judge of Quick and Dead comes. Verse.
11 Chapter. 17. The Devil does not wholly know his Judgment. Verse. 100
Chapter. 27. A description of the Last Judgment. from Verse. 1 to the 20
Chapter. 27. Why a Judgment is appointed. Verse. 4 Chapter. 27. Judgment
ought not to be slightly pronounced. Verse. 29

Key. Chapter. 4. Where the Key to Wisdom lies. Verse. 30 Chapter. 9. The Key
to the knowledge of the Paradise. Verse. 25, 26 Chapter. 18. The Keys which
open the Rich Chest of Gold. Verse. 99
King. Chapter. 15. What strife about these King of Life in a Child. Verse. 41
Kingdom. Kingdoms. Chapter. 16. Gods Kingdom goes not backwards. Verse. 27
Chapter. 20. Two Kingdoms wrestle in Man. Verse. 31 Chapter. 20. The Kingdom
of Christ is not desired by many. Verse. 31 Chapter. 20. How the Kingdom of
God may have the Victory. Verse. 48 Chapter. 20. The Kingdom of wrath in Adam
and Eve was very great after the Fall. Verse. 69 Chapter. 21. Three Kingdoms
in Man, and he is the field or Ground. Verse. 22. to the 25 Chapter. 25.
Wherein the Kingdom of Heaven consists. Verse. 65 Chapter. 26. What the
Kingdom of Heaven is. Verse. 10
Keeper. Chapter. 20. Who is the Keeper of the Tree of Life. Verse. 41 Chapter.
20. How the sword of that Keeper is made blunt. Knowledge. Verse. 42 Chapter.
3. It was once not Good for us to have the Knowledge of the fierceness, but
now it is highly necessary. Verse. 2

Lad. Chapter. 18. Antichrists Throne will be destroyed by a Lad. Verse. 56
Chapter. 18. In Hebron there is a root to Cure Lazarus. Verse. 57
Learned. Learning. Chapter. 3. Why the Learned forbid us to pry into God.
Verse. 6, 7 Chapter. 9. How Learning is to be attained. Verse. 46 Chapter. 26.
The Pride of the Learned, was the destroyer of the first pure Church. Verse.
16. to the 34
Life. Lives. Chapter. 14. Where the Life is generated in Man. Verse. 1
Chapter. 19. What the Great Life is. Verse. 15 Chapter. 22. There are two
Eternal Lives. Verse. 7
Light. Chapter. 8. Of the Light of the First Day. Verse. 6 Chapter. 14. Of the
Light which Men see by in Paradise. Verse. 2 Chapter. 14. Between Light and
Darkness there is a Great Gulf. Verse. 76 Chapter. 15. How the Light of Life
is kindled in the Incarnation of a child. Verse. 49 Chapter. 16. Light
striveth against Darkness. Verse. 10 Chapter. 16. Of the Light of the 3
Principles. Verse. 12 Chapter. 22. The Light has no Center. Verse. 35
Limbus. Chapter. 22. What the Divine Limbus is. Verse. 21 Lilly. Chapter. 10.
The Lilly shall grow in the Devils supposed Kingdom. Verse. 33 Chapter. 11. Of
the Lilly which shall shortly grow and bring us the true knowledge in the
Trinity. Verse. 28 Chapter. 13. The Branch of the Lilly which the Virgin
holds in her hand. Verse. 61 Chapter. 14. The smell of the Lilly will spoil
the Cornerd Cap. Verse. 39 Chapter. 15. The Lilly comes after the Great
Shower. Verse. 26 Chapter. 15. All is open in the Time of the Lilly, and then
the Tincture is the Light of the world. Verse. 54 Chapter. 17. Wherefore we
have need of the Lilly. Verse. 36 Chapter. 17. How the Beast will be destroyed
by the Lilly. Verse. 37 Chapter. 17. In the Time of the Lilly much shall be
revealed. Verse. 100 Chapter. 19. In the Lilly-Rose, the Doors of the
Mysteries shall fly open. Verse. 61 Chapter. 20. The description of the
Lilly-time. Verse. 15 Chapter. 20. The Branch of the Lilly shall be planted in
the Garden of Roses, and the sick Adam shall eat of it. Verse. 38 Chapter. 25.
A secret concerning the Time of the Lilly. Verse. 50 Chapter. 25. The Jews,
Turks, and other Nations have no time to expect, but the Time of the Lilly,
the sign whereof is the sign of Elias. Verse. 95 Chapter. 27. Where the Lilly
may be found, where not. Verse. 32
Love. Chapter. 20. In the Breaking of the Anger the Love appears. Verse. 59
Chapter. 20. Love is generated out of the Anger. Verse. 65
Lucifer. Chapter. 4. Why Lucifer is so called. Verse. 67. Chapter. 5. Whence
Lucifer being spewed out proceeded. Verse. 7 Chapter. 5. Which was the Kingdom
of Lucifer before his Fall. Verse. 17 Chapter. 5. How Lucifer was thrust out of
Heaven. Verse. 25. to the 30 Chapter. 6. How Lucifers Kingdom was shut up.
Verse. 6 Chapter. 8. Of the Fall of Lucifer. Verse. 3 Chapter. 10. Whence the
Fall of Lucifer and his Angels proceeded. Verse. 48 Chapter. 10. Lucifer and
his Legions; the father thrust out for the childs sake. Verse. 49 Chapter. 10.
Why Gods Love came not to help Lucifer. Verse. 50 Chapter. 11. The Ground of
Lucifers and Adams Fall. Verse. 5 Chapter. 14. Lucifer was thrown down for
his pride. Verse. 9 Chapter. 15. Where Lucifer stood before his fall. Verse. 10
Chapter. 25. Which was Lucifers Throne, and whither he fell. Verse. 103
Lust. Chapter. 20. Lust is the first beginning to act. Verse. 76 Chapter. 20.
Lust and the Mind are two distinct Things. Verse. 76

Magistrates. Chapter. 20. Strife between Magistrates and Subjects. Verse. 33
to the 35 Chapter. 20. Subjects or Inferiors cry against their Magistrates or
superiors. Verse. 38
Man. Chapter. 3. How Man became naked and bare. Verse. 3 Chapter. 4. How the
New Man is one with the Father and Son. Verse. 9 Chapter. 7. Man is a whole
spark, but not God himself. Verse. 2 Chapter. 10. God Created but one Man
only. Verse. 12 Chapter. 11. Why God created but one only Man. Verse. 23
Chapter. 13. What the Duty of a Man is toward his wife. Verse. 20 Chapter. 13.
How Man is in the Mothers womb. Verse. 54. to the 60 Chapter. 14. Man's Glory
above the Beasts. Verse. 5, 6 Chapter. 14. What Man's Ability is. Verse. 7
Chapter. 14. How far Man and Beast are alike. Verse. 56 Chapter. 14 Why Man is
so highly graduated. Verse. 57 Chapter. 15. Wherefore and of what Man was
Created. Verse 12. to the 14 Chapter. 15. How Man lost Paradise. Verse. 19
Chapter. 15. How Man may live in Paradise here in this life. Verse. 20
Chapter. 15. How Man wilfully lets in the Devil. Verse. 22 Chapter. 15. Why
Man must be out of that which is Eternal. Verse. 63 Chapter. 16. The
prevention of Man's being a living Devil. Verse. 26 Chapter. 16. H w Man is
differenced from the Beasts. Verse. 28. to the 31 Chapter. 16. Whence Man
speaks that which is good. Verse. 32 Chapter. 16. Three Men, in Man, striving
against one another. Verse. 33, 34 Chapter. 16. How Man was formed an Angel.
Verse. 35 Chapter. 16. How Man after his Death is either an Angel or Devil.
Verse. 37 Chapter. 17. Whence Adam gat the name Man. Verse. 15 Chapter. 17. God
did not make Man of a Lump of Earth. Verse. 22 Chapter. 17. Why Man's body must
perish. Verse. 23 Chapter. 17. How Man in the Fall, fell among Murderers.
Verse. 60 Chapter. 17. Man's misery between the Fall and the word of Promise.
Verse. 61 Chapter. 17. Man in this life dwells in the Abyss with the Devils.
Verse. 65 Chapter. 17. How Man dares do, what the Devil dares not do.
Verse. 78 Chapter. 17. In the beginning Man had no Beastiall Members. Verse.
81. Chapter. 18. It is the becoming Man of the Heart of God only, that helps.
Verse. 80 Chapter. 19. Man's Image stands in Three beginnings. Verse. 10
Chapter. 20. By the Law Man cannot come into Paradise. Verse. 28 Chapter. 21.
The Inability of Man's Spirit. Verse. 18, 19 Chapter. 21. How Man has the
Balance between two wills. Verse. 20 Chapter. 21. Man not to be condemned for
that which is outward. Verse. 26 Chapter. 21. What Man's Condemnation is. Verse.
27 Chapter. 22. Of what and for what Man is Created. Verse. 12 Chapter. 22.
Wherein Man is foreseen. Verse. 23. Chapter. 22. Which is the right New Man.
Verse. 25, 26 Chapter. 22. The New Man is hidden in the Old. Verse. 32 Chapter.
22. In what manner Man is greater than the world. Verse. 5 Chapter. 22. How
long Men were the Fathers. Verse. 71 Chapter. 22 Who was the Man to the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ. Verse. 71 Chapter. 23. How the new Man grows to
the soul. Verse. 17 Chapter. 23. Jesus Christ's becoming Man, lay not in us.
Verse. 31 Chapter. 23. The food of the New Man. Verse. 45 Chapter. 24. The Old
Man commits sin. Verse. 35 Chapter. 24. The old Man is swayed by the new.
Verse. 35 Chapter. 24. The new Man grows out of the Old. Verse. 37 Chapter.
25. The New Man striveth against the Outward Man. Verse. 4 Chapter. 25. How Man
in the second Principle was Created in that Place, out of which Lucifer was
thrust forth. Verse. 103 Chapter. 25. How God prevented it that Man in his Fall
became not a Devil also. Verse. 103
Marie. Chapter. 18. An Exposition of Mary's Name. Verse. 35 Chapter. 18. Mary
is saved only through her Son. Verse. 83 Chapter. 18. Marie stands upon
the Earthly Moon. Verse. 92 Chapter. 18. Of Mary's luster and Glory. Verse. 93
Chapter. 18. Invocation does not come to her. Verse. 94 Chapter. 18. Where Mary
dwells: she is no Goddess. Verse. 94. to the 96 Chapter. 22. Why Mary is
called, The Blessed of all women. Verse. 31 Chapter. 22. Wherein Mary is a pure
Virgin. Verse. 34 Chapter. 22. In what Body Mary was impregnated. Verse. 52
Chapter. 22. Whence Marie is. Verse. 12, 53 Chapter. 26. How wonderfully the
Auntients have spoken of Marie. Verse. 6
Marriage. Chapter. 20. The fast Band of Marriage or Wedlock. Verse. 55
Chapter. 20. Wedlock or Marriage is tolerated by God. Matrix. Verse. 55
Chapter. 8. The Matrix of the Earth stood in Death till the Third day, like
Christ. Verse. 10
Mere. Chapter. 6. Of the word Mere, or Sea, in the Language of Nature. Verse.
15 Mercy. Mercifulness. Chapter. 23. How the whole Mercy or Mercifulness of
God is become Man. Verse. 19 Metalls. Chapter. 6. How Metalls come to be.
Verse. 10, 11 Mind. Chapter. 10. The Mind is the God and Cre^^tour of the
Will. Verse. 49 Chapter. 11. How the Mind is free. Verse. 30 Chapter. 15. The
M^nde is the Free Will. Verse. 44 Chapter. 15. How the envious Mind appears
in the Eternity. Verse. 44, 45 Chapter. 16. The Mind has 3 things in it.
Verse. 4 Chapter. 16. What the Mind is. Verse. 4. to the 7 Chapter. 17 How the
Mind is after the breaking of the Body. Verse. 41. to the 44
Mis-rule. Chapter. 25. Who is Master of Mis-rule upon Earth. Verse. 62
Miracles. Chapter. 18. Of the Miracles which have been done by the Saints.
Verse. 77, 78 Moses. Chapter. 10. Why Moses wrote so covertly. Verse. 22
Chapter. 17. Why Moses hangs the veil before his face. Verse. 21 Chapter.
17. The veil of Moses is taken away in the Death of Christ. Verse. 36 Chapter.
17. Why Moses hangs the veil before his eyes in the Description of the
Serpent. Verse. 98 Chapter. 18. Why Moses was stirred up. Verse. 29 Chapter.
18. Why Moses face was made bright. Verse. 32 Chapter. 20. Why Moses must enter
into life through Death. Verse. 27 Chapter. 20. Moses his wonderful speech
about Adam and Eve^ driving forth of the Garden. Verse. 39. Chapter. 20. What
is the veil of Moses, where God set a Mark upon Cain. Verse. 101 Chapter. 20.
Why Moses brake the Tables. Verse. 5
Murtheresse. Chapter. ^^. She is a Murtheresse that destroys the fruit in
her womb. Verse. 39
Nature. Chapter. 3. How the Birth of the Eternal Nature is. Verse. 9 to the
19 Chapter. 8. Why Nature longs to be freed from vanity. Verse. 32 Chapter.
15. The haughtiness of Nature compels not. Verse. 22
Necromancer. Chapter. 15. Where the Necromancer is Generated; the Author must
conceal much because of the Devilish Enchantments. Verse. 6 Near. Chapter.
19. Near and far off is all one in God. Verse. 62 Number. Chapter. 14. How
Great the Number of Men shall be. Verse. 47, 48
Overcome. Chapter. 21. We must first have once Overcome in the Storm before
we attain the high knowledge. Verse. 53
Paradise. Chapter. 8. Of the Consent in Paradise. Verse. 11 Chapter. 8. Where
the Paradise is in which the Angels dwell. Verse. 30 Chapter. 8. A Scholar in
Paradise learneth more in one hour, than in thirty years in the
Universities. Verse. 36 Chapter. 9. Paradise and the Garden are two things;
where Paradise is; and what are its properties. Verse. 3. to the 5 Chapter. 9.
Of the Gulf that is between Paradise and this world. Verse. 7 Chapter. 9. How
there is Comprehensibility in Paradise. Verse. 18 Chapter. 9. The fruit, fire,
light, and air as Paradise. Verse. 20 Chapter. 9. Paradise is infinite: the
shadow of all Created things remain Eternally in Paradise. Verse. 21 Chapter.
15. We reach both Paradise and Hell in Copulation. Verse. 34 Chapter. 17 The
Author cannot describe the Joy of Paradise. Verse. ^4 Chapter. 17 What is
called Paradise. Verse. 48 Chapter. 17. How Paradise did hide it self from
Adam and Eve. Verse. 59 Chapter. 19. Reason seeks Paradise, out of which it
is gone forth. Verse. 60, 61 Chapter. 20. Paradisicall Love is destroyed by the
Devil. Verse. 28 Chapter. 20. What the sword of the Cherubine before Paradise
is. Verse. 40 Chapter. 25. What our Paradise is, where our Essences spring in
God, and where we put on Christ. Verse. 48
Pearl. Chapter. 21. How the Pearl is sown imperceptibly. Verse. 48, 49
Chapter. 24. How the Tree of Pearl grows in the Storm. Verse. 32 Chapter.
24. The Pearl sticks not in the outward Man. Verse. 34 Chapter. 25. The
Garland of Pearl may be lost again. Verse. 5 Chapter. 25. How the Pearl may
be found. Verse. 16 Chapter. 27. How the Pearl may be distinguished from
weeds. Verse. 30, 31
Possibility. Possible. Chapter. 15. The Possibility or ability of seeking is
in every one. Verse. 21 Chapter. 20. The Description of the Possibility or
Ability that is in us. Verse. 75 Chapter. 20. Man's Possibility or own Ability
was tried in Gain. Verse. 96 Chapter. 25. Wherein lay the Possibility of our
Redemption. Verse. 8 Chapter. 25. What Possible, what impossible, for us.
Verse. 94
Pray. Praying. Chapter. 19. Man's Praying for, or Intercession, how far it
avails. Verse. 52, 53 Chapter. 25. How Men ought to Pray. Verse. 85
Principle. Chapter. 5. What a Principle is. Verse. 6 Chapter. 15. The working
of the three Principles in a child in the Mothers Womb or Body. Verse. 50. to
the 55 Chapter. 16. There are 2 Eternal Principles. Verse. 27 Chapter. 25. Why
the third Principle is Created. Verse. 103
Prophecies. Chapter. 17. Why the Prophecies are written so darkly: about the
Treader upon the Serpent. Verse. 100 Purgatory. Chapter. 18. The Purgatory upon
which the Beast has built his Kingdom. Verse. 98 Chapter. 18. Purgatory
expounded, which has been so much disputed. Verse. 102, 103 Chapter. 19. Where
Purgatory is. Verse. 15 Chapter. 20. Of the true Purgatory, and of the false
Purgatory. Verse. 73, 74
Putrefaction. Chapter. 19. The Putrefaction of the soul when one dies; the
Author desires not to partake of it. Verse. 42, 43
Quality. Chapter. 1. Whence the Name of Quality arises. Verse. 42
Reason. Chapter. 17. Reason is afraid of the clear countenance of Moses.
Verse. 34 Chapter. 17. Reason makes of God an unmercifull Devil. Verse. ^^
Rest. Chapter. 25. Of Christ's Rest in the Grave. Verse. ^ to the ^
Resurrection. Chapter. 25. Christ's Resurrection described. Verse. 75 to the 92
Rich. Chapter. 16. The Rich go hardly into the Kingdom of Heaven. Verse. 43
Chapter. 25. Hard for a Rich Man to Enter into Heaven. Verse. 65 Chapter. 25.
The Rich need not give away their Goods. Verse. 66
Rulers. Chapter. 21. Of the Office of the Rulers or Magistrates. Verse. 39. to
the 44
Saints. Chapter. 18. The Saints In^^reeding avayleth not. Verse. 73. to the 79
Chapter. 18. The Invocation of the Saints is against the Nature of the first
Principle. Verse. 97 Chapter. 25. Who those Saints were that went out of the
Graves at the Death of Christ. Verse. 46 Chapter. 25. The Saints admit no
Legates or Ambassadors. Verse. 86
Satan. Chapter. 4. How Satan is become a Devil. Verse. 21 School. Chapter.
19. How the Authors School is to be understood. Verse. 33 Chapter. 22. Where
the Scholar in the School of this world must leave off, and the Scholar in
Gods School begin. Verse. 30 Chapter. 23. No School, Learning, Art, or Science
avails before God. Verse. 2
Seale^. Chapter. 20. When the 7 Seals are opened. Verse. 42 Seed. Chapter.
^^ What is meant by the Seed of the Woman. Verse. 99 Seeing. Senses. Chapter.
^^ ^herein Seeing consists. Verse. 29 Chapter. ^^ How the Seeing can be.
Verse. 66 Chapter. ^^ Wherein the Senses consist. Verse. 58
Seeking. Seekers. Chapter. 16. How our Seeking must be. Verse. 2 Chapter. 27.
That now there are many Seekers. Verse. 22
Serpent. Chapter. 15. The Treader upon the Serpent is instantly needful in
the Incarnation of a Child. Verse. 24 Chapter. 18. Why the Treader upon the
Serpent must be generated without the seed of a Man. Verse. 2^ Chapter. 20.
What the Head of the Serpent signifies. Verse. 95
Sin. Chapter. 17. How sin is sin. Verse. 71 Chapter. 17. How all our
Doings are sin. Verse. 76 Chapter. 19. How sins are when they are washed
away. Verse. 37 Chapter. 20. Wherein sin sticks. Verse. 76 Chapter. 22.
Original or Inherited sin is in the soul. Verse. 70 Chapter. 24. The Old,
not the New Man, commits sin. Verse. 35
Sleep. Chapter. 12. What sleep is. Verse. 18 Smell. Chapter. 15. A
description what Smell is. Verse. 70 Sodom. Chapter. 18. Why punishment come
upon Sodom. Verse. 28 Soul. Chapter. 2. Whence the soul has its original.
Verse. 2 Chapter. 2. How the soul looks into the first Principle. Verse. 2
Chapter. 2. How the Enlightened soul looks into the second Principle. Verse.
4 Chapter. 4. What is the Chariot of the soul. Verse. 18 Chapter. 4. Out of
what the soul is, and how it becomes a Devil. Verse. 20, 21 Chapter. 4. How
the soul comes to be an Angel. Verse. 22 Chapter. 4. How the soul comes to
be full of lies Chapter. 4. An assurance that the soul is come from God.
Verse. 40 Chapter. 5. The Devil cannot see a soul that is in the Light of
God. Verse. 5 Chapter. 7. Whence the soul is. Verse. 2 Chapter. 10. A
description of the soul. Verse. 13. to 16 Chapter. 12. The soul has 3
Principles in it. Verse. 56 Chapter. 13. Another description of the soul.
Verse. 30. to the 33 Chapter. 13. The soul is the roughest thing in Man.
Verse. 30 Chapter. 13. The soul remains Eternally in the Tincture. Verse. 45
Chapter. 14. How the soul is, and out of what it comes. Verse. 10 Chapter.
14. When the soul comes into a child. Verse. 10 Chapter. 14. The soul is
not at home here in this life. Verse. 11 Chapter. 14. How the soul sees with
two Lights. Verse. 12 Chapter. 14. Where the soul rests after its Decease.
Verse. 13 Chapter. 14. How and wherewith the soul can see. Verse. 38 Chapter.
14. What is the Cabinet or Treasury of the soul. Verse 54 Chapter. 15. Whence
distempers come into the Essences of the soul. Verse. 52 Chapter. 15. Whence
are the Essences of the Worm of the soul. Verse. 62 Chapter. 16. The Blessed
souls have no knowledge of the Evil. Verse. 47 Chapter. 17. How the soul is
bound with two Chains. Verse. 69 Chapter. 17. How the soul is in a hard
prison. Verse. 84 Chapter. 17. What light the soul has after the breaking of
the body. Verse. 105 Chapter. 17. What body the soul gets at the Last
Judgment Day. Verse 106 Chapter. 17. How hardly the soul gets into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Verse. 110 Chapter. 17. How the soul comes into Abraham's
bosom. Verse. 111 Chapter. 18. What the soul is. Verse 30 Chapter. 18.
Lamentation over the Masses for souls. Verse. 100, 101 Chapter. 19. How we
may find the Disquietnesse of the soul. Verse 1. to the 4. Chapter. 19. What
the Regeneration of the soul is. Verse. 5 Chapter. 19. Of the souls that are
not at rest Verse 7, 8 Chapter. 19. The soul is a sparkle from the
Almightinesse. Verse. 10 Chapter. 19. What the body of the soul is. Verse. 10
Chapter. 19. The soul is bound with 3 bands. Verse. 11 Chapter. 19. What the
souls dying is. Verse. 14 Chapter. 19. Of the going forth of the soul. Verse.
16. to 21 Chapter. 19. How the soul is incomprehensible, and also
comprehensible. Verse. 19, 2^ Chapter. 19. The damned soul sees the (...) of
its misery. (...) Chapter. 19. What light the soul of the (...) has. Verse.
(...) Chapter. 19. How the soul waits fot its (...) ^dy. Verse. 2^ Chapter.
19. Of the power and Ability the soul has. Verse. 2^ Chapter. 19. How the
souls departed can appear. Verse. 28 Chapter. 19. Where the unregenerated
souls remain. Verse 49, 50 Chapter. 19. What the Masses for souls are. Verse
54. to the 56 Chapter. 19. Of the soul which turns at the Last. Verse. 58,
59 Chapter. 19. Out of what the soul is Generated. Verse. 65 Chapter. 19. How
the soul remains in hell. Verse. 65 Chapter. 19. The souls needs no going
out nor in. Verse 67 Chapter. 19. Where the soul of the wicked remains.
Verse. 68 Chapter. 20. Of the fear the soul has in the hour of Death.
Verse. 53 Chapter. 21. How the soul longs after the sweet taste of the
Pearl. Verse. 50 Chapter. 21. How the soul striveth with the Devil about the
Pearl. Verse. 50 Chapter. 22. What and whence the soul is. Verse. 13, 14
Chapter. 22. How the soul is Free. Verse. 14 Chapter. 22. What is the right
Body of the soul wherein God dwells. Verse. 15 Chapter. 22. How the soul is
Regenerated in the soul of Christ. Verse 38 Chapter. ^^ How Christ has
redeemed the soul. Verse. 40. 42 Chapter. ^^ None attain another soul, but
another body. Verse. 40 Chapter. 22. What Image the soul of the wicked shall
have. Verse. 44 Chapter. 22. How the soul has turned away its will from the
Father. Verse. 58 Chapter. 22. The miserable Condition of th averted soul. 59
Chapter. 22. Of the Tincture of the soul that is in the fear of God. Verse.
70 Chapter. 22. The soul is not free from Original sin. Verse. 70 Chapter.
22. The soul of Christ is half from Mary's Tincture. Verse. 70 Chapter. 22.
We attain no other soul. Verse. 85 Chapter. 22. The soul comes to be
renewed. Verse. 85 Chapter. 22. How the soul is perfectly redeemed. Verse. 86
Chapter. 23. What food the soul must have. Verse. 7. to 11 Chapter. 23 Of the
food of the soul. Verse. 45 Chapter. 23. How the soul is an adulterous
whore. Verse. 48 Chapter. 24. How hard a departure that soul has that
deferreth repentance. Verse. 22 Chapter. 24. How the soul of the wicked is
after its departure. Verse 23. to the 25 Chapter. 24. How the soul falls
many times into sin against its will. Chapter. 25. How the soul is tied fast
to t^^^ Chains. Verse. 6, 7 Chapter. 25. How the soul is created. Verse. 19
Chapter. 25. How the soul has reflected it self Verse. 20 Chapter. 25. How the
soul was enlightened. Verse. 4^ Chapter. 25. How the souls of the blind
simple people come before God. Verse. 62, 63 Chapter. 25. Where Christ's soul
was in his Death. Verse. 7^ Chapter. 25. Where the souls rest till the La^^
Judgment Day. Verse. 79
Sound. Chapter. 15. Sound is Eternal; and sound or noise is of a higher (...)
in Man than in other Creatures. Verse. 69, ^0 Spirit. Spirits. Chapter. 7. The
Created Spirit of Man; its power before the Fall. Verse. 4 Chapter. 13 The
Spirit of the great world reaches to get the virgin, as a Thief reaches to
pluck fruit in a Garden. Verse. 40 Chapter. 14. The Inability of the Spirit of
this world. Verse. 7 Chapter. 14. The Spirit of the Earth discourses with the
three Elements. Verse. 29, 30 Chapter. 14. What Spirit is the Holy Ghost.
Verse. 82 Chapter. 14. Whither the Holy Spirit goes when he proceeds from
the Father and the Son. Verse. 83 Chapter. 16. What Spirit goes forth from a
Proud Man. Verse. 38 Chapter. 16. What Spirit goes forth from a Deceiver.
Verse. 39 Chapter. 17. Whence the Spirit of Man is. Verse. 81 Chapter. 20. The
Spirit of fierceness will also be manifested. Verse. 12 Chapter. 22. What is
the Spirit of the Pure Element. Verse. 21 Chapter. 27. What Spirit is. Verse. 7
Chapter. 9. A description of the Transitory Spirits. Verse. 43 Chapter. 15. For
what the Spirits are Created. Verse. 11 Chapter. 17. How the Spirits appear in
Hell. Verse. 99
Starry. Stars. Chapter. 2. The Starry Spirit sees into the Third Principle.
Verse. 4 Chapter. 15. What the Stars are. Verse. 48 Chapter. 15. How far the
power of the Stars reaches in the incarnation of a child. Verse. 26
Chapter. 16. The Stars, or Constellation frames no humane Image. Verse 20.
to 25 Chapter. 16. The Stars or Constellation frames beastiall properties in
Man. Verse. 21 Chapter. 17. Out of what the Stars are. Verse. 8 Chapter. 17.
How the Stars are the Councillors, and God King of the Land, and the Devil
Hangman. Verse. 67 Chapter. 20. What the Stars are. Verse. 42 Chapter. 20.
How the Stars Image or imprint themselves in the Incarnation of a child
Verse. 70. to the 72
Stones. Chapter. 20. In the Lilly-time silver and gold will be as little worth
as the Stones. Verse. 15 Chapter. 25. Wherefore the Stony Rocks did cleave
asunder at the Death of Christ. Verse. 45 Chapter. 25. Why the Stone was rouled
from the Grave. Verse. 77 Chapter. 26. Houses of Stone built for the Learned to
serve God in. Verse. 24
Strife. Chapter. 16. Of the Strife that is in Man. Verse. 32. to the 36
Chapter. 21. Of the Strife that is in the Regeneration. Verse. 47. to the 49
Substance. Chapter. 2. The Divine Substance or Essence is inexpressible.
Chapter. 15. There is an Eternal unchange (...) Substance or Essence. Which is
the Ternarius Sanctus. Verse. 17
Sun. Chapter. 5. How the Sun is a figure of the Heart of God. Verse. 10. to
the 13 Chapter. 6. How the Heathen have gazed upon the Sun. Verse. ^^ Chapter.
6. How the Sun in its kind, works continually. Verse. 3 Chapter. 8. The Sun
is the Goddess of the Third Principle. Verse. 12. to the 22. Chapter. 8. How
the Heathens have gazed at the Sun and Stars. Verse. 15 Chapter. 14. Why God
let the Sun come forth. Verse. 43 Chapter. 25. Why the Sun was darkened at the
Death of Christ. Verse. 44
Sword. Chapter. 26. Of the Sword that is upon Babell. Verse. 34
Taste. Chapter. 15. Of the Taste and feeling in a child. Verse. 71 Teachers.
Chapter. 18. Teachers at which the Elements Tremble. Verse. 61 Chapter. 26. How
the Teachers were honored at first. Verse. 17
Temple. Chapter. 25. Of the Temple which Ezechiel writes of. Verse. 49
Ternary. Chapter. 26. What the holy Ternary is. Verse. 8 Testaments. Chapter.
23. Of Christ's Testaments, which Babell contendeth about. Verse. 1 Chapter. 23.
A description of the Testaments of Christ. Verse. 28. to the 50
Thoughts. Chapter. ^^ From whence good Thoughts ^ome. Verse 29 Time. Chapter.
^^ Of the Time the Jews hope for. Verse. 49 Chapter. 27. Of the end of the
world or Time. Verse. 18
Tincture. Chapter. 12. A description of the Tincture. Verse. 22. to the 28
Chapter. 12. The Author desires to enjoy the ^eavenly Tincture: Verse. 35
Chapter. 13. A description of the Tincture. Verse. 23. to the 33 Chapter. 13.
Of the Tincture which the Devils have. Verse. 29 Chapter. 13. Of the Tincture
of the Man and of the Woman. Verse. 38 Chapter. 13. The Tincture is the Longing
after Copulation. Verse. 39 Chapter. 13. The Tincture is Noble in the Tender
Complexion. Verse. 39 Chapter. 13. How the Tinctures wrestle about the virgin,
and according to that which ouercometh the fruit gets the Mark of
distinction. Verse. 41 Chapter. 13. The Tincture is the Paradise of the soul.
Verse. 43 Chapter. 15. How the Tincture at the Time of the Lilly manifests it
self in the first Principle. Verse. 54 Chapter. 15. Of the Three forms which
the Tincture has. Verse. 56 Chapter. 15. What the Tincture of the first
Principle is. Verse. 57 Chapter. 15. The outward Tincture is not from G^d.
Verse. 68 Chapter. 17. The Marrow in the Bones has the Noblest and highest
Tincture. Verse. 88, 89 Chapter. 21. Why the Tincture was manifest to Adam.
Verse. 7, 8
Tongue. Chapter. 15. Why the Tongue must not always be believed. Verse. 47
Tree, Trees. Chapter. 5. Out of what came the Tree of Good and Evil. Verse. 14
Chapter. 10. A description of the Tree of Good and Evil. Verse. 27. to the 29
Chapter. 11. The Tree of Good and Evil. Verse. 6. 10 Chapter. 11. Why the Tree
of Good and Evil was in the midst of the Garden. Verse. 19 Chapter. 11. The
Tree of Good and Evil was the Greatest Tree. Verse. 21 Chapter. 11. The Tree
of knowledge of Good and Evil. Verse. 38. to the 41 Chapter. 15. The Tree that
grows out of the Grain of Mustard seed. Verse. 29 Chapter. 17. How the Trees
in Paradise were. Verse. 19 Chapter. 17. The Essences of the Trees in the
Garden. Verse. 24
Trinity. Chapter. 4. A description of the Trinity. Verse. 55. to the 61
Chapter. 7. What the Trinity or Threenesse is. Verse. 21, 22 Chapter. 10.
Concerning the Trinity. Verse. 38 Chapter. 14. Of the Trinities Generating.
Verse. 84 Chapter. 14. Of the will of the Trinity. Verse. 85 Chapter. 18. Of
the Threenesse, or what Trinity is. Verse. 21 Chapter. 19. The Trinity is
present every where. Verse. 62 Chapter. 22. How the Birth of the Trinity is.
Verse. 35 Chapter. 22. A similitude of the Trinity. Verse. 61
Turks. Chapter. 26. Out of what their Doctrine is sprung. Verse. 32
Virgin. Chapter. 12. The Virgin waits still for Adam. Verse. 60 Chapter. 14.
The Virgin fights against the Devil for the soul. Verse. 12 Chapter. 14.
What Promise the Virgin made to Author. Verse. 52 Chapter. 14. What the Virgin
is. Verse. 85 Chapter. 14. The Virgin is Gods Companion. Verse. 86 Chapter. 14.
What the will of the Virgin is. Verse. 87 Chapter. 15. The virgin was espoused
to Adam. Verse. 15 Chapter. 15. The Virgin admonishes Adam still continually.
Verse. 18 Chapter. 15. What the Virgin is that warns the soul. Verse. 46
Chapter. 16. The Virgin makes us zealous. Verse. 3 Chapter. 16. How the Virgin
fights against Iniquity. Verse. 12 Chapter. 16. The Virgin stands by us in
this Life. Verse. 47. to the 49 Chapter. 17. How the Virgin warns us. Verse.
78 Chapter. 17. The Virgin is a Servant to the Word. Verse. 109 Chapter. 18.
The Virgin presented a Rose to the Author. Verse. 58 Chapter. 21. How the
Virgin preserves the seed that is sown. Verse. 52 Chapter. 22. Why the Virgin
is so called. Verse. 21 Chapter. 22. The Virgin wherein God became Man. Verse.
31 Chapter. 22. Who is the chaste Virgin in the presence of God. Verse. 61
Chapter. 22. The Virgin the Auntients have spoken of. Verse. 64 Chapter. 25.
The Author has truly seen (...) Virgin with her Lilly Branc^ Verse. ^
Chapter. 25. How the Virgin waits for us. Verse. ^
Visitation. Chapter. 17. The Visitation of the Jews, Turks, and Heathens.
Verse. 101 Voice. Chapter. 17. How the voice of God came to Adam and Eve.
Verse. 91
Wages. Chapter. 9. The wages God gives. The wages the Devil gives. Verse.
27 Wantonness. Chapter. 20. Wantonness in married folk is an Abomination
before God. Verse. 56 Warning. Chapter. 9. Warning to the Reader. Verse. ^^
Chapter. 18. A warning to the Covetous Verse. ^^
Wars. Chapter. 20. The Wrath of God likes Wars. Verse. 19 Chapter. 20. God
is not pleased in wars and strife. Verse. 20. to the 26 Chapter. 27. It must
not be regarded who overcomes in wars and strife, as to judging which is in
the right. Verse. 32
Water. Chapter. 5. How water comes to be. Verse. 8 Chapter. 23. What the
water of eternal life is. Verse. 23 Chapter. 23. what water baptizeth the
soul. Verse. 24
Whores. Whoredom. Chapter. 15. Whores and Whoremongers are warned. Verse. 26
Chapter. 20. The Abomination and uncleanness of Whoredom. Verse. 50. to 54
Chapter. 20. Whores and unclean persons, what lesson the Author has for
them. Verse. 57
Wicked. Chapter. 20. What hinderance the wicked has Verse. 67 Chapter. ^^
What the wicked receive in the Lords Supper. Verse. 46 Chapter. 24. What League
or Peace they have with the Devil. Verse. 12 Chapter. 26. The wicked can
convert no sinner. Verse. 25 Chapter. 27. The Condition of the wicked in the
Judgment. Verse. 12
Will. Chapter. 8. What the will is. Verse. 25, 26 Chapter. 14. What the will
of God is. Verse. 73. to 80 Chapter. 15. Of the two wills that are in the
mind. Verse. 43 Chapter. 16. A description of the two wills Verse. 5 to 9
Chapter. ^0. The Author describes the Power of free will. Verse. 75
Wisdom. Chapter. 4. The way to Wisdom. Verse. 16 Chapter. 18. What Wisdom
is. Verse. 21 Chapter. 25. How the Wisdom of the world is made foolishness.
Verse. 97
Witches. Chapter. 13. Witches and Sorcerers know the subtilty of the Tincture.
Verse. 37 Chapter. 16. Out of what property Witches exist. Verse. 21
Wolf. Chapter. 18. Who the Beasts Wolf is which devoureth the Be^st. Verse.
102 Chapter. 20. How the Wolvish heat will be cut away. Verse. 99
Woman. Women. Chapter. 13 Whence is the weakness of Woman. Verse. 20 Chapter.
13. Of the Duty of Women. Verse. 20 Chapter. 13. Why Women with child loath
some meats. Verse. 47 Chapter. 17. Women will still be the finest Beasts of
all. Verse. 32 Chapter. 25. How the Woman stands upon the Moon. Verse. 12
Wonder. Chapter. 22. What is the Greatest Wonder in the Deity. Verse. 60 Word.
Chapter. 8. How the Word is every where. Verse. 17 Chapter. 14. What the Word
is. Verse. 82 Chapter. 17. How Hell Trembled at the Word of the Promise. Verse.
97 Chapter. 17. The Word of the Promise is the Bridegroom of the soul. Verse.
108 Chapter. 17. Where the Word is. Verse. 109 Chapter. 17. Why the Word must
become man. Verse. 11^ Chapter. 18. The Exposition of this word; The art Earth.
Verse. (...) Chapter. 18. Concerning the word of the Pr^mise. Verse. 23. to the
25 Chapter. 18. How and where the word of the Promise is. Verse. 36 to the 38
Chapter. 22. How the Word became a Heavenly Man. Verse. 38 Chapter. 22. The
Word has assumed or received our soul, but not our sinful body. Verse. ^5
Chapter. 22. How the Word is the Son of the Father, and also his servant.
Verse. 71
Works. Chapter. 16. How all Works follow Man. Verse. 41. Chapter. 19. How
works follow the soul. Verse. 34, 35
World. Chapter. 4. What was before the time of this World. Verse. 32 Chapter.
6. The World is a figure of the Eternal Matrix. Verse. 2 Chapter. 6. The Birth
of the World compared with the Birth of a child. Verse. 9 Chapter. 7. The
World as to the three Principles is a figure of Paradise. Verse. 9 Chapter. 7.
How the World came to be, and how God p^evented that all in the whole deep did
not come to be Earth and Stones. Verse. 25, 26 Chapter. 12. How the World shall
Rest after the Breaking of it. Verse. 55 Chapter. 20. Why the World is Created.
Verse. 10 Chapter. 22. Out of what the World is Generated. Verse. 11 Chapter.
^^ ^en are not perfect in this world Verse. 36 Chapter. ^^ (...) the world had
its beginning. Verse. 4 Chapter. ^^ (...) the World must perish. Verse. 5
Chapter. ^^ (...) what manner the World remains Eternally. Verse. 6. and 20
Chapter. 27. Out of what the World is Created. Verse. 7
Worm. Chapter. 12. Of the Worm of the soul, which dies not. Verse. 57. 59
Chapter. 14. Concerning the Worm of the soul. Verse. 9 Chapter. 14. A
description of the Worm of the soul. Verse. 64 Chapter. 15. The Worm of the
soul is Indissoluble. Verse. 57 Chapter. 15. How the Worm of the soul is
poisoned. Verse. 60, 61
Wounds. Chapter. 25. How Christ's wounds shall shine eternally in Glory, as
bright Morning Stars. Verse. 88 Wrath. Chapter. 17. How the wrath of God
became burning. Verse. 75 Chapter. 20. How the wrath gat the victory in the
first beginning. Verse. 47 Chapter. 20. Wrath is not known in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Verse. 6^ Chapter. 25. The wrath is the Birth of the life of the soul.
Verse. 5 Chapter. 25. How the wrath of God is neither Good nor Evil. Verse. 70
Chapter. 25 How the wrath was captivated. Verse. 71

FINIS.

